REFORMED DEVOTIONS, IN MEDITATIONS, HYMNS, AND PETITIONS, FOR Every DAY in the
Week, AND Every HOLIDAY in the Year.

Divided into Two PARTS.

The Second Edition.

Ex Aedibus Lambeth. May 7. 1686.

Imprimatur, Jo. Battely.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Joseph Watts at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1687.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY ANN BOSCAWEN.
MADAM,
WHen the best Things of the World are presented to the Great, this is a piece
of Justice done, both to those Honorable Persons, and to the things that are
presented; for thus much is undoubtedly due to the deserts of both. And when
such exalted persons are pleased to receive those things, and approve by using
them, this becomes an advantage to both: They have the service of what is most
useful in its kind; and their using it recommends it to others: For the
inferior ranks of Mankind commonly derive their Estimates of things from the
Opinions and Practices of those that are above them. It is because I account
this Book very Excellent in its kind, and worthy to be recommended as such to
the World, which makes me presume, Madam, to dedicate it to so high a Person as
your Honor. I hope, if you please to acquaint your self with it, that I shall
have the honor to be approved in my Judgment of it, and It may have the great
advantage to be recommended by you. I know that your accomplished Mind is
disposed to approve of what is ingenious and devout. Here presents it self to
your Honor, Divine Truth in a decent and fashionable Attire; it were not fit
for any one to make you a Visit in a careless Undresse. The Beauty here is not
concealed and disguised by too much external Ornament, nor exposed to Contempt
by too little. This Book, you may be pleased to observe, is fitted to possess
men's Minds with that pure and peaceable Wisdom which is from above; to excite
Devotion in the coldest and most careless Hearts; and to possess with a love of
Devotion our too nice and witty Age, since here it appears so rational and
ingenious even in its highest flights.

Madam,

I must readily acknowledge, the Hand that makes you this Present is too mean
and unworthy; but since you have not thought me too mean, to receive
Obligations from you, I must not believe my self thereby excused from bringing
all such Testimonies of Respect and Gratitude as I am able. Yet I most humbly
crave your Pardon for this Presumption, as what it were still greater
presumption to expect without seeking it: And, doing thus, it were a very
guilty despair on the other hand, if I should not hope to obtain it from a
goodness such as yours. Your Honor cannot want any Noble Quality in an
answerable degree, who derive your high Birth from two Illustrious Families;
and are furnished in them with so many excellent Presidents. While I present
this Book to you, I present also my Prayers to Almighty God; to the giver of
every good and perfect Gift, that by his Blessing it may become to your Honor,
a very profitable Entertainment: That it may nourish in you those good Advances
of Piety and Virtue, which adorn your Youth: That it may help to maintain still
that prudent constancy, which has shown it self able to conquer the violent
current of present Wickedness, while such a number of unthinking Sinners are
carried along with the fatal stream. I pray, that the God who has blessed you
with Beauty, and Wealth, and Honor, the three greatest Gifts of this World,
may still continue favorable ^ou in the Dispensations of (...) Providence; and
after a ^g and happy Life, may re^^^ve you to Heaven. Thus (...) Prayers show,
what I am ^dy in any other possible way express, that I am,

MADAM, Your Honors Most Humble, most Obedient, And devoted Servant, T. D.

THE PREFACE.
SOme Account of the Following Book I am bound to give, in point of Justice
both to it and my self; and something may be said tending to promote the
Usefulness of it. Which things will be the matter of this Preface; and in such
matter it will not be impertinent to detain the Reader for a little while.

It was a Book of Devotions disposed into the Form and Method of the Roman
Breviary; and, though the matter of it was not the same with that, yet therein
were the Truths of Christian Religion frequently mixed, as in the Belief of
that Church, with those erroneous Doctrines which in latter Ages have been
added to Christianity* What I thought to be such by the direction of Holy
Scripture, and the Articles of our Church which are drawn from thence,
according to the* usual Interpretation made of it by the most pure and
primitive Ages of Christianity, that I have taken away, and connected the Sense
with what those Rules suggested to be truth. Therefore has this Book the Title
of Reformed Devotions. And I dare say, if Holy Scripture may be the Rule to
judge by in these matters, (as it must be in all such matters) the Book is now
more truly corrected and amended, than it was in any of the former Editions,
though it pretends to have been four times printed, and twice with that
Advantage. In the fourth and last Edition, which is dated, Roan. 1685. it is
said to be corrected and augmented; and there is added to it in that a whole
Office for the Virgin Mary; which being very different from the former Book,
and much inferior to it in all Respects, and more corrupted, I have wholly
left it out; and having made use of that part of the former Book which provided
for all the Saints Days, I should have wanted a good Reason for so regarding
one particular Saint, if I had used that part of the Book distinct: And there
being enough of the other to serve my Method, I did not trouble my self to pick
out the best Sentences of that to mix with the rest. This I did out of one
Office in the other Book; because in the present Method I had no occasion for
it distinct, and because the greatest part of that Office related to the Souls
supposed to be in Purgatory.

I am justified in the reforming of this Book, and purging out those
forementioned Doctrines, by the Authority of our Nation, which did, for the
sake of them, a few years ago condemn the Book to a public burning. And
because there was a great deal of it very good Sense, and that composed in a
very devout strain, and an ingenious style, and mixed with several curious
Hymns; I thought it was worthy of a Reformation, and as well too good to be
thrown away whole, as too bad to be used whole: Which I doubt not, all
ingenious and devout Readers will acknowledge upon perusing what is here
presented, when I shall have said, that the most of it is but what I found in
that Book. Yet I subscribe to the Wisdom and Justice of that Condemnation which
it underwent as it was; for the better it was in some respects, (since many
offensive things were contained in it, and they often with great Artifice
insinuated in very disguising terms) the more it did deserve that fate. Some
passages there were in it capable of two Interpretations, which joined with
false Doctrines, must be interpreted to an ill meaning; but joined with Truths,
must be understood to mean well: And some of those do still remain here,
because I was loath to throw out any thing needlessly; and especially if there
was Wit and Elegancy in the Composure; that so this Book might be in some
respects better, and in others, at least, no worse than the former. There were
in it Lessons to every Office, which I have left out, because they consisted of
but some Sentences of the truly Canonical Scripture, joined without distinction
with other Sentences; and that Translation which those Scriptures were in, is
different from that Authentic among us: Besides, I did not always think them
exactly suited to the places they held; and I think the absence of them may be
reckoned well enough supplied by the pertinent Sentences of holy Scripture
which I have through the whole Book frequently mixed with the matter of it;
especially since those that will read Lessons in their private Devotions, have
the Holy Scriptures in their hands, translated into the vulgar Tongue. The
Hymns that were in the former Book are all retained, and one is added to fill
up the present Method: But they are many of them altered; some to be corrected,
some to be supplied with a few Syllables, or a Stanza here and there to fit
them to the Tunes of our singing Psalms, as many of them were before, and now
they all are. The Petitions here are gathered partly out of those parts of the
former Book, which in that were called Psalms, in this Meditations; and partly
from other places.

The Devotions for every Day in the Week, are not so appropriated to those
Days of the Week they are designed for, but that they may be used on any other
day; as indeed I know no reason for such appropriation: They are thus placed to
dispose them in some Method, that they might not lie together like a confused
disorderly heap. Only those for the Lord's Day are most proper for that: Those
set to Thursday, because all the Subject of them is the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, are very fit to be used on any Day when we receive that holy Sacrament.
To this, that some of the Devotions are said to be designed for the Holidays,
I say; Those that will be pleased but to look beyond the Title, will be as well
satisfied with the matter of that, as of any other part of the Book. I did not
contrive the Book so distinguished, but found it so, and thought that Method
might render it the more useful to those who shall be willing to use it in a
Method. Some among us are willing to observe such Days according to the
Appointment of our Church, and they may profitably on them make use of what is
here allotted to those Days, for their sakes. Others perhaps are not fully
satisfied in their minds to do this, and they may with good Profit (if they
please) read that part of the Book on any other Days: And why then should the
latter sort be displeased, if the former are gratified; and I, according to the
excellent Rule and Practice of St. Paul, do become all things to all men for
their good. To my Charity, he that regards a Day regards it to the Lord; and he
that regards not a Day, to the Lord he does not regard it. I suppose the
different Practice may proceed in both from pious minds, (but such as are
possessed in this matter with some difference of Opinions) and I will not judge
or set at naught any of my Brethren: And as I am not willing to put the worst
Interpretation that can be upon the Practices of any, so I desire all would
deal thus with me, and where any thing in the Book may be interpreted to a good
meaning, that they would do so. This Practice, I am sure, is contained under
that general and indispensable Rule, of doing to others as we would they should
do unto us. I have assisted the one sort the more willingly, because it will be
no prejudice to the other; unless they please to reject what is not in it self
the less useful, merely for bearing such a Title as this, and for being in such
a method as may render it the more useful to some of their Brethren. I desire
of the World but this piece of Justice also (which I shall certainly obtain
from all that are not ill-natured in the case) that every one do commend what
they may like in the book; for then I am sure it will be universally commended;
and then it will be the more generally and the more profitably used, which is
the end I aimed at in seeking to approve it to many.

In Reforming a book from such principles as are purged out of this, it is well
known I am not without several Presidents. And what has been done of this kind
before having found good acceptance, both formerly and more lately, I was
thereby the more encouraged in this undertaking: I will not disparage what
others have done; but I think there may be observed some defects in their work;
which I have avoided. The Book that I have chosen to correct, does equal, at
least, if not exceed any other that has been thus used. Indeed I have not seen
that writing of any Author of the same Communion, which in my Judgment, was
comparable to this excellent piece: The matter of the book I presume is not at
all less fit to assist, and excite true and wise Devotion than it was before:
For there is no need of errors to promote any exercise of true Religion: And
there being so much of excellent and useful matter still left, what is
separated may the better be spared. And the leaving out those principles
renders the book more generally useful, since now it is become so to those of
our Church, while they will meet with nothing in it, but what they can assent
to: And it may still, if they please, be useful to those of the other
Communion, since the peculiar principles, which they have received are only
left out, and the remaining matter is what all sober Christians may agree in:
Indeed I intended not to infect it with controversy, and not to gratify but
rather divert the contentious humor of the age. I would not engage the World
more in controversy, which perhaps is already too much engaged in it; but had
rather possess men's minds with an affectionate powerful sense of those
important Truths, which Christians do generally assent to; and which are of
absolute necessity to be known, and loved, and obeyed; for which purpose this
book is perhaps as well fitted now, as any that can be met with: Unless any one
will except that incomparable book the Exposition of our Church Catechism,
lately composed for the use of the Diocese of Bath and Wells; I can readily
assent to him that shall prefer that to this: In this following book I am sure
no impartial and judicious Reader, cannot think that the devout and serious
expressions do want their Foundation in Reason, by being separated from the
Principles that are purged out. Many such Expressions may be found in the
writings of the devout and elegant Fathers, which could not be drawn from such
Principles, because they are of a later invention: Besides, the Holy Scripture
and the fundamental Truths drawn from thence, and contained in the four first
Creeds, are Foundation enough for such things. It were a mistake therefore to
imagine, that we must needs be beholden to any peculiar or distinct principles,
not held by the truly ancient and Apostolic Church, for such a production as
this. I think it may appear by the following book, that those principles are
not necessary as a Foundation, nor any ways advantageous to the superstructure.

For the sake of those who shall be willing to use this Book in a certain Order
and Method in their private Devotions, (where a good Method constantly observed
is of great advantage) I shall suggest a few things for Direction in the Use of
it. I suppose the ordinary Course of most Persons in this private Exercise, is
only to read, perhaps, the Holy Scripture, or some good Book, and to Pray: But
I think those that do only so, leave out one of the most profitable parts of
the Exercise, which at least those Persons that have, or might have leisure,
should never omit, that is Meditation: To revolve, and over and over consider,
and reflect upon some divine Truths, that they may make impression on their
minds, and raise in them suitable Affections: This tends to make the temper of
the mind, and the course of a Man's life conformable to those Truths, which is
the end every man should aim at in his private Devotions: None may account
themselves the more religious and good for spending much time in them, unless
they have this influence and effect upon their hearts and lives, unless they
practice the more of Religion in their Conversations. Now in the performance of
this part of private Devotion, it were doubtless best, if every one could raise
suitable and affecting thoughts to be Meditated upon from the Scriptures he has
read; which is according to the Advice of a late very prudent Author, who has
written A Method and Order for private Devotion. But I fear there are but few
that can practice this way with any great advantage to themselves, at least
till they have long practiced it, and taken a great deal of pains to accustom
themselves to it, and so can perform it with ease and pleasure; the difficulty
therefore, and little advantage at first, do I doubt, keep many from a resolute
trial of it. Instead therefore of that way of Meditating, and for such as
cannot use it, I think these Meditations fit to be used. Then, after that a
person has Read his Chapters in the order which he has proposed to himself, he
may do well to read over the Meditations here provided for the day: But this he
must do, so as that it may be properly a Meditating on these things, not a
cursory reading of them: He should proceed very deliberately, often looking
back, and reviewing a Sentence that is past, to see, if it did not affect him
before, whether it may not do this upon the review; and to try if he may not
find somewhat more of importance in it, than he apprehended at the first
reading. After Meditation is done, then he is to proceed to Prayer, wherein he
may have assistance from the Petitions here added; they are not a complete
Prayer of themselves, nor were designed to be so, but only to suggest some
Requests fit to be put into our Prayers, suitable to the foregoing Meditations:
Therefore there are not in them any such Petitions or Acknowledgments as are
proper for the Morning or the Evening, nor any Petitions for the King, the
Church, or our Friends, which should never be omitted in our Prayers. Now they
that use a Form which has those other parts, may take in these where they think
fit, having considered and resolved it before they begin, or else they may say
these by themselves: They that do not use a Form in private, may add these to
their Prayer by their Memory, or by having the Book before them: And if any
person has been seriously affected by the Meditations, he will be mightily
disposed to make such Requests as these that follow them. As for the Hymns, it
will be fittest, if any person will sing them, either to begin his Exercise or
end it with them, according as he finds himself inclined: To help those that
may not readily find out the Tunes which these may be sung to, I think fit here
to suggest this; those that will go to the more common tunes, are Hymn 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 28, 31, 39. Those that will go
to the Tune of the Hundredth Psalm, are Hymn 7, 12, 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 27, 33,
36, 38, 40. Those that will go to the Tune of the Hundred thirteenth Psalm,
are Hymn 10, 26, 29, 30, 35, 37. Those that will go to the Tune of the twenty
fifth Psalm, are Hymn 19, 22, 32, 34. If the time will allow a man, and devout
affection inclines him to it, he may use at once Both Parts of the Devotions
for the Morning or Evening of the day, but by no means should any man constrain
himself to this, and therefore they were thus divided: For, according to the
very prudent Advice that an excellent Guide in these matters gave to a Friend;
We should observe what we can do with ease and pleasantness of spirit, and when
we find our selves to be free and forward, then we may be the longer and the
more enlarged in our Devotions; but when we are heavy and straightened, then it
is not fit to tire our Spirits, and drag them along with us whither they have
no strength to accompany us, nor disposition to comply with our desires. And
the whole Book being thus divided, some may find it of use to them, to use
sometimes one part and sometimes another, as being most affected with such
variety. I shall not need to direct particularly on what days those parts of
the Book designed for the Holy Days should be used, for that will be
sufficiently suggested by the public Liturgy of our Church, to those that are
acquainted with it; where also they will be directed to very apposite, and fit
portions of Scripture to be read upon such Occasions. And now I dare say, that
the following Book is not only better in the matter of it than it was before,
but it is also better fitted in its method to assist our private Devotion.

With hearty Prayers to Almighty God for its good success, I send it forth into
the World: May it abundantly promote his Honor, may it cause many to have
serious and affectionate thoughts of Religious matters, may it promote a true
and ardent Love to God in the World, which will be proportionably attended with
Love for our Neighbor; may none through Envy, or dislike of a few small
particulars, when they must needs approve the greatest part of it, be so guilty
as to oppose and hinder its usefulness; so preferring the advancement of their
private Opinions before the service of Religion in general, for promoting the
Life and Power of which it is designed and fitted. Let all know, I constantly
endeavor that it may be a small thing to me to be judged by man's judgment,
which is often mistaken both in approving and condemning: And there is one, even
the great God, who will be the final Judge of us all, to whom I am chiefly
concerned to approve my self: To him be Glory from us all, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Devotions FOR Every Day IN THE WEEK. The First Part.
For Sunday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
WElcome blessed Day wherein the Sun of Righteousness arose, and chased away the
clouds of fear. Welcome thou art to my Soul, thou Birthday of our hopes; a day
of joy and public refreshment; a day of Holiness and solemn Devotion; a day of
rest and universal Jubilee. Welcome to us, and our dark World; for the healing
saving light thou bring. May thy radiant Name shine bright for ever. May all
the Earth be enlightened with thy beams, and every frozen Heart dissolve and
sing. May all the Generations to come entertain thee with reverence, and employ
thee in the praise, and worship of the Lamb who is the Light of thee. This is
the Day which our Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice therein. This is
the day that he has sanctified to himself; and called by his own most holy
Name. Hark, O my Soul, do thou not hear the King of Heaven invite thee into
his presence? He graciously bids thee to suspend the mean Employments of this
World; to lay aside thy corroding earthly Cares: He calls thee to the honor of
Communion with himself; to spend a day in his most delightful service; he
desires to entertain thee with unspeakable Joys in his House of Prayer; to
feast thee with spiritual Dainties, that afford strength and pleasure to the
Mind. Worthy art thou, O Lord, of all our time; worthy to receive the Praises
of all thy Creatures. Every moment of our life is bound to bless thee; since
every moment subsists by thy Goodness. Shall others labor so much for Vanity,
and shall we not rest for the service of our God? Shall we employ the whole
week on our selves, and not offer in gratitude one Day to Thee? To thee who
bestowest on us all we have; and wilt give us hereafter more than we can now
receive or hope for. A day spent in thy Courts, O Lord, I will prefer to a
thousand that engage me in any other places. I will go to the House of my God,
to the Assembly of his Saints. Know ye all the Nations of the world, it is the
Lord who is the only true God. It is he that has made us, and not we our
selves. Let us enter into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with
praise. Come let us adore our Glorified Savior.

Hymn 1.
BEhold we come, Dear Lord, to thee;
And bow before thy Throne:
We come to offer, on our Knee,
Our Vows to thee alone.
Whatever we have, whatever we are,
Thy Bounty freely gave:
Thou do us here in mercy spare,
And wilt hereafter save.
But O, can all our Store afford
No better gists for thee?
Thus we confess thy riches, Lord;
And thus our Poverty.
It Is not our Tongue, or Knee can pay
The mighty debt we ow:
Far more we should than we can say;
Far lower should we bow.
Come then my Soul, bring all thy powers,
And grieve thou have no more:
Bring every day thy choicest hours,
And thy Great God adore.
But above all, prepare thy heart,
On this his own blessed day;
In it is sweet ta^k to bear thy part,
And sing, and love, and pray.
Glory to Thee, Eternal Lord!
Thrice blessed three in one:
Thy name at all times be adored
Till time it self be done.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
WHen the Harvest Sun provides a Cloud, and seems to rest his wearied beams: He
seeks not to save the journey of his light, he only spares the Reapers head.
Much less, O Lord, do thou, who made the Sun, seek by the reserve of a day
to procure thine own repose. Thou have not commanded the business of the World
to cease for one day in seven, for that thou art tired with overruling it to
thine own glory. Thou who createdst all things by a word of thy mouth, and
sustainest them all in thy hand, without feeling any weight: Who governest the
whole World without any perplexity of thoughts; and always remainest the same
unchangeable fullness: It is not to increase thine own Eternity, that thou
take a portion of our time. It is not to receive any advantage to thy self,
that thou requirest this days Worship of us. Thy Goodness does friendly bear
the Name of the day; but thou kindly intendest for us all the profit of it.
That the wearied hands may be relieved with rest, and be enabled to lift
themselves up to thee. That the ignorant Minds may be taught thy Truth, and
learn the way to everlasting Happiness. That the guilty Consciences may humbly
confess their sins, and receive an assured Pardon from Thee, who have promised
to revive the spirit of the humble, and the Heart of the contrite. That in this
our militant State we may ask and receive of thee grace sufficient for us* That
all may speak to Thee by Prayer, and hear thy Voice, by the mouth of their
Pastors. That the Love-prepared Souls may approach thy bounteous Table; and may
feast and confirm their Faith and Hopes with that delicious banquet. O blessed
Lord, what excellent and sit means has thy wisdom invented to fit us for and
bring us to thy self! How well are thy sacred Ordinances suited to our
necessities! To enlighten our dark Minds, to melt our hard Hearts, to quicken
and consecrate our Affections. Thou strengthenest our Faith by thy Word and
Sacraments; and improvest our Charity both to Thee and one another by our
public Assemblies; while we all meet together for the same blessed end; and by
mutual requests and praises increase our fervours. Happy, thrice happy are we,
O merciful God! whom thy Providence favors with these blessings. We that may
freely resort to thy holy Sanctuary, and there sing aloud thy Praises for these
great mercies.

MEDITATION III.
COme let us lay aside the cares of this World; and take into our Minds the
Joys of Heaven. Let us empty our Heads of all other Thoughts, and prepare that
upper Room to entertain our God. Retire we from the many distractions of this
Life, and recollect, and closely unite the forces of our Soul. That we may
apply them to the earnest pursuit of our one necessary work; the securing to
our selves the Kingdom of Heaven. Why should we spend all our days about
trifles, and our labor for that which will not profit. Earthly riches profit
not in the day of wrath; my Soul seek Heavenly Treasures. Seek thou lasting and
substantial Joys, while others dote on and pursue those flitting shadows
sensual Pleasures. Seek thou the sacred Knowledge of thy God, and Jesus the
Christ whom he sent into the World, whom to know is Life Eternal. Miserable are
they, O Lord, who study all things else, and neglect this Sacred Science;
though their skill can number the Stars, and trace out the ways of the
Planets. Miserable are they who gather great possessions, who heap up Gold and
Silver but get no interest in thee. Miserable are they who enjoy all that this
World can afford to please, but have no enjoyment of thee. To know thee is to
be truly wise, and is the highest Learning. To have thee my God and Portion is
to be exceeding rich; to contemplate and enjoy thee is a Heaven of Pleasure. I
determine to value no other Knowledge but that of Jesus the Christ, and him
crucified. I account all things but loss and dung that I may win Christ; and
may have Communion with the Father and the Son through the Spirit.

PETITIONS.
WIth fervent desires, O Lord, and a panting Soul I am going to thy house. O
maintain I pray thee such desires after thy self, and fulfill them while I am
waiting where thou appointest. Draw nigh to us who are drawing near to thee.
Make us sitly to perform our Duty. Open thou our Lips, and our Mouths shall
show forth thy praise. Open thou our eyes, O Blessed Lord, that we may see the
beauty of thy Commands; how Wise and Sweet in themselves they are, how
Necessary and Beneficial to us: While they improve our felicity here, and fit
us for that which will be hereafter. Send forth thy beams of spreading light, O
thou that art the morning Star! and lead us to thy Holy Hill. Send forth thy
Truth, O increated Wisdom! and bring us to thy Blessed Tabernacle. Guide thou
our Lives, O Gracious Lord! in the ways of thy Precepts, that by observing
faithfully those excellent rules, we may all every where be happy. O Glorious
Jesu! in whom we live, and without whom we dye; mortify in us by thy Spirit
all sensual desires, and quicken our Hearts with thy Holy Love; that we may no
longer have a high esteem for the Vanities of this world, but may place our
affections entirely on thee. Show us thy glorious self, O Jesu; in thee we
shall behold all we can wish. Only so much we beg to conceive of thy Majesty as
may move our Hearts to seek thee: Only so much discovery we ask as may conform
us to thy likeness. If we may not know thee clearly now; let us know at least
so far as to make us long to know further. If we cannot perfectly love thee in
this Life, let us love so much as that we may desire to love more. So let us
know and Love thee here, O thou the Sovereign bliss of our Souls! that we may
hereafter know thee better, and Love thee more for ever; to our Eternal Bliss,
and thy Eternal Glory thereby.

Glory be to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
As it was in the Beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end.
Amen.
For Sunday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
LEt them, O Lord, seek other delights; who expect no felicity from thee. Let
them fill up their time with other employments, and wast the remainder of this
Holy day, who think thy rewards not worth their labor. As for me, my Souls
chief content shall be to meditate on the Glories prepared for thy Servants
above. So will I meditate on them as often as the days of sacred leisure do
return, that my Heart shall be firmly set upon those Glories. And all the few
years that I live shall spend themselves to purchase that one Eternal Sabbath
which thy Saints shall celebrate in Heaven. A Day that is, whose brightness
knows no night; nor ever fears the least eclipse. Whose cheerful brow no cloud
o're-casts, nor does any Storm ever molest the passage of its rays. But it
still shines on serene and clear, and fills with splendour all the spacious
Palace. That ever-living day needs not the fading luster of our Sun; nor the
borrowed Silver of the Moon. The Sun that is risen there is the Lamb, and the
light that shines is the Glory of God. O how Beauteous Truths are said of thee,
thou City of the King of Heaven! Thy Walls are raised with precious stones, and
every Gate is one Rich Pearl. Thy Mansions are built with choicest Jewels; and
the pavement of thy Streets is transparent Gold. Along in the midst of thee
runs a Crystal River, perpetually flowing from the Throne of God. There all
along those pleasant banks, does most deliciously grow the Tree of Life. A Tree
which can heal all wounds with its balmy Leaves; and make immortal all those
who eat and taste its pleasant Fruit. Thus is the Holy City built; thus is the
New Jerusalem, like a Bride, in every part adorned. O Blessed and Glorious City,
how Free, how Rich, how Secure, and Happy are thy glad Inhabitants! Every Head
in thee wears a Royal Crown, and every Hand a Palm of Victory. Every Eye
overflows with joy, and every Tongue with Psalms of Praise. Behold, O my Soul,
the Inheritance that we seek; and where can we find more Riches to invite us?
Behold the felicities to which our exalted Savior calls us; Consider what
Mansions he is gone to prepare; Where can we meet with such pleasures to
entertain us? Can thy Senses present to thy Knowledge a place on Earth like
this? Surely they cannot: Banish then, my Soul, all worldly vain desires. Let
none of them hereafter molest thy Peace. Look not at the transitory things
which are seen, but at the Eternal which are not. And so receive some glimpse
of this Heaven, to encourage and quicken thy Travel toward it.

MEDITATION II.
Blessed be thy Gracious Wisdom, O Lord, that so mercifully condescends to the
mean and low capacities of our present mortal State. Under these veils thou
hidest these glorious mysteries, which are too high and Spiritual for our Flesh
and Blood: to us it cannot yet appear what we shall be. But after this manner
have thou revealed thy sublime rewards, to allure and captivate us with things
that of this world are most admired. Scepters and Crowns, thou know, are apt
to win the Hearts of us thy Children. Children, alas! we are too truly in
sacred Knowledge: O that we were such in Love and Duty. My Soul, if these
imperfect shadows of the future bliss do transport and please so many men,
should not the real substance sweetly delight thee? What is a drop of Water to
the boundless Ocean; or a grain of dust to this vast Globe? Such, O my God, and
infinitely less are the richest Kingdoms here below; If we compare their most
pompous State with the meanest degree that is in the Court of Heaven. When thou
have fed us a little while with Milk; thou invitest our appetite to stronger
Meat. Thou tellest us of a sweet delicious life; in the blessed Society of Saints
and Angels: With whom we shall dwell in perpetual Friendship; and be loved and
esteemed by them all for ever. Thou tellest us of a pure Soul-ravishing joy in
beholding the amiable face of Jesus. Whose Gracious smiles shine round about,
and fill the Heavens with Holy Gladness. And thou tellest, dear Lord, of
delights that are still incomparably higher than all these. Hearken well to
such things, O my Soul, and humbly adore thy bounteous God. His abundant
goodness has provided thee large rewards indeed, he intends himself to be thy
Portion and exceeding great reward. Himself he will clearly unveil before us,
and openly show us that great secret: What it is, Glorious Lord, to behold thy
face, to know as we are known. O happy secret! if once at last attained; If
once we can but see the face of our God in Glory. To know the Immensity of thy
self-subsisting Essence; and the Infinite Excellence of all thy Attributes. To
know the power of the Eternal Father; and the Wisdom of the Uncreated Son; and
the Goodness of the Holy Spirit; the incomprehenfible Glories of the undivided
Trinity. This, O my Soul, is the top of Happiness; this is the Supreme
perfection of our Nature. This, this alone is worthy to be the aim of our
Being; the Hope and End of all our labors. When we are come to this we shall
presently rest, and our satisfied desires will reach no farther. We shall be
filled with overflowing bliss, and our utmost capacities can hold no more. In
one Act of Joy we shall be eternally fixed, one lasting Act which will spring
fresh and unwearied for ever.

MEDITATION III.
NEver can we say too much, my Soul, of this glorious subject; never can we
think enough of the Felicities of Heaven. Arise my Soul, and leave mortality
and time below thy flight; to thee these joys belong: Arise and advance thy
self on high: Fly away with the wings of thy Spirit; are they not strong enough
to lift thee from earth? the only reason of it is want of exercise. Fly if thou
can possibly to that land of Promise, try resolutely, strive manfully to do
so; and visit those Heavenly Regions. Take an Evenings walk in that Paradise of
pure delights, amongst the beautified Spirits of just men who perpetually
contemplate the Eternal Deity. Think tho thy habitation at present is in this
vale of tears, thou mai'st hope one day to be advanced to their dignity; to
have a place and sing among their holy Quires: We may hope to know all things
that are produced, and to know besides the all producing Cause. O what a fire
of love will it kindle in our hearts, when we shall see those shining
Mysteries! When our great God, like a burning mirror, shall strike his
brightness on the eyes of our Soul. O what excessive joy will that love
produce! a love so violently desiring, and so fully satisfied? When our
capacities shall be stretched to the utmost, and the rich abounding Object shall
fill and Overflow them: O what profound repose will that Joy beget! a Joy so
exceeding high, and so eternally secure? When in amorous languishment we shall
sweetly dissolve into a fort of blissfull Union with our first beginning: When
without losing what we are, we shall become even what he is: We shall take part
in all his Joys, and share in the Glories of all his Heaven. O what divine and
ravishing words are these! How gently they enter and delight my Ear! How they
diffuse themselves over all my Brain, and strongly penetrate to my very Soul!
Methinks they turn to substance as they go, and I feel them stir and work
through all my powers: Methinks they lie as a rich Cordial at my heart, and
send forth Spirits to quicken and refresh me. There, O my Soul, we shall rest
from all our labors, which are but the way to all that happiness: There we
shall rest from sin and sorrow, and no longer be troubled with our selves or
others: There we shall rest for ever in the protection of our God; in the arms
and bosom of our dearest Lord: We shall enjoy a rest not senseless and stupid
as here, but attended with spritely joy and pleasure: Such is the desirable
rest that remains for the Servants of God.

PETITIONS.
O Heaven, the eternal source of all these Joys, and infinitely more and
infinitely greater! As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so does my Soul
thirst after thee: After thee it is that I daily sigh and mourn, and with a
greedy longing eye, often do I look up and say Descend thou blessed Heaven into
my heart, or rather take up my heart to thee: Thy Joys indeed are too great to
enter into me; O God! I pray thee, who art the Heaven I long for, take me hence
to enter into them. When, O my God, shall I sit at that fountain head, and
drink my fill of those living Streams? When shall I be Inebriated with that
torrent of pleasures which springs for ever from thy glorious Throne? Oh that
the days of my banishment were fully finished! How is the time of my weary
Pilgrimage prolonged! Why am I still detained in this valley of tears, still
wandering up and down in this wilderness of dangers? O God! who do graciously
woo us to our eternal Inheritance, by all manner of ways which are apt to
work upon us; Make these glories, I beseech thee, powerfully to insinuate
themselves into me, and become absolute masters of my heart, that I may not
wander in this wilderness, but may steadily direct my course to the heavenly
Canaan: Let the felicities of it so strongly settle themselves in my affections
that my Soul may be ravished therewith, that I may run with courage and
diligence in the way that leads to it. Make me despise the gaudy vanities and
temptations of this world, that would bribe my flesh to hinder me in my race.
Come thou sweet Jesu, my only hope and sure deliverer out of all sorrows and
dangers: Come thou and here begin to dwell in my heart: O come quickly to
prepare my Soul for that life which I desire and hope to live with thee in
Heaven: And when thou have fitted me for it, take me in thy time to my eternal
home.

Hymn 2.
WHy do we seek felicity
Where it is not to be found;
And not, dear Lord, look up to thee
Where all delights abound?
Why do we seek for treasure here,
On this false barren sand?
Where naught but empty shells appear,
And marks of Shipwreck stand?
O world, how little do thy joys
Concern a Soul, that knows
It self not made for such low toys,
As thy poor hand bestows!
How cross art thou to that design
For which we had our birth!
Us, who were made in Heaven to shine,
Thou bow'st down to thy Earth.
Nay to thy Hell; for thither sink
All that to thee submit:
Thou strew'st some flowers on the brink,
To drown us in the pit.
World take away thy tinsel wares,
That dazzle here our eyes;
Let us go up above the Stars,
Where all our treasure lies.
The way we know; our dearest Lord
Himself is gone before;
And has engaged his faithful word
To open us the door.
But O my God! reach down thy hand,
And take us up to thee;
That we about thy Throne may stand,
And all thy glories see.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
One ever living Lord:
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved, Obeyed, Adored.
Amen.
For Monday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
IT is highly fit and just that all Mankind do adore their Maker. The great God
formed our bodies out of the Earth, and gave us the Spirit in man which bears
his likeness; a Soul that all created nature cannot sill, nor any thing that is
below his own Immensity: He has freely bestowed on us all the rest of his
Creatures, which are fitted to serve and delight our bodies: But he has
moreover designed us for his glorious Kingdom, that we might dwell with him in
perfect bliss. All the Creatures he has made, the great God has always under
his observing eye so long as they continue in being: All things are open and
naked to his Omniscience. Though his Throne of State be established above, and
the splendours of his glory shine only on the Blessed that are there; yet his
unlimited Eye looks down to this lower World, and beholds all the ways of the
Children of Adam: If we go out he marks our steps, and when we retire; our shut
Closet cannot exclude him; while we are alone he minds all the vain and roving
imaginations that we have, he observes too the end that we aim at in all the
Studies which we apply our selves to: When we converse with others, He observes
our deportment, and the good or ill we do to them or our selves: In our
Devotions he takes notice of our carriage, and regards with what attention and
affection we make our Prayers. All the day long he considers how we spend our
time, and the darkest night conceals not our works from him: If we deceive our
Neighbor, He spies the fraud, and hears the least whisper of a slandering
tongue: If we in secret oppress the Poor, or by private alms relieve their
wants; If in our hearts we murmur at the Rich, or live contented with our
little portion: Whatever we do, He perfectly sees us; where e're we are He is
sure to be with us. He that made the Eye, shall not he see? and shall it be
said that he cannot hear who formed the Ear? But O thou Sovereign Lord of
Heaven, why do thou stoop thus low thy glorious Eye? What can thou find
that here does deserve thy view, among the trifles of this empty world? It is
not thy own satisfaction that thou seek herein, but thy design is our
advantage. Thou appearest still ready to punish our sins, that the fear of thy
rod may prevent our miseries. Sure, O my God, thy favors must be sweet, since
even thy threatenings have so much mercy: And I must be worse than blind if I
venture to be wicked in the face of Heaven: Thou do also Lord graciously
stand by us to see us work, that thine awful Eye may quicken our diligence;
thou art still at hand to relieve our wants. When all thy work, my Soul, is
done in the sight of him thou servest, this may justly encourage thee, this may
make thee hope that the Labors and Sufferings of thy love shall not go
unrewarded. Happy we who have our God so near us, if our pious Lives keep us
near to him.

Hymn 3.
WAke now my soul, and humbly hear
What thy mild Lord commands:
Each word of his will charm thine ear;
Each word will guide thy hands.
Hark how his sweet and tender care
Complies with our weak minds:
What er'e our State and temper are,
Still some sit work he finds.
They that are merry let them sing,
And let the sad hearts pray:
Let those still ply their cheerful wing;
And these their sober way.
So mounts the early chirping Lark
Still upwards to the Skies:
So sits the Turtle in the dark,
Among her groans and cries.
And yet the Lark, and yet the Dove,
Both sing, though several parts:
And so should we, how er'e we move
With light or heavy hearts.
Or rather both should both assay,
And their cross notes unite:
Both grief and joy should sing and pray;
Since both such hopes invite.
Hopes that all present sorrow heal,
All present joy transcend:
Hopes to possess, and taste, and feel
Delights that never will end.
All glory to the sacred Three,
All honor, power, and praise;
As at the first, may ever be,
Beyond the end of days.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
MY God, since Thou art never absent from us, we will endeavor to be always
present with thee. Often will we go up to thy Throne above, and there
contemplate and admire thy glory. We will often wait upon thee in thy house,
and there adore and praise thy mercy. Every where will we seek to meet thee;
and every where delight to find Thee. My soul let it be thy endeavor to walk
with God in all the parts of thy conversation, and take heed that thou walk
humbly with thy God. Gracious God, we will spread all our wants before thee,
and offer all our Petitions unto thee. Thou do willingly incline a favorable
ear to the Prayers that come from an upright and fervent heart. Thou art a
rewarder of those that diligently seek Thee. Our God loves to hear us treat of
Heaven, as if we made it the main business of our lives to get thither. All
other things we must ask with submission to Him; since we do not know what of
them is absolutely good for our selves. But his Eternal Joys we may beg without
restraint; we may urge and press for his assistance to gain them. Heaven is the
thing we may wish for, if for any thing, without resignation. We may pray for
it with great fervency and perseverance, and he will not account us too
importunate. O wise and gracious Lord, whatsoever thou do, thy love intends
it for the good of thy servents. If thou do sometimes defer to grant our
requests; it is only in charity to us, to make us repeat them. It is that we
may more sensibly feel our own poverty, and be more strongly convinced of our
dependence on Thee: That we may practice our Hope, and exercise our Faith and
Patience while we long expect; and may practice the higher gratitude, when we
receive at last. It is that we may learn this sure and happy skill, of working
in our souls the Virtues that we desire; For those very desires by being often
renewed do at length themselves become the Graces we seek. But O how
improvident, Lord, are we! how unwilling to pray are the most of us always,
and all of us at some times! How does a short service seem long and tedious;
and one half hour quite tire out our patience! We are slow to begin, and in
have to make an end; We are heavy while the duty is a doing, and glad when it
is done. Yet surely there is no easier work than to ask what we want, no
purchase can be cheaper than to have for asking; for asking of him who is
willing to hear us, who will not upbraid, who will give kindly and not
disdainfully. There is no sweeter pleasure than to converse with God; nor
greater profit than to gain his favor. We have still new transgressions to
confess; and shall, alas, never want infirmities to lament. We have then great
occasion as well as encouragement often to wait upon God. And this work, my
Soul, ought to be always performed with a serious application of all thy
powers to it. He is worthy of this whom thou servest, the important benefits
thou may receive deserve it. But unless we worship in spirit and truth, we
shall neither please him nor profit our selves. Take heed then that careless
and vain thoughts do not contradict thy words when thou art at the exercises of
thy devotion. Look to thy self lest when thou speak to Him, thou do not
hear thy self. And let no delay discourage thy Hope, nor the refusal to grant
any request destroy thy considence in him. But let this firm foundation still
sustain thee, and on this let thy peace be for ever established; that what is
truly necessary his Goodness will not deny, and all the rest it is thy duty to
submit to his pleasure.

MEDITATION III.
TAke heed, my soul, that thou do not so presume on the divine bounty, as to
omit the performance of thine own duty. Still to thy devotion see that thou add
thy best endeavors. If thou desire God to relieve thy necessities, do thou
also faithfusly labor with thine own hands. Do not expect a Blessing to drop
from the Clouds into hands that are only held up, or that God will indulge
thee in Idleness and neglect of thy self. If we beg Grace for victory over our
passions; we must also constantly strive to resist their assaults. We must
endeavor wisely to foresee particular dangers, and cast about how to avoid
them. We must use the proper weapons against every sin that we would conquer.
To every one oppose the strict Command of the great God, the dire Threatenings
against it, the Judgments executed against sinners: The mischiefs that are the
natural Consequents of sin, the hurt it will do to the Body or the Soul of thy
self, the prejudice that it may do to the interests of thy Neighbor. Consider,
my Soul, it will be in vain to approach the holy God to worship him, unless thy
life prepare the way for thy Offerings. Endeavor then to come with clean
hands. Let thy Life be a continued Exercise of Holiness and Virtue, if thou
would obtain an Increase of these by thy Prayers. Be thou merciful, if thou
would find mercy. God will shut his ears to thy loudest prayers; if thou do
not open thine to the cry of the poor. He will deny to pardon thy trespasses
against him, if thou do not forgive thine Enemies. But that very temper which
disposes us to be heard when we pray, does indeed depend upon his favor: Every
condition that he requires on our part is nothing else but his own free gift.
We should then, my Soul, ask with all that we desire, those qualifications to
which the things are promised. And as we find these increase in us, our
confidence and hope in the promises of God may also increase. Let us study what
he requires us to be, and aim at that in the first place, seeking first the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and then all other things that
are necessary and good for us shall be added. Godliness entitles to the
promises of this life and of that to come. To the good man God will perform his
promises in a bounteous measure. He holds his blessings as it were hovering
over our heads, still watching when we shall be sit to receive them.

PETITIONS.
O Most gracious God, vouchsafe to give what thou art pleased to command, and
then command what thou please. Come holy Spirit, and inspire all my prayers,
that it may not be my sad fate to ask and not receive, because I ask amiss.
Deliver me, O Lord, from asking what I cannot receive without danger to my
self. Deliver me from receiving what I cannot use without offending others or
ruining mine own Soul. Do thou, I beseech Thee, O sovereign Good, who alone art
worthy to be the center of my Soul, cure all my vain desires and worldly lusts,
and reclaim my wandering Thoughts from all other things when I am in thy
service. Make me to worship thee in spirit and in truth. O may the Spirit of
grace and prayer excite me to seek Thee diligently, night and day to call upon
Thee, to pray without ceasing or fainting. Lord, let thy bounteous Goodness
encourage me to do thus by affording seasonable and sit Answers to the Prayers
I make. Let my experience tell me Thou art my portion and refuge in the land of
the living, when I feel my self under thy sure protection in my dangers, and
within the reach of thy gracious Ear for whatever real good I ask, and do use
my just endeavors to attain. Lord since thou art every where present, where
e're I am thou art round about me, thou art in me and in all things:
Communicate I pray thee to thy creature such of thine exellencies as I want and
am made capable to receive. Let me not dwell in thy Fullness and yet remain
empty, surrounded with thy Blessedness and yet be my self miserable. Cure the
darkness of my mind by communicating of thy Light; cleanse away the pollution
and sinful spots of my soul, by making me a partaker of thy holiness. Since
thy Goodness is always near to me, infuse it into me; make me compassionate
to those that are miserarable, liberal to the poor, and patient toward the
infirmities of them I have to do with for their good. Lord make me like thy
self, that I may be such as thou can love, that thy nearness may always
have a favorable influence upon me; and that I may have comfort and not
terror in thy presence, from the assurance of a Friend and not an Enemy at
hand. Let every thing about me, Lord, bring Thee to my mind, since thou art in
and with every thing. Cause me to keep my eyes continually sixth on thine over
me, that thine may awfully check my inclination to folly, and may encourage my
pursuit of true good and the performance of my duty. Make me, O God, still with
humble boldness to rejoice before thee, who art my merciful Creator: And as a
new-pardon'd Subject justly fears the angry brow of his offended Prince; so let
my oft-forgiven Soul continually tremble to provoke the wrath of thy dread
Majesty: Thus temper, O Lord, my Love with reverence, and allay my fear with
hope, that I may live to thy glory in a cheerful Obedience.

Glory be to the Father, etc. Amen.
For Monday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
TO know Thee, O Lord, is the highest Learning, and to see thy face is the only
true Happiness. Consider now, my Soul, and thankfully remember what the great
God is to us men: Thou Lord art the great Beginning of our nature, and the
glorious end of all our actions: Thou art the overflowing source from whence we
spring, and the Immense Ocean into which we tend: Thou art the free bestower of
all we possess, and the faithful promiser of all we hope for: Thou art the
strong sustainer of our lives, and our ready protection from all our enemies:
Thou art the merciful Scourger of our sins, and the bounteous Rewarder of our
Obedience: Thou art the only wise God, and the only safe Conductor of this
life's pilgrimage: Thou art the ever blessed God, and the Eternal Rest of our
wearied Souls: God is the Guide to find my way, my strength to walk in it, and
my rest in the end of it: He must draw me or I cannot run after him, He must
seek me or I can never find him, and unless I find and enjoy him I can never be
happy. Such words our narrowness is constrained to use, when we endeavor to
speak the divine bounties, when we would express how many ways mankind are
beholden to him that made them. In a few words Lord, here is much expressed, what
may fill our minds with a great many thoughts, and afford matter for long
Meditation: But yet our words are, and our highest thoughts must be far short
of the goodness and mercy of thy thoughts toward us; they are more than can be
numbered by Men or Angels.

MEDITATION II.
LEt us now consider, my Soul, and with great humility remember what we are to
the great God: We, who alas are nothing in our selves, what can we be to his
Immensity? Thou Lord who art all things in thine own rich self, what can thou
receive from our poverty? This only we are to Thee, O Great Cretor! the
unthankful objects of all thy bounties: This only we are to thee, O dear
Redeemer! the unworthy cause of all thy sufferings. Guilty we committed the
Crime, and thou with thine own Innocence undertook'st the Punishment: We went
astray from the path of life, and thy mercy came down from Heaven to seek us;
to seek us in the wilderness where we had lost our selves, and bring us home to
the discipline of thy Love. Thou have sent thy Spirit to gather the lost Sheep,
and what are we to Thee, O holy and blessed Spirit! but very stubborn and
untractable creatures? We are not sheep till thou have changed our natures: Man
is born like the wild Asses colt. Lord, what are we, that thou should thus
regard such poor, vile and inconsiderable wretches? What can our good will
avail thy Bliss, that with so many charms thou wooest us to love thee? What can
our enmity prejudice thy content, that thou do threaten so severely if we
love thee not? Is there, O my God, not felicity enough in the sweetness alone
of loving thee? Is there not certainly misery enough in living destitute of thy
blissfull love? Yes, Yes, Dear Lord, so it is, and that thou knew; and that
is indeed the only cause which moved thy goodness to court our affections: Thou
knew'st we would else cast away our selves, by doting on the follies of this
deceitful world: Thou knew the danger of our wilful nature, and therefore
strivest by greatest fears and hopes, and by all the wisest arts of Love and
Bounty, to draw us to thy self, and endow us with thy Kingdom. But Oh unhappy
we! whose frowardness required so strange proceeding, to force upon us our own
Salvation: Yet happy we are in this, that our wants have met so kind a hand,
that our God is good, long-suffering, and whose mercy endures for ever: His
goodness needs but our emptiness to engage him to fill us, and nothing but our
misery to move him to make us happy.

MEDITATION III.
LOrd, without Thee, what is all the world to us but a flying dream of busy
vanities? It promises indeed a Paradise of bliss, but all it performs is an
empty cloud: Thine are the Joys that shine fixed as the Stars, and make the
only solid Heaven: Lord, without Thee what are we to our selves, but the
wretched causes of our own ruin? We, 'till thou gave us being, were purely
nothing, more removed from happiness than the most miserable of thy Creatures:
Now thou have made us, we wholly depend on thee, and perish immediately if thou
forsake us: Thou who without us art the same All-glorious Essence, perfectly
full of thy own eternal Felicity: Without us thy royal Throne stands firm for
ever, and all the powers of Heaven obey thy pleasures: O Lord, how contrary is
our imperfect nature in every circumstance to thy excellency and perfection?
Thou dwell above in the Mansions of Glory, and we below in houses of Clay:
Thou art from everlasting to everlasting, we are but of yesterday, and are
every moment going downwards to our dissolution: Thou art Immense, and thy
presence fills the Heavens, but the greatest of us, alas, how little are we?
two yards of Air contain us while we li^e, and a few spans of Earth suffice us
at our death: Thou art Almighty power, all-sufficient fullness; we are poverty
and weakness. When, O when my God, shall these vast distances meet together? it
is in thy power to make these extremities embrace each other; we know that by
thy amazing power they were once miraculously joined in the sacred person of
thy Eternal Son; when the King of Heaven stoopt down to earth, and grafted into
his own Person the nature of man: We hope they once again shall be happily
united in the blissfull vision of thy glorious self; when we shall be like thee
by seeing thee as thou art; when the children of Earth shall be exalted to
Heaven, and be satisfied with thy likeness: But are there no means here below?
O thou infinitely high and glorious God! Is there no way for us now to approach
toward thee, to diminish at least this uncomfortable distance? There is none
but the way of holy Love? Divine Love elevates our meanness: Love will bring us
near to the blessed God, it will make us live in a happy union to him: And none
can attain this but by thy free gift; unless Thou, O dearest Lord! do first
Love us, and with thy Love kindle the sacred fire in our breasts, we shall
never be so happy as to Love thee.

PETITIONS.
O Bounteous God! O abundant Goodness! add to all thy other favors this of
making me love and esteem thee above all things, above my self and all
creatures besides: Make me to see emptiness and vanity in all things else, to
account that all is vanity of vanities, but only the Love of God and enjoyment
of him. Let me, when I find this world ordained by thee to breed and widen
only, and not fill my capacity; let me make this use of all thy Creatures here,
to raise and heighten my desires of thy infinite self in thy Eternity. O God,
be thou to me my God and my All, and make me nothing in mine own eyes: Be thou
my whole everlasting delight, and let nothing else be any thing to me but thy
self; so draw my heart to thee, so engross I beseech thee all my affections as
to famish all the helpless Idols of my soul which in my state of darkness and
enmity to thee I have so fondly adored. Pity, Oh pity, gracious Lord, according
to thy infinite compassion, my miserable distance from thee: Thy hands have
made me and fashioned me, thou have made me capable to enjoy thee, thou have
given a capacity too large to receive satisfaction from any thing but thy self.
Oh regard with favor the work of thy hands! say to my soul thou art my
salvation, and say it so Lord as to make me hear; thy powerful word can open
the deaf ear: And through my ear Lord reach my heart, quicken my stupid soul,
put a new life into me; so make me gladly follow thee, that by following I may
find thee, and having found may never lose thy sight again, never turn away my
eyes from thee, never grow estranged again, nor lose thy blissful acquaintance:
Never let any thing but thy Eternal self be the prevailing ruling Joy of my
heart: Grant these requests or I am undone: Grant these requests for the love
of thy only Son our Mediator and Advocate.

Amen.
Hymn 4.
LOrd who shall dwell above with thee
There on thy holy Hill?
Who shall those glorious prospects see
That Heaven with gladness fill?
Those happy souls who prize that life
Above the bravest here;
Whose greatest hope, whose eagerest strife
Is once to settle there.
They use this world, but value that
That they supreamly love;
They travel through this present state,
But place their home above.
Lord! who are they that thus choose thee,
But those thou first did choose?
To whom thou gav'st thy grace most free,
Thy grace not to refuse.
We of our selves can nothing do,
But all on thee depend;
Thine is the work and wages too,
Thine both the way and end.
O make us still our work attend,
And we will not doubt our pay;
We will not fear a blessed end,
If thou but guide our way.
Glory to Thee, O Bounteous Lord!
Who giv'st to all things breath;
Glory to thee, Eternal Word!
Who sav'st us by thy death.
Glory, O Blessed Spirit to Thee,
Who fill'st our hearts with love;
Glory to all the Mystic three,
Who reign one God above.
Amen.
For Tuesday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
FRom thee O Lord, we derive our being; and from the same Goodness our
Continuance to be: if thou but withdrawest thy hand for one single moment, we
instantly return to our first nothing. Thou art without Cause or Maker as thou
art without beginning, and have thy dependence upon none else; we have but a
derived being, only borrowed worth, we have nothing which we have not received:
nothing but our Sins is entirely our own, which we have reason to be ashamed
of. Should we presume at any time, O Lord, to divide thy Grace, and proudly
challenge any share to our selves, thy mighty Truth stands up against us; and
our own infirmities may plainly confute us. Should thou severely examine our
Hearts, and ask who works all their actions in them; surely we must needs bow
down our h^^ds and from our low Dust humbly say: Nothing are we, O Lord, but
what thou have made us; nothing have we but what thou have given us. Not unto
us then, O Lord, not unto us but unto thy Name be Glory. When we have applied
our utmost cares, and used all the diligence that lies in our power; what can
we do but look up to thee, and second all our endeavors with Prayers for thy
Blessing? And when we implore thy gracious Mercy, what can we do but submit our
hopes, and expect the event from thy free goodness. If thou denyest what we
wish, who can compel thy will; or call in question thy Decrees? Are we not all
thy Creatures, O Gracious God! and as helpless Children, hanging at the Breast
of thy Providence? Are we not all as clay in thy hands; to frame us into
vessels of what use thou please? Behold we confess, O Lord, in thee we live;
in thee we move and have our being. All our sufficiency proceeds from thee; and
all our success depends on thy favor. Others may tell us the way that we
should go; but thou alone can enable us to walk in it. And they that tell us
our way, must be first taught it by thee. And they must be moved by thee to act
that Charity; and so at last all is resolved into thee. We know further, O
Lord, and thou thy self have taught us; that unless thou defend the City, the
Guard watches it in vain. We acknowledge and our own experience tells us; that
unless thou reach forth thy hand, we are presently in danger of sinking. Every
moment of our day subsists by thee. From all our Enemies thy Providence defends
us, and covers our Head in the day of danger: Thou sendest in thy Grace to
relieve our weakness; and so disappointest the temptations that threaten to
undo us. O my Soul, be thou ready to adore thy God that preserves thee. Has he
watched over thee all this night for good? has he renewed his mercies this
morning? does he bestow on thee all thy days and the comforts they bring? Then
be ashamed to think much of spending one half hour in his service.

Hymn 5.
COme let us adore the Gracious hand,
That brought us to this light;
That gave his Angels strict Command
To be our Guard this Night.
When we laid down our weary head,
And Sleep sealed up our Eye:
They stood and watch't about our bed,
To let no harm come nigh.
Now we are up, they still go on,
And guide us through the day,
They never leave their Charge alone,
Whatever besets our way.
And, O my Soul, how many snares,
Ly spread before our feet!
In all our joys in all our cares,
Some danger still we meet.
Sometimes the Sin does us overtake,
And on our weakness win;
Sometimes our selves our ruin make,
And we overtake the sin.
O save us Lord, from all those darts
That seek our Souls to slay;
Save us from us and our false Hearts,
Lest we our selves betray.
Save us, O Lord, to thee we cry,
From whom all blessings Spring;
We on thy Grace alone rely,
Alone thy Glory sing.
Glory to thee Eternal Lord,
Thrice blessed three in one,
Thy Name at all times be adored,
Till time it self be done.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
THe Almighty Power of God sustains our Life, and mercifully allows us space to
repent: that by well employing the time he lends us we may wisely provide for
our own Eternity. Wisely then thou actest, O my Soul, when thou set apart
some time every day wherein to meditate on God and his Word and works, by which
thou may be sitted for a happy Eternity. Consider then further the Divine
Providence, and say within thy self: Thus do we depend, O Lord! on thee, and
happy we are in that dependence, did we but know our own true interest. We and
our whole concerns are deposited with God; and where can we find a better hand
to ensure them? Is he not wise enough to choose safely for us, who disposes all
nature in such admirable order? Has he not power to go through with his
purpose, who commands the will of men and Angels? Wants he perhaps an
inclination to favor us, who desires our felicity more than our own Hearts do?
He feeds the Fowls of the Air, and clothes the Lillies of the Field. Without
his Providence not a Sparrow falls to the ground, and shall we mistrust his
care for his Children? Under his Government we have lived all this while; and
can we now suspect he will forsake us? He has shown his bounty in extraordinary
favors, and will he deny us his lesser blessings? He has freely bestowed upon
us his dearest Son; how shall he not with him freely give us all things else?
All that are useful to carry us on our way, and bring us at length to his
Eternal Rest. If our necessities be the effects of our folly; we must not
presume that he will maintain us in our sins: Rather we should strive to
moderate our appetites and correct our vices that have bred these miseries. But
if our wants be innocent and pressing; he will sooner do a miracle than break
his word: This he has often solemnly engaged; and often made good by his
Providence. Ask but the former ages, and they will tell you the wonders which
he wrought in them in favor to his faithful Servants. He multiplied the Oil in
the Poor Widows cruse; and fed his banished Prophet by a Raven. He dried the Sea
into a Path for his People, and melted the Rocks into streams of Water to
quench their thirst. He made his Angels Stewards of their Provision, and
nourisht them in the Wilderness with the Bread of Heaven. Still, O my God, thy
Eternal Charity retains the same affections for those that rely on thee. Still
thy all-seeing Wisdom governs the World with the same immense unalterable
goodness. Nay surely now the streams of thy Mercy run more strong; and have
wrought to themselves a larger channel. Since thou broughtest down the Waters
from above the Heavens; and openedst in thine own Body a Spring of Life. A
Spring of Joy and Bliss to revive our Hearts; and overslow them with a torrent
of everlasting Pleasures.

MEDITATION III.
LEt us sit down in Peace, O my Soul! and rest secure in the bosom of
Providence. Let us not disturb the order of those mercies which our God has
designed us in his eternal Councels: Every accident may be turned into virtue,
and every virtue is a step toward our glorious end. If our affairs succeed,
let us praise our great Benefactor, and think what he will give us hereafter,
who does so favor us here; if they miscary, let us yield to the will of
Heaven, and learn by our crosses in this world to love the other: Whatever
happens to us, this ought to be our constant rule, to provide for the other
life, and be contented with the present: Shall we not patiently accept a little
evil from him that has given us much good? Shall the being without some one
thing that we need not, more sensibly affect us than the having all that we
need? Ungrateful wretches* the common benefits that we all enjoy, deserve the
thanksgiving of a whole life; the air we breath in, the bright Sun that shines
on us, the water and the bounteous earth that do so faithfully serve us; the
exercise of our senses, and the use of our wits, if not in excellency at least
to some degree: All these things, O Lord, thou generally affordest both to the
good and to the bad; and for the least of these none can praise thee enough.
What shall we say then? can we yet with any justice complain because some few
perhaps are more prosperous than we? should we not rather look down on the many
below us, and be thankful to see our selves more favored than they? should we
not do well, my Soul, to reckon over the several miseries of mankind, and bless
our God that has so far preferred us? Had we some desperate Canker breeding on
our face, or noisome Leprosy spreading over our skin, (these we must all
confess are incident to our nature, and much more than these is due to our
sins) what would we then give to be as we now are? how gladly would we exchange
them for a moderate affliction? It is but to interpret our worst condition
well, and we shall sind motives enough to excite our gratitude to God: It is but
interpreting our best condition frowardly, and we shall imagine defects enough to
make us think our selves miserable. My Soul, do thou always adore the wisdom
of God, and leave it to him as he pleases to rule his own world: All his works
shall certainly praise him, and his Saints shall bless him. He scatters these
temporal things with a seeming negligence, as trifles of so little importance,
that they signify not either love or hatred. Nothing but Heaven is indeed
considerable, nothing but Eternity deserves our esteem: But if we could
understand the secret character of the divine Decrees, we should read in each
syllable a perfect Harmony.

PETITIONS.
TEach me I pray Thee, O thou the blessed Enlightner of our minds, teach me to
expound thy actions always in a fair sense; always to believe they are well
becoming thy infinite perfections, and therefore adorable: Suffer me not to
follow my own fancy in doing this, lest I create to my self a voluntary misery.
Lord, let all thy dispensations design favor and good to me, and let me
understand that they do so; then shall I heartily praise thee for them, of what
nature soever they be: Let me interpret the afflictions which thou sendest, as
meant to correct, and not to destroy me; to prevent some sin, or teach me the
practice of some virtue, and that when I shall need crosses no longer, thou will then remove them: In the mean while, O gracious Lord, I beseech thee to
give me Patience, according to my burden; enable me to wait thy time of
deliverance, without prescribing limits to thee, and without contracting either
a froward discontented Spirit, or a mean and dejected one: Make me, Lord, to
rejoice that my lot is in thy hands, while I see thy Mercy favorably choosing
for me: And willingly, I say, do thou dispose of my condition here as it
pleases thy self, only let my Portion hereafter be with thy blessed. Fix thou,
O Lord, my steps, establish my goings in thy Word, that I may not stagger at
the uneven motions of this world, but may steadily go on toward my glorious
home; not censuring my journey by the weather I meet with, nor turning out of
the way for any accident that may befall me. Thou have told us, O Lord, it is
not in man that walks, to direct his own steps, and therefore bid us not to
lean to our own understanding: I humbly beg of thee continual direction; I
desire thou would cause all self-presumption to dye in me; let this be the
effect of all my disappointments and ill successes, and make my whole
confidence to rely on thee, so shall my frailty make me more strong, and thy
Power, O my God, may be magnified in my weakness, and thy mercy triumph in the
relief of my misery. Teach me to begin all my works with fear, to go on with
obedience, and finish them with love, and after all to sit humbly down in hope,
and with a cheerful confidence look up to thee. All this we may do for men, and
they may fail us; we may fear and obey, and they forget our service; we may
love and hope, and they despise our affections; only Thou, O Lord, whom we can
no way benefit, thou will not fail those that trust and serve thee; thy
promises are faithful, thou art unchangeable, and thy rewards are Eternal.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For Tuesday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
WIth awful reverance, my Soul, consider that the Great God is infinite in his
power to punish, he has been and he can always be very terrible in his
Judgments; Our God is a consuming fire. Let vain dust no more speak proudly
against the Almighty, nor be so foolhardy as to provoke the living God. Let all
seal up their lips in humble silence when they are witnesses of his terrible
Judgments, and with fear and trembling always remember them. Remember thou my
Soul, how the Earth opened it self and swallowed up alive many thousands of his
Enemies. Call to mind that the Clouds rained Fire and Brimstone and buried
several rebellious Cities in their own Ashes. Remember that a general deluge
did once by Gods Commission overspread the whole world, and swept away almost
all mankind, when the wickedness of man was great upon the Earth. Remember
steadily that sin was the cause of all this misery and ruin. Sin threw the
Angels down from Heaven; and chained them up in eternal darkness. Sin banished
Adam out of Paradise; and turned the delicious Garden into a Field of weeds. O
God how terrible is thy mighty arm; when thou stretchest it forth to be avenged
on thine enemies! O Sin how fatal is thy desperate Malice; that pulls on our
heads all the thunder of Heaven! O my Soul, how dull and senseless are we, to
sleep secure as if all were safe! Can we repeat these amazing truths; and not
tremble at the wrath of divine Justice? Can we consider the deplorable end of
Sinners, and still dare to go on in the ways of Sin? Even when we sing thy
praises, O glorious Lord, it is our duty to rejoice with trembling before Thee.
What should corrupted nature then do, when it sees it self ready to offend
Thee? What should a guilty Conscience do when it sees it self upon the brink of
ruin by offending Thee?

MEDITATION II.
YEt, O my Soul, do not give up thy self to despair under a sense of thy sins;
bring thou to him but a humble and penitent heart, and thou shall find there is
forgiveness with him. He that is thus infinte in power to punish, is full as
infinite in goodness to save. How often have we broke his Commands, yet still
his Earth sustains, and serves us. How often, alas! have we abused our fullness of
Bread, yet still his Clouds shower plenty upon us! He is merciful and gracious
as well as Long-suffering; a God forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; He
spares us so long that we may have time to repent; and to seek and obtain his
Pardon. Only the proud apostate Angels find no forgiveness, because their
obstinacy does refuse to seek it. Could those rebel spirits disclaim their
crimes, and turn again to obey their Maker, his clemency would soon revoke
their sentence, and restore them to shine in their first bright seats. But O
the excess of mercy vouchsafe't to Adam, and to us dust and ashes his
contemptible Posterity! For whom the sovereign King of Heaven humbled himself
to descend upon Earth, to lead a poor laborious life, and to suffer a painful
death. He came to be a Prince and a Savior to us, to give us repentance and
remission of sins; to teach us by an exemplary Life how to live acceptably to
God; and to satisfy for our sins by his death. Thy mercies, O Lord, are above
all thy works; and this is above all the rest of thy mercies.

MEDITATON. III.
STill, my Soul, dwell in contemplation of the divine mercies, it is good and
pleasant to be here. When we lay buried in the abyss of nothing, it was his own
free Goodness that called us into being. He fashioned our limbs in our Mothers
womb; and filled our Nurses breasts with milk. He enlarged our little steps
when we began to go, and carefully preserved our helpless Infancy. He
commanded even his Angels to bear us up, lest we should dash our feet against a
stone. How many dangers, my Soul, consider, have thou escaped, and not one of
them but was governed by a Divine Providence! How many blessings do thou
daily receive, and there is not one of them which does not proceed from his
bounty! He provided Tutors to instruct our Youth; and to plant in our tender
minds the seeds of Virtue. He appointed Pastors to feed our Souls, and safely
guide them in the ways of Bliss. He sealed his Love with Sacraments of Grace;
to nourish in us Faith and Charity. All this thou have done, O merciful Lord!
the wise disposer of Heaven and earth. All this thou have done, and still thou
go on by infinite ways to gain us to thy Love. Thou command us to ask,
and promisest to grant; thou invitest us to seek, and assurest that we shall
find. Thou do vouchsafe even thy self to stand at the door and knock; and if
we open thou enterest, and fillest our hearts with joy. If we forget thee, thou
renewest our Memories; if we fly from thee, thou still kindly find some
means to recall us. If we defer our amendment, thou do patiently stay for us;
and nevertheless when we return we find thy arms open to embrace us. And if
when we were not, thou did freely love us, we may be assured thou will not
forsake us when we strive to love Thee. If when we had lost our way and were
wandering from thee, thy matchless kindness did condescend to seek us, and give
us an effectual call, thou will not refuse us when we seek after Thee.

PETITIONS.
I Therefore do most humbly and constantly seek after thee my God. For all good
I fly to Thee the Father of Lights, and giver of every good and perfect gift.
And at this time, Lord, I ask of Thee that thou would always possess my
heart with an awful reverence of thy great Name. Chase away all levity and
carlesness of spirit from me, by putting thy fear into my inward parts. Humble
my too proud and wilful spirit to a ready submission to thy will in all things.
Make me I pray Thee so to stand in aw of thee and of thy Judgments, that I may
not dare to sin. Those Judgments thou have often executed on obstinate and
impenitent sinners, let them be often called to my mind; let the thoughts of
them meet and antidote the temptations to sin: Make my fear of them prevent my
feeling the like. Still O Lord, let a lively sensible Conscience cry out aloud
when I am tempted, and say; Dare you commit this evil, and sin against God?
Dare you commit this evil and run upon the fire of divine Vengeance? Are you
not afraid to provoke his wrath to plunge you into everlasting torments? By thy
Judgments in the world, thou O Lord expectest that the inhabitants thereof
should be moved to learn righteousness. Grant Lord that I may always do so,
that so thy Judgments on others may prove mercies to me. And let also thy
abundant goodness and mercy shown to the penitent and faithful, win me to
repent and trust in Thee the merciful and Gracious God. Thus prevent me, I
beseech Thee from being overawed by the terrors of the Lord. Suffer not the
Enemy of my Soul to drive me into despair because I am a Sinner, dispose me to
lay hold of the mercy offered by the Redeemer, make me to believe and find that
humble and penitent Sinners have an Advocate with the Father, the righteous
Jesus, the Christ; That he, who suffered on Earth for our sins, is gone to
Heaven to make intercession, and to plead that satisfaction in the behalf of
those that apply themselves to him for his help. Encourage me to a steady
practice, and further pursuit of Holiness by the favors thou have shown to
good men, by assurance that I shall be assisted therein, and that thou will
hereafter, if not in this life, abundantly reward it. Thus Lord, let it please
thee by my hopes and fears, which are the great swayers of our natures here, to
counterpoise my propensity downwards to this earth, to keep me in a constant
tendency upwards; lift me out of the dirt of this world, into a happy converse
with thee all my days.

Hymn 6.
FAin would my thoughts fly up to thee,
Thy peace, sweet Lord, to find;
But when I offer, still the world
Lays clogs upon my mind.
Sometimes I climb a little way,
And thence look down below;
How nothing there do all things seem
Which here make such a show!
Then round about I turn my eyes,
To feast my hungry sight;
I meet with Heaven in every thing,
In every thing delight.
I see thy wisdom ruling all,
And it with joy admire;
I see my self amidst such hopes
As set my heart on fire.
When I have thus triumphed a while
And think to build my nest;
Some cross conceits come fluttering by
And interrupt my rest.
Then to the earth again I fall,
And from my low dust cry;
'Twas not in my wing, Lord, but thine,
That I got up so high.
And now, my God, whether I rise,
Or still lie down in dust;
Both I submit to thy blessed Will,
In both on Thee I trust.
Guide thou my way, who art thy self
My Everlasting End;
That every step, or swift or slow,
Still to thy self may tend.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One Consubstantial Three;
All highest Praise, all humblest thanks
Now and for ever be.
Amen.
For Wednesday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
COme, my Soul, let us adore the God that governs us, him who is absolute King
of Heaven and Earth: He sees at once the whole frame of all things, and
thoroughly comprehends their various natures: To every Creature he appoints a
fit Office, and guides all their motions in a perfect order, till he has
wrought out his glorious design, and that he may finish the world in a
beauteous close: His councels are deep, and his particular ways may be beyond
our reach, yet all his ways are wise, and just, and merciful: And if all
things come alike to all now, yet he will punish wilful sinners with eternal
miseries hereafter, and bless his servants with eternal happiness: Why then do
you laugh and rejoice, unhappy wretches, who tire your selves in the ways of
sin? ways they are indeed that seem smooth at first, but lead to danger, and
end in ruin: Why do you boast your pleasant life, who lie asleep in the arms
of Death? Awake, poor Souls, and shake off the golden dreams, that delude your
crazy heads with empty fancies: Awake, and fill your eyes with penitent tears,
sadly reflect on the real miseries to which your sins have exposed you:
Consider whither, alas, will your Souls be hurried, when in cold despair you
sigh away your last faint breath? they shall fly amazed from the sight of
Heaven, and hide their guilty selves in eternal darkness; there they shall
dwell with intolerable pains, wailing and lamenting for ever; their
understanding shall sit as in a deep dungeon, and think on nothing but its own
calamities; their will shall be heightened to a madness of desire, and
perpetually wrackt with despair of obtaining; their memory shall serve but to
renew their sorrows, and their whole Souls be drowned in a Sea of bitterness;
there every vice shall have its proper torment prodigiously bred out of its own
corruption: The Lascivious shall burn with unquenchable sires, perpetually
flaming in the rage of their own lusts; the Glutton and Drunkard shall vainly
sigh for a drop of water to cool their tongues; the furious Choleric shall
rage like mad Dogs, to their own only vexation; the spiteful Envious shall have
thoughts that only gnaw and torment their own minds; the desires of the
Covetous shall be as thorns in a man's sides; the haughty Proud shall be thrown
down to the lowest contempt, shall be loaded with utter disdain; the Slothful
shall miserably deplore their lost time, and languish with grief for their
stupid negligence: But O what horrid pangs shall seize them all, and wound and
pierce the very center of their Souls! anguish and trouble shall infect all the
whole spirit, when they shall see themselves deprived of the bright and
blissful Vision of God! when their offended God shall despise and reject them,
as if they were not his creatures, shall cast them away as offensive to his
sight, and he that made them will not save them, will show them no mercy: When
they shall see themselves eternally banished from the sweet and gracious
presence of Jesus; that he will not be their Savior, because they would not
take him for their King: When they shall see that God who made them to enjoy
his glory, will now cast them into thick deep shades of eternal darkness; and
the blessed Jesus who came into the world to redeem sinners, will say to them,
Depart from me, I know you not: Then shall they curse the day of their birth,
and the unfortunate companions that inveigled them to sin; they shall curse
this vain deceitful world, that draws them on in the ways of perdition, and by
a fatal mist cast before their eyes, hinders them from foreseeing the perdition
they are going to. Are these, alas! they will say, the effects of those fond
desires, whose gratifications we made our chief felicity? Alas! what do now our
wanton liberties avail us? what the fugitive pleasures that we so eagerly
pursued? What comfort receive we from those empty honors, from those faithless
riches that tempted us to sin? they are all of them vanished away like a shadow,
and gone as a cloud of smoke that is scattered with the wind: But the remorse
and punishment of these endure for ever, and torture our spirits with perpetual
anguish. Thus shall they cry and none will regard them, thus mourn and there
will be none found to pity: Such will be the dismal end and consequence of a
sinful and impenitent Life. Be thankful to God, O my Soul, whose gracious
Providence has given thee warning to avoid these miseries.

Hymn ^.
OPen thine Eyes, my Soul, and see,
Once more the light returns to thee;
Look round about, and choose the way
Thou mean to travel over to day.
Think on the dangers thou may meet,
And always watch thy sliding feet:
Think where thou once have fallen before,
And mark the place, and fall no more.
Think on the helps that God bestows,
And cast to steer thy life by those:
Think on the sweets thy Soul did feel,
When thou did well, and do so still.
Think on the pains that shall torment
Those stubborn Souls that never repent:
Think on the joys that wait above,
To Crown the head of holy Love.
Think what at last will be thy part
If thou go on where now thou art;
See life and death set thee to choose,
One thou must take, and one refuse.
O my Dear Lord, guide thou my course,
And draw me on with thy sweet force:
Still make me walk, still make me tend
By thee my way, to thee my end.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
One undivided Deity:
As it has been in ages gone,
May now, and ever still be done.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
AS the day will come wherein God will destroy all the workers of Iniquity; so
the day will come, my soul, the day will certainly come, when the gracious God
will reward and crown all that love his commandments, and seek the Glory he has
made us for. Why do you mourn, ye children of the light; to whom belong the
promises of Bliss? you who feed on the pleasant Fruits of Piety, and the
continual feast of a good Conscience? Who taste already the sweetness of Hope;
and hereafter shall be satisfied with the fullness of Fruition. What can molest
your happy state; whom the God of glory has chosen for himself? whom He has
adopted into his honorable family; and designed for heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven. That Blessed Kingdom where all Delights abound, and sorrow and tears
are banished away: Where none are sick, or grow old, or dye; where all flourish
in perfect health, and live an immortal Life, in all the beauty and vigor of
an Eternal Youth: Where none are perplexed with cares or fears, but all dwell
secure, and free for ever: Where we shall no more be subject to chance; no more
be exposed to the danger of temptation. No more shall we be crossed by others;
nor ever disquieted with our own Passions. There a serene tranquillity shall
always dwell within us, and innumerable Joys be round about us. Joy in the
Excellencies of our glorified Bodies; joy in the perfections of our enlarged
Souls. Joy in the sweet society of Saints; joy in the glorious company of
Angels. Joy in the ravishing sight of our beloved Jesus; joy in the blissful
Union with the adorable Deity. All shall be joy and love and peace, and all
endure for eternal ages. Let then the servants of our Lord rejoice and sing:
sweet is the yoke of thy Love, dear Lord, and light is the burden of thy
Commands: But O how far more rich are thy faithful Promises! how infinitely
greater thy glorious rewards! When every divine virtue in us shall there be
rewarded with its proper Crown and Glory. The humble there shall be highly
exalted; and the poor in spirit shall be preferred to be Kings. The meek shall
possess that holy Land; and the Mourners be comforted with eternal
refreshments: The clean of Heart shall see the God of purity; and the lovers of
Peace shall have the privilege of his Children: They who hunger and thirst
after righteousness shall be filled, and the merciful will be entertained with
the kind embraces of mercy: They who suffer persecution for Righteousness sake,
shall receive a great Reward; they that are Teachers and enlighten others,
shall shine bright as the Stars: They who relinquish any thing for God, shall
receive an hundred-sold; and all the Just shall be in glory for ever. Then
shall they bless the true Friend that at any time reproved their foolish
courses, and so was instrumental to convert them to the ways of Bliss; they
shall bless each charitable hand that was assistant to their happiness. They
shall praise and admire the provident mercies of their God; and sing aloud the
victories of his grace. With joyful wonder they shall say, Is this the effect
of those little pains we took; are these the Repairs for the petty losses we
suffered? Happy we who denied our selves a few Toys; and are now advanced to
these high felicities. Millions of years shall pass away, and our Glory shall
but then seem to begin. Yea when millions of millions are past, our glory shall
not for all that be nearer to its end. Thus shall they all rejoice and none
shall disturb them, and all the Hosts of Angels shall join with them in the
high praises of God. O be very thankful, my Soul, to the Gracious God, whose
favorable Providence to thee has brought this felicity to thy knowledge, that
it may allure thee to the pursuit of it.

MEDITATION III.
AND now, my Soul, consider what thou have to do. Consider what it is likely to
profit thee to gain the whole World and lose thy self. See Life and Death here
set before thee, the rewards of Saints, and the pains of Sinners. Consider
these things, and make thy eternal hearty choice; choose wisely, and thou shall
not need to choose again. Choose while thy gracious Lord allows thee time and
day, lest the night of darkness overtake thy neglect. Make a Choice, but
remember that all Eternity is concerned; and consider well, thou have reason,
before thou settle in resolution. Call all the Pleasures of the world before
Thee; and ask if any of those transitory relishes are worthy our enduring for
them such exceeding great, and endless pains. Enquire whether to satisfy some
irregular passion, can recompense with equal advantage the forfeiture of such
Felicities. Ask if the vain forbidden things thou love, deserve thy affection
better than thy Maker. Are they more worthy in themselves, or more beneficial
to Thee, that thou may justly prefer them before thy Redeemer? Do thou
expect to be at rest and satisfied by enjoying them? or everlastingly happy by
their procurement? Will they protect thee at the hour of thy death, or plead
thy cause at the day of Judgment? O no, they have little in them, they do but
deceive me with a smiling look; which I have too often proved by dear
experience. It Is Heaven alone that can yield a true content; it is that alone
that fills with eternal delight. Say then my Soul, Take away your flatteries,
false World; leave me a mind free for the entertainment of better things. If my
Savior turn but his Face toward me, my Mind shall be fixed on him. I will look
continually on his glorious beauties; and be ravished for ever with the charms
of his sweetness. It Is Thee, chaste Spouse of Souls, it is Thee alone I choose,
and dedicate my self entirely to thy service. Say these things, and mean as
thou speak, be thou hearty and sincere in choosing thus. Did we clearly see
what we say we believe, it would make the most of men alter the vain course of
their Lives. Did we but see the Damned in their flames; or hear them cry in the
midst of their torments: How should we be afraid to follow them in their sins,
which we know have plunged them into all those Miseries! How should we strive
against the next temptation; and cast about to avoid the danger! Did we but see
on the other side the incomparable Glories of the Saints; or hear the sweet
harmonious Hymns which they continually sing; how should we study to imitate
those holy ways in which we know they arrived at all their Happiness! How
should we seek all occasions of improvement; and make it our business to work
out our Salvation! What should we account too much to be done for the
attainment of those matchless joys! What should we not readily do to avoid
those sorrows! Yet all this is as sure as if we saw it, and would move us as
much if we could but seriously consider it.

PETITIONS.
DEar Lord, it is only thou that can make me consider these things so
carefully as to resolve upon a wise choice. If left to my self, I am, alas!
very likely to choose the vain goods of this world, to neglect my Soul, to
forfeit thy eternal joys, and to incur thy eternal punishments. O Blessed
Jesu, do thou choose me, and make my ignorant Soul so sensible of my true
interest as to choose Thee for my portion and Inheritance for ever. Make me
choose to love Thee above all thy competitors here, and till I come to see
thee; and then I am sure that from thenceforth I cannot choose but love thee
for ever. Pity, O Lord, the present frailty of thy Creature, and suffer not my
blindness to lead me into ruin. Supply, I pray thee, my want of sight by a
lively Faith of the glorious and terrible things that are unseen; and do thou
so confirm my Faith and enable it by thy Grace, that I may be very sensible it
is no matter of small importance to gain or lose the Kingdom of Heaven. Make
me, Lord, to pursue the good choice when I have made it, to use fit Means
industriously as well as desire the fit End. Direct and assist me, my God I
pray, to prepare my self for these Felicities. Having presented to me such
giorious Hopes, make me to purify my felf as thou art pure. Make me to labor
diligently, and continue steadfastly in doing well. Make me patient in suffering
of whatever Afflictions it shall please thy wisdom to lay upon me. Help me,
Lord, in all conditions to be carrying on the work of my Salvation: So shall
thou have Glory by my eternal happiness, the Glory which thou desire.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For Wednesday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
A Good Conscience is a contiual feast; and a peaceful mind the Antipast of
Heaven. Lord how secure and quiet they live, whom thy Grace preserves in
Innocence! The day goes smoothly over their heads, and silent as the shadow of
a Dial. The spirits of their Fancy run calm and even; they ebb and flow
according to the allegiance which they owe to reason. All their delight is to
think of Heaven; and to reckon over the many tastful joys which they shall one
day possess. The devout mind free from stormy passions is like a bright day of
the Spring, wherein the beauty of the Sun has no cloud to obscure it, the sweet
Air has no storms to ruffle it, the glad Birds sing, and all Nature puts on a
pleasing look. Such a mind is full of light and peace and joy, and puts the
countenance into a sedate and cheerful composure. Oh the happiness of such a
state! Oh how desirable is its eternal continuance! But our Days on earth are
mixed with Nights, our calms with storms, and fair weather with foul. Some
unruly passion presses to come in, it is importunate, and fawns at first to
gain admittance: It promises not to interrupt the Joy and Happiness, but after
a little time discovers its pernicious intent if it be not very quickly
rejected: Soon it grows bold to undermine our repose, and open a door to all
our enemies. Just so at a little breach in the wall of a beleaguered City, a
whole Army pours in their numerous body; and they enslave all that submit to
their violence, and destroy all those that make head against it. Such, alas! is
our confusion and hurt when once we have yielded to the first Assault of any
Passion. Immediately a throng of tumultuating spirits crowd into our heads, and
utterly consume the little remainder of our peace. O the endless distraction of
a life led by humor, by blind will! O the miserable thraldom of being subject
to our passions: What a boisterous sea, every where beset with Rocks and
Quicksands, is to a Mariner; that is a Mind subject to violent passions, such a
mind is in continual danger of making Shipwreck of a good Conscience. How often
do our passions engage us to contend with others, and imbitter all our days
with strife and envy! How often do they quarrel even among themselves, and
raise a fierce war in our own bosoms! If they by chance agree in one desire,
they many times vex us with their being disappointed. And the vexation of
disappointment is so much the greater by how much they were concerned. If they
perhaps sometimes succeed, they seldom produce the expected content. If they
delight our corrupted taste, and we greedily swallow their unwholesome sweets;
then, alas, it is that they most undo us, by feeding the humor of our fatal
disease. Vain at the best, and very short of duration are the enjoyments of
this world; and after they have flattered us a while, they betray our neglected
Souls into an eternal ruin. Thou art, O Lord, the only Anchor of our hope: O
Jesu, unless thou save us, we perish.

MEDITATION II.
THus are they miserably tossed up and down, who float on the waves of their own
Passions: Their wearied Souls soon faint within them, when they see the Lord
has withdrawn his presence: They seek him, but in such distraction and
confusion that they cannot find him; they call upon him, but he gives them no
answer presently: And now, when all their fears are grown to the height, and no
means appear to sustain their patience; when the proud waves beat violently
against them, and are ready to cover their little Vessel with despair and ruin;
then he awakes to their help, if they have persisted to call upon him; though
he sometimes may slumber for a while, to try their duty, or punish their
disobedience: Though he may suffer for a while the fury of the tempest to lie
upon them, to show them their hopeless state if left to themselves; yet when
they still seek and implore his help, his mercy at length hears their cry, and
pities their fear and danger: And then his blessed voice commands a Calm, and
immediately the Sea and stormy winds obey him; immediately his Sun arises in
their hearts, and with its gentle beams revives their hopes: Then is their
darkness turned into light, and the clouds dispersed into a bright day: Then
they recollect their scattered thoughts, and range them again in their right
order. Often they look back on the dangers they have escaped, and as often
bless the mercy that delivered them: Often they look forwards on the course
they hold, and as often sing with joy for their happy change: Welcome again,
they say, the easy yoke of Christ, and the light burden of loving our
Savior: Welcome the holy exercises of sweet Devotion, welcome the easy,
pleasant, moderate heat of Soul-enflaming Prayer. Now we discern this beauteous
truth, (O may we print it deeply in our minds) That the pleasures of Piety and
Virtue are pure and constant, and that infinite blessings attend to reward it:
But the pursuit of Vice is troublesome and intricate, and finishes its course
in an abyss of misery.

MEDITATION III.
TAke care, then, my Soul, to interrupt and break off the course of Vice by a
timely repentance and a sincere amendment, that it may not finish in thy
eternal misery. If passions do sometimes invade thee, let them not rest in thy
mind, do not give way to their settlement, lest they grow into rooted habitual
vices. Let not frequent and abiding Anger make thee contentious and malicious.
If any passion has ruffled thee, call on thy Savior for his aid, that the
Storm may not drown thee. Call earnestly, and labor diligently with thy self
the meanwhile to get out of thy danger. If he sees thee rowing hard, and
striving earnestly against the waves, he will assist thee. And remember always
when his Kindness has given thee seasonable relief, that thou take care not to
lose this unhappy experience; but learn wisdom from thy former miscarriage.
Reflect and find out where thy Error was; what betrayed thee into this
disorder, and fortify thy self against that defect. Carefully avoid all the
occasions of sin; and the importunities of such as delight in folly: Avoid the
snares of kind enticing Company, and the dangerous infection of evil Example.
Set a strict watch continually upon thine Eyes, and diligently keep the door of
thy Lips. Govern all thy Senses that they do not seduce the mind; and observe
and govern every inward motion of thy Heart and Fancy. When, O my Soul, did we
ever follow our Passions, but they instantly wrought our disturbance, and did
threaten our ruin. Suppress then all temptations in their first approach; when
their power is weak, and thy choice is in full liberty. Remember how formerly
their flatteries have abused thee; and when they counterfeit again, be no more
deceived. Never look on the face of Pleasures as they come, but as they go off;
when they leave nothing behind them but their venomous sting. Let thy
experience of the miserable Effects of yielding to their allurements make thee
more wary in observing, and more severe in repressing their first motions. So
shall thou gain the best of victories while thou masterest thy own corrupt
inclinations, and conquerest thy violent passions. So shall thou enjoy an
universal peace: Thou shall maintain peace with the bad, by bearing their
injuries; and with the good, by conforming to their Virtues: And with thy self
by subduing Sense to Reason; and with thy God by improving Reason with
Religion. Better is he that governs his own spirit than he that conquers a City.

PETITIONS.
BUT O Blessed Jesu! Do thou save me or I perish. I am in this world as always
upon a dangerous Sea; continually liable to these storms, and likely to be lost
by them. Oh send down thy powerful Grace, and bear me up against them. When I
am engaged let thy great Mercy speedily rescue thy poor servant: Fortify me
against all the furious Assaults of Passion* and Temptation; that I may be more
than conqueror over them. Bring it to pass, O Lord, that Reason and Faith, and
thy Love may more and more be enforced and strengthened in me. As thy all-wise
Providence seems to sleep sometimes, and suffer storms to grow high and loud; O
be pleased also to hear me when I call, for thou would have me call, and let
thy favorable hand still send me seasonable relief. O leave me not then to my
infirmities, lest the enemy of my Soul prevail against me. Forsake not my
miserable state when I am sinking, but reach forth thy hand and keep me from
drowning. Suffer not my frailties to become a Custom, lest I die impenitent and
perish without recovery. Deliver me often, O Lord, from the Occasions of sin,
succeed my watchfulness and lead me not into temptation. Perfect, O Dear
Redeemer, the work thou have begun, and cherish the good wishes thou have sown
in me, that they may become rooted habits of Virtue, and bring forth a
plenteous Harvest of good actions to thy Praise. And make, O Lord, I pray thee,
even my Passions servants to thy Grace. Change my rude Anger into a severity
against my self, and a prudent Zeal against the sins of others. Convert my fear
into a timerousness to offend, and an awful reverence of thy sacred Name. Let
all my affections be turned into thy Charity, that my heart may desire nothing
but Thee: whom I may safely love with all my heart and strength, whose Heaven I
may greatly covet, and fear no excess: O Thou whose blissfull Vision is the Joy
of Angels and sovereign Happiness of all thy Saints; O that my Soul could love
thee without limits, as thou art infinitely amiable. O my Beloved, let my
thoughts embrace thee all this night; while others sleep, let wakeful thoughts
refresh me by presenting Thee to my mind: Let me think how kind thou art, how
unspeakably good. Do thou, Lord, rest this night in my heart, and inspire it
with the pure flames of divine Love.

Hymn 8.
LEt earthy minds court what they please
And gain what e're they court,
For me, I find but little ease
In all their gayest sport.
Be Thou alone but with my heart,
My God my only bliss,
I shall not murmr at my part,
Nor envy their success.
They talk of pleasure, talk of gain;
None must their humor cross:
But well I know their pleasure's pain;
Their greatest profit loss.
Let them talk on; and have not we
Our gains, our pleasures too?
Pleasures that spring more sweet and free;
Gains that more fully flow.
Nay, well endured, our very pains
To us a pleasure are:
And all our losses turn to gains;
If hopes may have their share:
And sure they may, such hopes as cheer
The Heaven espoused breast;
Hopes that so strangely charm us here,
What will they be possessed!
All Glory to the Sacred Three;
All Honor Power and Praise:
As 'twas at first, still may it be
Beyond the end of Days.
Amen.
For Thursday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
THe good and wise Creator of the world, made man at first after his own
similitude: He formed a noble Spirit within him, and endowed it with
righteousness, and true holiness: He gave him dominion over the creatures, with
which he would plentifully stock the Air, Earth, and Sea: He gave to man a
perfect dominion over himself, and made him able to govern his appetites and
passions: He made him sole Lord of a beauteous Paradise which Gods own hand had
planted. Man was to have spent a few pleasant years on Earth, and then to have
been translated to the Heaven of Heavens: But all these privileges did the
foolish creature loose, by doing one guilty and needless act; by eating of the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil, and therein disobeying the Law of his just
Creator. Unhappy man has now forfeited all good, and exposed himself to the
invasion of every misery: By this one sinful act, according to the tenor of
the Covenant, our first Parents ruined themselves, and all their posterity with
them: From thenceforth our bodies were doomed to dissolution, and condemned to
return to the dust from whence they were taken: From thenceforth brutish and
sensual appetites became rebellious against the laws of right reason; and the
understanding is so blinded with partiality to sense, that it is not able to
find out those Laws. The mind of man is destitute of its moral excellency, and
the glorious Image of God is defaced. The Apostate spirit that tempted to the
sin, has infected our nature with his own resemblance. Thus are we wretches
become liable to all those sicknesses and pains that infest our bodies; and
thus to those violent Passions and disorders which distemper and torment our
minds: By this sin the favor of our God was forfeited, and we are all by
nature the children of his wrath: We are exposed to the tyranny of the Devils
while we live, and liable to partake in their torments when we dye. But when
our great guilt had provoked the divine anger against us, our great misery at
the same time moved his compassion: He pityed the poor creature undone by its
own folly, and resolved to find help for it by his Wisdom: His infinite
goodness pityed the many thousands of Souls, which one rash act of the first
Parents had undone; and when they might expect to hear from his Justice an
irreversible sentence of Condemnation, then did his wonderful mercy condescend
to comfort them, by making the first promise of a mighty Savior: A Savior
that should conquer him who now had the power of death, and who is become ruler
in the Children of disobedience. For thou, O adorable Son of God, Son coeternal
and equal with the Father: Thou did undertake to redeem us by an amazing way,
which will be the eternal wonder of all thy most inteligent creatures. Blessed
Son of God, thou did undertake our help when it was not in the power of any
creature to help us: Thou did undertake to ransom us from our misery, while
the fallen Angels were left subject to theirs. In the fullness of time, O kind
Redeemer, thou did according to that promise descend into this miserable
world: And, while here, thou wentest about doing good, and diffusing the light
of thy saving instructions: By taking the humane nature into a personal union,
thou did put thy self into subjection under the law; and by thy spotless life
and patient death thou have satisfied all the demands of the Law for us; so
that believing in Thee we are righteous by thy life, and our sins are attoned
for by thy precious death: Thy death upon the cross was our great sacrifice for
sin, and sufficient at once offering of thy self to take it away. Thou have by
thy meritorious life purchased for us all our forfeited good; and by thy
propitiatory death removed our desert of evil: By that death thou did go
again out of this world, and art now ascended to the right hand of the Father;
there thou ever live to make intercession for us, and to dispense the
purchases of thy life and death.

Hymn 9.
LOng had the world, in gloomy shades
Of Ignorance and Sin,
Benighted sat, whilst Hells dark Prince
Had tyraniz'd therein.
Weak Reasons twinkling Tapers long
Contended with the night;
And Prophets strove the shades to chase
With beams of borrowed light.
But all in vain, alas, 'till He,
The Son of righteousness,
At length with healing beams arose
To cure the worlds distress.
He rose, and with his presence brought
A bright and glorious day,
Infernal spirits and their dark works
Before him fled away.
They that in errors fatal chains
The captived world had led,
Were by the mighty Prince of peace
His conquered Captives made.
Thus came he, whom all Nations had
In great desire of old;
Whose coming, faithful Prophesies
To Israel long foretold.
And now, ye Nations of the Earth,
Know and revere your King,
Gladly submit to him who does
Your great Salvation bring.
Ye Nations of the Earth, rejoice,
And all your voices raise;
The wondrous faithfulness and love
Of your great God to praise.
Glory to God the Father give,
And to the Gracious Son,
And Holy Ghost henceforth as long
As time his course shall run.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
LOrd, what a happy change has thy coming made in the world! what glorious
effects have every where been the consequents of it! Narrow was once the gate,
and strait the path to bliss, and so covered with the mists of Ignorance, that
but few could find it: The whole earth then corrupted their way before God, and
wickedness increased as fast as people multiplied: Then did but eight persons
among a great many thousands find favor with God to be saved from an universal
deluge: In several populous Cities before this flood could well be forgotten,
there could not ten righteous persons be found, for whose sake they might be
spared from destruction: Then the rays of divine light were communicated but
to a few particular persons: Only Abraham found favor with God to have a
numerous seed, and that his seed should be heirs of a Covenant of Promise; I
will be thy God, said the Almighty to him, and the God of thy seed after thee:
Accordingly he that was the God of Abraham, took also particular care of Isaac
and Jacob; and he gave his Statutes and Judgments to the Children of Israel,
but did not deal so with any other Nation: But since thy coming, O glorious
Messiah, light is come into the world, and the way of Salvation has been made
known to all men; unclouded light has come wlth thee, no more oppressed with
ceremonial veils; which therefore has diffused it self into the dark corners of
the Earth, and spread it self to the ends of the World. The Dayspring from on
high has visited our distant region, and on us has the Sun of righteousness
kindly arose. The Christian Church, thanks be to thy Love, Dear Lord, has
included within its pale a great many Nations; It has had thousands that with a
strong and generous love have run swiftly after Thee in the way of thy
counsels; nay, millions with a fair degree of hope, have walked constantly
toward thee in the way of thy Commands. Whence, O my God, could this strange
improvement come, but from the infinite Merits of the Redeemers death: Hence it
was that when he had ended his holy Life, he ascended to Heaven, and gave gifts
to men; He gave largely of his Spirit to his chosen Apostles, and sent them out
to preach his Word, and dispense his appointed Sacraments: He gave them the
gift of Tongues, that they might Preach to all Nations; and the gift of working
Miracles, to confirm their Doctrines: By his Spirits cooperating with these,
and succeeding their endeavors, they every where propagated the Faith and Love
of Jesus. Our kind Lord, before he ascended into Heaven, appointed the use of
two sacred Rites in his Church; to assist the Faith of those who did not see
his Person, that they might notwithstanding believe, and in believing be
blessed. Lest mankind should be so ungrateful as to forget him, he has left us
memorials of his tender love: By these he shows us his bloody Death and
Passion, and makes himself present to those that believe and love; and these by
the powerful working of his Holy Spirit, have confirmed many Disciples in their
most holy Faith: Many they have possessed with a holy fervor and courage, to do
and suffer great things for the name of Jesus. O blessed Memorials of my Saviors
love, and faithful seals of all his promises! whereby what he has done for us
is represented, and what he has purchased is applied to us: If I forget to sing
of you, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: If I forget to meditate
on you, let my head forfeit its power to think.

MEDITATION III.
WHere, O thou boundless Ocean of Immense charity! where will thy overslowing
streams stay their course? we and our ingratitude basely strive to oppose Thee,
but nothing can resist thy Almighty Goodness: Thou did come to thine own
People, and they received Thee not; yet thou did not forsake the kind design
of thy coming: When the Impiety of man was treacherously plotting to betray and
murder Thee, then did thou mercifully consult about means to convey thy
saving blessings to the world: When they were resolving to bruise and kill thy
sacred Body, thou wast contriving how we might best reap advantage from thy
Passion and Death. Thy love we see was desirous to do more than dye for us,
having contrived moreover a way to live in us. The Lord Jesus on the same night
when he was betrayed, took Bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and
said, Take, Eat, this is my Body which was broken for you, this do in
remembrance of me: After the same manner also he took the Cup after Supper,
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for the
remission of the sins of many, Drink ye all of it, and do this as often as you
Drink it, in remembrance of me. Thus has our wise Lord found an excellent way
to make even our flesh assist the Spirit in us: He has contrived by sensible
things to make us move toward heavenly; by those things which are wont to draw
and fasten us to this earth. When he distributed the Bread and Wine to his
Disciples, he gave them an interest in his abundant graces and merits: And thus
is he ready to bestow himself still upon those that believe, and are desirous
to partake of him. He has commanded the celebration of this Holy Supper to be
continued in the Christian Church, to the end of the world: And that not only
to keep alive a thankful remembrance of his Death, but also to confirm his
gracious Promises to them that believe on him. To the happy Soul then that with
faith and thankfulness does thus commemorate the dying Love of our Savior,
this Holy Supper is a Feast of fat things, and of Wine on the lees well
refined. Jesus Christ himself will come and Sup with such, and be willing to
make his constant abode with them: His Promise assures his Presence with them,
while they are here on Earth, and that they shall when they go hence, be taken
up to be where he is. O Praise the Lord, ye Nations of the Earth, all praise
and admire his wisdom and love: His Love that so industriously seeks our
happiness, and his Wisdom that finds such excellent means to accomplish it:
Praise him that is the sole fountain of spiritual Blessings, and who alone has
right to ordain the means of conveying them; for that he has instituted a few
means, and those easy to be observed, and made them the conveyances of all the
riches of his Grace: Give hearty thanks to the kind Redeemer for this
Institution, and express your thankfulness by coming to this his Supper: Come
to it to remember his propitiatory Death, and to receive Jesus Christ, who
offers himself to you: Come to partake of the important purchases of his Death,
and to devote your selves entirely to him who has so loved you: Come all ye
People of the wide world, and let us adore the God that feeds us: With himself
our kind Savior will feed us, and with his Sacred Flesh; his sacred Flesh is
meat indeed, and his Blood is drink indeed. Our first Parents eat of the
forbidden tree, and incurred for themselves and their posterity an eternal
Death: We are invited to a Feast of spiritual Food, which whosoever eats
shall live for ever. With these dainties will divine love nourish us up to
immortal Life, confirming and increasing that happy union with himself, which
is begun even while we live below on earth, and shall be perfected when we come
to Heaven.

PETITIONS.
O God the Father of mercies! Father of our blessed Savior Jesus the Christ:
We believe that having given us thy dear Son, thou will with him also freely
give us all things; that whatever we ask of thee, O Father, in thy Sons name,
believing, we shall receive it. I humbly beceech thee therefore, O Lord, to
have mercy upon me a poor miserable sinner: And as thou have sent thy Son into
the World, send him also to take possession of my Heart. Let this great light
of the world enlighten my dark mind with a saving knowledge of thee and of
himself. Direct me to discern my true happiness, from the false flattering
goods of this world; that I may not spend my time here in worldly cares and
pursuits, but in seeking thee my End by him the only true Way to thee. Let him
teach and convince me of the great excellency of thy Laws; and make me consider
my ways, and turn my feet unto thy Testimonies. Let the glad tidings of the
Gospel, O Lord, by joyful tidings to me, by thy giving me an assured interest
in them. Give me the pardon of all my sins by the Death of Christ; and a right
to Life and Happiness by his meritorious Life. In me I pray that the mighty
Redeemer may effectually destroy all the works of the Devil; deface the ugly
image of the Apostate spirit, and restore the glorious likeness of thee my God.
Make me, Lord, diligently and reverently to use thy appointed Means of Grace,
and let thy blessing always make them means of grace to me. And while I
thankfully use them, and am duly fruitful under them, let me enjoy the means of
Grace till thou have brought me to glory. Grant this, O Father for the sake of
thy beloved Son our compassionate Savior.

Glory be to the Father, etc. Amen.
For Thursday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
THe kind Master of this blessed Feast, sends his Ambassadors to make a general
invitation. He that is the divine Food puts the kindest words into their
mouths; that their invitation may not fail of good success. He has said, Come
to me all ye that labor for Holiness, and are oppressed under the weight of
your sins: Come, and I will give you the end of your Labor; and will ease you
of that intolerable burden. Come you that hunger after Angels spiritual Food,
and thirst to drink at the fountain of bliss. Come to me, I will refresh you
with the Wine of gladness, and the bread of life. Come you that are weak, and
you shall be strong: come you that are strong, lest you become weak. Come you
that have leisure, and here entertain your time to your great advantage: And
you also that are busy, and here sanctify and devote your Employment. Our
glorious God did not only make a visit, but is willing to dwell perpetually
with us men upon earth: He whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, will make
his residence in our little Tabernacles. He whom the Seraphims prostrate adore,
and fly with all their wings to perform his commands. He who came down to die
for us sinners, and ascended again above the highest Heavens: Himself is there
with all his precious blessings to the Soul that does desire and believe. To
such a Soul this blessed Sacrament applies all the virtues, and merits of our
Saviors Death and Passion. When he receives the consecrated Bread and Wine,
from the hands of Christ's Minister in his stead; he is made a partaker in the
Satisfaction of his death, and the Pardon of all his sins is sealed and
confirmed. By eating the Bread and drinking the Wine, the good Soul is more
firmly united to the Redeemer: And as a member of his mystical body shall be
quickened and guided by his good Spirit. The indwelling Spirit shall teach him
his duty, and enable him to run in the way everlasting. He shall communicate
power to conquer difficulties and temptations, and to persevere with patience
till he reach the Crown. By this is such a soul united also to that Jesus, who
rose again from the death he submitted to. And as it is assuredly risen to a
new life of Grace, it shall hereafter rise to an eternal life of Glory. It may
look on these signs as certain pledges that it shall be advanced to the happy
mansions above. Thus as our Lord himself when on Earth contained under his
outward poverty, all the glorious fullness of the Godhead; so these signs that
represent him to us are but poor in themselves, in comparison to the rich
blessings they bring along with them. Whatever faintness we feel, if we hunger
after Christ and come hither to receive him, he can refresh us. Whatever fears
dwell in our guilty minds and trouble us, this Wine of true Consolation will
chase them away. O How great is thy Love, Dear Lord, that invites us miserable
sinners to partake of thee: That invites our emptiness to be united to thy
fullness; and our weakness to be cured by thy al sufficient power. O how should
the sons of men flock in when he sends out his invitations to this Feast! when
he calls us to a Feast of peace and love! A feast of joy and incomparable
sweetness. What should the Captive wish but Liberty, and the weary Pilgrim but
rest? What should the Sick desire but health, and the depending Creature but to
be near its God? All are welcome to this Feast that have but Desire to partake,
and Faith to receive.

MEDITATION. II.
LOrd, who are we unworthy wretches that thou thus regardest our sinful dust!
what is all the world compared to Thee, that thus thou seem for our sakes to
disregard thy self! It is for our sakes, and to make us rich in Grace, that
thou so graciously condescendest to come among us. More unworthy yet do we make
our selves, if we neglect to come where thou will be present. O how insensible
of their own true interest are those that neglect to approach this Sacred
Feast. Is it a small matter with you, O careless wretches, to ly under a great
load of guilt, that you come not to receive the pardon of your sins? Is the
Great God willing to be reconciled to sinners, and to give them sure pledges of
his reconcilement? And should not all Mankind then earnestly seek his favor,
and gladly receive the pledges of his love? None of us can be assured that he
will not turn us into Hell, till we are assured of our title to Heaven. Where
are all they that have been baptized, and pretend that they account themselves
Christians. Why do they not come, and own the Covenant then made by renewing it
again at this Supper? They that neglect this, do in effect renounce that
Covenant, and despise the incomparable blessings it promises. Well may they be
impotent toward all good, and enslaved to the tyranny of evil spirits; who
neglect this Means appointed to convey spiritual strength, and to furnish them
with the Spirit of Grace. Such must needs have lamentable cause to bewail the
weakness of their Graces, and the slow progress of their Holiness. Well may
they contract very deep stains, that do not often wash themselves with the
blood of the Lamb. Well may they that begin in the Spirit, soon after end in
the Flesh; who do not often here renew their resolutions, and receive fresh
strength to hold on their race. Those were times of vigorous and sound piety
when Christians had a strong appetite to this Spiriual Food. This Appetite
discovered their health, and by often eating they maintained it: When they
could hardly be contented a Day without receiving one of these blessed meals:
When they never came together to worship, but they also broke this holy Bread;
Then they were patient under the hardest sufferings, and then they abounded in
every good work. Then did the love of Jesus burn hot in their breasts, and the
light of it shined bright before men. Then they had great charity toward all
men, and much peace one with another. It is a sad sign, and may be reckoned a
cause that the Spiritual life greatly languishes in our days: When the proper
Food of it is little relisht by many, and a great many more never desire it.
Our sad days are likely still to languish in devotion, to be overrun with
impiety, and profaneness: Still will the base love of the world abound amongst
us, every one minding his own things, and none the things of Christ. Christians
will be enemies to one another, and more barbarous and cruel than wildbeasts:
They will go on to bite and devour their own kind, and to consume and destroy
the Christian Church; If we do not oftener commemorate the Love of our Lord, and
solemnly bind our selves to love one another.

MEDITATION III.
Does our gracious Lord make a Feast of himself for us, and invite us poor
Sinners to sit down at his Table? And should we not readily obey his call, and
go to the Feast he has so kindly prepared? Behold our Lord himself is willing
to meet us, and to bring a Heaven with him to entertain us. O leave the trifles
of this world, ye reasonable Souls, and go to partake of his substantial Joys:
Suspend the pursuit of transitory goods, ye immortal Creatures, and seek of
Christ his eternal Treasures. O how ungrateful, Dear Lord, to thee, are all
they that neglect this thy incomparable Provision: The Eternal Fathers Love is
slighted by them, who gave his beloved Son to dye for us: The Love of our kind
Redeemer is not duly valued, while we have no esteem or desire for the
blessings he has purchased: The sweet and saving Influences of the Holy Spirit
are set at naught, while we decline the proper means to enjoy them. Is it not a
most unspeakable ingratitude in mankind, to trample under foot the Blood of the
Son of God? to despise that precious Blood which was shed for our sakes, which
was shed for the remission of our sins? should we forget that painful Death he
underwent, to excuse us from suffering an eternal death? It was the particular
charge that great Love left, when he was just a going to be sacrificed for us;
That we should devoutly celebrate this holy Supper, and often do it in
remembrance of him. Are we not under great Obligation from his Love, to do any
difficult or dangerous thing for his sake? and much more to comply with his
dying will, when it requires so easy, and so pleasant a duty? Did our Savior
drink Vinegar, and eat Gall for us; and shall we refuse at his command to take
these pleasant dainties? He drank off the bitter Cup which the Father gave him,
to purchase for us a Cup of blessing. O how well would it become the whole
world to say, We will take the Cup of Salvation, and praise the name of the
Lord: We will remember thy Love more than Wine, dear Lord, and never forget thy
most useful Benefits: We will show that we love thee as we ought to do, by
keeping this and the rest of thy Commands. Had we but ingenuous Souls, we
should be extremely glad that he who has done so much for us, has told us what
will please him. This Feast is appointed by our Lord, to show forth his Death
'till he come: For he will come again in Glory and with Power, to Judge both
the quick and the dead: When he will render to every man according to his
works, and severely Punish all those that obey not the Gospel: What must become
of all those in that dreadful day, that do constantly neglect an undoubted
Precept? Men pretend to fear the incurring of damnation by unworthy receiving,
but do not fear to deserve it by neglecting to receive his Supper. But since we
disobey and offend our Lord in both of these, it should be our labor and care
to prepare our selves and draw nigh.

PETITIONS.
O Most Gracious and Merciful God, who have in kindness sent thy Son into the
world; O let the same kindness effectually draw us, and we will run after him;
for none of us can come unto him, except the Father that has sent him draw
them. Alas! Lord, we know not our true Interest, 'till thou do effectually
reveal it; we certainly refuse our own mercies, if thou do not incline us to
pursue them. O send forth a mighty power of thy Spirit upon the world, and
convince men of sin, because they believe not in Jesus; let him convince men of
their guilty state by nature, and of their further guilt in not obeying the
Gospel: Bring them in multitudes to Jesus Christ, by making them sensible that
there is no other name but his by which they can be saved. Teach us how
necessary to make atonement for our sins the great Sacrifice of himself was,
which he offered upon the Cross; and make us all earnestly concerned to partake
of that Sacrifice, and therefore forward to use the appointed means of it:
Convince us that we are poor without the riches of his grace, and naked without
the robes of his righteousness, and in want of all things necessary to
Salvation, 'till we are possessed of an interest in him: O make us come to Jesus
Christ, that we may have life, that our forfeited right to eternal Life may be
restored; and that he by his Spirit may quicken us to a spiritual and divine
Life, who are by nature dead in trespasses and sins: Quicken us, O thou who
wast dead and art alive, for thou alone have the words of eternal Life: Make us
discern and seek, and relish divine and spiritual things, capable of the
pleasures of devotion, and desirous above all things of Communion with thy
self: Make us in retired Devotion and public Worship often seek to have
Communion with the Father and the Son through the Spirit: And Lord, whenever we
draw nigh to thee, by coming carefully prepared to thine Ordinances, do thou
graciously draw nigh to us, and satisfy us with those good things thou have to
bestow; make us joyful in thy house of Prayer, and renew our strength while we
wait upon thee. Let every approach to thee in Worship conform us more to thy
likeness, and fit us more to see thy face in Heaven. These things, O Lord our
God, are desired as the purchases of our dear Saviors Blood; to whom be Glory
and Praise, world without end.

Amen.
Hymn 10.
COme Royal Sion, come and sing
Thy Soul's kind Savior, thy hearts King:
Stretch all thy powers thy Song to raise.
And since this lofty Theam's above
The best ambition of thy Love,
Call Heavens loud Quires to help thy Praise.
Sing how his Love from Heavens high throne
To Earth's low footstool brought him down,
For thee a cursed death to dye:
Sing that when hence he did remove,
He lest a Legacy of Love,
His needful Presence to supply.
Lo here the Bread of Life! this day's
Triumphant text provokes thy Praise;
The living, and life-giving Bread:
See the heart-chearing precious Wine
Which Great Love's pierced Heart did resign,
To the Great Twelve distributed.
Praise him, who has thy Pastors bid
Ever to do what he once did;
And thankfully his gifts receive.
Sing loud that to this bounteous Feast,
Each hungry Soul may be a guest,
And from his Death may Life derive.
The Heav'n-instructed House of Faith
Here a mysterious dictate has:
Himself to me my Savior brings,
With graces which are all divine,
Under the veils of Bread and Wine;
Immortal clothed with mortal things.
Lo the life-food of Angels then
Bowed to the lowly mouths of men!
Lo the full final Sacrifice!
The ransomed Isaac and his Ram,
The Manna, and the Pascal Lamb,
As figures fixed on this their eyes.
Jesu to thee we sinners sue,
O Thou our Food and Shepherd too,
Grant in all good we may improve.
Still by thy self vouchsafe to keep
As with thy self thou feed'st thy Sheep,
And from us Lord all ill remove.
Blessed be that love which thus makes thee
Mix with our low mortality:
O may it raise, and set us up
Coheirs with Saints, that so all may
Drink the same Wine, and the same way;
Convicters all of thy full Cup.
Amen.
For Friday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
MY God, who can complain of doing too much, if they consider the labors of
the loving Jesus? those painful labors that he freely undertook, and the
humble task he so mildly stoopt to? When he might have flown on the wings of
Cherubims, he chose to walk with us Worms in the dust: When he might have
called for Manna from Heaven, in the sweat of his brows he would eat his Bread:
When he might have made the Angels his footstool, he rather became the servant
of his Parents, living with them in their little Cottage, and readily obeying
even their least Command: There in that humble privacy he increased in wisdom,
and grew in favor with God and man; still by his pious candor gaining the
love of those happy few that saw his life. Happy they that saw thy life, O
glorious Jesu! and heard with joy and wonder thy incomparable sayings; that
felt a gentle motion stir their hearts, to love and imitate so blessed a pattern.
O that the same sweet Spirit of grace might draw our minds, dear Lord, to thee!
O that we could, my Soul, in every passage of our life, still actually reflect
on the example of His: His retirements were filled with holy Speculations, and
in the midst of business his mind was free for Heaven: His Converse with others
misspent no time, but bestowed every moment in excellent Charity; sometimes he
was employed to instruct the ignorant, sometimes to inform aright those that
were deceived: He applied himself to comfort the afflicted, and heal the
diseased; to convince the froward, and absolve the penitent, and persuade all
the world to be truly happy. It was meat and drink to him to do his Fathers
will, and it should be ours to perform his. It was for our sakes that he made
himself subject to the Law, and to obtain for us an everlasting happiness he
perfectly obeyed it. Take up thy Cross, my Soul, and follow thy Lord; for his
yoke is sweet, his burden is light. He humbled himself for us, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross to save us. When we had sold
our selves to sin, and were all become the slaves of Satan, our blessed Jesus
descended from Heaven, and brought a vast price to buy out our freedom: The
price was no less than his own dearest Blood, which he plenteously shed on the
ignominious Cross, depositing so his inestimable life to rescue us sinners from
eternal death. Come let us adore our God that redeemed us.

Hymn 11.
COme let us adore the King of Love,
And King of Sufferings too;
For Love it was that brought him down,
And set him here in woe.
Love drew him from his Paradise,
Where flowers that fade not grow,
And planted him in our poor dust,
Among us weeds below.
Here for a time this heavenly Plant
Fairly grew up and thrived;
Diffused its sweetness all about,
And all in sweetness lived.
But envious frosts, and furious storms,
So long, so fiercely chide;
This tender Plant at last bowed down
Its bruised head, and died.
O narrow thoughts, and narrower speech,
Here your defects confess;
The Life of God, the death of Christ,
How faintly you express!
O Thou! who from a Virgin-root
Made this fair flower to spring,
Help us to raise both heart and voice,
And with more spirit sing.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One undivided Three,
All highest Praise, all humblest Thank,
Now, and for ever be.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
MY God, who can repine at suffering too much; if they remember the afflictions
of Jesus? Those many afflictions He so patiently endured, and bore with Silence
all their weight. Even from his humble Cradle in the City of Bethlehem, to his
bitter Cross on the Mount of Calvary. How little do we read of glad and
prosperous in his Life! how much of pains, and grief, and perpetual affronts!
sometimes he was abandoned by his nearest Friends; and left alone among all his
discomforts: sometimes pursued by his fiercest enemies; and made the common
mark of all their spite: sometimes they plot to ensnare Him in his words; and
enviously slander his miraculous Deeds: sometimes they tumultuously gather
about him; to gaze at and abuse a man of sorrows: Sometimes they furiously
seize on his Person; and hale and drag him along the streets: At last they all
conspire to take away his life; and condemn him to a sharp, and cruel death.
Have you ever seen a harmless Lamb stand silent in the midst of ravenous
Wolves? so stood the Prince of Peace and Innocence, besieged with a ring of
savage Jews: When they blasphemed Him, he replied not again; and when they
injuriously struck him, he only observed their rashness. When they provoked him
with their utmost Malice, he pleaded their excuse; and when they killed him, he
earnestly prayed for their Pardon. O strange ingratitude of humane nature; thus
barbarously to crucify the Worlds Redeemer! O admirable Love of the worlds
Redeemer; thus patiently to dye for humane Nature! Say now, my Soul, for whom
thy dearest Lord endured all this and infinitely more; Can thou complain of
thy little troubles, when the King of Glory was thus afflicted? Can thou
complain of a meanly furnished house; when the Son of God had not where to lay
his head? We wear the badge of a crucified Lord; and shall we shrink back at
every Cross we meet? we believe in a God that was crowned with Thorns; and
shall we abide to tread on nothing but Roses? Before our eyes, O Jesu, we see
thee humble and meek; and shall thy Servants be proud and insolent? We see thee
travel up and down poor, and unregarded; and shall thy followers strive to be
rich, and esteemed? Thy charitable labors were maliciously slandered; and
shall not our faults have the patience to be reproved? Thou did not disdain
to be called, tho in scorn, the Carpenters Son; and cannot our lowness bear a
little disparagement? O how unlike are we to that blessed Original, who descended
from Heaven to become our Pattern! How do we go astray from that sacred path,
which the Holy Jesus traced with his own steps!

MEDITATION III.
ALL this, O Blessed Jesu! thou taughtst thy Holy Prophets to prepare the World
for the coming of a Humble Savior; all this and infinitely more thou did
verify in thine own Person, with the reproaches, pains, and inward sorrows
thou did endure. So much as was able to make even patience it self break
forth into this sad complaint: O all you that pass by behold and see, if there
be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow. My God, when I consider what thou have
suffered for us; and what we have done against our selves: I am amazed at the
wonders of thy goodness; and confounded at the vileness of our misery. Our Sins
were the cause of thy cruel death; yet still we permit them to live in us. We
entertain the worst of thine Enemies; and treacherously lodge them in our own
bosoms. Preferring a petty interest before thy Heaven, and a transitory
pleasure before Eternal Felicity. Many we confess are the follies of our Life;
and our Consciences may very justly tremble at their own great Guilt. Many are
the times thou have graciously pardoned us; and still we relapse, and abuse thy
clemency. The Memory, Lord, of my transgressions shall be very bitter to me,
and the thought of my ingratitude shall extremely afflict me. Oh that my Head
were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears; that Day and Night I might
continually lament my own many Sins, and my dear Saviors Sufferings. But is
there, O my Jesu, any stain so foul, which thy precious blood cannot wash away?
Is there any heap of Sins so vast, to exceed the number of infinite Mercies? O
no; Thou can forgive more than we can offend; but thou will not forgive
unless we fear to offend: Unless we seek to Thee for Peace, and reconcilement;
and humble our selves in thy Holy Presence. I will therefore O Lord humbly
prostrate my self before Thee; and cast my self upon thy infinite Mercy. I will
look seriously into my own Breast, and make diligent search for my bosom Sins:
I will confess and heartily lament my many failings, and strive to correct and
amend my self by Fasting and Prayer. All we can offer thy offended Majesty, to
pacify the Justice of thy wrath, is only an humble Eye bathed in Tears; and a
penitent Heart broken with godly sorrow: Only a firm resolve to change our
lives; and even all this we must beg of Thee.

PETITIONS.
O Thou our Gracious and Indulgent Lord, who freely pardonest all that truly
Repent: who give Repentance to all that ask, and invitest all to ask by
promising to give! O give me I pray an unseign'd Repentance for my past
offenses; and then give the Remission that thou have promised to Repentance.
Open, O Lord, my Lips freely to accuse my self for all the Crimes which my
Examination may find in my Heart or Life: Let the consideration of thy cruel
Sufferings heighten my sorrow for Sin, and confirm my detestation against it.
Make me in every action still think of Thee, and call to mind what thou have
commanded me to do; make me call to mind thy Holy and exemplary Life, and think
what thou thy self would do, O Blessed Jesu, if thou were here among us. And
when I have thus learnt my duty, make me steadily do what thou have taught me
to know. When I consider my ways, make me turn my feet unto thy Testimonies.
Pity, O dear Redeemer, the infirmities of thy Servant, and strengthen with thy
Grace my often fainting Heart. Preserve me hereafter by thy Almighty Power,
that no tentation may surprise or overcome me. Arm me, O Glorious Conqueror of
Sin and Death, against all the fears and terrors of this world. Arm all my
Powers with those celestial virtues, Faith, and Hope, and invincible Charity:
That I may still go on and resolutely meet whatever stands in my way to Heaven.
If I must suffer as a Christian, since I have deserved it from thee as a
Sinner; help me to bear it with such patience, as becomes thy Servant. Let me
not by doing evil, or omitting any required duty, decline any suffering I may
be exposed to for thy sake: Since thy love made thee suffer so much for me; and
has prepared so excellent rewards to Crown my Sufferings hereafter: Since Flesh
and Blood cannot enter into thy Heavenly Kingdom, make me to put them off here
by frequent denying even their just contentments. So shall I be disposed the
better to endure with patience the inconveniences of my way thither. I am, O
Lord, I must confess, unworthy of the least of thy mercies; but these things I
hope to obtain through the merits of thy Passion.

Glory be to, etc.
For Friday Evening.
MEDITATION. I.
O Senseless we, that so little consider what we do against our Savior, or
what he suffered for us! Lord, how the World requites thy Love* How ungrateful
are we to thy Blessed Memory! We negligently forget thy Sacred Passion; or
rather, which is far worse, our Sins renew thy Sufferings. While we deprive
others of their Right, what do we else but divest Thee of thy clothes? While we
delight in Strife and Schism, what do we else but rend thy seamless Coat? If we
despise the least of thy faithful Servants; are we not as so many Herod's that
scorned Thee? If we for Fear proceed against our Conscience; how are we better
than Pilate that unjustly condemned Thee? By forsaking thy will to follow our
own; do we not choose a Murderer before thee? By retaining a sharp and bitter
malice; do we not give Thee Vinegar and Gall to drink? By showing no Mercy to
the poor and afflicted; do we not pass by thy Cross as strangers unconcerned?
Thus we again Crucify the Lord of Glory; and put him afresh to an open shame.
Is this, O wretched we! the Duty we pay to the Sacred Memory of our Dear
Redeemer? Are these the Thanks our gratitude returns to that strange excess of
our Saviors Love? When we sat in darkness he took us by the hand, and kindly
led us into his own light. We sought not him, but he came from far to find us;
we looked not toward him, but his Mercy called after us: He called aloud in
Words of melting tenderness; Why will you perish, O ye Children of Men? Why
will ye run after empty trifles; as if there were no joys above with me?
Return, O you Dear bought Souls, and I will receive you; repent, and though you
had really crucified me, I will forgive you. Behold, O Blessed Jesu, to Thee we
come; on Thee O crucified Love, we fasten all our Confidence: Never will we
unclasp our hold, till thy Grace has sealed the pardon of our Sins. Never will
we part from this standard of Hope, till our troubled Consciences be dismissed in
Peace. There will we stand, and sigh, and weep; and every one humbly say to thy
Mercy: Jesu my God, I am a miserable Sinner. O be thou my kind Advocate with
the Father.

MEDITATION. II.
BElieve in Jesus, O my Soul, and thou may be silent, for he thy Lord will
answer for thee: rely on him and he will be thy security, love him and thou art
united to his satisfaction and merits. Be innocent and he will defend Thee; be
humble and he will exalt Thee. Repent, and he will forgive thy Sins, and purge
away all thy foul impurities. He will wash away the guilt of those Sins which
thy wickedness has ever caused in others; and of those also which thy weakness
has at any time received from them. The merciful Lord will purge thee from all
thy secret faults, and from those darling Sins that most abuse our Nature. He
will pardon what thou have been, and correct what thou art: Will order by his
good Providence what thou shall be, and in the end crown his own excellent
Gifts. Direct thy prayers to his tender Mercy, and his Bounty will bestow more
than thou ask. Never let us fear the favor of our God; if we can but
esteem, and earnestly desire it. He that so freely gave us himself; will he not
with himself give us all things else? Is not his painful Life and bitter Death
sufficient pledge of his Mighty Love to us. He has greater tenderness than any
Mother; and more faithful Love to our true Interest than any Friend: O
disparage not his great willingness to help, by seeking aid of any other
Mediators. Surely they have little Faith, and far less hope; who doubt the
Mercies of so Gracious a God: Mercies confirmed by a thousand Miracles; and
Dearly sealed with his own precious Blood: That Innocent Blood which was shed
for us, to appease the wrath of his offended Father. Is not his infinite love
to us sufficient motive of our duty to him? A Duty to which we are so many
ways obliged; and wherein our Eternity is so highly concerned? Now, my Soul,
is the time of Acceptance, now is the only day of Salvation. Seek to Jesus to
be washed in the pure Fountain of his Blood, and apply thy self to do whatever
he as thy Lord requires thee: So shall the blessed Jesus be to thee Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

MEDITATION III.
Should thou, O Lord, have dealt with us in rigor, we had long since been
sentenced to Eternal Death: Long since our guilty Souls had been snatched away
from this World, and hurried down to everlasting Torments: But thy gracious
Mercy has yet reprieved our lives, and given us space to work out our
Salvation. Now is the time of Acceptance with thee; Now is the Day of Salvation
for us. Now, O my Soul, let us mourn our former Offenses, and henceforth take
care to bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance. If we have hitherto persecuted
the Lord of Glory, and with our sins nailed the Blessed Jesus on the Tree of
Death: Now let our whole endeavors attend the Service of our Savior, and
loyally conspire to un-crucifie their Lord. Let us ascend the Mount of Calvary,
and often as we go, salute his holy steps. We kiss thy steps, dear Lord, when
we love thy ways, and humble our selves, and follow thee. Let us there on our
knees approach him on the Cross, and reverently cover his naked Body: We cover
thee, when our Charity clothes thy Servants, and hides the infirmities of thy
little ones. Let us there with tenderest care unfasten the nails, and gently
draw them out of his Hands and Feet: We draw them out, O Lord, when we freely
obey thy Will, and loosen our Affections from cleaving to the World: When thou
have thus, my Soul, rescued thy Lord, nail thy self in his stead to the Cross.
Mortify thy members which are upon the Earth; and crucify the Flesh with all
its inordinrte Lusts.

PETITIONS.
O Father of Mercies, and of our loving Savior; let the love of thee, and of
thy Son, win our hearts entirely to thy self: Win them from this vain Life, and
all the little goods of it, to the sole pursuit, and hopes of enjoying thee in
thy Eternity. Let the love of our crucified Redeemer soften our hearts, and
make them break for our past offenses against thee: For we have broken the Laws
of our Maker, we have provoked the wrath of our Judge; we have despised the
goodness of our God. O deal not with us according to our fins, nor give us the
sad desert of our Iniquities. We fly, O Lord, from the Bar of thy Justice, to
the mild and gracious Seat of thy Mercy. Spare us, O Lord, who are the works of
thine hands, spare us whom thou have redeemed with the blood of Christ. Pardon,
O Lord, our sins of weakness and surprise; pardon our sins of wilfulness, and
deliberation; pardon our relapsing into the sins we have repented; pardon our
former living in sin without Repentance. Make us so grieve for our sins as to
hate them; so hate, as utterly to forsake them. O may the good Spirit mortify
all our corrupt Affections, that no principle may ever divert us from loving
and serving thee. Crucify, O Lord, our Flesh with the fear of thee, and let us
have all our portion of sorrow in this World: Crucify us to the World, and the
World to us; that being dead to it, we may live to thee: At least live thou in
us, O holy Jesu: Possess thou us, who have bought us so dear as with thy Life's
last drop of precious blood. Dispose of all our motions according to thy
righteous will; help us to root out all our Vices with the constant practice of
contrary Virtues; that so we may bring forth fruits agreeable to a true
Repentance. And confirm, O Lord, we beseech thee, our resolutions against sin,
and our courage to fight manfully under the Banner of thee our Crucified
Savior; that we may withstand the shock of all Temptations, and conquer the
Assaults of all our spiritual Enemies: And make us watch, as well as pray, lest
we enter into temptation; that so we may be delivered from evil. So guide and
govern us, dear Lord, by thy great Wisdom, and Love, that nothing may be able
to separate us from the love of thee our Glorious Redeemer; who with the Father
and the Holy Spirit, live and reignest ever one God, world without end.

Amen.
Hymn 12.
AND now, my Soul, can thou forget
That thy whole life is one long debt
Of love to him, who on a Tree
Paid back the Flesh he took for thee?
Lo how the Streams of precious Blood
Flow from five wounds into one Flood:
With these he washes all thy stains,
And buys thy ease with his own pains.
Thy Cross, dear Lord, does clearly now
That doubt of former Ages show;
It was this wood should make the Throne
Fit for a more than Solomon.
Large Throne of Love! royally spread
With purple of too rich a red:
Strange costly price! thus to make good
Its own esteem with its Kings blood.
Jesu, best plant of Paradise!
To thee our hopes lift up our eyes:
O may aloft thy branches shoot,
And fill the Nations with thy fruit.
O may all reap from thy increase,
The just more strength, the Sinner peace;
While our half-withered hearts and we
Engraft our selves, and grow on thee.
Live, O for ever live, and reign,
Blessed Lamb, whom thine own love has slain;
And may thy lost sheep live to be
True lovers of thy Cross and thee.
All Glory to the sacred Three,
One undivided Deity;
As it has been in Ages gone,
May now and ever still be done.
Amen.
For Saturday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
A Wake all ye Powers of my Soul, and come, pay your homage to the Prince of
our Salvation; cast your unworthy selves at his sacred feet, and renew your
vows of following his steps: He triumphed over death in his own body, and will
enable us to conquer it in ours: He changed the corrupted government of the
world, and established a new and holy Law, that as we were Vassals to sin
before, we might now become the free subjects of Grace: Let us live and dye in
his blessed Obedience, and let no temptation ever separate us from him, who if we
resist will make us overcome, and when we have overcome will crown us with
peace. Come let us adore our victorious Redeemer. Thou have, O Lord, triumphed
over all thy enemies, and ours, but we alas, are yet conversing in the midst of
our enemies: Prostrate before Thee, we will confess our misery: To how many
dangers is our life exposed! with how many tentations are we round besieged!
tentations in meat, tentations in drink, tentations in conversing, tentations
in solitude; tentations in business, tentations in leisure, tentations in
riches, tentations in poverty; all our ways are strewn with snares, and even
our Senses conspire against us. Whither, O my God, shall our poor Souls go,
encompast with a body so frail, and a world so corrupt? Whither but to thee the
justifier of sinners, and to thy grace, the sustainer of the weak? Thy Grace
instructs us what we ought to do, and breeds in us the will to endeavor what
we know: Thy Grace inables us to perform our resolves, and when all is done,
thy Grace must give success. We, that of our selves can do nothing, may,
through Christ strengthening us be able to do all things, and gain the sentence
of approbation that shall be pronounced upon his steadfast followers; Well
done, good and faithful Servants, enter you into your Masters Joy.

Hymn 13.
LOrd, we again lift up our eyes,
And leave our sluggish beds;
But why we wake, or why we rise,
Comes seldom in our heads.
Is it to sweat, and toil for wealth,
Or sport our time away;
That thou preserv'st us still in health,
And giv'st us this new day?
No, no, unskilful Soul, not so,
Be not deceived with toys;
Thy Lords commands more wisely go,
And aim at higher joys.
They bid us wake to seek new grace,
And some fresh virtue gain;
They call us up to mend our pace,
'Till we the prize attain.
That glorious Prize for which all run,
Who wisely spend their breath;
Who when this weary life is done,
Are sure of rest in death.
Not such a rest as here we prove,
Disturbed with cares and fears;
But endless joy, and peace, and love,
Unmixt with grief and tears.
Glory to Thee, O bounteous Lord!
Who giv'st to all things breath;
Glory to Thee Eternal Word!
Who sav'st us by thy Death:
Glory, O blessed Spirit, to Thee,
Who fill'st our Souls with Love;
Glory to all the mystic Three,
Who reign one God above.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
LOrd, with what admirable Wisdom do thou govern the world, and order the
several conditions of Men! thy wise Providence orders some to be poor, and
appoints them their task of innocent work: Thy Providence is pleased to make
others rich, and give them leisure for their better improvements: Thou have
made both poor and rich to be some way needful to one another, that all may
live in love and unity, and apply themselves to mutual assistance. Happy are
they, O Lord, who have so much employment, that there remains no room for idle
thoughts: Happy are they who have so little business, that they want not space
to attend their Souls: Happy yet more are they, who in the midst of their work,
can think sometimes of the wages above; whom nothing diverts from that chief
concern of seeking to make their Election sure: But while their backs are bowed
down with labor, they freely can raise up their minds to Heaven: And while
they are tied to their Beds with sickness, can yet move on toward their
Eternal rest: Often they rejoice with themselves alone, and silently say in
their contented hearts, Here we, alas! are narrowly confined, and our time
entertained with trivial affairs: But hereafter we expect an unbounded
enlargement, and the same glorious office with the blessed Angels: Here we are
subject to a thousand miseries, and the most prosperous life is vain and short;
but hereafter we expect an infinity of Joy, and the solid Pleasures of Heaven
for ever. We too, my Soul, let us Pray to be guided in the middle Path, and
take care that we decline to no vicious extreme; to avoid the stormy sea of too
much business, and the dead water of a slothful life; lest we be cast away by
forgetting God, or become corrupted by neglecting our selves. Sometimes at
least recollect thy thoughts, how much soever thy condition distracts thee: In
all thy works remember thy last end, when thou must bid a long farewell to all
this World; Remember that dreadful Day of the Universal Judgment, when thou
must give an account for every idle word: Remember the Joys prepared for the
Innocent, and the miseries that attend the wicked: Remember how nearly it
concerns thee to have a good or a bad Eternity, and that every action tends
toward the one or the other: Thus kept in awe, thou will be careful not to
sin, and encouraged by the reward thou will strive to do well. Then may thou
look up with humble confidence in our God, how low soever thy afflictions
depress thee: Thou may look up to the eternal Mountains, and feed thy hungry
desires with this sweet hope; the day will come, when out of this dark world we
shall joyfully ascend to that beauteous light: The day will come, and cannot be
far off, when we shall rest for ever in the bosom of Bliss.

MEDITATION III.
HAppiest of all, O Lord, are they, whose very business is thy sacred Service:
Who not only bestow an interrupted glance, but steadily fix their Eyes on Thee:
Who are devoted to the happy Service of the Sanctuary, and night and day dwell
in thy presence: Who, not engaged in the cares and tumults of the World, spend
their time in Retirement and Devotion: If the Sun rise, it finds them at their
Masters work; and when it sets, leaves them at the same sweet task. Every place
is a Church to such consecrated Souls, and every day a holy Sabbath: Every
object is an occasion of Piety, and every accident an exercise of Virtue. Do
they behold the beauteous Stars, they presently adore their great Creator: Do
they look down on the fruitful Earth, they instantly begin to praise his
Bounty: Let War or Peace do what they will, and the inconstant World reel up
and down; they pass through all with a ferene mind, and smoothly go on their
regular course; looking still up to that glorious Life above, and entertaining
this present in hope, and labor to attain it: When they depart sometimes from
their proper center, and forsake a while their beloved retirement; it is to
approach and give light to others, and inflame some cold or lukewarm hearts:
While they are abroad they are still with Thee, and nothing can divide them
from thy dear Presence: When they return, still Devout and Innocent, thou
receivest them as familiar Friends; and freely admit'st them to thy secret
Sweetness: Thou give them a taste from thine own full board, and overflowest
their hearts with the Wine of gladness. Often they feel a little beam from
Heaven strike gently, and fill their breasts with light; often that gentle
light is kindled into a flame, and chastely burns with pure desires: Desires
that still mount up and aim at Thee, the supernatural center of all their
hopes. Oh happy state of the Reverend Clergy, who empty of the World, are full
of God! Such shall seldom fall, and quickly rise, and make swift Advances in
the way to Heaven: They shall live in purity, and dye with confidence, and go
to sing among the Quires of Angels.

PETITIONS.
O Gracious, and eternal Wisdom and Goodness! who see and pitiest the
infirmities of our nature surrounded on every side with the worst of dangers;
tentations to folly: O guide my steps in thy safe way; order every chance to
prevent my falling, and still lead me on toward a happy end. Give me the eye
and wing of an Eagle, to see my danger at a distance, and fly swiftly away from
it. If I needs must engage my Enemy, and there be no means left to escape the
Encounter; strengthen me, O Lord, with thy all-powerful Grace, to persevere
with courage, to break through all that offers to divert or stop the advance of
my love to thee alone; strengthen me, that I may never be wanting in my
fidelity to thee. Convince me, O blessed God, into this firm judgment, and make
my Memory faithfully retain it; whatever my Senses say to deceive me, or the
World to obscure so beauteous a truth: That thy self alone art our chiefest
good, and the sight of thy glory our supreme felicity. Give me, O thou
dispenser of all things, give me in this World neither poverty nor riches, but
feed me with food convenient for me, lest perhaps being full, I be allured to
deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or compelled by want, do flatter or steal,
or forswear the name of my God. Whatever my lot be, assist me by thy Grace to
submit my Will entirely to thine: Assist me so to improve the Talents which thy
Providence assigns me; that at the great day of Account I may be received with
those precious words, Well done, good and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy
Masters joy: Through the Merits of Jesus Christ the Mediator.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For Saturday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
WHY do we still pursue this World, and so eagerly seek its fond enjoyments? A
world of vanity and false deceits; a world of misery and many sad disasters;
whose Crosses are solid, and Comforts empty; whose Sorrows are permanent, and
Delights pass quickly away: A World where the innocent are often condemned with
shame, and the bold guilty acquitted with applause: Where sometimes the wicked
are advanced to honor, and the virtuous are oppressed with disgrace: Where
Friends soon fall off, and Kindred forget, and every one minds his own private
Interest. Yet are we taken with this crooked World, and blindly court its ugly
painted face. We make some sordid Passion Mistress of our heart, and neglect
the pure and amiable love of Jesus; whose goodness to us gives all we have,
whose Perfections in himself are more than we can conceive. Thou art, O
glorious Jesu, the Beauty of Angels, and the everlasting Joy of all thy Saints.
Thou art the Heaven of Heaven it self, and in thy sight alone is the fullness of
Bliss. All this thou art, and infinitely more! and yet alas! how few esteem
thee! The World (we dearly know) too often has deceived us; and our rashness
takes no care not to be undone again. Thou never, O Jesu, have failed our hope,
and our dullness fears to rely on thee. The World distracts and embroils our
spirits, and wretched we delight in our misery. Thou always, O Jesu, fill'st
our hearts with peace, and senseless we are weary of thy happiness. The World
calls, and we faint in eager following it; thou call'st, and we are still
relieved by thee: Yet is our Nature so ingratefully perverse; we run after that
which tires, and abandon that which refreshes. Sometimes our lips speak
gloriously of thee, O thou living Fountain of eternal Bliss. Some happy times
we relish thy sweetness, and decry aloud the poisons of the World. But we are
soon enticed by its gilded Cup, and easily forsake the Waters of Life.

MEDITATION II.
ALL this is true, and yet the World is loved, and our nature inclines to
affect its vanities. It Is loved, and so it justly deserves to be, did we
understand its real value. Our Life indeed seems trivial and mean, and all
things about us look troublesome and dangerous: Yet, O my God, is their
consequence excellent in this; that they are our only way of coming to thee.
This World, and this alone is the Womb that breeds us, and brings us forth to
see thy light. This is alone the proper Machine, wherein thy hand has set our
Lives; to learn the art of managing it right, and wind up our selves to thy
glorious Heaven. O that we had that happy skill! how soon would every thing
help forward to advance us! Whether we eat or drink, or whatever else an
innocent hand can undertake; if we regard our faithful end, and order all to
the improvement of our minds* They instantly change their secular name, and
deservedly are preferred to become religious. Riches themselves, and imperious
Honor have not so perverse and fixed a malice; but a prudent use converts them
to Piety, and makes them fit instruments of highest Bliss. Our very delights (O
the goodness of our God!) may be tempered with so wise an alloy, that his mercy
accounts them as parts of our Duty, and fails not to give them their full
reward; while they are entertained for the health of our Bodies, or the just
refreshment of our wearied spirits; and both our Bodies and Spirits constantly
applied to gain new degrees of the love of Heaven. Thus, gracious Lord, every
moment of our lives may still be climbing up toward thee; thus may we still
proceed in thy service, even then when we most of all serve our selves: And
then indeed it is we best serve our selves, when we are busiest in what we call
thy service. Thou sweetly vouchsafest to style that thy glory, which in very
truth is nothing but our interest: Thou kindly complain'st we dishonor thy
Name, when we only mischief our own Souls.

MEDITATION III.
THis Life indeed is the way we must walk; but this alone cannot bring us to
our end. E're we arrive at our appointed home, we must be led through the Gates
of Death; where we shall absolutely be stripped of all we have; and carry nothing
with us but what we are. Where we not only must quit the whole World; but leave
behind us even part of our selves. Have thou, my Soul, seen some Neighbor dye?
and do thou remember those circumstances of Sorrow? We are sure, the Case
e're long will be our own; and are not sure but it may be very soon. Have we
our selves been dangerously sick? and do we remember the thoughts we had then?
How we resolved to correct our Passions; and strive against the vices that
particularly endanger us. It will come to this again; and no reprieve shall be
found to stay one single Minute the hand of Death: But he immediately will
seize upon us, and bear us away to the Region of spirits; there to be ranged in
our proper place; as the course of our Life has qualified us here. Nor is this
all, to expire, and dye; and dwell for a time in a state of Separation. We must
expect another day; a day of public accounts, and restitution of all things:
When the Archangel shall sound his Trumpet, and proclaim aloud this universal
summons: Arise you dead, and come to Judgment; arise, appear before the Throne
of God. Then shall the little heaps of Dust immediately awake; and every Soul
put on again her proper Body. Immediately all the Children of Adam shall be
gathered together; from Heaven, and Hell, and every corner of the Earth. There
they must stand, and all attend their doom; but O with how sad and fatal a
difference! The Just shall look up with a cheerful confidence; and in their new
white robes triumph and sing: Alleluja, let us rejoice, for the Marriage of the
Lamb is come; and his Bride has prepared her self. Let us rejoice, for the
Kingdom of the World is made our Lords, and his Christ's; and he shall Reign for
ever and ever. Let us rejoice, for now our Redeemer is nigh; behold he comes
quickly, and his reward is with him. Come, come, Lord Jesu, thou long desire of
our Hearts; come quickly thou full delight of our Souls: Come, and declare to
all the world thy Glory; come, and reward before all the World thy Servants.
Lo, where aloft he comes in Power, and Majesty; attended with a train of
innumerable Angels. Behold where he sits enthroned on the Wings of Cherubims,
and takes at once a view of all mankind. Soon he commands his Angels to sever
his sheep; and gather them together on his Right hand. First then to them he
turns his glorious Face, and shines upon them, and says these ravishing words:
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the World. O the joys their Souls shall feel, when those Heavenly
Words sound in their Ears; Joys that the wit of man cannot conceive; joys
that the Tongues of Angels cannot express. Let it suffice, themselves shall
taste their own felicity; and feed on its sweetness for ever. But O, with what
dejected Eyes and trembling Hearts shall the wicked stand expecting their
Judge! What shall they do when, wherever they look, their grieved Eye can meet
with nothing but what will cause despair? Above the offended Judge ready to
condemn them; below the bottomless Pit gaping to devour them Within the worm of
Conscience gnawing their Bowels, and round about them all the world is in
flames. What shall they do when that terrible voice shall strike them suddenly
down to the bottom of Hell? Go you accursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil, and his Angels. The day of man is past, when Sinners did what they
pleased; and God seemed to hold his Peace. It Is now the day of God, when his
wrath shall speak in thunder; and Sinners shall suffer what their wickedness
deserves. Then shall they sink immediately into the Pit of Sorrow; and dwell in
darkness and torments for ever. While the just shall go up in Joy and Triumph;
and Reign with our Lord in his Kingdom for ever. Thus shall the whole Creation
be finally disposed; and Mercy and Justice divide the world. O my Soul! who now
art here below, and read'st these dreadful Truths as things afar off: Know thou
shall be present and see them with thine Eyes, and be thy self concerned for
all Eternity. Know as thou live, thou art sure to die; and as thou die thou
art sure to be judged. Think what a sad condition it will be to find thy self
on the wrong hand: Think what then thou would give to have repented in time;
think what thou would give for a little time to repent. Think on these
things, and now heartily repent while yet a moment of time is left thee.
Improve this moment about the necessary work, because thou can not be assured
of the Succession of another. Watch, now, thy self continually, and continually
pray; for we know not the Hour when the Son of man will come.

PETITIONS.
O Son of God and Man, who came in Mercy to save! O bring the same Mercy with
Thee, when thou come to Judge us. In the mean while assist me by thy heavenly
Grace, to stand perpetually with my accounts prepared; that I may die in the
Peace of God, and Communion of his Church, and go to live with him, and that
part of his Holy Church which is triumphant. O Blessed Jesu! King of Clemency,
and great rewarder of every little Grace! Thou who by all we can do pretendest
no gain, but bestowest on us all that thy self have done: Instruct my gratitude
to consecrate all to Thee, since all by thy bounty will redound to thy self. O
Thou who tookst upon Thee all our frailty, to bestow on us thine own
perfections, teach me to prize the joys of Heaven, and part with all things
else to purchase Thee. O let not the flatteries of worldly pleasures any more
delude me! nor any superfluous cares perplex my mind. O may my chief delight be
to think of thee, all my study to come to the enjoyment of thee. Let the
shortness and vexation of all worldly enjoyments so disparage them to my
Apprehensions, that they may become less tempting to me, and take the less hold
of my heart. Make me thankfully sensible of thy mercy and kindness to Mankind,
in mixing this worlds enjoyments with so much trouble and inconvenience; since
we cannot attain thee, the Heaven of Heavens, if we do not fix our selves
entirely upon thee: Nor can we do this if we are or may be satisfied with any
thing beside thy glorious self. Thus has thy wisdom fitly qualified this life,
the present dark womb of our Souls, so that by its own uneasiness it will with
thy blessing the more easily dispose them for a happy birth into thy blessed
Eternity: Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who with the Father and the
Holy Ghost together, is worshipped and glorified.

Amen.
Hymn 14.
LOrd, what a pleasant life were this,
If all did well their parts;
If all did one another love
Sincerely with their hearts!
No Suits of Law, no noise of War
Our quiet minds would fright;
No fear to lose, no care to keep
What justly is our right.
No envious thought, no slandoring tongue
Would e're disturb our peace;
We should help them, and they help us,
And all unkindness cease.
But the All-wise chose other Laws,
And thought it better so;
He made the World, and sure he knows
What Is best with it to do.
It Is for our good, that all this ill
Is suffered here below;
It Is to correct those dangerous sweets,
That else would Poison grow.
So storms are raised to clear the air,
And chase dull clouds away;
So weeds grow up to cure our wounds,
And all our pains allay.
How often, Lord, do we mistake,
When we our Plots design!
Rule thou hereafter thine own world,
Only, thy self be mine.
Or rather, Lord, let me be thine,
Else I am not mine own;
Give me thy self, or take thou me,
Undone if left alone.
To thee, great God of Heaven and Earth!
Each knee for ever bow;
May all thy Blessed sing above,
And we adore below.
Amen.
Devotions FOR Every Day IN THE WEEK. The Second Part.
For Sunday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
SIng to our Lord a Psalm of Joy, sing Praises to the God of our Salvation:
Sing with a loud and cheerful Voice, sing with a glad and thankful Heart: Say
to the weak of spirit, Be strong; say to the staggering Faith, Be steadfast; say
to the sorrowful, Be of good comfort. Tell all the World this Soul-reviving
truth, and may their Hearts leap within them to hear it: Tell them the Lord of
life is risen again, and has clothed himself with immortal glory: He made the
Angels Messengers of his Victory, and vouchsaf't even himself to bring us the
happy news. How many ways did thy condescending mercy invent, O thou wise
contriver of all our happiness! to convince thy followers into this blessed
belief, and settle in their Hearts a firm ground of hope: Thou appearedst to
the holy Women, in their return from thy Sepulcher, and openedst their eyes to
know and adore thee: Thou did purposely overtake in their Journey two of thy
Disciples, that were discoursing of Thee, and make their hearts burn within
them by thy Discourse, whilst thou did kindly expound to them the things that
related to thee in all the Scriptures, and which by thee had been fulfilled.
Thou did show thy self on the Shore to thy Disciples laboring at Sea, to
intimate that they must now leave that fishing to become Fishers of Men: They
labored all night in vain, without the Blessing of their Master Jesus: Thou
did show thy self to them, and tell them plainly who thou were, by the kind
known token of a beneficial Miracle: When the doors of the House were shut,
thou who had insensibly come in, did appear to give them peace and
satisfaction; to satisfy them of thy Resurrection from the dead, and of thy
continued tender Love to them: How did thou condescend to eat before them,
and invite them to touch thy Body! How did thou sweetly provoke the
incredulous Thomas to thrust his hand into thy wounded side: And thou have
taken occasion from his hardness to believe, to facilitate the Faith of thy
Church in after Ages. We bless Thee, O Lord, who has so ordered the Duties of
our Faith, that the true reports of Sense may help us in some of them, and do
contradict us in none. How often, O gracious Lord, in those blessed forty
days, did thy Charity cast to meet with thy Disciples! that thou might
teach them still some excellent truth, and imprint still deeper thy Love in
their Hearts: Discoursing perpetually of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
establishing proper means to bring us thither. At last when all thy glorious
task was perfectly finished, and thy hour of departing from this Earth did
approach, Thou did tenderly gather thy Children about thee, and in their full
sight go up into Heaven; leaving thy dearest Blessing on their heads, and
promising a kind Comforter in thy absence. O how adoreable are thy Counsels, O
Lord! How strangely endearing the ways of thy Love! Say now, my Soul, is not
this evidence clear enough, to answer all our darkest Doubts? Is not this hope
abundantly sufficient to sweeten all our bitterest Sorrows? What though we
mourn and be afflicted here, and sigh under the Miseries of the world for a
time? we may be sure that our Tears shall one day be turned into Joy, and that
Joy none shall be able to take from us: What though our Bodies be crumbled into
dust, and that dust should be blown about over the face of the whole Earth? Yet
we undoubtedly know that our Redeemer lives, and shall appear in brightness at
the last Great Day. He shall appear in the midst of all the numerous Hosts of
Angels, and before him shall be brought all Nations: Then with these Eyes which
now read of him, we shall see him; we shall see him in whom we have so long
believed, we shall find him whom we have so often sought: In our full and final
Redemption we shall find him a faithful and mighty Redeemer: We shall possess
him whom our Souls have loved, and be united to him for ever, who is the only
end of our being.

Hymn 15.
A Wake my Soul, rise from this Bed,
Of dull, and sluggish Earth;
Quickly arise, lift up thy head,
And see thy Lords new birth.
Once did he come, O Blessed He!
Born of a Virgin-womb;
Lo now he comes, (and still for thee)
Sprung from a Virgin-tomb.
See thy Lord rises fresh and bright,
Incircled round with Stars;
Which all from him receive their light,
And from his glorious Scars.
And thus as he his Progress makes
Up to his Heaven again,
Each risen Saint his Music takes,
And follows in his train.
Thus all together they ascend,
'Till at Heavens gate they come;
Where wondering Angels do attend,
To bid them welcome home.
The Angels know again their King,
And soon his Call obey;
All the glad Quires come forth to sing
And crown with mirth the day.
Come thou, my Soul, let us rejoice,
Us too, our consort bring;
Up to high Heaven let us lift our voice,
And with the Angels sing,
Glory and Honor, Power and Praise
To the mysterious Three;
As at the first beginning was,
May now and ever be.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
RAise thy head, O my Soul! and look up, and behold the Glory of thy Crucified
Savior. He that was dead, and laid in the Grave low enough to prove himself
Man; He is risen again, and ascended into Heaven, and is in exaltation high
enough to prove himself God. He arose, and made the light his Garment, and
commanded the Clouds to be the Chariot of his Triumph. The gates of Heaven
obeyed their Lord, and the everlasting Doors opened to the King of Glory.
Enter, bright King, thy glorious Palace, attended with thy shining Angels;
enter with the glad train of thy new delivered Captives, the first Fruits of
thy Victory, and the earnests of more. Enter, and repossess thy ancient Throne,
and reign eternally at the right hand of thy Father. May every Knee bow low at
thy exalted Name, and every Tongue confess thy Glory. May all created Nature
adore thy Power, and the Church of thy Redeemed exult in thy goodness. Whom
have we in Heaven but thee, O Lord, who did expressly go thither to make way
for thy followers? What have we on Earth that yields us any comfort and
delight, but our hope by following thee to arrive at last where thou art gone
before us? And worth our while, O Lord, it is to follow thee in the greatest
labor of doing well, and in patience under the greatest Adversities; since the
end of all is, that where thou art we shall be. We shall be there, and shall be
like thee; for we shall see thee as thou art: We shall be exalted, and
glorified, and rest from our labors. O glorious Jesu, our Strength, and our
Joy; and the immortal Life of all our Souls. Thou art worthy to be the
principal Subject of our Studies, and the daily entertainment of our most
serious thoughts.

MEDITATION III.
WHat mighty cause, O God, have thou given poor Mankind to rejoice and praise
thee, in that thou have raised our Savior from the Grave. He died for our
sins, and rose again for our Justification. In this we see a full satisfaction
made for our sins by his death: Hereby he ever lives to make intercession for
us sinners. O let all the World rejoice in the Victory and Triumph of our Lord
over all the Enemies of our Salvation. I bless thee, O my Savior, for thy
Death, and I praise and adore thee for thy Resurrection: The one a work of
infinite condescending Mercy; the other of infinite Power. And now, my Soul,
how art thou conformable to thy kind Lord, if when he is risen, thou lie dead
in trespasses and sins? If thou be not risen with Christ to a new and spiritual
Life, certainly thou art none of his, Will he not draw all his own thus after
him? Will he suffer any of them to lie entangled in earthly desires? If he has
not drawn thy heart from the World, and from thy self, and made thee value him
most, and delight to run the way of his Commandments; thou have no part in him.
And if thou be risen with Christ, thou should seek those things which are
above. Why should our Hearts dwell on Earth, when the best Treasure of our
Hearts is returned to Heaven? Since our glorified Jesus is ascended above, to
prepare us a place in his own Kingdom? A place of rest, and secure peace, where
we shall see, and praise, and adore him for ever; a place of joy, and
everlasting fruition; where we shall love, and possess, and delight in him for
ever. O happy we, and our poor Souls, if once admitted to that blissfull
Vision! If once those heavenly Portals unfold their Gates, and let us in to the
joys of our Lord; how will our Spirits be ravished within themselves, to
reflect on the fullness of their own Beatitude! How shall we all rejoice in one
another felicity; but infinitely more in the infinitely greater felicity of
God. O Heaven, toward thee it is meet that we frequently lift up craving eyes,
and with out-stretcht hands reach at thy Glories. It is fit that with
languishing Hearts we often say, When, O when shall we behold that incomparable
light with which our exalted Savior is clothed as with a Garment. That Glory
which illuminates the eyes of Angels, and eternally renews the youth of
immortalized Saints. That light is thy very self, O Lord our God, whom we shall
there see face to face; whom we shall there know as we are known: In thy light
we shall see light.

PETITIONS.
O Divine, Immense, Original Light! shine thou perpetually in our eyes, that
thy brightness may for ever darken all the false luster of this World. O light
that delightest to diffuse and communicate thy self, shed so many of thy
powerful Beams into our Hearts, as that thy heat may burn up all other desires.
Make us burn continually with the pure Love of thee, and let that resining fire
purge us from the love of this World. Let thy light shine in our Hearts, and be
a guide to our ways, till we be called from this vale of darkness, into the
glorious presence of the living God: To see him that made the Heavens and the
Earth, and gave to all things their Luster and Beauty: To see him that first
gave us our Being, then governed us in our way, and brought us to so blessed an
end. Mean while, O glorious Jesu, who art the foundation and finisher of all
our hopes; do thou make us entertain our life with the comfort of this hope,
and our hope with the assurance of thy promises. Let thy Triumphs and Glories
ever shine in our eyes, to animate our Labors, and comfort our Sufferings. Let
them confirm our Faith in this comfortable point, That if we are thy faithful
followers in this Life, we shall hereafter be partakers in thy Glory. Make us
also, Lord, every day more perfectly understand our own great Duty, and thy
infinite Love. Make us especially on this thy Day, meditate the advancement of
thy Glory, and invite all the World to sing thy deserved Praises. Inspire our
he arts, O Lord, with such loving wishes as these. Praise our Lord, O you holy
Angels. Praise him, O you happy Saints. Let the Faithful Souls departed from
this Life by his Grace, ever praise him. Let all the living on Earth, who
subsist by his mercy, praise him. Let one Gone-^^^ion after another carry on
the Duty of praise, till Generations shall be no more; and say;

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the Beginning, is now, and
ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.
For Sunday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
O Sin, how have thou disturbed and confounded this our miserable World. Before
Sin entered, nothing but Happiness dwelt here. Sin has disordered the Nature of
Mankind, and of every thing else. The Righteous Vengeance of God has laid a
deserved Curse upon the whole Creation: Now is unhappy man born to trouble, as
the sparks of Fire are to fly upward. Poor Mankind, this is not the place of
thy rest, because thy Sin has defiled it. Thou art liable to receive hurt and
trouble from all things here below; and thou can never be happy till thou art
translated into Heaven. Heaven only is the Place of true and lasting Joy, the
place of ease and secure rest. Who will give my weary Soul the wings of a Dove,
that I may fly away and be at rest? That I may leave this dangerous, dark,
uncomfortable, vexatious world. That I may fly away from the troubles of this
Life and be at rest, Dear Lord, with Thee. Here we, alas! are forced to utter
many a deep Sigh, to bear with grief the burden of weighty Miseries: Often we
encounter chances that endanger us, and divert our progress in the way of
Bliss: Often we are assaulted with temptations that overcome us, and set us
back in the accounts of Eternity. How many times, O my Soul, have we plainly
concluded that this Earth affords no real Joy. When we have observed by our own
experience, or by the carriage of others, that the enjoyment never preforms
that which the expectation promises. How many times have we fully agreed that
Heaven alone is the place of Happiness: When we have found all places and
conditions here encombred with Vanity and Vexation. Yet these false allurements
do again, and again deceive us, and seduce our Hearts to dote on folly. We have
found that which glittered like Gold to be but dross, and yet we are caught
again with something else that glisters. Thus do we foolish and unconstant
Creatures, forget our wisest resolves, and the meanwhile we neglect our true
felicity. My Soul, to be Wise and Happy thou must only Thirst and Sigh after
thy God: He is the living Fountain of the true Rivers of Pleasures. Thou must
despise all other delights, and set thy affections entirely on the joys which
the blisseful enjoyment of him affords. Nothing can ever satisfy thy desires
but He, and he alone can do this. O then seek nothing so much as him; seek
nothing be sure that stands in competition with him. To seek him is to save thy
self, for thou shall find him: but by seeking other things in neglect of him,
thou will lose him and thy self and them. Nothing but labor, disquiet and
unrest will attend thy seeking other things, and the enjoyment of them will not
render thee free from those.

MEDITATION II.
IF my Gracious God afford me but the Innocence of the Dove; I shall need none
of its Wings: If my Soul, Lord, be filled with thy mild Spirit; Heaven it self
will dwell in my Heart. It Is on the proud thou look afar off; but inclinest
thine Ear to the humble and meek. Those who delight in the Peace of a contented
mind, and limit their thoughts to their own little Sphere: Who never intermedle
with the actions of others, unless where Justice, or Charity to men, or Piety
to God does engage them: Whose loved employment is to sit in silence, and
meditate on the Happiness, that they expect hereafter. To contemplate the joys
of Saints and Angels; and the blissful Face of our Glorified Jesus. O how
secure, and sweetly do they sleep; who go to bed with a quiet Conscience! Who
after a day of honest painful industry, in a course of just and pious living,
lay down their wearied Heads in Peace, and safely rest in the Bosom of
Providence. If they awake their Conscience Comforts them in the Dark, and bids
them not fear the shadow of Death: No nor even Death it self; but confidently
look up, and long for the dawn of that Eternal day that succeeds it. This too,
my Soul, should be our care; to note and censure and correct our selves: To
strive for Mastery over our passions that molest us; and dismiss from our
thoughts what does no way concern us. Are not our own occasions business enough
to fill as much time as this Life deserves? Does not the other at least deserve
every Minute of leisure that we can spare from this? Let then the worldly men
pursue their fancied liberties; and say and do as they think fit: What Is that
to Thee, my Soul! who shall not answer for others, unless thou some way make
their faults thine own. Thy pity may grieve, and thy charity endeavor; but if
they will not hear, follow thou thy God. Follow the way that leads to Truth;
follow the Truth that leads to Life. Follow the steps of thy beloved Jesus; who
alone is the Way, the Truth and the Life. Follow his Holiness in what he did;
follow his Patience in what he suffered. Follow him that calls thee with a
thousand bounteous Promises; kindly condescending to invite, when he might only
command; and who will crown those that follow him, with unconceiveable Rewards.
Follow thy faithful Lord, O my Soul, to the end; and thou may be sure in the
end to enjoy him for ever.

MEDITATION III.
LEarn of me, says our kind and wise Master, for I am meek and humble of
Heart; and you shall find rest to your Souls. Thou, Lord, were it wondrously
meek, a glorious pattern of Humility and Patience. And in that meekness and
Patience did always possess a well-composed Soul. A mind regular in all it is
motions, always easy to it is self, and always ready to do the will of him
that sent Thee: Meekness of Spirit is indeed to us the Heaven of this Life, but
the Heaven of Heavens, O Lord, is above with Thee. Meekness may qualify our
miseries here, and make the tedious time of this Life pass the gentlier away:
It fortifies the composed Spirit to bear the present burdens: But to be fully
happy we must stay till hereafter, when all burden shall be removed; till thy
Mercy bring us to our last great end. That Glorious end for which our Souls are
made, and all things else to serve them in their way. It is not to sport away
our time in Pleasures, that thou O Lord have placed us here on Earth. It Is not
to gain a fair estate; that thy kindness still prolongs our days. But to do
good to our selves and others; and to glorify thee in a wise improvement and
regular use of thy Creatures. To increase every day our longing desires of
beholding thee in thine own bright self. By the goodness of thy Creatures we
should be inflamed with greater longings toward thee, because thou have all
that goodness in thy self: By the defect and insufficiency of the Creatures, we
should increase our desire of thy self, because thou have that goodness which
they want.

PETITIONS.
O Thou who art the victorious Conqueror of Sin and Death; We, weak Combatants,
beseech thee to assist us in our dangerous Warfare. Assist us against the
Rebellions of our Passions; still thou quickly all the tumults which the
occurrences of this World begin to raise in our Souls. O thou the Fountain, as
well as Pattern of Meekness, possess our Souls with this excellent virtue; that
our minds may never be discomposed, that our Tongues may not break forth into
violent expressions, nor our Hands into any rash injurious actions. Let us be
calm and regular within, however irregular and full of confusion the World be
without us. O thou blessed Spirit, the only sure Comforter, the benign
refresher of distressed spirits; grant us thy Joys and Consolations to relieve
us in this tedious Pilgrimage: Let our Souls feel only the sweet impulses of
divine Hope and Charity. O glorious and chiefest Good, whose infinite sweetness
provokes and satisfies all our Appetites! May my entire Affections delight in
Thee above all the vain enjoyments of the World: Above all Praise, and empty
Honor; above all Beauty, and fading Pleasure; above Health, and all deceitful
Riches; above all Power, and subtlest Knowledge; above even all that thy own
Bounty can give, and whatever is not thy very self. O may my wearied Soul
repose in thee, the home and center of eternal Rest. May I forget my self to
think on thee, and fill my Memory with the wonders of thy Love: That infinite
Love which when my thoughts consider, not as they ought, alas! but as I am
able; the Goods or Ills of this World lose their Names, and yield not either
relish or distaste. O my adored Jesu, let me love thee always, because from
Eternity thou have loved me: Let me love thee above all Creatures, because thou
have loved Mankind more than any besides. O let me love thee only, gracious
God! because thou alone deservest all my Heart. Always and only let me love
thee, dear Lord! since always my hope is only in thee.

Amen.
Hymn 16.
DEar Jesu, when, when shall it be,
That I no more shall break with thee*
When will this War of Passions cease,
And let my Soul enjoy thy Peace!
Here I repent, and sin again;
Now I revive, and now am slain:
Slain with the same unhappy dart,
Which, O! too often wounds my Heart.
When, dearest Lord, when shall I be
A Garden sealed to all but thee!
No more exposed, no more undone;
But live, and grow to thee alone.
It Is not, alas! on this low Earth,
That such pure flowers can find a birth:
Only they spring above the skies,
Where none can live till here he dies.
Then let me die, that I may go,
And dwell where those bright Lilies grow.
Where those blessed plants of Glory rise,
And make a safer Paradise.
No dangerous fruit, no tempting Eve,
No crafty Serpent to deceive;
But we like Gods indeed shall be:
O let me die, that life to see.
Thus says my Song, but does my Heart
Join with the words, and sing its part?
Am I so thorow-wise to choose
The other World, and this refuse?
Why should I not? what do I find,
That fully here contents my mind?
What is this meat, and drink, and sleep,
That such poor things from Heaven should keep?
What is this Honor, or great place;
Or bag of Money, or fair Face?
What Is all the World, that thus we should
Still long to live with flesh and blood?
Fear not, my Soul! stand to the word
Which thou have sung to thy dear Lord:
Let but thy love be firm and true,
And with more heat thy wish renew.
O may this dying life make haste
To die into true life at last:
No hope have I to live before;
But then to live, and die no more.
Great ever-living God! to thee,
In Essence One, in Persons Three;
May all thy works their Tribute bring,
And every Age thy Glory sing.
Amen.
For Monday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
COme, let us Meditate the Praises of our God, and joyfully recite his divine
Perfections: His Being is of himself alone, and no dependence his eternal
Essence knows: His Knowledge fathoms the vast extent of all things; and with
his Power he commands and disposes them as he pleases: His Goodness is
supreamly Infinite, and all his glorious Attributes transcendently adorable.
Come, let us Meditate the Praises of our God, and joyfully recite his divine
Perfections: He is the source of all Felicity; eternally full of his own
unchangeable Bliss; before time began, he was; and when the Sun must lose its
light, his bright day will remain the same for ever: The Heaven of Heavens is
the Palace of his Glory, and all created nature the subject of his Dominion: In
his Presence the brightest Seraphims cover their Faces, and all the blessed
Spirits bow down their Heads to his Footstool. It is the loved Employment of
those Spirits, to sing aloud the eminent Prerogatives of their God and ours;
let us then stretch our utmost thoughts to exalt the divine Greatness. But O
most glorious and dreadful Deity, how dare we Wretches undertake thy Praise!
How dare our sin-polluted Lips pronounce thy Name? or where shall we seek
expressions fit for thee? All we can say, is nothing to thy unspeakable
Excellencies; all we can think, but a faint shadow of thy unconceivable
Beauties: Even the Voice of Angels is too low to reach thy worth, and their
highest Strains fall infinitely short of Thee. Only in this shall thy Servants
rejoice, and all the Powers of our Souls be glad, that thy self alone art thy
full Praise; that all thy Works, merely in what they are, do Praise thee: Thou
have magnified thy self in making the Creatures. The boundless Ocean of Being
would not contain his Streams, but overflowed upon pure nothing, and out of
nothing a beauteous World appeared. Be to thy self, O great Creator, thine own
glory, as thou have made all things for thy self. Live, our great God,
eternally encompast with the beams of thine own inaccessible light: Live, our
adored Creator, and reign for ever on the Throne of thine own immortal Kingdom.

Hymn 17.
OBserve, my Soul, how every thing
Consents to serve our bounteous King:
Each Creature double tribute pays,
Sings first its part, and then obeys.
Birds, Natures chief and sweetest Quire,
Him with their cheerful notes admire:
Chanting out every day their Lauds,
While the glad grove their Song applauds.
And though their Voices lower be,
Yet Streams have too their Melody;
All night, all day they warbling run,
They never pause, but still sing on.
All the fine Flowers that guild the Spring,
To this Praise their still Music bring:
If kind Heaven bless them, thankful they
Will smell more sweet, and look more gay.
Only Mankind can scarce afford
This easy homage to our Lord:
We on whom his large bounty flows,
Gives all we have, yet nothing owes.
Awake for shame, my sluggish Heart,
Rouse thee, and gladly sing thy part:
Learn of these birds, and beasts, and flowers,
How thou should use thy nobler powers.
Invite whole nature to thine aid,
Since it was he whole nature made:
Join all in one Eternal Song,
Who to one Author all belong.
Say, Live for ever, glorious Lord!
Live by all thy great works adored:
Thou one in three, and three in one,
All we thrice bow to Thee alone.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
TOo Glorious art Thou, O Lord, in thy self, and thy direct Ray shines too
bright for our Eyes: Yet we may venture to Praise Thee in thy Works, and
Contemplate Thee at least reflected from thy Creatures: In them we may safely
behold our Almighty Maker, and freely admire the Magnificence of our God:
Heaven and Earth are full of his greatness, Heaven and Earth were created by
his Power: From him did all the Hosts of Angels receive their Being, from him
they have the honor to worship in his presence: He kindled warmth and
brightness in the Sun, and beauteously garnisht the Firmament with Stars: He
spread the Air, and stored it with flocks of Birds; He gathered the Waters, and
replenisht them with shoals of Fishes: He established the Earth on a firm
Foundation, and richly adorned it with innumerable Varieties. Every Element is
filled with his Blessings, and all the World with his liberal Miracles; He
spoke the word and they were made, he commands, and they are still preserved;
He governs their motions in perfect order, and distributes to each his proper
Office, contriving the whole into one vast Machin, a spacious Theater of his
own unlimited Greatness. O Glorious Architect of universal Nature, who
disposest all things in number, weight and measure! How does thy Wisdom engage
us to admire Thee! How does thy Goodness oblige us to love Thee! How does thy
Greatness and Supreme Excellency command us to reverence and stand in awe of
Thee! Not for themselves alone, O gracious God, did thy hand produce those
happy Spirits above, but partly to receive in charge thy little Flock, and
watch them in this Wilderness till thou gatherest them to folds of Bliss. Not
for themselves at all, O Bounteous Lord, were the rest of this huge Creation
framed, but to sustain our Lives in the way, and carry us on to our Eternal
home. O my Soul, do thou first Praise him for thy self, and the excellent
Powers that he has given thee, and employ all thy Powers in his excellent
Service: Praise him next for all his Gifts, but infinitely above all still
value the Giver. Let every Blessing be a motive of thy gratitude, and every
Creature a step of approach toward God: So will thou faithfully observe their
end, and happily arrive at thine own: Thou will use them only to sustain and
comfort thee a little here, and they will not hinder thy Souls preparation for
Heaven: And when thou art become full ripe for thy translation hence, the kind
Angels shall conduct thee into the divine Presence.

MEDITATION III.
HOW admirable is thy Name, O Lord, over all the Earth! How wise and gracious
the Counsels of thy Providence! After thou had thus prepared the World, as a
House ready furnished for a Man to Inhabit; thy mighty hand framed our Bodies
of the dust, and built them in a shape of use and beauty: Thou did breath
into us the Spirit of Life, and fit us with faculties proportioned to our end:
Thou gav'st us a Soul to govern our Bodies, and reason to command in our Soul:
Thou did reveal a Law for the Improvement of our reason, and inablest us by
thy grace to observe that Law: Thou made us Lords over all thy Creatures, but
little inferior to thy glorious Angels: Thou compellest whole Nature to serve
us without reward, and invitest us to love thee for our own happiness: Thou
designedst us an age of pure delights in that sweet and fruitful Garden; where
having led a long and pleasant Life, thou promisedst to transplant us to thine
own Paradise. All this thou did, O glorious God, the full Possessor of
universal Bliss! not for any need thou had of us, or the least advantage thou
could derive from our being: All this thou did, O Infinite Goodness, the
liberal bestower of all that we possess! not for any merit, alas, of ours, or
for the least motive we could offer to induce thee; but for thine own excessive
Charity, and the mere inclination of thine own rich nature; that empty we might
receive of thy fullness, and be partakers of thy overflowing bounty: So sheds
the generous Sun his beams, and freely scatters them on every side, guilding
all the World with his beauteous light, and kindly cherishing it with his
fruitful heat: And so do thou, and infinitely more, O thou God of infinite
more Perfection! So we confess thou do to us; but we, what return have we
made to Thee? have we considered well the end of our being? and faithfully
complied with thy purpose to save us? Ah wretched we! we neglect thy Holy
Rules; and govern our actions by chance and humor. We quite forget our God
that made us; and fill our heads with thoughts that undo us. This is the only
praise thou expectest from us, and the whole honor thou requirest of thy
Creatures. That, by observing the orders thou appointest here, in this lower
region of motion, and change, we may all grow up to be happy hereafter; in that
state of permanency and Eternal rest above.

PETITIONS.
O Lord, the Merciful and Gracious God, I poor Sinner humbly beseech Thee to
pardon all my past ingratitude, all my neglect and forgetfulness of Thee; and
mercifully do thou direct my time to come. Teach me wherein I have done* amiss
and have omitted my Duty, and enable me to practice a sincere Repentance and
amendment. Teach every passage of my yet remaining Life to express the
acknowledgements due to thee and to thy Mercies. O Infinite and perfect Being!
make me to know and adore Thee; to ascribe all excellency and perfection to
Thee. So guide thou my thoughts and words that neither of them may at any time
impute what is unworthy of thee. Make me ever humbly to adore thy infinite
fullness of Being, a fullness underived, independent and unchangable. Make me
often to think and fully believe that there is none besides Thee like unto
Thee, and always to ascribe unsearchable greatness. Give me too, O bounteous
Lord, I pray, among thy other gifts, a large sense of thy Immense liberality to
Mankind, that I may fitly acknowledge and praise thy bounteous Mercy. Give to
all mankind a sit and grateful sense of thy Mercies: that the people every
where with one consent may confess and praise thee, that one Generation may
praise thy name to another, and thankully talk of all thy wondrous Mercies. O
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to
the Children of men. O make our senses subject to our reason, and our reason
entirely obedient to Thee. Make us always in using thy Creatures to take their
service as admonition, and obligation to mind our Duty to thy self. Teach thou
us, that all things in this world ought to praise Thee by the Tongues and
Hearts of men; whom thou have not only made capable to know their goodness, but
have also given leave to enjoy their usefulness. O make the whole Creation
conspire to thine Honor, and all that depend on Thee join together in thy
Praise. Mercifully carry on the whole Creation to its end. Order thy Creatures
about us to attain their end in serving us, and so order us that we may attain
ours in glorifying and enjoying Thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
For Monday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
MY God, in every thing I see thy hand; in every passage thy wise and gracious
Providence. Thou wisely governest the House thou have built, and preventest
with thy Mercies all our wants. Thou call us up early in the morning, and
give us light by the beams of the Sun; that we may every one labor in his
proper work, and so fill up the little place appointed for us in this World:
Doing that service to Thee, and that good to Mankind which thou our great Lord
and Master do require. And thou providest also a rest for our weary Evening,
and favourest our sleep with a shady darkness to refresh our bodies in the
Peace of Night, and save the waste of our decaying Spirits. Again thou awakest
our drowsy eyes, and biddest us return to our daily task. Thus has thy Wisdom
mixed our Life, and beauteously interwoven it with rest and work; whose mutual
change sweeten each other, and both prepare us for our greatest duty: That of
finishing here the work of our Salvation, to rest hereafter in thy Holy place.
In like manner, thy wise Providence, O Lord! has appointed that after a little
time of toil and trouble, death should call thy Saints away to a state of rest.
Thou do not, we thank thee, oblige us to conflict with the difficulties and
evils of this Life till the day of retribution comes. Thou soon call us to a
place where the wicked cease from troubling, and our subtle adversary the Devil
from tempting us; Where our own appetites and passions shall strive no more
against our Reason and Conscience: Where our Innocence shall be no longer
assaulted or endangered by the threatenings or allurements of this World: Our
Souls are enlarged to a spacious liberty, being let out from this prison of the
Body, and go to dwell in the region of Spirits: While our Bodies quietly rest
in their silent grave; till they rise again to Immortal Glory. And thou have
designed, O Lord, that they shall awake again from the sleep of Death, and rise
even from the bed of the Grave. And then indeed there comes a Morning which
shall never be succeeded by an Evening; a waking time for the body, after which
it shall sleep no more. It rises indeed to work again, but that work never
tires it any more: that work is sweeter than the rest it leaves. There needs no
interruption of that work to sweeten it, which is eternally pleasant and
delightful.

MEDITATION II.
LOrd, how does thy bounty give us all things else with a large and open hand!
Our Fields at once are covered with Corn, and our Trees bow under the weight of
their Fruit. At once thou fillest our Magazines with plenty, and sendest us
whole showers of other blessings. Only our time thou distillest by drops, and
never give us two moments at once. But take away one, while thou lendest
another, to teach us to prize so precious a Jewel. That we may learn to value
every hour, and not childishly spend them upon trifles: Much less maliciously
murder whole days, in pursuing a course of Sin and Shame. It was thy Mercy
too, O Gracious God, to disperse by parcels our portion of time: That the
succeeding day may learn to grow wise, and correct its faults by experience of
the past. Else, if our being were all at once, as it shall be in the next, the
Eternal Life; our Sins would have here no power to be repented, and then alas
how desperate were we! We who are born in the way to Misery, and unless we
change can never be happy. We, who so often wilfully go astray, and unless we
return must perish for ever. Thou have appointed our time, O Sovereign Lord,
beyond which we cannot pass. When thou take away our breath, we die; we
return to the dust, and our place here shall know us again no more for ever.
Thou command the grave to dispense with none, but indifferently to seize us
all alike: That all alike may provide for the fatal hour of death, and none may
be undone with mistaken hopes. Thou tellest us plainly we must dye, but kindly
concealest the time and place, that every where we may stand upon our guard,
and every moment expect thy coming.

MEDITATION III.
WHy do we so much bemoan our selves, and complain for the necessity of dying?
Seems it so hard a fate to tread the path, which all our Ancestors have gone
before us. Adam the first of men, and Abraham the Friend of God: David the man
after Gods own Heart, and the Blessed Mary Virgin Mother of our Lord. All these
have paid their debt to Nature, and subscribed to the Law of universal
Mortality. Yea, Jesus Christ himself the Eternal Son of God expired on the
Cross; and went to his Glory through the Gates of Death. And shall our fond
self-love so blindly flatter us, as to make us wish an exemption from this
common fate? Should we not be glad that a troublesome Life will have an end;
and rejoice to get out of danger into safety, from a stormy Sea to a quiet
Harbor. This Life is so encombred with evils, that we have reason to be
thankful it will not last always, and rather to wish than complain that it may
not last long. If we die in Old age, Death should be very welcome to us after a
long and tedious voyage: If in our Youth we die, it prevents a thousand
calamites; a thousand dangers of ruining our Souls. What need we be possessed
with fear at thinking how many kinds of Death there are, we are sure there is
but one for us? Dying is an act to be done but once, and if it be once well
done, we are happy for ever. Our days perhaps are too few to grow rich in, or
to satisfy the ambition of a haughty Spirit. But to be taught the Love of God,
and the Meek and Humble Life of Jesus; requires not so much the number of
years, as the faithful endeavors and prayers of a pious Mind. Would we bestow
on the improvement of our Souls, the time we vainly trifle away; our day would
be short enough and not seem tedious, and yet would be long enough to finish
our appointed task. And what, O Glorious Lord, is our business here, but to
trim our Lamps and await thy coming: To sow the Immortal seed of Hope, and
expect to receive the happy increase! It is no matter how late the fruit be
gathered, if still it go on in growing better: No matter how soon it fall from
the Tree, if it be not blown down before it is ripe.

PETITIONS.
O Thou most just, but secret Providence! who governest all things by the
Counsel of thine own Will; whose powerful hand can wound and heal, lead down to
the Grave, and bring back again: Behold, to thee we bow our heads, and freely
submit our dearest concerns. Strike as thou please our Health, our Lives; we
cannot be safer than at thy dispose. Only these few requests we humbly make;
which, O! may thy Clemency vouchsafe to hear. Cut us not off in the midst of
our folly, nor suffer us to expire impenitent, and with our sins unpardoned.
But make us, Lord, first ready for thy self, and then take us to thy self in
thine own fit time. Thou do frequently, O Lord, put us in mind of our own and
the World's last end, by burying every day in the dark silent Grave of Night*
Sweeten, we humbly beseech thee, and render familiar to our expectation those
terrible Periods of time by our constant due use of night and sleep: Grant,
that our yielding so often and so easily at the Summons of our drowsy humors,
to suspend a while the operations of the whole man; may teach our Souls to
reflect themselves into a more reasonable willingness, when ever thou call
to leave our Bodies in the Bed of dust, and pass into the state of their own
perfect and ever-waking Activity and Bliss. Do thou, Lord, in whose indulgent
hands are both our Time, and our Eternity; whose Providence gives every minute
of our Life, and governs the fatal period of our Death; make us every Evening
still provide to pass with comfort that important hour: Make us still balance
our accounts for Heaven, and strive to increase our Treasure with thee: That if
we rise no more to our acquaintance here, we may joyfully waken among thy
blessed Angels; there to unite our Hymns with theirs, and join all together in
one full Quire.

Amen.
Hymn 18.
NOw, O my Soul, the day is gone,
Which in the morn was thine:
It Is emptied Glass no more shall run,
It Is Sun no longer shine.
It Is true, alas! the day is gone;
O were it only so!
Is it not lost as well as done?
Cast up thy Counts, and know.
Art thou got so much nearer Heaven,
As nearer to the Grave?
Has thy Hearts grief a fitness given
Sin's pardon to receive?
From what base Vice have thou refrained,
To break the course of sin?
Or what new Virtue have thou gained
To make thee rich within?
Their time is well bestowed on those
Who well their time bestow;
Whose main concern still forward goes,
Whose hopes still riper grow.
Who when the warning Clocks proclaim
Another hour is past;
Have the wise art to set their aim,
And thoughts upon their last?
This sad Life's last and happiest hour,
Which brings them to their home;
Where they shall sing, and bless the power
That made them thither come.
O my dear Lord! of Life and Death,
The ever-living King:
Since thou do give to all their breath,
May all thy Glory sing.
Glory and Honor, Power and Praise
To the mysterious Three;
As at the first beginning was,
May now and ever be.
Amen.
For Tuesday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
BE thou eternally adored, O God of our Salvation; and may thy Praises be sung
by thy Servants for ever. When our first Parents had disobeyed thy Precepts, to
the ruin of themselves, and their whole Posterity; thy wondrous mercy did
immediately provide a remedy. Thou did provide and promise a powerful
Redeemer. Thou did commit the helping us to him that is able to save to the
uttermost. A Redeemer that could conquer Sin and Death; and crush the Serpents
head, who drew us into misery: A Redeemer that could fully repair the breaches
our sin had made, and render our condition better than before. That could
satisfy for our sins by his Death, and merit the Beginning and Perfection of
happiness for us, in our present Holiness, and future Glory. He can enlighten
our eyes with a clearer view of those excellent Truths that belong to our
peace, can support our feeble Nature with a stronger Grace, to carry us on
safely through all Encounters; till we arrive at the Land of Rest, and be
received for ever into the glorious Kingdom. O Blessed Jesu! our Strength, our
Guide; who know and do pity our weak Capacities; and in thy tender care
have so contrived the way to our happiness, that nothing can undo us but our
own perverseness; nothing but the wilful love of Sin and Death. How easy have
thou made the way to Heaven! how light is the burden thou lay'st on thy
followers! It is but to believe in thee the God of Truth; but to love thee our
greatest Benefactor; but to desire earnestly the seeing thee, that thou
requirest; and doing thus we are sure to possess an Eternity of Joy. Eternal
Praises be given to the admirable wisdom of God, who knows how to bring good
out of evil. Eternal praises to that infinite Goodness which graciously
condescended to do this. Let all the admiring World join together in this, and
say, O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Goodness of God! How
unsearchable are his Attributes; and his ways how much past finding out? Man
guiltily threw away the happiness his God had given him: God takes occasion
thence to give him greater: He not only restores us to our first degree; but
makes even our fall rebound us to a greater height. This is the Love of God the
Father to Mankind; This is the Love of Jesus the Christ; this is the love of
the eternal Spirit of Love.

Hymn 19.
LET others take their course,
And sing what name they please:
Let Wealth or Beauty be their Theme;
Such empty Sounds as these:
For me, I Will never admire
A lump of burnisht Clay:
However it shines, it is but dust,
And shall to dust decay.
Sweet Jesus is the Name
My Song shall still adore:
Sweet Jesus is the Charming word
That does my life restore.
When I am dead in grief,
Or, which is worse, in Sin:
I call on Jesus, and he hears;
And I to live begin.
Wherefore at this bright Name,
Behold, thus low I bow;
And thus again; yet is all this
Much less than what I owe.
Down then, down both my knees,
Still lower to the ground;
While with mine Eyes and Voice lift up,
Aloud these lines I sound.
Live, glorious King of Heaven,
By all thy Heaven adored:
Live gracious Savior of the World,
Our chief and only Lord.
Live, and for ever may
Thy Throne established be:
For ever may all all Hearts and Tongues
Sing Hymns of Praise to thee.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
BEhold, our faithful Lord has remembered his word: He has raised up in the
World the long expected Prophet like Moses, and put his word in his mouth, and
he has kindly and sufficiently taught us. Light with him is come into the
World, to lead us through the Wilderness of Life into the true Canaan that is
above. Admirable were thou, O Lord, in thy merciful Promise; but infinitely
more in thy wonderful performance. Thou did not depute an Angel to supply the
place of a Redeemer, nor entrust so great a work to the management of a
Seraphim; but did thy self bow the Heavens, and come down, and with thine own
blessed hands work our Redemption. Thy self did take upon thee our frail
Nature, and vouchsafe to be born of a humble Virgin, condescending to the
weaknesses of a Child; a Child whose Parents were poor, and of no esteem in the
World. So did he make himself of no reputation. He did not decline the mean
entertainment of a Stable. O how unfit was that for the Birth of the King of
Heaven! He contented himself with a Manger instead of a convenient Cradle; and
with the homely, uneasy lodging of a Bed of Straw; refusing the soft
Accommodations of the Rich, to undergo the inconveniences of a poor Stranger.
Thus, Lord, at the cost of thy own ease, have thou instructed us to despise the
World. Only the faithful Joseph stood waiting on thee, and provided as he was
able for his helpless Family: Only thy pious Mother dearly embraced thee, and
wrapped thy tender Limbs in little clouts. Wonder, O Heavens, at this: Ye Angels,
who had seen before many wonders, for this surpasses all besides. Be amazed, O
Earth, and let every Creature there humbly bow the head and knee: Bow all, and
adore this incomprehensible Mystery; the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt with
us: But most of all we who are most concerned, the guilty Children of sinful
Adam; let us bow down our faces to the low dust; and all prostrate adore so
unspeakable a mercy. Behold, my Soul, thus low my Savior stoopt for me, to
check the aspiring pride of my corrupted Nature. Behold, thus low he stoopt to
take me from the ground, and raise me to the felicities of his own Kingdom.
Rise willingly with him, my Soul, from base sensuality; leave the low Earth
with thy desires, and seek a better Country; so shall this God not be ashamed
to be called thy God. Lift up thy Voice too with Joy, O my Soul, and sing
Hosanna to the newborn Jesus: With blessed Angels celebrate his gloriously
humble birth, and say, Glory be to God on high, for peace on earth, and good
will toward men. Lift up thy Voice aloud, O my Soul, lift up your Voices all
ye his Saints, and join the Praises of the Church to the Hymns of Heaven.

MEDITATION III.
Rejoice all you the faithful Nations of the Earth, when ye hear the sweet Name
of our dear Redeemer: Rejoice, and with your bended knees and hearts adore the
Blessed Jesus: He is the Son of the ever-living God, equally participating the
glories of his Father: He is that great Messiah whom the Prophets foretold, and
all the ancient Saints so long expected: At length in the fullness of time, he
came to visit in person our miserable world: He came with his hands full of
Miracles, and every Miracle was full of Mercy, full of miraculous good will to
an unkind ungrateful world: He made the crooked become strait, and the lame to
walk and leap for joy: He opened the ears of the deaf to hear, and gave sight
to them that were born blind. Happy they in the season of their relief, who
could then hear the Instructions of the Eternal Wisdom, and could see thee the
Blessed Savior of the World: He loosned the Tongues of the dumb to speak, sure
their first exercise was his deserved Praise: He cleans'd the Leprous by the
word of his mouth, and healed their Diseases who did but touch his Garment: To
the Poor he revealed the rich treasures of his Gospel, and taught the simple
the Mysteries of his Kingdom. He cast out Devils by his awful command, and
forced them to confess and adore his Person: He raised the dead from the very
Grave to Life, the dead that was four days buried, and was corrupting; Nay,
even himself being slain for us on the Cross, and his Tomb made fast and
secured with a guard, he raised again by his own victorious power, and carried
up our nature into the highest Heavens: All these stupendous signs, O glorious
Jesu! were done by the hand of thy Almighty mercy, to witness thy truth with
the Seal of Heaven, and endear thy Precepts with obliging Miracles; that thus
strongly engaged we might believe on thee, and obey thee to the Eternal
Salvation of our own Souls.

PETITIONS.
O Kind and Merciful Jesu! thou did, when on Earth, go about doing good, as
thou did purposely come hither to do good: Thou have not lost thy goodness we
believe since thou art gone to Heaven: O let us find that thou have not, still
exercise thy goodness and thy power, O God, in kind and beneficial Miracles: O
may it please thee to soften many stony hearts into a tender sense of thy great
Goodness, and their own Duty: Raise our dead spirits from this heavy Earth, to
dwell with thee in the Land of the Living, to mind and love Spiritual and
Immortal things: Open thou our Eyes, that we may behold the wondrous things in
thy Law; strengthen our feeble faculties, O Lord, by thy all-sufficient grace,
that we may steadily run the race which shall be set before us; strengthen us
to encounter successfully all the Enemies of our Salvation, that we do not run
in vain, nor labor in vain. Thus Lord, let our experience teach us to admire
thy bounteous Power, that we may daily sing the wonders of thy grace toward
our selves; and when our days shall be exchanged for Eternity, let us
eternally sing the wonders of thy Glory. Whenever thou do any of these kind
things for us, open thou our dumb Lips, that our Mouths may show forth thy
Praise.

Glory be to, etc.
For Tuesday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
GOod God, how extremely ungrateful are Mankind! How strangely insensible of
our manifest Duty: Every Creature performs its Duties, but we who alone are
made capable to understand and know ours: Every Creature lives by rule, but we
who have reasonable Souls to direct our actions. We, O Lord, are most beholden
to thee of all the lower Creation, and we alone of all prove rebellious against
thee: The other Creatures live by thy wise rules, and so do serve and attain
their particular ends. And thus does every Creature reach its true dignity and
honor, while Man basely falls far below his, in neglecting the rules of that
Law which thou have given to be his direction. The Sun observes his place of
rising, and sets exactly at his appointed time: The Sun stands still if thou
command, and goes back to obey thy will; and yet the Sun pretends to no
reward, nor looks to be placed in a higher Heaven. But we who expect the
performance of glorious Promises, we forget and neglect the Law of our God; a
Law that brings great rewards with the observance of it in this Life, and is
followed by greater in the next. Thy Law, O Lord, written in our Hearts,
perfects our corrupted natures, by restoring to us thy glorious Image in
righteousness and true holiness: Thy Law fills the dark mind with chearing
light, and makes the simple truly wise: Thy Law raises the will to its true
Liberty, and frees it from the fetters of sin: It tames the unruly Passions and
Appetites of the flesh, and settles a happy Peace within us: If we are so wise
and happy as not to be discouraged from observing it by the little difficulty
which attends it at first, our steady perseverance in well doing will find it
easy, and incomparably pleasant. Thy Laws will dispose us to pass with comfort
through the various circumstances of this Life; and they will also prepare us
to enter at the end of it, into the pure mansions of Heaven. For our kind Lord
has prepared unspeakable Happiness to reward them with, who love Him and keep
his Commands. Thy bounteous goodness, O Lord, will reward us, for the
performance of our Duty; thou will reward us for doing what is good for our
selves. Thy Laws are all Holy and Just and Good, and thy Rewards are
unconceivable and Eternal Joys. O what Blindness and Folly possesses the
sinful world, who neglect and refuse so great advantages!

MEDITATION II.
Does it become Mankind for whom Christ died to neglect his sacred Laws? Shall
we say of him, who has done so much for us, he shall not reign over us? shall
we neglect so Gracious a Savior, whose only design is to draw us to his love?
Shall we neglect so generous a love, whose only design is to make us Happy.
Yet, O Lord, how are thy just Commands neglected in the World! How few are
there that demonstrate they love Thee by keeping them! And indeed, to say the
World generally neglect to keep thy Commands, is too mild a reproof for us, who
in many instances directly contradict them. What thou forbiddest we eagerly
pursue, as if our kind Savior had therein envied us some great advantage. And
whatever thou command, we are forward still to do the contrary, as if the
thing thou requirest were hurtful. We boldly converse with temptation and sin,
which thy Charity advises us to fly like Death. We timerously dread the
incurring any worldly losses, or the displeasure of men; when thou command
us to proceed with undaunted courage. And we do not stand in aw of the Wrath of
Almighty God, nor fear the loss of our own Souls, when thou threatnest us with
them to restrain us from Sin. We greedily pursue the little vanities of this
World, which thou forbiddest us to set our affections upon; and are by them too
easily drawn into Sin: But the greater goods of a better world we slight, and
will not suffer our selves to be allured by them to Holiness. We govern our
actions by our own wild fancies, and expect that thy Providence should comply
with our Humors. We would have Thee relieve us when we list; and Rain, and
Shine as we think fit. Thus is our rude perverseness, O Lord, apt in every
thing to go contrary to Thee.

MEDITATION III.
IT was not alone to make the day, that thou, O Lord, did make a Glorious
Sun. But to teach us these pious Lessons too, and write them plain as its own
Beams. That so should our light shine forth to others, and direct them to
glorify God: So should our Charity warm their coldness, and quicken them to an
active Zeal for his Honor. So when they say, we are under a cloud of
Adversity, we should like the Sun be really above it. And though to the sight
of men, we may be eclipsed by disadvantageous circumstances, and may seem quite
extinguished in a Night of Sorrow and Affliction: Still we should shine to our
selves and God; and still go on in the ways of light. Though we become small
and despised in the Eye of the World, yet we should not forsake thy Law. So
shall we after the vicissitudes of bright and dark, of fair weather and foul,
which we must expect to meet with in this World, enjoy an Eternal bright and
serene day. Not like the Sun that every Night goes down, and must at last be
put quite out: When we have finished here our course, and seem to set to this
dark Earth; we hope to rise, and set no more; but shine perpetually in a
brighter Heaven. And this sweet Hope, my Soul, may justly allay the grief of
thy present Afflictions. Thy rest and Comfort meet with many interruptions now;
but let not them interrupt thy Faith and Holiness, and hereafter thou shall
enjoy an endless unmixed rest and felicity. I am the Resurrection and the Life,
says the Son of God, who was dead, and is now alive, and lives for evermore:
He that believes in me, though he be dead, shall live; and every one that
lives, and believes in me shall not dye for ever. O praise our Lord, all you
blessed Saints, who are advanced from the transient mutable Light of this
World, to the durable Glory of the other. My Soul, be thou a steadfast follower
of them, as they were of Christ; and thou can not fail to attain the same
Glory. O praise our Gracious Lord and bounteous Master, ye Glorious Angels,
whose bright felicity began so early! Stars that arose in the Morning of the
World, and still through the goodness of God retain an unchanged Luster;
shining perpetually near the Throne of God, as the top and Masterpiece of all
his works. Let all Mankind with them praise the Lord for our excellent work,
and for our Glorious Wages: That our God did make us but little lower than them
at first; and when we are become a great deal lower by following our own
inventions, does concern himself to recover us from our fall, and raise us by
degrees to their bright and Happy Society. O Praise our Lord all you his Works;
bless him, and magnify him for ever.

PETITIONS.
O Infinite Wisdom and Goodness! Teach I pray Thee, and convince my Soul of the
great Excellency and Wisdom of thy incomparable Laws: Make me to esteem all thy
Commandments, concerning all things to be right; to consent unto thy Law, that
it is good, to delight in it in the inward man, and regulate my whole
Conversation thereby: So shall I walk by the best rule, the rule that certainly
leads to Happiness. Lord, make me to have such apprehensions of thy goodness,
as to esteem thy commands the necessary rules of Soul-saving love; to account
that thou have required nothing of us, but what is necessary and highly
conducing to the Salvation of our Souls. Let me not be so dangerously foolish,
as in any thing to think my self wise in contradiction to the Precepts and
Dictates of thy Word. O may thy Holy Will, dear Lord, therein revealed, be all
my rule; and thy Gracious Hand my constant guide. Order thou my steps in thy
Word, let no iniquity have dominion over me. Hold up my goings, that my
footsteps do not slide. Quicken, O Lord, I pray, the too frequent slackness of
my obedience, by the example of the Creatures about me; who yield thee a
constant and unrelucting obedience; and by a firm belief and apprehension of
those great and glorious rewards, which thou have prepared for such as serve
Thee; fashion my Spirit to a humble submission and conformity to thy will. Make
me exactly observe what thou prescribest, how bitter soever it may taste to
Flesh and Blood: Make me always readily submit to every dispensation of thy
Providence, though for the present it may be grievous. And Lord, since thy
wisdom knows our infirmities, I pray thee lay upon me at no time more burden,
than I shall be able to bear: let not my circumstances be attended with
temptations, either that are so violent or so lasting as to overcome me. Since
thy goodness delights in our relief, assist me against the difficulties of
Duty: Lord help me so to do all the work thou give, (for thou alone can
help me,) as that I may at last attain thy Eternal rewards, through the Merits
of Jesus Christ my Lord.

Amen.
Hymn 20.
BLessed, O Lord, be thy wise grace,
That governs all our day;
And to the night assigns its place,
To rest us in our way.
If works the laboring hand impair,
Or thoughts the studious mind;
Both are considered by thy care,
Both fit refreshment find.
Fit to relieve the present state,
Fit to prepare the next;
While we are taught to meditate
This plain and useful Text.
As every Night lays down our head,
And Morning opes our eyes;
So shall the dust be once our bed,
And so we hope to rise:
To rise and see that beauteous light
Spring from those eyes of thine,
Not to be checked by any night,
But clear for ever shine.
That thou may hope, my Soul, to view
That lasting blissful light;
Take heed thy present work thou do,
And use thy rest aright.
All glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever-living Lord;
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved, Obeyed, Adored.
Amen.
For Wednesday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
LET them neglect thy Praises, O Lord, who never consider thy Mercies: Let them
be silent to thee, O gracious God, whose Mouths are full of themselves: But as
for me who subsist by thy gifts, and thankfully acknowledge the riches of thy
goodness; my heart shall continually Meditate on thee, and my Lips shall
delight to sing thy glory: All my Life long will I Praise my God, and lift up
my hands to his holy Throne. Blessed for ever be thy Name, O Jesu! and blessed
be the sweetness of thy Wisdom; whose infinite Charity has vouchsaf't our Earth
such excellent Rules to guide it to Heaven: Thou have taught us that happy
Skill of finding our lives, by a generous losing them to follow thee: Thou have
taught us to love our true selves best, by wisely hating our mistaken selves:
Thou have taught us to trample this world under our feet, and use it as a step
to climb up to the next: From thee we learn those glorious Mysteries that exalt
our Faith so high above Reason: From thee we derive those Heroic Counsels,
that raise our Souls so far above nature; from thee alone, and from thy School
of grace we learn all that we know, and receive power for all that we do. How
long, alas, might we have wandered here, in the midst of Darkness and Error;
had not thy love and pity, O merciful Lord, brought down thy very self to
become our light! Never should we else have learnt to deny our selves, and take
up our Cross and follow thee: Never should we have known that great secret of
Peace, to forgive our Enemies, and do good to those who despitefully use us. On
the unsatisfying things of this low Earth, should we blindly have set our whole
Affections, if thou had not told us of the Kingdom of Heaven, and bid us lay
up our treasures there: We had always chose the deceitful and pernicious ways
of sin, if thou had not terrified us to fear thy wrath, by declaring the
miseries that attend them: We should ever have neglected thy good Commands, and
lost the happiness of a religious life, if thou had not invited us to obey
thy Commands, and proposed to us the felicities that will attend our doing so.
O what have thou promised, Gracious Lord, to the meek and poor in Spirit! O
what have thou promised to the Weepers here? to those that hunger and thirst
after Holiness! How many Joys has thy bounty prepared for the lovers of Mercy,
and makers of Peace! How many Blessings for the pure of Heart, and those who
with Patience bear their Crosses: Thus have thou, Lord, kindly shown us our
end; and suggested the true way to attain it: Thou have given us such blessed
directions, as tend to make our Life here more sweet, and to lead us hereafter
to everlasting Felicity.

Hymn 21.
MY God, had I my breath from thee,
This Power to speak and sing?
And shall my Voice, and shall my Song
Praise any but their King?
My God, had I my Soul from thee,
This Power to judge and choose?
And shall my brain, and shall my will
Their best to thee refuse?
Have thou revealed the ways that lead
To Happiness above?
And shall I let my wandering feet
From thy blessed Paths remove?
Alas, not this alone, or that
Have thou bestowed on me;
But all I have, and all I hope,
I have and hope from thee.
And more I have, and more I hope,
Than I can speak or think;
Thy Blessings first refresh, then fill,
Then overflow the brink.
But though my Voice and Fancy be
Too low to reach thy Praise;
Yet both shall strain thy glorious Name,
High as they can to raise.
Glory to thee, Immortal God,
One great Coequal Three;
As at the first beginning was,
May now, and ever be.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
NEver will we cease to exalt thy Goodness, O gracious Jesu; since thou never
ceasest to oblige us with new Blessings. Thy generous Charity could not be thus
satisfied, to have only spoken to us the words of Life; it was not enough for
thy excessive Love, that thy heavenly Sermons told us our duty, but thou
would moreover urge and provoke our Obedience by the sweet enforcement of
thine own Example. Thou did forbid thy followers to affect Superfluities, and
accordingly thine own Provision was a few Barley Loves. Thou did command the
rich to give Alms with cheerfulness; so thou wentest about doing good, and
did often relieve those that were not able to requite thee. Thou have
commanded us not to fear them which can kill the Body; and yielded up thine own
to the death upon the Cross, to do the will of him that sent thee, thou wast
obedient even unto death. Thou have commanded Subjection to Parents, and
practiced it; have said, Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and
wrought a Miracle to pay a Tribute. Thou injoynest us Mercy and Compassion; and
who ever expressed more than thy self? Thou did not only weep in Sympathy with
the Affliction of thy Friends; but also over the hard and stubborn Jerusalem,
that had killed thy Prophets, and was ready to kill thee. Thou enjoynest us to
love our fiercest Enemies, and thy dying breath prayed for thy Crucifiers. Thy
perfect Soul did not need, as our weak Natures do, the outward Forms and
Discipline of Religion; yet thou did conform to the observance of the common
appointed Feasts, and assist in the public Duties at the Temple. Thou did
watch and pray with so fervent a Zeal, that thy Practice was perfectly equal to
thy Precepts. This Life, and even Death it self our merciful Lord undertook, to
mark out for us the way to Heaven. To beat it plain by his own sacred Steps,
and render our passage thither easy and secure. Shall we not then, O my Soul,
rejoycingly follow that path which we see our Savior trod before us? Which we
see, though spread all over with Thorns, yet carried him directly to the
Glories of Paradise? Shall we not confidently rely on so gracious a Leader; who
promises, if we faint, to look back and relieve us?

MEDITATION III.
MAY every Age sing Praises to our God, and all Generations adore his
Providence. From the Beginning his Mercy has still laid means to raise us to
those blessed Objects which are above our Nature. At first he created Adam with
all necessary knowledge, and then taught the Patriarchs to inform their
Families. Afterward he made use of the Angels to bring us his Commands, and
often inspired the Prophets to declare his Will. When he had done all this, it
was not enough to bring untoward Man to his true end: What did he then to save
the perishing World? O strange Excess of divine Goodness! He sent even his own
beloved Son to dwell among us, and teach us the way of Salvation; the sacred
Art of training up our Souls for Heaven, and fitting them for the blissful
Union with himself. But O! thou King of glorious Sweetness, whose flowing
Tongue dropped Milk and Honey! We were, alas! not happy to behold thy Person, nor
our Ears worthy to hear thy Voice: Yet e're we were born thou had us in thy
thoughts, and did provide a sufficient method to supply that defect;
selecting a number of choice Disciples; and thoroughly instructing them in thy
heavenly Doctrine; that they might keep alive the memory of thee, and witness
to all Nations thy stupendous works. Thou did verify their Mission with the
Power of Miracles, and inflame their hearts with the fire of the Holy Spirit:
Over all the World they proclaimed thy Law, and undauntedly preached the
Crucified Savior and God. Deep in the Breasts of the Faithful did they write
thy Gospel, and seal it before their eyes with their own Blood. Their
Successors deposited the same precious Treasure in the common Magazine of the
Church. The Church has been maintained by the mighty power of God, so that the
Gates of Hell have not prevailed against her. Thus is the Catholic Faith
descended on us, and thus shall continue to the end of the World. Blessed be
thy power, O Lord, that has wrought such Miracles to confirm thy Truth, and
inclined our hearts to believe it. How many Souls are miserably seduced by the
Corruptions of the latter Ages, and revolted to a mixture of Paganism with
Christianity! while we by thy good Providence are led in the right way to
Happiness. We are taught to direct our Homage where we cannot sin, nor fail in
doing it, to one God, by one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus, the Man who also is God. How many Nations lie miserably involved in the
darkness of Barbarism, and Unbelief! while we enjoy a clear noonday, and
safely walk in the light of Truth. O infinite Goodness, who freely choosest to
pour forth thy Blessings on us who are unworthy of the least Mercies. As it is
from thee alone that we receive these favors; to thee alone we will return our
Praises.

PETITIONS.
O Christ, the all-seeing Wisdom of the Eternal Father, and Sovereign King of
Men and Angels! who from thy glorious Throne did descend on our Earth,
familiarly to teach us the Oracles of Heaven! O write thy sacred Instructions
deep in the Table of our Hearts, and suffer not at any time our Passions to
break them. Make us still study thee our heavenly Master, and continually
admire the excellent Beauty of thy Law. Let us be transformed into an inward
agreement to it by the renovation of our Minds; that all our infirmities may be
cured, all our defects supplied, and our thoughts, and words, and actions
conformed to the dictates of right Reason. Let thy excellent Example, O Lord,
always shine bright before our eyes, and never be forgotten by us. O put it
often into our Hearts to reflect, and say; How would our Master have behaved
himself in the Circumstances that we are in? And what thou have done, we pray
thee enable us to do: Reach forth thy powerful hand, and strengthen us with
thy Grace, that nothing may divert us from following thee. In the dangerous
Labyrinth of this. World, and the whole course of our Pilgrimage here, Lord,
let thy heavenly Dictates be our Map, and thy holy Life our Guide. And that we
may be the more surely conducted to the Folds of Bliss, do thou, dear Lord,
send us Pastors after thine own Heart. O illuminate all that thy Providence
calls to the Sacred Office, with true knowledge and understanding of thy Word;
possess them with a fervent Zeal to promote thy Glory, and the Salvation of our
Souls: Give them great prudence, that they may know how to manage our folly and
perverseness, so as notwithstanding them to do us good. Make them, O Lord, good
Examples to the Flock in Self-denial, Meekness, Contempt of the World, in due
subjection to Magistrates, and Charity to all their Neighbors; that they may
save themselves, and those that hear them. And make us, O Lord, to encourage
them by all means in their good Work, to esteem them highly in love for their
works sake; to receive the Instructions, and submit to the Reproofs which thou
sendest by them. Grant these things, O Lord, who art the great Shepherd of
Shepherds, and of our Souls, for thine own honor.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For Wednesday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
WEll, we are now so much nearer our Grave, and all the world is older by a day
than it was in the Morning of this. So much more of this short life is spent,
and can never be recalled again. My Soul, there is so much less time left us to
enjoy the good things of this life, that we have, or hope for; and so much less
wherein we shall be exposed to the evils that we feel or fear. Time has set us
nearer to the Grave, from which no privilege can exempt any of the Sons of
Adam. The rich are nearer the time when they must go hence, and leave all their
Wealth behind them: The great Ones of the World are nearer to their dark
lodging in the dust, into which they must e're long be thrown: The beauteous
Face is nearer to be turned into noisome rottenness, and the pampered Bodies to
become the food of Worms. This day has set all the living nearer to the Grave,
and tumbled a great many into it. The longer we live the shorter does our Life
become, and in the end all our Vigor, Strength, and Beauty turns to a little
lump of clay. The Portion of the wicked is so much less, and the time of their
punishment is nearer approacht: The Sufferings of the Patient are so much
diminisht, and their hopes of Delivery so much increased. They who have spent
this day in sin and folly, see all their thoughts now vanished like a Dream:
They see all the pleasure of their guilty Actions is past, and there is nothing
remains but the just fears of a sad revenge. The best consequence that can be
of their course, is the sadness of a bitter Repentance. But such as have wisely
bestowed their time, and made another new step toward Heaven; they see their
joys come to meet them in their way, and still grow bigger as they come; till
by a holy Death they join in one, and dwell together for eternal Ages. For our
bounteous God has made our Souls immortal: And when this house of Clay shall
fall into the dust, and this narrow Cottage be broken down; they shall soar
alost on their own free wings, and enter into the beatifick Vision of God: If
they have trained themselves up whilst they were here to a fitness for Heaven,
and its joys, they shall instantly fly to those blessed Objects. But if their
terrene thoughts have flagg'd below, and delighted most to hover near the base
Earth: If they have not loved above all things, and sought most the Enjoyment
of their God: They must sit down in the shades of Sorrow, and be confined in
the Vale of Darkness and despair for ever.

MEDITATION II.
WE are nearer indeed to the end of our Life, but what are we nearer the end
for which we Live? What have we done, my Soul, this day, that has given Glory
to God, and advanced us toward our future Blessedness? Have we increased our
esteem of Heaven, and settled its love more strongly in our hearts. Have we
avoided any known Temptation, or faithfully resisted what we could not avoid?
Have we interrupted our customary faults, and checked the Vices we are most
inclined to? Have we embraced the Opportunities of doing good, which the Mercy
of Providence has offered to our hands? Have we industriously contrived
occasions to improve as we are able our selves and others? Tell me, my Soul,
how stand our great Accounts? Are we prepared to meet our strict and righteous
Judge? Who without respect of persons judges all men, and will dispose them
accordingly to their eternal abodes. Alas! dread Lord, what do we see when
seriously we reflect upon our too careless lives? Many hours and days we spend
in nothing; and many we abuse in that which is far worse than nothing. We
sacrifice our Youth to sport and folly, and our manly years to Lust and Pride.
We spend our old Age in Craft and Avarice, and think then of beginning to live,
when we apprehend we shall shortly die. Thus we lead a negligent life, and
Death steals upon us unawares. We are apt to bewail the shortness of our time,
when yet we do prodigally throw much of it away. We lose the time of working
out our Salvation, in the busy pursuit of very Trifles; and so we lose our
neglected Souls for ever. They must in eternal anguish lament our present
careless Liberties, and suffer unspeakable pains for our gratifying the
passions and Appetites of our Flesh. O my Soul, consider the mighty work thou
have to do, to fit thee for a happy departure out of this world. Do that work
diligently while it is called to day, because the night constantly approaches
wherein none can work. Every one of these nights sets us nearer to our last and
longest; which, if we have spent the day of life in diligence, reserves for us
eternal wages.

MEDITATION III.
COme my Soul, let us make our peace betimes with our God, before the evening
of our Life approach too near. Let us endeavor to find favor with our Judge,
before we shall be brought to his awful Tribunal. Confess the follies and sins
thou find in thy Life, and charge them all entirely on thy self. Confess
them with a penitent and contrite heart; for a broken and a contrite heart our
gracious God will not despise. Thy Repentance, my Soul, will come too late to
meet with mercy, if thou deferr it till this life is at an end. Seek the favor
of God in the Name of his beloved Son; he is pleased that we should make
mention of him: For his sake he will readily bestow a pardon to them that
humbly seek it; for he desires not the death of a Sinner. Moreover, my Soul,
all the good that thou have done to thy self or others, thou must ascribe to
his free Grace, as the only principle of it. Such humility will be very
acceptable to him, and dispose thee to receive larger Benefits from his bounty.
Say then to him, if thou have found any good in thy course: Little, O Lord,
thou know, is the good we do, and every grain of it derived from thee. We
could not have saved our selves from any dangerous temptation, unless our God
had powerfully sustained us. We could not have carried on any pious purpose,
unless thy hand had blessed our endeavors. No, to thy self, O Lord, take all the
praise, if thy Creatures have performed the least good work: Take to thy self
all the glory, O Lord, if they have not committed the worst of sins: Thy hand
alone directs us to do well, and the same blessed hand restrains us from ill.
It Is not in us to esteem thy unseen Joys, nor to despise the charming
Flatteries of this deceitful World: It Is not the work of corrupted Nature to
mortify our Senses, and patiently bear the Crosses we meet. Of our selves we
are inclined to none of these, but the Grace of God inables us for all: Grace
gives us strength to overcome our Passions, to make the World and the Flesh
subjects to us: Grace gives us Faith to fortify our reason, and helps us to
take Heaven by violence. O how glorious, Dear Lord, are the effects of thy
Grace! How shameful the instances of our folly and weakness!

PETITIONS.
OBlessed Jesu! who art a Prince and Savior, whose kindness it is to give
repentance and remission of sin! Bestow, I beseech thee, on me, such a hearty
Contrition for all the wandering steps that I have made from my Duty, as to fit
me to receive thy Pardon: And then Pardon, O Meek Redeemer, what my passions
have done, and what my weakness has omitted: Let a sense that thou my God art
reconciled to me, give me this night a sweet repose as in the arms of thy
tender Mercy: Make me too hereafter, O Lord, if I shall live after this night,
more carefully watch my self, that my few days do not slide unprofitably away,
and especially that they be not spent in sin: Make me every day retire to study
thee and my self: My self, that I may know and correct my many Infirmities; and
Thee, that I may adore thy infinite Perfections. And to thy Perfections, O
Lord, and the strength from them communicated unto me, make me ascribe all the
good that I am able to do: Let me always say, as I ought, This is not I, but
Christ that lives in me: Make me also the more attentively obsequious to the
steady guidance of thy Grace, and grant I may never want it, while the time of
my warfare and pilgrimage continues: Instruct me, I beseech thee, O thou who
art the best of Teachers, in these great and wise truths; that the things of
this world are of very little import, since its joys and griefs will last but a
very little while; and that the future state does infinitely concern me, where
the Life and Death are for ever. Fix my heart, O Sovereign Goodness, I pray
thee, on thy self alone: Let me not be good only by halves, since there is a
glorious Heaven prepared, that is worth all our labors: Prevent by the power
and prevalence of thy grace in me, my mingling so much as formerly thy pure
Grace with my corrupted Nature. Deliver me, O Lord, from the Temptations of
this world, and mercifully save me from the wrath to come; that dreadful wrath
which we so justly fear, and which many condemned wretches do already
irrecoverably feel.

Hymn 22.
AND do we then believe
There is a world to come,
Where all this world shall summoned be,
To take their final doom?
Is there a Heaven indeed,
To crown the Innocent?
Is there a Hell, and horrid Pains
The Wicked to torment?
Are these Eternal too,
And never to have end?
Shall never those Delights decay,
These Sorrows never mend?
Good God, is all this true?
And sure most true it is;
And yet we live as if there were
Nothing so false as this.
O quicken, Lord, our Faith,
Of these great Joys and Fears;
And make the last days Trumpet be
Still sounding in our Ears.
Still may this glorious hope
Shine bright before our eyes;
We shall go up at last to meet
Our Jesus in the Skies.
Come Jesu, come and take
Our banished Souls to thee;
Come quickly Lord, that in thy light
Our eyes thy light may see.
Glory to Thee, great God,
One Coeternal Three:
As at the first beginning was,
May now, and ever be.
Amen.
For Thursday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
HE who made the Sun to enlighten our steps in the Pilgrimage of this short
Life; has he ordained no guide to conduct our Souls in the difficult way to our
eternal home? Yes, he sent his Son a bright light into the world, by whose
Directions we may find our Happiness. He who feeds the Ravens, when they call
upon him, has he not provided Bread for his Children? He has; and still his
Mercy furnishes means to perform whatever his Justice commands. The Son of God
himself became incarnate, and took the humane nature into a Personal Union.
Thus it was consecrated by him to become the Instrument wherewith he would
accomplish our Redemption. He was sacrificed for us upon the Cross, that so he
might become food to our Faith: And that food he gives with the Sacramental
Bread and Wine to every the meanest meet receiver. Though he be now exalted to
the right Hand of God, and his Glorified Body shall suffer Death no more: Yet
the believing Soul that comes to this Supper, finds him really present, and
does partake of his Body, and Blood. The Lord of love has espoused to himself
an Holy Church, and promised it his presence to the end of the World: He has
made her all Glorious within; the Saints are the excellent of the Earth. With
these he is present at the celebration of his worship, and feeds them with his
own Crucified Body at his Supper. O Souls redeemed by the Blood of Jesus, and
nourisht with his Sacred Body! why melt you not away in Tears of Joy for being
so regarded by the King of Heaven? What have thou promised, O Gracious and
Faithful Lord! to him that receives Thee with an Humble Love? All that is
contained in those sweet and mystic words: He dwells in me, and I in him. O
Blessed Words, if once my Soul can say, He dwells in me, and I in him. He is my
Refuge in all Temptations: He is my Comfort in all Distresses: He is my
Security against all mine Enemies: He dwells in me, and I in him. What can an
infinite bounty give greater than it self? and what can an empty Creature
receive better than the Alsufficient God? Blessed, O Jesu! are they who discern
Thee under the Veils of Bread and Wine: Blessed are the Souls prepared by Faith
and Love, to receive Thee at this Sacred Supper. Blessed yet more is that
devout Heart, that desires thy second coming into the World; that longs to see
thy immediate self, and to see thee in thy Glory. O thou Lord of Grace and
Glory! our chiefest Joy and best Portion in the land of the living! what have
thou prepared for thy Servants to give them hereafter, when thy bounty is so
liberal to them here! What do thou reserve in thy Kingdom; who give us thy
self in this place of Banishment! How will thy open vision transport our Souls,
when our dark Faith yields us now such delight! O my adored Redeemer, my Soul
longs for the Happy Day, when I shall see thy Face without a Veil: When I shall
be able to endure the beams of thy Glory shining out upon me in their full
brightness: And my weakness will not need, as now, to converse with Thee with
Clouds and Shadows interposed. My Soul, seek thy Savior now, and thou shall
find him hereafter; receive him thus veiled, and thou shall enjoy him in his
Glory. Take these things that he offers Thee, with a thankful Heart and humble
Faith; and then they shall prove sure pledges that Christ himself will be ever
thine.

Hymn 23.
WIth all the Powers my poor Soul has,
Of Humble Love, and Loyal Faith;
I come, Dear Lord, and worship Thee,
Whom too much love bowed low for me.
Down busy Sense, Discourses dye,
And all adore Faith's Mystery:
Faith is my Skill; Faith can believe,
As fast as Love new Laws shall give.
Faith is my Eye, Faith Strength affords,
To keep pace with those Gracious Words:
And words more sure, more sweet than they
Love could not think, Truth could not say.
O Dear Memorial of that Death,
Which still survives, and gives us Breath!
Live ever Bread of Life, and be
My Food, my Joy, my All to me.
Come Glorious Lord, my hopes increase,
And mix my portion with thy Peace:
Come, and for ever dwell in me,
That I may only live to Thee.
Come hidden Life, and that long Day
For which I languish, come away:
When this dry Soul those Eyes shall see,
And drink the unsealed source of Thee.
When Glory's Sun Faith's shade shall chase,
And, for thy veil, give me thy Face:
Then shall my Praise Eternal be,
To the Eternal Trinity.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
Do thou, my Soul, design an approach to the Sacred Table of our Lord? Take
heed then that thou put on a Wedding Garment; and come thither dressed like a
Friend of the Bridegroom: Consider how chaste these Eyes should be which go to
behold the Symbols of his presence: How clean that mouth should be, which
presumes to receive the Bread of Heaven: How all celestial that Soul should be
which aspires to an Union with our Heavenly Lord. Look, look my Heart, look
well into thy self; and strictly search every corner of thy breast. Carefully
empty thy self of all that which this sacred food will not agree with; that
thou may safely come to the Marriage Supper, and not eat and drink thine own
Damnation. Empty thy self of all self-admiring thoughts, and take heed there be
no secret love of Sin. Empty thy self of Worldly cares, and let thy desires
seek only thy Savior: Seek only now the Riches of his Grace, seek only the
pleasures of his Love. Let no turbulent passions now dwell in thee, but only
serious thoughts and devout affections. This spiritual food affords no
nourishment, but what we receive by calm Meditation. Come not with any malice
against a Neighbor, when thou seek the favor of thy God. The God of love
will not dwell with hatred, nor show Mercy but to those that are merciful. Come
hither with a Faith that works by love, and then thou shall be filled with the
Celestial Manna. But the uncharitable Faith, as a dead thing, is utterly
incapable of food or nourishment. Draw nigh with a humble and broken Heart, to
partake of the broken Body of thy Lord. Get a distinct knowledge of this divine
institution, that thou may be able to discern the Lords Body. Know that
Christ our Passover was crucified for us, the innocent Lamb of God made a
Sacrifice for our Sins. We are invited to Feast upon this Sacrifice, and
therein to be united to it, and have Interest in it. Jesus Christ gives himself
to us at this Ordinance; and expects that we should give our selves to him.
Come with a mighty love to thy loving Savior; and a very great esteem of an
interest in him. If thou believe indeed, he will be precious to thee: And in
such thoughts as these will thy Soul move toward him: Thou art my only hope, O
Blessed Jesu! and thy favor alone is all things to me. In Thee I shall possess
whatever I want, and thy fullness exceeds even my utmost desires. In Thee I
shall find the Providence of a Father; and the tender kindness of an indulgent
Mother. In Thee I shall enjoy the protection of a King, and the rare fidelity
of a constant Friend. I shall need no other Advocate with the Father but Thee;
nor want any Instruction, if thou will be my Teacher. What can I wish for more,
if I may say: O Jesu! thou art my God, and all things! In that enough is said
for them that love thee, and know the value of those precious words. O sweet
and charming words, My God, and all things! Sweet in excess to those that taste
them: Not so indeed to the corrupted Palates of the World; who relish nothing
but the food of sense: Words that revive the fainting mind; and fills it is
darkest thoughts with light, and joy. Thus furnished, my Soul, thou may come
to this Feast, and shall find the reception of a welcome guest. Though some
imperfections do remain in thee, yet go, that those imperfections may be
healed. He has kindly and earnestly invited us to his Supper, who sees, and has
great compassion on our Miseries. He bids us come, my Soul, and will surely
receive us, and with his bounteous fullness supply our defects. Go then, my
Soul, to that Sacred Table, and take thy part of that delicious Banquet: Go all
inflamed with love, and with desire; and quench thy Holy Thirst at that Spring
of Bliss.

MEDITATION III.
APProach, my Soul, with an amorous reverence to the Presence of so kind a
Majesty: O be transported with Joy, and wonder to think that thou art going to
receive thy God; thy great and glorious God, who only out of love thus gives
himself the Pledge of thy sinal Salvation. Welcome the glad day with
Thankfulness and Praise, on which thou may be admitted to this excellent
Feast: And while the King sits at his Table, it is meet thy Spikenard send
forth the smell thereof; that thou exercise those Graces he has given thee in
devout Meditations: He delights in the exercises of these, and thou ought to
delight in pleasing him. Say then, my Soul, when the Solemnity begins, and thou
art bid to draw near and take the Holy Sacrament: Alas, how poor, dull and
empty am I! O Lord, how infinitely unworthy so divine a Sacrament! In my best
attire, O Lord, I am so ragged, that I am even ashamed to see my self: Well may
I then with shame and blushing come into the Presence of holy Angels, and much
rather be abasht to appear before the purer Eyes of thy Infinite Glory. What is
Man, O Lord, that thou art thus mindful of him! What am I, the unworthiest of
men, that thou should Invite me! O this kindness is too much for Man to
receive, it is infinitely more than the mean Creature can deserve; but it is a
kindness suitable to a God to bestow, whose goodness like himself is infinite.
It is in Obedience, Great Lord, to thy Command, that I now present my self
before thee; and in a due acknowledgment of thy faithfulness, I come to partake
of thy Blessings. When thou hear, my Soul, the words of Consecration
pronounced, which separate the Bread and Wine from a common to a divine use,
say, I believe, O Eternal Son of God, thou did take our Nature into a
Personal Union with thy self; Thou did take it in all its essential Parts,
but free from all our sinful Infirmities: I believe thy Soul was made an
offering for sin, and that offering was accepted of the Father; thy Sacrifice
made a full Propitiation, and therefore are we permitted to eat of it: And
seeing the Body and Blood of our Crucified Redeemer, I cannot question the love
of the Father to Mankind. God the Father, it appears, did so love the world, as
that he gave his only begotten Son to dye for them. God the Son, I see, is
willing that many should be partakers in his Death, since he has Instituted
this Blessed Sacrament, and Invites all men to it. With Angels then, and
Archangels, and all the glorious host of Heaven, I Praise and admire the Love
of God the Father, and God the Son: I Praise and adore the ever blessed
Trinity, for the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ: And I come,
O Savior, to take and eat thy Body which was broken for me; I come joyfully to
drink that Cup which is the New Testament in thy Blood, which Blood thou have
shed for the remission of the sins of many, and invited all believing Souls to
partake of: I desire, I long to partake of this my necessary Food; I desire, I
long to receive these incomparable dainties. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so thirsts my Soul after thee, O Christ: I will open my mouth
wide, O Lord, for thy fullness can suffice my largest desires. When, O my Soul,
thou see the Holy Bread broken, and the Consecrated Wine apart from it, say:
I remember thy sufferings, O crucified Love; and that bitter passion which
ended in Death it self. I call to mind how thy Blessed Body was scourged and
bruised! How thy Sacred Head was pricked with the sharp Thorns! How thy Hands,
which had wrought many a kind Miracle, were bored through and torn with great
Nails! How thy Feet, which had carried Thee about to do good, were now by
ungrateful men nailed to the Cross! How thy tender Heart was pierced by the
Soldiers Spear, and at these wounds thy Blood, and thy Life forsook Thee. I
must grieve, and I must love, O thou great Martyr of Love; when I consider all
this was undergone for me. I must needs detest my self, and abhor my Sins, when
I consider thou wast made a curse for me. My numerous Sins increased thy heavy
load; my Sins were some of the procuring causes of thy bitter Death. With a
broken and contrite Heart, I deeply lament my past transgressions; and resolve
that from henceforth every Sin shall be very odious to me. I resolve to sight
against it with all possible care and industry; and will not allow any known
Sin to be quiet in me. When the Bread and Wine, my Soul, are by Christ's
Ministers given to thee, say: These, kind Lord, are thy Instruments of
conveyance, and they make over to me the Blessings of the New Covenant. Welcome
dear signs of my Saviors presence: Welcome sure pledges of his love, and of my
Happiness. Open ye everlasting doors of my Heart, and let this King of Glory
enter in. Welcome, dear Lord, to my poor Soul, and sit thou as sovereign of my
Heart. I shall be very happy under thy Dominion, and very safe under thy
protection. My Beloved is mine, and I am his; I will live to my Love, that dyed
for me. When the Bread and Wine are given to others in thy sight, thou must
look upon them as members of Jesus Christ: Thou must look with love upon those
whom he loves; and resolve to practice all the kindness to them that thou
can. Conclude the solemnity with hearty Joy and Thankfulness, and say: What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits; O matchless love of God to a
poor Sinner! O Love beyond Degree! O Love that passes Knowledge! I can never
sufficiently show my self grateful. Yet bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that
is within me, praise his Holy Name. Praise him who graciously forgiveth all thy
Sins, and justifies thee freely by his Grace. Praise him who heals all thy
diseases. Study to make as liberal returns to thy Lord as thou can; for thy
Lord has dealt very bountifully with Thee.

PETITIONS.
O Lord, thou art the great searcher of Hearts, and thou know us altogether:
O assist my serious examinations of my self, that I may overlook no secret Sin.
Thou Lord know how to influence and turn our Hearts even as pleases thee. O
prepare my Heart according to thine own will to draw nigh to thee. Breath O
Divine Spirit, upon my Soul, and then the grateful odours of my Grace will flow
forth. O Lord, I would with all due affections commemorate and receive my
Savior; and I earnestly desire that every Grace may renew its strength. Let
every Grace, O Lord, be so improved, as that I may bring forth more fruit in
doing well; and may more steadily resist the assaults of all temptation to
evil. Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief; and fill me with all Joy and Peace
in believing. Inflame my Heart with a more ardent Charity, let my love be
stronger than Death, let me be rooted and grounded in love: Make me to mind
more the things above, and despise the things below: to be more patient in
adversity, and more humble and fruitful in prosperity. To be strictly just and
honest in a deceitful World; and charitable to those that injure me, and set
themselves against me. Increase in me the Love of all thy Commands, and the
hatred of every Sin. O God the Father our Creator and Sovereign Lord, regard I
beseech Thee, thy Son's death, which we shall now commemorate before Thee;
remember how well he pleased thee in all things, and when I am united to him
regard me with favor too. When I partake of his Sacrifice accept it as a
propitiation for my Sins, and pardon for his sake all my transgressions. O
Spotless Lamb of God, once slain for us Sinners on the Cross, have Mercy upon
me; O Christ hear me, and be my powerful Advocate with the Heavenly Father.
Solicit by thy merits his Mercy for my poor Soul. Offer thy sacred Body before
his Throne, and turn away the wrath that my sins have deserved. If thou will, O
Eternal Merciful God, one God in three persons, do all these kind things for
me, for the sake and merits of the Redeemer, and out of thy great love to
Souls; then since I can never have given thee praises enough, grant that I may
ever live to praise Thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc. Amen.
For Thursday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
Have thou, my Soul, been Feasting at the Table of the Lord? Has he given thee
himself and his rich blessings? What thou have done signifies the renewal of
that Covenant, that was made in Baptism between the Lord and Thee. Thou have in
coming to this Feast professed thy self a Christian, and declared a resolution to
live, and dye so. Thou have pretended to account nothing so precious to thee as
thy Savior; and that no other Lord but he shall have dominion over thee. The
Loving Jesus must now have full possession of thy Heart; and thou may not be
governed by the love of this World. Thou have bound thy self, my Soul, to be
the Servant of Jesus Christ, and to observe the whole Religion of our Savior:
To be taught by his Precepts, and to follow his excellent Example. Thou must
not then learn the foolish Maxims of this world, nor conform to the sinful
practices of it. But live as one redeemed from a vain Conversation, and engaged
to hate every wicked way. Thou must hereafter challenge no right to have thy
self at thine own disposal: But deny thy self to please thy Master, and take up
thy Cross when he requires it. When it would cost thee thy Estate or Life to
own him and profess his Truth, thou must cleave to him with full purpose of
Heart; and forsake all things as dross and dung for his sake: Thou must
endeavor to walk worthy of thy Heavenly calling; and that thy Conversation be
such as becomes the Gospel: And therefore live not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit; and live Godly, Righteously, and Soberly in this present world. Do
good to them that hate thee, and pray for them that despitefully use thee.
Forgive those that injure thee, and live in Charity with all Mankind. As thou
have opportunity, it is required that thou do good to all men, but especially
to those of the household of Faith. The Law of thy Savior requires that
according to thy capacity, thou do cloth these when they are naked, and feed
any of them when they are hungry; direct them when they are wandering, restore
them when they are fallen, quicken them when they are slothful; fortify them
when they are tempted: Bear with their acknowledged infirmities, and encourage
them in all their well-doing. And the Lord, having plentifully entertained thee
at his Table, does expect, my Soul, that thou should increase in strength. He
expects that thy knowledge of Divine things should be more clear, thy Faith be
stronger to resist Temptations: That thou be more patient under the adversities
of this Life, and more ardent in thy desires after a better. That thou be
fruitful in Holy Thoughts, and pious words; fruitful in just and charitable
deeds: fruitful to thy self in thine own improvements, and to others in thy
good example. If thou do not increase in strength, it is because thou art
slothful in business: Be diligent then in thy work, and hold on thy way: so
shall thy exercise of Grace make thee grow stronger, and stronger; for to him
that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance.

MEDITATION II.
MY Soul, thou did dissemble with God in going to his Sacred Table, if it was
not in thy intention and purpose to love him, and keep his Commands: And if
thou do not continue in that purpose afterward, and endeavor to put in
practice thy resolutions, thou despisest the obligations of his Love, and art
basely false to thy Covenant. Every act of sin that thou commitest after thou
have been a partaker of thy Lords Supper, is not only a neglect of thy Duty,
but the breach of a renewed Oath. Can thou find in thy heart to take the Cup
of Salvation, and not call upon the Name of the Lord? if he delivers thee from
Death and Hell, thou art highly obliged to Worship him, and reverence all his
Institutions: Will thou take an interest in Christ, without giving him an
interest in thee? Is it not a very fitting act of Thanksgiving for this, to
offer and resign thy self to his disposal? Is it not great shame that thou
should ever hereafter account any thing too much to part with, or do for his
sake, when he loved not his own Life to the Death, that he might ransom thee
from eternal misery? Thou have renewed the remembrance of thy Savior's dying
Love, received new Pledges of thy interest in it: These things ought to tie
thee faster in bonds of Love to him, and spread the divine Love further in thy
Soul; 'till all thy faculties and powers be under the command of it, and thy
whole self as it were changed into Love. Such should thy Love be, as never to
forget how great things his Love has done for thee; such as never to think of
those great things without the most fervent and hearty adorations; such as to
make thee much delighted to think often of his Love, and often to commemorate
him at his Supper; to make thee study what will please him, and strive to do it
in an universal Obedience; to make thee desire that his Honor may be promoted
in the World, and his Kingdom enlarged to all the corners of the Earth. Did our
Savior come into the World to destroy the works of the Devil; and shall I help
to carry on those works in the world, by retaining and living in any sin? This
sure were highly to affront the great Redeemer, and despise his kind
undertaking: To such there remains no other Offering for sin, but they ought
with fear to expect a terrible Judgment. Will thou, my Soul, entertain and
cherish that which has pierced the heart of thy Savior? O with what
Indignation should we regard all sin, even our most beloved sins! when it was
these that gave him his many Wounds; these brought him to the Agony in the
Garden, these caused his secret Sufferings on the Cross, which his Soul felt,
when he sadly cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! All these
things will condemn me, if I regard any Iniquity in my heart. Consider further,
my Soul, what is worthy of them who are washed in the precious Blood of the
Lamb. How very much ought they to love, to whom much has been forgiven! How
should they love one another, whom the Father so loved, as to give them his
Son! Consider again, how they ought to walk, who are consigned to immortal
Blessedness! How should they purify themselves, as God is pure, and cast away
all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit! With what Contempt should they look upon
all the Pomp and Glory of this World, and pity those that fondly admire it, and
never envy any the enjoyment of it! With what Moderation and Indifferency
should they desire and enjoy these things! They should never be proud of any
enjoyments in this world, nor be dejected with any wants. In vain was our
Savior a man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, to purchase for us the
Glories and Joys of Heaven, if the hopes of Glory are not worthy to delight
us, and make us rejoice evermore. Thou do undervalue thy Saviors Purchase,
if the thoughts of Heaven do not inflame thy desires; and account his Blood
cheaply thrown away, if thou think it not worth thy endeavors. To answer then
the obligations of thy Saviors Love, thou must earnestly strive to fit thy
self for Heaven, thou must greatly desire to be there, and cherish the hopes of
it as thy chiefest Joys and Consolations on Earth.

MEDITATION III.
I Acknowledge, O Blessed Son of God, and Lord of Heaven and Earth, that as I
am thine by receiving my being from thee, so I was early devoted to thee: I was
engaged in a Solemn Covenant, by which I stand bound to do thee faithful
Service. I own, O Lord, the Justice and Equity of being so obliged; I account
it my Interest to be entirely thine. I am saved by being Devoted to thee, and
honored in admission to thy Service: It is the greatest Preferment I can
attain, to serve him who is Lord of Heaven, and Prince of the Kings of the
Earth. Thy Service, O Lord, is perfect Freedom, and they have great Peace that
love thy Law: There are no riches comparable to thy rewards, nor any Pleasures
so sweet as thy Consolations. I am ashamed, O Lord, and have great reason to be
so, for that I have lived no more suitable to such a Devoted State: That I have
presumed to dispose of my self so much according to the devices and desires of
of my own heart: I have often wandered from the safe and pleasant Path of thy
Commandments, and often stepped into the dangerous uneasy ways of sin; I have
greatly disparaged my self hereby in thy sight, and in the sight of thy Holy
Angels: O it is fit that thou, and they who have seen my sins, should see my
repentance; that have seen me most basely breaking my Covenant with my God,
should see me heartily renewing again so just a Covenant. I thank thy Love,
Dear Jesu, for it is by what thou have done for us, that our Repentance may be
accepted: I thank thee, O gracious Savior, for Instituting thy Supper, for the
Renewal and Confirmation of our Baptismal Covenant; that thou have commanded us
at that to reinforce our resolutions, and that thou art ready to confirm them
by thy Grace. It is, Lord, the sincere desire of my Soul, never to revolt from
Thee any more* I believe there is no greater happiness, than to be a firm
Confederate with the faithful Jesus: By which I shall become a Temple to the
Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Light and Love, the Spirit of Grace and Glory. Now
Lord, that I have had a fresh sight of thy Love, and have sat under thy Shadow
with Delight; thy blessed Name shall be deeply engraven in my heart; I will
allow no affection but the Love of Jesus, and all my powers, and all their
motions shall be subject to that: I will say to all the Vanities of the world,
Be gone, I have no room in my heart for you, whom I cannot love too little; I
will reserve it all for my Savior, whom I can never love too much: I will say
to those Temptations that would draw me into sin, cease your base
Solicitations, for I cannot willingly grieve my loving Savior: If it be
difficult to serve him, I will steadily conflict with those difficulties: If it
will cost me the loss of all worldly Conveniences, I will gladly forsake all
to adhere to him: If it expose my Life, I will let that go, rather than deny
my loving Lord. Now that I have received the Blessed Jesus at his Supper, and
thou, Lord, art come to make thy abode with me, I will study to give thee such
kind Entertainment, as may please thee, and keep thee with me: I will endeavor
in my thoughts, words and actions, to set always before thee what I think will
be acceptable; I will watch against every thing that is impure, and would be
offensive to thy holy sight. I will often retire from the World to converse
with thee: Worldly cares and business shall not keep me from thy Company. I
have been praising thee, O Lord, in thy House, and at thy Table, but I have not
praised thee enough: And who can praise thee enough for what I there saw, for
what I there received! Oh! how low are my Conceptions of thy Love! how vastly
below it are all my words! I will try, O Lord, what my deeds can do in praising
thee; and every part of my Life shall endeavor thy honor. Thus, Lord, I may
and ought to resolve; but my Practice depends entirely on thy Grace.

PETITIONS.
O Lord, our kind and gracious Redeemer! Thou art exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins: I beseech thee, O Lord, as
thou have enabled me to repent, and to confess the folly of my backsliding
heart; do thou graciously give me thy pardon. Forgive me, O Lord, that I have
been so false to former Vows, and have so often contradicted my Covenants with
thee. O deal not with me as I deserve, cast me not away from thy presence, take
not thy Holy Spirit from me. I have been weakly striving against my sins, and
could not so far conquer them as I would: And therefore, Lord, I came to thy
Table, to receive greater strength against them. O let such a virtue come from
thy Death at this Remembrance of it, as may lay all my sins utterly dead; and
let the Influence of that power so remain, as that they may never revive; that
I may never be hindered in my Duty by any sin easily besetting me; that I may
serve and please thee in all purity, heavenly-mindedness, integrity, in
Charity, Humility and Contentedness, in whatever condition it shall please thee
to place me. Enable me perfectly to overcome my Passions, and keep them all
subject to the Laws of thy Love. Let thy Love which is represented in this
Sacrament, so deeply affect me, that I may delight to think and to speak of it,
and may endeavor, as far as I can, to imitate it. Keep me mindful of my Vows,
make my Endeavors successful, and my Obedience perfect and complete in all
things. So possess me with the Love of thee my kind Redeemer, as to make me
ardently desirous of seeing thee face to face. Refine me at length by that holy
fire, from all the dross of my Corruptions; and to such a degree of holiness
and purity, that I may be fit to fly away from this World, to the Habitation of
thy Holiness and Glory.

Amen.
Hymn 24.
DO I resolve an easy life,
With plenty stored, and free from strife;
When, my dear Lord, thy days and nights
Were past in poverty and fights?
Do I design a gentle Death,
Just singing out my aged Breath;
When, my Love, cruel tortures tore
Thy dear Soul out, all drowned in gore?
Oh no; our Christian Sacrifice,
Acting, in a sweet disguise,
My Saviors Passion over again,
Shall all such fond Conceits restrain.
This must keep lively in my mind,
How I ought still to be resigned.
This humble pattern should destroy
My sensual Grief and worldly Joy.
Are Sufferings Ills? No, Goodness chose
His, and our way to Bliss through those.
Are Pleasures Goods? No, Wisdom scorned
Their dalliance, and has us forewarned.
This, Lord, this make my Song to be,
At least, whene're I meet with thee;
Thee its glad ground so often repeating,
As may prevent my Souls forgetting.
Jesu! thus armed, no terrors shall
E're make my virtuous Courage fall:
No flatteries here my blessed hopes drown,
Since thy sad Cross led to thy Crown.
O live for ever, glorious Lord,
Live by all Heaven and Earth adored:
May both their joyful praises give,
They who can see, we who believe.
Praise to the glorious Three in One
Let Time ascribe till Time be done:
Then let the work continued be,
By an endless Eternity.
Amen.
For Friday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
COme let us glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom is our Life,
and Health, and Resurrection. Shall we rejoice, my Soul, to day? Shall we not
rather mourn at the Funeral of our dear Redeemer? Such, O my Lord, was the
Excess of thy Goodness, to derive joys for us from thine own Sorrows. Thou
forbad'st thy followers to weep for thee, and reserved'st to thy self alone the
shame and grief. Thou invitest all the World to glory in thy Cross, and
command'st us to delight in the memory of thy Passion. Sing then, all you
dear-bought Nations of the Earth; sing Hymns of Glory to the holy Jesus. Sing,
every one who pretends to Felicity; sing immortal praises to the God of our
Salvation: To him who for us endured so much scorn, and patiently received so
many Injuries: To him who for us sweat drops of Blood, and drank off the dreggs
of his Father's wrath: To the Eternal Lord of Heaven and Earth, who for us was
slain by the hands of the wicked; who for us was led away as a Sheep to the
slaughter, and as a meek Lamb, opened not his Mouth. Whither, O my God, did thy
Compassion carry thee! how did thy Charity too far prevail with thee? Was it
not enough to become Man for us, but thou must expose thy self to all our
Miseries? Was it not enough to labor all thy life, but thou must suffer for us
even the pains of Death? No, gracious Lord, thy Mercy still observed some wants
in our condition as yet unsupply'd. Thou saw our too much fondness of Life
needed thy parting with it to reconcile us to Death. Thou saw our fear of
Sufferings could no way be abated, but by freely undergoing them in thine own
person. Thou saw our Souls so deeply stained with Guilt, that without thy
Blood we could have no Remission. O Blessed Jesu! whose Grace alone begins and
perfects all our hopes: How are we bound to praise thy Love! how infinitely
obliged to adore thy goodness! At any rate thou would still go on, to heal
our weak and wounded Nature: Even at the price of thine own dear Blood, thou
would accomplish for us the purchase of Heaven.

Hymn 25.
TUne now your selves, my Heart Strings, high;
Let us alost our Voices raise:
That our loud Song may reach the Sky,
And there present to thee our Praise.
To thee, Blessed Jesu! who came down
From those bright Spears of Joy above,
To purchase us a dear-bought Crown,
And woo our Souls to' espouse thy Love.
Long had the World in darkness sat,
'Till thou and thy all-glorious Light
Began to dawn from Heavens fair Gate,
And with thy Beams dispel their Night.
We too, alas! still there had stood,
As common Slaves in the same shade;
But Mercy came, and, with his Blood
Our general Ransom freely paid.
Not all the Spite of all the Jews,
Nor Death it self could him remove:
Still he his blessed design pursues;
And gives his Life to crown our Love.
And now my Lord, my God, my all;
What shall I most in thee admire?
That power which made the World, and shall
The World again dissolve with fire?
Oh no; thy strange Humility;
Thy Wounds, thy Pains, thy Cross, thy Death:
These shall alone my wonder be,
My Health, my Joy, my Staff, my Breath.
To thee, Great God! to thee alone,
Three Persons in one Deity;
As former Ages still have done,
All Glory now and ever be.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
AWake, my Soul, and speedily prepare thy richest Sacrifice of humble Praise:
Awake and summon all thy thoughts to make haste, and adore our great Redeemer.
To him let us reverently go, and offer our devout hearts at his sacred Feet.
Thither let us fly from the Troubles of the World; with him let us dwell among
the Mercies of Heaven: Under the shade of that happy Tree let us fix our abode:
A Tree of safe defense, and delicious fruit. Let us remember every passage of
our Savior's Love, and desire that none may escape our thanks. Let us
compassionate every stroke of his Death, and one by one salute his sacred
Wounds. Blessed be the Hands that wrought so many Miracles, and were bored with
cruel Nails. Blessed be the Feet that so often traveled for us, and at last were
unmercifully fastened to the Cross. Blessed be the Head which was crowned with
Thorns; the Head that so industriously studied our Happiness. Blessed be the
Heart which was pierced with a Spear; the Heart that so passionately loved our
peace. Blessed be the entire person of our Crucified Lord, and may all our powers
join in his praise: In thy eternal praise, O gracious Jesu! and the ravishing
thoughts of thy incomparable Sweetness. O what excess of Kindness was this!
what strange extremity of Love and Pity! The Lord is sold, that the Slave may
be free; the innocent condemned, that the guilty may be saved. The Physician is
sick, that the Patient may be cured; and he who was God dies, that man may
live. Tell me, my Soul, when first thou have well considered, and looked about
among all we know; tell me, Who ever wished us so much good? Who ever loved us
with so much tenderness? What have our nearest Friends done for us; or even our
Parents, in comparison of this Charity? No less than the Son of God came down
to redeem us; no less than his own dear Life was the price he paid for us. What
can the favor of the whole World promise us, compared to this miraculous
Bounty? No less than the joys of Angels are become our hope; no less than the
Kingdom of Heaven is made our Inheritance.

MEDITATION III.
TO thee, O God, we owe our selves, for making us after thine own Image. To
thee, O Lord, we owe more than our selves, for redeeming us with the Death of
thine only Son. Nor were our Ruins so soon repaired, as at first our Being
was easily produced. Thy Power to Create us said but one word, and immediately
we became a living Soul: But thy Wisdom to Redeem us, both spoke much, and
wrought more, and suffered most of all. To redeem us, he humbled himself to
this low World, and all the infirmities of our miserable Nature. He patiently
endured hunger and thirst, and the malicious affronts of enraged Enemies. How
many times did he hazard his life, to sustain with Courage the Truths of
Heaven! how many Tears did he tenderly weep in compassion of his blind
ungrateful Country! how many drops of Blood did he shed in the doleful Garden,
and on the bitter Cross! the Cross, where, after three long hours of grief, and
shame, and intolerable pains, he meekly bowed his fainting Head, and in an
Agony of Prayer yielded up the Ghost. So sets the glorious Sun in a sad Cloud,
and leaves our Earth in darkness and disorder; but goes to shine immediately in
the other World; and soon returns again, and brings us light. And so do thou,
dear Lord, and more: Thy very darkness is our light. It Is by thy death we are
made to live, and by thy wounds our sores are healed. O my adored Redeemer, who
took'st upon thee all our miseries, to impart to us thine own Felicities! Can
we remember thy Labors for us, and not be convinced of our Duty to thee? Can
our cold Hearts recount thy Sufferings, and not be inflamed with the Love that
suffered? Can we believe our Salvation cost thee so dear, and live as if to be
saved were not worth our pains? Ungrateful we! how do we slight the kindness of
our God! how carelessly comply with his gracious designs! For all his gifts he
requires no other return, than to hope still more, and desire still greater
Blessings. For all his favors he seeks no other praise, than our following his
steps, to arrive at his Glory.

PETITIONS.
O Glorious Jesu! behold, to thee we bow, and humbly implore thy blessing, in
whom all fullness dwells. Accomplish in us, we pray, those gracious purposes for
which thou did assume the humane Nature, and suffer a painful and ignominious
Death. Teach us, O Lord, by thy Word, and thy example, the sole way to that
Bliss for which we were created. Give us an assured pardon of all our sins, and
the privilege of becoming the Sons of God: Possess us with the joyful hope of
an eternal Life, purchased for us by our Redeemer's Death. O Almighty Redeemer,
destroy in us the works of the Devil: Deliver us (for none else can) from the
power of every sin. Set us at liberty to run the ways of thy Commandments; thy
Service is perfect freedom. Give us the special Assistance of thy Grace, that
we may wean our Affections from all vain desires, and clear our thoughts from
all impertinent fancies, that our lives may be entirely dedicated to thee, and
all the Faculties of our Souls to thy holy Service: That our minds may
continually study thy Knowledge, and our Wills grow every day stronger in thy
Love: Our Memories may faithfully lay up thy Mercy, and both Tongue and Heart
be continually disposed, and often employed to praise thee; to praise thy
incomparable Love, which has done and suffered so much for lost Mankind. O let
the continual memory of thy bitter Passion and Death, make us despise the Goods
or Ills that we meet with here, compared to the advancing our selves or others
in the esteem of what we hope hereafter; through the Sufferings and Merits of
thee our Lord Jesus Christ.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For Friday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
COme, let us now call off our thoughts from ranging abroad, where they but
lose themselves. Let us diligently examine the Accounts of our Time; and sum
up the profit we have made to day. What have we gained by all we have seen or
heard? For nothing is so barren but it may yield some fruit; had we the Art to
cultivate it right, and fitly apply it to our own advantage. If we have spied
some good Example which our gracious God has presented to instruct or quicken
us; did we immediately entertain the motion, and resolve in our heart
effectively to follow it? If we have fallen among vicious Company, which, O!
too often engages into folly; did the danger increase our care, and the sin of
others breed Virtue in us? We have heard perhaps some melancholy news, of
sudden sicknesses, or unexpected Deaths: But did we fear to be surprised our
selves, and provide betimes for that day of Trial? We meet with accidents enough
to disparage this World; but do we really feel it lose credit in our Hearts?
Does our esteem of the other grow strong and high; and every one faithfully
tell his own Soul; It Is not in this poor World thou must expect content: It is
not here you must hope to enjoy a perfect rest: Order thy whole affairs with
utmost skill; and which is seldom seen, let all thy designs succeed: Still thou
shall find something to trouble thee; and even thy pleasures will be tedious to
thee: Wheresoever thou go, still Crosses will follow thee; because
wherever thou go thou carriest thy self? Who then, my God, is truly happy
in this World? or rather I should ask, who comes the nearest to happiness? He
that with patience resolves to suffer whatever his endeavors are not able to
avoid. Happy yet more is he that delights to suffer, and glories to be like his
Crucified Savior. When thou art come to this, my Soul, that thy Crosses seem
sweet for the love of Jesus; think then thy self sublimely happy; for surely
thou have found a Heaven upon Earth; at least, the best Heaven that this Earth
can afford; and take it as a pledge of a better to come.

MEDITATION II.
MY Soul, when thou art thus retired alone; and fitly disposed for quiet
thoughts; never let the greatness of another molest thy Peace, nor his
prosperous condition make thee repine. Say not in thy Heart, had I that fair
Estate; or were I entrusted with so high a place; I should know how to contrive
things better, and never commit such gross mistakes. Tell me, how do thou
manage thine own Employments; and fit the little room thou hold in the
World? If thou have leisure, art thou not idle, and spendest thy precious time
in unprofitable follies? If thou art busy, art thou not so too much; and
leavest no time to provide for thy Immortal Soul? Do thy riches make thee more
wise, and generously assist the innocent poor? Does thy poverty make thee
humble, and faithfully labor for thy little Family? Do thou in every state
give thanks to Heaven, and contentedly submit to its severest decrees? Can
thou rejoicingly say to God; O my adored Creator! I am glad my Lot is in thy
Hands? Thou art all Wisdom, and see my wants? thou art all goodness, and
delightest to relieve me: Under thy Providence I know I am safe; whatever
befalls me, thou guidest to my advantage. If thou will have me obscure and low;
thy blessed will, not mine, be done. If thou will load my back with Crosses,
and imbitter my days with Grief or Sickness; still may thy Blessed Will, O
Lord, be done; still govern thy Creatures in thine own best way. Place
wherever thou please thy other favors; but secure to my Soul a Portion in
thy love. Take what thou will of the things thou have lent me, but leave I
beseech thee, in my Heart the Possession of thy self. Let others be preferred,
and me neglected; let their affairs succeed, and mine if thou please
miscarry: Only one thing I cannot choose but desire, and may my Gracious God
vouchsafe to grant me that: That thou cast me not away from thy presence for
ever; nor wipe my Name out of the book of Life: But let my Eternal hopes
remain, and still grow quicker as they approach their end.

MEDITATION III.
MY Thoughts, run over the passages you have met to day; or rather forget such
impertinent things. What have we seen, but distracting Vanities, and what
brought home but unprofitable Fancies? How often have we felt our Minds
disturbed! how often endangered by unhappy accidents! Sometimes we frowardly
throw our selves down; and like sullen Children will not stand. Sometimes the
tempest throws us down; and like weak Children we cannot stand. Yet are we
venturing still among the snares; enticed by the Appearance of some present
delight. We weary out our selves with running after flies; which are hard to
catch, and trifles when they are caught. This we pursue, and follow that; but
nothing we meet can fill our Hearts, till we have found out Thee, O Gracious
Lord! our only full, all-satisfying good: Till we have found out Thee not by a
dark belief; but clearly, as thou art in thine own bright self. Remember, O my
Soul, this truth of the World we live in; which our own experience too
evidently proves: The Eye is not filled with seeing it is varieties, nor the Ear
with hearing all its harmony. Remember also this Truth of the World we hope
for; which is made sure to our Faith by the Word of Christ: The Eye has not
seen such beauteous glories, nor has the Ear ever heard such ravishing charms;
nor can the Heart it self conceive such incredible joys, as our God has
provided for them that love him: As our Blessed Jesus has purchased for his
Servants; and even for Thee, my Soul, if thou art one of them. Then thou may
in Peace lay down thy Head, and rest secure in the protection of thy God: Whose
Mercy has so graciously singled thee out from among the race of guilty Mortals:
To give thee the Peace which passes all understanding, and the hopes that are
strongly established on himself.

PETITIONS.
O Infinitely mild, and unexhaustible source of Mercy and Compassion! have
Mercy upon me poor miserable Sinner. Have Mercy Lord, and help me, for I spend
my days in Vanity though I am continually hasting down to the Grave. I do not
improve as I might in Virtue by the occasions I meet with, but they often make
me guilty and improve in Vice. O Lord, enter not into Judgment with thy poor
Creature, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Lord make me judge
my self, lest I be condemned by Thee; and frequently chastise my self, lest I
be punished by thee: Make me mortify my senses with discreet austerities, that
I may reduce my Body into Subjection to my Mind; and bring my Mind at length
into a due Subjection to thee. O Lord, of thy great Mercy pardon my daily Sins;
and let thy Grace make even them occasions of improvement in Virtue. Let thy
Provident Mercy, O God, make every day a new Branch of Knowledge to me, from
whence the Evening may gather fresh variety of Fruits to nourish my Soul to an
Eternal Life; fruits that may strengthen me against those occasions by which I
have been most frequently overcome; that may render me steady in the ways of
Virtue. Grant, I beseech Thee, that no experience of Good or Evil which this
day has afforded, may be lost upon me. Make me more skilful by all, to discern
the true value and use of the present state in all its various postures: wean
me more from this world, since thou have made me for a better: Make me more
ready to offer up with our Savior my whole Concerns and Being here to thy
will, and the sole advance of thy Glory, that I may at length be Crowned with
bliss among the rest of thy resigned, and devoted Servants through Jesus Christ
thy well-beloved Son.

Amen.
Hymn 26.
It Is not for us, and our proud Hearts,
O Mighty Lord, to choose our parts;
But act well what thou wisely giv'st:
It Is not in our weak power to make,
One step of the way we undertake;
Unless thou kindly us reliev'st.
What thou have given, thou can take,
And, when thou will, new gifts can make;
As all things flow from thee alone:
When thou did give it, it was thine;
When thou retook'st it, 'twas not mine:
It Is fit thy will in all be done.
It might perhaps too pleasant prove,
Too much attractive of my love;
And so make less my love of thee:
Some things there are, (...) Scriptures say,
And reason proves that Heaven and they
Can very seldom will agree.
Lord! let me then sit calmly down,
And rest contented with my own;
That is, with what thou here allow'st:
Keep thou my mind serene, and free,
Often to think on Heaven and Thee;
And those great things thou there bestow'st.
There let me have my portion, Lord!
There all my losses be restored;
And then no matter what falls here:
Is It not enough that we shall sing,
And love for ever our blessed King;
Whose glorious goodness brought us there.
Great God, as thou art One, may we
With one another all agree,
All in thy thankful praise conspire:
May Men and Angels join and sing
Eternal Hymns to Thee their King,
And make up one Adoring Quire.
Amen.
For Saturday Morning.
MEDITATION I.
IF we rejoiced for our selves, in the Sufferings of our Lord, let us now
rejoice for him, that his Sufferings are ended: Now that the Fowlers Net is
broken, and the meek and innocent Dove escaped: Now that the Cup of bitterness
is past away, and never possible to return again: Never again, O dearest Jesu,
shall those blessed Eyes weep; nor thy holy Soul be sorrowful unto Death: Never
shall thy precious Life be subject any more to the bloody Malice of ambitious
Hypocrites: Never shall thy Innocence any more be exposed to the barbarous fury
of an ungrateful multitude: But thou shall live, and reign for ever, and all
created Nature shall perpetually adore thee. O happy end of well endured
Afflictions! O blessed Fruits, that spring from the Cross of Jesus! Look up my
Soul, and see thy Crucified Lord sit gloriously enthroned at the right hand of
his Father: Behold the ragged Purple now turned into a Robe of light, and the
scornful Reed into a royal Scepter. The wreath of Thorns is grown into a
sparkling Diadem, and all his Scars polisht into brightness: His Tears are all
now changed into Joy, and the Laughter of his Persecutors into sad Despair:
Herod long since perished in miserable conntempt, and Pilate still trembles with
everlasting fears; the impenitent Jews are scattered over the World, to attest
his Truth and their own obdurate blindness: But himself is crowned with eternal
Triumphs, and the Souls he redeems, shall sing his Victories for ever. Live
glorious King of Men and Angels, live happy Conqueror of Sin and Death: Our
Praises shall always attend thy Sufferings, and our Patience endeavor to bear
our own: Through fiercest dangers our Faith shall follow thee, and nothing
wrest from us our hope at last to see thee: We will fear no more the sting of
Death, nor be frighted at the darkness of the Grave; since thou have changed
our Grave into a Bed of rest, and made Death it self but a passage into Life.
We will love no more the Pleasures of Vanity, nor set our hearts on
unsatisfying riches; since thou have opened Paradise again, and Purchased for
us the Kingdom of Heaven.

Hymn 27.
MY God, to Thee our selves we owe,
And to thy Bounty, all we have;
Behold, to thee our Praises bow,
And humbly thy acceptance crave.
If we are happy in a Friend,
That very Friend it is thou bestow'st;
His power, his will, to help our end,
Is just so much as thou allow'st.
If we enjoy a free Estate,
Our only Title is from thee;
Thou made our lot to bear that rate,
Which else an empty blank would be.
If we have Health, that well-tuned ground,
That gives the Music to the rest;
It is by thee our Air is sound,
Our Food secured, our Physic blessed.
If we have hope, one day to view
The Glories of thy blissful Face;
Each drop of that refreshing Dew
Must fall from Heaven, and thy free grace.
Thus, then, to thee our Praises bow,
And humbly thy acceptance crave;
Since it is to thee our selves we owe,
And to thy bounty all we have.
Glory to Thee, great God, alone,
Three Persons in one Deity;
As it has been in Ages gone,
May now, and still for ever be.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
BLessed be thy Name, O holy Jesu! and blessed be the mercy of thy Providence:
Who have cast our lot in these times of Grace, and designed our birth in the
days of light; when we may clearly see our ready way, and directly go on to
our glorious end. 'Till thou appearedst, O thou only Light of the World! our
miserable Earth lay covered with darkness: 'Till thou wentest away, O thou
Sovereign Lord of Life! the Kingdom of Heaven was close shut up: When thou
had overcome the sharpness of Death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to
all Believers: Thou did communicate thy Joys to all the World, and display
the bright glories of thy happy Kingdom to all that esteemed so blessed a sight,
and stood prepared to entertain thy coming: As for the rest, whose eyes are
shut, or turned away by their own malice; thy Presence yields them no more Joy,
than light to those that will not see: But the hearts that receive and love
thee, thou fillest with gladness, and overflowest them with an ocean of
heavenly delights. Come ye happy believing Souls, that are made partakers of
the mercies of his Kingdom: Come let us now raise up our thoughts, and
continually Meditate our future Beatitude: Let us comfort our selves with the
hope of rest, and our Sufferings with the expectance of a glorious reward: Now
that the hand of our gracious Lord has unlockt the gates of everlasting Bliss:
Now that they stand wide open, to admit such as diligently strive to enter in:
Such as have wisely made choice of Heaven for the only end and business of
their life; rejecting all the false allurements of this World, to attend the
pursuit of true felicity.

MEDITATION III.
PRaise our Lord, O you children of Men! Praise him as the Anthor of all your
hopes. Praise our Lord, O you blessed of Heaven! Praise him as the Finisher of
all your Joys. Sing, O you reverend Patriarchs and holy Prophets! Sing Hymns
of Glory to the great Messiah. Sing and Rejoice all you ancient Saints, who
have so long enjoyed the happy repose of Abraham's bosom: Bring forth your best
and purest Incense, and humbly offer it at the Throne of the Lamb: The Lamb
that was slain from the beginning of the World; by the sprinkling of whose
Blood you all were saved. O still sing on the Praises of the King of Peace, and
bless for ever his victorious Mercy: It was he dissolved the power of darkness,
and broke asunder the strong bars of Death. He has conquered Death, and him
that had the power of it, even the Devil, that his faithful Followers might
triumph over both. How did your glad eyes sparkle with Joy, to see the
Ascension of your humbled Redeemer! How were your Spirits transported with
delight, to behold the splendours of his glorious Exaltation! to have his
Presence among you, his blissful Presence, that can turn even the saddest night
into a cheerful day; that can change a Dungeon into a house of Mirth; and make
every place a joyful Paradise! O glorious Presence! when shall our Souls be
filled with strong and constant desires of enjoying Thee? O sluggish Soul! how
can thou contentedly hover about this Earth, when the loving Jesus is
Ascended above the Skies? with longing hopes look up thither, and say, When,
dearest Jesu! shall my desires be filled with the everlasting fruition of thy
blessed self? Henceforth for thee, and for thy Sacred Love, O thou great and
only Comfort of our Souls! shall all Afflictions be welcome to me, as wholesome
Physic to correct my Follies; shall the Pleasures of the World be very
cautiously used, as dangerous Fruit that may fill me with Diseases: Will I, by
thy example, neither fear to Dye, nor refuse the labors of this present Life:
But while I live, I will obey thy Grace, that when I dye, I may enjoy thy Glory.

PETITIONS.
O Blessed Jesu, our only hope, our all-sufficient strength, and the liberal
Rewarder of all thy Servants: As thou have freely prepared for us ready wages,
so Lord, let thy Grace enable us to work: Let thy Grace excite to diligence in
our work, and make us steady and persevering in the way thou love: Make us
direct our whole Life to thee, O Fullness of Bliss! and undervalue all things
compared with thy Love. O Seal up our Eyes to the Illusions of this World, and
open them upwards to thy solid Joys; there let them fix their pleased sight,
and look 'till we be transformed into thy glorious likeness: That when our
present earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, and this House of Clay shall
fall down into the dust, we may ascend to thee, and dwell above in that
Building not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. O Jesu! thou did expire
on the Cross, and descend into the Grave, to destroy the life of Sin in us, and
the fears of Death: Grant then, I beseech thee, that these may never revive in
me, to tempt or affright me from the ways of Holiness. Fix in me, O Lord, the
firm belief of this very sure and important Truth, That the greatest mischiefs
which our Salvation can cost us here, are but momentary, and shall work for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory: Through thy abundant Merits,
O dear Redeemer.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For Saturday Evening.
MEDITATION I.
TOO often are we troubled about many things, when the truly necessary is only
one. Retire, O my Soul, into thine own bosom, and search what thou aim'st at in
all thy thoughts: Examine where thou do place thy chief Felicity, and whither
tend thy strongest desires: Go to the Great and Prudent of the World, and learn
of them to choose thy Interests: Do they not there increase their Estates,
where they mean to spend the most of their life? Do they project their Mansion
Seat in a Country through which they only pass as Travelers? No more, my Soul,
should we build our best hopes on the sandy Foundation of this perishable
Earth; where, sure we are, that we cannot stay long, and are not sure we may
have leave to stay but a very little while. We must then use this transitory
Life, as Pilgrims returning to their beloved Home; that we may take only what
our Journey requires, and not think of settling in a foreign Country; but
wisely forecast our Treasures so, as to be happy there where we must always
be: Let us use this World as not abusing it, for the fashion of this World
passes away: Use it so as to gain thereby the next, in reward for our using
this well: So shall this short Time end in a happy Eternity.

MEDITATION II.
NOW thou have found thy happy end, and found it the only good that lasts for
ever; study, O my Soul, to know still more, and still more to value those
immortal joys. Strive for so glorious a prize with thy whole force; with the
utmost endeavors of all thy Faculties: Purchase at any rate that blessed
Inheritance, and wisely neglect before that any thing else; any thing that
would divert thee from thy holy course, or but retard the speed of thy Advance:
For though the lowest degree of Happiness, in the Mansions above be happy
enough, where every satisfied Vessel is filled to the brim; yet to enlarge our
Capacity to the least nigher degree, deserves the busiest diligence of our
whole life. Shall the industrious Be endure no rest; but fly, and sing, and
labor all day? Shall the unwearied Ant be running up and down, to fetch and
carry a few grains of Corn? And we for whom all Nature so faithfully works, and
tires it self in a perpetual Motion; for whom the tender Providence of God
commands even his Angels to watch continually; for whom the adored Jesus came
down from Heaven, and spent a whole life in continual labors? Shall we sleep
on in a drowsy Sloth, and not stir a finger to help our selves? Awake my Soul,
and chide thy sluggish thoughts; and let their stupid folly plainly know we
have a store to provide as well as (...), and infinitely richer than their poor
hoard. We have a work to do as well as Bees, and that which is infinitely
sweeter than all their honey. What can so nobly enrich an immortal Soul, as
still to be gathering a stock for Eternity? What can so highly delight one that
every day improves, as daily to see the increase of his hope. O blessed hope,
thou shall be my chief delight, and the only Treasure I covet to lay up: Thou
art the quickening Life of all my Actions, and the sweet allay of all my
Sufferings. So shall I never refuse any the meanest labor, while I look to
receive such glorious Wages. So shall I never repine at any temporal loss,
while I hope to gain such Eternal Rewards.

MEDITATION III.
BUt O! it is not so much our sloth undoes us; as the imprudent choice in
applying our Diligence. Many, alas, take pains enough; many perplex themselves
too much. See how the busy toylers of the world are chained perpetually like
slaves to their work. How early they rise, and go late to sleep; and eat the
Bread of Care and Sorrow. See how the hardy Soldiers follow their Prince,
through a thousand difficulties, to meet with dangers: See how the venturous
Mariners expose their lives, over stormy Seas, barbarous Nations: And why is
all this, poor ill-advised wretches! but to fetch, perhaps, a little Fish or
Spice? To gain a few Pence or some petty Honor; which others often share in
more than your selves? O Gracious Lord, how easy are thy commands! how cheap
have thou made the purchase of Heaven! Half these pains would make us excellent
Saints; half these Sufferings would place us in thy account among the Martyrs;
were they devoutly undertaken for thee, and the higher enjoyment of thy
Glorious Promises. Thou do not bid us freeze under the Polar Star; nor burn
in the heats of the torrid Zone: But proposest a sweet, and gentle rule; and
such as our Nature it self would choose, did not our passions strangely mislead
us, and the World about us distract our reason. Thou biddest us but wisely love
our selves; and attend above all things our own true happiness. Thou bid'st us
value even this world as much as it deserves; since it is the School that breeds
us up for the other: Only we are forbidden to be wilful fools; and prefer a
short Vanity before Eternal felicity. O the mild Government of the King of
Heaven! his will we can do, whatever else we are doing. This we can do even
while we sit still; and only move our Thoughts toward thee. Yet take care my
Soul, that this sweetness of thy Lord, be never abused to a^ wanton neglect:
But strive still to love thy Lord so much the more, as by any means thou
discoverest more the excess of his love.

PETITIONS.
O Thou the Eternal being, who changest not, and yet art the cause and end of
all our changes! Who still remainest the same rich fullness in thy self, the
same bright Glory to all thy Blessed: Make me sensible of my approaching
change, of the dissolution that will call me away from this present world: And
make me regard this world as a place of Pilgrimage, as having here no enduring
City. Teach me also, O Lord, the Immortality of my Soul, and convince me that I
must dwell for ever in another world; so make me endeavor to have thee the
Eternal God for my Everlasting Portion, and spend this short time in diligent
striving to reach the Blissful Enjoyment of Thee: Suffer me not, O God, to take
up my rest on Earth; to be ever unconcerned about Eternity, whatever my
condition be here* When I see with what unwearied diligence the wretched
adventures for all sorts of Vanity, do round about me pursue their vain
designs; let this, Lord, be taken as a very just reproach for my negligence in
the pursuit of better things. Make me ashamed* to see any others more concerned
for the applause of men, than I am for the favor and approbation of God: To
see others more eager of the transient pleasures of this World, than I for the
lasting delights of Heaven. Preserve me, O Gracious Lord, from the many dangers
which on all sides assault me now; to divert or hinder my progress toward
Heaven. O keep my mind ever disposed to receive thy Holy inspirations; that
being always strongly and pleasantly carried forward by thy Holy Spirit, I may
at last happily arrive at the Heavenly Jerusalem: For the sake of Jesus Christ
the Mediator.

Amen.
Hymn 28.
MY Soul! what is all this world to thee?
This world of sin and woe;
Where only sense can taste its sweets,
And those unwholesome too?
Truth is thy food, truth thy delight,
Which cannot here be free;
Thy mind was born to know and love
What this life never can see.
Malicious world, how do thou lay
And cover thy false Baits!
Here those of pleasure, there of gain,
Each for our ruin waits.
Unhappy we, it is our fault,
It Is we our Life abuse;
The world presents a furnished Shop,
And we the tools misuse.
So have I seen a little Child,
If Nurse but turn her Eye,
In stead of haft, take hold of the blade,
And cut it self, and cry.
This little Child, alas, am I,
Self-willed, Self-wounded too;
But, Lord, turn not thy face away,
Lest I my self undo.
O make me still so use this world,
That I the other gain;
O make me so the other love,
That this its end attain.
Its end to breed up Souls for Heave'n,
Then be it self new dressed;
No more corruption, no more change,
But one perpetual rest.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The undivided Three,
One equal Glory, one same Praise,
Now, and for ever be.
Amen.
Devotions FOR THE Holy Days, The First Part.
FOR THE FEASTS OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOR.
For the Morning.
MEDITATION I.
BRing to our Lord, all you his Servants; bring to our Lord the Sacrifice of
Praise: Bring to our Lord, all you Nations of the Earth, bring Hymns of Glory
to his great Name; at the Name of Jesus let every knee bow, of things in
Heaven, and things on Earth, and let his whole Church Militant and Triumphant
gladly adore our God that Redeemed us. Come now, and hear, you that fear our
Lord, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul: Hear, and I will tell
you what he has done for yours, and the wonders of his bounty toward all the
World. When we lay asleep in the shades of nothing, his mighty hand awaked us
into Being: Not that of Stones, or Plants, or Beasts, over which he has made us
absolute Lords; but an accomplished Body he has given us, and an immortal
Spirit, and has made us little inferior to his glorious Angels: He printed on
our Souls his own similitude, and promised to our Obedience, that we should
partake of his own felicity: He endu'd us with Appetites to live well and
happily, and furnished us with means to satisfy those Appetites; Creating a
World furnished with excellent Creatures to serve us while we abode on Earth,
and providing a Heaven of Bliss to glorify us when we removed hence. Thus
did thou favor us, O Infinite Goodness! But we, what return did we make
thee? Blush, O my Soul, for shame at so strange a weakness, and weep for grief
at so extreme an Ingratitude. We childishly preferred a trivial Apple, before
the Law of our God, and the safety of our own Lives: We fondly embraced a
little needless Satisfaction before the Pleasures of Paradise, and the eternal
Joys of Heaven. Behold the unhappy source of all our Miseries, which still
increased its streams as they went farther on; 'Till they exacted at last a
deluge of Justice to drown their deluge of Iniquity: And here, alas, had been
an end of Man, a sad and fatal end of the whole World; had not our wise Creator
foreseen the danger, and in time prevented the extremity of the ruin;
reserving for himself a few choice Plants, to replenish the Earth with more
hopeful Fruit: Yet they quickly grew wild, and brought forth sour Grapes, and
their Childrens teeth were set on edge. Quickly they aspired to an intolerable
Pride of fortifying their wickedness against the power of Heaven: Justice was
now provoked to a second deluge, and to bring again a Cloud over the Earth; but
Mercy discovered a bow in the Cloud, and our faithful God remembered his
Promise; allaying their Punishment with a milder Sentence, and only scattering
them from the place of their Conspiracy; which yet his Providence turned into a
Blessing, by making it an occasion of Peopling the World. Still their
rebellious Nature disobeyed again, and neither feared his Judgments, nor valued
his Mercies; but with a graceless emulation they propagated sin, as far as his
Goodness propagated Mankind: Then he selected a private Family, and increased
and governed them with a particular tenderness; giving them a Law by the hands
of Angels, and engaging their Obedience by a thousand favors: But they
neglected too their God and Heaven, and fell in love with the ways of Death.
When thou had thus, O dearest Lord! used many Remedies, and our Disease was
beyond their power to cure; when the light of Nature proved too weak a guide,
and the general Flood too mild a correction; when the Miracles of Moses could
not soften their Hearts, nor the Law of Angels bring any to perfection; when
all was reduced to this desperate State, and no imaginable hope was left to
recover us: Behold the Eternal Wisdom finds a strange Expedient, the last and
highest Instance of Almighty Love: Himself he resolves to cloth with our
Flesh, and come down among us, and dye to Redeem us. Wonder, O my Soul! at the
Mercies of our Lord; how infinitely do they transcend even the utmost that we
could have wished! Wonder at the admirable Providence of his Councels, that
they are so exactly fitted to their great design! Had our Savior been less
than God, we could never have believed the sublime Mysteries of his Heavenly
Doctrine: Had he been other than Man, we must needs have wanted the powerful
motive of his holy Example: Had he been only God, he could never have suffered
the least of those Afflictions which he so gloriously overcame: Had he been
merely Man, he could never have overcome those Infinite Afflictions which he so
patiently endured. In thee, O blessed Savior! the two Natures of God and Man
were so mysteriously united, without either change or confusion, that they made
in thee but one Person, one Mediator and Lord.

Hymn 29.
JEsu, who from thy Fathers Throne,
To this low vale of Tears came down,
In our poor nature humbly dressed;
Oh may the charms of that sweet love
Draw up our Souls to thee above,
And six them there on thee to rest.
Jesu, who were with Joy Conceived;
With Joy were born, while no pain grieved
Thy Blessed Mothers Virgin-womb:
O may we breed, and bring thee forth
In our glad hearts, for all is Mirth
Where thou, kind Lord, art pleased to come.
Jesu, whose high and humble Birth,
In Heaven, the Angels, and on Earth
The faithful Shepherds gladly sing;
O may our Hymns, which here run low,
Shoot up aloft, and fruitful grow
In that more warm, Eternal Spring.
Jesu, how soon did thou begin
To bleed and suffer for our sin;
Cut by the Circumcising Knife!
O may thy grace, by making good
Our Souls just cause against flesh and blood,
Cut off for us that dange'rous strife.
Jesu, who took'st that heave'nly Name
Thy blessed Purpose to proclaim,
Of saving self-destroy'd Mankind:
O may we bow our Heart and knee,
Bright King of Names, to Glorious thee,
And thy hid sweetness ever find.
Jesu, who thus began'st our Bliss,
Thus carry'edst on our happiness,
To thee, as due, all Praise be paid:
O may the great mysterious three
For ever live, and ever be
By all Adored, Beloved, Obeyed.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
SOon as this Blessed Decree was made, of sending the Son of God to redeem
Mankind: Immediately his goodness was ready to come among us, had our
ungracious world been ready to receive him. But as yet we were too gross and
sensual, and utterly incapable of his so sublime Laws: We were immerst in
worldly cares and pleasures, and indisposed to be allured by unseen rewards.
While we were thus unfit for thee, O God of pure and perfect holiness! Thou
graciously were pleased to stay for us; and all that time to prepare us for thy
coming: From the beginning entertaining us with Hope; and through every age
confirming our Faith. How early, O my God, did thou engage to relieve us! The
seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. How often did thou repeat
thy Promise to Abraham! In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. How many ways did thy mercy invent, by unquestionable tokens to give
notice of thy coming? Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall
call his name, God with us. There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. The Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him; the Spirit of Wisdom, and understanding; the Spirit of Counsel
and Might, the Spirit of the Knowledge, and Fear of the Lord. I will raise them
up a Prophet like unto Moses; and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I command him. And thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though
thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come
forth that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old,
even from the days of Eterni. Hark how the Eternal Father introduces his Son!
commanding first all the Angels of God to worship him! Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten Thee; I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession. It is too little that thou
raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and convert only the dregs of Israel: Thou art
appointed a light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as to be the glory of thy
people Israel. Hark how the ancient Prophets rejoice in the Messiah; and in
soft and gentle words foretell his sweetness. He shall come down like rain upon
the mown grass, as showers that water the Earth. He shall feed his flock like a
tender Shepherd; and gently lead those that are with young: He shall gather his
lambs with his arms; and carry the weak in his bosom. The bruised Reed he
shall not break, nor quench the smoking flax. In his days shall the righteous
flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures. Then shall the
eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be made to hear
Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing.
Thus did thy holy Servants prophecy of thee: Thus did their Children sing thy
praises. Blessed be the Lord our God who alone does wonderful things; and
blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever. His dominion shall reach from sea
to sea; and from the river to the ends of the earth. They who dwell in the
Wilderness shall bow before him; and his enemies shall lick the dust. The Kings
of Tarshish and the Isles shall offer him Presents; the Kings of Sheba and Seba
shall bring their gifts: Yea all the Kings of the earth shall fall down before
him; and all nations shall do him service. For he shall deliver the poor when
he cries; the poor also and him that has no helper. He shall spare the poor
and needy, and preserve the souls of the poor. He shall redeem their soul from
deceit and violence; and precious shall their blood be in his sight. He shall
live, and to him shall be given of the Gold of Sheba; Prayer also shall be made
for bim continually, and daily shall he be praised.

MEDITATION III.
IT was not thy Joys alone, O dearest Lord! that thou inspir'dst thy holy
Prophets to foretell: But thou did reveal to them also thy Sorrows, and give
command to publish them with exact care. That they should not only speak thy
words, but the more to affect us, sometimes put on thy Person. O let our eyes
run down with water; and our hearts faint away with grief: While we remember
the Sufferings of our Lord, and listen to his sad complaints. I gave my back to
those that scourged me; and my cheeks to those that plucked off the hair. I
turned not away my face from shame and spitting. My enemies speak evil against
me; they say, When shall he die, and his name perish? Yea, my familiar Friend,
who did eat of my bread, has lifted up his heel against me. As for me, thou
uphold'st me, Lord, in my integrity, and set me before thy face for ever.
They compassed me about with words of hatred, and fought against me without a
cause. They have rewarded me evil for good, and with hatred they requited my
love. I am poured forth like water; I am taken away as a shadow when it
declineth. My heart within me is as melted wax; and all my bones are out of
joint. My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to the
roof of my mouth. I looked for some to take pity, but there was none. I looked
for Comforters, but I found not one. O my God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me! Thou have brought me into the dust of Death. Our Fathers cried to thee, and
were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. But I am a worm,
and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people. All they that see me
laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, and shake the head, saying, He
trusted on the Lord, that he would save him; let him deliver him seeing he
delighted in him. Be not thou far from me, O Lord, my strength! for trouble is
nigh, and there is none to help me. The Assembly of the wicked have enclosed
me; they pierced my hands and my feet. I may tell all my bones; they look and
stare upon me. They part my garments among them, and on my vesture they cast
lots. They gave me gall for my meat, and vinegar when I was thirsty to drink.
All these sad things, O Lord, thy Prophets foretold, to prepare our Faith for
such Truths. All these indeed they expressly foretold; but could there be found
such wretches as would act them? Yes, O my God, thine own selected Nation
conspired against thee, and after innumerable affronts most barbarously
murdered thee. This too, even this thy cruel Death, thou plainly foreshewed'st,
in saying, The Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall look on me whom they have
pierced, and mourn. But O you holy Prophets! what was the dismal cause, that
shed the blood of this spotless Lamb? He had (they quickly answer) done no
Iniquity, neither was guile found in his mouth. He was cut off from the land of
the living: For the transgression of the people was he stricken. He has poured
out his soul to death, and he was numbered with the Transgressors: He bore the
sins of many, and made intercession for the Transgressors. All we, like sheep,
have gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all. He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our sins: The
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Thou were for us, O Lord, obedient to the Death, even the cursed Death of the
Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted thee, and given thee a name above
every name. Live, glorious Jesu! and reign for ever, eternal King of Heaven and
Earth; may all thy Blessed above perpetually adore thee, and all thy Servants
here continually praise thee.

PETITIONS.
O Most blessed and adorable Jesu! who have graciously vindicated our Nature
from the Contempt and Tyranny of the Devil, by taking it into a personal Union
with thy Godhead: I earnestly beseech thee, deliver me in my person from the
dominion of that my great adversary; let not the Prince of Darkness rule in me
as a Child of Disobedience. Make me always a watchful Enemy against any thing
that may debase my Nature, which thou have so much honored: To hate all
sensual and devilish sins, abstain from all appearance of evil, and not
willingly enslave my self to any base Lusts. Make me, Lord, duly to adore thee
as God, who art Lord of Heaven and Earth; and teach me to imitate thee in the
excellent pattern thou have set us, of a holy, harmless, and beneficent Man.
Thou did take upon thee, O blessed Jesu! our innocent Infirmities, to bestow
on us thy perfections, to cure us of our guilty Infirmities: Heal me then, I
pray thee, O thou great Physician of Souls, and as thou were free from sin,
make me so: O cleanse me from all unrighteousness; Lord, if thou will thou
can make me clean. Let every step thou took'st in the working of our
Redemption, which thy Servants have recorded in thy Life and Actions to be
considered by us men, be often and always profitably considered by me: Let
each have some good influence upon my Heart and Life, and by thy powerful Grace
tend to the healing my sinfulness, and the fitting me for eternal Happiness.
Heal me, O Lord, and advance me in Holiness by the Mystery of thy holy
Incarnation; instruct me by the meanness of thy humble Birth. Heal and save me
by the precious blood of thy Circumcision: When thou took'st upon thee the
sweet and ever blessed name of Jesus, a name signifying thy kind design, which
was the saving thy people from their sins. Strengthen my Faith in thee, O Lord,
by thy wondrous Miracles; confirm my Hope, and inflame my Love by thy kind and
meritorious Passion. Help me by the joys of thy victorious Resurrection, and
the Triumph of thy glorious Ascension: So effectually rule me here, O Lord,
that I may always obey thy Grace, and do thou so favor me hereafter, that I
may enjoy thy Glory.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit:
As it was in the Beginning, is now, and
ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.
For the Evening.
MEDITATION I.
LEt us be willing to learn of the Blessed Jesus, and he will teach us his
ways; let us follow him, who is the light of the world: He that follows him
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of Life. The Law and its
Types were given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Lift up
thy Voice, O Jerusalem, and be not afraid; say to the Cities of Judah, Behold
your God: Behold the Lord your God is come with a strong hand; his Reward is
with him, and his Work before him: He is come to bring Redemption to all the
world, and Graciously offers it first to you his People. But ye denied the Holy
One, and the Just; and desired a Murderer to be granted to you. Hark with how
sweet and elegant a Compassion, thy kind Redeemer complains of thy ingratitude:
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto Thee: How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a
Hen gathers her brood under her wings; and ye would not: Hark with how
tender and charitable a reproof thy Lord unwillingly withdraws from thee his
favor. O had thou known in this thy day the things that belong to thy Peace!
but now they are hid from thine Eyes. Hearken once more, and if his kindness
cannot move thy Love; he will try how his anger can work upon thy Fear. Hearken
then, and tremble at those terrible threatenings with which thy Provident Lord
forewarns thee of thy danger. O Daughter of my People, gird thee with
Sackcloath; and wallow thy self in Ashes; make thee mourning as for an only
Son, most bitter Lamentation. For the days shall come upon thee when thy
Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee; they shall compass thee round and keep
thee in on every side. They shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy
Children in thee, and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another: Thy
People shall fall by the edge of the Sword; and shall be led away captive into
all Nations. They shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince;
they shall mourn without Sacrifice or Altar. And Jerusalem shall be trodden down
by the Gentiles; till the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled. But O, how
long, Lord, Holy and Merciful; how long! Will thou be angry with them for ever?
Have thou not said, he that scatters Israel will gather them again; and keep
them as a Shepherd does his flock? When thou will remember thy ancient
Promises, O Lord! and resolve to save the remnant of thy once loved Israel?
When thou will take away the veil from before their Eyes; that they may see thy
Truth and embrace it: Take away the hardness from their stony Hearts; that they
again may be thy People, and thou again their God: Then shall they lay aside
the Garment of Mourning, and put on the brightness which comes from Thee. They
shall celebrate the Jubilee of this their greatest deliverance; and every one
sing in that day of Joy: Come, let us ascend to the Mountain of our Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob, he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk
in his paths: As it was our wickedness to go astray from our God; so now
returned, let us seek him ten times more. Too late have we believed on thee, O
thou ancient Truth! too late have we loved thee, O thou the desire of all
Nations: We were misled by the error of our Forefathers; we were abused by our
own blind passions. The Kingdom we expected deserves not that Name; a short,
vain, and troublesome Prosperity: Thy Dominion, O Lord, is Holiness and Peace,
and of thy Kingdom there shall be no end. Such was the Kingdom thou promisedst
to David, Thy Throne will I establish for ever. Such is the Kingdom thou giv'st
to thy Servants; they shall live and reign with thee for ever. If we love, my
Soul, and seek first this eternal Kingdom, all other things shall be added to
it: This Happy Kingdom we ought to love and seek, though nothing else should be
added to it. Thou art, O Lord, the true light of the World, they who follow
Thee, walk not in darkness.

MEDITATION II.
RIse Holy Spouse of the Son of God; rise and put on thy robes of joy: Rise and
shine forth, for thy Glory is come; and the splendor of our Lord strikes
bright upon Thee. The Gentiles shall walk in the beams of thy light; and Kings
in the luster of thy Brightness: Lift up thine Eyes round about, and behold;
they gather all together and flock to thee: Thy Sons shall come from far; and
thy Daughters be nursed at thy side: Then thou shall see, and flow together; thy
Heart shall wonder, and be enlarged with gladness. Because the abundance of the
Sea shall be converted unto Thee; and the strength of the Gentiles come unto
thee. The Sons of Strangers shall build up thy Walls; and their Kings shall
Minister unto Thee. The Nation shall perish, that will not serve thee; and the
Kingdom be utterly wasted, that refuses thee. The Sons of thy afflicters shall
come bending before Thee, and all they that despised thee bow thimselves down
at the soles of thy feet. For our Lord shall be thy everlasting light; and the
days of thy Mourning shall end in Glory. To thee shall be given the Keys of
Heaven; and thou shall shut and open those Eternal Doors. Thy Foundation shall
be laid on a firm Rock, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against thee. A
way shall be made so direct and plain, that the Passengers though Fools shall
not err therein. And the Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of our Lord,
as the waters cover the Sea. All this we read, all this we firmly believe; for
the mouth of our Lord has spoken it. Heaven and Earth shall pass away; but not
a tittle of his word be disappointed for ever. Many of the Sacred Prophesies
are already fulfilled* abundantly sufficient to assure us of the rest. Already
a Virgin has brought forth a Son, and given him the Gracious Name of Jesus: The
Kings of the East have been led to him by a Star; and offered him Gold and
Frankincense, and Myrrh. His Holy Parents have presented him in the Temple; and
the devout Simeon was over-joyed to see him. In his tender infancy he fled into
Egypt, and out of Egypt again God brought forth his Son. He past his private
Life in Peace, and meekness; and taught a contradicting People in Patience and
Humility: He confirmed his Doctrine with innumerable Miracles; and defended the
Truth to the last drop of his Blood. He rose again victoriously from the Grave;
and ascended in Triumph to the Right Hand of his Father: And there, O Glorious
Jesu, will thou sit and Reign; till all thy Enemies become thy footstool. Nor
has thy Judgment slept, O dreadful Lord! but with a swift, and terrible
Vengeance crushed them into ruin: Jerusalem long since was made a heap of
stones; and the Children of thy Crucisiers run wandering over the World* But
while thou art thus severe in the Predictions of thy Justice, thou have not
forgot those of thy Mercy. Thousands of that ungrateful City have acknowledged
Thee their Lord: Thousands of that perverse Generation have submitted to thy
Scepter. Whole Nations of the Gentiles have embraced thy Faith; and remotest
Islands obeyed thy Law. Blessed for ever be thy Name, O Lord, and blessed be
the sweetness of thy Mercy; who have revealed thy self to those that knew Thee
not; and art found of those that sought thee not: Who often followest those
that fly from thee; and never refusest any that come to Thee. Thou still
exactly performest thy part; but we ungrateful wretches, how do we comply with
ours? Where is the profit thou may justly require to answer the ^are of thy
Providence over us? Thou have planted us, O Lord, in thine own Vineyard; and
fenced us about with thy Holy Discipline: Where is the Fruit we should always
be bearing; since good works are never out of season; Of our selves alas, we
are very dry and barren; and our Nature at best brings forth nothing but
leaves. In Thee, Lord, while we remain we live, but separated from Thee we are
certainly dead and fruitless. In thee, O Lord, is all our hope; and that thou will have Mercy on the work of thy hands: That thou will not curse these
fruitless branches, lest they wither away, and be cast into the fire: Nor
pronounce against us, that dreadful Sentence; Cut them down, why cumber they
the ground? But mercifully cut them off from their wild stock; and graft them
in thy self the true Vine. And then still water us with the dew of Heaven, and
bless our low shrubs with thy powerful influence: So shall Grapes grow on
Thorns, and Figs be gathered from those that were Thistles.

MEDITATION III.
Rejoice in our Lord, all you Children of Adam; rejoice in the bounty of his
free Grace: No longer now confined to a few choice Favorites, and the narrow
compass of a private Family; he has thrown down that partition Wall, and opened
the way of Life to all Mankind: That all may believe and love him here, and all
enjoy and be happy in him hereafter. But, O my God! what do we see, when we
look abroad into the wide World? We see the sad effects, but cannot see the
cause why so many Kingdoms lie miserably waste. We know, O Lord, thy ways are
in the deep Abyss, and humbly adore thy secret Councels: Only we cannot think
of their lamentable condition, without pitying their misery, and imploring thy
mercy. Some have not yet so much as heard of thee, and others who have heard,
have refused to entertain thee: Some who have once acknowledged thee, have
quite fallen away; others have corrupted thy Doctrines by mixing with them
their own Traditions. Many, even of those who rightly believe, abuse their holy
Faith by a wicked Life. Thus the far greatest part of wretched Mankind, whom
thy goodness created after thine own similitude, whom thou have shed thy
precious Blood to redeem, and to bring them to an everlasting Happiness; still
fail; alas! of their true end, and die in their sins, and everlastingly perish.
Where, O Lord, is thy Zeal, and the Bowels of thy Mercy? Where are thy promises
to thy beloved Son? Have thou not said, All Nations shall adore him, and all
the Tribes of the Earth be blessed in him? Have thou not said, thy self, O
glorious Jesu! If I be lifted up, I will draw all men after me? Have thou not
given thy Disciples express Commission to go into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature? When will thou again, O infinite Charity, choose out
burning and shining Lights, and send them forth over all the World; and send
them not alone, lest they faint by the way, or miscarry in the end. If thou will go with them thy self, and guide them by thy Grace, and crown their
Labors with thy powerful Blessing: Oh, then what mighty works would be done by
them! Then shall the humble Valleys be raised up, and the stubborn Mountains be
brought low. So shall the crooked paths be made direct, and the rough ways
smooth and plain: So shall the Glory of God be every where revealed, and all
Flesh shall joyfully see it together; the light of the knowledge of the Glory
of God in the bright face of Jesus Christ. Happy the times when this shall come
to pass, happy the eyes that shall see these times! Come glorious days, wherein
that Sun shall shine, which enlightens all at once, both the Hemisphears.

PETITIONS.
REmember, O God the Father, God of everlasting Truth, thy dear Engagements to
the Son: Remember, O God the Son! who art the Author and Finisher of our Faith,
thy gracious Promises to the World. Come holy Jesu, in a plentiful effusion of
thy Spirit upon us, and make that glorious day of Gospel light, which we
greatly desire, and thy Promises give us leave to expect: Come, and in the
largest sense maintain thy Title, and be effectively the Savior of the
universal World. Visit, O Lord, thine own House first, and thoroughly redress
what thou find amiss. Make our Lives holy, as thou have made our Faith, and
let all that name thy Name depart from Iniquity. O thou who art the Author of
Peace, and lover of Concord; who did so often repeat the Command, that thy
Disciples should love one another! Inspire, we beseech thee, thy whole Church
with a Spirit of Truth, Unity and Concord. Bring thou into the way of Truth all
such as have erred and are deceived. Convince us all, that the wrath and fury
of Man works not the Righteousness of God; and hasten the time when there
shall be no hurting nor destroying in all thy holy Mountain. Kindle, O Lord, in
the hearts of Kings, and the great Ones of the World, an heroic Spirit to
advance thy Glory: Inflame the hearts of Prelates, and the Priests of thy
Church, with a generous Zeal for the Conversion of Souls: Convince them all, it
is the End and Duty of their places, to endeavor the improving of Mankind in
virtue and Religion; and direct them to the use of such just and gentle means,
as are suitable to the End, and agreeable to thy Word. Send forth thy saving
light, O Lord, into the dark corners of the World, and bring them from the
power of Satan into the Kingdom of God. Remember thy great Love which thou have
shown, and the Mercies which seem yet promised to the Jews. Let every people
bow their Knees to thy great Name, Oh blessed Jesu! and all Tongues confess thy
Greatness: Make all to receive thy Truth in the love of it, and mix it with
Faith, that it may become an engrafted Word, able to save their Souls. These
things we crave for the honor of our Advocate and only Mediator, Jesus the
Christ.

Amen.
Hymn 30.
JEsu, whose Grace directs thy Priests
To keep alive by solemn Feasts
The memory of thy great Love:
O may we here so pass thy days,
That they at last our Souls may raise
To that long Feast with thee above.
To that long day of sacred Rest
Whereon our happy Souls shall feast
On thy celestial Joys, and thee:
Our Bodies too thy Love shall raise,
Thy self to see, and sing thy praise
In a blessed Immortality.
Jesu, behold three Kings from far
Led to thy Cradle by a Star,
Bring gifts to thee their greater King:
O guide us by thy Light, that we
May find thy loved Face, and to thee
Our selves may for thy Tribute bring.
O thou the pure and spotless Lamb,
Who to the Temple humbly came,
Appointed legal Rites to pay:
Make our proud Heart and stubborn Will
Thine, and thy Church's Law fulfill,
Whatever relucting Natures say.
Jesu, who on the fatal Wood
Pourd'st forth thy life's last drop of Blood
For us, nailed to a shameful Cross:
O! may we bless thy Love, and be
Ready, dear Lord, to bear for thee
All present grief, or pain, or loss.
Dear Lord, who by thine own Love slain,
By thine own Powe'r took'st Life again,
And from the Sepulcher did rise:
O may thy Death our Spir'its revive,
And at our Death a new Life give,
A lasting Life, that never dies.
Jesu, who to thy Heaven again
Returnd'st in Triumph there to reign,
Of Men and Angels mighty King;
O may our parting Souls take flight
Up to that Land of Joy and Light,
And there with Angels ever sing.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One undivided Deity;
All honor, blessing, power and praise
O may thy blessed Name shine bright,
Crowned with those Beams of beauteous light,
Its own eternal glorious Rays.
Amen.
FOR THE FEASTS OF THE HOLY GHOST.
For the Morning.
MEDITATION I.
LOrd, we are forced to admire the sweet and natural conduct with which thy
Providence governs the Children of men! Leading them on from one degree to
another, 'till thou have brought them up to their highest perfection: Thou
put them to learn in the School of Virtue, and disposest their Capacities
into several forms. In the first Ages, when the World was young, thou gave
them for their guide, the Book of Nature; there thy divine Assistance helped
them to read some few plain Lessons of their Duty to thee: They saw this
admirable frame of Creatures, and as far as these could argue, they could
conclude: Sure there is a God, the cause of all things, certainly there is a
Providence that disposes of all things: He must be very powerful that made so
vast a World, and exceeding wise that contrived such excellent works: He must
be goodness it self, that did all this for us, and we ungrateful Wretches, if
we will do nothing for him. Thus far some few could say, and very few could do,
with those slender Assistances which they then enjoyed. Afterward thou gave
thy People a written Rule, which trained them up in a set form of Discipline,
which grew and spread into a public Religion, and which was uniformly professed
by a whole Nation: They had some weak conceit of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
some imperfect means to bring them thither: But for those high supernatural
Mysteries that so gloriously exalt the Christian Faith; they all, alas, were
blind, or in the dark, and dangerously exposed to the effects of their own
Ignorance; wanting those clear Instructious to know their end, and those
powerful Motives to love their God: Yet this prepared them for the times of
Grace, to which thy Mercy, O Lord, reserved far greater favors; to which thou
have promised by thy Holy Prophets, an effusion of Blessings from thine own
full hands: I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts; I will be their God, and they shall be my People; I will pour out my
Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons, and your Daughters shall Prophecy: They
shall teach no more every one his Neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, for all
shall know me, from the least of them to the greatest, says the Lord.

Hymn 31.
COme, Holy Spirit, come and breath
Thy Spicy Odours, on the Face
Of our dull Regions here beneath;
And fill our Souls with thy sweet grace.
Come, and root out the poisonous weeds
Which overrun, and choke our Lives;
And in our hearts plant thine own seeds,
Whose quickening power our Spirit revives.
First Plant the humble Violet there,
Which dwells secure by dwelling low;
Then let the Lilly next appear,
And make us chaste, yet fruitful too.
But O! Plant all the Virtues, Lord,
And let the Metaphors alone,
Repeat once more that mighty Word,
Thou need'st but say, Let it be done.
We can, alas, nor be, nor grow,
Unless thy powerful Mercy please;
Thy hand must plant, and water too,
Thy hand alone must give the increase.
Do then, what thou alone can do,
Do what to thee so easy is;
Conduct us through this world of woe,
And place us safe in thine own Bliss.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever-living Sovereign Lord;
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved and Praised, Feared and Adored.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
LOok up, languishing World, look up and see how punctually thy faithful Lord
performs his word! When he had finished here that gracious work which his
goodness undertook for our Redemption; when he had told us what we ought to do,
and what to suffer for the Kingdom of Heaven; when he himself had done more
than he required of us, and was about to be offered up for us by his Death on
the Cross; and he had wrought our Salvation so far, that now his absence from
Earth was more expedient for us: He first prepares the hearts of his Disciples,
and comforts their Sorrows with these sweetest words; Children, I will not
leave you Orphans, but will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter; even the Spirit of Truth, who shall teach you all things, and bring
to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you: Peace I leave with you, my
Peace give I to you, let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid:
I ascend unto my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God; I go to
prepare a place for you, that where I am, there may also my faithful and
constant Followers be. Thus he gave them to expect that the Holy Spirit should
be sent into the World upon his departure from it: That this kind Spirit would
apply himself to Comfort them, by all those ways wherein comfort could be
given: That this Spirit should supply his Presence, not only for a time, but
should abide with them, never to remove to Heaven again, as he did: That he
should continue in the Christian Church a sufficient Guide, and a powerful
Comforter; to Teach them what is to be done, to Comfort them under Afflictions,
to fortify and support them in their spiritual Conflicts; to assist the
application and use of those excellent Instructions which he had left among
them; to take their part in the World, and convert their enemies into friends,
by convincing them of sin in not believing on Jesus, of the righteousness which
it appears they may have from him, because he is gone to the Father; and of
Judgment to come for sinful men, since the sinning Angels are judged. And after
their kind Master had said these and other comfortable things to them, he led
them forth together, and gave them his Blessing, and parting from them, went
away into Heaven: So loving Mothers when the weaning time is come, withdraw
from their beloved Children; but while they thus deprive their tender little
ones, of their most dear and all-supplying Presence, they still depute some
faithful Friend to assist them; for though they leave, they do not intend to
forsake them. Such, and far greater was the care of our God, as his love is far
greater than that of tenderest Mothers to their Infants: He saw it necessary
for so mysterious a Faith to be shown in a clear and supernatural light to the
first Believers, that they might confidently recommend to others, what they
knew with infallible certainty themselves: He saw it necessary for so perverse
a World, to infuse into its first Converters a fullness of Charity, that with
an ardent Zeal they might instruct their Hearers, and with a patient courage
overcome their opposers: He saw it necessary for such varieties of Nations, to
furnish the Preachers with variety of Languages, that they might teach every
one in their native Speech, and understand their doubts, and satisfy their
objections.

MEDITATION III.
WHEN the appointed time was come, as all the works of God go forth in their
fittest season; the Disciples having tarried at Jerusalem, according to
direction, to be endued with power from on high; when they were gathered
together into one place, and with one accord, and so were excellently disposed
for the Visits of Heaven; when they had long continued in ardent Prayer, and
wrought up their Affections to the utmost point of desire, suddenly there was a
sound from Heaven, from whence every good and perfect gift descends; a vehement
Wind filled the whole house, for the Grace of God is strong and liberal:
Behold, on the Head of each sat a Tongue as of fire, the properest means to
enable them for the Conversion of the World: While they were all illuminated
with a pure light, and all enflamed with a fervent heat, and to communicate
both to every Nation, they were all endued with the gift of Languages. Thus
were the words of the Prophets fulfilled, and the Promises of our Savior
performed, and the Faith of the Christian Church was thus miraculously begun:
Thus were the Messengers of everlasting Peace prepared, they were miraculously
baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, and were perfectly qualified for
their great Commission; to Preach to every Creature this happy Gospel, He that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved: When our Lord ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men: He did not affright the world
again with the Thunders and Lightnings of Mount Sinai, but gently infused the
pleasant fire of divine Love into the hearts of his Disciples: How should we
bless the Lord our God, who are Members of the Christian Church, to which at
this time, instead of the Law of Moses, was given the grace of Christ; for the
Letter, the Spirit; for Shadows, Truth; and for the Spirit of Fear, the Spirit
of Adoption. Blessed be thou, O Eternal Father! God of abundant and infinite
goodness, for this unspeakable kindness of sending thy Spirit into our
miserable and wicked World; a Spirit so suited to our necessities, and able to
bring many of us to glory: This, Lord, was thy free gift with respect to us
unworthy Creatures; Mankind did not, could not deserve it of thee, it ought
therefore to be the more mavelous in our eyes. And we may justly wonder, not
only at thy Bounty, but at thy Patience too herein; for Mankind had highly
forfeited this Mercy, and it was directly contrary to his Deserts: Thou did
send thy Spirit for our good and advantage, after that the ungrateful World had
abused and put to Death thy Son. Blessed be thou, O Dear Redeemer! whose Blood
and Death purchased for us this incomparable gift, and whose powerful
Intercession in Heaven obtained it: Blessed be thy merciful Providence, O Jesu,
who when thou had finished thy great work on Earth, did ascend into Heaven,
to draw our minds even thither after thee: Blessed be thy Infinite Goodness,
who when thou had taught us the words of Eternal Life, sentest down the Holy
Ghost to make us observe them, and raise up our Affections to that glorious
Kingdom whither thou art gone before us; that where Thou our happiness art, our
hearts, as they should, may also be. Blessing and Praise be to the Holy Spirit
himself, who though proceeding from the Father and the Son, is equal in nature
and glory; whose free goodness it was to give himself to our forlorn World: He
is both the Giver and the Gift, from the great Love wherewith he loved us. Thus
are we beholden to the ever blessed Trinity, not only for excellent and
supernatural Graces, but also for his Presence, who is the cause and Author of
all Grace: And they to whom this Spirit is given, have not only the Streams,
but the Fountain of living Waters; in whom therefore they must needs be
springing up, even unto Eternal Life.

PETITIONS.
O Merciful Lord, who have loved us from the beginning; be graciously pleased
to love us unto the end: Pity the unhappy state of fallen Mankind, which
neither Nature, nor Law could bring to any perfection. Send out thy Spirit, O
Lord, and we shall be created again unto good Works; and from our nothing of
sin be raised to a Life of Holiness: O send out thy Spirit, and renew the face
of the Earth, and then our weeds and thorns shall be turned into a Paradise. O
cure our World in thy due time of all those distempers in the spirits of men,
that make us miserable, confused and unquiet: Deliver us from the spirit of
Profaneness and Infidelity; from the spirit of Error, Heresy and Schism:
Deliver us from the spirit of Pride and Avarice, from the spirit of Anger,
Sloth and Envy: Deliver us from the spirit of Drunkenness and Gluttony; from
the spirit of Lust, and Wantonness, and Impurity: Deliver us, O God, from every
evil spirit, and vouchsafe to give us the Graces of thy good Spirit; that Order
and Peace may flourish in the World, and Mankind may not hate, nor fear, nor
persecute one another. O may the Christian Church, which thou have wonderfully
begun, and with many wonders yet continued in the World; may it go on still to
the end of time; and make it, Lord, to increase and multiply, till every Nation
speak in their own language the wonderful Works of God. O blessed Spirit! the
Church thou have been pleased to establish, vouchsafe always to govern:
Always keep it free from Usurpation and Tyranny in the Governors, and from
Contention, Unruliness and spiritual Pride in those that should be governed:
That it may always be in a fit posture to receive the Influences of thy Grace,
and may with those heavenly dews be as a fruitful Field. Which things we humbly
implore, through the Merits of Jesus Christ.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.
For the Evening.
MEDITATION I.
COme, my Soul, and adore our God that sanctifies us; implore his Grace to make
thee able, and then adore him: Him who from the Father and the Son eternally
proceeds, and with the Father and the Son must be equally worshipped and
glorified. In thy Name, O Lord, together with that of the Father and the Son,
we are by divine appointment Baptized, and so directed to believe in thee: Thou
art therefore a distinct Person in that Adorable Trinity which is the one
eternal God: Thou do make the for the Saints with the Father; and therefore
art not only the power of the Father. Thy coming, O Lord, into this World, did
depend upon the departure of the Son; therefore I believe thou art distinct
from the Son. I believe, O Lord, thou wast manifestly distinguished from the
Father and the Son, when at the Baptism of our Savior thou did descend upon
him in the likeness of a Dove; when at the same time there was a voice from the
Father, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. Thou art, O
Lord, not a created Person, but with the Father and Son art God blessed for
evermore. By thee was our Savior conceived in the Womb of a Virgin, and
therefore was her Birth called the Son of God. Thy dwelling in one of us
converts a poor Creature into a Sacred Temple; therefore we ought to adore thee
as God: And I humbly adore thee as the most high, eternal God; as of the same
Nature, Attributes and Operations with the Father and the Son. I adore thee, as
having inseparable from thy Nature an infinite essential and original Holiness
as God. And it is peculiarly and especially thy Undertaking or Office to make
us poor sinners holy; therefore I adore thee under the glorious Title of Holy
Spirit. It was thou, O Lord, that did speak to the World by all the holy
Prophets that have been since the Beginning. And thus it came to pass, that all
the holy Scripture was given to us by the inspiration of God. Thou art the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, by an internal illumination of our Minds:
Thereby thou inclinest us to the obedience of Faith; and to give our assent to
those Divine Truths, which our carnal, corrupted natures would reject as
foolishness. By thee it is, that we are renewed in all the faculties of our
Souls, and our Affections and Will are made conformed unto the will of God.
Thou do infuse into us the breath of Life, and bring us forth in our second
Birth; in which birth we become the Children of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom
of Heaven. By thee are all sincere Christians baptized into one Body, even the
Mystical Body of Christ; and it is thy Testimony alone that comfortably assures
to any of them their Adoption. In order to these great things, it is thy kind
office to sanctify and set apart Persons for the Duty of the Sacred Ministry:
By whose Ministry thou do perfect the Saints, and build up the Body of Christ
to the end of the World.

MEDITATION II.
BLessed for ever be thy Name, O Holy Spirit, and blessed be the bounty of thy
Goodness. When the Eternal Father by creating the World had declared himself,
and his Almighty Power: When the Uncreated Word by redeeming Mankind had
revealed himself and his infinite Wisdom: When now there remained but one seal
more to be opened of the Book of Divine Mysteries: Behold a strange
condescendence to our weak nature, the Invisible Spirit Visibly appears: He
descends from Heaven in the shape of a Dove, and gently alights upon the Prince
of Peace. Again he descends in the likeness of Fire, and miraculously sits on
the Heads of his Disciples. Mingling thus together in one blessed compound those
chief ingredients of excellent virtue: Mildness to allay the heat of Zeal, and
Zeal to quicken the indifferency of Mildness: Innocence to adorn the light of
Knowledge; and Knowledge to direct the Simplicity of Innocence. O Blessed
adorable Teacher! Who can instruct like the Spirit of God? He needs no years to
finish his course, but with a swift and efficacious touch consummates all
things. He entered the Soul of a young delighter in Music, and presently
sanctified him into a composer of Psalms: He took a poor Shepherd from
following the Flock, and immediately raised him to the degree of a Prophet. He
by one Lesson perfected the Disciples, and polisht rude Fishermen into eloquent
Preachers: He touched the Heart of a persecuting Pharisee, and instantly changed
him into a Glorious Apostle. There is none, O Lord, can resist thy efficacious
Grace; but it accomplishes whatsoever thou intendest: And the most Stubborn
refusers thou make to become a willing People in the day of thy Power. All
this thou have done, O Infinite Goodness, and all the good that we do, is
wrought by thee. By thee is every condition sanctified to us in this mutable
World; and we are enabled through all to walk steadily toward our Eternal
Rest. By Thee our Souls are comforted on our beds of Sickness; and thou alone
fittest us for the Mansions of Glory. If in the Church there be any Wisdom or
Knowledge; if any real Sanctity, or decent Order; if any Faith of the Mysteries
of Religion, if any Hope of Everlasting Salvation: If any Love of God, as our
Sovereign bliss; if any mutual Charity of one toward another: If any Miracles
have been wrought to convert unbelievers, and to confirm the weak in Faith
against the violence of Persecution: All these things flow from thy free Grace,
O thou boundless Ocean of Eternal Mercies: All flows from thee, and all our
little streams ought to return in tribute to thy Bounty. Blessed be thy Name, O
Holy Spirit of God, who dividest thy Gifts to every one as thou please, and
workest all in all.

MEDITATION III.
STill, my Soul, continue thy Meditations on this adorable Person, and humbly
present thy further acknowledgments and praises, to him who is the Eternal Love
of the Father and the Son, and the Glorious Finisher of the Sacred Mystery: To
him the quickening Spirit of regenerate Souls; in whom they live, and move, and
have their Being: To him the sovereign Balsom of our wounds; and only comfort
of all our Sorrows: To him our refuge in this place of Banishment, and faithful
guide in this wandering Pilgrimage: To him the Sacred pledge of our free
adoption, and ensuring Seal of our Eternal Salvation. What do we say of Thee, O
Adorable Spirit of God! What do we say, when we utter such words as these? We
say what we can in our low capacity; but, alas, how short of thy unspeakable
excellencies! O that we had the tongues of Glorified Saints, and of Angels! O
that we had thine own Miraculous Tongues! Those which sat flaming on the Heads
of the Apostles, and made them speak thy wonders in every language: Still all
our praises would be poor and narrow, still infinitely less than thy infinite
perfections. But if we cannot speak as our God deserves, shall we therefore
hold our Peace, which God forbids? Woe be to them, O Lord, who are silent of
thee, and spend the breath thou give them on any but thy self. When we have
tried our best endeavors, and taken a measure of our own defects; when our own
Hearts can conceive no more, and our tongues have expressed their utmost; we will
then call upon all others to praise thee, who have been beholden to thy
infinite Bounty; and say: Praise the Eternal Spirit, O all you Quires of
rejoicing Angels, for his early Grace confirmed you in Glory: Praise him ye
Reverend Patriarchs, whose ways he governed, and by particular Providence led
you to felicity. Praise him, ye Ancient Prophets, whose Souls he inspired to
teach his chosen People the Mind of Heaven. Praise him, you glorious company of
the Apostles, whose Persons he empowered to be Ambassadors of Peace between
Heaven and Earth. Praise him, you the Noble Army of generous Martyrs, whose
Spirits he encouraged, and gave you the Victory over the terrors of Death.
Praise him, ye Blessed Confessors, whose lives he sanctified; and gave you
Victory over the World and your selves. Praise him ye Holy Virgins, whose Souls
he espoused, and consecrated your chaste Bodies into Temples for himself. Praise
him, O thou the Blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord, by whom the Worlds Redeemer
was conceived in thy Womb: Praise him, all you the faithful departed this Life,
whose hope he sustains of a Glorious Resurrection of your Bodies. Praise him,
all ye that make up the Holy Church throughout all the World; bless him, and
magnify him for ever. Praise him in the Power, and freedom of his Grace;
praise him for the Eternity, and greatness of his Glory. Praise him, O my Soul,
for his Mercies to thee; Praise him for his goodness to all the World. Praise
him on the choicest Instrument, that of the Heart. Praise him in the fittest
Place, the public assemby of his Saints.

PETITIONS.
O Kindle in my Heart, holy Lord, thy divine fire, that I may offer to thee the
hallowed incense of Praise. O thou who openest the mouths of the Dumb, and
make the Tongues of Children eloquent, inspire thy devoted Servant, if not
with expressions suitable to thy self, at least with such as are profitable to
me: Such as may instruct me what I ought to do; and such as may move me to do
what I say. Come holy Spirit, who art the free dispenser of all Grace, visit my
poor Heart, and replenish it with thy Sacred inspirations. Refuse not, O Lord,
to hear me now I call upon Thee, and make me still hear Thee when thou call
upon me; do thou by thy mighty operations in my Soul establish such an interest
in me, as may always dispose me to so advantageous a duty. Illuminate my
understanding, inflame my affections, and sanctify all the powers of my Soul
and Body; that I may know, love, and constantly do the things that belong to my
Everlasting Peace. Till my understanding with the Knowledge of such Truths as
may fix it on thee the Eternal Verity. Inure my will to embrace such objects,
as may unite them to Thee, the Sovereign goodness. O suffer me not obstinately
to persist in any known wickedness; nor maliciously to impugn any know Truth:
Grant I may never be deceived by any false spirit, nor be overcome by the
vicious suggestions of Flesh and Blood. In all my doubts do thou direct me into
the way of thy Truth; in all my weakness grant me the assistance of thy Grace.
Help me devoutly and most thankfully to commemorate thy Descent to this World
in the likeness of fiery Tongues, which sat on each head of thy Disciples, and
fitted them to preach the Gospel to every Nation. And let it so increase the
holy fervor of my Heart, that my Life may attest by all fruits of Grace the
same Spirit's still abiding with me: To the Glory of thee, O God the Holy
Spirit, who with the Father and the Son live and reignest ever one God, world
without end.

Amen.
Hymn 32.
COme mild, and Holy Dove,
Descend into our Breast;
Do thou in us, make us in thee
For ever dwell, and rest.
Come, and spread over our heads
Thy soft, all-cherishing wing,
That in its shade we safe may sit,
And to Thee Praises sing.
To thee who giv'st us Life,
Our better Life of Grace;
Who giv'st us Breath, and Strength, and Speed
To run and win our Race.
If by the way we faint,
Thou reachest forth thy hand;
If our own weakness makes us fall,
Thou make our weakness stand.
When we are sliding back,
Thou do our danger stop;
When we again, alas, are fallen,
Again thou take us up:
Else there we still must lie,
And still sink lower down;
Our hope to rise is all from thee,
Our ruin's all our own.
O my Ungrateful Soul!
What shall our dullness do
For him that does all this for us,
Only our Love to woo?
We Will Love thee then, Dear Lord,
But thou must give that Love;
We Will humbly beg it of thy grace,
But thou our Prayers must move.
O hear thine own self speak,
For thou in us do Pray;
Thou can as quickly grant as ask,
Thy grace knows no delay.
Glory to Thee, O Lord,
One Coeternal Three;
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One equal Glory be.
Amen.
FOR THE FEASTS OF THE SAINTS.
For the Morning.
MEDITATION I.
TEll me, you eager Lovers of this present World, what is it you aim at in all
your pretenses? You weary your Bodies with restless labor, and afflict your
Minds with perpetual care; day and night you are still perplexed, still busily
plotting to compass your ends: Tell me what are those ends you so long have
sought, and I will tell you what you soon will find; while they are many, they
but distract your thoughts, and often engage them to quarrel among themselves:
One end, and one alone is the way to true and lasting Peace, and on that one
must all the rest depend. It is true, perhaps you will say, and by that rule we
guide our Lives, whatever we undertake, our ultimate design is only to be
happy; It is to be happy that we strive to be great, and enrich our selves by
defrauding others: It is to be happy that we run after Pleasures, and covet to
have in every thing our own proud will: But you, alas, mistake your Happiness,
and foolishly seek it where it is not to be found. As silly Children think to
catch the Sun, when they see it setting at so near a distance, they travail on
and tire themselves in vain, for the thing they seek is in another World: Just
so we foolish Mortals commonly judge, and are just so deceived, when we think
to meet with Heaven upon Earth. This World, alas! has now no Paradise, but all
its Fruits are mixed with Weeds and Thorns; all dangerously mixed with occasions
of sin, all sprinkled over with the bitterness of sorrow: What did we ever
passionately love, but still in the end it made us repent? Nay, the best end
was heartily to repent, and learn by our falling to tread more sure. It is not
then here that we must seek our happiness, and yet it is happiness that we all
must seek. Happy are thy Saints, O Lord, who wisely chose their end, and
constantly pursued the means to attain it. Come, let us adore the King of
Saints.

Hymn 33.
AWake, my Soul, chase from thine eyes
This drowsy sloth, and quickly rise,
Get up, and to thy work apace:
No less than Kingdoms are prepared,
And endless bliss for their reward,
Who finish well this short Life's race.
It Is not so poor a thing to be
Servants to Heaven, Dear Lord, and thee,
As this mistaken World believes:
Not even here, where often the wise
Are most exposed to Injuries,
And Virtue, poor and friendless, grieves.
Sometimes thy hand lets gently fall
A little drop, that sweetens all
The present bitter of our Cup:
O what hereafter shall we be,
When we shall have whole draughts of thee
Filled to the brim, and drink them up?
Say, happy Souls, whose thirst now meets
The fresh and living stream of sweets,
Which ever spring from that blessed throne;
Did you not find this true even here?
Do you not find it truer there,
Now Heave'ns strong Joys are all your own?
Oh yes, the sweets we taste exceed
All we can say, or you can read;
They satisfy, and never cloy:
On Earth our Cup was sweet, but mixed;
Here all is pure, refined and fixed,
All highest Quintessence of Joy.
Here, in Heave'ns splendid Court, have we
Our blessed abode, and ever see
The kind and radiant face of Love;
Whose Beams make us with Glory shine,
Our glad hearts warm with Love divine,
And these our Tongues with Praises move.
Hear'st thou, my Soul, what glorious things
The Church of Heave'n in triumph sings
Of their Seraphick life above?
Cheer thy saint hopes, and bid them live;
All these thy God to thee will give,
If thou embrace his bounteous Love.
Great God of rich Rewards, who thus
Have crowned thy Saints, and wilt crown us;
As we do both to thee belong,
O may we both together sing
Eternal praise to thee our King,
In one Eternal thankful Song.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
IF thus our Nature tends to Happiness, there is sure some Happiness to content
our Nature. Sure the All-wise Creator has provided means to satisfy the
Appetites which himself has made. Doubt not, my Soul, the Bounty of thy Lord,
but turn all thy fear on thine unworthiness; and yet correct that fear again,
that it do not degenerate into despair, by consisidering the worthiness of our
kind Mediator. Look up then, and see a rich delicious Land, that flows with
sweeter Streams than Milk and Honey: Look up, and see a glorious City,
incomparably braver than the splendid Courts of Kings. Behold the blessed
Angels shining on their Thrones, and all the holy Saints triumphing with their
Hymns: Great is the Clemency of our gracious Sovereign, to pardon the offenses
of repenting Sinners: Great is the bounty of our glorious Lord, to Crown with
Rewards his faithful Servants. Thousands of Saints attend in his presence, and
Millions of Angels wait on his Throne, all beauteously ranged in perfect order,
all joyfully singing the praises of their Creator. But look up yet higher, O my
Soul, in thy Contemplations, and see the glorified Humanity of thy dear
Redeemer, that blessed Jesus who died for us on the Cross, and now invites us
to partake his Crown: See, and rejoice in those eternal honors which Heaven
and Earth justly pay to their King. Look up once more, and, if thou could,
look infinitely higher, and humbly admire the unconceivable Mystery: Wonder
now, and adore the Sovereign Deity, essentially full of his own blessed Light;
full, and overflowing into all his Creatures, which shine but as little Beams
derived from him. Bow low thy Head and Knees to him before whom the Seraphims
cover their Faces: Bow low a humble Heart to him, before whom all the happy
Saints cast down their Crowns. When thou have seen all this, my Soul, and
staid, and dwelt a while among these pleasing wonders; then turn thine Eye down
toward this Earth again, and see the petty things that are wont to entertain
our minds: What is a name of Honor, and a momentary pleasure, compared to the
Bliss of an eternal Paradise? What is a bag of Money, or a fair Estate, if
counterballanc'd with the Treasures of Heaven? How narrow there do our greatest
Kingdoms seem! how small a Circle the whole Globe of Earth! Cities and Towns
appear like little Hills, and the busy World but as a Swarm of Ants running up
and down, and justling one another, and making all this stir for a few grains
of Corn. O Heaven! let me again lift up my Eyes to thee, and take a fuller view
of that glorious Prospect: There I will stand, and fix my steady sight, till I
have looked my self into this firm judgment: All that the most prosperous
fortune can here possess, or even the largest Fancy possibly imagine; all is an
idle Dream to those real Joys, an absolute Nothing to that solid Felicity. Oh
how glorious is the Kingdom of Heaven, where our Lord reigns in the midst of
his Saints!

MEDITATION III.
IT is true; there is, I see, a glorious State prepared above for the Spirits
of just men made perfect: But how shall we poor dust and ashes, and laden too
with the burden of our sins! how shall we hope to ascend those higher Regions,
or obtain a portion in that holy Land? Fear not, my Soul, but send up thy Sighs
and Prayers to the gracious King of Saints: Seek to him, and he will guide thee
by his Counsel, till he has brought thee also safe to his Glory. If thou
would know what makes the bright Angels so happy; his Word will tell thee,
that they readily obey their Creator: If thou would know what raised the
blessed Saints to that high Felicity which they now enjoy; it will be told
thee, They faithfully loved their Redeemer, and followed the Dictates of Love
till it brought them thither. If thou would know what bred in those happy
Creatures the excellent Virtues that are thus rewarded; if thou could hear
their acknowledgements, thou would find them often repeating such as these:
Blessed for ever be the Grace of our God, which alone has wrought all our works
in us: Blessed for ever be the Bounty of our Lord; which first freely gave to
us, and then as bounteously Crowned those his own gifts. O you blessed Saints,
who are now arrived at the quiet Mansions of eternal Joy: Rejoice ye in the
King of Saints, eternally rejoice; and sing for ever the wondrous mercies of
our Lord: His blessed hand has wiped away all tears from your eyes, and now you
no more shall weep, you shall no more complain: Now the sad Evening of sorrow
is over with you, and the day of eternal joy is come: Now you no longer shall
sigh to be delivered out of this dark and tedious Prison, but shall dwell for
ever in that glorious Light; the light which ever springs from the face of God.
And fear thou not, my Soul, though now thou dwell below, and art yet sighing
under the weight of Flesh and Blood; fear not to ascend at last to this place
of joy, and take thy happy seat among those joyful Quires; since they once
lived in this same Vale of Tears, and were set to strive with the same unruly
passions. He that made them overcome, can as easily strengthen thee; he that
has crowned their victories, will as surely glorify thine: Fear not; for the
way is smoother than the Adversary of thy Soul would make thee believe; and the
time of thy Warfare perhaps is shorter, than even thou thy self art disposed to
desire. Take the direction of thy Savior's Word, and the direction of the
Saints Example, to know and love but thine own true Interest; which sure can be
thought no very hard task: And do this but whilst you live, which you seldom
think too long; and this being well done, you have no more to do, but to rise
and sing, and rejoice with them.

PETITIONS.
TO thee, O Gracious King of Saints, and to thy mild Throne, we direct our Eyes
and Prayers: To thee whose Love (we know) stands ready to meet our wishes, will
we humbly represent our fears and wants; and both, alas! O Lord, will be many
while we remain below in this miserable World: Often therefore must we make our
Addresses to thee, till thy Goodness and Mercy shall take us to thy self: And
when we come to possess thee in Heaven, we shall want nothing, and dwelling so
near thee we shall fear nothing. But pity us now, O Lord, who are lanched on a
tempestuous Sea, and are so variously tossed with our passions and lusts, that
we cannot steer as we should any certain course: Pity us who are so blinded by
the mists of Ignorance, that we know not to what Port we should direct our
course to find a harbor of rest. Shine thou upon us, O Lord, with thy
beauteous Light, and convince us thoroughly, that there is a better World than
this, a happier People than any that we know here; that we may at length begin
our course thitherward, and be all the while preparing our selves for that
blessed Company. Behold us, O Lord, struggling in this Sea of Storms, and guide
us safely through all our dangers. Save us, O thou whose power the winds and
the Sea obey; save us, O merciful Lord, or else we perish: Save us who call on
theee in our distresses; save us for whom thy immortal Self were pleased to
die, and graciously receive us into thine own blessed arms; for thou art, O Lord,
the Haven of our Repose; bring us to thy self, and our Souls shall be safe:
Deliver us from that sad and deplorable end which thy Justice has prepared for
the wicked: Deliver us from those vain, deceitful courses, in which many make
an eternal shipwreck of their Souls. Bless us, O Lord, with a happy Death, that
our Souls may depart in peace, and go up to dwell among thy Saints and Angels:
Bless us with a holy Life, and then our Death cannot but be happy. Grant these
things, O Lord, for the sake* of our Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the Beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.
Amen.
For the Evening.
MEDITATION I.
LOrd, what a lukewarm Life is this of ours, compared to the zeal and fervor
of some of thy primitive Saints! Often and long many of them fasted to chastize
their Bodies, and bring them under the command of Reason: On all their senses
they set a constant guard, to let nothing in that might disturb their peace.
Part of the night they would watch, when most of the day they had labored; and
both night and day continually prayed. All things about them went on in perfect
measure, just fit for their pious purpose, and no more: Their Clothes, their
Food, their Sleep, their Recreation; all taught to serve the improvement of
their mind; their mind, the only aim of all their cares, the only scope of all
their severities; that disengaged from the embroilments of this World, they
might quietly consider the Felicities of the other: That they might daily grow
more enamored of their Lord, and more enflamed with his divine perfections;
till at last, dissolved in those holy fires, they melted away with longings to
enjoy him: Sharp to themselves they were, but sweet to others; obliging all the
World with their candid Charity: Whatever any wanted they gladly supplied, and
gave away at once, sometimes both fruit and tree: They studied not how to raise
their Families here, but to entail on their Posterity the example of their
Virtues. It was not their Plot to leave a fair Estate behind them, but to
benefit the World by their useful Labors: To instruct the ignorant, and
confirm the weak; to comfort the sorrowful, and protect the helpless innocent:
This was their constant work, this their beloved design; to promote with their
utmost strength the happiness of all. Lord! what a little it is our frowardness
endures, compared to the heroic patience of some former Saints! when they were
reviled, they reviled not again; when spitefully scorned, they meekly held
their peace; when they were cursed, they blessed their Enemies; when barbarously
oppressed, they prayed for their Persecutors: They served their Lord in hunger
and thirst, and all the incommodities of an impoverished life: Often they were
threatened, and they stood the danger; often enticed, and they repelled the
flattery: Prisons and Chains they willingly accepted, Tortures and Racks they
cheerfully embraced; even Death it self they undauntedly encountered, Death
furiously armed with every shape of Terror: All this they endured, and a great
deal more, of which unmindfull we keep no remembrance: All this they endured,
and under all rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer for Jesus. O
generous Souls, you conquered Heaven it self, and entered by force those
everlasting Gates! You would not sit down in the lowest Forms, but still
pressed on to new degrees of perfection! and while you carefully wrought out
your own Salvation, you endeavored the Salvation of others. Excellent Copies
of our great Masters Original Life, which he drew himself in Holiness, and
Righteousness, and Goodness. My Soul, do thou endeavor also to be a follower
of Christ, as thou have the Saints for an example.

MEDITATION II.
LIttle, we know, O Lord, is the good we do; little the ill we suffer with
patience: But what, alas! should we have done or suffered, had not thy Grace
assisted us, and given us such excellent examples; thy provident hand has helped
us, by hanging out those Lamps bright as Stars to shine before us: But more by
thine own appearing, O Sun of Righteousness, to light and warm us with thy
cherishing beams. Our Faith had been dark, our Charity cold; and the flower of
our hope had languisht away. Now we are sure the way to Heaven is passable,
since it has been trod by so many Passengers. And all of them men clothed in
flesh and blood like us; and weakened with the same imperfect nature: Now we are
sure the Promises of God are true; confirmed by as many Witnesses as there are
Saints in Paradise: Who by their own experience are fully convinced, and with
joy acknowledge that they are so. And by ravishing sweets they perpetually
taste, are perpetually excited to adore and sing, Faithful is our Lord in all
his words, and overflowingly bounteous in all his Gifts: While we lived, we
received the hundred fold; and now we are translated to an infinity of Bliss.
What he freely promised he has fully performed; what he engaged to give us, he
has abundantly paid: He told us of treasures, and golden crowns; but the joys
we find are incomparably greater; Joys of a far more high and noble race;
which neither we can express, nor you below conceive. It Is enough for us that
we feel them in our Breast; it is enough for you as yet that ye see them in your
Faith. Even our lesser happinesses infinitely surpass the greatest pleasures of
your dull world. O how agreeable is the Company we enjoy! how delightful the
meeting of our old acquaintance! with whom we have prayed, and wept and
suffered; with whom we spoke of this day, and of this place: With whom we now
can safely sing, free from the scorn and malice of our Enemies; Blessed for
ever be the goodness of our God, that has brought us hither to his own Palace.
This is not like our Cottages of clay; nor the loathsome Prisons where we lay in
Fetters. This cheerful melody is not like our old complaints; nor the
threatening words of our Stern Oppressors. The Scene is changed, and, for our
world of Miseries, behold we enjoy a Paradise of endless felicities. Here we
shall live, and ever live; here we shall praise our God, and ever praise him.
Thus sings the Church triumphant, and thus shall we; if we practice diligently
the Lessons they have taught us. If we inure our selves to the same blessed notes
on Earth, and live in tune with our holy Songs: We shall hereafter be admitted
to their Quires, and sing as long, and as loud as they.

MEDITATION III.
TAke courage now, my Soul, and chase away thy Doubts, far more are with us
than against us. The Almighty God is on our side, and all his hosts of
ministering Spirits. Our great Creator looks on to excite us; our gracious
Redeemer comes down to instruct us: The Blessed Spirit is within us, to confirm
our Hearts; and the whole Trinity ready to crown our Victories: Whom shall we
then fear, when we are thus safely guarded? who can resist so invincible a
strength? None but our own corrupted nature dare contend, and the unlucky
accidents that conspire with it against us; Sometimes surprising our unwary
negligence; sometimes defeating even our strongest resolves. Not that they can
compel our wills, unless we yield; or make the least wound without our
consent. Much less prevail against the power of Heaven; and frustrate the
purpose of the Almighty Wisdom: Whose Mercy has used more arts to save us, than
the craft of Vice can invent to destroy us. Such a Redemption so miraculously
wrought; such holy Sacraments, so often repeated: Such glorious promises so
faithfully assured; and which revives our hope, so easily attained. O infinite
goodness, how generous is thy Love! how liberally extended over all the World!
Thou invites;t little Children to come to thee, and the lame, and the blind to
sit down at thy Feast. None are shut out of Heaven, but such as will not go in;
none made unhappy, but those who care not to be otherwise. Cheer then thy self,
my Heart, and let no fears molest thee; nor even Death it self abate thy
courage. Death is a passage that was always short, and our Saviors death has
made it safe to them that follow him in their lives: By the practice of the
Saints it is grown familiar; and by their happy success become desirable. Lose
not then thy hope in so glorious an enterprise; where Eternity is at stake, and
Heaven is the reward. That Heaven for which the Ancient Hermits sought devout
retirement in the Deserts: That Heaven for which the holy Confessors spent all
their time; and innumerable Martyrs laid down their dearest lives: That Heaven,
where Millions of Angels continually sing; and all the blessed make one Quire:
That Heaven where the adored Jesus eternally Reigns; and the Immortal Deity
shines bright for ever: That very Heaven is promised to thee, my Soul; that
blessed Eternity thou art commanded to hope for. Raise now thy head, and see
those beauteous Prospects, that ravish the Hearts of all their beholders.
Yonder, far above the Stars is thy Saviors Kingdom; yonder we must dwell when
we leave this Earth. Yonder must our Souls remove to rest; when the stroke of
Death shall divide them from their Bodies: And when the Almighty Power shall
join them again, yonder must we live with our God for ever.

PETITIONS.
O Most Gracious and Bountiful King of Saints! It was by thy sufficient grace
afforded to them, that any of thy Saints were able to do much good, and to
suffer much evil for thy sake: They acknowledged it was not they that did any
good, but it was Christ that lived in them. O Lord! to whom then should we go
but unto thee, for assistance to follow those that have been Followers of Thee:
To thee, O Lord, we must address our selves, and to Thee alone; for thou alone
art the Dispenser of that Grace we need: And we thank thee, thou have given us
such assurance of thy good will, in taking our nature and dying for us; that we
know not, nor need desire one more tender than thou, and more ready to help us.
O Lord, direct us we Pray, to find the footsteps of thy Flock, and enable us to
follow the blessed track, that we may come at last to the happy rest thou
give them. Pity, O Lord, the Infirmities of thy Servants, and quicken our
slowness by the example of thy Saints: What we see they have done for the love
of Jesus, let us be ambitious to do; what they patiently suffered, let us
neither sinfully decline, nor undergo with murmuring and discontent: Make us
especially, O Lord, to remember what thou have done and suffered, to set before
our selves thy bright example, the light of which directed them: And make us
mindful too of what thou promisest, and what they have gained by following
thee, that their Names according to thy Promise are written in the Book of
Life; and they shall be exalted to sit with thee on thy high Throne. O
Bounteous Lord, the only Author of all we have, the only object of all we hope!
As thou have prepared a Heaven for us, O may thy grace prepare us for it: O
make us live the Life of the Just, and let our last end be like theirs; that we
may dye the death of the Just, and live for ever in that blessed Society; and in
that blessed Society may for ever sing thy Praise, and say, To him that loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings, and
Priests unto God and his Father, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever, and
ever.

Amen.
Hymn 34.
TEll me, ye glorious Stars, that shine
About the Lambs Caelestial throne,
How, from such bodies once as mine,
Are you to this great brightness grown.
Hark, with one Voice they thus reply,
This to the Lambs desert is due;
His humble Death raised him so high,
And us his faithful Followers too.
With one Voice, this too they will say,
Our Lord taught us the happy Skill,
By his bright steps to guide our way,
And follow his best Followers still.
As we saw they had set their mind,
And ruled their course, we ordered ours;
This State alone we both designed,
And up towa'rds this strein'd all our powers.
Taught by wise Temperance, we abstained
From Earths low Joys, for greater goods;
And slighting little drops, we gained
Full, sweet and everlasting Floods.
Well armed with Fortitude, we bare
All lesser evils, worse to fly;
And mortal-death we durst out-dare,
That we might not for ever dye.
Strict Justice we observed, by giving
To every one their utmost due;
That all in peace and order living,
All freely might this Heaven pursue.
But Prudence governed all the rest,
Prudence, that made us still apply
That which was fittest, and was best
To advance greatest Charity.
On these swift golden wheels of Grace,
That Loves bright fiery Chariot bear,
We all arrived at this bright place,
O follow us, and do not fear.
O certain Truths! O blessed Attesters!
O that all yet on Earth might prove
Of both these things such strong digesters,
That both these things might feed their love.
Him who has made us all for this,
Him who has made himself our wa^*
Him that will lead us in it to Bliss,
May all men Praise, and all obey.
Amen.
Devotions FOR THE Holy Days, The Second Part.
FOR THE FEASTS OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOR.
For the Morning.
MEDITATION I.
COme, let us ascend to the house of our Lord, and celebrate this day with a
holy Joy; imploring his Mercy in all we need, and blessing his Bounty for all
we have: He is our God, and we are his People, Created by his goodness to be
happy for ever: He is our Redeemer, and we his Purchase, restored by his Death
to a forfeited Happiness; to day let us adore our God that Redeemed us. Praise
our Lord, all you Nations of the Earth; Praise him with the Voice of Joy and of
Thanksgiving; Praise him with the well-tuned strings of your Hearts; Praise him
with the sweetest Instrument, a cheerful Obedience: Let every one that pretends
to felicity, sing immortal Praises to the God of our Salvation: He is our full
and all-sufficient Redeemer, he has perfectly finished what he graciously
undertook; for all our Trespasses he has made satisfaction, for all our
forfeitures he has paid the ransom: We by our Disobedience were banished from
Paradise, and he has received us into his own Kingdom: He has set up a Kingdom
of Grace on Earth, to prepare us for his Kingdom of Glory: We wandered up and
down in the wilderness of Error, and he has guided us into the ways of Truth:
We were by nature Children of wrath, and he has mediated our Peace with his
offended Father: We were become the Slaves of sin, and he has bought our
Freedom with his own Blood: We were in bondage to the dominion of Satan, and he
has overcome and confined his Power: We were in danger of sinking into Hell,
and he has saved us from that bottomless Pit: The gates of Heaven were shut
against us, and he went up himself, and opened them to all Believers;
dissolving for ever the terrors of Death, and rendering it now but a passage
into Life. O dearest Lord, who made us first of nothing, and restor'dst us
again when we had undone our selves! Who would at any rate redeem us from
Misery, at any rate procure our Felicity: How came we wretches to be so
considered! How came we Sinners to obtain such Favor! that from thy Throne of
Glory, where Seraphims adored thee, thou should descend on our Earth, where
Slaves would affront thee: That thou should lead a Life of poverty and
labor, and in perfect Innocence dye a Death of shame and sorrow: That thou
should do all this for such contemptible worms as we, without the least
concern or benefit to thy self; only to raise us up from our humble dust, and
set us to shine amongst thy glorious Angels. O infinite Goodness, the bounteous
Author of all our hopes! What shall we say to thy excessive Charity? O
gracious Lord, and mighty deliverer from all our fears! What shall we render
for thy unspeakable Mercies? We cannot choose but search over all we have, but
we can find nothing to return but what thou have given us: We will therefore
use the gifts thou have bestowed on us, according to thy direction, and give
the Praise to Thee of what we do well: All the Glory of our Salvation we will
ascribe to thee, and to thee alone, as the great cause who have begun, alone,
as and wilt at length finish it: By thee we will always say we do good, and
not lean to our own understandings; by thee we will expect our Reward, and
never rely upon our own Merits.

Hymn 35.
SWeet Jesu, why, why do thou love
Such worthless things as we?
Why is thy Heart still toward us,
Who seldom think on thee?
Thy Bounty gives us all we have,
And we thy Gifts abuse;
Thy bounty gives us even thy self,
And we thy self refuse.
My Soul, and why, why do we love
Such worthless things as these;
These that withdraw us from our Lord,
And his pure Eyes displease?
Break off, and be no more a Child,
To run, and sweat, and cry;
While all this stir, this huge concern
Is only for a Fly:
Some silly Fly that is hard to catch,
And nothing when it is caught;
Such are the toys thou striv'st for here,
Not worth a serious thought.
Break off, and raise thy manly Eye
Up to those Joys above;
Behold, all those thy Lord prepares
To woo, and crown thy Love.
Alas, Dear Lord, I cannot love,
Unless thou draw my Heart;
Thou who thus kindly make me know,
O make me do my part.
Still do thou love me, O my Lord!
That I may still love Thee;
Still make me love thee, O my God!
That thou may still love me.
Thus may my God, and my poor Soul
Still one another love,
Till I depart from this low World,
To' enjoy my God above.
To thee, Great God, to thee alone,
One Coeternal three,
All Power and Praise, all Joy and Bliss,
Now, and for ever be.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
PRoceed, my Soul, to celebrate the Praises of thy Lord, go on with fresh
attention to remember the Mercies of thy God; whose Wisdom has contrived to
save Mankind by so compendious a method as may be expressed in one short word: He
saw the only cause of all our ruin, was our Love misplaced on this present
World: He saw the only remedy of all our Misery, was to fix our Love on the
World to come: This therefore was his great intent, and in this concentred all
his Merits; to possess us with Love, the end of Faith, and greatest of divine
graces; to change the bias of our wrongset hearts, by establishing among us
new motives of Charity; such as might strongly incline our Affections, and
efficaciously draw us to Love our true Good; such as might gain by degrees upon
all Mankind, and render Salvation easy and universal: For this he came down
from his Fathers Bosom, to teach us the rules of Eternal Life; that we might
firmly believe those Sacred Truths, which God himself with his own mouth has
told us: For this he Converst so long on our Earth, to encourage and provoke us
by his own example; that we might confidently embrace those unquestionable
Virtues, which God himself in his own Person had practiced: For this he endured
so sharp and many Afflictions, and became at last obedient to the Death; that
we might patiently suffer whatever should befall us, when God himself was so
treated by his Creatures: For this he so often Preached of the Joys of Heaven,
and set them before us in so clear a light; that seeing so rich a Prize hang at
the end of our Race, we might run, and strive with our utmost force to obtain
it: For this he ordained all the means of Grace, and left us the Sacraments of
his Body and Blood; that he might breed and nourish in us the Life of Charity,
and ravish our Hearts with the sweetness of his Presence: For this he
established a perpetual Church, and sent the Holy Ghost to Inspire and govern
it; that it might be maintained through all Ages in Truth and Sanctity, and
plant the same heavenly Seed over all the World: For this he assumed those
strange endearing Names of Friend, and Brother, and Spouse to us Wretches;
doing far more for us, O wondrous Love! than all those Names import, than all
our hearts can wish. Blessed, O Glorious Jesu! be the Wisdom of thy Mercy, that
has found so sweet and short a way to save us: Thou art, O Lord, the cause of
all our Love, and Love the cause of all our Happiness: By Love we fulfill all
thy Commands, and in keeping thy Commands there is great reward: By Love we are
reconciled from Enemies to Friends; by Holy Love we are translated from Death
to Life; by Love we are delivered from the fear of Hell, by Love we are the
regenerated Heirs of Heaven; by Love we are disposed for that blissful Vision;
by Love we are secured of the enjoyment of our God; who by the sole perfection
of his own free Goodness can never deny himself to those that love him; else
would their very loving him be a cause of great misery; since the misery of a
Soul is the want of what it loves: Indeed he that is possessed with love, is so
far already a partaker of a divine nature; for thou have told us, O Lord, that
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him. He
then that loves must needs be proportionably happy too, for so much as he has
of God, so much he possesses of his true good. Thus, Lord Jesus, whatever thy
holy books do record of thee, in expressions suited to our low capacities:
Whatever they say of thy restoring all things; and repairing again the ruins
of Mankind: All is exactly verified with this one line, which our thankful
Hearts should repeat with joy: Heaven is attained by Love alone, and Love alone
by thee.

MEDITATION III.
STill, my Soul, let us repeat a few Lines more, to the praise of him whose
Mercies are no fewer than infinite. Of him whose pity took us by the hand, and
kindly led us into his own light. Of thee, O Blessed Jesu, our Lord, our God,
who alone art the source of all our Happiness: The World till thou came sat
wrapped in darkness; and few discerned so much as a shadow of thee: They followed
the Appetites of Sense and Humor; and placed their felicity in being
prosperous here: Little considering the Life to come; and less the joys that
entertain that Life: This was, alas! their miserable State; and which was worse
than this, they had no power to help it. How could they believe what they never
heard of; or love what they never believed? How could they desire what they
never loved, or be glad to receive what they never desired? It was thou, O
Lord, did first teach us our true end, the blissful Vision of the Eternal
Deity. It was thou did first teach us the true means to attain that end; by a
hearty love and desire to attain it. O the blessed change which thy hand has
wrought! the happy improvements which thy coming has produced! Now every Woman,
and illiterate Man can discourse familiarly of the highest Truths. The Creation
of the World, and the fall of Adam; the Incarnation of God, and Redemption of
Man: the mystery of the Trinity, and Miracle of the Resurrection; the day of
Judgment, and State of Eternity. All these we know, but it was thou, O Lord,
who taught'st us; and by thy holy Church first spread them over the World. Now
thou have opened our Eyes, we plainly see what unassisted nature could never
have reached. We see the framing right of our Affections here, is both cause and
measure of our Happiness hereafter: If we supreamly esteem the goods of the
future life, we shall find them there and be happy. If we love Heaven with our
whole Soul, and press on strongly with all our force, we shall enter its
Glories with a strange surprising delight; and possess them for ever in a
perpetual ecstasy: We see our Souls are made to know, and perfect themselves by
the worthiest objects: We see their Nature is free, and unconfined; and nothing
can fill them but that which is infinite. All other knowledges enlarge our
faculties, and breed new desire to know still more; which if unsatisfi'd, we
yet are miserable; since none can be happy who want their desire. Only the
sight of God fills us to the brim; and infinitely overflows our utmost
capacities: It fills and overflows all the powers of our Souls, with joy and
wonder and inconceivable sweetness: O blessed and glorious sight! when will the
happy day appear, and open to my Soul that beauteous prospect! When, dearest
Lord, shall I fee thee face to face! when shall I heartily at least, desire to
see Thee! Thou art my full and high felicity; and only and alone sufficient for
me.

PETITIONS.
O Most Gracious and adorable Jesu, who so lovedst this sinful World as to die
for us, we cannot think thou will deny us any thing that we humbly ask of thee
according to thy will. Those that believing come unto thee, thou will in no
wise cast out: Let me then obtain, I beseech thee, these important favors, and
whatever else thou see conducing to my Happiness. Teach me, I pray,
effectually, that this low world can never make me happy, that I must set my
affections on things above* Make me seek therefore in the first place the
Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof; to love with my whole affections
the enjoyment of God, since nothing but love can qualify me for that
enjoyment, and nothing without that enjoyment can ever render me happy. O my
God, make me ardently love thee that I may eagerly desire thee, and eagerly
desire thee that I may with joyful transport enjoy thee. Make me, O Blessed
Jesu, so meditate on thy infinite Mercies, that my whole Soul may be filled
with the memory of thy love; that the frequent remembrance of it may diffuse a
vigorous love of thee into all my powers: let the mark and badge which they all
bear, be the love of Jesus. Let every step of thy love, dear Lord, in redeeming
lost Mankind, confirm my Soul in Love and Duty: fortify me thereby against all
Persecution, and discouragement; and so effectually draw me into thine own
Kingdom of Glory, by thy Holy Life and precious Death and glorious
Resurrection: Make me to persevere in thy obedience to the end, that I may die
in thy favor, and rise again to rejoice with thee for ever: Who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost live, and reignest one God, World without end.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For the Evening.
MEDITATION I.
REtire now, my Soul, from thy common thoughts, that are permitted to entertain
thy less serious hours: Retire, and call thy wandering Fancies home, and
speedily range them in peace and order; that thou may be so prepared to hear
thy Lord, who invites thee among the rest, to taste his sweetness. The Prince
of Love and Bounty says; Come to me, all you that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest: Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am
meek, and lowly in heart; and you shall find rest to your Souls: For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light. Enough, dear Lord, enough is said, to draw all
the World to thy holy Discipline. What can be offered so agreeable to our
Natures, too much, alas! inclined to pleasure and profit? What can be offered
so powerfully attractive, as to make our work delightful, and then reward it?
As to propose an Employment, like the Music of Churches, devout, sweet, and
gainful to the Performers? Whither, O my God, should we go, but unto thee? Thou
alone have the words of eternal Life. Thou art our wise Instructor to know what
to do, and our only Enabler to do what we know: Thou art the free Bestower of
all we have; the faithful Promiser of all we hope for. Thy kind Savior, my
Soul, has given thee a gracious Call; to thee has he sent the Invitations of
the Gospel: Shall he call, and will thou not hear his voice, and constantly
follow it till thou come to him? Will thou be so foolish, as still to go astray
like a lost sheep, wandering up and down in thine own Bywayes? Wandering out of
his ways, and the ways of Happiness, pursuing only thine own Perdition. By
seeking our selves in this World of Vanity, we lose both thee, O Lord, and our
own Souls: By seeking our selves in thee, and in thy Love, we find both thee,
and our own Happiness. O how unspeakable are thy sweetnesses, O Lord, which
thou have hid for those who fear thee, which thou have partly revealed to those
who love thee, and keep their taste uncorrupted with the World. But O! what are
they then to those who see thee, and in that sight see all that is necessary to
their Happiness; to those who rejoice perpetually before thee; and in that joy
find all joys beside! O beauteous Truth, which known, inforces Love, and which
well loved, begets Felicity. Live thou for ever in my faithful Memory, and be
my constant Guide in all my ways. Still, my Soul, let us think of the Joys
above, and undervalue all things compared with everlasting Salvation: Still
contemplate thy dear Savior's Love, that purchased for thee all those
unutterable joys.

MEDITATION II.
MY God, when I remember those Words of thine, Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand: When I consider they were the first thou spakest in public,
the chosen Text of the Eternal Wisdom; I cannot think but they contain a very
important Precept, and that I ought to be deeply affected with the power of the
Motive. My Soul, did Christ begin his public work with this Command? Apply
then those searching Words to thy self, and bind them fast upon thee. Repent, O
my Soul! for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven depends upon thy Repentance. Unhappy me, that I cannot live without sin,
but blessed be our God, that I may obtain Pardon by my Repentance. Practice
then, my Soul, that safe and easy method of censuring thy self, to be
acquitted by him. Every night sit as an impartial Judge, and lay before thee
all thou can of the past day: Severely examine every thought and word, and
strictly search every Deed and Omission: And since thou art not strong enough
to be perfectly innocent, at least endeavor to be humble enough to be truly
penitent: Say, Woe to the day and hour wherein I sinned; woe to the many days
and hours I have foolishly misspent: Or rather, Woe to me, who abuse my days
and hours, allowed by thy goodness to work out my Salvation. Be heartily sorry
for what thou have done amiss, and make firm and wary resolutions not to do
again what will make thee sorry: Implore for the past the Mercy of Heaven, and
for the time to come the same indulgent Mercy: Ask it in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for it is only by his Blood that our Repentance can obtain the remission
of our Sins. If perhaps thou find in thy Examination, that some little thing
has been well done; return to God all the Glory for this, and beg his Grace to
continue thy good, and improve it: His is the hand that sowes the seed, his is
the Blessing that gives the Increase. Thus I will once in a day at least look
home, and seriously inquire into the state of my Soul: Whatever my Malice or
weakness may have done, I should now undo it, as it were, by a hearty
Contrition: Let not the Sun go down upon thy Wrath, nor upon any other
unrepented Sin. O happy man that can write at the foot of his Account,
Reconciled to my God, and in Charity with all the World. Such an one may go to
Bed with a quiet Conscience, and fall asleep in peace and hope.

MEDITATION III.
LOrd, e're I take my leave of this Day, which thy Church has devoted to the
honor of thy Memory; I would repeat some few words more of those incomparable
many that thou have left among us: I would attentively meditate their
substantial sense, and settle them as Principles of my Life and Actions. Thou
have said, I remember, O divine Wisdom, and well worthy it is to be remembered:
Lay not up for your selves treasures on Earth, where moth and rust do corrupt,
and Thieves break through, and steal. But lay up for your selves treasures in
Heaven; where neither moth nor rust do corrupt, nor Thieves break through, and
steal: For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Go now, you
curious, and study what you please, for me; I Will stay, and listen to my Savior:
He will teach me high, and sure, and useful Truths; he will teach me Truths that
will bring me to Happiness. Only I must receive and keep the Truths he teaches
me, and obey their direction in my course of Life. In vain am I told this
Instruction, if I will still dote on the uncertain Goods of this World; utterly
in vain, if I will not be concerned for the more durable and certain
possessions of a better: Notwithstanding this wise instruction I shall be a
fool, if I suffer my heart to six below, if I set my Affections on that which
is not. All our few days we live here, my Soul, are full of Vanity, and our
choicest pleasures are sprinkled with bitterness: The things here perish in the
using, and our transitory joys vanish like a Dream. Besides, consider, there
is no reason thy Heart should six here, when thou thy self art designed for a
removal: Thou art but a mere Sojourner and Stranger on Earth, and art passing
hence to an eternal home. Already I am dead to all the years I have lived, and
shall never live them over again: All must go down to the same dark Grave; and
none can tell how soon he may be called: To day we are in health among our
friends and neighbors, and to morrow Arrested by the hand of Death: Nature may
faintly struggle for a time, but must yield at last, and be buried in the
Earth. At last we must take our leave of nearest Relations, and bid a long
Farewell to all the World. And how sad a thing, my Soul, will it be in that
day, to have no Treasure but what thou must leave, and to leave the only
Treasure that thy heart is set upon. Let thy chosen Treasure then be in Heaven,
since where the treasure is the heart will be also. Ye careless Worldlings,
hear but this one word more, which our great Master has also spoken; and then I
expect you will stay and observe his Instructions too, if any sense of your
eternal good can hold you: Hark, he tells us this new and glorious secret; We
shall be hereafter like the Angels in Heaven. O precious word to them that
relish it, and thoroughly digest it is strong nourishment; to them that feed on
it as often as their daily bread; We shall be hereafter like the Angels in
Heaven. Those that now set their Affections on things above, shall be hereafter
like the Angels in Heaven. And what, O dearest Lord, are those blessed Angels,
but Spirits that know and love, and delight for ever. Such, O my soul, we shall
be, if we follow now the Instructions of our Savior: We shall lead that sweet
life, and be, and live like the Angels in Heaven: We shall know all that is
true, and love all that is good; and delight in that Knowledge and Love for
ever* No ignorance shall darken us, nor error deceive us, for we shall be like
the Angels in Heaven: No Cares shall perplex us, nor Crosses afflict us, for we
shall be like the Angels in Heaven: Our joys shall be full, and pure, and
everlasting; for we shall be like the Angels in Heaven. Cheer thee, my Soul,
and bless thy bounteous Lord, by whom thou shall be exalted to that dignity;
Comfort thy self, and raise thy hopes yet gloriously higher; raise them to the
expectation of more than thou can conceive, for so much yet more is intended
for thee; so much more is included in those wonderful words: We shall be like
him, for we shall see him as he is.

PETITIONS.
O Blessed Jesu, whose Sacred Body was laid in a Sepulcher, after thou had
finished in it the work of our Redemption: Make me so frequently to renew in my
Mind the memory of thy Death and burial, as may put me upon a serious
preparation for my own. Since thou did not design to abide long on this
Earth, let not my Heart be set on any condition here; make me to grow daily
less affected to this transitory life, and more in love with thy eternal joys:
Give me, O thou that art the only giver of repentance, a truly penitent Heart,
for all my past neglects of thee: Deliver me, O Lord, from the punishments my
Sins deserve, and deliver me from the Sins which deserve those Punishments.
Make thy self, O my adored Redeemer, the Master-wish of my Heart, the scope and
end of all my time. Wherever I am in this unconstant World, and whatever
business entertains my hand, still let my inward eye look up toward thee, and
fix it is sight on thy glorious face: Soon as I awake let me look up toward
thee, and when I rise first bow my knees to thee: Help me often in the day to
call in my thoughts to thee; and when I go to rest, close up mine Eyes in Thee:
Suffer me not, O Lord, to be any longer distracted about many things from thee,
who art the one thing Necessary; but gather me up from the World into my self,
and then take me up from my self into thee; there to be ravished with thy kind
embraces, there to be feasted with the Antipasts of Heaven: So shall my time be
governed by thy Grace, and my Eternity be crowned with thy Glory: Grant these
things, the purchases of thy precious blood, O Lord, for thine own Eternal
Honor and Glory.

Amen.
Hymn 36.
LOrd, now the time returns,
For weary man to rest;
And lay aside those pains, and cares,
With which our day's oppressed.
Or rather change our thoughts
To more concerning cares;
How to redeem our misspent time,
With sighs and tears and prayer's.
How to provide for Heaven,
That place of rest and peace;
Where our full joys shall never wain,
Our pleasures never cease.
Blessed be thy Love, dear Lord,
That taught us this sweet way*
Only to love thee for thy self,
And for that Love obey.
O thou our Souls chief hope,
We to thy Mercy fly:
In every place thou can protect;
And all we need supply.
Whether we wake or sleep,
To thee we both resign;
By Night we see, as well as Day,
If thy light on us shine.
Whether we live or dye,
Both we submit to thee;
In Death we live as well as Life,
If thine in Death we be.
Glory to Thee, Great God,
One Coeternal three:
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Eternal Glory be.
Amen.
FOR THE FEASTS OF THE HOLY GHOST.
For the Morning.
MEDITATION I.
COnsider now, my Soul, the Mercies of thy God, consider the wonders he has
wrought for the Children of Men: The Eternal Father created us of nothing, and
set us in the way to everlasting Happiness; the Eternal Son came down from
Heaven, to seek and restore us again to it, when we had lost our selves; the
Eternal Spirit sends his Grace to sanctify us, and gives strength to walk that
holy way. Thus every Person of the Sacred Trinity has freely contributed his
peculiar Blessing, and all together, as one co-infinite Goodness, have
graciously agreed to complete our Felicity. But O Ungrateful we, was it not
enough to receive of our God all we have and are? was it not enough that the
Son of God should come down, and live here to teach us, and dye to redeem us?
was not all this enough to make us Love? And Love is all he aimed at, and Love
is all we needed: We will confess to thee, O Lord, our miserable condition, and
to the Praise of thy necessary merciful relief: Such, alas, was the corruption
of our nature, and so many, and so strong the Temptations round about us, that
without this thy last miraculous favor, of sending the Holy Ghost to guide and
quicken us, we should still have remained in our old dull pace, slow to
understand, and slower to obey: We should have quite forgotten our God that
made us, and neglected the service of our Lord that bought us; had not thy
fullness been furnished with one Blessing more, and thy goodness ready to bestow
it on thy poor Creatures; had thou not providently reserved a better Blessing
than the dew of the Clouds, and fatness of the Earth: better than Plenty of
Corn and Wine, or the multitude of Posterity, or Dominion over our Brethren.
These were the great Rewards of the old Law, but behold far greater than these
are here: Divine Refreshments from the Heaven of Heavens, and the rare
delicious fruits of the Holy Ghost: Meekness and Peace, and Joy diffused in our
Breasts: Strength and undaunted Courage kindled in our Hearts: The strong and
sweet Ardours of Divine Love, that make every Duty in our way delightful, and
every Cross tolerable: A thousand sweet Embraces of the Spouse of Souls, a
thousand dear Pledges of his everlasting Love: These are the great Rewards of
the Law of Grace, and are given to prepare us for the Kingdom of Glory.

Hymn 37.
COme, Holy Spirit, send down those beams
Which gently flow in silent Streams,
From thy bright Throne in Heaven above:
Come, thou Enricher of the Poor,
And bounteous source of all our Store,
Come fill our Souls with thy pure Love.
Come, thou our Souls delicious Guest,
The wearied Pilgrims sweetest Rest,
The injured Suffe'rers best relief:
Come, thou our Passions cool allay,
Whose Comfort wipes all tears away,
And into Joy turns all our Grief.
Come, thou bright Sun, shoot home thy darts,
Pierce to the Center of our Hearts,
And make our living Faith love thee;
Without thy Grace, without thy Light,
Our strength is weakness, our day night,
And we can neither move nor see.
Lord, wash our sinful stains away,
Water from Heaven our barren Clay,
Our many mortal Bruises heal;
To thy sweet Yoke our stiff Necks bow,
Warm with thy fire our Hearts of Snow,
And soon our wandering feet repeal.
O grant thy Faithful, dearest Lord,
Whose only hope is thy sure Word,
The saving gifts of thy good Spirit;
Grant us in Life to obey thy Grace,
Grant us at Death to see thy Face,
And Heave'ns Eternal Joys inherit.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever-living Deity,
All Power ascribe, and Bliss, and Praise;
As at the first when time begun,
May the same Homage still be done,
While time does last, when time decays.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
HOw glorious, O Lord, is thy Grace over all the World! How admirable are the
influences of thy Spirit: They who through dullness so slowly understood the
often repeated Lessons of their divine Master; now when the Spirit descended
upon them, did with the first swift glance see through all, and no mystery
could pose, nor error deceive them. They who through fear forsook their Lord,
and fled away from the danger of being his; now do rejoice in suffering for his
Name, and neither Life nor Death can forbid them to confess him: They who knew
only their Mother tongue, and that no better than as simple Fishermen; now
speak to every Nation in their several language, and with their powerful
Eloquence ravish their Hearts: They who after our Saviors resurrection shut
fast the doors for fear of the Jews; now in the open Streets and public
Synagogues confidently proclaim the Name of Jesus. These were new bottles
sill'd with new Wine; wine that made them quite forget their former selves:
Wine that exalted them into a generous Spirit of despising all things for the
love of Jesus. Wine that in the midst of Racks and Prisons, made them often
break forth into that sweet ecstasy; no joy like the pain of suffering for
Jesus, no Life like the death endured for his Love. O were there now such
tongues of fire, to kindle in the world those divine flames! O were there now
such Hearts in the world to receive the holy sparks that fall from Heaven! The
Apostle Peter preached but one Sermon, and immediately there were converted to
Thee three thousand Souls; he preached again, and wrought but one Miracle, and
five thousand more were added to the Church: Thus every day they increased in
number, and which was better their number increased in Virtue. They were all
inebriated with the same heavenly Wine, and all filled with the same Heroic
Spirit: They sold all they had, and brought the price, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet: they lived in an Innocent community, and called nothing their
own, even in their will and understanding they were all united. Every one had
enough, and that is to be rich; none had too much, and that is to be free; free
from the cares that perplex the wealthy, free from the temptations that wait on
superfluity: Had thou been there, my Soul, to have seen the flaming ardour of
those first converts; it would have made thee utterly ashamed of all sloth,
and coldness. You may easily suppose, you might have heard them saying such
passionate words as these from a mixture of grief and love: Ah dearest Lord,
why were we not so happy, as to be converted by thee, while thou livedst
amongst us? Why not to entertain Salvation, when thou broughtest it to our
homes; and did prefer our little Nation before all the World? Unhappy we in
our neglect and perverseness, which were the causes of our insidelity: We looked
on thy many kind miracles, O Lord, and did not see them. Before our Eyes thou
did give sight to the Blind, and our Souls were dark with Sin and prejudice:
Thou did cleanse the Leprous, and heal all manner of Diseases; thou did
raise the Dead, and cast out Devils with a Word: Yet we alas, how many of us
blasphemed thy Name! how many conspired with thy Bloody Crucifiers! We cried
out among the tumultuous rabble, Away with him, away with him, crucify him,
crucify him; for we knew thee not then to be the Lord of Glory. Blessed be thy
holy Spirit, who has opened our Eyes, and made us see through the veil that
eclipsed thy luster: Now we believe thee the Messiah we expected, now we
acknowledge thee the King of Israel.

MEDITATION III.
PRoceed, my Soul, a little further to meditate on the mighty works of the Holy
Spirit: and with their greatness admire his power; and with their goodness his
bounty and Love. When Lord, thou did descend into our wretched World, then
was that Word of thy faithful Prophet fulfilled: The Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid: the Calf and the Young Lion, and
the Fatling shall be together; and even a little Child shall lead them. They
who in the day of our Saviors Passion, fiercely persecuted him like Lions and
Wolves; thou did easily convert many of them into innocent Sheep, and join
them with the rest of his harmless Flock. Those that were covetous as Wolves,
thy powerful Grace made them liberal; those that were fierce and proud as
Lions, it made humble and meek: Those that had been intemperate as Swine, were
made sober; and they that were lustful as Goats, became chaste: They were all
joined together in the bonds of pure Charity, and submitted to the government
of the meek and poor Apostles: Then was the worship of God not a burden but a
delight; not a diversion but a business to the ardent love thou did inspire.
The Disciples continued daily in the Apostles Doctrine; humbly attending to
their saving instructions: Daily they broke the holy Bread; and celebrated the
appointed Supper of our Lord; inflaming thereby their love to him, and
confirming their holy Faith, and resolutions: Daily they assembled to unite
their Prayers; being filled with the Spirit of Grace and Supplications: Thus
they obeyed thy dictates, and thus they increased in the measure of thy Gifts
and the strength of thy Graces: Such were the fervours of those happy times;
and, Oh how Happy were our times, had we those fervours too: But our times
alas, are become miserable, by Schisms, and heresies, and the darkness that
covers a great part of the World: Ours are become miserable by the defect of
Charity; and by the scandalous examples of too many Christians: Many are
scandalous in the Principles which they profess, to the disparagement of our
Lord's instructions; and many others in their vicious Conversations, which
disparage his wise and pure Precepts: Too many, alas! there are of these, yet
the Gates of Hell can never prevail against the Power of God: Still the same
Spirit visits the World, and keeps alive in some the same Primitive Fire: Still
there are some Hearts full of the Holy Ghost, full of the ravishing Wine of
Divine Love: Still there are some who renounce the World, and readily take up
the Cross, and follow our Lord: Still the Almighty Goodness is true to his
Church, and keeps it one, and Holy and Universal: Still the Holy Spirit, thanks
be to his unwearied goodness, maintains in his Church some burning and shining
Lights. He that as a Wind breaths where he lists, and is the free Dispenser
of his own Gifts; is often found of those that seek him not, and vouchfafes to
strive with them that resist him. Though the ungrateful World abuses his
blessings, yet he has not utterly withdrawn himself from the ungrateful World.
Yet O, ye Sons of Adam, consider what your Maker has said; My Spirit shall not
always strive with Man. If this refining Fire does not purge you from your
wickedness, the slames of his wrath will devour your World and you.

PETITIONS.
O Kind and gracious Spirit, who art often near to us, when we are far from
thee; often ready to grant, when we are unmindfull to ask: Vouchsafe now to
hear these few humble Petitions which thy Grace disposes me to present. I pray,
O Lord, for the good Estate of thy Catholic Church: Fit and dispose thy
Servants first to entertain thee, then graciously vouchsafe to descend into our
hearts: Fill us, O Holy Ghost, and our little Vessels, and as thou fillest us
enlarge our Capacities: Make us the more we receive of thee, still grow in
desire of receiving more, till we ascend to those satisfying joys above, where
all our Faculties shall be stretched to the utmost; where they shall all be
filled to the brim, and overflowed with a Torrent of Pleasure: Make us fit to
entertain thee, and then possess us with the holy fire of Meekness and peace;
that all the World may know whose Disciples we are by seeing us love one
another. O deliver us from the contrary fire, the fire of the false and evil
Spirit, that scorches without warming, and smoaks without shining, and consumes
without enlightening. Deliver us from Schism and* Heresy, and every the least
uncharitable Passion. Vouchsafe to give us the spirit of Fortitude, the spirit
of Temperance, Justice and Prudence, the spirit of Wisdom, Understanding and
Counsels; the* spirit of Knowledge, Piety and the fear of thee; the spirit of
Patience and Benignity, the spirit of Humility, Sobriety and Chastity. And
bring, we pray thee, the whole World into thy one Flock; that all may be so far
of the same mind here, as all to enjoy the same happiness hereafter. Grant
these things, O Lord, to the Merits of our only Mediator, Jesus Christ.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For the Evening.
MEDITATION I.
WE are not our own, but the Temples of the Holy Ghost; let us dedicate our
selves entirely to his Service. Come, let us now again prepare our Hearts, and
humbly offer this our evening Sacrifice. Who will give me this happy favor,
that I may now find my God alone; that I may find him in the silence of
retirement, where the noise of this World can no way interrupt us; but that my
God may speak to me, and I to him, as dearest friends converse together: That I
may unfold before him all my wants, and freely ask the Charity of his Counsel.
What shall I do, O gracious Lord, to be happy here? what shall I do to be happy
hereafter? Nature already has thus far taught me, that in all I undertake I
seek mine own good: Only I have cause to fear I may mistake that good, and set
up a vain Idol instead of thee; unless, my God, the Spirit of Truth vouchsafe
to instruct me, and show my Soul its true Felicity. Hark, my Soul, how the
eternal Wisdom gives thee Advice, and let every word sink deep into thee: Seek
with thy first endeavors the Kingdom of Heaven, and all things else shall be
added to thy wish. Love with thy whole Affections the enjoyment of thy God, and
all things else shall conspire to thy Happiness: All these my lips confess are
excellent Truths; but my Life, O God, is not so ready to confess them. I cannot
perfectly overcome my Passions, nor guide them so as to tend steadily toward
thee. Often do they draw me into sin, by setting me upon the pursuit of this
World. While they are mine I cannot govern them; behold, dear Lord, I offer
them to thee, to be subjected in all their Motions to thy Laws, and entirely
employed in thy Service: That my fond heart may be weaned from the follies of
this World, and its Appetites quickened to thy solid Joys: That I may hunger
and thirst perpetually after thee, and those glorious Promises thou have made
to thy Servants: That my whole Soul may seek thee alone, since thou alone, O
Lord, art all my Heaven. O glorious God, my Life, my Joy, and the only fit
Center of all my Hopes; were my too unsteady Soul once firmly united to thee,
and could I relish the true sweetness of thy presence, how would all other
Company seem dull and tedious, and the whole World be even bitter to my taste!
How would my thoughts cleave fast to thee, and gladly seal this everlasting
Covenant: If thou, O Lord, wilt dwell with me, my Heart shall continually
attend on thee. Night and day will I sing thy Praises, and all my life long
adore thy Mercies.

MEDITATION II.
WHen, O my Soul, shall thy God find thee alone; free from those busy thoughts
that fill thy head? O with what ready Charity would he then instruct thee, and
let thee into his blessed Secrets. Himself would become thy familiar guest, and
dwell with thee in perpetual joy. Strive then to clear thy self of all other
thoughts, that fill thee at best with nothing but emptiness. Remember, thy God
is a pure Spirit, and delights to dwell in a clean Tabernacle. He will not
entertain a Soul that regards any Sin, nor stay where he finds his grace
neglected. If he vouchsafe the blessing of a Visit, and O how sweet and
ravishing is his presence! let us open wide our bosoms to receive him, and
summon all our powers to entertain him. Say, Come my Understanding, and bring
all thou know; all that enlightens thee in the way to Felicity. Come my
Will, and call in all thy Loves, and contract them into one, and settle them
here for ever. Come my Memory, but lay aside thy swarm of Notions, and forget
them all but what concerns thy Eternity. Come my whole Soul with these
Faculties about thee, and prostrate adore the Eternal Spirit. Behold, he now is
nigh, and sits in the devout heart as on the Throne he delights in. In devout
retirement and calm silence he will familiarly speak to us, and teach us what
shall be for our good. Come then and with devoutest reverence attend, my Soul,
to what now thy God will say: Let thy Understanding be ready to assent to his
Truths; thy Will to follow his divine Inspirations: Thy Memory to treasure up
his sacred Instructions, and all thy Powers to acknowledge his glorious
Attributes. The blessed Spirit will not only visit but dwell in thee, if thou
entertain and obey him as he justly requires. He will never forsake thee,
unless thou chase him away, but will guide and comfort thee with his holy
Inspirations. Resolve then, that the Flesh shall deceive thee no more, nor draw
thee to disoblige the Holy Spirit. If the Flesh grow bold, and insolently
demand, How can you live without sinful Liberties? Hear thou the Spirit, and he
will tell thee, they are base Slaves that serve sensual Lusts, and the Service
of God is the only true Freedom. If the Flesh allege, What joy is there in
suffering Ills, or doing contrary to our own Inclinations: Hearken to the
Spirit, who will tell thee, the Cross of Christ is sweet, and nothing is so
glorious as the conquest of our selves. If the Flesh insist, What do you see,
or hear, or exercise any sense in, but the things of this World? Regard the
Spirit rather, who will enter his protest, and make every devout Soul subscribe
this Truth; I see the vanity of this World, and its vexations, and meet in
every thing danger and falsehood. Say then, according to the dictates of the
Spirit, Away Flesh and Blood, with your foolish Inclinations; away deceitful
World, with thy bewitching Vanities: You were only created to serve me in the
way to my Father's house, and to set me down at my journey's end: Away with all
your fond deluding dreams; be banished for ever from my awakened Soul.

MEDITATION III.
HAppy were we, O God, could we be still thinking on thee, and could we raise
our thoughts into desires to be with thee. Happy were we, could we always feel
those fervours, of which sometimes thou inspir'st a little spark. If that spark
were kindled into a Fire, and that Fire blown up into a continual Flame. But
we, alas! are hot and cold by fits, and which is worse, our cold fit is the
longer. Some few half hours we spend in Prayer, and many whole days in Vanity
and Idleness. Sometimes we bestow a little on the poor, and often throw a great
deal away on our Passions. Sometimes we deny and mortify our selves but far
more often obey our sensual Appetites. Sometimes we follow thy Grace, and are
drawn by it to do one good Work; but we are again seduced by our Nature to a
thousand Iniquities, and then we resist and grieve the Holy Spirit. Thus we
confess to thee, O Lord our God, who perfectly see every corner of our
hearts: Thus we confess to thee, not that thou may know us, but that we may
know our selves, and thou may cure us: To thee, Lord, I may go on confessing,
for many are the Graces I want, and none can give them but thy Bounty: Many are
the sins and miseries thy poor Creature is exposed to, and none can deliver me
but thy Providence. Such an occasion often endangers me, and such a Temptation
too often overcomes me: My own infirmities are too strong for me, and my ill
customs prevail against me: Every day I resolve to amend, and every day* I
break my resolutions: Often am I unhappily engaged, and blindly running on in
the ways of Death; and then I need thy Grace, O Lord, to check my desperate
speed, and to make me stay, and look before me: To show me the horrid downfall
into that bottomless Pit where impenitent sinners are swallowed up for ever: To
strike my too regardless Soul with fear and trembling at the dreadful sight of
so sad a ruin. I need thy powerful Grace, O Lord, to turn my eyes from the
allurements of sin to a safer Prospect: To make me sensibly Meditate on the
Peace and Pleasure, and great advantage of a Pious Life: To make me look
steadily on this, and well consider it, and besides to look through and see
beyond it: To make me delight in the hope it enjoyes, a hope of Joys that are
unconceivable and glorious: Joys which none, O Lord, but thou can give, and
none but thou can make us capable to receive. O Lord, all our Springs are in
thee, and all our Happiness depends on thee: In thee our Sorrows have a
Comforter to allay them, our Sins an Advocate to plead against them: In thee
our Ignorances have a guide to direct them, and all our Frailties a God to
relieve them. To thee therefore we will continually address our selves, and
rely only upon thy care and conduct: To thee we will with humble confidence
direct our Petitions, who promisest to help the Infirmity of our Prayers; we
will not doubt the graciousness or bounty of thy goodness, but hope thou will
grant whatever thy Word gives us leave to ask: And above all things we will
seek thy self, being assured that the Holy Spirit shall be given to them that
ask him.

PETITIONS.
O God the Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
me, miserable sinner. O God of infinite compassion, and comforter of penitent
minds, have mercy upon me sorrowful sinner. I lament, O Lord, and beseech thee
to pardon my sins past, and to prevent the repetition of my sins and follies
for the future. Cure me, O thou great Physician of Souls, cure me of all my
sinful distempers: Cure me of this aguish intermitting Piety; and fix it in an
even constant Holiness. O make me use Religion as my regular Diet, and not only
as a single Medicine in a pressing necessity: So shall my Soul be possessed of a
sound health, and disposed for a long, even an everlasting Life. Come to all
thy servants, O blessed Spirit of Faith, and govern our Lives with thy holy
Maxims; subdue our Sense to the dictates of Reason, and perfect our Reason with
the Mysteries of Religion. Teach us to love and fear what we see not now, but
what we are sure will be our Bliss or Misery hereafter. Show us the narrow way
which leads to Life, which few without thee can find or follow. Guide on thy
Church in the middle path of Virtue; that we never decline to any vicious
extreme: Let not our Faith grow wild with superfluous branches; nor be stripped
into a naked fruitless trunk: Let not our hope swell up to a rash presumption,
nor shrink away into a faint despair: Let not our Charity be cooled into a
faint indifferency; nor heated into a furious Zeal: Give us, O Gracious Lord,
the free Beginner and Finisher of all good actions, give us a right Spirit to
guide our intentions, that we may constantly aim at our true end; give us a
holy Spirit to sanctify our affections, that what we rightly design, we may
piously pursue; give us an heroic Spirit to confirm our Hearts, that what we
piously endeavor we may courageously atchieve: Grant these things, O Lord, for
thine own Glory, to whom all Glory is due for ever.

Amen.
Hymn 38.
COme my vain thoughts, that wandering
At every toy which passes by; sly
Still spending so your strength in vain,
While what you wish, you never can gain.
Come, my fond Soul, who sure must be
Quite tired with all this Life can see;
This Life, where little can be seen,
But reigning misery and sin:
And cheating Images of Good,
Most valued when least understood;
Which yet to our pursuits are coy,
As they prove vain when we enjoy.
Come let the wings of thy desire,
Fond man, to nobler things aspire;
Implore the Spirits kind gales, and He
To nobler things will carry thee.
Let warm Devotions, Holy Fire,
And Love Divine thy Breast inspire;
So shall thou Heavens true Pleasures taste,
And grow more sit for Heaven at last.
Seek thou no more abroad thy rest,
Seek it at home in thine own Breast;
Let but thy mind from guilt be clear,
Then seek for all thy Comfort there.
With thy self, and thy gracious God,
Delight to make thy chief abode;
In him repose secure and free,
And no mischance can trouble thee.
Should Death it self thy walls assail,
Still thou art safe and can not fail;
Still is thy Soul thine own, and she
To a new House removed shall be:
New, and Eternal there above,
All built and furnished with pure Love;
There shall this dark mud-wall of thine
Repaired the brightest Stars outshine.
Great Spirit of Love, and Source of Peace,
Our Praise of thee shall never cease;
To thee, the Father and the Son,
Eternal Homage shall be done.
Amen.
FOR THE FEASTS OF THE SAINTS.
For the Morning.
MEDITATION I.
GReat is the Majesty of the King we serve, and rich the splendor of his
Courts; where the humble Saints all shine as the light, and rejoice in
uninterrupted felicity: Come, let us that call our selves by his Name, humbly
adore the King of Saints; let us meet in Peace and Love, which are highly
pleasing to him, and join our Hearts and Voices into one glad Song: And which
of his wondrous works shall we make our Theme? which shall be the worthy
subject of our Contemplation and Praise? Shall we admire the mighty Conquerours
of this World? or any of the Great ones whom the World applands? Shall we
admire the men of deep or universal Learning? or those that manage all their
worldly Affairs with a dexterous and successful wisdom? Oh no, there are
greater things than these to employ our Admiration; those blessed Spirits who
bravely overcame themselves, and that led in triumph their own Passions; those
who renounced the greatness of this World to be rid of its encumbrances, and
that they might with more ease and speed prepare themselves for a better: Those
who learned Jesus Christ so as to imitate him well, and were so wise as to work
out their Salvation; those who from mean and poor on Earth, from reproacht and
despised, are advanced to be bright Courtiers in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
honored by the King of Saints. Rejoice thou, my Soul, who feel these
miseries here, and often complainest of the dangers of this Life: Rejoice at
their glad delivery from all these sorrows, and heartily congratulate their
secure Felicity: Rejoice, and with thy best instructed thoughts admire the
exquisite Wisdom of the divine Providence; who from such low beginnings can
raise so great effects, making every step thrust connaturally on the next.
Behold a little Seed that is buried in the Earth, shoot gently out its tender
leaves, and nourisht on with the Clouds and Sun, climb up by degrees into a
tall stalk; there it displayes its full blown hope, and crowns its own head
with a silver Lilly. Such is the progress of immortal Souls, even those who
shine now among the highest Seraphims: At first shut up in their Mothers womb,
where they lie confined close Prisoners in the dark; thence they come forth to
see and hear, and slowly begin to walk and speak; next they advance to
understand and discourse, then learn to ^^ve with the wings of Grace, till they
get up even beyond themselves, and believe above their own nature; at last the
kindly hand of Death gives them a stroke, and they instantly become like the
glorious Angels: Instantly their dark and narrow knowledge unfolds it self, and
spreads into a clear and spacious view; where they at once shall see all the
glories of Heaven, at once possess, and for ever enjoy them. Thus from the
humble seed of Grace, connaturally spring the flowers of Glory, and from this
Life's green stem of Hope, grow just on the top the Lillies of Paradise:
Lillies that never fade, but still shine on, and fill the Heavens with
beauteous sweetness: Lillies, that even Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of these. Sing then, my Soul, his Praise, who planted, watered
and increased these beauteous Flowers: But still among thy Hymns thou must
mingle resolves, to imitate whatsoever thou find good in their Lives. This
is the Praise most delightful to him, whose kindness desires the Conversion of
a Sinner. Learn but of them to be Humble, and Meek, and submit all thy Wishes
to the Will of Heaven; to govern thy Senses by the rule of Reason, and thy
Reason by the dictates of Religion; to design thy whole Life in order to thy
End, and establish for thy end the Bliss of Eternity. These holy Lessons let
thy Life transcribe, and then the King will accept thy Praises.

Hymn 39.
WAke all my Hopes, lift up your Eyes,
And crown your heads with Mirth;
See how they shine beyond the Skies,
Who once dwelt on our Earth.
Peace busy thoughts, away vain cares,
That clog us here below;
Let us go up above the Spears,
And with those Orders bow.
Bow low to Heave'ns Eternal King,
Whose bounteous goodness it is,
That makes the happy Orders sing,
And fills the place with Bliss.
With glorious Angels, Heirs of Light,
The highborn Sons of Fire;
Whose Heats burn chaste, whose Flames shine bright,
All Joy, yet all Desire.
With Holy Saints, who long in hope
On this Life's green Stem sat;
But gained at length the beauteous top
Of Heaven's resplendent State.
With great Apostles of the Lamb,
Who brought that early ray,
Which from our Sun reflected came,
And made our first fair day.
With generous Martyrs, whose strong hearts
Bravely rejoiced to prove,
How weak pale Death are all thy darts,
Compared to those of Love.
With steadfast Confessors who died
A Death too, Love did give;
Whilst their own Flesh they crucifie'd
To make the Spirit live.
With beauteous Virgins, whose chaste Vows
Renounced all fond desires;
Who wisely chose our Lord their Spouse,
And burnt with his pure fires.
With all the happy Spirits above,
Who make that glorious ring
About the sparkling Throne of Love,
And there for ever sing.
To some low place of that bright Quire,
While loftier notes they raise,
Let this thy little wreath aspire,
And join their Crowns of Praise.
All Glory to the Sacred Three,
One ever-living Lord;
As at the first, still may he be
Beloved, Obeyed, Adored.
Amen.
MEDITATION II.
THou art our King too, O Blessed Jesu; and we, alas, thy unprofitable
subjects: we cannot praise thee like those thine own bright Quires above; yet
will humbly offer our little tribute: And while with thy present goodness to
us, we consider thy great bounty to them; the glorious hopes which we from
thence conceive, give our praises the more spritely accents: O praise our Lord,
we are constrained to say, all the powers of our Souls; praise the immortal
King of Saints and Angels. Praise him as the Author of all their Graces; praise
him as the Finisher of all their Glories: Praise him for the mighty Hosts of
Angels; whom he sets about us for the guard of our lives; that they may safely
keep us in all our ways, and conduct our Souls at last to their eternal home.
Praise him for the consecrated company of Apostles, to whom he revealed the
Mysteries of his Kingdom; that they might teach us too those heavenly truths,
and show us the same blessed way to felicity: Praise him for the generous
fortitude of Martyrs; whom he strengthened with courage to resist even to death;
that we might learn of them to hold fast our Faith, and rather lose this Life
than hazard the other: Praise him for the eminent sanctity of Confessors; whose
whole design was a course of Heroic Virtue: That we might raise our minds from
our usual lazy slight; and with a quick and active wing mount up toward
Heaven. Praise him for the Angelical purity of those Virgins, whose Hearts he
so inflamed with his Divine Charity; that they would admit no such desires as
would bring upon them other cares besides those of pleasing himself alone: And
pray him to possess thee too with such a fervent love to him the spouse of
Souls, as may make thee regard with great indifferency even the best of this
worlds goods. Praise him for the excellent holiness of all his Saints; whose
lives he has molded into so various shapes, that every sort of ours might be
readily furnished with a pattern cut out and fitted for it self. O praise our
Lord, all you powers of my Soul! praise the Immortal King of Saints, and
Angels: Praise every Person of the Sacred Deity; for every person has concurred
in these glorious works; say, Blessed for ever be the Eternal Father; who has
fixed his Angels in so high a Happiness: Triumph bright Angels on your radiant
Thrones, and shine continually in the presence of your God: Blessed for ever be
the Eternal Son; whose love has exalted weeds of Earth to be flowers of
Paradise. There as they shall Eternally grow and shine; their luster shall
always redound to his Glory: Blessed for ever be the Eternal Spirit, whose
Grace prepares the Saints for Glory; where every happy Saint rejoices in his
own felicity; and every one in the felicity of all. Blessed for ever be the
Undivided Trinity; whose sight alone is the Heaven of Heavens; O sing his
praise all you the Citizens of Heaven; sing all together your everlasting Hymns.

MEDITATION III.
WHo are we, born here below in the Dust, and still kept down with the thoughts
of this World? Lord, who are we, that our polluted hands dare offer to thee the
Incense of praise? We who so often disobey thy commands, and so seldom lament
for our many follies? Yet is praise from us thy undoubted due, and we cannot
neglect it without omitting our duty: But because our praises alone are too low
to reach the deserts of thy wondrous nature, and perfect works; we will in our
hearty wishes call upon those to do it who are better able to praise thee: O
praise our Lord, you pure unblemisht Angels; praise him, ye mighty ever-active
flames: Praise our Lord all you the Spirits of Just men made perfect; now you
are free from the heavy clogs of mortal bodies: And thus they do: look up, my
Soul, and see the innumerable multitude of triumphing Spirits. See how they
stand all clothed in white robes, with palms in their hands, and with golden
Crowns on their Heads: Behold the glorious Angels fall down before the Throne;
and prostrate adore him that lives for ever. Behold the blessed Saints lay
their Crowns at his feet, and on their faces adore him that lives for ever.
Hark how they fill that spacious temple with their Hymns, while night and day
they continually sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty; who was, and is,
and is to come; Hallelujah! Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts; Heaven and
Earth are full of thy Glory; Hallelujah! Glorious art thou in creating all
things; glorious in preserving them in every moment of their being: Glorious in
governing them their several ways; glorious in appointing them their proper
ends: Glorious in rewarding thy Servants above their hopes; glorious in
punishing Sinners below their demerits: Glorious art thou, O Lord, in all thy
works; but infinitely more in thine own self-blessed Essence. Thus they rejoice
above, thus they triumph; and may their joy and triumph last for ever: While we
who live below may as faithful Echoes to their praises, repeat every day these
few short Ends of their Seraphick Hymns: Salvation to our God that sits on the
Throne; and the Lamb, that redeemed us with his Blood; Hallelujah! Blessing,
Honor, Glory, and Power be to him that sits on the Throne; and to the Lamb,
for ever, and ever. Hallelujah!

PETITIONS.
O Most Glorious and Gracious God, we are all so beholden to thy abundant
goodness, that we owe thee the utmost praises our Hearts and Lives can render:
O do thou excite us to endeavor, and assist us to succed in the discharge of
this mighty debt. Open our lips that our mouths may show forth thy praise,
bestow upon us every divine Grace that our lives may show forth the virtues of
him that has called us from the dark to his glorious Kingdom: Make us inure our
selves by degrees to thankful acknowledgments, and praises in this place of our
banishment; that we may at length be fit to sing the lofty songs of the
celestial Zion: O let us see thy goodness still preparing us for the
blessedness of Heaven; sanctifying every condition to the promoting our growth
in Grace; which as it will raise our hopes of the future Glory, will
proportionably raise our praises. O let thy love, dear Lord, at length be
pleased to take us to the fellowship of those joys and glories, which so raise
the thankful praises of the happy Spirits above: Bring us to that perfect state
where no defect shall weaken us; to that happy place where nothing shall divert
us from seeing, enjoying, loving, and praising thee for ever. Grant, O most
merciful Savior, that as thy Blessed do without ceasing pray for thy Church
below, we may be ready devoutly to praise thee for them: And help us Lord, so
to commemorate those excellent Graces and good works by which they adorned our
holy profession, as to be excited thereby, and directed to practice the same:
Till we all meet before thy glorious Throne, with one Heart and Consent to
adore thee the kind Savior of us all; who with the Father and the Spirit art
one God blessed for ever.

Glory be to, etc. Amen.
For the Evening.
MEDITATION I.
ALL things do live to thee, O Lord! thou sole preserver of universal nature:
the blessed Saints rejoice in thy glory; and our imperfect Souls are here
sustained in hope: We know that thou will bring us to the Grave, which is the
house appointed for all the living; and from thence thou will raise us again to
an universal Judgment, and then dispose of us to our Eternal Portion: O happy
they whom our Lord shall honor on that day of his solemn triumph! and rising
from his seat of Judgment, go gloriously before them, and with these sweet and
gracious words invite them to follow him: Come you blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. The
reward of your labors I will give you; I my self will be your reward: you have
firmly believed, you have readily obeyed, you have constantly suffered; Come
enter now into your Masters joy. They that are careful, my Soul, to dye the
death of the righteous, will with them be thus caressed at the day of
judgment: Now thou have passed another day, another step toward thy long
home; thou have seen the Sun a few hours more, and this day is gone and lost in
its own night: But have thou lost it too, and made no use of it while it
shined? then let the dew of thy penitent tears for shame lament its departure.
Thou art nearer thy death, but no more prepared for it, if thou have made no
advance toward perfection. Examine thy self to know the truth, and ask thy
self these useful Questions: Am I grown devout as the Saints of God were? Am I
chaste, temperate, and resigned as they, yet? Do I despise now the World with a
Zeal like theirs, and value Heaven at the same high rate with them? Would I
give all I have just now to be there? And part with Life it self just now to go
thither? Has the consideration of their blissful reward, brought me to a full
resolution to aim at the highest imitation of them? At least have I learnt to
humble my self, and check the vanity of my proud conceits? To mourn and blush
at my own many Infirmities, when I consider their excellent Lives and Virtues?
If thou can not equal, my Soul, such glorious patterns, yet let it be thy
hearts desire to do it; and what they really did, do thou really wish to do.

MEDITATION II.
LET us humble our selves, we that are yet in this low state, but not grow
faint at the sight of others so far before us. Rather let us quicken our sloth
by considering their swift pace; and encourage our fears with their happy
success. We who profess the Religion of all these Saints, who lived and died
Members of the same Church with us: We who partake of the same holy Sacraments,
and eat the same celestial Food; who may partake of the same holy and powerful
Spirit, if we diligently seek, and readily receive him. Why should we fear, but
that one day we may shine above, and rejoice together with the glorified
Saints? Are we not all redeemed by the same rich price, and the same eternal
Crowns proposed to us all? Are we not bred in the same Apostolic Faith, and
taught of God by his appointed Ministers? The Lessons, I see, and Teacher is
the same, but the hand is dull, and the Instrument out of tune: They lived in a
dangerous World, like this; and were tied to Bodies frail as ours. But by a
constant vigilance they overcame the World, and subdued those Bodies to the
service of their Minds: They overcame with a joyful Heart, and we thus
congratulate the Triumph of their victories: They overcame, but not by their
own strong hand; and now they triumph, but it is by the bounty of their God.
Cheer then thy self, my Soul, and raise thy Head, and open thy bosom to the
hopes of Heaven: Fear not, our God has a blessing too for us, if we have a love
and obedience for him: If we delight in the ways of Piety, and diligently
attend the Offices of Devotion: If we refrain from the liberties of the World,
and curb the loose suggestions of the Flesh: If we can look on Gold, and
Honor, and their flaming beams not dazzle our Eyes; if we perform with them the
part of faithful Servants, we shall surely with them have the portion of
Children.

MEDITATION III.
PRecious in thy sight, O Lord, is the death of thy Saints, which finishes thy
greatest Work, the perfecting of Souls; whom thou esteemest as the Jewels of
Heaven, and choicely gatherest into thine own Treasury. Precious to themselves,
O Lord, is the death of thy Saints, which takes off the dusky cover that hides
their brightness, which shapes and polishes them to a beauteous luster, and
sets them as Stars round about thy Throne. Precious, O Lord, to us is the death
of thy Saints, from whence we are furnished with such means of Virtue. Some
teach us courage to encounter dangers, and not for fear make shipwreck of our
Conscience. Others by their Example instruct us to converse with meekness, and
patiently bear neglects and injuries. From some we may learn how to use this
world wisely, and make it serve us in our way to the next. From others we may
learn how more generously to despise it, and pass our days in Peace and
Prayer: By all, with thy blessing, we may learn this best of arts, to live and
dye like Saints; and do this in the best of methods, thy glorious Example. O
gracious Lord, whose Love still looks about, and searches every way to save us
sinners! who came thy self, bright Sun of Glory, to enlighten our darkness,
and warm our frozen Hearts: Who with thy fruitful Beams still kindlest others,
to burn as Tapers in thy Church's hand; and by their near proportionate
distance, stand fit to shine into every corner of our lives: We will ever bless
thy Name for all these Mercies, and take care to pass by not one with
Ingratitude. We will not consider in vain the Crown at the Race's end, and sit
down lazily in the shades of ease; nor keep in vain the memory of thy Saints,
without endeavoring to imitate them, which would be to the reproach of our
unprofitable lives. We will strain all our Powers, and pursue to the mark for
the glorious prize that is set before us: Still with our utmost speed we will
follow them, whose travel ended in so sweet a rest.

PETITIONS.
O God of infinite, adorable Goodness, who after thy faithful Servants had
spent their day of life in a course of steady and laborious Piety and Virtue,
did graciously close their Evening with a comfortable death, and give them
instead of this an eternal day of Glory: O grant to us below, we beseech thee,
so to imitate thy Saints in the wise bestowing our allotted time on our Earth,
that we may follow them in their happy passage out of this World, and be
admitted with them to thy everlasting Glories in the other. When our Life's
last day, O Lord, begins to fall, and bids us hasten to prepare for night; then
send thy willing Angels to watch about us, and suffer not the Enemy to disturb
our passage: Send them to receive in peace our departing Souls, and to bear
them safely to thy presence. Then, O thou dear Redeemer of the World, and
sovereign King of Life and Death! thou who despisest not the Tears of the
Penitent, nor turnest away from the sighs of the Afflicted: Thou who preservest
all that rely on thee, and fulfillest their desires that long to be with thee:
Do thou hear our cries, and pardon our sins; and graciously deliver us from all
our fears. Call us to thy self with thine own blessed Voice; Call us, O dearest
Jesu, in thine own sweet words. Say, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World. Then will our happy
Souls immediately obey, and go forth with gladness to meet their Lord, and
Love; to live with him, and behold his Glory, and partake of his Happiness, and
sing his Praise. These things, O Lord, we humbly expect from the merit of thy
humble Death, and the power of thy glorious Exaltation. O Lamb of God that
take away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us; have mercy upon us, and
grant us thy eternal peace.

Amen.
Hymn 40.
TOO hasty night forbear; our Praise,
And our yet young beginning Hope,
Set to increase on these blessed days,
So faint, and dull, requires more scope.
Night will not hear, but sullen flies,
And summons all the World to sleep;
Commands us close our Books and Eyes,
What we have gained content to keep.
O happy Saints! this broken rate
Our slowness bids to ply its wings;
While your unwearied active state
Does always wake, and always sings.
Yet eve'n our state your School too was,
And those your now unwearied Lays
By such a change of sing, and pause,
Here among us you learned to raise.
Here you, thus often too, took breath,
And yet have climbed those hills of light:
O may your good success bequeath
A Hope to reach that glorious height.
Though now our Notes be short, and few,
Our rests too frequent are, and long;
If we but keep in tune with you,
We shall at last sing your glad Song.
If with our utmost humble powers
We here our daily Praye'rs attend;
These poor Devotions shall, like yours,
There in a nightless fervor end.
Glory, O Lord, to thee alone
Be here below, as there above;
O may thy joys, Great Three in One!
Ever attract, and Crown our Love.
Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
These few mistakes of the Press the Courteous Reader is desired to Pardon, and
Correct.

PAge 6. line 7. for talk read task. p. 17. l. 20. f. beautified r. beatified.
p. 28. l. ^8. f. seel r. feel. p. 72. r. Hymn 7. p. 96 f. Son r. Sun. p. 204.
l. 6. f. potion r. portion. p. 282. last l. r. thus acting. p. 302. first l. of
the Hymn r. ' It Is not for us. p. 319. l. 7. f. adventures r. adventurers. p.
358. r. H. 31. p. 442, 443. 445, 446. at the top f. Even r. Morn, p. 452. l.
17. f. fire r. flame.


