A FORM OF RECONCILIATION OF Lapsed Protestants, AND OF ADMISSION OF Romanists
To the Communion of the Church of IRELAND.

Written by the Right Reverend Father in God Anthony Lord Bishop of Mead.

DVBLIN, Printed and are to be sold by Andrew Crook at Their Majesty's
Printing House on Ormonde-Key, and by Eliphal Dobson a^ the Stationers-Arms in
Castle-street, 1601.

A FORM OF Reconciliation, etc.
THere was never any signal Deliverance afforded by God Almighty to his Church,
but as it proved an occasion of greater piety to the devout and sincere
Christian, so it stirred up a desire in such as were either it is open enemies,
or disguised friends, to join themselves in external communion with the true
members of the Church, when they were delivered from their oppressions.

Thus we read of a mixed multitude that joined themselves 2.
to the Jews and went up with them out of the Land of Egypt: These certainly
were no others than some of the Egyptians and other nations, who having seen
the miracles wrought by Moses, and being convinced by them, that they must
needs be the people of God, in whose favor so many amazing prodigies had been
effected, thought it their wisest course to forsake the Idolatry of Egypt, and
join themselves with the Professors of the true Religion.

Thus the Samaritans that disclaimed all friendship and alliance 5.
with the Jews, in the time ant. c.
of their distress, did notwithstanding court and implore their favor,
pretended to be of the of the same religion and communion with them, when they
were restored to the liberty of their religion, and the enjoyment of their
properties in their own country: And it c. 54
was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, that their deliverance out of Captivity
should be so wonderful to the Heathen Nations round about them, that it should
invite vast numbers of them to join themselves to their communion: And what was
thus foretold so long before their return out of the Babylonish Captivity, did
accordingly come to pass after their deliverance, for many of the Nations that
before were their 2.
Enemies, did declare themselves in favor of them, and desired to be admitted
to their communion. And as it happened thus with the Jews before the coming of
our Savior, it was so likewise with the Christian Church after it: For 300
years she enjoyed little of delight or quiet in the world, and few or none
embraced her Religion, but those that did it on a pure principle of conscience,
without any regard to secular profit or advantages; but when Kings and Princes
became nursing Fathers to the Church, and encouraged the Religion by making
Laws for its security, and countenanced the professors of it, by large
privileges and promotions in Church and State; then many of the Heathens
flocked to its communion, and embraced the profession of it; not because they
loved it better than their own, but because they saw it enjoyed the countenance
of the State, and found it the ready way to those honors and advantages which
they knew they must want in the profession of their own: This having been the
state and condition of the Church in former Ages, we have reason to believe,
will be again the consequent of that great deliverance that God has afforded
her in this Kingdom, it being reasonable to presume that those who never were
of her communion, as well as those who Apostatized from it, will be desirous to
be received into her communion: The latter out of a principle of shame and
sorrow, and the former out of desperation, as being out of all hopes of seeing
their Religion to flourish again among us, especially since it received so
remarkable a disappointment, at a time when they flattered themselves with the
hopes of an entire establishment of it. And because it is fit that some penance
should be imposed on those that forsook us in time of danger, as well as a
method propounded for the admission of those that never were of our communion,
that so the former may be brought to a due sense of their sin and danger, and
the latter encouraged to continue in our communion, I shall therefore presume
to offer my thoughts upon this point, and lay down such a Scheme for the
admission of them both, as may serve the present necessities of the Church,
'till the wisdom of the Convocation shall prescribe another in its stead.

In order to this I shall consider,

First, What the Ancient Discipline of the Church was, in receiving Penitents
that had fallen from her.

2ly, How far that Discipline is at present practicable.

3ly, What methods are most proper to be used for the admission of Papists, or
the reconciling of Apostates.

In the handling of the first head, I do not design to insist Peculiar places
appointed for the Penitents.
upon all the particulars of the ancient discipline of Penance, for that would
be a laborious and voluminous work, but shall only mention such branches of it
as may be serviceable to my present design, and in order to that I consider,

First, That there were peculiar Nic. c. 11. Ancyr. c. 4. Tert. de poen. Basil
ad Amphil. c. 22. 56
places appointed for the Penitents and Catechumens in the Church; some
difference indeed there is in the number of them, for the Councils of Nice and
Ancyra mention only three, because they did not esteem the (...) or weepers to
be any order of penitents, but rather as Candidates and expectants of it, and
accordingly they are said by Tertullian, to be in vestibulo panitentiae, rather
in the way and passage to it, than reckoned up as a distinct Order of them: But
the great St. Basiil takes notice of four, viz. the (...) (...) (...) and (...)
Weepers, Hearers, Prostrates and Consistents, and so does Balsamon in his notes
on the Council of Neocaesaria. To these Greg. Thaumatur gus adds a fifth order,
that of the (...) or Communicants, though they cannot properly be reckoned any
Order of penitents, but should rather be esteemed as persons that have
performed their penance, and so were admitted to an entire communion with the
Church; but notwithstanding this difference in the number, it is agreed on all
hands that there were several places appointed for the several Orders of
penitents.

These places and stations were introduced into the When first introduced, how
long continued.
Church long before the Council of Nice, or Constantine the Great's time, as
may appear by the disputes between the Novatians and the Catholics concerning
the reception of the Lapsi, and the Story of Philip the Emperor in Eusebius,
who Hist. Eccl. 6. 34.
tells us that the Bishop would not admit him to enter into the Church before
he had made a confession of his sins and stood in the place of penitents. And
it is plain by the forementioned Canon of Nice, that it rather supposes them
as things of long use and practice in the Church, then prescribes any new rules
or directions about them: And as they were introduced very early into the
Church, so they continued in practice much longer in the Western than the
Eastern Church, for the three first were abrogated in the fifth Century, soon
after the days of Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople; but they continued in
the Western Church till the ninth Century, as may appear by the Capitulars of
Charles the L. 5. c. 71.
Great: After which time the discipline of penance beginning to be relaxed, the
stations of the penitents decayed with it.

2ly, That the place for the Where those stations were.
Weepers was in the Churchporch without the doors of the Church, the place for
the Hearers was at the further end of the Narthex, the place for the Prostrate
within the body of the Church, but before the Ambon the Pulpit or reading desk,
and that for the Consistents before the Choire or Chancel: This will be more
evident by applying proofs out out of ancient Writers to each of these
particulars. First then for the place of the Weepers, we have the testimonies
of Greg. Can. 11
Thaumaturgus and St. Basil, the former of whom tells us, that it was without
the doors of the Oratory where the penitent stood and beseeched the ^^ithful to
pray for him: and the latter Ep. Can* c. 56. 75*
says, that they were to stand without the doors of the Church and confess
their sins and desire the prayers of the faithful in their behalf. The The
place for the hearers.
place for the Hearers was at the hither end of the Narthex, or the entry into
the Church, which whether it was within or without the Church is not much
material to my present purpose, it being only incumbent on me to make good that
there was such a peculiar determined place appointed for this order of
penitents: perhaps that controversy is easily reconciled by adjusting the
several notions of the Ancients concerning the word Ecclesia, which some
extended not only to the (...) but the (...) also, and included the Nave or
body of the Church under the word Ecclesia, and then it must be granted that
the Narthex was within the Church, and a part of it: But others take the word
Ecclesia in a more restrained sense as including only the Nave or Body of the
Church where the faithful did assemble to Prayers and the Sacrament, and then
the Narthex was no part of it, but must be supposed to be a part without it:
However let that controversy lie as it will, I am only concerned to prove, that
the Narthex was the place or station of the Hearers: And by the Narthex, I
mean, the (...) the forepart or first entry into the Church, extending from
the West door till you come to the Pulpit; of which we have some footsteps
remaining in the two Cathedrals of the Holy Trinity and St. Patricks Dublin, in
each of which, there is a stone Pulpit fixed about the middle of the Nave or
Body of the Church: Now the Narthex will contain all that part of the Church
that reaches from the great West door, till you come near the stone Pulpit,
and here anciently the Catechumens and Daemoniacks, and the Hearers had their
stations; the place before the Pulpit (which anciently was fixed in the middle
of the Nave, though now removed to the Wall) was the place of the (...) or the
prostrate, and from thence, to the Choire or Chancel, was the place of the
Faithful or Consistents, where they stood to hear the Word and pray, and from
thence forward is the Chancel, called by the Ancients (...) and (...)

Now that the Narthex was the place of the Hearers, is plain from the testimony
can. 11.
of Greg. Thaumatur gus, who says that the station of Hearers was within the
doors, in the Narthex, where they were to stand till the Catechumens were
dismissed, and then to go out with them: To the same purpose are the words of
Balsamon and Zonaras and Gabriel the metropolitan of in can. 4. Ancyr. lib. de
paenit. c. 10.
Philadelphia affirms, that the place of Hearers, was within the door of the
Church, viz. in the Narthex, where the Hearers stood and communicated in the
Hymns and reading of the Scripture.

The place for the (...) The place of the prostrate.
or Prostrate, was behind the Ambon, or the Reading Desk: All the Scholiasts on
the Codex canonum agree on this, as Balsamon and Zondras Aristenus and Math.
Blastares; Balsamon places it (...) in can. Nicen. ^ 1. 12. Ancyr. 4. 5.
behind the Reading Desk Zonaras and Aristenus (...) in the hind part of it,
and Blastares affirms, in can. praed. syntag. lit. m. 6.
it was within the Church, (...) but behind the Ambon, and that they went out
of the Church with the Catechumens when the Deacon pronounced (...)

The last place for the Consistents, was between the The place of the faithfu
Reading Desk and the Chancel, though not without some distinction of place
between them and the faithful that were not under the censures of the Church:
This is plain not only from the aforementioned Canons of Nice and Ancyra, but
from the Annotations of the Scholiasts upon them, which we do all place them in
the same rank and station with the faithful, and allow them the same
privileges with them, except the participation of the Lords Supper, and the
liberty of bringing their Offerings to the Holy Table.

3ly. That those several distinction in habits, prayers, etc. made between them.
Orders of Penitents were not only distinguished from the faithful in their
places, but also in their habits, in the form of prayer that was used for them,
and in the time of their departure out of the Church. The several Writers on
the discipline of Pacian. in paraen ad paenit. Ambrosad virglaps. c. 8. Cypr.
de laps. Hieron. Ep. 30. ad Ocean. Conc. Agath. c. 15. Tolet. 3. c. 12. B^rc.
in c. 6. Eligius hom. 8.
penance do take notice of a distinct habit that they were to put on, during
the time of their penance, which by some is called Sordida vestis, by others
lugubris, atra and pullata, by others velamen paenitentiae, and habitus
religiosus.

To these, others require, as necessary signs of contrition, tears in their
eyes, and sadness in their countenance, shaving of the hair and lying on the
ground, the putting sackcloth on their bodies and ashes on their heads, and all
for this end and purpose, that it might be known to all persons that they were
under the censures of the Church, and that they might prove by these tests
whether they were sincere in their reformations; If any denied to undergo
these severities, they looked upon him as an hypocrite, and a person
unquallify'd for their communion.

Besides they were distinguished Laod. c. 19. Clem. constable. l. 8. c. 6. 7. 8. l.
2. c. 57. Dion. Hier. Eccl. c. 3. Basil. Ep. can. c. 56. 75. Sozom. hist. l. 7.
c. 16. Chrysostom. hom. 72. in Math. and hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesios.
from the rest of the people, in the time and manof their departure out of the
Church, and the form of prayer and benediction that were used over them: for as
soon as the Hymns were sung, and the Scriptures read and the Sermon finished,
the Hearers were dismissed, and then the doors were shut, and the Catechumens
were prayed for, and when that prayer was finished, the Catechumens were
dismissed, and then the Penitents come under discipline, and as soon as they
had kneeled down, and some certain prayers were offered up in their behalf, and
the Bishop or Presbiter had laid his hands on them, then they were dismissed
out of the Church, and the doors were shut again, and then the Faithful
proceeded to the second Service, and the participation of the Lords Supper.
These things are so plainly set down in the synod of Laodicea, and in those
Authors that have given us an account of the manner and order of the service of
the Church, that I need not insist any further on them.

4ly. confession of their sin Confession required.
was also required of them according to the nature and quality of it, and this
was judged so necessary a part of their repentance, and so sure a sign of the
sincerity of their sorrow, that without it no one could receive the benefit of
Absolution: The ancient canons indeed take notice of two sorts of (...) or
confession, the one, before the penance was imposed, and this was done either
in private to the Bishop, or in public in the Church, as the Bishop should
direct, the other after the penance was performed: The former of these was
looked on as necessary to free the Church from the guilt and the scandal of
public sins, and in the case of private ones it was required as a means to
bring the sinners to a more due sense and conviction of their faults: Thus
Tertullian commends it de paenit. c. 9 *
to the penitent as a thing highly available to Repentance, for he calls it
prosternendi and humilificandi hominis disciplina, and says that it is the
parent of Repentance, and disposes the penitent for pardon and forgiveness and
St. Cyprian in his account of the proceedings with the penitents, tells us that
by outward gestures and tokens they showed themselves to be sorrowful for their
sins, and then made an humble confession of them before the whole congregation,
and desired all the brethren to pray for them: This was also the in Sal. 37.
practice in Origen's time, and we have an ample account of the custom of the
Church in this particular out of Sozomen, where he tells us, that Hist. Eccl.
l. 7. c. 16.
it was the custom at first for the penitents to confess their sins in public,
that afterward to consult the modesty of the penitents, and because it was
thought a little to severe, to make the congregation privy to their sins, there
was a peculiar Penitentiary appointed to receive their confessions; that this
office was after abolished by Nectarius, upon the occasion of a crime confessed
by a penitent, that they who were conscious to themselves of having offended,
did fall down flat upon the the ground, with weeping and lamentation, etc. In
the Church, and then the Bishop runs to them with tears in his eyes, and falls
down to the ground in token of sorrow and compasion, the whole Congregation in
the mean time sympathizing with them both, and expressing their compassion with
tears and sorrow: It would be an endless thing to transcribe all the
authorities of the primitive Writers to this purpose, I shall therefore only
mention two particulars, that are a plain evidence of it. The first is, that
the word,

(...) or confesion is frequently used by Ecclesiastical Writters for the whole
action of Repentance, and this is so common in the Greek and Latin Fathers, in
Ireneus, and St. Basil, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Pacianus, and others, that the
crafty Sophisters of the Church of Rome, make use of it as an argument to prove
their new Doctrine of Auricular Confession, and wherever they find the word
(...) or confessio mentioned, they do not so much inquire into the genuine
sense of the word, as force it into a proof for the practice of their Church in
this particular. Now to me it is a plain evidence that confession of sins in
public was esteemed a necessary part or principal ingredient of Repentance,
because it could give a dinomination to the whole action, and make the
discipline of Repentance to pass under that name, 2ly. That the Romish Doctrine
of Auricular Confession has been superstructed upon this foundation: for it is
realy nothing else but the public exomologesis reduced to ashes and sprang up
in the Church out of it is ruins, and as a late Bishop Tailor. Un. Necess. chapter
10. S. 4.
excellent Author says, it is the relics of that excellent discipline of
Ecclesiastcal repentance which was in some cases necessary, in very many
useful, until by the disolution of manners, it became unsufferable, and a
bigger scandal than those which it did intend to remedy.

5ly. That during the time of their Ecclesiastical penance, fasting enjoined.
they were required to fast. There is none of the ancient Writers on the
discipline of penance, but among the rest of the austerities that were
practiced by the penitents, do mention this of fasting, as a principal part of
it, sometimes under the notion of jejunium, sometimes under the terms of cibus
siccus, and (...) and this will be evident, if we consider the several periods
of the Church and deduce the History of fasting and the practice of it through
them; from whence it will appear that though it was always continued as a part of
the penitential discipline, yet it admitted of different degrees, both as to
the manner of fasting and the time of it: Tert: de paenit. c. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Morni. de paenit. l. 4. c. 9.
for the three first Centuries we only read of fasting in general without
determining the nature of it, or the time how long, or the kinds of meat that
were to be abstained from; and where there is any mention of the time of
performing it, it is rarely extended beyond seven weeks at most. The incestuous
1. Corinthians. 5. 2. Corinthians. 2.
Corint hian mentioned in St. Paul (who was the first instance of the Churches
severity in her censures, and of her indulgence in the relaxation of them) did
not continue above a year under that discipline, if we may be permited to draw
any argument from the distance of time between the writing of the two Epistles,
and the Eusebius. 3. 23.
young man reclaimed by St. John from the society of Robbers, was not above a
month or two at most under the severity of it: And it is plain from that story
and several passages in Tertullian and St. Cyprian, where they describe de
paenit. c. 9. 10. Cypr. de lapsis.
the manner and order of this discipline, that there is only mention of tears
and fasting, of sackcloth and ashes, and prostrations on the ground, of cibus
siccus, and (...) and cibus and potus purus without any determination of the
nature of the fast or the time of it is continuance.

In the 4th Century, as the time of the penance was made more tedious, so the
time of fasting was enlarged with it, and that fasting confined to a spare
diet, and an abstinence from some particular meats: We read in the Ancyr. c.
16. Nicen. c. 11. 12. Basil. Ep. Can.
Councils that were called, and the Fathers that writ within this Century, of
penance imposed for 5. 7. 10: 12. 20. 30 years, according to the nature of the
crimes that the penitents had been guilty of; and because it was impossible for
men to fast so long from all manner of food, we are therefore to presume, that
their fasting did consist rather in a spare diet during all the time, or a
setting apart of some one or more days in a week (wherein they eat nothing till
Evening) than in a total abstinence from all manner of food.

From the 4th Century onward, the manner of fasting came to be prescribed and
limited, and then it was thought a tolerable degree of abstinence, if the
penitent did fast with bread and water, as may appear by the Canons of several
Councils and the penitential Canons extant at the end of Gratians decrees, and
thus things continued, till the Eleventh Century, at which time the disipline
of the Church began to be Corrupted by the avarice of the Priests and the ease
and luxury of the people, and then pilgrimages to the shrines of the saints,
and the entering into Monasterys, the going on an expedition for the recovery of
the Holy Land, or the maintaining of those that were willing to engage in the
Expedition, destroyed the ancient discipline of the Church, and reduced it to
that weak and languishing state in which it is at present.

2ly, I come now to the second how far the ancient discipline is practicable.
particular, to enquire, how far the ancient discipline of the church, is at
present practicable, and here I consider, that some things are of the substance
of it, which continued the same in all ages, and were constantly practiced as
long as the discipline continued in its vigor, and others are of a mutable and
circumstantial nature, which being altered and changed according to the custom
of places and the will of the Governors of the Church, may still be laid aside
as they think fit. Those things that are of the substance of it, I see no
reason why they ought not still to be continued, for they are practicable now
as well as formerly, and having received no alteration through the several Ages
of the Church that have transmitted them to us, are a plain evidence to any
unprejudiced man, that they are not alterable at the will of the Church; that
they may be suited to her in any state or condition, and may still be reduced
to practice when the wisdom of her Governors shall think it expedient: And
among these I reckon three things formerly mentioned, viz. The penitents
confession of his fault, his afflicting himself with fasting for a season, and
his standing for some time in a peculiar place of the Church appointed for that
purpose, before he be admitted to her communion. Among the circumstantial and
less necessary things I reckon the distinction of their Apparel, and the Ashes
on their Heads, the Sackcloth on their bodies, and prostrations on the ground,
the abstinence from Feasts, and and all kind of Civil Business and Commerce,
the macerating of the body, by want of sleep, and long and severe Fastings, the
length of time in which they were forced to continue under the Censures of the
Church, and wait for Absolution, before they could receive it, which sometimes
and in some cases, extended to twenty or thirty years, and as to some
particular Sins, they would never grant a relaxation of their Censures, till
the penitent was expiring. These things, some of them, were the peculiar
flights and excellencies of the primitive Christians, and were an argument of a
rare and excellent temper that reigned among them, and may put us into a just
admiration, whether the severity of the Bishops and Presbiters in imposing
them, or the readiness of the people in complying with them, were more to be
valued, and esteemed. But alas! since ease and Luxury have broken all the
forces of Piety, and the true practice of Religion is decayed in most, it is in
vain to talk of reducing a debauched Age to the austerities of the former, or
prescribe those things as a remedy for their Disease, which they nauseate the
thoughts of; it is sufficient for us, if we can be able to revive the substance
of it, though we cannot be so happy as to recover it to its primitive vigor:
There remains only to consider,

3ly, What methods are most present methods fit to be used.
proper for the admission of Papists to our Communion, or the reconciling of
Apostates from it, and here it is to be considered,

First, that the cases of these two are very different, and therefore the
method of dealing with them must be so too: For the Romanists having never been
of our communion, may and ought to be treated with more tenderness then an
Apostate Protestant, for he has the pretense of ignorance for his excuse, but
the others sin is the more inexcusable, because he has acted against the light
of his Conscience, and has had the opportunity of knowing better things.

2ly, That some difference distinction to be made between the lapsi
must be made as to the case of the Protestants that have fallen off from us,
according to the several grounds and occasions of their Apostasy: Some of them
have been servants under the power of severe Masters, and others wives under
the authority of their husbands, some have forsaken us out of a principle of
fear, lest they should be stripped of all, and exposed to want, and others have
complied out of hopes of gain and making their fortunes by the exchange; some
have sat down quietly on their fortunes, behaving themselves peaceably and
inoffensively among their Protestant neighbors, and endeavoring to do them
all the good offices that lay in their power, others have Joined with the
Romanists in their violence against the Protestants, and have been more than
ordinarily eager in the prosecution of them, that so they might approve their
zeal and the sincerity of their conversion to their new Masters; and as the
motives to their change before they made it, and their actions and behavior
after, has been very different, so the methods of treating them must be more
mild or severe, and tempered according to the several circumstances of the
party.

3ly, Let there be a seat Penitents Seat.
prepared at the entry into the Church behind the West door, called by the
name of the penitents seat, and let the party, that desires to be received, sit
there during the times of prayer and Sermon on every Sunday for a month
together, that the Congregation may know the person, and take notice of his
behavior during his continuance there.

4ly. Let none of them Conference with them.
be permitted to come to Church, or be present at Divine Service, that do not
give notice beforehand, to the Minister of the Parish, of his desire to be
admitted to our communion; and when he does so, let the Minister spend some
time in conference with him, and labor to bring him to a due sense and
conviction of his fault, in forsaking our communion (if he were a member of it)
or of his danger in continuing so long in the communion of the Church of Rome,
if he were a Romanist.

5ly. Let the Minister, Penitents address to the Minister, and his answer.
the next Lords Day (after notice given him by the person that desires to be
reconciled) appoint him to attend him to the Church, and when they come to the
Church door, let the penitent (standing without the door) in the presence of
some of the Congregation, say these words to him: Sir, I have formerly been a
Member of the Church of Rome, and am now sensible of my sin and danger in being
so, and I am come hither to desire that I may be admitted into the communion of
your Church, and to desire yours, and the Prayers of the faithful, to God in my
behalf; To which let the Minister answer: Brother, the Arms of the Catholic
Church are always open to embrace those that are truly penitent for their
faults, but you must wait here a while, till I go into the Church, and desire
to know the minds of my Christian Brethren, whether they are willing that you
should be admitted, for since they have been scandalized by your fall, it is
but reasonable that they should be satisfied in your Repentance.:

6ly. Then let the Minister Consent of the Church necessary.
go into the Church (the penitent still standing without the door) and acquaint
the Congregation with the request of the penitent, and if they be willing to
have him admitted, let him go to him again, attended with three or four of the
people, and bring him into the Church, placing him in the penitents seat, and
saying: Sir, I have acquainted the Congregation with your desire, and they are
willing to consent to it, but you must be content to wait for four several
Sundays in this place, and communicate only in the prayers of the Church, and
the preaching of the Word, till you be admitted to a more full communion with
them. When this is done, let him proceed in the Office of the Church, and when
prayers are ended, let a Sermon be preached, Sermon for the occasion.
adapted to the present occasion, and consisting of these heads. First, the
laying open the errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome, both in Doctrine
and Worship. 2ly, The danger of continuing in the communion of a Church that is
so corrupt. 3ly. That notwithstanding this danger, yet there is hopes of pardon
with God upon the sincere repentance of the party. 4ly. Let the nature of
Repentance be opened to him, and let him be told what Acts and Offices he is to
do for the making his repentance acceptable with God. 5ly. Let him give him
some general Rules for the regulation of his life and conversation.

7ly. When this is done, Fasting and Prayer.
let the Parish Minister go to his house, and discourse over the heads of his
Sermon to him. Let him advise him to set apart one day in a week during his
suspension, for the work of fasting and prayer; Let him direct him how to
observe that fast, and give him a few short prayers, suited to his occasions,
and advise him how to employ his thoughts, that they may not interfere for want
of a subject fit for meditation: In particular, let him advise him to say the
Litany and the seven Penitential Psalms, and the three prayers in the Office of
Commination: All this is advised in case the party can read, but if he cannot,
the Minister must take more pains with him in instructing him, and learning him
some few prayers by heart. 8ly. Let him also acquaint him public confession.
that a public confession of his sin, in forsaking the communion of our
Church, will be expected from him, together with an abjuration of the errors of
the Church of Rome, and an open promise of continuing for the future, in the
communion of our Church, according to the form hereafter prescribed, and let
him read over to him the several things that he is to do in the face of the
Church, upon the day of his admission, that he may not be surprised at the time
of doing them.

9ly. When the party Form of admission.
has observed these Rules, and has stood four Sundays in the penitents seat, as
before directed, let the Minister on the last Lords Day tell him, that he
intends to admit him into the communion of the Church the next Lords Day
following, and desire him to prepare himself accordingly for it; And when the
day for his admission is come, which must always be some Sunday or Lords Day,
publicly in the Church) let the penitent sit in his seat, till after the
Second Lesson at Morning prayer, and then let the Minister go down for him, and
bring him up to the middle of the Church before the Reading-Desk, and then let
him pray,

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun continued and
ended in thee we may Glorify thy holy name and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life through Jesus Christ Our Lord.


Then let the penitent say

Sir,

I am come hither with a design to make a public Penitent's address to the
Minister
confession of my fault, in deserting the communion of this reformed Church, in
the times of danger and affliction, and embracing the communion of the Church
of Rome to preserve my self from trouble; I do here publicly own this to be
a great sin in me, and do beg your assistance, in readmitting me to the
communion of the Church from which I have Apostatized, as also your holy
prayers, and the prayers of the Congregation unto God for me, for the pardon of
this great and crying sin, and for the assistance of his Spirit to preserve and
strengthen me in this Communion all the days of my life.


If the person can read, he is to read the aformentioned profession, if not let
some one that can read, repeat it for him saying Sir, I. N. of C, in the parish
of B* is come hither etc. And then let the penitent express his assent to it.

Then let the Priest say,

Sir,

Before you are admitted Interr^tories
into the communion of our Church, it is fit that you should make some public
profession of your faith, and acquaint the present Congregation with the
motives of your Change, to the end it may appear to them, that you do not
return to us again rashly and unadvisedly, for worldly ends and secular
respects; but upon sober grounds and weighty arguments of conviction, I demand
therefore of you.

First, Do you believe all the Articles of the Christian faith?

2ly. Repeat them then for the satisfaction of the Congregation.

I believe, etc.

3ly, Do you here in the presence of God and of this Congregation renounce all
the errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome as they stand determined by
the Council of Trent, and are at present taught and practiced in that Church?

4ly, Declare unto the Congregation for what reasons you forsook the communion
of our Church.

5ly, Are you sensible of your sin in forsaking our communion for those
reasons, and sorry for so doing?

6ly, Do you desire to be admitted into the communion of our Church which you
have forsaken?

7ly, Are you resolved by the Grace of God to live and die in the unity of the
Catholic faith, and in the communion of the Church of Ireland as it is
reformed from the errors and corruptions of Popery?


Then let the Priest say

ALmighty God who has Prayers to be used
put these good resolutions into your heart give you grace and strength to
perform them, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


After this let the party read his abjuration, openly in the Church (if he can
read, and if not let some one of the standers by read it for him) and at the
end of it, let him be asked by the Priest whether he assents to the contents of
it. Then say, let us pray.

O Most merciful God, who according to the multitude of thy mercies, do so
put away the sins of those that truly repent, that thou remembrest them no
more, open thine eyes of mercy, upon this thy servant who most earnestly
desires pardon and forgiveness, renew in him, whatsoever has been decayed either
by the fraud of the devil or by his own carnal will and frailty, preserve and
continue him in the unity of the Church, and restore him to thy peace and favor
in heaven, upon our admission of him into the communion of thy Church on earth:
Give him Grace to perform the good Resolutions that he has made, and let the
sense of his former frailty, in departing from the truth, have so strong an
influence upon his Soul, as to make him embrace it the more firmly for the time
to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

MOst Gracious God and Merciful Father, receive we beseech thee, this wandering
Sheep into thy Fold, which by the snares of the Tempter, and the frailty of his
nature has gone astray from it; pardon his sin in so doing, and accept of his
Repentance for it; let thy Fatherly pity be extended toward him, and receive
him into the Arms of thy Mercy, now that he desires to return into the way of
truth, that so the Enemy may not triumph in the ruin of thy Servant, but that
the Church may rejoice like an Indulgent Mother, at the conversion and return
of her lost Child, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Then let the Priest stand up (the Penitent kneeling) and lay his hand on his
head saying,

BY virtue of the Authority, Absolution.
to me committed, by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I do readmit this
person into the communion of the Church, and restore him to the prayers of the
Church, and the participation of the Eucharist, and to all other Rites and
Symbols of communion, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.

Let us pray.


MOst Gracious God and merciful Father, who have vouchsafed to call this thy
Servant from the darkness of error, to the light of thy truth, and to recall
him into the bosom of the Catholic Church; send down upon him, we beseech
thee, the the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in him the gifts of
thy Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel
and Ghostly strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness, and fill him,
O Lord, with the Spirit of thy holy fear, now and for ever. Amen.


Exortation.
After this let the Minister make some short exhortation to him on these heads.
1st. The nature of the Promise and Obligation that he has entered into. 2ly. the
necessity of performing a promise that has been made so publicly and upon such
solemn occasion. 3ly. The shame, danger and hazard of breaking it.

The Form of Abjuration.
I H. E. of S. in the Parish of T. and Dioces of M. Do acknowledge my self, to
have been an unworthy Member of the Reformed Church of Ireland, until by the
treachery of my own sinful heart, and for sinister ends and worldly respects,
and especially for [ Here let him mention his reasons.
] I forsook the same: I am truly sensible of my great sin in so doing, and am
heartily sorry for the same, and do for the future renounce all the errors and
corruptions of the Church of Rome, as they stand determined by the Council of
Trent, and are at present taught and practiced in that Church; and do resolve
by the grace of God to live and die in the unity of the Catholic faith, and in
the Communion of the Church of Ireland, as it is reformed from the errors and
corruptions of Popery, Intestimony whereof I do hereunto put my hand this day
of 1691.

This Abjuration should be signed by the party, and witnessed, and then
delivered to the Priest, that it may be entered into the Parish Registry, then
let it be sent to the Bishop of the Diocese that it may remain on Record on his
Registry also.

If the lapsed person has done injury to any of his Protestant Neighbors by
robbing them of their goods, he ought not to be admited till he makes
restitution, or professes a willingness to it.

A Form of Admission of Romanist's into our Communion.
First, Whenever any person that has been educated in the communion of the
Church of Rome desires to forsake it, and to embrace the communion of our
Church, it is fit, that he should give notice of his intentions some time
before, to the Minister of the Parish, wherein he lives, to the end the
Minister may be satisfied in the motives of his change, and spend some time
with him in convincing him of the errors and corruptions of Popery. If the
person be ignorant, and uninstructed in the common principles of Religion,
contained in the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the Ten Commandments (as I am
afraid many of the Papists are) the Minister ought to spend the more time upon
him; First in instructing him in the common agenda and credenda of Religion,
and then descending from them to the doctrines of the Church of Rome, and
showing him the errors of them out of the word of God: For it is in vain to
gain a Proselyte to our Church that is not acquainted with the common grounds
of Christian Religion that are owned by all Chistians as necessary to
Salvation; and the admitting any person as a member of a distinct communion,
does necessarily presuppose him instructed in those principles of Religion in
which the Christians of all communions are agreed; But if he be better educated
and instructed in the grounds of Religion, the Minister of the parish need only
examine him in the reasons and motives of his intended change; And if he finds
him able to give a good account of his Change, Then let him ask him in private
whether he has had any hand in the Rappareeing of his Neighbors, and if he
confesses he has, let him lay the danger of that sin before him, and acquaint
him with the necessity of making restitution; and let him not be admitted, till
he makes some restitution if he be able, or where he is not, profess a
willingness to do it.

2ly. Let him appoint him to attend him at the Church door, the next Lords Day
after notice given as formerly, and then let the person that desires to be
admitted stand at the Church door, and say in the presence of some of the
Congregation, Sir, I have formerly been a Member of the Church of Rome, and
being sensible of my sin and danger in continuing so long in the communion of
that Church, I am willing to forsake it, and to embrace the communion of your
Church, and am now come hither with an earnest desire to be admitted into it.

3ly. Then let the Minister tell him (as before directed) that he must go into
the Church and enquire the consent of the Congregation to his admission, and if
the Congregation be willing to it, let him return to the party with three or
four of the Congregation, and introduce him into the Church, placing him in the
penitents seat, and saying as before directed in the Office for the Lapsi. 6.
except only as to the time of his standing in the penitents seat, which is left
to the Minister's discretion to enlarge or abridge as he sees cause.

4ly. Then let the prayers of the Church begin, and after that, a Sermon
preached on the heads formerly mentioned. 6. then let him be put in mind of
appointing a day once a week for fasting and prayer, according to the
directions. 7.

5ly. Let him acquaint him also, that a public Abjuration of the errors of the
Roman Church, together with an open promise of continuing in the Communion of
our Church, will be expected from him before he be admitted, and to prevent
surprise at any thing that he is to do, let the Minister preacquaint him with
them before he come to perform them.

6ly. When the party has observed the foregoing Rules, and has stood in the
penitents seat according to the time limited by the Minister, let him on the
last day tell him, that he intends to admit him to the communion of the Church
the next Lords Day, and when the day is come, letthe directions formerly
prescribed 9 be observed,

7ly. After the prayer [Prevent us O Lord] is finished, let the party, standing
before the Reading Desk, say,

Reverend Sir, I am come hither with a design to renounce the errors and
corruption of the Church of Rome, in which for many years past I have been
educated, and to implore your paternal assistance in admitting me to the
Communion of your Church, as also your holy prayers, and the prayers of this
Congregation unto God in my behalf for the pardon of all the sins, errors and
ignorances of my life past, and for the assistance of his spirit to preserve
and strengthen me in this Communion all the days of my Life.


Then let the Priest say,

Sir,

BEfore you are admitted to the Communion of our Church, it is fit that you
make some public profession of your Faith, and acquaint the Congregation with
the motives of your change, that it may appear to them that you have neither
forsaken the communion of the Church of Rome, nor embraced the communion of
ours, for finister ends, and worldly respects, but upon sober grounds, and
solid arguments of conviction; I demand therefore of you,

First. Do you believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Ans. I do*

2ly. Repeat them for the satisfaction of the Congregation.

3ly. Do you here in the presence of God and this Congregation heartily and
sincerely renounce all the errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome, as
they stand determined by the Council of Trent, and are at present taught and
practiced in that Church?

Ans. I renounce them all.

4ly. Are you sensible of your sin and danger in continuing so long in the
communion of that Church?

Ans. I am.

5ly. Do you desire to be admitted into the communion of our Church?

Ans. I do desire it.

6ly. Are you resolved by the grace of God to live and die in the unity of the
Catholic faith and in the communion of the Church of Ireland as it stands
reformed from the errors and corruptions of Popery?

Ans. I am so resolved.

7ly. Read your Renuntiation.


After the reading of it let the Minister say,

ALmighty God, who has put these good Resolutions into your heart, and has
discovered to you the light of his Truth, give you grace and strength to walk
in that light, and perform those good resolutions, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.


Then let the Minister use the two former Collects, and then proceed as in the
former Office, except only in the first Collect instead of these words [let the
sense of his former frailty in departing from the truth] let these be inserted,
Let the sense of his former ignorance of the truth have so strong an influence,
etc. After the two Collects, let the Minister stand up (the Penitent kneeling)
and lay his hand upon his head, saying,

BY virtue of the Authority to me committed by our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, I do receive this person into the communion of the Church, and admit
him to the prayers of the Church, and the participation of the Lords Supper,
and to all other Rites and Symbols of communion, In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.


Then shall follow the Collect in the former Office, and after that a short
Exhortation upon these following heads. First. To show to him the advantages
that the Protestant communion has beyond that of the Church of Rome, in
allowing the liberty of reading the Scripture, and the benefit of the public
prayers in a known tongue, in drawing its Members off from relyances on Saints
and Angels, on hallowed Beads and Medals, and and fixing their trust and
confidence only upon God. 2ly. To lay before them the necessity of continuing
steadfast in the communion that they have embraced. 3ly. To show them the danger
and hazard of breaking the Promise which they have so solemnly and publicly
made, and to forewarn them of, and arm them against the loud clamours of
Heretic and Schismatic, and their being out of the Church, which they must
expect will be raised against them and said unto them by the men of the
communion which they have forsaken.:

The Form of Abrenuntiation
I H. T. of B. in the Parish of M. and Diocese of M. Having been educated in
the communion of the Church of Rome, by means whereof I was neither able for
some time to enquire into the Doctrines of that Church, nor to shake them off
without much difficulty after enquiry: But now being sensible of the errors and
corruptions of that Church, and the great hazard of my salvation by continuing
longer in it, I am desirous to renounce her communion, and to be admitted into
the communion of the Church os Ireland, as it stands reformed from the errors
and corruptions of Popery; humbly imploring the Divine Mercy for all the
Ignorances and errors of my life past, and desiring all Christian people to
pray to God for me, that they may not be laid to my charge; and also humbly
entreating you my Spiritual Pastor to admit me a Member, though a very unworthy
one, into the communion of your Church, in which by the grace of God I do fully
purpose to live and die: And this Declaration I do make willingly, sincerely
and unfeignedly, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation, So help me
God, through Jesus Christ, this (...) day of (...) 1691.

FINIS.

