Given to the ELECTOR Prince CHARLES of the Rhyne from the Lady ELEANOR, Anno
1633.

At Her being in Holland or Belgia.

Lamentation, Mourning and Woe. Witness, how washed the late Cup; that of Noah's,
etc.


AMSTERDAM: Printed by Frederick Stam. 1633.

To the PALSGRAVE of the Rhyne, Took Essay of the Cup, 1635. miserably
imprisoned by the French House of Medicis those Medes. Cup Bearer to the
Emperor.
Charles Prince Elector: The Palm of the Hand, Dan. Cap. 5.
The Tune to, Who list a Soldiers life, etc.
Psalm. I will utter my grave matter on the Harp.


By the Lady Eleanor, Anno 1633.
Babylon or Confusion.
TO Sion most beloved I sing of Babylon a Song,
Concerns you more full well I wot then ye do think upon.
Belshazzar, lo, behold the King feasting his thousand Lords:
Phoebus and Mars praised on each string, every day records.
As when Prague lost, he feasting with Ambassadors was betrayed, etc.

His own ('it is like) were made away, bids holy things bring out;
Praising of Gold and Brass the gods, of Iron, Wood and Stone,
See, hear, nor know not, out alas, praised in Court alone.
Daniel signifying judgment of God. Execution place.

Upon the Wall against the light it wrote about a line
In presence of his numerous Peers, Styled Charles Stuart.
not set an hour full,
In Loins nor Knees had he no might, changed as a ghastly skull.
Pleaded hard.
alas, the thing, Belshazzar loud does shout;
Calls for Magicians all with speed, came in, as wise went out.
Caldeans and Southsayers sage, the meaning who so can
Of Mean Mean third Realms Peer in Scarlet-Robe the Man. Judgment Parliament.
The President in Scarlet.

Supt not, drank a glass of wine.

Musicians may their Pipes put up, stood gazing on the wall.
The pleasant Wine at length as sharp too late, till thought upon
Division of another strain unfolds the Fingers long, Sentenced his Head to be
severed, etc.

Soldiers alarm.
where hosts of Lords did ring,
So wisely came the Graceful Queen, said, Ever live, O King.
Lo trouble, O King, A handmaid that followed him. Also one Mrs Grace Carry,
Anno 1639. A Prophetess.
thy thoughts no more forthwith shall it be read;
Daniel there is, who heretofore like doubts did over spread.

On whom confer the King needs would his Orders sight unsought. Give his Order
to B. Juxston, etc. not permitted to send it to his son.

Needless preferments yours reserve, Sir, keep your gifts in store:
High Offices let others gain, there is give too much before.

Sure as in thy Banqueting house, The fatal place.
where all that comes may view:
The Vessels of my God are brought, (Sabbaths.)
the Palm salutes thee know
Herewith; for these profaned by thee threatens the fatal blow.

Caldean Land, Caldeans signifying union mingling, or as Devils, Witches,
Scotland of old, called Calcdonia.
a Nation fell gave them to have and hold.
The Royal Scepter and the Crown advanced whom he would have,
And whom he would he pulled down, could put to death and save:
January 30. marched from S. James Park.

Excellent Majesty how gone, Court exchanged for the Stall.
Thy Grandsire on as came to pass, Nebuchadnezzar, a Father and Grandfather,
both signifying Bewailing of the Kindred.
at all yet minded not,
As if a feigned Story, but his miserable Lot.
By whom termed Round dealing Gentlemen of Westminster. As multitudes grazing
at S. James of late; which forenoon the Ducks, viz. Duces, etc. mounted, or
flew over the Scaffold.
whose lofty words memory can speak well,
Hardened in pride, unheard of such, the wild Ass with did dwell:
Sent to the Ox it owner knows, undreamt of this his Doom:
Fowls their appointed time observe, wots not the Night from Noon.
Assyrians haughty heart droven out with such as bray,
The Diadem fits thee as well, Ass go as much to say.
Earth that of late made seem to dance, with Songs of Triumph high
All overgrown, abas'd as much, Disguised Himself. Common Soldiers.
among the Herd does lie.

Whilst they bedew the Earth with tears, discerns not friend from foe.
Fields, Woods, for woe ring out as well as Men, and Echoes call*
Mercy this Savage King upon in holy Temples all.

An Eagle mounted on the Crest, a Heart in silver field. Threatens Entrails.

Extold again his God as high, blessed him all his days:
Others reputes them as nothing, His Prayer Book.
alone proclaims his praise.
Aged seven times seven, in 49. King and Queen of Scots both put to death of
late. Render Himself a prisoner to the Scots. Promised or pretended.

Whom Devils Legions do possess, a Monarch turned a Slave.
Deposed thus thou knew well, Belshazzar, O his Son,
And renowned so deliverance voiced by every one.
Beside 1605. November the fifth, etc.

And with a Feast solemnized, that no time might recall:
The memory of such an act, yet as it had not been,
Thy Favorites who are more this day, or marched to thy Kin.

Meditate carved Statutes on in Faction do combine
With Enemies of God most high, The Stuarts matched with A rundel and Weston,
etc.
to thrust him from his Throne,
And thus have lifted up thy self so facile and so prone.
He last of those Caldean Belchaser. (Anagr) Charles Beheaded, given him, Anno
33.
not humbling of thine heart,
But stiffned have with pride thy neck unto thy future smart.
Behold polluting holy things with Sabbath so Divine,
Idolatry and Revels in that day and night made thine. Altars again adored.


Thou have not glorified him sent this wrote on the Wall. Transported from
Babylon the Great, to Great Britain, Mean, Mean Laus, The power of the People.

God numbered thy Kingdom has ended; the Hand points here,
In Balance his weighed thee too, the set hour drawing near.
Crowned and married 1625. was defeated 1645.

His Image wanting found much more lighter then can be told.
Parted, divided thine Estate, given to the Medes is; Reveal O Daniel. (Anagr.)
Eleanor Audley.

At hand as these bids it adieu, finished thy Majesty's.
WHich in several Courts by her answered, anno 33. As then October 23, she
committed to the Gate house close Prisoner, by the space of about two years,
for these (a testimony to all Nations) Printed beyond Sea; so again the Three
and twentieth of October was the Irish Massacre; and likewise Kenton fight,
October 23, since when Reprinted anno 48. Septembr. the ensuing Month, were
given to the then Lord General, with her own hand superscribed, THE ARMIES
COMMISSION: Behold he comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute
judgment on all, (Jude, etc.) replied by him, But we are not all Saints. The
Army at St. Albons then, when unexpected, came up nevertheless doing thereafter
that, January 30. At her return thence, she taking up at Whitehal her Lodging,
where attending their coming, to be a beholder of the Prophetical Tragedy, etc.

FINIS.

