THE COVENANT OF GRACE: OR AN EXPOSITION upon Luke 1. 73, 74, 75.

By GEORGE DOWNHAM, Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of DERY.

GENESIS 22. 16, 18. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord That in thy seed all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Bible, near the Royal Exchange. 1647.

ILLVSTRISSIMI DUUM-VIRIS PROREGIBUS SIVE SUMMIS SERENISSIMI REGIS CAROLI PRO
REGIMINE TOTIUS HIBERNIAE JUSTITIARIIS D. ADAMO VICECOMITI LOFTVS DEELY
DIGNISSIMO EJUSDEM REGNI CANCELLARIO; ET HONORATISSIMO D. RICHARDO BOIL COMITI
CORCAGIAE, DOMINIS SUIS COLENDISSIMIS.

GEORGIUS DOWNAME EPISCOPUS DERENSIS DIATRIBAS HASCE DE FOEDERE GRATIAE DEO:
PERSEVERANTIA SANCTORUM QVALESCUNque TANQUAM LEVIDENSE MUNUS, IN PERPETUUM
SUMMAE OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIUM L.M.D.D.

In this T^eatise upon Luke 1. 73, 74, 75. are handled, the Context or
Coherence, with a brief analysis of the Hymn of Zachary called Benedictus, Cap.
2. Text, wherein we consider, the Parties between who^ this Covenant was made,
viz. The God of Israel, Cap. ^. Abraham our Father, Cap. ^.
Tenor of the oath it self, cap. 3. containing a twofold gift, cap. 4. viz.
Redemption, cap. 5. The fruit of our Redemption, which is our new obedience,
whereof are set down the Parts, viz. Holiness, Cap. 6. Righteousness. Cap. 6.
Properties, Spiritual security, Cap. 7, 8, 9. Vprightness, Cap. 10, 11.
Perseverance, Cap. 12.






THE COVENANT of GRACE: OR AN EXPOSITION upon Luke 1. 73, 74, 75.
The Text. LUKE 1. 73, 74, 75. The Oath, which he swear to our Father Abraham,
that he would give us; that we being delivered from the hand of our enemies,
should worship him without fear, in holiness, and righteousness, before him all
the days of our life.
CHAPTER. I.
The Context or coherence of the Text.
THese words are the sum and substance of the Covenant of grace, which the Lord
made with Abraham the Father of the faithful, and the very abridgement of the
Gospel (for God, when he made this Covenant with Abraham, (...) he preached
beforehand the Gospel unto him* Gal. 3. 8.) and therefore are most worthy both
to be handled with much diligence, and to be heard with great attention and
reverence. They are part of that heavenly Hymn, which Zacharias the Father of
John Baptist pronounced at the circumcision of his Son; for such was both the
goodness of God toward him, that he did not only restore unto him his speech
and hearing, the use whereof for a time he had lost through his incredulity,
but also bestowed upon him the Spirit of Prophecy: And such also was his
thankfulness to God, that no sooner had he recovered his speech, but he
employed it to the glory of God.

Now both these, I mean the miraculous both loss and recovery of his speech,
happened By singular dispensation.
(...), as Theophylact has well observed, that it might win credit to the
extraordinary Ministry of John the Baptist, who was to be the forerunner of
(...) in.
Christ, that he being to bear witness of Christ might be worthy of all credit.

In this Psalm Zachary Prophesies, first, of the Son of God our Savior Christ,
to the end of the 75 Verse, and after of his own Son, at the 76 Verse to the
end of the Psalm.

His Prophecy concerning Christ is a Prophetical thanksgiving, wherein he
blesses God for his unspeakable Mercy to the Israel of God, in sending his
own, and his only begotten Son to work our Redemption and Salvation. For
although our Savior was not as yet born, and much less had paid the price of
our Redemption; yet he knew him to be incarnate, and conceived in the womb of
the blessed Virgin: Wherefore knowing, that now the work of Redemption was
already begun by the incarnation of Christ* he speaks of our Redemption,
after the manner of other Prophets, as of a thing already, done, and praises
God therefore.

His Prophecy concerning his own Son, is a Prophetical gratulation,
congratulating the great favor of God vouchsafed unto him, whom the Lord had
ordained to be the Prophet of the most high and the (...) or forerunner of our
blessed Savior, and consequently to be more then a Prophet, then whom there had
not risen a greater among the sons of women, Math. 11. 11.

But to return to the former Prophecy (which I called a Prophetical
thanksgiving) out of which my Text is taken. The benefit or blessing for which
Zachary blesses God, is first propounded in these words verse. 68. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, who has visited his people; and afterward twice
expounded. First, more briefly in the end of v. 68. and the two verses
following; and then more largely at the 71. v. to the end of my Text. The (...)
or more brief Exposition in these words, has visited, that is, has redeemed
his people, by raising up a horn of Salvation for us, (that is a mighty
Savior, as Psalm 18. 3.) in the house and lineage of his servant David (whose
son according to the flesh the Messiah was to be) as he spoke by the mouth of
his holy Prophets, which have been of old. For God is said to visit men, when
he does to them, as he had foretold, whether in the better part, by way of
promise; or in the worse, by way of threatening. And thus, in the better part,
Moses teaches us to expound this phrase, Genesis 21. 1. The Lord visited Sarah,
that is, he did to Sarah as he had promised. Upon which words Fremelius and
Iunius have this note: hence are we to take the Explication of this usual
phrase; for to visit is to put in execution the good promised, or the evil
denounced. So Genesis 50. 24. God (says Joseph) will surely visit you, Exodus 13.
19. that is, will bring you out of this land, unto the land of promise, as he
swear to Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob. And accordingly when God did send Moses to
deliver his people out of Egypt, as he had promised, he is said to have visited
them, Exodus 3. 16. and 4. 31. In like manner, when God sent his own Son to
redeem us, as he had formerly promised. he is said to have visited, that is, to
have redeemed his people, as he had spoken by all his holy Prophets in former
times.

The latter and more large Exposition, or (...) beginning at ver. 71. for the
man of God being ravished with the consideration of this unestimable benefit,
does as it were dwell (...) upon it, being not content to have propounded it,
and once to have expounded the same, but again, by way of exultation, he
amplifieth it in other words, after the manner of the godly in their songs of
deliverance; as you may see in that song of Moses Exodus 15. which was his (...)
or song of victory, which the Israelites had over Pharaoh and the Egyptians; as
this is Zacharies (...) or song of victory, which the Israel of God has over
the spiritual Pharaoh, and all the enemies of our Salvation.

But I come to the words of the Exposition. Salvation, where we may out of the
words going before, repeat the Verb (...) or (...), as if he had said, Who, I
say, has wrought or raised Salvation, that is, saved us from our enemies, and
from the hand, that is, the power of all that hate us: Verse 72. That he might
work mercy with our Forefathers, that is, that he might perform his merciful
promises made to our Fathers, and remember, that is, show himself mindful of
his holy Covenant: Then Verse 73. The Oath, which is either to be read by
apposition, if with Theophylact we read (...), to wit, The Oath, or to be
referred to the Verb (...) or (...), that he might perform or remember the Oath
which he swear to our Father Abraham. In this latter Exposition, as the words
are multiplied, and the phrases varied, so the affection of the argument is
also changed: for whereas in the former Exposition it was said, He visited,
that is, Redeemed his people, as he had graciously promised; here it is said,
He visited, that is, Redeemed or saved us, that he might perform his promise:
Where the keeping of his promise is made the end of his sending Christ to
Redeem us; to let us understand, That as God was most gracious in promising our
Redemption, so most faithful and just in the performance. So that the former
part of this Psalm, from the beginning thereof to the end of my Text, is but
one sentence or Axiom, wherein there is relation of consequence; the sum
whereof is this, Because the Lord has visited, that is, has Redeemed his
people, according to his promise, and has saved us, that he might keep his
promise, and perform his Oath; he is therefore to be Blessed, that is,
magnified and praised.

This Analysis I have the rather propounded, because we repeating this Psalm
daily in our Lyturgy, might, as David exhorts, Psalm. 47. 7. Sing with
understanding; as also because my Text being but a part of the sentence, is not
complete in it self, but must be perfected by repetition of that which goes
before, after this manner, The Lord God of Israel is therefore to be blessed,
because he has visited, that is, has sent his Son to Redeem us, as he has
promised; and to save us, that he might keep his promise, and perform his Oath
which he swear to Abraham; the tenor whereof was this, That he would give us,
etc. and this is the Coherence of my Text, Out of which we may gather these
three Observations:

First, where it is said, That God did therefore send his Son to Redeem us,
that he might keep his promise, and perform his Oath: we observe the immutable
truth and fidelity of God in performing his promises; For in Christ all the
promises of Godare yea, and amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. If therefore the truth of God
be such, that rather then he would go back from his word, he did send his own
Son to suffer death for our redemption: yea, if his fidelity were such, as that
therefore he sent his son that he might perform his promise, then can we not
doubt of the performance of any other promise of God; this being the most
difficult of all, either for God to grant, or for us to believe. When the world
was to be made, the Lord did speak the word, and it was created. But when it
was to be redeemed; he gave his Son to be a price or ransom for us. And who
would ever have thought (but that the Lord has revealed this his unspeakable
mercy in his word:) that God, being of infinite Majesty and Glory, and enjoying
all self contented happiness, would give his only begotten Son to dye for his
enemies? If therefore to make good this promise, he gave his Son to dye for us,
how shall he not Romans 8. 32. with him give us all other good things which he
has promised? Such is the truth of God, that every faithful man may say with
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and I am sure that what
he has promised shall in due time be performed. For as he is omnipotent, and
therefore able, so he is the God of truth, Psalm 31. 5. yea truth it self,
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and therefore willing; he is Jehovah, Exodus 6. 3. one that gives
being to his word; who though he can do all things, yet he cannot lie, Tit. 1.
2. nor deny himself 2 Timothy 2. 13. Wherefore, as the faithful, who lived before
the incarnation of CHRIST, did faithfully and comfortably wait for the
performance of that promise, as being the consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 25.
though between the making of it, and the performance, there did intercede four
thousand years: So whereas the Lord has promised his second coming for our
full redemption; though it may seem to be delayed, we are with comfort to wait
for it, with earnestnes to long for it, and with undoubted certainty to expect
it.

Secondly, whereas Zachary praises the Lord for performing his promise
concerning our redemption by CHRIST, we learn, what is our duty; namely to
praise and magnify the name of the Lord, as for all other his mercies, so
especially for the work of our redemption; according to that, Psa. 107. 2. Let
them praise the Lord, whom he has redeemed, and delivered from the hand of the
enemy. But of this more hereafter.

Thirdly, whereas Zachary gives thanks to God for a benefit not as yet
received; for as yet CHRIST was not born, and much less had he as yet redeemed
us; we learn, That we are to give thanks, not only for the benefits already
received, but for such also as are promised: for this is a notable fruit of a
lively Faith, setting forth also most notably the truth of God in his promises;
when a man in the assurance of Faith, which is the substance of things hoped
for, Heb. 11. 1. gives thanks for those benefits and blessings which as yet he
has not, as though he had already received them. It is the commendation of the
faithful, Hebr. 11. 13. who having not received the promises, but having seen
them afar off (as Abraham, Joh. 8. 56. saw the day of Christ) believed them,
embraced them, and rejoiced in them: For, if he who praises God for benefits
received, does glorify God, Psalm. 50. 23. then much more does he glorify him,
and magnify his Truth, who praises him for benefits which he has only
promised, because this is a fruit of a greater Faith. Thus David showed himself
thankful to God for the favors which he had promised by Nathan, 2 Samuel 7. and
thus ought we to be thankful for the promises of a better life. So much of the
Context.

CHAP. II.
The Text resolved into his parts; the first whereof are the parties between
whom this Covenant was made.
NOw I come to the Text it self; the contents whereof, as you see, is an Oath,
wherein we are to consider both the parties between whom it was made, and also
the tenor of the Oath it self. The parties, as well him that swears, viz. The
Lord God of Israel, as he to whom the Oath was made, viz. Abraham our Father.
Concerning the tenor, we are to know, That whereas some Oaths are assertory,
wherein some truth is avouched; others promissory, wherein some promise is
made: this is of the latter sort, containing the promise of a gift; for so he
says, That he would give us. This gifs is twofold, viz. Redemption, in those
words, That we should be delivered from the hand of our enemies; and the fruit
and end of our Redemption, which is the true worship of God, in those words,
That we should worship him, etc. which worship of God is set forth both by the
parts and properties thereof. The parts are two, Holiness, and Righteousness;
for by Holiness we are to understand the duties of the first Table, which we
owe unto God: and by Righteousness, the duties of the second Table, which we
owe unto man. The properties are three; The first, respecting our enemies, from
whom we are delive^ed, in the word (...) without fear of them; the second,
respecting God, in the words before him, the third, respecting the continuance,
all the days of our life. The first of these is (...) or* spiritual security;
the second, is uprightness and sincerity: the third, is constancy or
perseverance. Of these in order.

Concerning the party which did swear, we are to consider these three things.
1. By whom he swear. 2. How, or after what manner. 3. To what end. For the
first; it is the manner of men in their oaths to swear by a greater. But the
Lord; when he made this Covenant with Abraham, because he could not swear by a
greater, he swear by himself, Heb. 6. 13. By my self have I sworn, says the
Lord, etc. Genesis 22. 16.

Concerning the manner: we may gather by that, which the Lord requires in our
oaths, what he performed in his own, Ier. 4. 2. There are three properties
required in an Oath, Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness. Truth, opposed to
falsehood o^ perjury: Judgment, to rash and common swearing; Righteousness, to
unjust and unlawful oaths.

For the first: that the Lord did swear in Truth, it is most certain, because
it is impossible, that the Lord in his promise, and in his oath should lie,
Hebr. 6. 18. and therefore we may be assured of that, wherewith Micah
concludes his prophecy, Mic. 7. 20. that the Lord will undoubtedly perform
his mercy, which by oath he promised to Abraham. From whence we may learn this
most profitable instruction. That seeing the oath of the Lord, whereby he
promises to give to all them that are delivered from the hand of their
spiritual enemies (that is, to all that are redeemed by CHRIST) grace to
worship him in holiness and righteousness, is infallible, we should therefore
be careful to bring forth these fruits of our redemption; otherwise, we can
have no assurance, that we are the redeemed of the LORD. Yea, on the contrary,
it may be verified of us; that if we do live in sin, and do not, at the least
desire and endeavor to serve God in the duties of holiness and righteousness:
it is as certain as the Oath of God is true, that as yet we have no part in the
redemption wrought by CHRIST. And the reason hereof is evident; for to be a
servant of sin, and to be redeemed from the bondage of sin; are things
repugnant, and imply a contradiction. For whom Christ the Son of God makes
free, they are free indeed, Joh. 8. 36. but he that is a servant of sin is not
freed indeed. Now every one that commits sin, as habituated in sin, that is
in whom sin reigns, he is the servant both of sin, Ioh. 8. 34. and of Satan,
1 Ioh. 3. 8.

Secondly, in Judgment, a man is said to swear in judgment when he swears
advisedly upon just and necessary occasion; for Oaths are then only good, when
they are necessary. This necessity of the Lords Oath arises from our weakness
and infidelity, who will not believe the Lord without an Oath: and therefore
the Lord, in great mercy to relieve our infirmities, has confirmed his
Promise, which in it self needs no confirmation, as being truth it self
(...), Heb. 6. 16. more abundantly then otherwise needed, by Oath, which as it
argues our great corruption, so it ought to be a remedy for the same. It is
great infidelity not to believe the Word and Promise of God, but greater not to
believe his Oath: In not believing his Promise, thou make him a liar, 1 John
5. 10. In denying credit to his Oath, do thou make him any better then a
perjured person? And yet this is the estate and condition of many professing
the Name of Christ. God has swo^n, and will not repent, That to those whom he
Redeemeth, grace shall be given to worship him in holiness and righteousness.
These men do not so much as desire, care or endeavor to worship God in holiness
and righteousness, but live in sin, and go on in sin, without repentance; and
yet for all this, they will needs persuade themselves that they are the
Redeemed of the Lord, contrary to the express Oath of God.

Thirdly, in Righteousness; men are said to swear in righteousness, when that
which they promise by Oath is lawful and good: and this goodness is measured by
the reference which it has to the glory of God, and good of man. Neither does
the Lords Oath want this property; for what could be either more glorious to
himself, or more profitable unto us, then that which by this Oath is promised?
For as touching the glory of God, among all the works which God ever wrought,
there is not any that sets forth more the glory both of his Mercy and of his
Justice, then the work of our Redemption, with the fruits thereof: For hereby
appears his mercy to be such, as that, rather then he would suffer us most
miserable sinners to perish in our sins, he gave his own, and his only begotten
Son to die for us. His justice such, that rather then he would suffer the sins
of his own elect children to go unpunished, he has punished them in the death
and sufferings of his only begotten Son.

And if you consider our profit, it is evident that (as hereafter you shall
hear) in the things promised by this Oath, our happiness does consist. Neither
doubt I to affirm, that by the things promised in this Oath, our estate
becomes better, then that which we lost in Adam. Adam, though he were just,
stood righteous before God, but in his own righteousness; but we being redeemed
by Christ, stand righteous before God in the righteousness of Christ, which far
surpasses the righteousness both of men and Angels. Adam was created good, but
changeable, and therefore, being tempted, he fell; but we, being once redeemed
by Christ and sanctified by his spirit, shall never fall away; but by the power
of God through faith we are kept safe unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. The
happiness, which Adam enjoyed, was in an earthly paradise, but the happiness,
which Christ has purchased for us, is in Heaven. Thus much of the manner.

Now are we to consider the end for which the Lord did swear: which is plainly
and fully set down Hob. 6. 17, 18. that he might more abundantly show unto the
heirs of promise, the stableness of his counsel: that by two immutable things
(that is his word, and his Oath) they might have strong consolation. For
howsoever they might doubt (...) their p^rseverance unto salvation, in regard
both of their own frailty, and also of the strength of their enemies: yet they
know* that the foundation of God abides sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and that the Word
and Oath of the Lord is immutable; and that, howsoever heaven and earth shall
pass away, yet not one jot, or title of the Oath of God shall fall to the
ground. And therefore have just cause with David, Psalm. 40. 2. to profess
them confidence, and with Paul, Romans 8. 38. 39. to rest assured, that nothing
shall be able to separate them from Gods love in Christ Jesus our Lord. For the
Lord has sworn, and will not repent, That he will give us, being delivered
from the hand of our enemies, to worship him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness, before him, all the days of our life. If therefore the oath of
an honest man be, or ought to be, (...) the end of controversy, Hebr. 6. 16.
how much more-ought the Oath of the Lord to be an end unto us of doubting and
distrust?

The use, which we are to make of that, which has been said, concerning the
Lord his taking of an Oath, is that, whereunto we are so often exhorted in the
Scriptures, Be you holy. as I am holy, says the Lord, that is, in this
particular duty of holiness (for swearing is required in the first Table) We
are to imitate the Lord, both in respect (...) the action it self, and also in
regard of the object, the manner, and the end.

As touching the action it self, where the Lord is said to have sworn, we are
taught, that to swear, is in it self a thing lawful and good, though the
Anabaptists deny it in all Christians, and the Papists in them, who in their
conceits, are perfect; and yet in the Scriptures we see it practiced by the
holy Angels, by the blessed Apostle in diverse places of his Epistles, in the
penning whereof he was free, as from erring, so also from sinning, and lastly
by God himself, in this, and many other places. Neither is it only commended
as lawful, and good, as Psalm. 63. 11. but also commanded as necessary, and as
a thing which not only may be done, but also which must be done, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
10. 20. as being a d^ty both of holiness to God, and of righteousness and
charity to man. For being rightly performed, it serves greatly to set forth
the glory of God, by ascribing unto him Omniscience and Omnipresence, the
knowledge of secrets, justice, the patronage of truth, the punishing of
Falsehood. Of charity and righteousness to men, as being profitable and
necessary for the (...) of a necessary truth, for (...) among men, for the
discharge of our duty, and sometimes for (...). And therefore being a (...) so
necessary in respect both of God and man; God himself has sworn it should be
practiced in the new Testament, Esaias 45. 23. But I shall not need to prove the
lawfulness of swearing in these times, when there are m^^e that swear, then
that do fear an (...), Eccles. 9. 2. Let us rather consider, how we are to
imitate the Lord in swearing, in respect of the object, the manner and the end.

First therefore, as the Lord did swear by the true God only, that is,
himself: so we are to swear by no other, for what we swear by, that we Deifie;
and therefore to swear by any other, is to forsake God, I^r. 5. 7.

And as touching the manner, we are to swear in truth, in^udgement, and in
righteousness, Ier. 4. 2. for not to swear in truth is perjury; which is
forbidden, condemned, and punished as a detestable sin, and as an horrible
profanation of the Name of God, Lev. 19. 12, Ier. 5. 2. Zae. 5. 4. wherein
besides falsehood and lying, which destroy the soul, and ^^clude out of heaven,
Apoc. 22. 15. and besides deceit, (and that under the religion of an (...)
whereof God is the ^venger, 1 These. 4. 6. Psalm. 5. 7. there do also concur two
other abominations. The one an horrible indignity offered to the Majesty of
God, whereby as if he were a patron of falsehood, they call upon him, as a
witness, to second their untruth. The other in that they tempt God, and dare
him, as it were, to his face, to execute his vengeance upon them, if they
avouch an untruth; when they themselves know, that they swear falsely.

Secondly, in judgment: for to swear rashly and commonly in our ordinary talk,
is to make common, that is, to pollute the holy name of God; and to turn the
Sanctuary of verity, into a common house of vanity. As the Name of God is holy
and reverend* (...) ought it to be used holily, and reverendly; And as an oath
is not simply good, but upon necessity, so ought it not to be used, but when it
is necessary. For, bonum necessarium extra terminos necessitatis non est bonum.
Our Savior therefore forbids us to swear at all in our ordinary talk, Mat.
5. 34. 37. and S. James wishes us above all things to take heed, that we swear
not, ^left we fall into condemnation, Iam. 5. 12. and wholesome to this purpose
is the council of the son of Syrach, Eccl. 23. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, in Righteousness* for by oath to promise that, which is unlawful,
besides that it argues a full purpose, and resolution to do evil, which is to
sin with a high hand: i^ does also offer an horrible indignity unto God, when a
man calls upon him to be, as it were his surety for the doing of that evil,
which he promises.

There rem^ineth the end: for so we are to swear, that by testifying a
necessary truth, which cannot by other means be manifested* God may be
glorified (according to that form of adjuration, Give glory to God, Ios. 7.
19.) our brethren satisfied, controversies ended, our duty discharged, our own
innocence cleared. Vain are the o^thes, which are not referred to these, or
such like ends; and by them also the holy Name of God is taken in vain. So
usually do they swear, that swear usually; having no respect, either to the
glory of God, the good of their brethren, or discharge of their duty; but rap
out Oaths, sometimes in choler, sometimes in pride and vain glory, sometimes
in deceit, to color their falsehood: sometimes in a vain conceit to win
credit to their speeches wherein notwithstanding they are miserably deceived,
for he that swears much, sometimes for swears: and he that makes no
conscience of polluting the holy and dreadful Name of God by common swearing;
will learn to make no conscience of swearing (...). So much of the party that
did swear.

Now we are ^o speak of the party to whom this Oath was made; who is here
described by his name Abraham, and by his re^^tion to us, Our Father. Abraham
was so called by God himself, Genesis 17. because he ^ade him Ab-hans^^, the
Father of many nations, that is to say, of the faithful in all Nations. Now,
whereas I showed before, That the Lord would not have taken an Oath, unless it
had been necessary, in respect of our weakness and incredulity, who will not
believe him without an Oath: It appears, That Abraham himself needed to have
the Promises of God confirmed to him by Oath: From whence we learn this
profitable lesson, That the Faith of the best of as has its imperfections, and
is mingled with Unbelief. For if Abraham, the Father of the faithful, the most
worthy pattern of a lively and a strong Faith, had need to have his infirmities
relieved, as it is plain that he had; not only (as in this place) by Oath; but
also Genesis 15. by a sign; Genesis 17. by the Sacrament of Circumcision, which was
unto him a Seal of that Righteousness which is by Faith, Romans 4. 11. and almost
in every Chapter of his story, by the often repeating and renewing of the
promises unto him: What are we to think of our selves, who are by many degrees
inferior to Abraham? Surely we are to beware, both of the proud fantasy of
those, who dream of perfection in this life; and also of the c^reless practice
of others, who thinking they have proceeded far enough, sit still, not seeking
to go forward in the way of Christianity; and therefore are not likely to come
to the end of their way, which is the salvation of their souls. But we, in the
humble acknowledgement of our imperfections, must with the Apostles, Luke 17.
5. pray unto the Lord to increase our faith, and using all good means to
proceed from faith to faith, until we come to a perfect man in Christ, we
must with the Apostle, as not having attained, Phil. 3. 12^ 13. forget those
things which are behind, and reach forth to those things which are before,
pressing forward toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ* Phil. 3. 14. and if the Apostle, and those who are perfect, that is,
adulti, grown men in Christ, are to be of this (...), is the Apostle says in
the next verse: much more thoft, which are not so good (...), ought to be so
minded, remembering, that Religi^^ ^s compared to a way, wherein we are still to
go on, until we come to the end of our way* which will not be before the end
of our life.

And whereas Zachary calls Abraham our Father, this is not to be understood,
either of all the Jews, or of the Jews alone; ^ut of all the faithful,
whether they be Jews or Gentiles. For Abraham is the Father of all the
faithful, Romans 4. 11. and all, which are of the faith, are the children of
Abraham, Gal. 3. 7. In this sense, Zacheus the Publican receiving our Savior
by faith, became the son of Abraham, Luke 19. 9. As for those, who were of
Abraham's seed, according to the flesh, and not according to his faith, they are
not accounted the seed of Abraham. For ^s the Apostle says, Rom* 9. 6, 7. All
they are not Israel, which are of Israel, neither are they all children,
because they are the seed of Abraham, but in Isaak shall thy seed be ^all^d,
that is, says the Apostle, verse. ^. They, which are the children of the flesh,
are not the children of God, but the children of the Promise are accounted for
the seed. So our Savior, John 8. although he grant, that the Jews, to whom he
spoke, were, according to the flesh, the seed of Abraham, verse. 37. Yet he
concludes against them, that they were not Abraham's sons indeed, because they
did not the works of Abraham, verse. 39, 40. This must teach those, who come of
faithful parents, or are nobly descended from famous and worthy ancestors, not
to rely too much upon their parentage, but to show themselves to be their
children by imitating their faith, and their godly conversation. For otherwise,
though their parents were the children of God, they may notwithstanding be the
children of the Devil, as our Savior tells the unbeleeving Jews, Ioh. 8.
44. And therefore John the Baptist warns the Jews, not to stand so much upon
this, that they had Abraham to their father; but wills them to bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance, Mat. 3. 9. If therefore we would be able, with
Zachary, to call Abraham our father, we must follow the faith of Abraham,
Galath. 3. 7. and imitate his works, Ioh. 8. 39.

Again, from hence we observe; that, what is spoken in this Oath concerning us,
as that he would give us, that we being delivered, etc. is not to be understood
of all men, but of us, who have Abraham to our Father, that is to say, of the
faithful, who only are the sons of Abraham, the heirs of the Promise.

CHAP. III.
The Tenor of the Oath.
NOw I come to the Tenor of the Oath it self, in these words: That he would
give us, that we being delivered, etc. But here some m^n will say, there is no
such Oath as this, recorded in the Scriptures of the old Testament, which God
did swear to Abraham.

Whereunto I answer: that it is not always the custom of the holy Ghost, in
the New Testament, when he alleges Testimonies out of the old, to recite the
very same words, and syllables, but sometimes, as being the best interpreter of
himself, in stead of words, he sets down the true sense and meaning thereof:
so in this place. For whereas Moses Genesis 22. 16. 18. records this Oath in
these words, by my self have I sworn, says the Lord, that in thy seed all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed: Zachary verse 67. here being filled with
the holy Ghost, expounds what this blessedness is, which was promised in
Christ the promised seed, viz. that the Lord, would give us, that we being
delivered from the hands of our enemies, should worship him without fear, etc.
That this is the oath, which Zachary means, it is most certain: because he
gives thanks to God, for the performance of his oath, which he swear to
Abraham, concerning the Redemption of his people the Israel of God, by the
Messiah or promised feed: which can be no other (...) that which I named, In
thy seed all (...)

And surely great cause there was, that in the beginning of the prom^^^gation
of the Gospel, it should be explained, what this blessedness is, which was
promised by the Messiah. 1. First, for confutation of the erroneous and
pernicious conceit of the Jews, who thinking that the Messiah should be ^
temporal Monarch, expected only tempora^ blessings from him: But if our hope in
Christ were only in respect of this life, then were we of all men most
miserable. 1 Cor. 15. 19.

Secondly, For prevention of a most dangerous scandal, which otherwise would
have ensued upon that erroneous conceit. For it being^ received opinion among
the Jews, from which the Disciples of Christ were not free, Mat. 20. ^1. Act.
1. 6. that the Messiah should be a temporal Monarch, who should restore the
Kingdom unto Israel, and make his followers happy with external and ^empor^
blessings: If this opinion had been nourish^d in them, it could not have been
avoided, but that they would have taken offense at Christ's (...) and poor
estate, when in stead of honors, riches, greatness and g^^ry in this world,
which they expected from the Messiah, all things should happen contrary to
their expectation. Our Savior therefore pronounces them blessed, who were not
offended at him in respect of his mean condition, and poor estate. Mat. 11. 6.

Thirdly, For rectifying our judgment in that most weighty point concerning our
happiness. For the very foundation of a Christian conversation, is the right
belief concerning happiness. For all men desire happiness, as the supreme end.
And such as is the end, or happiness which they propound unto themselves: such
are the means which they use, such are their studies and endeavors. As for
example, if men place their happiness in pleasure, their whole course of life
is volumptuous; if in riches, covetous; if in honor, ambitious, etc.

For these causes, as I said, it was necessary that it should be declared, what
this blessedness is. Our Savior therefore in the beginning of his gracious
Sermon upon the Mount shows, that the happiness, which by him they were to
expect, did consist in spiritual grace, and eternal glory. Mat. 5. 3. Blessed
are the poor or beggars in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. and so
in the rest, in every whereof two degrees of happiness are noted: (...) the one
set down, as the Schoolmen speak, per modum meriti, which I called grace: the
other, per modum praemij, which Lealled glory: the one being, be (...), via, or
our happiness n^this life: the other, beatitudo patriae, or our happiness in
the life to come. S. Paul likewise expounds the happiness, which we have by
Christ, to be spiritual. Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God (says he) who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessing^ in heavenly things in Christ. Thus S.
Peter, speaking of this Covenant, which God made with. Abraham. and applying it
to the Iew^, expounds this blessedness to be their turning, and consequently
their freedom from sin. Ye ^e (says he) Act. 3. 25, 26. the children of the
Covenant, which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed; unto you first, G^d having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of
you from your iniquities. In like manner* the Apostle Paul, Galat. 3.
expounds this blessedness of justification by faith, redemption from the
curse of the Law, and receiving the promise of the spirit. Those which are of
faith says he, verse. 7. 8. 9. are the sons of Abraham, and the Scripture (that
is the holy Ghost who speaks in the Scripture) foreseeing, that God would
justify the (...) through faith, preached the Gospel before to Abraham,
saying: in thee, that is, in thy seed shall all nations be blessed, Genesis 12. 2,
3. chap. 13. 15. 17. chap. 15. 18. So then* they which be of faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. Again, verse. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of
the Spirit. But most chiefly in this place, where the Holy Ghost does, as it
were, ex profess, expound, what this blessedness is, viz. That he would give
us, that we being deliver^^ from the hand of our enemies should worship him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life.

Now, that this is a most true and perfect exposition, I will prove by these
two reason^. And first, for the truth of it. For whera^ there (...) called,
obtain in this life, (...) and sanctification, justification, by (...) to the
Kingdom of (...) with it concur redemption, (...) adoption, being all in
substance the (...) only in some relation or respect. For when God does forgive
our (...) of Christ's righteousness, he does both redeem and recon^^^e, and
justify, and adopt (...) but with this distinction. First, that when f^rgiving
our sins, by which we are bound over to death and damnation, and held (...)
sun and Satan, he fi^eth us from this bondage, he is said to redeem us,
Eph^s. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.. Secondly, when forgiving (...) whereby we are the
children of wr^th, and enemies against God, he receives us unto his love, and
favor in Christ, he is said to reconcile us, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Thirdly, when
forgiving our sins, which exclude us from he^ven, and make us guilty of (...)
absolve and (...) us from the (...), and does accept of us in Christ (...), and
as heirs of salvation, he is said to just (...), Romans 3. 24. 25. 4. 6, 7, 8.
Fourthly, when forgiving our (...) of the Devil, he does in Christ (...) to be
his children, he is said to adopt us. The second degree is Sanctification, by
which we are prepared and made fit for Gods Ki^^dome. Now these two are the two
parts of the gift, which God by oath in this place promised to give to the
faithful the sons of Abraham: viz. deliverance from the hand of our spiritual
enemies, namely the law, sin, death, and the devil, which is our redemption or
justification: and grace to worship God without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, which is our sanctification.

2. And that it is a full and perfect exposition, it is easily proved: because
not only to the whole gift here promised, but to every part and parcel thereof,
happyness is ascribed in the word of God. As first, to redemption; for what is
it to be redeemed by Christ, but to have remission of sins by him? Ephesians. 1. 7.
Col. 1. 14. By him we have redemption, even the remission of our sins. But to
the remission of sins, the holy Ghost ascribes blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
Romans 4. 6, 7. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity.

2. Secondly to a godly life: which is here termed the worship of God in
holiness and righteousness, in which the keeping of the law does consist. For
when a woman out of the crowd cried unto our Savior, blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the papes that gave thee suck: Our Savior returned this answer,
Luke 11. 28. Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep
it. The same has Solomon, Pr^v. 29. 18. and who knows not that, which the
Apostle teach, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come, and consequently of the happiness both of
this life, and of the other life.

3 To the parts of Gods worship; as namely to holiness. Apoc. 20. 6. Blessed
and holy is the man, who has his part in the first resurrection. Which
testimony yields unto us a double proof. First, because he uses the terms of
(...) of life. And not only to holiness in general, but to the several
branches thereof is blessedness ascribed; as to saving knowledge, Prove. 3. 13.
Ioh. 17. 3. to faith, Luke 1. 45. Ioh. 20. 29. to assiance, Psalm. 2. 12. 34. 8.
40. 4. 84. 12. to hope, Psalm. 146. 5. Esaias ^0. 18. Ier. 17. 7. to obedience,
Apo^. 22. 14. to the fear of God, Psalm. 112. 1. 128. 1. 4. to humility, Mar.
5. 3. Ioh. 13. 17. to patience, Iam. 1. 12. 5. 11.

4 To righteousness, Ps. 106. 3. Es. 56. 1, 2. and not only to righteousness it
self, but also to the true desire of it,. Mat. 5. 6. Ye^, and to the several
branches of it, as to mercifulness, Mat. 57. Psalm. 40. 1. 2. Prove. 14. 21. to
meekness, Mat. 5. 4. to peacemaking, Mat. 5. 9.

And not only to the parts of Gods worship, but also to the properties. Fifthly,
therefore to the worship of God without fear of our enemies, that is in
confidence, Psalm. 146. 5. Whether you understand it without cause of fear,
because there is no condemnation to the^ that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.
or without servile fe^r, in expectation of eter^al happiness, Ti^. 2. ^3. for
this indeed is the top of our happiness in this life, to worship God, as
without fear of damnation; so in a found expectation of eternal life. And this
seems to be employed in the Hebrew word Hithbaracu, which being of a
reciprocal signification, signifies, that in Abraham's seed all Nations should
not only be blessed, but also should bless themselves, that is esteem and
account themselves blessed.

Sixthly, To uprightness and integrity, or to the worshipping of God in holiness
and righteousness as before him, Psalm. 1 19. 1. Blessed are the upright in the
way, that is, who walk uprightly; So Psalm. 84. 11. and not only the upright
themselves, but their children also after them are pronounced blessed, Prove.
^0. 7.

^

If therefore blessedness be ascribed, first of all to redemption (...)
secondly, to the true worship of God in general; thirdly, to holiness:
fourthly, to righteousness: fifthly, to the worship of God without fear:
sixthly, to integrity, or to the worship of God as before him: seventhly, to
perseverance, or to the worship of God (...) days of our life: Then seven times
happy is that man, who being delivered from the hand of his enemies, has grace
given unto him to worship God without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of his life.

By this conference of places we learn, what the happiness of a Christian is in
this life; not to abound in wealth, not to attain to great honors, not to
wallow in pleasures, (...) graces above all the things in this world (for what
is our happiness, that is our chief good) esteeming all wordly things as dross
and d^ng, yea as loss in comparison thereof, Phil. ^. 8. 9, For as without
these spiritual graces all wordly things are ^ain and unprofitable: yea, to
them that set their hearts on them, hurtful and pe^^icious; So having fought
and obtained these graces, all temporal blessings shall be added unto us: or if
we seem to want any of them, our seeming want thereof shall not hinder our
happyness. And therefore our Savior pronounces the faithful, though living in
poverty, hunger, sorrow, and persecution, happy and blessed, Luke 6. 20. 21. 22.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the gift promised by this Oath in general, and of the two parts thereof
jointly.
THus much of Zacharies exposition of Gods Oath, now we come to the words
thereof, that he would give us, etc. The thing then promised in this Oath is a
gift: Of this gift we are to speak; first in general, and then in particular.
In general, we may observe, first, the main difference between the Covenant of
works, made with all mankind: and the Covenant of Grace* made with Abraham and
his seed, the heirs of promise, In the former, the Lord (...) perfect
obedience to the performed by our selves to our justification, and salvation
and denounces his fearful c^rse against those, that do not continue in a total
and perfect obedience. In the latter, the Lord, i^ in stead of requiring
perfect obedience to be performed of us to our justification and salvation;
promises to those, which believe, redemption and justification without works:
and being redeemed and justified by faith, he promises to give them grace to
walk in new obedience, as being an unseparable fruit of our redemption and
justification, and as the highway wherein we are to walk toward our
glorification. Of this new Covenant the holy Ghost prophesies by Jeremy, Chap.
31. verse. 31. 32, 33. Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will make a
new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not
according to the Covenant which I made with their fathers, when I brought them
out of Egypt (which was the covenant of works:) but this shall be the Covenant
that I will make with them, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it
in their hearts, etc. Which is the covenant of grace recited by the Apostle, Heb.
8. v. 8. 9. 10 of which, being a better Covenant, Christ is the mediator, v. 6.
according to that John 1. 17. This Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ. The same Covenant repeated by Ezekiel, Chap. 36. 26. 27.
The Gospel therefore or Covenant of Grace is not a new law, nor Christ a new
lawgiver (as the Papists absurdly teach, confounding the Law and the Gospel;
saving that they teach, that the Gospel requires more perfect obedience to be
performed by our selves, then the Law it self does prescribe unto
justification) but to them that are redeemed and justified by faith, it
promises grace to walk in new obedience. Howbeit this is true, that as men
deprived themselves of what was promised in the Old Covenant, by disobedience:
So if men do live in sin without faith, and without repentance, not so much as
desiring, caring, and endeavoring to worship God in holiness and
righteousness: they can have no assurance that they are within the Covenant of
grace, made only with those that truly believe: God having promised to those,
which are redeemed and justified by faith, to give them grace to worship him,
in holiness and righteousness.

Secondly, we note, that our justification and sanctification are both the free
gifts of God, for it is he that redeemeth and justifies, and it is he also
that sanctifies, which point needs no proof, seeing God (...) swear they are
both his gifts. The use where of in a word is, that both they, which want these
benefits, being neither freed from the guilt of their sins, nor purged from
their corruptions, may know where to seek them and also those that have them
maybe thankful to God the giver of them: which is the thing, whereunto the holy
Ghost by Zachary exciteth us in this Psalm.

Now this gift promised by Oath (that I may come to the parts thereof) is
twofold; our redemption or justification (for to be redeemed is to have our
sins remitted, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. and to have our sins remitted is to be
justified) and the fruit or end of our redemption, which is our sanctification,
consisting in the faithful, sincere, and constant service of God in holiness
and righteousness.

Of these I am to speak, First, jointly of both together; and then of either of
them severally. In the joint consideration, we are to observe both the order
and conjunction of them. The order is plainly expressed by the Participle (...)
that being delivered from the hand of our enemies we should worship him etc.
For the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that God would give us, both that we
should be redeemed and delivered from the hand of our enemies; and also that we
should worship him; But to note the order, he has expressed the former part,
which is the benefit of redemption, by the Participle, that being delivered
from the hand of our enemies we should worship him, etc. which teaches us,
that before we can worship God aright, we must be delivered from the bondage of
our spiritual enemies, and that for two reasons. For first, naturally we are
the servants of sin, and of Satan. Being servants of sin, we are in two
respects utterly disabied from serving God, until we be delivered out of this
bondage, for first, being servants of sin, we are fr^e from righteousness, Romans
6. 20. in respect of that privative corruption, which is in us all derived from
our first parents; being a privation of all spiritual goodness, Romans 7. 18. not
only in respect of the act, but also in respect of the habit and power (as
blindness is of sight) being a mere impotency to that which is spiritually
good, in so much that not only we do not think, nor will, nor do that which is
good; but also we are not able thereunto, Of our selves we cannot so much as
think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. The natural man does not understand
spiritual things, neither can he understand them, 1. Cor. 2. 14. Fulgentius, De
incarnat, and gratia, (...) well, that Adam by his sin wholly lost the faculty of
thinking those things which appertain to God, and also of willing that which is
good, and much more of doing that which is good: for will may be present when
performance is wanting, Romans 7. 18. But it is God that works in us both to
will, and to do, Phil 2. 13. Insomuch that the faithful themselves, if they
think, or (...) or do any thing that is good, may truly say every of them, 1
Cor. 15. 10. not I, but the grace of God which is with me. For the carnal mind,
or the disposition of our corrupt nature is not subject to the Law of God,
neither can it be, Romans 8. 7. Augustine truly faith, that man by his fall lost
bonum passibilitatis, and our Savior professes, that without him, or not
being in him, we can do nothing. John 15. 5. Does not the holy Ghost elsewhere
teach the same, when he affirms tha^ we are naturally dead in fin, Ephesians. 2.
1. 5? And therefore, as a dead man cannot perform the actions of the natural
life; no more can he* that is dead in sin, perform the actions of the life
spiritual: likewise, when he calls our recovery from sin, sometimes, the
first resurrection, whereby the soul, which before was dead, is

Homo per peccatum facultatem (...) perdidit and bona voluntatis.

it raised as it were from the grave of sin* sometimes, regeneration,
whereby, we being before dead, are quickened, and begotten a new unto God.
Sometimes new creation, by which we are made new creatures created unto good
works. For as the first creation was a motion from nothing to those things
which are; so the new ( Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 2. 10. (...) etc.
) creation is a motion from our not being of grace, and spiritual goodness, to
a being thereof; which serves notably to confu^e the erroneous conceits of
the patrons of freewil, the Pelagians, Papists, Arminians, and our new
Anabaptists.

Secondly, being servants of sin, sin reigns in us, as a Iyrant, without
resistance, imposing upon us a necessity of sinning. In respect whereof it may
truly be said, that naturally we do nothing but sin, neither can we do
otherwise but sin. Our free will by nature having (as Augustine says) Nihil
vnlet nist ad peceandum. De spiritu and lit. c. 1.
no hability but to sin. For as the same Augustine says, Ad ^^^facium (...)
Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 8.
(...) The frame of a man's thoughts and imaginations which the Apostle calls
(...), is evil, and only evil, and that (...), Genesis 6. 5. 8. 21. and therefore
of the (...) Apostle affirms, Romans 8. 7. (...) (...) but (...) not an (...)
also enmity against God. And for the (...) cause our Savior, when Peter (...)
counsel, called him Satan; (...) why he so called him, was, (...) (...) that
is mind and affect, the things which are of men, Mat. 16. 23. And S* (...)
affirms, that that wisdom which is (...)* and carnal, is also (...) (...)*
Iam. 3. 15. As therefore it was well said of Augustine, De natura and gratiae
contra Pelag. that man by his fall did lose (...) possibilitatis; so as truly
he did deny that he retains possibilitatem non peccandi. And this (...) the
estate of all men in their pure (...)* which the Philosophers do magnify as
good* and the Papists qualify as not evil. In regard whereof notwithstanding,
we may truly be said, besides the guiltiness of Adams heinous transgression, to
have but two faults; the one, that there is in us no goodness spiritual, nor
possibility of our selves, but a mere impotency to that which is good. The
other, that there is us naturally an evil disposition, and (...) into all
m^^^er of s^^, which does so dom^^^^r in us, that it imposes a necessity of
sinning, so that by nature, as we do no good, neither can we think, or will, or
do that which is good; so do we nothing but sin, neither can we do any thing
but sin. And as we are naturally the servants of sin; so by sin we are also the
serof the devil, who is the Prince, Ioh. 12. 31 and God of this world 2 Cor. 4.
4. under whose subjection the whole world of the wicked lies, 1 Ioh. 5. 19.
who is the powerful Prince of the air, working effectually in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. carrying them away captive to do his will. 2 Timothy 2.
26.

This servitude to sin and Satan, the mystery of our redemption does
presuppose. For if we were not captives, we needed not to be redeemed. And he
does therefore redeem us, that we might serve him; and therefore before he does
actually redeem us, we cannot serve him in holiness and righteousness.

Socondly, we are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. and enemies,
yea rebels against GOD. And therefore until we be reconciled unto him by the
death of Christ, and justified by faith through redemption wrought by Christ;
we cannot do any thing which may be acceptable to God. for they that are in the
flesh cannot please God. Romans 8. 8. The person must be accepted, before his
actions can be accepted* And without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11. 6.

Now if this be so, that we cannot serve God, or do any thing that shall be
accepted of him, unle^s we be first redeemed, justified, and reconciled to him:
how does it beho^e every one, that has not yet obtained these graces, to
labor for them above all the things in this world? For until then, he does
nothing but sin, and by multiplying sins he does hoard up wrath against the
day of wrath.

The means of Gods part, is the preaching of the Gospel, which is therefore
called the ministry of reconciliation, which God has committed to the
Preachers thereof, by whom, as his Ambassadors in Christ's steed* he entreats
you to be reconciled unto God* 2 Cor. 5. 18, 20.

The means on our part, are faith, praye^, and repentance. For if thou do
truly, and by a lively faith effectually believe, that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, and Savior of all that believe in him; thou art bound to believe also
(or else thou make God a liar) that he is thy Savior, and so believing thou
art justified, and being justified by faith, thou shall have peace with God.

Secondly, if the Lord who is the party offended, and needs not thy
friendship, desi^eth thee to be reconciled unto him; wilt not thou, who art the
offender, who also without his favor, shall perish eternally; wilt not thou (I
say) by hearty and earnest prayer de^i^e him to be reconciled unto thee? Now if
(...) do by the prayer of faith desire God to be reconciled unto thee; what
should hind^^ thy reconciliation, when thou destrest (...) of God, which God by
his Ministers desires of thee?

But unto these two we must add the duty of repentance. For if we continue in
sin without repentance, and please our selves in ^^^pleasing God; how can we
persuade our s^lv^s, that we desire to be reconciled unto him? And if we do not
desire to be reconciled, then are we the professed enemies of God, for whom
remains the fearful expectation of that judgment which shaldestroy the
adversa^^^^ of God. Heb. 10. 27. So much of the order.

Now we are to speak of the concur^^nce of these two graces. For when the Lord
swears, that to those whom he redeemeth and justifies, he will give grace to
worship him in holiness and righteousness; from hence we do necessarily
collect, that sanctification is an unseparable companion of justification; and
that no man can have assurance, that he is justified, unless he be in some
measure sanctified. Let no man therefore deceive himself with a vain profession
of an idle and dead faith, (...). 2. 14. for unless thou do, at the least,
desire and endeavor to worship God in holnesse and righteousness; it is as
certain, as the oath of the Lord is true, that as yet thou art not justified,
nor actually made partaker of the redemption wrought by Christ. It is true that
our Savior Christ in the days of his flesh, did redeem us meritoriously,
paying a ransom sufficient for all that should believe in him: but none are
actually made partakers of this Redemption, but they to whom it is applied; and
it is applied only to those that truly believe, and true faith* purifieth the
heart, Act. 15. 9. and works by love* Gal. 5, 6. and is to be demonstrated by
good works, (...) faith, as all those are which truly believe in him, in them
Christ dwells by his Spirit (for, Romans 8. 9. they are not his, who have not
his Spirit) applying unto them not only the merit of his death, to their
redemption, and the benefit of his resurrection to their justification, Romans 4.
25. but also the virtue and efficacy of his death to mortify their sins,
Phil. 3. 8, 9. and of his resurrection to raise them to newness of life; so
that for whose sins Christ died, they die to their sin; and for whose
justification he arose, they also rise to newness of life. The Apostle, Romans
6. 3. 4. affirms, that those who have been bapt^zed into CHRIST, were
baptized into his death, and resurrection; that as CHRIST did die and rise
again; so they also die to sin, and rise to a newness of life.

2. CHRIST was given unto us by his Father, not only to be our justification,
and redemption; but also our Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Neither did he come
with blood alone, or with water alone; 1 John 5. 6. But as Saint John in his
Gospel carefully observes, as a thing most remarkable. John 19. 34, 35. He
came both with water and with blood, with the blood of redemption, to expiate
the guilt of our sins, and with the water of ablution, or sanctification, to
cleanse us from the corruption* 1 John 5. 6. And in respect of both, his blood
does cleanse us from all our sins, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. from the guilt, perfectly, in
our justification, from the corruption, in part, and by degrees in our
sanctification. See Hebr. 9. 14.

3. Whosoever are the sons of God by adoption, as all those are, Io. 1. 12, 13.
that truly believe, they also are his sons by regeneration.

4. The same is implied in the benefit of Redemption, whereby Christ our
blessed Savior does not only redeem us from the guilt of sin, which binds
men over to damnation, but also from the bondage of sin, that howsoever sin
does remain in the faithful, yet it shall not reign in them, Romans 6. 14. nor
have dominion over them. For they that practice sin, are the servants of
sin, John 8. 34. and of Satan, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. in them sin reigns; and
therefore they are not by Christ redeemed from the bondage of sinn^* For whom
the Son makes free, they are free indeed, Ioh. 8. 36.

5. The same is proved by the nature and property of a true faith. For faith is
a grace of regeneration, which the Spirit of God, when he does regenerate us,
ingenerateth in us: whereby, as we are justified alone, because no other grace
does concur with it to the act of justification: So are we sanctified in
part, ^^gether with other graces; and therefore is never severed from the grace
of regeneration, or from other sanctifying and saving gra^^^, and further it is
the property of faith, having justified us, inwardly to purify the heart Act.
15. 9. and outwardly to work by love, Gal. 5. 6. Therefore, though to the act of
justification, neither outward obedience, nor inward graces do concur with
faith, as any cause thereof: Yet in the subject, that is, in the party
justified; they must, and do concur, as necessary fruits of a true and lively
faith, without which it is dead, Iam. 2. 20. And therefore a true, lively,
justifying faith, is also a sanctifying faith.

Now, both from the order, and conjunction of these graces, we may infer a
singular consolation to all the true^ Children of God. For if there be such a
conjunction between these two graces of justification and sanctification, that
whosoever has the one, has also the other, and who has not both has
neither: then it follows necessarily, that, as he that is justified, is also
sanctified; So he that is sanctified, is also justified; and if the order
between them be such, that a man cannot serve God in the duties of
sanctification, until he be justified, nor cannot worship God aright, until
he be redeemed from his spirit^all enemies* then it follows (...), that they
who are in any true measure sanctified, are also justified; that they who
sincerely desire, and endeavor to walk in the obedience of Gods holy will,
making conscience of their ways, are redeemed from the hand of their
spiritual enemies. And not only may we from our sanctification come to the
certain knowledge of our justification: but also we may thereby make our
calling and our election sure. For do thou, professing the true faith,
endeavor to keep a good conscience, and to walk uprightly before God; then it
is certain, that thou art justified by a true faith; art thou justified? then
(...) is certain, that thou art effectually called: art thou called according
to Gods purpose? then without doubt thou art elected: art thou elected? then
undoubtedly thou shall be saved. Seeing then such singular comfort ^^set^ from
the leading of a godly and upright (...), as that thereby we may make our
calling and election sure, hereby we should all of us be excited to the study
of godliness, and practice of piety: for the greatest comfort that we can have
in this life, is to be (...) of our election and salvation. But to the
knowledge of our election, we cannot come (...), by any thing going before, as
the cause thereof, but a posteriori by the effects. The s^ries or chain of the
degrees of salvation, may not unfitly be compared to Jacobs ladder, which
reached from the earth to heaven, the lowest step whereof in this life is our
sanctification, whereon, if we can set our foot, we may from thence arise to
our justification, and from thence to our effectual calling, and from thence
to our election. But if we will without ascending by these degrees, take upon
us to conclude the certainty of our election, we shall be like him, that being
to go up a ladder, would strive at the first, to set his foot on the highest
step of the ladder, neglecting the lower degrees.

CHAP. V.
Of the parts of the gift severally, and first of Redemption.
NOw we are to speak of the parts severally; and first, of redemption, in these
words, That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies. Where we are to
note.

Three things. 1. The parties that are rede^med. 2. The party, by whom, and
after what manner. 3. The parties from whom, our enemies.


1. The parties redeemed are We, who have Abraham to our Father; that is to
say, the faithful: not all men, but those only that believe. For, so God loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whos^ever believes in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 16. Thus he is said
to have saved his people from their sins, Matthew. 1. 21. to lay down his life
for his sheep, John 10. 15. to have given himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might purify to himself a
peculiar people, Titus 2. 14. The Prophet Esaias te^tifieth that Christ by his
knowledge (that is, by the knowledgement of him, which is faith) shall justify
many, Esaias 53. 11, 12. for he shall bear their iniquities; and that he bare the
sin of many: and our Savior himself, Matthew. 26. 18. that his blood was shed
for many for remission of sins. It is true, that Christ his death is a
s^fficient price of ransom for the sins of the whole world: Yea, of more
worlds, if there were more then one, for his blood and his sufferings, whereby
he redeemed us, were the blood and sufferings of him that was and is God: Act,
20. 28. but yet they are effectual only to those that do believe.

Arg. 1. For if Christ had redeemed all men, then all should be saved. 1. For
all that are redeemed are also justified and all that are justified shall be
glorified. 2. For, for whom Christ died, for them he has satisfied the justice
of his father, so that there is no condemnation to them, whom Christ has
redeemed. 3. For whom Christ dyed, them by his death he reconciled to God; now
they, who when they were enemies were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; much more being reconciled (...) be saved by his life.

Arg. 2. Neither may we think, that Christ would die for them, for whom he
would not pray. But for the world, faith he, John 17. 9. that is for the
company of the (...) and repro^at^s I pray not: but for them whom thou have
given me out of the world.

Arg. 3. But if the Oath of an honest man, ought to be the end of controversy,
much more ought the Oath of God in this place end this controversy concerning
universal redemption. For God has sworn, that to so many as he redeemeth, he
will give them to worship him in holsness and righteousness, But the greater
part of mankind have never the grace to worship God in holiness and
righteousness, and therefore to them the benefit of redemption does not belong.

Now, when we do profess our selves to be the redeemed of the Lord, we do
withal confess, that in our selves we are bondmen, and servants, whom Christ
came to redeem out of this bondage. But howsoever all will challenge to
themselves the benefit of Redemption, yet how few, in comparison, do acknowledge
their bondage? But like the unbelieving Jews, when our Savior promised them
liberty, profess, that they never were in servitude, John 8. 33. and so bewray
themselves not to be redeemed. But this humble conceit of our selves before
our Justification is necessary for us, if either we would seek to Christ, or
have him to respect us. For if by nature we be not in bondage, what need we a
redeemer? If not lost, what need we a Savior? Mat. 9. 12. The whole need not
the Physician, but they that are sick, Christ came not to call the righteous
but sinners to repentauce, Mat. 9. 13. to preach redemption to the Captives,
Luke 4. 1^. and to save that which was lost. He was given unto us of his
Father, to be our wisdom, our lustification, our redemption, our
sanctification, our life our salvation, 1 Cor. 1. 30. If therefore we would be
made partakers of these benefits, we must acknowledge our selves to be fools in
spiritual things, that in him we may become wise; guilty of. death and
damnation, that in and by him we may be absolved and justified: defiled and
polluted with sin, that by him we may be sanctified: dead in sin, that in him
we may be quickened and revived: lost, that in him we may be saved: captives and
bondmen, that by him we may be redeemed.

2. As touching the party by whom we are redeemed; the text says; he would
give us that we should be redeemed: which, in the beginning of this Psalm is
more plainly expressed: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and
redeemed his people, or as the words are, has wrought redemption to his
people. How? By raising an horn of salvation, that is, a mighty savior For us,
who according to the flesh was the Son of David. The father therefore redeemeth
us by giving his son for us: the son redeemeth us, by giving himself to be a
price of redemption for us. 1 Timothy 2. 6. The holy Ghost also redeemeth us, when
working in us the grace of ^aith, he applies unto us the benefit of
redemption. The father redeemeth, as the gracious Author and Donor; the Son, as
the meritorious worker, the holy Ghost, as the effectual applier. The good will
and love of God the Father is the (...) or antecedent moving cause, the death
and obedience of Christ is the (...) or meritorious cause; the application of
the holy Ghost is the (...) or effectual cause, by which we are made actually
partakers of redemption, which is the grace wrought by Christ, proceeding from
the love of the father, 2 Cor. 13. 14. applied unto us by the communion of the
holy Ghost.

Now here are diverse things to be observed. 1. The infinite and unspeakable
love of God the father, in giving his only begotten Son, and of God the Son in
giving himself for us; and of God the holy Ghost the spirit of grace, in
communicating unto us the mercy and love of God, and the merit and virtue of
all that Christ did or su^^ered for us.

For the first, herein is love, says the beloved Apostle, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins. 1 John 4. 10. So God loved the world, so infinitely, so unspeakably, so
beyond all comparison, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Ioh. 3. 16. And
again, To. 8. 32. that he spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us
al. But her in especialy god mendeth his love toward us, that whilst we were
sinners, and by sin enemies, Christ died for us, Romans 5. 8. 10.

If this love of God be shed abroad in our hearts by his holy spirit, Romans 5.
5. that is, if by the Holy Ghost working in us faith, we are truly persuaded
and assured of it, these effects will follow, 1. that we shall love God again,
the beams of his love inflaming our hearts, and reflecting back some heat of
love. For therefore do we love God, because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19.
Magnes amor is amor: Love is the loadstone of love. The woman in the Gospel,
who had many sins remitted, did therefore love much. Luke 7. 47. If it be
demanded, why, and how we should love God, I answer with Bernard, Lib^de dilig.
Deum, initio. Causa diligendi Deum Deus est; modus, sine modo diligere. God is
good without measure, and without measure he has loved us, therefore without
measure, if it were possible, we ought to love him. But though we cannot do so,
yet we ought to love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all
our might. Lev. 6. 5. Mat. 22. 37. Or if we cannot do so by reason of the
flesh, yet at the least with an upright soul, and a sincere heart, to the
uttermost of our power. And this our love we must express by keeping his
commandments, Ioh. 14. 15. Exodus 20. 6. and that willingly. For this, says
Saint John, is the love of God, 1 Ioh. chap. 5. ver. 3. that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous.

2. We shall love our neighbor for the Lords sake, it is the use which S. John
make^h in the place even now cited, 1 Ioh. 4. 10. 11. Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the pr^pitiation for
our sins. Beloved (says he) if God so loved us, we ought also to love (...)
another.

3. The persuasion of this love of God affords unto us singular comfort, in
diverse respects. As first in afflictions. For therefore do we glory in
afflictions, Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. knowing that tribulation works patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given
(...) us: that is, because by faith wrought in us by the holy Ghost, we are
persuaded of the love of God in Christ, which love God commends toward us,
in that, when we were sinners, Christ died for us.

The second comfort. If God did so love us, when we were his enemies; much more
when by Christ we are become his friends. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life.

The third comfort. If God so loved us, that he spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not then with him also freely give us
all things, Romans 8. 32. all things that be expedient for us.

2. The love also of God the Son exceeds all knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. who so
lo^ed the Church, that he gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25. who so loved us,
that he washed us from our sins in his own blood, Apoc. 1. 5. Greater love has
no man then this, that a man lay down his life for. his friends. John 15. 13.
But Christ our sweet Savior, being not only man, but God also, gave himself
not for his friends but for his enemies; and that, not to a commo^and ordinary
death, but to the most painful, most shameful, and most accursed death of the
Cross; and not only to fuffer a corporal death, but also in his soul, to
undergo the wrath of God in our steed; the fear whereof, when he was in that
grievous agony, caused him to sweat great dropps of blood, Luke 22. 44. and the
sense thereof on the Cross, being in his own sense as a man forsaken of God,
made him cry out. My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? Mat. 27. 46.

The acknowledgment of this wonderful love of Christ, ought first to work in us
a love in some measure answerable to his; that as he gave himself for us an
offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. so we
should present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto him,
which is our reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. And as he gave himself for us, so
should we b^willing and ready, if occasion serve, to lay down our lives for
him, the rather because he has promised, that whosoever shall lose his life for
his sake and the Gospels, shall save it, Mar. 8. 35. We owe our selves unto
Christ in a double or treble respect: first, for that in our creation he gave
us to our selves: secondly, because in our redemption, when we were lost, he
restored us to our selves: thirdly, when in restoring us, he gave himself for
us. For our selves given and restored, we may and ought to give and render our
selves; but what retribution shall we make him for himself? For though we should
give and render our selves to him, or for him a thousand times yet what are we
to him? As Bernard sweetly argues. Lib. de delig. Deo.

Secondly, we are to imitate our blessed Savior, as the Apostle exhorts us
in respect of his love, showing it self in his wonderful humiliation and
obedience for us. Phil. 2. 5. Let the same mind be in you, which was in Christ
Jesus, who being God coequall with his Father, for our sakes abased himself to
become man: and being man, humbled himself, not only to all active obedience,
performing all righteousness, as being made subject to the Law for us; but also
to the passive obedience, being obedient to death, even the death of the
Cross; and all this for us men, and for our salvation.

Thus you have heard the love of the Father, in giving his Son, and the love of
the Son in giving himself for us; whereunto we may add the love both of the
Father and the Son, in sending the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of love to
accompl^sh our redemption, and also of the Holy Ghost, who furnishes with his
graces, and furnished, sends forth the Ambassadors and Ministers of God,
committing unto them the means of our salvation; in and by which, he having
united us to Christ, and made us partakers of him, he works effectually in
the hearts of Gods chosen, all those saving and sanctifying graces, whereby they
are not only enti^led unto Gods Kingdom, but also fitted and prepared for the
same.

But as in the work of our Redemption we have observ^^ the (...) love of God:
so in the second place we are to observe his infinite justice manifested in the
same. For such is the justice of God, that rather then he would suffer the sins
of his own elect children to go unpunished, he has punished them in the death
of his only begotten Son. The consideration whereof ought to strike a terror in
them that do not believe, nor repent. For if God punished the sins of the
faithful in Christ, what shall become of them, who have no part in Christ?
Undoubtedly every sin, as it deserves death, so is it punished with death;
either with the death of Christ in the behalf of them that believe, or with the
death of the parties themselves, who are not in Christ. And as it ministers
terror to the wicked; so it affords singular comfort to the faithful, who are
in Christ. For they may from the consideration of this justice of God, safely
conclude; that to them, being in Christ, there is not only no condemnation, but
not so much as any punishments so properly called, which in order of justice is
inflicted by way of vengeance to satisfy the justice of God. For Christ having
fully satisfied the justice of his Father in the behalf of all them that
believe; it cannot stand with the justice of God to punish the same sins in the
party, which he has already punished in Christ. The children of God are indeed
subject to manifold afflictions, which are mala poenae, but unto them the
nature of them is changed, so that they be not punishments to them, but either
fatherly chastisements, (for when we are judged, 1 Cor. 11. 32. that is,
afflicted for our sins, we are chastised of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world) or else trials for their good.

Thirdly, we observe how heinous, and how detestable our sins are in the sight
of God: the guilt whereof could not be expiated, nor the justice of God
satisfied, nor his wrath for them appeased, by any other means, but by the most
precious blood of the eternal Son of God. That both in respect of our sins past
we should be touched with remorse, when we consider that by our sins we nailed
our Savior to the Cross, (to which end we are to pray, that the Lord would
pour upon us the spirit of grace and supplication, that when we look upon him,
whom we have pierced, we might lament and mourn, as a father mourns for his
only son:) and also in respect of the time to come, we should not be animated
to commit any sin, as being small; seeing there is none so small, but the price
of it was the precious blood of Christ: none so light, but that if we be not
eased from the burden of it, by the merits of Christ, it is of sufficient
weight to press us down to hell.

The third thing to be considered in the doctrine of Redemption, are the
enemies from whom we are delivered; which are not carnal, as the Jews imagine,
dreaming that their Messiah should be a temporal Monarch, who having subdued
their enemies, which held them in subjection, should restore the Kingdom to
Israel, but spiritual. And these are the Law, sin, death, and the devil; the
La^ being the strength of sin, sin the sting of death, and death the power
of the devil; from the hand, that is, from the power of all which our Savior
Christ has delivered us.

If it be demanded, why among the enemies, I do not reckon the world. I answer,
if by World, be meant worldly desires, as 1 Ioh. 2. 15, 16. they are
comprehended under the title of sin: if wicked worldlings, they are but the
feed of the Serpent, and the instruments of the Devil. And in both senses, not
only our Savior has overcome the world for us, Ioh. 16. 33. but the faithful
also in and by him, 1 Ioh. 4. 4. and 5. 4, 5.

The Law by reason of our transgression is an enemy unto us; whether we
consider the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, or the bondage wherein the Moral Law
did hold us, From the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, Act. 16. 10* which neither we
nor our Fathers were able to bear, our Savior Christ delivered us, blotting
out, or cancelling the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross, Col.
2. 14. and abolis^ing in his flesh the enmity, even the law of the
Commandments consisting in ordinances, Ephe^^. ^. 15.

And as touching the moral law, our Savior has delivered us, first from the
curse of the law, and consequently from all punishments of sin, whether
temporal or eternal, himself being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13* and not
only so, but has also made us (...) of the blessedness promised in him to
Abraham, and to his feed, that is, to all the faithful, who are the (...) of
promise.

2. From the rigor and (...) of the law, e^acting of us perfect
righteousness, inherent in us, and perfect obedience to be performed by us to
our justification, by performing perfect righteousness in his own person for
us, by which righteousness being apprehended by faith, we are justified be one
God, without the works of the Law, that is, without respect of any
righteousness inherent ^n us, or obedience performed by us, Romans 3. 28. Now
this twofold bondage was most miserable, to be subject to the fearful curse
of God, if we did break the law, when we could do nothing else but break it: and
to be excluded from justification and salvation, if we did not perfectly fulfill
the law, which by reason of the flesh is impossible unto us, (...). 8. 3.

3. From the terror, and coaction of the law working servile fear in those
who are under the Law, forcing them by fear of punishment, as bondslaves by the
whip, to the outward, though unwilling performance of it. From this spirit of
fearfulness, ^ Tim. 1. 7. which is also called the spirit of bondage, Romans ^.
15. Christ has freed us, that as a voluntary people. Psalm. 110. 3. Zealous of
good works (...). 2. 14. we may worship God (...) as it ^o^^oweth in my text,
without servile fear, with upright hearts and willing minds, 1 Chronicles. ^8. 9. as
not being under the Law, but under Grace.

4. From the irritation of the Law, in regard whereof especially it is called
the strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. whereunto our own corruptions did make us
subject, as unto an husband, Romans 7. 15. begetting foul issue by us tending to
death. For such is the corruption of our untamed nature, until we be renewed by
the Spirit of God that when the Law which is holy and good, forbids sin, and
seeks to b^idle our sinful affections* like an untamed (...) rebelleth so
much the more; and that it might appear exceedingly sinful, takes occasion by
the Law forbidding sin, to work in us al manner of concupiscence, Romans 7. 8.
13. But when we being adopted in Christ, are also regenerated by the Spirit,
and so made dead to sin; we are mortified to the Law, and the Law to us, in
respect of this irritation accidentally caused by our corruption, always prone
to that which is forbidden: and consequently are delivered from the bondage of
the Law, as of a former husband being dead, Romans 7. 2, etc.

Secondly, we are by Christ freed from death, both from the first death, as it
is a punishment, and from the second. For as of all other afflictions, so of
death the nature is changed in respect of the faithful, to whom it is not a
punishment or curse, the sting of it (which is sin) being taken away; but
rather a blessing; no loss, but advantage, because to them it is the end of
sin, and consequently of all misery, the beginning of happiness, a passage from
the vale of tears to the kingdom of glory, the end of a mortal life, and the
beginning of a life immortal.

Likewise from the second death, for he has delivered us from the wrath that
is to come, 1 These. 1. 10. so that to them that are in Christ, there is no
condemnation, Romans 8. 1. this being the main promise of the Gospel, that
whosoever believes in him shall not pe^ish, but have everlasting life, Ioh. 3.
1^, 16, 18.

Thirdly, from the power of the d^vil: that howsoever he may assault us, yet he
shall not hurt us. Because he that is in us, being greater then he that is in
the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 18. has overcome this strong man, Luke 11. 22. and has
bound him, as being stronger then he. For by his death he has overthrown him
that had the power of death, that is the devil, delivering them who through
fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. and
having spoiled principaliti^s and powers (meaning the devil and his ang^ls) he
has made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them on the cross, Col. 2.
15.

Fourthly, But the most pernic^ous enemy is that which we carry in our own
bosom, and that is sin, from which if we be freed, we are delivered from all
the rest. For if we be d^livered from sin, then are we freed from the curse of
the Law, from the evil of death having lost his sting, from the danger of
damnati^n being absolved from the guils of sin, from the malice of Satan, who,
if we be freed from sin, has nothing to object against us. For who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that does justify, who shall
condemn? Christ having died and being risen again sits at the right hand of
his Father making intercession for us, Romans 8. 33, 34 Therefore in the
Scriptures the whole benefit of our Redemption is expressed sometimes by
deliverance from sin, as Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. By Christ we have red^mption,
viz. ^re^^ssion of sins. For therefore Christ gave himself for us, that he
might rede^m us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. Act. ^3. 25, 26.
Now, from sin he does deliver us; first, in respect of the guilt thereof, by
(...) us, and reconciling us unto God, Act. ^3. 38, 39. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

Secondly, in respect of the corruption of sin, (which he (...) in us by
degrees,) he (...) us from the bondage and dominion of ^in; that howsoever it
remains in the children of God, yet it shall no more reign in them, Romans 6.
14.

The use of this doctrine concerning our redemption, is:

First, seeing Christ our Savior has redeemed us from our enemies, that
therefore we should not stand in fear of them, according to that, Esaias 43. 1.
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee. But as we are taught in the next words, we
should all the days of our life worship him (...) fear: and in the end of our
days commend our souls into the hand of God, saying with David, Psalm. 31. 6.
Into thy hands I commend my (...), for thou have redeemed me Lord God of truth.

2. When we have sinned against God, the remembrance of our redemption should
encourage us to return unto him by unfeigned repentance, as himself exhorts,
Esaias 44 22. These things, says Saint John, I write unto you, that you sin not;
but if any man do sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2.

3. Seeing our Savior has redeemed and bought us with so great a price,
therefore we ought to acknowledge him to be our Lord in the right of Redemption,
and our selves not to be our own men, but his servants. For therefore Christ
died and rose again to life, that he might be the Lord both of the quick and of
the dead, Romans 14. 9. And if we acknowledge him to be our Lord, we must be
careful to do his will, otherwise in vain do we call him so: Why do you call
me Lord, and do not the things that I command you? Luke 6. 46. Not every one
that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father which is in heaven. Mat. 7. 22. Again, being bought with
a price, we are not our own men, but his that bought us: and therefore ought
not to seek our selves, or the satisfying of our own lusts; but to glorify God
both in our bodies and in our spirit, which are not ours but Gods, 1 Cor. 6.
19, 20. That body is not thine to spend in sin, but is to be offered unto God,
as an holy and acceptable sacrifice. That tongue is not thine own, as the
wicked say of theirs, Psalm. 12. 4. to use, or rather abuse at thy pleasure, but
to be used to the glory of God. That heart is not thine to be addicted to
worldly vanities, but to be given to God. In a word. Christ died for all, that
they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which
died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 4. 15.

4. Seeing Christ has given himself for us to f^ee us from our enemies, let us
stand fast in that liberty which Christ, at so de^r a price, purchased for us;
and not suffer our selves to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage, Gal.
5. 1. For what can be, either more dishonorable to out Redeemer, then that we
should revolt from him to serve sin and Satan, or more pernicious to our
selves; for then our latter end should be worse then our beginning, 2 Pet. 2.
20. Remember the Israelites, who being redeemed out of Egypt, for desiring to
return, perished in the wilderness. Remember Lots wife, Luke 17. 32. who, being
delivered out of Sodom, for looking back, was turned into a pillar of salt. The
which I speak not as though I thought, that a man who is once truly justified
and redeemed, can either totally or finally fall away from saving grace* but to
admonish those, who think they stand, to take heed they do not fall, 1 Cor. 10.
12. For if any professing himself to be redeemed, shall fall away, his example
will not prove, that a man may fall from saving grace: but his falling away
will evidently prove, that he was never in the state of grace, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
(...)

5. For as much as Christ our (...) is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 8. we
should purge out the old leaven, and keep a perp^^^all feast of unleavened
bread (signified by the (...) days of that feast,) not with the (...)
hypocrisy, nor with the old leaven of naughtiness, but with the unle^vened
graces of sincerity and truth: but especially when we celebrate the memory of
our redemption (...) the Lords day, or in any of our Lords Feasts, or at the
celebrating of the holy (...), which is the antitype to the Passover.

6. Lastly, we are to be hear^dy thankful unto God for this (...) benefit,
whereby we, being (...) lost by sin, and therefore in our selves worse then
nothing (for better were it not to be, then being lost, not to be redeemed) are
restored to a betten estate then we lost in Adam, And this our thankfulness we
are to express, partly by thanksgiving, whereunto we are excited in this
Psalm, (...)

CHAP. VI.
The fruits and end of our redemption, viz. the true worship of God in
holiness and righteousness.
(...) we shall abuse this great benefit of Redemption, if we have not respect
to the end thereof; which is our sanctification. For else what can be the cause
of such dissolute living, as is every where to be seen among those who profess
themselves redeemed by Christ, but a foolish opinion, that Christ having freed
them from their sins, they may sin the more freely, and that he having dyed for
their sins, they need not to die to them, and so abuse the grace of God unto
wantonness, Jude 4.

For if our sanctification be the end of our redemption, then do we abuse this
great benefit of God, if we do not refer it to this end: yea rather, we deceive
and abuse our selves with a vain opinion of our redemption. For if this be the
end of our redemption, then those that live in sin, as the servants of sin,
either are not redeemed (for whom Christ the Son makes free, they are free
indeed) or else they are redeemed in vain, for that is in vain which is
frustrate of the end.

Now that sanctification is the end of our redemption, it may be proved by the
testimonies of holy Scripture, and also by sound reasons drawn from thence.
Tit. 2. 14. Christ has given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and that he might purify or sanctify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Christ loved his Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse in with the washing of
water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious* Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or anys^ch thing, but that it should be h^ly and
without blemish. Col. 1. 21, 22. You that were enemies Christ has reconciled
in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you holy and unblameable in
his sight, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Christ himself bare out sins in his own body, on the
tree, that we, being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness.

The reason is evident. For that which is the end of all Gods blessings in this
life, both spiritual and temporal, must needs be the end of our Redemption. But
our sanctification is the end of all Gods blessings in this life, 1 These. 4. 3.
This is the will of God even your sanctification; this is that which God
wills, and intends in bestowing his benefits upon us. He has elected us,
that we might be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. he created us after his own Image, that we
might worship him in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 24. he has called
us to holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. and we are called to be Saints, or Saints by
calling, Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. he does regenerate us to the same end. For we
are the workmanship of God creat^d in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them Ephesians. 2. 10. To the same end he
has planted us in his Church, that we might be called, trees of righteousness,
bringing forth fruit to his glory E^ay 61. 3. and finally, to the same end he
bestows his temporal benefits upon us: The Psalmist having in the 105.
P^alme. recounted the manifold blessings of God bestowed upon the Israelites in
the last verse he concludes this to be the end of all, that they might observe
hi^* statutes, and (...) Laws.

And as it is the end, so also the fruit of our redemption; as it is plainly
delivered in thi^ text, that he would give us, that we being delivered from the
hand of our enemies, should worship him without fear in holiness^ and,
righteousness. More plainly, Romans 6. 22. B^^ng made free from sin, and become
servants to* God, we have our fruit (...) holiness, (...) the end everlasting
life* And to the^e w^ may add Hebr. 9. 13, 14. For if the blood of bulls and
goats, and the ashes of an bey^er sprinckling the unclean, sanctifies to the
p^rifying of the fles^* how much more shall the blood of Christ* who through
the eternal S^^rit offered himself without sp^t to God, (...) our consciences
from dead works to serve the living God. And Tit. 2. 11, 12. The saving grace
of G^d has appeared to all (namely, both by deed and word: in deed by sending
Christ to redeem us, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. 1 Ioh. 4. 9, IC. by word in publ^shing
this benefit of redemption by preaching of the Gospel) the fruit whereof is this
Teaching us, that we renouncing al ungodliness, and worl^ly lusts, should liv^
s^orly and justly, and holily in this present world, expecting the h^ppy hope,
that is, the happiness hoped for etc.

Seeing then that holiness of life is both the* end and fruit of our
Redemption, and of all other the gifts of God, let us labor to attain to this
end, and to bring forth this fruit: so s^all we show our selves thankful unto
God for this and all other his benefits, and shall also ^a^e, not only our
justification and redemption, but also our calling and election sure.

But on the contrary, if professing our selves redeemed by Christ, we live in
sin, as the ser^^^s of sin, then are we most unthankful unto God, this being
the end of our Redemption, and the only fruit which he e^pecteth in lie^ of
this and all other his benefits; and most injurious to our selves, not only
depriving our selves of al^ assuran^e of our salvation, but also drawi^g upon
our selve^ most deserved damnation. And let us know, that the foundation of God
which is sure, has this seal: Let every one that names the Name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. ^ T^m. 2. 19.

(...) fruit and (...) of our redemption, is here ^o^ably described, by the
parts and properties thereof. The parts are Hol^ness and Righte^usness. For by
holiness, you are to understand the duties of the first Table, Viz. of piety
and religion toward God: by righteousness, the duties of the second Table,
which we owe unto men: And of these we are to speak, first, jointly, of them
both together, and then of either of them severally.

Holiness and righteousness as they are here joined together by the Holy Ghost,
so in practice they may not be severed. Those that are in Christ are new
creatures, 2 Cor, 5. 17. renewed according to the Image of God in (...)
holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 74. And in this place the Lord has
promised to give to those that are redeemed, to worship him, not in holiness
alone, nor in righteousness alone, but (...) holiness and righteousness. And
therefore those things, which God has ^^njoyned, let no man sever, for these
two are so ^onjoyned by God, that whosoever has the one, has the other; and
whosoever has not both, has ^^ither of them in deed and in truth. He that
loves God, loves his neighbor also, 1 John 4. 21. neither can a man love God
in truth, that loves not his brother also, as S. John argues; If any man say
I love God, and hates (...) brother, ^e is a liar, for he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? ^ Io^.
4. 20. for true is the old saying, in (...), of seeing comes loving.

Neither can a man love his neighbor as he ought, but he will love God much
more; For our brother is to be loved in the Lord; and se^ the Lord. And it was
well said of Bernard, Licet aliquid diligere preter Deum, ^od^ id diligamus
propter Deum. Now it is a rule in Ph^losophy, (...), for what any thing is,
that is much more. Therefore if we love our brother for Gods sake, then do we
love God much more.

Here therefore two sorts of men are to be reproved. The former is of those,
who would seem to be forward professors of religion and piety toward God, that
are very backward in the duties of charity and righteousness to their brethren:
Such were the Pharisees, whom our Savior called hypocrites, bidding us to
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy; For, says he,
unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness^ of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 20.

These man are wont to discover their hypocrisy, partly by their words, and
partly by their works. By their words, being evil speakers, detracters and
depravers of their brethren: who with the same tongue bless God, and curse
man, who is made after the similitude of God, Iam. 3. 9. But the said S. James,
Chapter 1. 26. has given his censure of these men.

For, says he, If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tong^^, ^ut de^^^veth his own heart, this man's religion is vain: By their
works, cloaking under the show of religion, hard dealing and deceit; having
Jacobs voice and Esau's stands, scandalizing the profession of religion by
their hypocrisy. The Holy Ghost therefore* to discover such hypocrites, when he
would set down the marks and notes of men truly religious, describes them
commonly by the duties which they perform to their brethrens ^aking them the
touchstone, as it were, of their piety and religion toward God, R^al ^5. and
24. Iam. 1. 27.

The other sort is of those, who pro^essing themselves to be Christians, are
but (...) honest men, void of piety and religion toward God, I speak not
against civ^ll honesty, which is very commendable and necessary; in so much as
they who w^nt it, are worse then some of the heathen that know not God. For
many of the Hea^hen were of a civil and honest conversation, yea, some of them
excelled in moral virtues. But I would not have a Christian to rest, in a
fair, outward, civil ^onversation among men, as though (...) more were
required of him. For if a men, professing himself a Christian, s^^ll have (...)
more in him then the Pagans who knew not God: can such a one be esteemed a
sound Christian? Our love of men ^^st procee^ from the love of God; the
streams of ou^ justice and charity toward men, must be derived from the
fountain of piety toward God, with^^^ faith i^ is impossible to please God.
Hebr. 11. ^. Without Faith, without piety, without the ^ear of God, without
r^pentance, the best actions of civil honest men, are but splendid^ p^ccata.
The chiefest care of a Christan must be to worship God, (...) ^harity toward
men.

But the mere civil honest man neith^^ worshipeth God in the duties of piety,
(...) yet in the duties of righteousness^; which he perf^^m^th as a mere
natu^all man, without any respect or relation had (...) God: And therefore
cannot be said in doing those (...) ties to serve God in righteousness, as no^
(...) ^bedience to God, or for Gods (...)

Now if they which w^nt either of these are not to be deemed sound Christians,
what shall we say of tho^^ which h^ve neither* yea, that not so much as seem to
have either? profane and wicked men, who professing themselves Christians,
that is to say, men redeemed by Christ, turn the grace of God into ^antonnesse,
Jude 4. being in name Christians, in deed Atheists; professing themselves to
know God, but in deed denying him, being abominable and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate.

Now we are to speak of either of them severally, but briefly, and in a word.
For if I should treat of them at large; under the title of Holiness, I should
discourse of all the duties required in the first Table of the Decalogue; in
all which we must think our selve^ bound to worship God, if we will worship ^im
in Holiness. And under the name of Righteousness^, I should treat of all the
duties of the second Table, all which we must endeavor to perform to our
neighbor in obedience to God, if we would be thought to worship or toserve him
in righteousness.

But first, we are to speak of Holiness; because that is the first and the
gre^test Commandment, Mat. 22. 38.

That holiness is a f^^it of our redemption, the Holy Ghost does plainly
testify, Romans 6. ^2. Being freed from sin, and made serv^nts to God, you have
your fruit unt^ holiness, and the end everlasting life. And that (...) also
the end of our redemption. S. Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 5. 27. Col. 1. 22. And as
it is the fruit and end of our redemption and justification in part; so is it
also a necess^ry forerunner of glorification. And therefore if we shall truly
worship the Lord in holiness* we may be assured, that the Lord has redee^^d
us; and consequently, as we have the fruit of our redemption in holiness; so
shall we h^ve the end thereof, which is the salvation of our souls, R^m. 6.
22. Apoc. ^0. 6. But contratiwise, if our conversation be unholy and unp^re, as
we want the fruit of our redemption, so shall we never attain to the end
thereof, which is everlasting life. For as the Holy Ghost witnesses, Heb. 12.
14. (...) holiness no (...) shall s^e God.

Righteousness also, as has been said, is in part the fruit and end of our
redemption, for being fr^^d from sin, we become the se^vant^ of righteousness,
Romans 6. 18. And therefore did our Savlour in his body on the tree bear our
sins, that we dying to sin, might live unt^ righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 34.

But h^re some may object, if righteousnes^ contain the duties With we owe to
man, whether our brethren or our selves; how is it here said, that we are to
worship or serve God in righteousness? Answ. This teaches us that (...) (...)
must also, and that principally be careful to worship him in holiness. And
this is to be understood of civil callings. But as touching the Ministers of
Gods word, this may further be added for their comfort, that so many of them as
with good conscience take pains in their function, whether in their private
studies, or in their public ministry, seeking to glorify God in the
edification of the Church, or the members thereof; they do worship God both in
holiness and in righteousness.

By this which has been said it plainly appears, that howsoever we are freed
from the curse, the rigor, the terror, and irritation of the Law; yet we are
not freed from the obedience of the Law Moral. For freedom from obedience and
righteousness, is the servitude of sin. But we are freed from the bondage of
sin, that we may be enabled with upright hearts and willing minds to worship
the Lord in holiness and rigteousness. And therefore, howsoever carnal
gospellers and Libertines, ^buse the liberty which Christ has purchased, as an
occasion to the flesh, turning the grace of God into wantonness, to their own
perdition: Yet devilish is the slander of the Papists, who calumniate the
doctrine of the Gospel, as if we taught thereby that Bellor^. Iustif. ^ib. 4.
tap. 5.
men are freed from obedience to all Laws wha^soever, of God and man, yea,
from the D^calogue it self. But this needs no answer* it being evident to all
the world, that we do urge the obedience of the Law Moral as w^ as they do,
and by better arguments and reasons, then they do. For their chief reasons are
taken from the fals^ly supposed benefits of good works, that they satisfy for
sin, justify before God, and merit eternal life. But by these reasons they
teach men to mar good works, and not to do them; for a good work done with
the opinion of satisfaction, justification, or merit, is so far from being a
good work, that it is odious and abominable in the fight of God; as being
derogatory to the most perfect satisfaction, and all-sufficient merit of Christ
our Savior.

But we among other arguments, take some from this text: Because our new
obedience or practice of good works is the fruit and end of our redemption. 2.
Because it is an unseparable companion of our redemption and justification. 3.
Because God has sworn that he will give to them that are redeemed, grace to
worship him in holiness and righteousness, and therefore, that works in them
that are redeemed or justified, do follow nec^ssarily by necessity of
infallibility. And therefore it is impossible, the oath of the Lord being ^^ue
(which cannot possibly be untrue) that a man should be actually redeemed or
justified, and yet have no care to practice good works, that is to say, to
perform the duties of holiness and righteousness. But in other respects also,
we do urge the necessity of good works, which we prove to be necessary also,
necessitate pr^cepti, and so by nec^^ssity of Duty, which we owe, 1. unto God,
to show our selves obedient and thankful unto him, and studious of his glory;
2. to our neighbor, and 3. to our selves: likewise necessitat^ signi, not only
as they are the testimonies and tokens whereby we are to make our callings and
election sure: But also, as they are the evidence according to which our
Savior will judge us at the last day. And lastly, necessitate m^di^: for
although we are not justified by them, nor saved for them, yet they are the way
wherein we are to walk toward our heavenly country; as Bernard w^ll said, that
they be, via regni the way to the kingdom, though not causaregnandi, the cause
of obtaining the kingdom. For as the Apostle says, Ephel. 2. 10. we are the
workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them, as in the way which leads to
eternal life. This is the way, let us walk in it, Esaias 30. 21.

CHAP. VII.
The properties of Gods worship, and first of the worshipping of God without
fear
THus much of the par^^ of Gods worship: now follow the propertie^. For it is
not sufficient to do that which is good* (...) we must be careful of the manner
also, that it be well done. It is not sufficient to wor^hip God in the parts of
his worship; unless they be performed in that manner, which God has
prescribed.

Our new obedience has three properties: for therein we are to worship and
serve God without fear. before him. all the days of our life.


The first respecting our enemies, (...) without fear of them. The second
respecting God. (...) before him. The third respecting the time, all the days
of our life.


The first is (...) or spiritual security noted in the word (...) without fear.
For without doubt this adverb is to be adjoined in constru^tion to the verb
(...) and not to the participle (...)* For neither was the deliverer without
fear, Heb. 5. 7. Mar. 14. 33. Luke 22. ^3 44. nor the delivered, Heb. 2. 15.

The second, uprightness* or integrity noted in the words, before him.

The third, constancy or perseverance, noted in these words, all the days of
our life.

As touching the 1. we must in the 1. place endevor to explain the true sense
and meaning of the words. For at the first sight it may seem not well to agree
with other places of the Scripture, wherein fear is highly commended.

For first, the fear of God is the b^ginning, or chief point of wisdom, that
is, of true piety, Psalm. a II. 10. Pro. ^: 10. Job. 28. 28. By it, as a bridle,
men are restrained from evil, ( for the fear of God is to depart from evil,
Bro. 8. 13.) which bridle being cast off, men run headlong into sin; see Genesis
20. 11. how then can this be promised as an especial blessing to worship God
without fear?

2. S. Pet. 1. Epist. 1. 17. 18. says, We are therefore to pass the time of
our pilgrimage in fear, because we know that we are rede^med by the blood of
Christ. Here the Lord promises, that he will give us, that we being redeemed
by the blood of Christ, shall worship him without fear; so Esaias 43. 1. Fear
not, for I have redeemed thee.

3. Solomon, Pro. 28. 14. pronounces him blessed who fears always: here
Za^hary expounding the blessedness, w^^ was promised in Abraham's, seed, says,
it is to worship God without fear.

4. S. Paul exhorts us, because we have such promises, that to us being
redeemed by Christ, God will be our Father, etc. to perfect our sanctify ation
in the fear of God, 2 Cor 7. 1. and elsewhere he admonishes the redeemed,
whose salvation was already begun, to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 3. 12. here the Lord promises the redeemed, that they shall
worship him without fear.

5. Psalm. 2. 11. and 5. 7. God is to be worshipped with fear.

6. Carnal security, which is the want of f^^r, is, as it were, the cradle of
the Devil, wherein he (...) men asleep to their perdition; and it, is a brand
or mark of the wicked, not to have the fear of God before their eyes, Romans 3.
18. how then can the want of fear be promised (...) a^ a blessing?

^or an^wer to this objection, we are to (...) fear or (...). Fear is to be
distinguished? both in respect of the object, and of the subj^^t. (...) object,
that is, the party or the (...): The subject, that is the person w^o feare^h.

1. First i^ respect of the party feared. For there is a fear of God, and there
is a fear of our enemies. God has delivered us from the hand of our enemies,
that we should worship him without fear, not of Him, but of them. For as he
has redeemed us from the service of our enemies, that we might se^ve him, so
he has freed us from the fear of them, that we may fear him alone, and
hereu^to appertains that place of Esaias, Chap. 43. 1. Fear not (to wit, thine
enemies) for I have redeemed thee.

But this (...) or want of fear in respect of our enemies, which is a doubtful
fear, may be understood, either metonymically, without cause of fear, or
properly, without fear it self. And so there are two degrees of this (...) or
want of fear; the former, implying the certainty of the object; the latter, of
the subject: the former pertaining to all true believers, though but
Incipient^, whose salv^tion is certain and sure (which I call the certainty of
the object) though they perhaps be not as yet, nor at all time^ ^ertain, nor
sure of it. The other belonging to proficients, or grown Christians. Of the
former, you may with Theophylact understand the word (...) without fear, as
signifying (...) without danger, or cause of fear: So are they said to be
secure, or without fear, who are in safety and out of danger, as all the
faithful are, being kept safe by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Of the latter, Beza understands the word (...) as
signifying (...) in confidence or assurance, Ephesians. 3. 12. Or as the Apostle
speaks. Titus 2. 13. in assured expectation of salvation; which (...) or
^earlesness, is a co^sequent of the former, That being the foundation of This,
when we know our selves to believe. For if we believe that we are out of
danger, we will also be without fear, and according to the measure of this
belief, is the measure of this ^ecurity, or want of fear, and this degree
seems to be employed in the Hebrew verb hithbarac^, Gen, 22. 18. as I noted
before.

And this I called the certainty of the subject.

This place therefore is to be understood of the fear of our enemies, that we
are to worship God without fear of them; and not of the true fear of God: which
all those places, which were objected, as commending fear, did speak of which
true fear of God th^^ (...) in not fearing our enemies, is a fruit and effect.
For he that fears God truly* needs not to fear any thing else, according to
that, Prove. 14. 26. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence.

2. In respect of the thing feared: fear i^ either of the evil of punishment,
or of the evil of sin. But this distinction is the same in effect, with that
distinction of fear in respect of the subject, whereof I am now to speak.

3. In respect of the subject, that is, the persons fearing. Fear is either of
Bond-servants who are under the Law, which is a servile or slavish fear. Sons,
who are not under the Law, butunder grace, which is a son-like or shall fear.


The former is properly called metus, whose effect is metuere ab aliquo, to be
afraid of the object, that is, feared. The other is timor (of (...) whose
effect is to fear or to reverence the object feared. The former is a fearful
expectation of some evil from the party feared: the other is an awful
reverence of the party feared, not to offend him by doing evil: so that the
formal object of the former, is malu^ poena, the evil of punishment, in regard
whereof they are afraid of God: of the other, malum culpae, the evil of sin, in
regard whereof they fear to offend or displease God. The former is rather metus
poena, then timor Dei, fear of punishment, rather then of God, For if there
were no punishment, they that have but this fear, would not fear to offend God.
Oderunt peccare mali formidine pocnae.

The other out of the love of God and of goodness, though there were no
punishment to be fear^d fears to offend. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis dmore.

The former being (...) the spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15. and (...) the spirit
of fearfulness, 2 Timothy 1. 7. is a fruit and effect of the Law, forcing and
compelling those that are under it to yield some outward obedience for fear of
punishment. The other is a fruit of the Gospel, and of faith; when a man being
persuaded of Gods mercy and goodness toward him in Christ, fears to offend
so gracious a God, and merciful Father, according to that, Psalm. 130. 4.
There is mercy with thee that thou (...) be f^ared.

Of this son-like fear, there is no question, but that we are to worship God
therewith, Psalm. 2. 11. 5. 7. Nay, we cannot worship God arigh without it, Den.
6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him: this being one of the
chiefest things required in his service, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Eccles. 12. 13. and is
therefore called caput sapientiae, the very chief point of wisdom, that is, of
true piety and godliness, Psa. 111. 10. Pro. 9. 10. Of the other, there may be
a question; whether God has promised to those that are redeemed; that they
shall worship him without all servi^e fear; seeing that it is profitable, that
men should be restrained from sin by fear of punishment. And to that end
does the Lord threaten judgments and punishments to terrify and to deter
men from sin.

To this I answer, as I delivered before in the doctrine of redemption, that
our Savior in delivering us from the terror and coaction of the Law, does
free us also from servile fear, but we are to consider quatenus, how far forth.
For such as is our redemption (I speak of it passively, as it is in the
redeemed) such is our freedom from servile fear; to wit, inchoated or begun in
this life, and increasing by degrees; complete, and perfect in the life to
come, which is called our full redemption; which being not total in this life,
does not free us totally from this servile fear. Full and perfect charity
indeed casts out this fear, and he that thus fears, is not perfected in
charity, 1 Ioh. 4. 18. But whiles the relics of sin, or rather the body of
sin remains in us, whiles we are in part flesh, as well as spirit, we have
not perfect charity.

And therefore so far forth, as we are flesh, we are subject to servile fear:
yea, so far as we are carnal, we are servants, Romans 7. 14. 23. but so far
forth as we are spirit, we are freed from that fear, as not being under the
Law, but under grace: Yet because concupiscence and the corruptions of the
flesh, still abide in us; it was expedient for the subduing and mortifying of
the flesh, that we should in some part be obnoxious to this fear. To which end
the rest also of our spiritual enemies, though they be overcome, and we
delivered out of their power, are still (...) to ^^counter us: that we standing
upon our guard, and exercising and maintaining a spiritual^ warfare against
them, may at length triump^ over them, and receive the crown promised to those
that overcome.

In the mean time we are freed from this servile fear by degrees, from the time
of ^ur justification to our glorification, as our faith, hope and charity do
increase, by increase whereof we are more and more enabled to worship God, as
without fear, so also with willing and cheerful minds. And therefore we are to
be stirred up to labor for the increase of these graces in us, that our fear
may be diminished, and our assurance increased; wherein our happiness in this
life does consist.

Security likewise is twofold, Carnal. Spiritual.


The carnal security is, when a man being void of grace, and of the true fear
of God, and destitute of faith, hope and charity, goes on carelessly in his
sins without repentance, presuming of Gods favor, and ^is own salvation.

The spiritual security, as I distinguished before, is either of the object,
signifying the spiritual safety of the faithful, because there is no
condemnation to them that be in Christ. In regard whereof, they worship God
securely, or without fear, that (...) or (...) without danger, or cause of
fear. The spiritual security, in respect of the subject, is, when a man being
justified before God by faith, and assured in some measure of (...) is favor,
as knowing himself to have received grace to believe, and having peace of
conscience, worshippeth God in assured expectation of everlasting life. And of
this (...) or spiritual security, the Holy Ghost speaks in this place.

The sum of that which has been said by way of exposition, is this (...)
that God has promised to give the faithful, being redeemed by Christ, to
worship him without fear, not without the true fear of God (for that is a chief
part of his worship) but without fear of their spiritual enemies; and namely,
without fear of damnation: and that in two degrees, so that they may worship
him without fear, that is, without cause of fear, securely* and safely without
danger, because their salvation is certain and sure, there being no
cond^mnation to them that are in (...)

Secondly, without fear it self, namely, of their enemies, from whose power
they believe themselves to be redeemed, and consequently, from the servile fear
of God, performing a worship unto him, not of bondslaves (who are under the
dominion of the Law) forced and extorted from them by servile fear, but the
service of sons yielding voluntary obedience. Not that we are delivered, from
servile fear altogether, and at once, in this life, but by degrees, according
to the measure of our faith, hope, and charity, wherewith we being endued in
some good measure, shall worship the Lord securely, or in security, not
carnal, but spiritual, and consequently not in fear of damnation, but in
expectation of everlasting happiness.

Now this being the principal point in this whole text, and the chief thing
wherein the happiness promised in Christ, the promised seed, does consist in
this life; viz. to worship the Lord without fear: Therefore as I have stood the
longer in explaining the words; so I will endeavor to set down the doctrines
and uses, which are to be made of this point.

CHAP. VIII.
The first doctrine concerning the certainty of salvation.
THe first doctrine: that there is a twofold certainty of salvation of all
those that truly believe in Christ. The former is called the certainty of the
object, in regard whereof, the salvation of all that truly believe, is sure and
certain, though they perhaps be not assured thereof. For this is the main
promise of the Gospel, that whosoever does traly believe in Christ shall not
perish, but have life everlasting, Joh. 3. 16. To my sheep (says our Savior)
that is, to all the faithful, I will give eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any be able to pluck them out of my hands, Joh. 10. 28.
Saint Peter testifies, I Epist. 5. that the faithful are kept safe by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. And the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. I.
That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

And in this place the Lord by oath assures them, that they shall worship him
without fear, that is, without cause of fear at the least, all the d^yes of
their life; yea, such is the certainty of their salvation, who truly believe,
that the Holy Ghost doubts not to affirm, that the^ have ^^ernall, life, Ioh.
6, 47. 54. ^ Ioh. 5. 11, 12. and tha^ they are pass^d from death to life, Ioh.
5. 2^. and that, whom the Lord has justified, ^e has also glorifi^d, Romans 8.
30.

The latter i^ the certainty of the subject, when a faithful man, soundly
applying the promises of the Gospel to himself is persuaded, and in some
me^sure assured of his salvation, for he that knows himself to believe, may
apply the promise to himself, and by appliration be assured of that which is
promised.

This certain^y of persuasion, or assurance, some call special faith* special I
say, first in respect of the object, which is Christ, and is therefore called
sometimes the faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 22. 26. (...) 2. 16. 2. 3. 22.
Phil. 3. 9. sometimes faith in Christ, Act. 20. 21. 24. 24. 26. 18. Gal. 3. 26.
faith in his blood, R^. 3. 25. For although by that faith, which does justify,
we do believe all the Articles of faith, and the whole word of God, and every
part and parcel thereof, containing threatenings as well as promises; yet the
ob^ect of it, ^uatenus justificat, is Christ. For it justifies, as it is the
instrument to receive Christ, who is our righteousness. Secondly, and more
especially it is called special, in regard of the effect, which is, specially
to apply Christ unto our selves. And this special Faith is a degree o^ that
assurance, which the Grecians call (...) in some more, in some less, which
some Divines, both Protestants and Papists, not curious to speak so dis^inctly
and properly as they might, have called (...) this special Faith to be
affrance: when indeed fiducia is not Faith, but a necessary and unseparable
fruit thereof. So unseparable, that sometimes it seems to be employed in the
phrase of believing in Christ. For to believe in Christ implies three things:
First, to believe that Christ is the Savior of all that believe in him;
secondly, to believe that he is my Savior, which is the special faith; and
from this follows the third, as a necessary fruit and effect; that because I
believe he is my Savior, therefore I put my trust and affiance in him for my
salvation. But though it be an un^eparable fruit of faith, yet it is not to be
confounded with it. For faith is the cause, affiance the effect. For by faith
we have affiance, Ephesians. 3. 12. upon which place Bez^ no^eth, that they are
deceived, who confound faith and affiance. Faith, is a persuasion or assurance
of the mind, though working upon the heart: Affiance, is an affection of the
heart, though proceeding from the assurance of the mind. The fear therefore of
faith is the mind, or intellectual part; of affiance, the heart, which is the
seat of the affections. And as it^ subject they differ, so also in the object;
the object of faith, being verum: of affiance, benum: there being little
difference betwixt it and hope in respect of the time to come, which are often in
the Scriptures confounded, the same word Batach being translated sometimes to
trust, and sometimes to hope* Notwithstanding in the behalf of some of our
Divines, it may be said, that when they call this special faith* fiduciam, or
fiduciall assent; they mean nothing else but a certain persuasion or assurance
of that which is believed.

This special faith the Pap^ts abhor and scorn; and yet cannot deny, but that
true Christians ought to labor for assurance, namely the assurance, not of
faith, but of hope. They must have a kind of hope, that their (...) be
remitted, and that they shall be saved; but they may not believe the remission
of their sins, or eternal life, as belonging to themselves. Howbeit all their
assurance is merely conjecturall and uncertain: Neither can they have any sound
assurance of hope unless first they had assurance of Faith, for Faith is the
foundation of hope, and the (...) the subs^ance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.
1. But howsoever the Papists do scorn the special Faith; yet* it is a certain
truth, that there is (...) not any grace, either more profitable to the
faithful, or more necessary. For as all other s^ving graces in the faithful,
proceed from Faith, first apprehending, and after applying Christ unto
themselves, in so much, that without it there is no other saving grace; so
according to the measure of it, such is the measure of all other saving graces.

That peciall Faith, which the Holy Ghost works in us, by shedding abroad the
love of God in our hearts, (that is by persuading our souls of the love of God
toward us in Christ) produces the love of God, (for therefore do we love God,
because we are by Faith persuaded that God loves us first) and consequently,
the love of our brother for Gods sake. Charity, which is the and of the
C^mmandement, proceeding from faith unfeigned: It works in us affiance. For
when we believe that Christ is our Savior, we rest upon him for salvation. It
works in us hope; for when we believe, that the promises belong unto us, we
expect the performance. Faith having begotten affiance and hope, and working by
love, begets zeal, peace of conscience, Romans 5. 1. rejoicing in God, and
joy in the Holy Ghost, thankfulnes^, voluntary and cheerful obedience,
patience, and comfort in afflictions, etc. And indeed, how can a man love his
neighbor for Gods sake, who lov^th not God much more? how can a man love God
as he ought, who is not persuaded of Gods love toward him in Christ? which
persuasion is this special Faith. And if he cannot love God without Faith, much
less can he have the z^al^ of God: for zeal is the servency of love. How can
a man have affiance in Christ, and rest upon him for salvation, who is not by
Faith persuaded, and in some measure assured, that he is his Savior? How can
he hope and wait for the performance of the promises, that does not believe
that they belong unto him? Faith being the substance of things ho^ed for. How
can a man have true peace of conscience, who is not persuaded, that God is
reconcled t^ him? How can a man rejoice in God, wh^ is not assured of Gods
favor toward him? How can a man trust in God, that is not persuaded of Gods
goodness toward him? How can a man be thankful unto God, wh^ is not persuaded
of Gods love and (...) toward him? How shall they fear God^ as sons, that is,
fearing to offend so merciful a Father, who are not persuaded that he i^ their
Father in Christ? Or when they have sinned, how shall they be encouraged to
return unto him, if they be not persuaded of his fatherly respect to t^em? How
shall they perform vo^^ntary and che^rful ^b^dienc^. who are not persuaded that
their endeavors are accepted of him? How shall they pray, who do not believe
they shall be heard? Or as the Apostle speaks, How shall they call upon him
in whom they have not believed. Romans 10. 14. How shall they patiently and
comfortably bear afflictions, who are not persuaded they be fatherly
chastisements, or trials proceeding from Gods love, and tending to their good^.
Finally, with what heart (...) worship God, who are not persuaded, that their
service is accepted of him.

And as it works all other graces in us; so according to the measure of our
Faith, such (as I said) is the measure of all other graces. For the more a man
is persuaded of Gods love and favor toward him in Christ, (that is* by how
much the greater is a man's special Faith) so much the more he loves God, and
his neig^bour for Gods sake; so much the more is he inflamed, with the (...) of
God: so much the more confidently does he rest upon Christ for salvation: so
much the more he hopet^ for, and expects the good things promised: so much
^he more he rejoices, and glo^ieth in God: so much the more he is thankful,
to God for his goodness: so much the more he trusts in God, so much the more
the fears to offend so gracious a God, and so (...) a Father: (...) offended,
he will (...) return* unto God: so much the more (...) and comfortably he
bears afflictions, saying with Job, Though he kill me, (...) will I p^t my
trust in him^ Job. 13. 15. So much the more willingly and che^rfully will he
obey and serve the Lord.

Wherefore it is evident, that they which renounce this Faith, as the Papists
do, discover themselves to be void of all saving grace^, and to have no truth
nor power of religion in them. But whatsoever they think or speak of special
Faith, let us know and acknowledge these three things: First, that it is the
duty of every true Christian, that does truly assent to the doctrine of the
Gospel, to apply also by special Faith^ the promises of the Gospel unto
himself. For this is most profitable, most comfortable, most necessary.
Profitable, because from this application of Faith, all oth^^ graces do
proceed, as has been said. Comfortable, because by this application, we grow
to assurance, as shall be showed. Necessary; first, because That belief or
assent is not lively and effectual (as you shall hear) which is not joined
with ^ desire to apply CHRIST to thy self and with a resolution to acknowledge
him to be thy SAVIOVR, and to rest upon him for salvation: For although he,
which at the ^^rst believ^th only by a^^ent, ^oth not yet actually apply the
promises of the Gosp^ll to himself; yet that assent, if it b^liv^ly and
^ffectuall, works both an earnest desire, and settled resolution of
^pplication. 2. He ^ha^ knows himself to believ^ by a true assent, and
refuses to apply the promises to himself, he makes God a liar, as shall b^
showed. 3. Where this application is not at least in desire, resolution, and
endeavor, there is no other saving grace, as I have proved.

The second thing, which we are to take notice of, is that it is the chiefest
comfort, and indeed happiness of a Christian in this life, by special faith
to be assured of the ^ternall love and favor of God in Christ. For so Za^hary
in this place expounds our blessedn^ss^ to be this being redeemed by Christ
to worship God without f^ar, etc.

The third, that seeing it is a thing so profitable, so ^^cessary, and so
comfortable that our happiness is to be repo^ed therein: it is therefore our
duty to do our best endeavor, to attain unto the assurance of salvation, and to
this special faith: or as the Apostle P^ter ^xhorteth in other words, to give
dilig^^nce to make our calling and election sure. 2 P^t. 1. 10. or as the
Apostle Paul speaks, 1 (...). 6. 1^. to lay up i^ st^re, a good foundation
against the time to come, that we (...) lay hold upon et^rnall lif^. For though
the Apostle in that place does by this argument exhort them that be rich to
works of charity: yet his meaning is not, that those works are the foundation;
but that we by doing of them, may gather assurance to our selves of our
justification and salvation, as by t^stimonies and evidences of our faith:
which assurance of special faith is so sure a foundation against the day of
trial, as they who h^ve built thereon, cannot by any temptation b^ removed*
but like mount Sion stand fast for ever, or like to three-square or triangular
bodies, which, howsoever they be tossed and turned, keep always their
positure, which (...) undique sursum.

Now you must not think, that full assurance is obtained at the first, or at
onc^* but we must attain unto it by diverse degrees.

And first we are to know, that the ordinary way to exaltation by sound comfort
and assurance, is Humil^tion: according to that general rule given by our
Savior, after (...) had reported the notable humiliation of the penitent
Publican (which rule is also delivered in diverse other plac^s of Scripture)
that, whosoever exalts himself shall be abased: but he that humbles himself
shall be exalted, (...) 18. 14. S. Peter therefore having signified, that the
Lord resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, infers this
exhortation: humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6.

This work of humiliation, the Holy Ghost ordinarily works in Gods children
by the ministry of the Law, whereby he reveals unto us our miserable estate
in our selves, in respect both of our sins, ( for by the Law comes the
kno^ledge of sin. Romans 3. 20.) and also of the punishment, denouncing the
fearful plagues of God for sin, both in this life, and in the world to come.
Thus when Peter had declared to the Jews their heinous sin in crucifying
Christ; they were pricked in their hearts, and said to the Apostles, Men and
brethren what shall we do? Act. 2. 23. 36. 37. When the Prophet Nathan had by a
Parable, which he applied to David the King, aggravated his sin, saying, thou
art the man: David both privately testified his humiliation to the Prophet,
saying, I have sinned against the Lord; 2 Samuel 12. 7. 13. and also publicly
professed the same, Psalm. 51. But of humiliation for sin, the Publican is
propounded as a notable pattern for imitation, Luke 18. 13. And as for
humiliation wrought by denunciation of judgments, consider the example of
Josias, 2 King. 22. 11. 13. 19. Of the Ninivites, Ion. 3. 5, 6. In like manner
ought we to be humbled before God, when we consider that our sins are so
heinous and detestable in the sight of God, that nothing could satisfy the
justice of God, or appease his wrath for them, or expiate the guilt of them,
but the death and sufferings of the Eternal and only begotten Son of God. Of
which death of Christ the blame is to be laid upon our sins, as the meritorious
cause, rather then upon those, who were but the instruments of his death. For
by our sins we nailed. Christ upon the Cross; by our sins we pierced the
precious body of Jesus Christ: we are the men that crucified our blessed
Savior Let us therefore pray to God, that he would pour upon us the spirit of
grace and supplication, that looking upon him whom we have pierced, we may
mourn for him (being put to death for our sins) as a man mourns for his only
son, Zach. 12. 10. And if the denunciation of Gods temporal judgments ought
to humble us before God; how much more ought we to be humbled at the
consideration, both of the temporal plagues denounced in this world, and also
of eternal torments in hell?

But when these ordinary means of humiliation, by the ministry of the Law,
will not prevail; it pleases God sometimes, by means extraordinary, or at the
least, not so ordinary, to draw men unto him, as it were, by a strong hand,
adding to the Ministry of the Word, sometimes afflictions and crosses, and,
sometimes terrors and anguish of conscience. By afflictions I* sophs brethren
were brought to acknowledge their sin, Genesis 42. 21. Manasses when he was in
affliction, greatly humbled himself before God, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. So did the
prodigal son, Luke 15. 18. according to that, Esaias 26. 16. Hos. 5. 15.

By terrors also sometimes men are humbled, as Peter, Luke 5. 8, 9. being
affrighted, when by the miraculous draught of fishes he was brought to
acknowledge the Divinity of our Savior Christ: much more the Gaolour, Act. 16.
27. 29. And most of all S. Paul, Act. 9. 6. 9.

But here we must beware of an erroneous and dangerous conceit of some, who
run into contrary extremes. For as they imagine none to believe, who have not
full assurance; so they think none to be humbled as they ought, or effectually
called, who are not drawn, either by grievous afflictions, or by the terrors
of their conscience, to the brink of despair, as though there were no hope of
salvation for them. Indeed it is good for a man to be much humbled in himself,
and as Job speaks, to abhor himself, repenting in dust and ashes, and to
acknowledge that i^ himself, or by his own means, there is n^ hope of
salvation. But it is either great ignorance, or forgetfulness of Christ, to
acknowledge no means whereby to be saved, or if a man acknowledge Christ, it is
great infidelity to think that his sins, which are but ^inite, (though many and
great) a^ more and greater then the mercies of God, and merits o^ Christ, which
are infinite. Therefore so to be humbled is a fearful sin, and perhaps a
greater sin, then any for which he is humbled. Notwiths^^nding this may be
said for the comfort and profit of those whom ^od does draw by a strong hand,
that is, by grievous afflictions, either outward, or inward (which are indeed
the most grievous; for a wounded Prove. ^9 14. The spirit of a man will sustain
his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can ^ear?
conscience who shall bear) I say, first, for their comfort, that the Lord does
sometimes so cast down those whom he purposes most of all to exalt; and that
they sometimes do prove the most zealous Professors of Religion, and the
worthiest instruments of Gods glory; as you see in the example of Paul.

For their profit they are to be advised, that when they are afflicted either
outwardly or inwardly, they would first acknowledge the hand of God, by what
means soever the affliction does happen unto them, and not to seek to remove
the hand of God afflicting them; if outwardly, by indirect or unlawful means;
if inwardly, by worldly and carnal delights; but to labor, that the end which
God propounds in afflicting them, may be achieved. 2. That they would humble
themselves under the mighty hand of God, whom they have provoked to anger
against them; laboring to call to mind their sins, whereby they have offended
God; to confess them particularly, to bewail them, and to be sorry for them,
because by them they have displeased God, and pierced our Savior: earnestly
and heartily to pray to God for the remission of their sins, for Christ his
sake; to promise, purpose, and vow amendment for the time to come. Thus
confessing their sins, and forsaking them, they shall be sure to find mercy;
and humbling themselves, they shall be exalted, Prove. 28. 13.

But as I said, ordinarily, the Lord works humiliation by the ministry of
the Law. Now, that we may be humbled thereby, we are not only to believe the
sentence of the Law, denouncing the terrible curse of God, against every one
that does not continue in all the things which are written in the Book of the
Law, to do them, Gal. 3. 10. to be true, but also to apply it to our selves,
after this manner; seeing this is most true, as being the undoubted Word of
God, that every man in himself is subject to the fearful curse of God, both in
this life, and in the world to come, who does not perform the three degrees of
obedience contained in this sentence, that is, to Do the things commanded, to
do them all, and to continue in doing all; therefore it cannot be denied, but
that in my self, I am most accursed; who, to the not performing of these three
degrees of obedience, have added the three contrary degrees of disobedience.
For I have not only nor done the things commanded, but also I have done the
things forbidden: I have not only not kept all Gods Commandments, but also I
have broken them all: I have not only not continued in perpetual obedience,
but I have also continued in a perpetual course of disobedience. O therefore
wretched man that I am, and in my self thrice accursed! O that I were delivered
from the fearful curse! O that I were freed from this woeful state of
damnation!

Thus by applying the sentence of the Law to themselves, men come to see and
acknowledge their own damnable estate in themselves; whereby they are forced to
seek for salvation out of themselves, in Christ; especially, if to the
application of the sentence of the Law, they adjoyn a serious consideration of
the day of judgment (which the Apostle calls the terror of the Lord.) at
which time all of us shall appear before the judgment seat of God, to receive
according to those things which we have done in the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.
But without this application, men not seeing nor feeling their own misery,
neglect the promises of the Gospel, not caring to apply them to themselves:
but most ungraciously suffering the most precious blood of Christ, as much as in
them lies, to be spilt in vain; as it is in vain to them, unto whom it is not
applied. But when by the paedagogie of the Law, which is a Schoolmaster unto
Christ, Gal. 3. 24. men are brought to see and to feel their misery: O then how
beautiful are the feet of those who bring glad tidings of salvation! How
acceptable is the promise of deliverance to them that are captives; of
justification, to them that in themselves are accursed! Of salvation, to them
that are lost! In respect of these, the Kingdom of God is said to suffer
violence, and these are they which with violence take it to themselves, Mat.
11. 12.

Thus then being schooled by the Law, by which the Holy Ghost works in us the
Legal faith, which is a preparative to the Evangelical, we become fit auditors
of the Gosp^l, by which the Holy Spirit works in us the grace of justifying
faith. And therefore in the next place we must be diligent and attentive
hearers of the Gospel, by the hearing whereof Being pr^pared by the Law, and
other legal means, we must attend to the Gospel, Rom 10. 8. 17
comes faith. In which regard, as the Gospel is called the Word of faith: So
also the Preachers of it are not only termed Ministers, by whom you believe, 1
Cor. 3. 5. but also are said to justify men, Dan. 12. 3. and to save them, 1 Timothy 4. 16. 1 Cor. 9. 23. as being the instruments of the Holy Ghost, working
in us the grace of faith, by which we are justified and saved.

By the By which the Holy Ghost works in us faith, and that in two degrees.
Ministry of the Gospel, the Holy Ghost works in us the grace of faith in
two degrees; The former is of assent, the other of application. As touching the
former: the Holy Ghost having prepared us by the Law, does in the ministry of
the Gospel, first, reveal unto us the mercies of God in Christ. Secondly, he
stirs us up by the Ministers of reconciliation to embrace Gods mercies, 2
Cor. 5. 18. 20. and to be reconciled to him: And thirdly, having thus knocked,
as it were, at the door of our hearts, he himself does open out hearts, Apoc.
3. 20. as he did the heart of Lydia, Act. 16. 14. not only to attend, but as
the word (...) also signifies to assent unto, or to believe the Gospel.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that by that phrase is meant, that the Holy
Ghost did work in her the grace of faith.

And as touching the latter; the Holy Ghost having opened our hearts to receive
Christ, by a true, willing, and lively assent (which is the condition of the
promise:) he teaches us to apply the promise unto our selves, as belonging to
us.

Here therefore three things are to be done: 1. We are to believe in Christ by
a lively assent to the promise of the Gospel. 2. So believing in Christ, we
are to apply the promises of the Gospel to our selves. 3. Having by
application attained to some assurance, we must give all diligence, that this
assurance may more and more be increased.

As touching the first: we must be very careful, that our assent to the
doctrine of the Gospel, promising salvation to all that believe in Christ, be
willing, true, lively, and effectual: otherwise, though we may believe that
Jesus the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, is the Son of God, and Savior of all
that shall be saved (which not only hypocrites, and wicked men, but the Devils
themselves after a sort believe) yet we cannot truly be said to believe in
Christ. First therefore it must be a willing assent, and therefore approving
what we believe; not forced, as that of the devils, and of some wicked men; who
being convicted with the evidence of the truth, do, whether they will or no,
know and believe the truth of the Gospel, and with horror acknowledge it,
Iam. 2. 19. Mat. 8. 29. Secondly, it must be true, lively, and effectual. For
as there is a twofold knowledge, the one literal, swimming in the brain,
informing the judgment, but not reforming the heart and the conversation,
serving only to purchase the more stripes: Luke 12. 47. the other spiritual,
not only informing the judgment, but also reforming the heart, and conforming
our lives to the practice of that which we know (which in Divinity is accounted
the only true knowledge, I Ioh. 2. 3, 4. for the other, though in regard of the
object it is true, because it is the knowledge of the truth; yet it is not true
formally, and in respect of the efficacy, or of the effect:) so faith, which
sometimes goes under the name of knowledge or acknowledgment, may be
distinguished. For there is a counterfeit, idle, and dead faith; which, having
neither root, nor fruit, is uneffectuall, either to justification, or to
sanctification; which is the faith of hypocrites, and of all carnal and
worldly Professors, which the Papists themselves (...) fidem informem. And
there is a true, lively, and effectual faith, (which the Schoolmen call
formatam, and not amiss, saving that they hold Charity, which, as I have
showed, is a fruit and ^ffect of faith, 1 Timothy 1. 5. to be the form thereof,)
by which we receiving Christ, and being rooted in him, or engraffed into him,
do receive from him spiritual life, Gal. 2. 20. For having, by faith, union
with Christ, we have also communion with him, both in his merits to our
justification, and in the virtue of his death and resurrection, to our
fanctification, Romans 6. 3, 4, etc. Phil. 3. 9, 10. Now this Assent is
effectual to justification, when by it we receive Christ, who is our
righteousness* For when this belief is willing, lively, and effectual, we do
receive Christ not only in our judgments, by this true and lively assent; but
also this lively assent working both on the heart and the will, we receive him
in our hearts by an earnest desire, that he may be applied unto us, and we made
partakers of him, (which desire we express in hearty prayer) and in our will,
by resolving to acknowledge him, to be our Savior, and to rest upon him for
our salvation. For (...) a man truly and effectually believe, that in himself,
and without Christ he is accursed, according to the sentence of the Law, and
that in Christ, if he believe in him, he shall be happy and blessed, according
to the doctrine of the Gospel: and not desire both to be freed from that
damnable estate, and to be made partaker of happiness in and through Christ?
can a man truly and effectually believe, that being in himself accursed, he
shall, notwithstanding the curse of the Law, notwithstanding the testimony of
his own accusing conscience, notwithstanding the accusations of Satan, become
happy and blessed in Christ, if he shall believe in him; and not resolve with
himself, that, whatsoever the Law, his own conscience, or the Devil can object
to the contrary, he will acknowledge Christ to be his Savior, and rest upon
him for salvation? For as the understanding, when it conceives any thing to be
true, not by evidence of reason, but by the authority of God speaking in his
Word, as in matters of faith, has the concurrence of the will, acted by the
Spirit of God, willingly to assent thereunto: So when the understanding,
enlightened by the Holy Ghost, conceives and judges any thing to be good, it
commands the will to embrace it, the will ordinarily following the judgment
of the practi^^ understanding.

To sanctification it is effectual, as it is a grace of regeneration, 1 Ioh,
5. ^. pur^fying the heart, and working by love, and transforming a man into a
conversation answerable to that which he does believe, and therefore is ever
joined with repentance, which the Holy Ghost regenerating us, with it, and by
it works in us: and therefore a lively faith is never severed from
repentance, nor repentance from it; for as we cannot truly repent, unless we
believe; so we cannot truly know that we believe, unless we repent.

This assent being true, willing, lively and effectual, as I have said, is the
very condition required in the promise of the Gospel, and the first degree of
justifying faith; which if we have obtained, we may and ought to apply the
promise of the Gospel to our selves. This being a matter of excellent comfort,
and of singular use, I will prove by plain testimonies of Scripture, and by
evident reasons: the rather, because I know, to some it will seem a paradox.

1. The testimonies of the Scripture are these. For first, This is the says
for which our Savior pronunoceth Simon Peter blessed, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God, Mat. 16. 16, 17. The like profession is made by the
Apostles, Ioh. 6. 69. and by Martha, Ioh. 11. 27.

2. Joh. 20. 31. These are written, that you might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, you may have l^fe through his Name.

3. Act. 8. 37. 38. Here is water, says the Eunuch, what does hinder me to be
baptized? Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. And
he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

4. Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. For with the (...) man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made to salvation.

5. This is the Faith, without which it is impossible to please God. For he
that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him, Hebr. 11. 6.

6. 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God.

7. 1 John 5. 5. Who is he that overcommeth the world, but he that believes
that Jesus is the Son of God?

1. The reasons. 1. The justifying and saving Faith many times goes under the
name of (...) acknowledgement, which is all one with assent, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2
Pet. 1. 2, 3. or of knowledge, meaning acknowledgement, as Ioh. 17. 3. Esaias 53.
11. My righteous servant (meaning Christ) agnitione sui, by the acknowledgement
of himself, that is, by faith in him, shall justify many.

2. To receive Christ, is to believe in him, Ioh. 1. 12. By this lively assent,
we receive Christ, as has been said, in our minds, in our hearts, in our wills.

If any man therefore object, that justifying faith consists not in assent,
but in application of the promises.

3. I answer, that there are two degrees of justifying faith, the one, being
(...) assent to the promise of the Gospel; the other a sound application
thereof to our selves. By the former, as being the condition of the promise, we
are justified in foro coelesti, in the court of heaven: by the latter, in the
court of our own conscience. By the former, we are justified before God; by the
latter, we are persuaded in our conscience, and in some measure assured of our
justification.

4. By the second degree of faith, which some call special faith, the promises
of the Gosp^ll are to be applied. But they cannot be applied to any aright, but
only to those, who have the condition of the promise, which is the justifying
faith.

For the Gospel does not promise justification and salvation to all, but to
those only who have a justifying faith.

Therefore a man must be endued with justifying faith, before he can or ought
to apply the promises of the Gospel to himself. For as salvation is promised
to them that believe, so damnation is denounced to them that believe not, Mar.
16. 16. Ioh. 5. 16. 18.

5. It is a very erroneous opinion to think, that we are justified, or do
obtain remission of sins, by being assured, and much more by being fully
assured of the forgiveness of our sins: or that we are to believe, that they
are forgiven, to the end that they may be forgiven: For justification and
remission of sins is promised only to those that believe by a justifying faith;
(I speak of those who are adulti, and are come to the years of discretion, not
of infants, who are justified sometimes, before they actually believe)
therefore a man must have justifying faith before he has remission of sins,
for by faith we obtain remission of sins, and by faith we are justified: and
therefore have we believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the faith
of Christ) A man's sins must be forgiven, before he can be assured that they be
forgiven; and it is absurd to imagine that the assurance that our sins be
forgiven, goes before the forgiveness of them.

For if a man must believe or be assured of the forgiveness of sins before
they be forgiven, then he is bound to believe that which is false. And lastly,
a man must ascend by diverse degrees of assurance, growing or proceeding from
faith to faith, before he can attain to full assurance. And here I hold it
expedient, briefly to touch a certain discourse of the learned Chamiers: that
it may evidently appear, that they who do not acknowledge this distinction of
justifying faith, must of necessity be forced to it. For, whereas Vasques
objecteth against us, that we teach, that we ought to believe that our sins are
remitted, to the end that we may be justified, and may obtain remission of
sins: he answers, that it is a mere slander: For, says he, Quid monstri est,
credere sibi remissa peccata ut remittantur? Sic enim constituitur fides
remissionis prior reipsa ipsa remissione; quod omnem absurditatent superat:
Enimveroe si prius remissa credimus, quam sint remissa, falsum nos oportet
credene. Quid plura? Nobis potius est p^rsuasissimum, remissa esse peccata
antequam credimus, etc. It is a monster, that a man should believe, that his
sins be forgiven, to the end that they may be forgiven, for so the faith that
our sins be forgiven, should go before the forgiveness it self, which
surpasses all absurdity: Surely, if we are to believe that our sins be
forgiven before they be remitted, then must we believe, that which is false.
What should I say more? We rather are fully persuaded, that our sins be
forgiven before we do believe, etc.

But say I, if no other justifying faith be acknowledged, but the special
faith whereby we are assured of the remission of our sins: and if this also be
true (which the Scripture teaches) that by faith we are to obtain remission of
sins, that absurdity will necessarily follow, which he so much di^claimeth. For
to hold that the sins of those who are adulti, or come to years of discretion,
be forgiven before they do believe, is as great an absurdity as the other;
because by faith we obtain remission of sins; neither is remission promised to
any, who are of years, but only to those that believe.

Of necessity therefore we must hold this distinction of faith, viz. that there
is one degree of justifying faith, which in order of nature, goes before
remission of sins, by which we obtain forgiveness of sins, and by which we are
justified before God: and that there is another degree of justifying faith,
which follows after justification and remission of sins: whereby we being
persuaded, and in some measure assured of the remission of our sins, are
justified in the court of our own conscience. And of this indeed it is true,
that our sins be forgiven, before we believe, or be assured that they be
forgiven.

6. For the further clearing of this distinction of Faith, let us distinctly
consider the differences between the two degrees: for 1. By the former, as I
have said, we are justified before God in the Court of Heaven, by the latter,
we are justified in the court of our own conscience: by the former, we are
justified properly; by the latter we are assured of our justification. 2. Of
the justification, which we have by the first degree, (which properly is called
justification) there are no degrees; but of that which we have by the second
degree, which properly is not justification before God, but the assurance of it
in our own consciences, there are degrees according to the measure of our faith.

3. The first degree goes before the remission of sins, the second follows
after.

4. Every man is bound upon pain of damnation to have the first degree of
faith, which is truly, and firmly to believe, that JESUS the Son of the blessed
Virgin, is the Eternal Son of God, and Savior of all that truly believe in
him; but no man ought to have the second, who has not the first; for a man
must first have ^ustifying Faith, which is the condition of the promise, before
he ought to believe, that the promise of remission of sins, or of salvation
belongs to him.

5. The former degree seems more properly to be the work of the Spirit
regenerating us, 1 Ioh. 5. 1. the latter of the same Spirit, as it is the
Spirit of adoption, sealing us after we have believed, Ephesians, 1. 13. 4. 30.
Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.

6. The former is begotten ordinarily by the ministry of the Gospel, and not
by the ministry of the Sacraments, which notwithstanding were ordained of
purpose, as I shall show hereafter, that they who have the first degree, might
attain to the second. For to him that believes truly, according to the first
degree, the Sacrament is a seal of the righteousness which is by faith, and a
pledge to assure him, that so certainly as the sign, so also the thing
signified, which is Christ with all his merits, are communicated to him.

7. The former, as hereafter I will make plain, is fides principiorum; the
latter, of conclusions deduced from thence by application, and by necessary
consequence.

8. Of the former, the four first notes of happiness, Mat. 5. are the signs and
fruits: of the second, the four latter. For though the Papists make of them
eight Beatitudes; yet there is but one Beatitude in this life, whereof Christ
is the foundation, and Faith is the instrument, whereby we receive and apply
Christ unto our selves; of which those eight are so many notes. For these (...)
or pronunciations of blessedness, the Lord Jesus directs to his Disciples,
and in them to all the faithful, saying, Blessed are you poor, etc. Luke 6.
20. The four first Beatitudes, as I said, are the Notes of the former degree.
for those that have the first, are not at the first happy in their own sense
and apprehension, but rather the contrary; being poor beggars in spirit,
mourning for their wants, subdued by the sense thereof unto meekness; hungring
and thirsting after righteousness, which they find themselves to want: and yet
our Savior pronounces them bl^ssed, which proves that they are justified
before God, though not assured thereof in their own conscience. The four
latter are marks of the second degree. For when we are in some measure assured
of Gods mercy toward us we become merciful to others for Gods sake; when we
have assurance of salvation, we endeavor to purify our selves, as he is pure;
when being justified by faith we have peace with God; we become peacemakers
among men. When men have obtained the assurance of Faith, to them it is given
not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for him.

2. Thus much of assent, which being lively and effectual, is the very
condition of the Evangelicall promise. Now I come to application, whereby we do
attain to assurance. And that we may soundly apply the promise to our selves,
we must first be assured, that we have the condition of the promise, which is
the first degree of justifying Faith, whereof I have spoken, that is, a true,
lively, and effectual assent; which we may know our selves to have, if our
belief be effectual, as before I said, both to justification, as it is when by
it we receive CHRIST, who is our Righteousness, not only in our judgments,
but also in our hearts, and in our wills: and also to sanctification, as it
is, when it produces the duties of repentance.

Having therefore the condition of the promise, and knowing that thou have it,
thou art bound in conscience, whatsoever the Papist faith to the contrary, to
apply the promise to thy self as belongs to thee. Do thou therefore truly
believe that Christ is the Savior of all those that truly believe in him; then
thou art bound to believe that he is thy Savior, that he died for thy sins*
and rose again for thy justification, that by him thou have remission of sins,
and that by him thou shall be saved. Otherwise, if thou know thy self to
have the condition of the promise, and wilt not apply it to thy self; that is,
if knowing thy self truly to believe, that Christ is the Savior, thou will not
believe that he is thy Savior, thou make God a liar, says S. John, in not
believing the record which God gave of his Son. And this is the record that God
has given to us (that believe in Christ) eternal life, and that this life is
in his Son. He that has the Son (as every true believer has) has life; and
he that has not the Son, has not lif^. These things (says he) I have written
to you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that you may know that you
have eternal life, and that you may believe on the Name of the Son of God. The
meaning of which last words seems to be this: I have written to you that
believe on the Name of Christ, by a true and lively assent, but have not
perhaps as yet attained to any sound assurance; that you applying the promises
of the Gospel to your selves, and gathering testimonies to your selves, that
they belong to you by such marks, as I in this Epistle have set down; may
attain to assurance, and so proceed from Faith to Faith. For without absurdity,
the Words cannot be understood of the same degree of Faith. I have written to
you that already believe in Christ, that you may believe in him. What? No
otherwise then already they do believe? Yes, no doubt, that they which believed
in a lower degree without assurance, might know that they have eternal life;
and that so attaining to a higher degree of faith, might thereby be assured of
salvation by Christ.

Now, this application is made by a practical Syllogism, the proposition
whereof, (which some call (...)) is the undoubted Word of God.

Whosoever truly believes in Christ, he shall be saved. The assumption is the
testimony of our own spirit, which is therefore called (...).

But I through Gods mercy do truly believe in Christ. For the Holy Ghost having
opened my heart, as he did the heart of Lydia, Act. 16. 14. to assent unto, or
to believe the Gospel, I do receive Christ, not only in my judgment, by a
firm, willing, and unfaned assent, but also in mine heart by an earnest desire
to be made partaker of him, which is the desire of application) and in my will
by a settled resolution (whatsoever the Law, mine own conscience, or the Devil,
can object to the contrary) to acknowledge him to be my Savior, and to rest
upon him for salvation, which is the resolved purpose of application.

The conclusion which is called (...) is the verdict or testimony of the Holy
Spirit, testifying with our spirits in the assumption, according to the word in
the proposition.

Therefore I through Gods mercy shall be saved, which is the voice of special
Faith.

The consequence of this, and all other formal Syllogismes, is such, that the
conclusion cannot be false, if the premises be true. Otherwise a contradiction
would be implied, that is, contradictories would be true together, which is
impossible: For if this conclusion should be false, then either the Proposition
is not true; that whosoever truly believes in Christ, shall be saved: or the
assumption, that I truly believe in Christ.

Of the proposition of this Syllogism, there can be no doubt, it being the
undoubted word of God, and the main promise of the Gospel.

Against the assumption, two things may be objected: the one, out of the
doctrine of our Divines: the other, out of the doctrine of the Papists. For
some of our Divines, define faith to be a full assurance of the love of God
concerning the remission of our sins, and eternal salvation by Christ, or in
other words to the like effect. But the faith mentioned in the assumption is no
such assurance.

I answer, that our Divines, defining the special Faith, are not to be blamed
for defining it according to the perfection thereof; for so every virtue and
grace ought to be defined; that so we may learn not to content our selves with
that imperfect measure whereunto we have already attained, but may aspire
toward perfection But if any shall hereupon infer, that no man does truly
believe, who has not that full assurance (as some unadvisedly have done) he
shall give occasion to the greatest part of believers, either to despair, that
they have not Faith, because they have not full assurance, or because they woul
not be thought without Faith to presume that they have a full assurance which
notwithstanding men do not attain unto at the first, nor at once, but by
diverse degrees, after much practice of piety, and long experience of Gods
goodness toward them; and never is so fully obtained before the end of this
life, but that somewhat still may, and ought to be added to it.

The objection of the Papists against the assumption is, that a man does not
know, that he does believe; and therefore not being ass^red, that he does
believe, he can have no assurance of salvation. This is in deed the thing which
they must stand unto, if they will deny, as they do, the certainty of
salvation. For if a man may be assured that he does truly believe, he may also
be assured that he shall be saved.

But that the faithful may know, that they believe, I prove.

1. Because every believer is taught to say, I believe in God the Father, I
believe in God the Son, I believe in God the Holy Ghost. This profession of
Faith every true Christian is bound to make with confidence; therefore every
true Christian is bound to know that he does believe. The father of the
demoniack, though endued but with a weak faith, when our Savior told him,
that the cure of his Son was possible, if he could believe, returned this
present answer, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. Mark. 9 23. 24. The
Eunuch, though a new convert, when Philip told him he might be baptized if he
did believe with all his heart, answered I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God. Act. 8. 37. We believe and know that thou art that Christ the
Son of the living God. John 6. 69. so John 11. 26, 27. This is that which
Augustine affirms. Videt (fidelis) ipsam sidem suam, quase credere sine
cunctatione respondet The faithful man feeth his own faith, whereby that he
does believe, he answers without delay.

Object. Yea, but many recite the Creed, saying, I believe, etc. who
notwithstanding do not believe, and much less know it.

Ans. The question is not, what hypocrites and unsound Christians do, or can
do, of whom there is no question, but that seeing they do not believe, they
cannot know themselves to believe. But every faithful and sound Christian,
whom the Seriptures call (...), when he professes, that he does believe, does
not only believe, in deed, but also knows that he does believe, and he which
does not know that he does believe, has just cause to suspect himself that he
is not (...), a sound and approved Christian. But for this there is an evident
proof. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith (...),
try your selves whether you be (...), or not. Know you not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you except you be (...), that is, not sound, nor
approved Christians.

Those that are commanded to try themselves, whether they be in the Faith, may
upon trial know it. Those that may know that CHRIST is in them, may know they
do believe, because CHRIST is in us by faith, and if they be (...), unsound,
who do not know that CHRIST is in them, then all that are (...), that is,
sound, approved Christians do know it. And wehereas some Papists take
acception, that the Apostle speaks of the true doctrine, which is called the
Catholic faith; I answer, first, that a man cannot know that he is in the
catho like faith, unless he also know that he does believe it. 2. The Apostle
speaks of that faith, whereby Christ dwells in us, which is not the
doctrine, but the grace of Faith. 3. The Apostle vindicateth and proves his
calling by theirs: as we prove the truth of our Church, and of our Ministry
against our Separatists, who before their separation, seemed very forward
Christians. Try, whether you have a true Faith, and if you have, acknowledge
that to have been a true Ministry, by which it was wrought For how can they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard, and how can they hear without a
Preacher, and how can they preach, unless they be sent? Romans 10. 14.

3. These things says Saint John, have I written to you, that believe on the
Name of the Son of GOD, (1 John 5. 13.) that you may know that you have
eternal life: which they could not know, unless they knew themselves to
believe.

4. At that day, viz. after the sending of the Holy Ghost, you shall know that
I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you, says our Savior, John 14. 20.

5. The mind is not ignorant of its own a'tions A g^pi. 112. ad Paulin^^. c.
2. Meant (...) vides, vit^m, v^l^ntate^, cogi^atem, cogitationem, memoriam,
cogitationem, intelligentiam, sientiam, fidentuam.
when it understands, it knows it self to understand, when it discourses,
it knows it self to discourse; so when it a^^enteth, it knows it self to
assent; when it desires any thing, it knows that it does desire it; when it
purposes, or resolves, it knows that it does purpose, or resolve, much more
being helped by the Spirit of God, whom we have received from God, that we
might know the things which are given unto us of God. 1 Cor. ^. 12.

6. How should any man glory in the testimony of his own conscience, that he
does believe, or that he does walk uprightly before God (which is the chiefest
(2 Cor. 1. 12. Esaias 38. 3.) comfort of all sound Christians) who is not
conscious to himself, that he does believe, and walk uprightly before God, Est
ergo quidam modus in conscientis glor^andi, ut noveris sidem tuam esse
sinceram, noveris esse spem tuam certam, noveris charitatem tuam esse sine
simulatione (In Psalm. 149.) says, Augustine And again, suam (de Trinit. li.
13. c. 2.) quisque fidem apud seipsum videt C. I. fidem videt quisque in cord
suo esse, si credit -- non sicut corpora. -- Non sic videtur fides in cord in
quo est, ab eo cujus est, sed eam tenet certisima scientia, clamatque
conscientia. And again, though we see not the things which we do believe,
ipsam tamen fidem quando inest in nobis videmus in nobis. Epist. 112. c. 4.
Menti nostrae fides nostra conspicua est.

So much of the assumption.

Upon these premises necessarily follows the conclusion, which is the (...),
or verdict of special Faith, concluding the certainty of salvation, by
application of the promises to him that has the first degree of faith. Which
in my poor opinion is a most comfortable doctrine.

But against special Faith so proved, the Papists still object diverse things.

1. That it cannot be truly termed faith, and that for three reasons. For, 1.
vere fidei falsum sub esse non potest, the object of true faith cannot be that
which is false, but of this, the object may be false, because a man may be
deceived in the application.

I answer: as there is a double knowledge, the on of principles manifest in
themselves, called (...) the other, of conclusions (not manifest in themselves,
but manifested by discourse) called (...), so there is a twofold Faith, the one
of principles contained in the word of God; the other, of conclusions deduced
from thence: which conclusions though they are not absolutely necessary, yet
the premises being true, they cannot be false. But the premises of this
practical syllogism made by a faithful man, are true; therefore the
conclusion cannot be false. Indeed if the syllogism be made by an hypocrite,
or ungrounded Christian, the conclusion is not necessary; because the
assumption is false, or at the least, uncertain: false, if he do not believe;
uncertain, if he do not know himself to believe; and then the assumption at
the most, is but this; but I do suppose that I do believe; and the conclusion
must be answerable, therefore I suppose that I shall be saved. But the (...),
the faithful and sound Christian, who does not only believe. But knows
himself to believe; as he assumeth, I do know, and I am sure that I do
believe; so he concludes, therefore I know and am sure that I shall be saved.

2. True Faith is grounded upon the Word, the special Faith that this man or
that man shall be saved, is not grounded on the Word. ergo, it is not a true
Faith.

Resp. Particulars are included in the general, and quod omnibus promittitur,
singulis promittitur; therefore if it be true, that all believers shall be
saved, then it is as true, that this or that believer shall be saved; and this
the Apostle teaches, Romans 10. 9. if thou etc.

3. Because Faith mentioned in the Scripture, is the Faith of assent, and not
of application.

I answer, that as there are many places which speak properly of assent, some
whereof I before cited; so there are many which mention or mean the special
Faith. As namely all those places, which are very many, and almost innumerable,
wherein the faithful do apply, and as it were appropriate those things which
are spoken of God * to themselves. As my God, my Lord, my Savior, the God of
my salvation, etc. (* Psalm. 3. 7. 4. 1. 5. 2. 7. 1. 5. 13. 3. 16. 2. 18 1, 2.
46. 19. 4. 22. 1, 8. 27. 1. 9. 38. 41. 22. 43. 4, 5. 51. 14. etc. Hab. 3. 18.
Luke 1. 47. John 20. 28. etc.

So Gal. 2, 20. Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me,

Likewise in those places where the faithful profess their assurance of
justification and salvation, as Job. 13. 18, 19. 25, 26, 27. Psalm. 103. 3. who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, Psalm. 32. 5. Rom 8. 35. 38. 2 Timothy 1. 12.

Secondly, upon the Patrons of special Faith, the Papists do presle diverse
inconveniences and absurdities.

As 1. If every man be bound to believe in particular his own salvation, then
it would follow that every man shall be saved; because no man is bound to
believe an untruth: but the consequent is false, therefore the antecedent.

Answ. I have showed before, that every man is bound upon pain of damnation to
have the first degree of Faith, which is to give a firm assent to the promise
of the Gospel, assuring salvation to all those that believe in CHRIST; but the
second degree none ought to have, but they only who have the first; no man
ought to apply the promise of the Gospel to himself, who has not the
condition of the promise, unless he will pernieiously deceive himself. For,
as he that believes shall be saved: so he that believes not, shall be
condemned. Mark. 16. 16. If thou do truly believe that CHRIST is the Savior,
thou art bound to believe, that he is thy Savior: And so believing in CHRIST,
and receiving him both by assent, and applycation, thou shall undoubtedly be
saved.

The second absurdity] 2. Those that have this special Faith ought not to ask
the forgivenes of sins, which notwithstanding our Savior teaches his own
Apostles to ask. For they that have full assurance of the forgivenes of all
their sins, ought not to ask forgivenes, unless they will dally with God,
for nothing desires that which it has.

I answer. 1. that not all believers have full assurance; some are incipients,
some proficients, some perfect or grown men in CHRIST. Those that are
incipients, pray both that their sins may be forgiven, and that they may
have some assurance there of: proficients, and those that be grown men, pray
both that their sins may be remitted; and their assurance augmented, for
none are so perfect, but that their assurance may be increased.

2. As we daily sin, so we must daily ask forgivenes, prayer being the
means that GOD has ordained to that end.

Ob. Yea but says the Papist; ye forsooth have already full assurance of the
remission of all your sins, not only past, but also to come.

Answ. It is absurd to imagine, that sins be remitted before they be
committed, and much more that we be assured they are remitted, before they be
either remitted or committed; that indeed were a doctrine to animate, and to
encourage men to sin.

But howsoever the Pope sometimes forgiveth sins to come, yet God does not;
when God justifies a man, he gives him remission of sins past. Romans 3. 25.
As for time to come, we teach, that although Christ has merited, and God has
promised remission of sins of all the faithful unto the end of the world:
Notwithstanding, remission of sins is not actually obtained, and much-lesse
by special faith believed, until men do actually believe and repent, and by
humble and faithful prayer renew their faith and repentance. For as God has
promised to the faithful all good things; but how? Mark. 7. 7, 8. (...) them
that ask that seek that knock: so also remission of sins. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that remission of sin, though merited by CHRIST, though promised
by GOD, though sealed unto us in the Sacrament of Baptism, is obtained by the
effectual prayer of those that believe and repent, for whom CHRIST has
merited it, and to whom GOD has promised it in his Word, and sealed it by the
Sacrament; even as the obtaining of the rain, which GOD has promised, (1
Kings 18. 1. 41.) and the Prophet Elias had foretold, is ascribed ( Iam. 5.
16. 18.) to the effectual prayer of Elias.

3. The third absurdity which the Papists put upon the doctrine of special
Faith, is, that by it men are animated to commit all manner of sin. As if it
were no matter, how many, or how great sins a man does commit, so long as he
is assured by special Faith, that all his sins past, present* and to come,
are remitted.

Answ. That which they say of sin to come, is a malicious slander, as I noted
before; but I answer: the practice of sin (especially of any crime) and
going on in the same without repentance, cannot possibly stand with the
assurance of Faith. Neither can a man be assured of the forgivenes of any
sin, whereof he does not repent: and much less can he be assured before hand
of the forgivenes of that sin which presumptaously he does purpose to commit.

As for the doctrine of special Faith, I do confidently profess, that there
is scarce any one doctrine in all Divinity, of greater force and efficacy,
either to encourage men to well-doing, or to preserve them from evil. For as I
have showed before, the more a man is assured of GODS love toward him in
CHRIST, in forgiving his sins, and giving unto him eternal life; the more
will his heart be inflamed with love toward GOD, and toward his neighbor for
GODS sake; the more zealous will he be of GODS glory, the more thankful for
his mercies, the more desirous to please, the more fearful to displease, the
more careful to obey him, the more ready when he has offended to return unto
him etc. and therefore not without cause, chasidim. the favorites of GOD, who
have experience and assurance of GODS special favor toward them, are every,
where almost translated (...), that is, godly.

3. Having thus by application of the promises to our selves (as having the
condition thereof) attained to some measure of assurance, we are to be careful
to use all other means which GOD has ordained, for the confirming of this
assurance.

The first means is Prayer, both for the spirit of adoption, and for the
increase of our Faith.

As touching the former: forasmuch as special Faith is the work of the Holy
Ghost, shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts; we are therefore to
entreat the Lord that he would give us his Spirit (which he has promised to
give to those that ask him (Luke 11. 13.) the spirit of adoption, crying, that
is, by whom we cry in our hearts Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 15. testifying
with our spirits that we are the sons of GOD; and if sons, then also heyers,
heyers of God, and coheyers with Christ, Romans 8. 16. 17. by whom we are sealed
to the day of our full redemption, who also is the earnest of our inheritance,
2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians 13, 14. 4. 30.

And as for the other: because full assurance is the highest degree of special
faith, unto which we do never so fully attain, but that still more and more
may and ought to be added; therefore we are to pray continually for the
increase thereof, saying with the father of the Damoniack, Mark. 9. 24. I
believe Lord, but help thou my unbelief and with the Apostles, Luke 17. 5. O
Lord increase our faith. For as Augustine says, fides fundit orationem, fusa
oration fidei impetrat firmitatem. (De verbis Do. sermon. 36.)

2 Unto prayer we are to adjoyne repentance, for our sins; without which
neither is our faith lively nor our prayers effectual, the rather, because to
it, and to the several duties of it, as proper notes and evidences of a true
faith, the promise of forgiveness is made; as namely to confession of our
sins, to contrition in being displeased with our selves, and grieved for
them, to deprecation in craving pardon for them, to an unfeigned desire and
purpose to forsake them, and to practice the contrary duties. Yea if a man
shall as truly desire to confess his sins, to bewail them, and to forsake
them, as he does desire the forgiveness of them; such an one may undoubtedly
be assured of the remission of them. For most gracious are the promises of God
made unto penitent sinners, as Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes
his sins shall have mercy, so Jerem. 3. 12, 13. Levit. 26. 40, 41. Hos. 14.
1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

More particularly, as I said, to confession, 1 John 1. 9. Job 33. 27, 28.
Psalm. 32. 5. Luke 15. 21.

To contrition. Mat. 5. 4. Psalm. 34. 18. 51. 17. Esaias 57. 15. 61. 1, 2, 3. 66.
2.

To humble deprecation. Zach. 12. 10. Luke 18. 13. Hos. 4. 2.

To conversion unto God, and forsaking of sin, Deuteronomy. 4. 30, 31. 30. 2. 10.
Es. 1. 16, 17, 18. Jerem. 3. 1. 22. 18. 8. Ezech. 18. 27, 28. 30, 31, 32, 33.
11. Joel. 2. 12. Zach. 1. 3. Mal. 3. 7.

3. To prayer and repentance we must add the diligent and conscionable hearing
of the Word, by which Faith ( Romans 10. 17.) as it is at the first begotten, so
it is nourished and increased. 1 Pet. 2. 2.

4. Because Faith begotten by the Word, consists at the first in assent,
without actual application, therefore to the hearing of the Word is to be
adjoined the worthy receiving of the Sacraments, which were ordained to this
very end, that those who have the first degree of Faith, may proceed to the
second, and go on therein. Do thou therefore truly believe, that Christ is
the Savior of all those that believe in him? the Sacrament, which thou
receivest, is a pledge unto thee, and an assurance that he is thy Savior; a
pledge I say, communicated to the receivers severally, to assure every one that
believes truly according to the first degree of faith, that as certainly as he
receives the Sacrament; so he is made partaker also of the thing signified,
which is the participation of Christ, and all his merits to his justification
and salvation.

5. To these we are to add reading, meditation, conference, etc.

6. The practice of piety, or leading of a godly life making conscience of all
our ways, and walking upright before God. For hereby especially we are to make
our calling and our election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. for he that does these things
shall never be removed, Ps. 15. 5. And this is confirmed by the order and
conjunction of justification and sanctification mentioned before (page 37.)
More specially by brotherly love, 1 John 3. 14. and the fruits thereof in
giveing alms, Mat. 25. 35. 1 Timothy 6. 18. 19. and forgiving the offense of
others, Mat. 6. 14. and therefore our Savior teaches us to use this argument
in our prayer for the confirmation of our faith, Mat 6. 12. but more plainly,
Luke 11. 4.

So much of the first doctrine.

CHAP. IX.
Two other uses of this property.
NOw follows the second doctrine. For if we be enabled to worship the Lord
without servile fear, as being freed from the terror and coaction of the law;
then it follows, that we are to worship the Lord with willing minds, as
David exhorts his son Solomon. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. and promises for himself,
Ps. 119. 32. I will run the way of thy commandments when my heart is set at
liberty. For therefore has the Lord freed us from the servitude of sin, and
bondage of the law, that we might serve him with free and willing minds. The
people redeemed by CHRIST, become a voluntary people, psalm. 110 3. or, as Paul
speaks, his peculiar people, zealous, or studious of good works. Tit. 2. 14.

Thus the duties both of piety toward GOD, and charity to our brethren, are to
be performed with willing minds and cheerful hearts. In the duties of piety
we are to serve the Lord with gladness. Ps. 100 2. I rejoiced (says David Ps.
12. 21.) when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord. More
particularly,

The Word of God is to be preached (...), willingly, 1. Pet. 5. 2. that we may
say with the Apostle, Romans 1. 15. (...), as much as lies in me I am willing to
preach the Gospel, for it must be done in love to CHRIST, and zeal to GODS
glory, John 21, 15, 16, 17. Act. 20, 28. in love and zeal of our brethrens
salvation. 2 Cor. 11. 2. It is to be heard with willingness, after the example
of the Beraeans, Act. 17. 11 who received the Word (...) with all readiness of
mind, desiring 1 Pet. 2. 2. and longing after it, Ps. 119. 131. To be
conversant therein. should be our delight Ps. 1. 2. the Word ought to be sweet
unto us, even as the honey, and the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 11. 109. 103. and we
should rejoice in it as in all manner of riches. This affection toward Gods
Word David expresses, psalm. 119. 14, 15, 16, 24. 47. 72. 111. 127. 143. 162.

We must give our selves to prayer, as devoted thereunto, Psalm. 109. 4. taking
delight to confer with God in prayer; and offering up our prayers and
thanksgivings, as a willing sacrifice, Psalm. 119. 108.

We must praise God with joyfulness, and give thanks with cheerfulness, Psalm.
9. 2. 95 2. 95. 1. 2. 63. 5. for as (...), which is thanks, comes of (...). to
re^oyce; so it must be (...), that is, with joy, Phil. 1. 3. 4. we must esteem
it a blessed thing, wherein we resemble the blessed Saints and Angels in
heaven, Psalm 84 4.

We must call the Sabbath our delight, Esaias 58. 13: And we must esteem one day
spent in the house of God as better then a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. Psalm. 26. 8.
27. 4. 84. 1, 2, 3, 4. 10.

The duties of charity are also cheerfully to be performed, Romans 12 8. he that
shows mercy let him do it with cheerfulness, drawing forth his soul to the
hungry and afflicted* Esaias 58* 10. id est, ex animo liberaliter hilariterque
communicans ejus necessitatibus. For the Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor.
9. 7.

Finally in doing the will of God, we are to imitate the holy Angels,
according to our daily prayer, that we may do the will of God upon earth, as
it is done in heaven, that is willingly, readily, cheerfully; following also
the example of all examples, our blessed Savior, whose delight it was, Psalm.
40. 8. and whose meat it was to do the will of his heavenly father, John 4. 34.

As for that obedience, or service, which is extorted from men by servile
fear, because it is forced, it is but momentany; For no violent thing is of
continuance, and being mome^tany, it is but counterfeit, whereas true piety is
constant and permanent, Such is the obedience and repentance of hypocrites: who
when they are affrighted with Gods judgments, or afflicted with his heavy
hand pretend repentance, and promise amendment: but when the hand of God is
removed from them, they return to their former courses, and are so far from
learning obedience by that which they have suffered, or feared, that like
anviles with often striking they are more and more hardened; according to that,
Esaias 1. 5. why should you be shricken any more you will add revolt. A notable
example hereof we have in Pharaoh, who, as upon the inflicting of the several
judgments, promised obedience, Exodus 8. 8. 25. 9. 27. 10. 16. 12. 31. so upon
the removing of the plagues, he returned to his former obstinacy, Exodus 8. 15.
32. 9. 34. 10. 20. 14. 5. Yea in the Israelites themselves; who, when God slew
some of them, they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early after GOD,
etc. Nevertheles they did but flatter him with their mouth, and with their
tongues they lied unto him, for their heart was not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his covenant, Psalm. 78, 34, 36, 37. This therefore ought
to teach men not to put off their repentance to the time of sickness or old
age, or to the hour of death; lest the repentance which then they hope to
perform, prove counterfeit. Now, that our obedience may be voluntary and
cheerful, and our service of God without servile fear, we are to be adorned
with the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity: for according to
the measure of these three graces, in the measure of our spiritual security
and assurance, which is the ground of our cheerfulness. Faith; for no man can
worship the Lord with a willing mind, and cheerful heart, that is not by Faith
persuaded, that his service is accepted of him. The persuasion of Gods love
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, that is to say, Faith, makes us
to love him again, and in love to serve him willingly; to whom much is
forgiven, they love much, Luke 7. 47. That charity whereby the whole law is
fulfilled, proceeds from Faith unfeigned, 2 Timothy 1. 5. and without Faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Hope, for they that have fastened their
anchor of hope in Heaven, perform the duties of piety and righteousness with a
comfortable expectation of everlasting happiness. The hope whereof makes them
easily to swallow all the difficulties and troubles of this life, for the joy
that is set before them, and with cheerfulnes to serve the Lord, and to finish
their course with joy, Act. 20. 24. whiles we hold fast this hope, nothing
shall be able to discourage, or to withdraw us from the voluntary worship of
GOD. Not the desires of this world, which to him that has this hope seem mere
vanities in comparison of the happiness hoped for. Not the terrors or
bugg-beares of this world, which are not worthy of the glory expected. (see
Romans 5. 2. 3.) Consider the example of Moses, who, when he was come to years,
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of GOD, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, esteeming the reproach of Christ (in his members) greater riches then
the treasures of Egypt: the reason of all which is this, for he had respect to
the recompense of reward Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.

Charity, (1 John 4. 18.) which expelling fearfulness, causes cheerfulness. To
him that loves, the commandments of God are not grievous, 1 John. 5. 3. nor
the yoke of CHRIST tedious. Nothing is hard to him that loves Jacobs 7 years
of hard service for the love of Rachel seemed to him but a few days, Genesis 29.
20.

The third use, is a singular comfort, which from hence arises to the
Faithful. For whereas the Lord in other places, when he would comfort his
servants, bideth them not to fear, as Esaias 43. 1. fear not, for I have
redeemed thee, Luke. 12. 32. fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom: Here in this covenant of grace, he promises,
and that by oath, that he will give us to worship him without fear, or at
least without cause of fear, so Esaias 54. 4. which must needs be a singular
consolation unto us, whether we respect our condition by nature or by grace.
For by Nature we are obnoxious to our enemies, subject to the terror of the
law, and to the fear ( Heb. 2. 15.) of death and damnation; And though we be
in the state* of grace, yet are we infirm and weak, not able by our own
strength to resist our enemies; The ground therefore of this our being without
fear, is not any confidence of our own strength: but first of all, the truth
of God, ( Heb. 6. 17, 18.) who by oath has promised that we shall worship him
without fear.

2. Secondly, the power of God, whereby he is able to make good his promise 2 Timothy 1. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

3. Thirdly, his fidelity, in regard whereof he is also willing to perform his
oath, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24.

4. Fourthly, his Fatherly providence* Esaias 54. 17. Romans 8. 28. and protection,
Psalm. 91.

5. Fifthly, CHRIST'S protection of us as our King, who having vanquished all the
enemies of our salvation, and deliveder us out of their hand, none shall be able
to hurt us, Esaias 54. 14. 17. and much less to pluck us out of his hand, John
10. 28.

6. Sixthly, his intercession for us, as our Priest, Romans 8. 34. 1 John 2. 2.

7. Seventhly, his union with us as our Head, with whom our life is hid in God,
Col. 3. 3. Now as whiles the head (as they say) is above the water, the members
cannot be drowned, so whiles our Head is in glory, sitting at the right hand of
his Father, none of his members can perish; but as himself has promised,
because I live, you shall live also, Ioh. 14. 19. wherefore we are to think of
our selves, as of the members of CHRIST, whom the Lord has quickened together
with CHRIST, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in CHRIST JESUS. Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.

8. Eighthly, the testimony of the Holy Ghost the Comfortor, who shedding (Romans
5. 5.) abroad the love of God in our hearts, and testifying with ( Romans 8. 16.)
our spirits, that we are the sons of God, becomes the earnest (1 Cor. 21. 5.
5.) of salvation, sealing us ( Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.) until the day of our full
redemption, and not only freeth us from the spirit of bondage and of fear, as
being the spirit of adoption, by whom we cry (Gal, 4. 6.) in our hearts Abba
father; but* also works in us peace of conscience, (Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 15.
Romans 5. 1. 5. 14. 17.) and joy in the Holy Ghost. which St. Peter calls
unspeakable and glorious. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

CHAP. X.
Of uprightness and of the worshipping of God in holiness before him.
THe second property of our new obedience is uprightnes, signified in these
words (...) before him. Whereby is meant, that we are to serve God in holiness
and righteousness, not as before men in eye-services as men-pleasers; but as
before God, in sincerity and truth. And so the Lord himself seems to expound
this phrase Genesis 17. 1. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be
upright. For to walk before God, or to walk with God (both which phrases are
used in the Scriptures, sometimes jointly, as 1 Kings 3. 6. sometimes severally
with God, as did Henoch, Genesis 5. 22. 24. and Noah, Genesis 6. 9. and as we are
required to do, Mich. 6. 8. before God, Es. 57. 2. as did Abraham, Genesis 24.
40. and Isaa^ Gen, 48. 15. David* Ps. 116. 9. Iotham, who prepared his ways
before the Lord, 2 Chro. 27. 6.) it is to behave our selves as in the sight and
presence of God, setting God before our eyes, admitting him to be the beholder,
witness, and judge of our actions; that is, to demean our selves uprightly. And
this property is required, not only in the duties of piety, which we perform
directly to God; but also in the duties of righteousness, which we owe unto men:
for so it is here said, that we should worship him in holiness and righteousness
before him; in which two, being sincere and upright, the image of God renewed
in us does consist, Ephesians. 4. 24. in righteousness and holiness of truth, that
is in true, sincere, upright, and unfeigned righteousness and holiness. But
first we are to speak of worshipping GOD in holiness before him, or of
uprightness, as it has relation to GOD. In which sense it is opposed to
hypocrisy, and so what is upright, is said to be (...), without hypocrisy, or
unfeigned.

What uprightness is] Now what this uprightnes is, we may gather by those
diverse words and phrases, whereby it is expressed, both in the Old Test. and in
the New.

As first, by the word josher (Psalm. 25. 21.) which signifies uprightness,
and jashar, which signifies right or upright, as Psalm. 37. 37. Job. 1. 1, 8.
2, 3. but more plainly and fully, when it is joined with some other word, as
right in heart, signifying the inward disposition; or right in the way,
signifying the conversation. For so the upright are called recti^orde, right or
upright in heart, as Psalm. 7. 10. 32. 14. 36. 10. 64. 10. 94. 15. 94. 15. 125.
4. and uprightness rectitudo cordis, 1 King. 3. 6. Psalm. 119. 7. they are also
called recti via Psalm. 37. 14. upright of way, Psalm. 119. 1. or perfecti via,
ambulans integer. [Integer vitae Horat.] Psalm. 15. 2. whose way is
uprightness. Es. 26. 7. their way being made straighy by God. Both which do
concur in the upright, for he is properly integer, who is both outwardly
straight, that is rectus via and inwardly sound, that is rectus cord. Both
must con^urre, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.

2. By the word Emeth which signifies truth, for as there is truth in words,
opposed to lying, so also in deeds, opposed to dissembling and hypocrsie, which
is uprightness, as Io^. 24. 14. Psalm. 51. 6. Es. 8. 3. Psalm. 145. 18. and as
there is a saying, ^2 Chronicles. 31. 20.) so also a doing of the ruth. Ioh. 3. 21.
1 Ioh. 1. 6. and walking ^ truth, 2 John 4. and 3 John 3. hence to walk
uprightly, is to walk before God in truth. 1 King. 2. 4. and 1 King. 3. 6. in
truth and righteousness and uprightness of heart, 2 King. 20. 3. in truth
with a perfect heart, and to worship God uprightly, is to worship him in Spirit
and in truth, Joh. 4. 23, 24. or as Samuel exhorts, in truth with all our
hearts, 1 Samuel 12. 24.

3. The most usual word to signify, either the upright is Tham or Thamim,
which commonly is translated perfect, as Genesis 17. 1. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Psalm. 15. 2.
37. 37. 119. 1. (...) uprightness, is Thom or thamim, which ^sually is
translated perfection, whereby ^ot legal perfection is meant (which is
^bsolute and complete, not only in respect of the parts, but also of degrees)
but evangelicall, according to the covenant of grace; which is nothing else)
the Lord (2 Cor. 8. 18. Genesis 22. 16. 2 Samuel 7. 2. etc.) accepting in his
children the will for the deed) but integrity or uprightness; and is so
expounded Psalm. 25. 21. Ios. 24. 14. Job. 1. 1. 8. 2, 3. Psalm. 37. 37. For very
many in the Scriptures have this perfection attributed to them, who
notwithstanding had their imperfections, as Noah, Genesis 6. 9. Job. 1. 1. 8. 2,
3. Jacob, Genesis 25, 27. etc. Of Asa it is said 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. that his heart
was perfect all his days: and yet in the next Chapter there are recorded three
foul sins which he committed, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7. 10. 12.

4. By the word Shalem, which is the Greek is translaned, sometimes (...)
perfect, sometimes (...), and sometimes (...) full or complete exampls of the
first, 1 King. 8. 61. 11. 4. 15. 3. 14. 2 King. 20. 3. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. 2. Chro.
15 12. of the second Es. 38. 3.

Of the last 1 Chronicles. 29 9. 16. 9. 19. 9. 25. 2. And in this sense, they that
are upright are said to have fulfilled after the Lord, that is fully or
entirely to have followed him, Number. 14. 24. 32. 11. 12. Deuteronomy. 1 36. Ios. 14. 8.
9. 14. as contrariwise of those who are not upright, but have a name that they
live, and yet are dead; it is said that their works are not (...) full or
perfec before God. Apoc. 3. 2, 3. but dimidiata, worshipping and obeying God by
the halfes not fulfilling after him, Number. 3^. 11.

5. By the whole heart, being not legally, but evangel cally understood, as
when duties are to be performed with the whole heart, or with all the heart,
and with all the soul, as Deuteronomy. 4. 29. 26 6 30 2. 1 Samuel 12 24 2 Kings 23 3
Psalm 1 9 2. 10. 34. (9. I^el 2 12 which being legally understood, import a
greater perfection, then is incident to any man since the fall: but being
evangeli^ally understood according to the covenant of grace, nothing else is
meant thereby, but that they are to be performed with an entire or upright
heart, or as David speaks, Psalm. 119. 7. with uprightness of heart.

6. Not with an heart, and an heart (after the manner of hypocrites, who are
(...) Iam. 1. 8. 4. 8) Psalm. 12. 2. 1 Chro. 12. 33. 38.

7. Without guile, that is hypocrisy, Psalm. 17. 1. 32. 2.

8. As the upright are called recti cord, so also puri cord, pure in heart,
Psalm. 24. 4. 73. 1.

Whereby is not meant, that they are wholly pure of free from sin: for who
can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20. 9. or if
an ^ shall say so, in him there is no truth, ^ Ioh. 1. 8. But they are pure in
heart, who are sincere and upright, purified from the leaven of hypocrisy,
Iam. 4. 8. in whose heart there is no guile, Psalm. 32. 2. who being endued with
faith unfeigned, which purifieth their hearts, Act. 15. 9. as the instrument
apprehending the blood of CHRIST, which does purge our hearts from sin, 1
Ioh. 1. 7. and purifieth our conciences from dead works to serve the living
God, Heb. 9. 14. and being also endued with this hope, that they shall be like
unto Christ in glory, will (1 Ioh. 3. 3,) purify themselves even as he is
pure. But this is puritas inchoata, not perfecta.

In the new Testament uprightness is expressed sometimes by this phrase (...)
before God, as not only in this, but also in other places, where we are taught
to speak, as before God in Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 19. to preach, as before God in
Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 17. commending our selves to every man's conscience in the
sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. and to take care for the people of God, as in his
sight, 2 Cor. 7. 12. to hear as before God, Act. 10. 33. Thus* both those
persons which be upright, are siad to be righteous before God, Luke 1. 6. and
those hypocrites, whose heart is not right before God, Act. 8. 21. and those
actions and duties, which are upright, are said to be acceptable, pleasing and
unproveable before God, 1 Timothy 2. 3. 5. 4. Heb. 13. 21. 1 Ioh. 3. 22. Col. 1. 22.

2. Sometimes by the word truth, John 4. ^3. 4. 1 Cor. 5. 8. 1 John, 3. 18.
Phil. 1. 18. ^ph. 4. 24. hence an upright heart is called (...) a true heart.
Heb. 10. 22.

3. Sometimes by the word (...) that is sincerity as 1 Cor. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 2. 17.
and 2 Cor. 1. 12. where it is called the sincerity of God, that is, godly
sincerity* for that is (...) which is sincere, or without mixture, as bread
without leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 8. without the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy, Luke 12. ^. or as honey without wax (as the word sincere does
signify) or as Hesychius expounds it (...), pare, sincere, or without
deceit, land true. This sincerity the Lord required of the Israelites, by
forbidding diverse sorts of mixture: as to plant their vineyards, or to ^ow
their fields with diverse sorts, to plowe with an ox and an ass together, to
wear a garment of diverse stuffes, as of woollen and linen together, Deuteronomy. 22.
9. 10. 1^. Levit. 19. 19.

4. Sometimes the upright man is signified by the word (...), which signifies
a sound, or an approved Christian; such as are not only hearers, but doers also
of Gods word* who are not only in the Church visible, but also of the Church
invisible, who are sheep in Christ's flock^, and not goats; wheat in Gods
floor, and not chafe, corn in Gods field, and not tares; children in Gods
family, and not bond-servants, Ioh. 8. 34, 35. and contrariwise, those who are
hypocrites or unsound Christians are called (...) (1 Cor. 9. 27. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 8.) which does not signify reprobate, as opposed to the elect; but
reprovable, as opposite to (...)* that is, approved. 1 Cor. 11. 19. there must
be heresies, that those who are (...) sound and approved may be known, Iam. 1.
12. Blessed is the man who endures temptation; for when by trial he shall be
found (...) that is, a sound and approved Christian, he shall receive the crown
of life. For temptations and trials, are (...) probations, by enduring and
overcomming whereof the upright, or (...) (who have the privilege of
perseverance) are discerned and known* Sometimes the word is used with some
addition, as (...) approved in CHRIST, that is an approved Christian, Romans 16.
^0. (...) approved of GOD, a Tim. 2. 15. for not he who commends himself is
(...), but he whom God commends 2 Cor. 10. 18. (...), acceptable or
well-pleasing to GOD, and approved of men, Romans 14. 18.

5. that which is upright and sincere is sometimes signified by the word (...),
(for to be upright, is not to be an hypocrite) as Romans ^2. 9. 2 Cor. 6 6. 1
Pet. 1. 22 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 5. Iam. 3. 17. and sometimes by the word (...),
1 Pet. 2. ^. sincere or without guil^, And they are said to be upright, in
whose spirit there is n^ guile, that is hypocrisy, Psalm. 32. 2. true
Israelites, in whom there is no guile, Ioh. 1. 48. for such fools are
hypocrite^, as that they (dancing, as it were, in a net) go about with their
flattering words, and fair pretenses to deceive ^od Psalm. 78. 36.

6 As in the old t^stament, so al^o in the new, the upright are called pure in
heart, as Mat. 5. 8 and the upright heart is called a pure heart^ Tim 1 5, ^im
2. 2^ 1 Pet 1. 22.

7. Lastly, to walk uprightly is (...) to go with a right foot Gal 2. 14.
neither treading awry^y dissimul^tion n^r halting as the Israelites did betwixt
God and Baal, 1. King. 18, nor declining to the right hand or to the left,
Deuteronomy. 5. 32. 28. 14. 2 Chro. 34. 2. or as the Apostle speaks Heb. 12. 13. to
make steight or right paths to our feet, according to the exhortation of
Solomon, Prove. 4. ^6. as it is rendered by the 72. (...), make right paths to
thy feet, and order right thy ways, decline (v. 27.) not to the right hand nor
to the left, and as he exhorts, v. 25. let thine eyes look right on, and let
thine eye-liddes look straight before thee, would you know then what it is to
worship God in holiness before him? it is to walk with God, or before God
without hypocrisy, in sincerity and truth, with perfect, with pure, with our
whole hearts, that is to say, with entire or upright hearts, walking in the way
of religion and godliness with a right foot, looking right before us, declining
neither to the right hand, nor to the left neither treading awry by
dissimulation, nor halting downright, either as neuters in religion, betwixt
CHRIST and Antichrist, or as worldlings between GOD and Mammon; nor
worshipping or obeying GOD by halves, but approving our selves to be (...)
entire and sound Christians, to him that tries and searches the heart and the
reins, setting God always before our eyes, and behaving our selves as in his
sight and presence, doing that which is right in his sight.

Arguments to move us to integrity] Now that we may be moved to labor for this
integrity and uprightness of heart, I will use the 3. usual arguments of
commendation, viz. the excellency, the profit, and the necessity of it as it
were a triple chain.

1. The excellency of ir is such, that first it goes under the name of
perfection: and those thing, which are done (though with great weakness and
much imperfection) with an upright heart, that is to say with a sincere desire,
unfeigned purpose, and upright endeavor to please God, are accepted of God as
done with a perfect heart.

2. Uprightness is the inward beauty of Christ's spouse, in regard whereof,
though she be outwardly despicable in the eyes of the world; yet she is
glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. like to the Tabemacle, which was a type of the
Church, which though outwardly covered with Rams skins and Badgers skins
Ex. 36. 19. which made but a homely show; was nevertheless most beautiful and
glorious within Or as the spouse in the Canticles c. 1. 5. says, I am black
but comely; black without, as the tents of Kedar, who were scenitae having
tents of sackcloth; comely within, as the hangings of Solomon within his house,
as the lining thereof.

3. Integrity is of all things most pleasing to God, Psalm. 51. 6. Behold, thou
art delighted with truth in the inward parts, I know also my God, that thou
triest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. Yea, I
may say more, that to be upright, is not only pleasing to God, but also the
pleasing of him, Prove 11. 20. the upright in the way are Gods delight. The
Hebrew word* jashar which signifies right, is translated (...) pleasing, and
the verb w^i^h signifies to be right, signifies also to please (...) and is
often times so translated, as the noue, Exo 15. 6. Deuteronomy. 6. 18. 12 25. 13 18
21. 9. the verb Iud. 14. 3. 7. the young woman of Timnah was right in Samsons
eyes; that is, she pleased him well, so, 1 King 9. 12. 2 Chro. 30. 4 Ier. 18 4
Dan 4 24 but most plainly Number. 23. 27. perhaps it will seem right in the eyes
of God; that is, as we also translate it, peradventure it will p^ease God.

In like manner the phrase of walking with God or before God is every where by
the 72. translated by the verb (...), that is, to please God. As Genesis 5. 2^.
24. where it is said, that Henock walked with God, they read, (...), he pleased
God: so Genesis 6. 9. 17. 1. 24. 40. 48. 15. Psalm. 116. 9. the son of Syrach
speaking of Henoch* observes the same translation, Eccles. 44. 16. so does the
Author of the book of Wisdom. chapter 4. 10. and so does the Apostle himself,
Heb. 11. 5. Henoch before his translation had this testim^ny, (...) that he
pleased God.

4. The excellency of uprightness is such, as that it is that virtue which God
chiefly re^uireth, Genesis 17. 1. Mich^ 6. 8* 1 Samuel 12 24. which he most highly
esteems Genesis 5. 22. ^4. which has always been the chief commendation of the
faithful, as of E^och, Noah, Job, etc. 1 King. 3. 6. The chief thing wherein
the faithful are to rejoice in time of prosperity, 2 Cor. ^. 2* and their
chiefest stay and comfort in d^stresse, Esaiah* 38. 3. Act. 23. 1.

The profit.] 2. Put come we to the profit, by which most men ( Psalm, 4. 6.)
are drawn. In general it is said, that God is good to those that are of a
clean heart, Psalm. 73. 1. according to David's prayer, Psalm. 125. 4. more
particularly, Psalm. 84. 11. the Lord is a sun and shield, the Lord will give
grace and glory, and no good thing will (...) withhold from them that walk in
upright^esse. He is a sun, that is, the Author of all ^omfortable blessings,
which are signified ^y light, according to that Psalm. 112. 4. to the upright
there arises light in darkness, that is to say, comfort in afflictions; yea,
to them that are upright, the conscience of their own integrity does minister
singular comfort. It was Ezechias his stay and comfort, when he had received
the sentence of death, Es. 38. 3. and this was Paul his rejoicing, the
testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity he had his
conversation here in the world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Act. 23. 1. For God to him that
is good before him, that is upright, ^iveth joy, Eccles. 2. 26. yea to them*
all (...) joy, and praising of God with joy and ^ladnesse is appropriated,
Psalm. 32. 11. 33.

64. 10. For lighs is sown for the righte^us, and gladness for the upright
in^heart, Psalm. 97. 11.

And as the life of the upright is comportable, is upright conscience being
unto ^im as a continual ( Prove. 1. 15.) feast; ^his end is happy, Psalm. 37.
37. Observe the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace. So Esaias 57. 2. which is further proved, because uprightness is evermore
attended with perseverance to the end, as hereafter shall fully be proved in
the Treatise of perseverance. For the integrity of the upright does guide and
preserve them, Prove. 11. 3 Psalm. 25. 21. the upright man who is not only a
hearer, but also a doer of Gods word, is like the wise man, which built his
house upon the rock, which could not be overthrown, Mat. 7. 24, 25. wherefore
the upright shall never be moved, but his righteousness endures for ever,
Psalm. 112. 3. 6.

The Lord is also a shield to them that walk uprightly, Prove. 2. 7. For the
eyes of the Lord perlustrate the whole earth, to show himself strong in their
behalf, whose heart is perfect or upright toward him, 2 Chro. 16. 9. which
David applying to himself, says Psalm. 7. 10 God is my shield, who saves the
upright in heant.

He gives also grace and glory; grace in this life, and glory in the life to
come, Grace: for uprightnes being the soundnes of all graces, God has
therefore laid up in store for the upright Tushijah, whatsoever is sound and
truly good, as Solomon says, Pro. 2. 7. And such is the concatenation of all
saving graces, that where any of them in truth, (as they are in the upright)
there is a concurrence of them all in some measure: some going before, as
^auses producing the rest, others following and presupposing the former. As for
example, where is faith unfeigned, there is also hope and charity; and where
these are in truth, no other saving grace can be wanting, and therefore ^od may
truly be said to give al manner of graces to the upright, as saving knowledge,
and true wisdom, Eccles 2 26. which David found by his own experience Psalm
119. 98. 99 100. and so of the rest. And upon this foundnesse of grace
follows the increase of grace, peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Eccles. 2. 26. assiance and confidence Pro. 28. ^. when
fear surpriseth the hypocrites, Es 33. 14. patience, constancy, and
perseverance, Luke 8. 15, by which the upright and sound Christians are known,
when contrariwise the double-minded man (that is the hypocrite) is inconstant
in all his ways. I am. 1. 8. and his heart being not right with God, neither
is he steadfast in his covenant. Ps. 78 37. but is subject to defection, ^ John
2. 19. as having built upon the sand, Mat. 7. 26.

The Lord also gives glory to the upright; for whosoever walks ^orightly
shall be saved, Pro. 28. 18 they shall dwell in the presence of God, Ps 40 13
in the mountain of his holiness, Ps 15 12. Ps. 24. 3, 4. the pure in heart
shall see God (in which vision of God our eternal happiness does consist:) and
therefore they are blessed* Mat 5 8 Ps 119 1. and not only themselves are
blessed, but their children also after them, Pro. 20. 7. Ps 112* 2. Of this
happiness we have a notable example in Henoch; whom, because he walked with God,
the Lord translated into the kingdom of glory. Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 1^* 5. to let
us understand by this precedent, as being the first mentioned in this kind,
what account he makes of uprightnes. Now, if the Lord do grant them glory in
his own kingdom, it may not be thought, that he will (Ps. 84. 11.) withhold
any thing from them that is good, Luke 12. 32. any good thing, I say, which
they shall ask at his hands: for the prayers of the upright are accepted of
God, Pro. 15. 8. and he is near to all that call upon him in truth. Ps. 145.
18. insomuch that whatsoever they do ask they do receive, because they do
those things which are pleasing in his sight. 1 John 3. (...).

3. But if neither the golden chain of excellency will allure, nor the silver
chain of profit draw us; then must the iron chain of necessity compel us to
uprightness. The necessity may be showed by these considerations.

1. As with uprightness the smallest graces, and the weakest meakest measure
of obedience are accepted with God: so without it, the best graces which we may
seem to have, are but counterfeit; and the best worship that we perform
without it, is but hypocrisy. For the soundness of all grace, and of all
worship stands in uprightness. Our faith therefore must be (...) unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1^5. or ^ else it is no true faith; our charity also must be
unfeigned, Romans 12. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 22. that is, we must love in deed,
and in truth, and not in word only, and from the teeth outward, 1 Ioh. 3. 18.
Iam. 2. 15, 16. Our wisdom likewise must be (...) Iam. 3. 17. not that mixt^^
prudenti^ of our Politicians, which is mingled with disguising and deceit, for
such is earthly, carnal and devilli^h, Iam 3. 15. Our repentance also must be
unfeigned, and from the bottom of our hearts, Joel. 2. 12, 13, not like that of
the Israelites, when the hand of God was upon them, who made show of
repentance, but their heart was not upright with God, Psalm. 78. 34, 36, 37.

Likewise our obedience must be from the heart, Romans 6. 17 Yea it must be
performed with our whole heart. Deuteronomy. 26. 16. 30. 2. 2 King. 23. 3. Psalm. 119.
34. 69. If with Amasiah we do that which is right before God, but not with a
perfect, that is, upright heart; we may fall away from God, as he did 2 Chro.
25. 2. 14. for when men's hearts are not upright with God, neither are they
steadfast in his covenant, Psalm. 78. 37. If therefore without uprightness our
faith be dead, our love fained, our wisdom divelish, our repentance unfound,
our obedience counterfeit, and so of all other graces, then is uprightness as
necessary, I say not, as any one grace, but as all of them put together:
uprightness being the truth and foundnesse of them all, without which they are
not (...) indeed and in truth; for ens and verum convertuntur. And therefore
that which is not a true faith is not faith indeed, and so of the rest, And as
the graces, which we seem to have without uprightness are but counterfeit; so
all our worship and service of God, without it is mere hypocrisy. Our worship
therefore of God must be in spirit and in truth, Ioh. 4. 23, 24. we must seek
the Lord with our whole heart, (whereby seeking, we are to understand the whole
worship and service of God) Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Psalm. 119. 2. Thus David sought the
Lord Psalm. 119. ^0. Thus Asa and his subjects did make a covenant to seek the
Lord with all their hearts, 2 Chro 15. 2. Thus Iehosaphat 2 Chro 22. 9.

It is not our bodily exercise 1 Timothy 4. 8 but our reasonable and spiritual
service that is acceptable to God R^m. 12. 1. It is the heart that the Lord
requires Prove. 23 26 and that he respects, 1 Samuel 16 7. If therefore we draw
near to God with our mouths, and honor him with our lips, but remove our
hearts far from him. Es 29 13. we must expect the reward of hypocrites.

[ Necessary to Invocation.] But let us descend to the parts of Gods worship,
and first, ( To prayer.) to prayer and thanksgiving, which are the two sorts of
invocation. If we would have our prayer accepted of God, both we our selves
must be upright, and our prayers also, we; for the Lord delighte^h in the
prayer of the upright. Prove. 15. 8. but abhors the prayer of the hypocrites,
Prove. 28. 9. Es. 29. 13. If therefore we regard wickedness in our hearts (as
hypocrites use to do) we must make our account with David, that the Lord will
not hear us; Psalm. 66. 18. Our prayer must also be upright, when we are to
pray, we must prepare our hearts to seek the Lord; 2 Chro. 30. 19. we must pray
in spirit. Ephesians 6. 18. in truth, Ps. 145. 18 Our prayer must be the lifting up
of our souls to God, Psalm. 5. 1. 86. 4. a lifting up of our hearts with our
hands unto God in the heavens Lam. 3. 41 pouring forth of our souls before the
Lord, Psalm 6^. 8. we must pray out of a pure and upright heart. 2 Timothy 2. 22
with our whole heart, Psalm. 119. 145. with lips unfeigned, Psalm 17. 1. And to
this manner of praying is the promise of hearing our prayers restrained, Psalm.
145. 18.

But if we pray with fained lips, if in our prayers we speak with an heart,
and an heart, Psalm. 12. 2. if we ask with our mouth that which we do not desire
in our hearts; if in our prayers we pretend that which we do not intend; if we
promise that which we do not mean to perform; if we draw near unto GOD with
our mouths, and remove our hearts from him, as hypocrites use to do, we shall
offer a great abuse to the the Majesty of GOD. For fained lips are as the
Psalmist calls them, Psalm. 17. ^: lips of deceit, whereby hypocrites in
their prayers lying unto GOD, Hos. 7. 13, 14. go about to deceive him.

The like is to be said of praise and thanksgiving, which if we would have
accepted of GOD, both we our selves must be upright, (for praise is comely for
the upright, Ps. 33. 1. for they only can rejoice in GOD: and therefore they
alone can praise him aright, Psalm. 32. 11. 145. 10.) and our praises also and
thanksgiving must be uprightly performed. First, therefore we must prepare our
hearts, Psalm. 5. 77. 108. 1. and stir up our souls to praise God, Psalm. 103.
1, 2. 104. 1. 146. 1. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy Name, then must we sing and praise him with grace Col. 3. 16.
that is, with thankfulness, and with gladness in our hearts, with our whole
hearts, Psalm. 91. 86. 12. 111. 1. 138. 1. that is with uprightness of heart,
Psalm. 119. 7. Otherwise we shall make but bad music in the ears of the Lord,
if there be a discord between our hearts and our tongues.

Let us come to the ministry of the word, which must uprightly be both
preached and heard. The Preacher must not adulterate the Word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God he must speak in CHRIST, 2 Cor.
2. 17. 4. 2. not seeking to please men, Gal. 1. 10. but studying to show
himself approved to God who tries our hearts, 1 These. 2. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 15.
neither seeking his own praise or profit; but seeking only the glory of God in
the salvation of the hearers.

And as the word is to be preached with integrity, so is it also to be heard
with uprightness, and to that end, before we come into the house of God, we
ought to l^ok to our feet, that is, to our affections, Eccles. 5. 1. and to put
off the foul shoes (Exodus 3. 5. Jos. 5. 15.) of our feet that is, our corrupt
affections, Iam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1. that we may receive the word into honest
and good, that is, upright hearts, Luke 8. 15. And when we are come into the
assembly, the place of Gods presence, we are to set our selves in the presence
of God, that we may say with Cornclius, Act. 10. 33. we are here present before
God, to hear what shall be delivered out of his word, And as the Minister must
preach, as he that delviereth the oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. so we must hear
(...) the word preached ^ot as the word of man, ^ut as it is indeed the word of
God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. with earnest attention hanging as it were upon the mouth
of the preacher, Luke 19. 48. and so desiring to hear God* as we desire to be
heard of God, (for without attention being present in body, we are absent in
mind,) with a sincere desire (1 Pet. 2. 2. to profit by it, and an unfeigned
purpose to practice it For if we be hearers, and not doers of the word, like
Ezekiels hearers, Ezech 33. 31. 32. as we shall play the hypocrites to deceive
others, so we shall prove Sophisters to beguile our selves, ^Iam. 1. 22. ((...))

To the Sacraments] There remain the Sacraments For as in the old Testament the
Circumcision of the flesh was of no value, ( Romans 2. 8. 29 without the
circumcision of the heart; so is it to little purpose to have the body washed 1
Pet. 3. 21. with outward Baptism, unless our heart be cleansed with the blood
of CHRIST apprehended by fiath unfeigned. For what will it avail us, if without
uprightness, of heart we do with Simon Magus profess our selves to believe,
and to be baptized? For if our heart be not right before God, we have, for all
our baptism and profession, no part in CHRIST: but do remain as he did, in
the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, Act. 8. 21.

And as in celebrating the Passover, the Jews were to use unleavened bread:
so must we receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which is the antitype to
the Passover) not with the leaven of hypocrisy, but with the dzymes or
unleavened graces of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5. 8. For what will it avail
us, if with Judas Iscariot, we shall receive the Sacrament, and carry our
selves so smoothly, as he did, that when our Savior told his Apostles, that
one of them should betray him; all of them were as ready to suspect themselves,
as him? for if our hearts be not upright, but false, as his was, well may we
receive, as Augustine says of him, pan^m Domini, the sacramental bread, but
we shall not receive pan^m Dominum, the Lord, who is the bread of GOD which
came down from heaven, John 6. 33.

But if when we are to receive the Sacram^nt, we pr^pare our hearts to seek
the Lord, (2 Chronicles. 30. 1.) and come with upright hearts void of hypocrisy;
though we have many imperfections and wants, and though the graces req^ired in
a worthy receiver be very small and weak in us; yet if they be in truth, we
shall in Christ be accepted, as worthy receivers. But without uprightness of
heart, the most glorious show that can be made, either in our preparation, or
in the receiving of the Sacrament, is but hypocrisy.

2. Secondly, the necessity of uprightnes is proved by the a^thority of God
speaking in the scriptures, as 1. By the commandment of God imposing a
necessity of duty, Deuteronomy. 18. ^3. Ios. 24. 14. who so requires it as a maine
and principal duty, Genesis 17. 1. 1 Samuel 12. 24. Mich. 6. 8. which in all
duties is, as it were, all in all and without which all is nothing Act* 24 16.
For this cause Israel was called Ieshurun. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. 33. 5. 26. Es. 14, 2
because this was the thing which the Lord required cheifely in every Israelite,
this is the true Israelite, John, 1. 47. Romans 2. 29. This is Jacob, Ps. 24. 6.
or this is the generation of Jacob (who was ish T am, perfectus or integer Genesis
25. 27) this, the Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16. Secondly* by the testimony of our
Savior, Mat. 5. 20. except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the scribes and Pharisees (whose righteousness consisted in outward
appearance, not in inward truth, they being soured with the leaven of
hypoc^^sy) you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. If therefore we
have a form (...) of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5. if
we have lamps without oil Mat. 25. 3. green blades without root. Luke 8. 13.
green leaves without fruit, Matthew. 21. 19. we cannot please God. And thirdly,
by the oath of God in this place inferring a necessity of (...); that those,
who are the redeemed of the Lord shall worship him in holiness and
righteousness before him.

3. Thirdly if we be not upright, then are we hypocrites, for not to be upright
is to be an hypocrite. But pocrisy is a sin most odious into God; and most
pernicious to the hypocrite. For as the upright are the Lords delight, so they
that be of a perverse heart, that is to say the hypocrites, are an abominat^on
to him, Pro. 11. 20.

And so pernicious it is to him that is infected therewith, that as there is no
assurance of his salvation, (for what hope has they hypocrite, when GOD shall
take his soul Job 27. 8*) so there is great certainly of their damnation,
unless they repent: whereof there is less hope: in an hypocrite, then in an
open sinner. For which cause our Savio^r CHRIST tells the (M^t, 21. 32.)
pharisaicall hypocrites, that publicanes and h^r^o^s enter into the Kingdom of
heaven before them. And such is the certainty of their damnation, that our
Savior Christ, when he would signify, that the wicked servant of whom he
speaks Mat. 24 48. should certainly be damned: he says, he should have his
portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and g^ashng of teeth. v. 51.

Seeing therefore uprightness is a grace so excellent, that it goes under the
name of perfection, that it is the inward bewty of the spouse of Christ,
wherein especially he is delighted, that it is not only pleasing to GOD, but
also the pleasing of him: so profitable, that all good things are promised to
the up^ight, and no good thing kept back from them; so necessary, that in it
consists the soundness^ of all saving graces, and of all religious worship,
in so much that without it the best graces are counterfeit, and all our best
worship but hypocrisy; so necessary as that without it men can have no
assurance that they are redeemed of the Lord, or that they shall be saved: but
that as without it they being no better then hypocrites; have no sound hope
that they shall be saved, so there is a certainty and assurance that they shall be
condemned: it behooveth us by all means to labor for this virtue, which is so
excellent in it self, so pleasing to God, so profitable, and so necessary to
us.

Other means to uprightness.
And first, for as much as it is the gift of God from whom every good and
perfect gift does come, Iam. 1. 17. for it is he that makes our way perfect.
Ps. 18. 3^. it is he that swears in this place, that he will give those that
are redeemed to worship him in holiness and righteousness before him we are
therefore to beg this grace at the hands of God by hearty and faithful
prayer, after the exampl^ of David. Ps. 51 10. Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me; and Ps. 119. 80. let my heart be sound
or thamim upright in thy statutes, that I be not ash. med.

2. To our p^ayer let us join ou^ endeavor to keep a watch over our heart,
and as Solomon exhorts Pro. 4. 23. above all k^eping to ^^epe our hearts, for
out of ^t are the issues of l^^e, that is, as it is the ^ountaine of life, so
of living well or ill from whence all our saying and doing do stream: The
good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things, and
the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Luke 6. 45
and accordingly the hand works, wherefore in reforming our lives, our first
and c^eife care must be of purging the heart; for that is the foundation of a
godly life, without which there is no sound reformation.

first, (says our Savior CHRIST) Mat. 23. 26. cleanse the inside of the cup
and platter, that the outside may ^e clean also, In vain do we go about to
clear the streams, whilst the fountain is corrupt: In vain do we go about to
stop the streams, whiles the wellspring flows in his full course, In vain
shall we like the summer fruit be fair and mellow on the outside if we be
rotten at the core: In vain have men a name that they live, when they are dead.
Apoc. 3. 1.

And the rather we are to tak care of our hearts, because GOD himself does
especially look unto the heart, 1 Samuel 16. 7. and according to the quality and
disposition of the heart, he judges of the man. If the heart burn with lust,
the man is an ^dulterer before GOD; if the heart be fraught with
coveteousnesse, the man is a thief before GOD, as Judas was. Ioh. 2. 6. If the
heart boil with hatred and malice, the man is a murderer before GOD, 1 John
3. 15. If the heart be removed from GOD, and set upon the world, and the things
that are therein, then is the man a spiritual adulterer, that is, an idolater
before GOD, Iam. 4. 4.

And finally, the heart is to be kept above all keepings, because it is
deceiptfull above all things, Ier. 17. 9.

3. Thirdly, that we may learn to walk with God, and to behave our selves as
in his ^ight, and in his presence, it is necessary, that we should effectually
acknowledge, believe and remember, and upon all occasions meditate of the
om^^science and omnipresence of God, after the example of David, who was in
respect of his integrity and uprightnes, a man according to Gods own heart Ps.
139 the first 12. verses. ^or if we do powerfully, acknowledge, and
effectually believe and remember, 1. that the eye of the Lord is in every
place, beholding the just and unjust, Pro. 15. 3. 11. and that he knows all
things, even those which are most hidden and secret, and namely that he knows
the ^eart, and scarcheth the reins, that he knows our thoughts before we
think them, Ps. 139. 3. and that no thoughts can be hidden from him: Job 42. 3.
we thereby be moved to behave our selves as in the sight of God, laboring to
approve, not only our words and deeds, but also our inward thoughts and
affections to God, who not only knows the heart, but especially looks to
the heart. It is the argument, which David uses to move Sol^mon to
uprightness. 1 Cor. 28. 9. And thou my son Solomon (says he) Know thou the
God of thy father, and serve him with an upright heart, and willing mind, for
the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all imaginations of the
thoughts.

2. If we would meditate of the omnipresence of God, that God is at all times,
in all places present with us, and that we cannot ( Psalm. 139. 7.) possibly
avoid ou^ of his presence, that would make us behave our selves as in the
presence of God. Inferiors when they are in the sight and presence of their
Superiors, are very careful of their behavior. He were an ungracious son,
or a lewd servant, that would misdemeane himself in the sight and presence of
his father, and of his Lord, She were a very lewd and impudent wife, that in
the sight and presence of her husband would prostitute her self to another
man. This is our case: God is our father, we are his children, he is our Lord,
and we are his servants; he is our husband, we are his spouse, and we always
are in his sight and presence. If therefore we could truly and effectually
believe, and remember this, (which is a most certain and undoubted truth, and
no less certain then that there is a God, which of all truths is the most
certain truth) we would abstain from sin, neither would we be so shameless,
as in his sight; and in his presence to sin against him, see Job 31. 4. 34.
21. Psalm. 119. 168. Prove. 5. 21. To this purpose, Seneca (Epist. 11.)
admonishes his friend Lucilius, that he would set before him Cato or Laelius,
or some other grave and reverend person, that so he might behave himself as in
their presence: for magna pars says he) peceatorum tollitur, s^ peccaturis
testis assistat, a great part of sins would be prevented, if when we are about
to sin there were some witness present with us. How much more would the
presence of almighty God restrain us from sin, if we had the eye of Moses,
the eye of faith, to see him who is invisibly present with us always, and in
all places, Heb. 11. 27.

4. To the meditation of Gods omniscience and omnipresence, let us join the
consideration of his all sufficiency. For this is the argument, which not only
the Prophet Hanani used to Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. the eyes of the Lord
perlustrate the whole ^arth, to show himself strong in their behalf, whose
heart is upright toward him; but also which God himself used to Abra^am, Genesis
17. 1. I (...) God all-sufficient, walk before me, and ^e upright. For what is
the reason, why men do play the hypocrites? Is it not because they desire to
please men, and to approve themselves to them rather then to God? And why do
they seek to please men, rather then God, is it not because they fear men,
more then God? or trust in men more then in God? But if we did effectually
acknowledge Gods all sufficiency, we would learn to fear him, and to trust in
him above all; knowing that no creature is able, either to do us good, unless
God use him as his instrument for our good, or to hurt us, unless God use him
as his rod to scourge us, and therefore as we would fear him, and trust in
him rather then in his instruments; so would we labor to please him above al.

5. Let us meditate of Gods bounty toward us, whereby he has showed himself
all-sufficient to us, ( Deuteronomy. 33. 16.) and for our good; which argument is ^sed
both by Samuel, 1 Samuel 12 24. and by Joshua c. 24. 14. where having recounted
Gods bleffings toward them, even from Terah Abraham's father, he infers this
use, Now therefore fear the Lord and serve him in uprightness and in truth.
But chiefly we are to meditate of his spiritual blessings and of the end for
which he has bestowed them. For why did he elect us? was it not that we should
be ^oly and blameles^e before him? Ephesians. 1. 4. that is to say, upright? why did
he redeem us? was it not that we should serve him in holiness and
righteousness before him? has he not reconciled us unto God, that we should
be holy and blameless before him? Col. 1. 22. has he not regenerated us
according to Gods image, that we should worship him in holiness and
righteousness of truth, that is true and upright holiness and righteousness,
Ephesians. 4. 24. In vain therefore do men profess themselves to be elected in
Christ, redeemed by him, reconciled unto God, regenerated by his Spirit, if
they be not upright. For the end which God propounds to himself cannot be
frustrated.

6. Finally, if the consideration of Gods benefits will not move us, let us
consider the terror of the Lord, as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Let
us set before our eyes our Savior Christ, sitting in judgment at the last
day, at which time he shall judge the secrets of men, Romans 2. 16. Eccl. 12. 14.
that so we may endeavor in the mean time to walk uprightly before him, and
approve our selves to him, that judges secrets; that when he shall appear, we
may have confidence, and not be ashamed (John 2. 28.) (...) that is, not depart
from him, as hypocrites shall, flying from the face of the lamb, and desiring
that the hills would fall upon them, and hide them from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, ( Apoc. 6. 16.) For
horrible will thy shame and confusion be, if having prof^s^ed religion, and
made show of christianity before men, thou shall then before all the world, not
only be discovered and convicted to have been an egregious hypocrite, but also
be condemned to have thy portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. But on the other side, if we shall walk uprightly in GODS
Tabernacle, we shall rest in the mountain of his holiness; if we be sound
and upright members of the Church militant, we shall be inheritors of glory in
the Church triumphant; if we be sheep in CHRIST'S flock and not goats, we
shall be set at his right hand, and receive that blessed sentence; Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world, Matthew. 25. 34.

The signs of uprightness.
Now, forasmuch as the Lord has promised to all the sons of Abraham, the
heirs of promise, that is to say, to all the faithful, that being redeemed
from the hand of our spiritual enemies, he will give us to worship him in
holiness before him; it be^^veth us seriously to try and examine our selves,
whether we be upright with the Lord our God or not* ( Deuteronomy* 18. 13.) For if we
be hypocrites and unsound Christians, we can have no assu^ance that we are the
redeemed of the Lord. God having sworn, that to those whom he redeemeth, he
will give grace to worship him in holiness and righteousness before him. And
to the same purpose, and with the same labor, we are also to try our selves
whether we be hypocrites or not. For such is the imme^ diate opposition
between uprightness and hypocrisy; that if we be not hypocrites, then are we
upright, and contrariwise.

But here it will be said, that hypocrisy is in all men, either more or less,
and that as all men are subject to lying, so also to hypocrisy. This, the
Papists whose profession notwithstanding of Christianity (being for the most
part a mere formality of religion denying the power thereon) is mere
hypocrisy* will hardly grant* namely, that the sin of hypocrisy is in all.
For they teach, that a man who is justified, as every one of them is, who
either in his infansie is baptized, or absolved priest, when he is come to
years, is withwithout sin; and that there is nothing in him that God hates,
nothing that properly can be called sin, until he draw upon him the guilt of
some mortal sin. Thus, saying that they have no sin, they are convinced to
have no truth in them, 1 John 1. 8. But we confess* that original sin, which
is equally in all men by nature, is not only a privation of all spiritual
goodness, but also an evil disposition and proneness to all manner of sin;
as to infidelity, pride, self-love, hardness of heart, carnal security,
hatred, uncleanness, cotousness, ambition, lying, and hypocrisy, etc. and that
these sinful corruptions, being so many habitual sins, remain in all men
both regenerate and unregenerate; but with this difference, that in the
unregenerate they remain in their full strength, and for the most part with
increase, as the incrementa of original sin, unless perhaps abated or
restrained by the contrary sins, which contrary vices being from evil
dispositions, grown to wicked hab^ts, are said to reign in carnal men. But in
the regenerate, these corruptions remain only as the relics of original
sin, in some measure mortified in them, some more, some less. All which are
the infirmities of the fai^hfull but especially those which are less mortified.

All which, like the scattered fo^ces of rebels vanquished, but not utterly
destroyed, still remain ad agonem, to encounter with us upon all advantages.
So that in the best of us there remains a spice, as of infidelity, pride,
self-love, hardness of heart, carnal security, hatred, uncleanenesse,
covetousness, ambition, lying, so also of hypocrisy. But so long as a man
sees, and detesteth this corruption, and labors to mortify it, so long as
he is careful to a void it, and jelous over himself, lest his profession or
other his good endeavors be contaminated or taynted therewith; though there be
some matter of hypocrisy remaining in hin, yet he is not formally an
hypocrite, but is reputed upright. For as it is said both of the faithful
themselves in general, though partly spirit, and partly flesh, that they are
men spiritual and regenerate, having their denomination from the better part;
and also of their actions performed in odedience, though taynted with the
flesh, that they are good works; so is it in this particular, even as a wedge
of gold, in which there is much dross, is notwithstanding a wedge of gold,
though not of pure gold; and as an heap of corn, wherein is store of chafe,
is called an heap of corn, though not of pure grain: so the faithful though
some dross of hypocrisy and as the Prophet called it tin, Es. 1. 25.
remain in them, are notwithstanding upright.

Therefore though hypocrisy be in all men, yet all are not hypocrites; but
they in whom this corruption reigns without resistance. Yea but in baptism
original sin withal his branches is taken away, I answer with Augustine:
(De N^ptiis and Concup. 1. ^. c. 25.) it is taken away, first, in respect of
the guilt, non ut peccatum non sit, sed ut in peccatum non imputetur, not that
it should not be at all, but that it should not be imputed to them that
believe, Secondly in respect of the dominion; for it is taken away, not that it
should not remain at all but that it should not reyg^e in the faithful. Romans
6. 14. wherefore as I said, though hypocrisy be in all men, yet none of the
faithful are hypocrites.

Who is an Hypocrite.
For an hypocrite is he, who being inwardly void of grace, and full of
wickedness, makes an outward show of Christianity, and piety, dissembing
that, evil which is in him, and making semblance of that goodness which he has
not: having as even now with the Apostle I said of the Papists, (...) an
outw^rd formality of religion, but denying the power thereof: Being, as our
Savior says, like to whited sepulchers which in deed appear beautiful
outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Mat.
23. 27: like to those summer pears, which being fair and mellow without, are
rotten at the core.

Now, hypocrites are of two sorts, for as of not speaking the truth, that is
lying, there are two degrees the one is me^tiri (which is co^tra mentem ire,
wittingly to lie, and to avouch for a truth that which himself knows, or at
least thinks to be an untruth,) the other mendatium dicere, to tell an
untruth, unwittingly, supposing it to be a truth: so of not walking in the
truth that is, of hypocrisy there are two degrees. viz. of such as be
hypocrites, either wittingly or unwittingly. Both are deceivers; the former,
knowing himself to be an hypocrite, goes about to deceive others, yea God
himself with his fair, shows; the other, not knowing himself to be an
hypocrite, but being deceived by the devil, and his own deceiptfull heart
Jer. 17. 10. deceives himself, as St. James says chapter 1. 22. Be ye doers of
the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves, and v. 26. If any
among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his
own heart, this man's religion is in vain, and likewise S. Paul Gal. 6. 3. If
a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
Both of them are (...), that is unsound, being not inwardly and in truth, that
which in profession and outward show they would seem to be, to both of them
the description of an hypocrite does agree, they have a formality of religion,
but deny the power thereof 2. Tim. 3. 5.

The former, is the gross and notorious hypocrite, who does best deserve the
name; for (...) an hypocrite, in the greek tongue, signifies a stage player.
whose profession it is to take upon him the person of another man, the other,
is the close and the most ordinary hypocrite, who being not the man; which he
professes or takes himself to be, acts also another person, as well as the
other, though not so grossly and as it were upon the stage seeming to
himself, and desirous to be reputed of others, that which in deed he is not a
good Christian, having a name that he lives, but is dead. Apoc. 3. 1.

The former is a damned hypocrite damned in his own conscience, the other is a
s^lfe-pleasing and a selfe-deceiving hypocrite, pleasing himself, by reason of
his profession in his pride and self-love, in his vain presumption and
carnal security, in his infidelity and impe^^itency, professing himself to be
a true Christian, and yet being a mere worldling, a carnal Gospeller, a
temporizing and temporary professor. Of which sort, by how much the greater is
the number, for the world is full of such; by so much the greater must our
desire and care be, that we may be cried, and proved, and upon trial found to
be sound and upright Christians. Our desire we must express in prayer to God,
that we may be proved and upon trial approved (for until we be tried we know
not our selves) saying with David. Ps. 139. 23, 24. Ps. 26. 2. search me O LORD
and know my heart, that is, make it know^ unto me, try me and know my thoughts,
and see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting, that is, in the way which leads to everlasting life. Now GOD
does try both the upright and the hypocrite, though in a d^fferent manner. The
upright he tries, both by proving them himself, and that for their good.
Deuteronomy. 8. 16. and by suffering them to be tempted by others; and that, either to
manifest his graces in them, to his own glory, their comfort, and good example
of others: (thus he tried Abraham Genesis 22. 12. Job and all the martyrs:) or to
discover unto them their own weakness, that they may be humbled, and be made
the more circumspect for the time to come: And to that end, he does not only
suffer them to be tempted unto evil, but also sometimes (when he leaves them
for a time unto themselves) to take a foil. Thus God for a time left Ezechias,
to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32 31. and
therefore those who come to serve the Lord, must prepare their souls for
temptation, (Eccles. 2. 1.) But howsoever the Lord suffers them to be
tempted, yet he does not lead them into temptation; and though he permits
them sometimes to fall, yet he does not suffer them to fall away from him.

The Lord also tries the hypocrites, that their hypocrisy may be discovered.
Therefore our Savior advises his disciples, Luke 12. ^, 2. to beware of the
^eaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy; and his reason is, because
nothing is covered, which shall not be discovered. And thus he does, not only
by suffering them to be tempted, and leaving them to themselves; but also
sometimes for a punishment of their former wickedness and hypocrisy, he
leads them into temptation, giving them over to their own lusts, and to the
temptations of Satan, not only to fall into sin, but also to fall away from
God; which falling away is an evident sign of hypocrisy, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
wherefore as the son of Syrach well admonishes, c. 1. 28. 29, 30. Come not
to the Lord with a double heart, be not an hypocrite in the sight of men, and
take good heed, what thou speak. Exalt not thy self, lest thou fall, and
bring dishonor upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee
down in the midst of the congregation; because thou came not in truth to the
fear of the LORD, but thy heart is full of deceit.

Our care we must show by trying our selves, as the Apostle exhorts, 2 Cor.
13. 5. Examine your selves whether that you be in the faith, (...), that is,
prove your selves whether you be (...) sound and upright.

Here therefore we are to set down the notes both of the u^r^ght, and also of
the hypocrites. The knowledge whereof, as it will be comfortable to so many as
are true Christians; so it will be profitable to the rest.

These notes are either more general special


General notes of uprightness.
The urst general note is set down in the place even now cited, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Prove your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in
you unless you be (...) that is, not ^ound or approved Christians, but
hypocrites, for the word (...) (which commonly is translated reprobate) does
not signify a reprobate opposed to elect, but to (...) to him that is
approved. See verse. 6, 7.

But how shall we know that CHRIST is in us, seeing he is in Heaven, and we
upon earth? we may k^ow it by his spirit, 1 John 3. 24. which dwells in us,
Romans 8. 9. 11. and in all his members, which by reason of the union, which is
betwixt them and their Head are said to be in Christ, and Christ in them, for
even as in the natural body, the feet are united to the head by the same
soul, which being principally seated in the Head, is also in all the members:
so in the mystical body of CHRIST the lowest members which are upon earth, are
united to their Head by the same spirit, which being pr^ncipally in the head,
is also in all the members. But how shall we know that the spirit of Christ is
in us? if we be led by the spirit (Romans 8 14. Gal. 5 18) that is, if we live
not after the flesh, but after the spirit And how shall we know that? by the
fruits of the spirit and of the flesh, which the Apostle has set down, Gal.
5. 19 22. The works of the flesh, says he, are manifest, which are these
adultery, fornication, ^ucleannesse, lasciviousness, idolatry, witcherast,
hatred or ^mni^yes, c^ntentions, ^mulations, indignations, strife, seditions or
divisions, heresies or sects, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings:
(...), comessationes, expressed elsewhere by the word (...) carpula, which is
translated surfettings, Luke. 21 34 both of them having their name from their
effects; for (...) dicitur (...) because it troubles the head by excess of
rating and drinking; so (...) because it causes (...) that is, drowsinesse, or
the drowsy evil, or rather ryotings, as it is translated, Rom 13. 13. and so
ought to be, when it is joined with drunkenness; the French fitly translate
it, g^rmandise, and it signifies excess of be^l chreere in ryotous, feasts and
compotations, and such like) of the which I foretell you, as I have foretold
you heretofore, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Now as in setting forth the works of the flesh, the Apostle mentions
chiefly the offenses of the second table; so in setting down the fruits of the
spirit, he reckons up the duties of the second table opposed to the offenses
thereof formerly mentioned; and not the virtues of the first table wherein our
piety, which is to be tried, does consist. For this cause the Apostle
mentions, not either faith in CHRIST, or love of GOD, or hope of salvation,
or assiance in GOD or the fear of GOD, and such like, which are the principal
fruits of the spirit; because these are not the notes of trial, but the things
to be tried; for the trial whereof, as namely whether we have true faith, the
true love and fear of God, etc. The Holy Ghost commonly propounds such
notes, as express those duties which we owe to men, as Ps. 15. and 24. Esaias
33. 14, 15.

1 The fruit therefore of the spirit, is charity, says the Apostle, that is,
the love of our neighbor, opposed to hatred, with the fruits thereof, 1 John
3. 14.

2. Joy, opposed to envy and emulation, whereby the carnal man repineth at the
welfare of his neighbor, in which the spiritual man rejoices.

3. Peace, opposed to contentions, strife, divisions and factions.

4. Long-suffering and patience, opposed to wrath and indignation.

5. Gentleness or kindness (...) a fruit of charity, 1 Cor. 13 4. (...) which
the Apostle has fully expressed, Ephesians. 4. 31. 32. Let all bitterness and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all
malice, and be you (...) kind one to another, forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Col 3. 12, 13.

6. Goodness, whereby we are free from desire to hurt any body and are ready
to do good to all, Gal. 6. 10. even to those that deserve ill of us,
ov^rcoming ill with goodness, Romans 12. 21. opposed to hatred and murder.

7. Fuith, that is, fidelity or faithfulness, as the word elsewhere is used,
Tit. 2. 10. and is one of the weighty points of the law, Mat. 23. 23. A
faithful man is he, who is both true in his words, and firm in his promises,
both which are tokens of the upright. Ps. 15. 24.

8. Meekness, or the spirit of meeknes, so called 1 Cor. 4. 23. Gal. 6. 1.
because in the faithful it is a fruit of the spirit, called also mildness and
lenity. (1 Pet. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 2 24, 25. Tit. 3 1) Which being a moral virtue
proceeding from humility, charity, patience or long suffering, with which it is
joined in the Scriptures (with love 1 Cor. 4, 21. 13. 4. 5. 7. with humility
Ephesians. 4. 2. Mat. 5. 3. 5. 11. 29. Pro. 16 19. with long-suffering and patience,
Col. 3. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 11.) moderateth and ^estrayneth anger and grief, with all
the fruits thereof, which are called the irascible passions and perturbations
of the soul, such as be impatience, desire of revenge, and all insolent
cruel, bitter, sierce, harsh, contentious, clamorous, and turbulent
disposition toward our nighbour: with which virtue whosoever is endued, is by
Solomon prefered before the men of might, Pro 16. 32. for howsoever it be
despised in the world, as a sign of fools and mecockes; yet it is of
especial account with God, 1. Pet. 3 4. as being the most proper, and if I am
so speak characteristicall mark of Christ's ^^eepe. Whereby as they best
resemble the Lamb of God, Esaias 53. 7. who was meek in spirit, and humble in
heart, Mat. 11. 29. so are they best discerned from those, who being of an
insolent, a ^ierce, an harsh, a cruel and turbulent behavior; are to be
accounted wolves, rather then the sheep of Christ. And therefore it is
reckoned by our Savior among the 8. notes of ^eatitude Mat 5 5. Blessed are
the meek* for they shall inhe^ite the land, meaning the celestial Canaan, the
land of the living (...) Hebrews 2. 5. as being in Christ the heirs of the
world whom the Lord will beaut^fie with salvation. Ps. 149. 4. 76 9.

9. The last is temperance, which is also a moral virtue moderating the other
sort of affections* which are called desires and concupiseences (...) referred
naturally either to the preservation of the individuum, in the nourishing and
cherishing of the body; or to the propagation of mankind by generation, and
restraying the abuses and disorders thereof. This virtue, as it respects the
former, is Sobriety in meat, drink, apparel, opposed to drunkenness and
bellicheere before mentioned, and vanity in apparel, as it respects the
latter, it i^ called Chastity, opposed to adultery, fornication,
lasciviousness and all uncleanness.

And this was the first general note of difference, that the upright Christian
does know, or may know, that Christ is in him, by the fruit of the spirit: but
the hypocrite though he professes himself a Christian and consequently a
member of Christ; yet neither does nor can know it, seeing that neither he is
in CHRIST by faith, nor CHRIST in him by his spirit.

2. The second is this; The upright man walking with God, and before God, is
desirous chiefly to approve himself to God who sees the heart, (1 Thessalonians. 2.
4.) and therefore is as religious (if not more) alone and in secret, as before
others, yea, chooses rather, according to the advice of our Savior, (Mat, 6.
46. 18.) to do private duetyes in secret, rather then before others. The
hypocrite, walking as before men, who see the outward man only, seeks
chiefly to approve himself to men; and therefore is more religious before
others, then alone; and those good things, which he performs he does them to
be seen of men, Mat. 23. 5. as our Savior shows in the duties of alms
prayer and fasting, Mat. 6. 2. 5. 16. And one the other side, those sins
which he forbeareth, or fears to commit before men, he fears not in private
to commit before God. And in a word, if men be not acquainted with his actions,
he neither carech to do good, nor fears to do evil.

3. The upright man prefers the testimony of his own conscience concerning
himself, (2 Cor. 1. 2^. 1 Cor 4. 3. Job 31. 36) before the opinions of other
men, and therefore labors to keep his conscience clear toward God and
toward men. The hypocrite prefers the opinion of others concerning himself
before the testimony of his own conscience not regarding the verdict of his
own conscience conde^mning him; so he may have a good reputation among men
commending him; not caring though he be dead, so he may have a name that he
lives: desiring to seem to be good, rather then to be so; and to be evil
rather then to seem so; which is extreme madness, seeing it is better to be
good then to seem good; and worse to be evil, then to seem evil.

The special notes respecting.
The spiciall notes respect either good things intended by the upright and
pretended by the hypocrite; or evil things, whether of sin, or of punishment.

Good things, as their Profession of Religion, Worship of God, Obedience,
Graces.


The profession of the upright is i^ truth,

Both in respect of the Purpose and desire of his heart. Practice of his life.


The purpose of his heart is sincere, without any sinister, sinful, or
worldly re^spects; or if any worldly respects may seem to concur, yet they
are not the chief, or those for which he professes religion, but secondary
respects, which he subordinateth to his profession, and to his care of keeping
a good conscience, being resol^ed ( Luke 14. 28. 13.) not to forsake his
profession for a world, nor willingly and wittingly to violate his conscience,
though he might gain never so much, for what would it profit a man to gain
the whole world and to loose his own soul^? Mark 8. 36. The hypocrite makes
his profession in pretense Phil. 1. 18. pretending religion to his worldly, and
sometimes to his wicked respect; and first, for his worldly respects, whereunto
he subordinateth his profession, and his seeming ca^e of keeping a good
conscience, careing indeed for neither, ^urther then they may stand with the
fruition of his worldly desires; halting betwixt God and Mammon, and dividing
himself between them; but so, as to God he gives the outward, show, and to
Mammon his heart, of such Mammonists the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

There be many (says he) that walk o^ whom I have told you often, and now tell
you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, and who
are these of whom all this evil is spoken? viz. such as walk, that is make
profession of christian religion; and yet mind and affect principal earthly
things: These men, when they are brought to this exigent, that either they must
make shipwreck of a good conscience, and perhaps forsake their profession, or
forgo their worldly desires; they will readily violate their conscience, and
renounce their profession, rath^r then they will be disappointed of that
worldly thing, which they princip^lly affect, and which is in deed their God.

Such a profession made Saul 1 Samuel 18. of providing (...), when in his
covetousness he spar^d all the best of the cattle which he ought to have
destroyed. Judas (John 6. 71. ^2. 6.) who for his gain followed Christ, being
a those, and for all his fair shows, a Devil. The people that followed our
Savior, that they might be filled. (John 6. 26.) Ananias and Sapph^ra, who
seemed ^orward professors, but were worldlings, Act. 5. and in a word all such,
to whom not godliness is gain, but gain is godliness. (1 Timothy 6 5, 6.) These
men professing themselves Christians, do withal profess themselves to be
pilgrims on earth, ( Heb. 11. 13.) citizens of heaven, whose (...) and
country is above, ( Phil. 3. 20) but in deed behave themselves like
earth-wormes, being wholly addicted, and as it were glewed to the earth, and
worldly desires, not desiring nor expecting a better country, ( Heb. ^. 14.
1^.) but placing their Paradise upon earth.

Sometimes also they pretend religion to their wicked designs as the Scribes
and Pharisees, ( Mat. 23. 14.) who devoured widows houses, and for a pretense
made long prayers; even as the Priests and Jesuits at this day do prey upon
their devout Proselites. Absalom when he intended rebellion, pretended the
performance of a vow, 2 Samuel 15. 7. Iezabel, when she meant to have Naboth
unjustly condemned; appointed a fast to be proclaimed, as a preparative to that
judgment, 1 King. 21. 9. Herod makes a show to the Wiseman, that he would
come and worship CHRIST, when he meant to kill him, Matthew. 2. 8. Thus men many
times pretend conscience, either to the not doing of their duties: as they will
lend no more, because they have vowed the contrary; or to the committing of
sin, because they think they are bound thereto by oath: as Herod, rather then
he would break his oath, beheaded John Baptist: so they sin double, first in
their promise, but much more in the performance. The high priest Caiphas
(Matthew. 16. 25.) when he sought most unjustly to condemn our Savior unto
death, in an hypocritical zeal rent his clothes, pretending that he had
spoken blasphemy. And what zeal soever those Priests and Pharisees, which most
hotly p^rsecuted our Savior, pretended toward God and his Law yet their true
intent was This is the heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize upon his
inheritance, Mat. 21. 38. In respect of the desire of his heart, the upright is
a forward professor, and i^ some measure ( Tit. 2. 24. zealous of religion,
The hypocrite is backward, careless and luke warm, Apoc. 3. 17.

So much of the intent, purpose, and desire of the heart; now follows the
practice.

The upright, being Christians within, ( Romans 2. 10) and not without only, do
Walk in the truth 2 John 4. 3 John 3. endeavoring to frame their lives
according to their profession and as the truth is in Jesus, Ephel. 4. 21, 22,
23, 24. joining works with faith, ( Iam 2. 24) and doing with hearing, ( Iam
1. 2.) and well-doing with saying well, sanctification with justification, (2
Cor. 17.) living not after the ^lesh, but after the spirit, which by the
Apostle is propounded as the proper sign of those who be in CHRIST, Rom 8. 1.

The hypocrites, being Ch^istians without, ( Romans 2. 28) and not within*
profess the truth, but do not walk in the truth: not framing, nor desirous to
frame their lives according to their profession, but live after the flesh, and
not after the spirit, professing ^aith ( Iam. 2. 14) without works,
justifi^ation without sanctification; saying well, but doing ill, being hearers
of the word, but not doers; being fruitless branches in the vine, John 15. 2.
6. siggetrees in Gods vineyard bearing no sigges, Luke 13. 6. having leaves but
no fruit; like the fig tree which Christ cursed, Matthew, 2^. having lamps, but
no oil, like the foolish virgins, Mat. 25. Of such our Savior speaks, Mat.
7. 21, 22, Luke 13. 25, 26, that notwithstanding their profession, they shall
at the last day be excluded from the kingdom of heaven.

Gods worship.] Now I come to the worship of God; first, in general: The
up^ight worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, 1 King. 3. 6. the hypocrites
draw near the Lord with their mouths, but remove their hearts far from him,
Es. 29 13. Mat. 15. 7, 8.

In special the upright pray in truth, Ps. 145. 18. with lips unfeigned, Ps.
17. 1. lifting up their hearts, Psalm. 25. 1. ( Lam 3. 41.) and pouring forth
their souls ( L^m. 1. 15.) before the Lord. The hypocrites in their prayer
cry, but not with their heart, Hos. 7. 14. They lift up their eyes and their
hands, but not their hearts; they pour forth their voice, but not their souls.
Their prayer is but a lip-labor, for both their mouth speaks what their
heart does not think, making a common and perpetual trade of praying with
wandering thoughts, (which I deny not sometime to be incident to the upright)
and also asking with their mouth that which they do not desire in their heart,
promising (especially in time of af^liction) (Ex. 10. 17. Ps. 78 34) what they
do not truly mean to perform, pretending what they do not intend, making
show of that which they are not (as in the Lords prayer throughout) craving
that in prayer, which they do not seek by any endeavor of their own, or by
use of other means ordained of God.

Thanksgiving] The upright praise God with grace, (Col. 5. 16.) that is
thankfulness in their heart, and with humility acknowledging their own
unworthiness, ( Gen 32. 10. 1 Chronicles 29. 14.) and Gods undeserved favor
toward them. The hypocrites give thanks without thankfulness, without
humility; praising themselves, ( Luk 18. 11.) when they should praise God, or
if they do praise him, they do it to this end, to praise themselves.

But here it may be demanded; may not a man praise God for his grace and
blessings bestowed upon him, unless withal he shall seem with the Pharisey,
Luk 18. to praise himself.

Whereunto I answer; first, the Pharisaicall hypocrite thanketh Go^ for that
which he neither has received, nor yet expects from God: which is both
falsehood and arrogance. But the upright man thanketh God for that which he has
received, or assuredly hops to receive, (as Zachary in this hymn praises
God for our redemption by the promised Messiah, before CHRIST was borne,) which
to do is not arrogance, but thunkfullnesse; not falsehood, but truth.

2 The hypocrite thanketh God to that end and purpose, not so much to praise
God, (to whom he is a false witness,) 1 Cor. 15. 15. as to praise himself.
The upright man in thanking God seeks not his own praise, but the glory of
God, stripping himself of all praise, that God alone may have all the glory.
For he thanketh God, as I said, in humility, acknowledging his own
unworthiness, and the more, he extolleth the undeserved bounty and favor of
God toward him, the more he depriveth himself of praise: and on the other
side, the more he acknowledges his own unworthiness, the more he magnifieth
Gods goodness toward him. Thus Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. O Lord (says he) I am
less then the least of thy mercies: and David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I O Lord
God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? and ^ Chro. 29.
14. but who am I, and what is my people? etc.

Preaching] The upright Preacher endeavors to approve himself to God, 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4. seeking sincerely the glory of God in the salvation
of the The hypocrites preach themselves, and not the Lord Jesus; not seeking
Gods glory in the edi^ication of the people, but their own praise, or profit;
not striving to approve themselves unto God, but to please carnal men, which
whosoever does, he is not the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10, Herein, they
grievously offend, who affecting the praise of humane eloquence, feed the
people as Heliogabalus did his parasites, with painted dishes; and in steed of
drawing forth the two edged sword of the spirit, bring forth an embroidered
sheath; professing themselves ambassadors from God, but bringing no message
from God, which concerns the people to hear, either for the informing of
their judgments, or reformation of their lives, whose preaching serves for no
other use, but to please the itching ears of carnal men, and to work in them
a loathing of the sincere food of Gods word.

The upright preacher is careful to practice that which he preaches unto
others, and to avoid that in his own preson, which he reproves in others.

The hypocrite say, ( Mat. 23. 8.) but do not, commending that to others which
themselves have no desire nor care to practice; and reproving that in others
whereof themselves are no less guilty, Rom 2 21, 22. Ps. 50. 16. who therefore
may expect both from the hearers this censure, Medicecura toipsum; and from God
this sentence, out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee thou unsaithfull
servant, Luke 19. 22.

Hearing] The upright hearers take heed how they hear. Luke 8 18. hearing the
word of God preached, as the word of God, (1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.) (acknowledging Gods
ordinance,) as in the sight of God, (Act 10. 33.) with humility and submission,
with reverence and attention receiving the seed into upright hearts, (Luke 8.
15.) as it were into good ground, with desire to profit by it, (1 Pet. 2. 1.)
and care to practice it, being doers of the word, and not hearers only, ( Iam.
1. 22.)

The hypocrite hear, not regarding, so they do hear, how they hear, not
looking to their feet, who they are affected, but come so disposed as to a
stage play, desiring that their itching ears may be delighted with
vaniloquence, rather then their hearts to be edi^^ed with sound and profitable
doctrine, not acknowledging Gods ordinance, nor behaving themselves as before
him, hearing without submission as to Gods word, hearing not as learners, but
as censurers, without reverence, without attention, being present in body, and
absent in soul, without desire to profit by it, without any purpose or care to
practice it, receiving the seed into stony ground, or else among thorns, like
to Ezechiels hearers, c. 33. 31. 32. they come unto thee (says the Lord) as
the people of God do use to come, and they sit before thee as my people, and
they hear thy words, but they will not do them, for though with their mouths
they make show of much love and delight, yet their heart goes after their
covetousness; And lo thou art unto them as a very pleasing song of one that
bath a pleasent voice, and can play well on an instrument, for they hear thy
words, but they do them not.

Sacraments, Baptisme] The upright are careful in some measure to perform
their vow made in Baptism, and to find the effect and fruit thereof: which is
to seal and assure to them that belive and repent, their union and communion
with Christ, for they receive Christ by a true faith are baptized into Christ,
Gal. 3. 27. and consequently put on Christ.

The hypocrite rests in the outward baptism, as if the washing of the flesh
did save, (1 Pet. 3. 11.) taking no care to perform his vow made in baptism;
who therefore though baptized, has no part in Christ, because his heart is not
upright in him, Act. 8. 21.

The Eucharist] The Upright are careful, not only to receive the sacrament,
but also to receive it worthily; and are therefore earefull (1 Cor. 11. 28.)

to prove and approve themselves, before they come to the Lords table preparing
their hearts (2 Chronicles. 30. 19) to seek the Lord and so receiving the sacrament
with the unleavened graces of sincerity and truth (1 Cor. 5. 8.) do eat the
body of Christ and drink his blood.

The hypocrites not greatly caring how they receive, so they do receive, not
preparing their hearts to seek the Lord, not caring to prove, and much less
to approve themselves unto him, coming to the Lords table as the guest without
the wedding garment, endued neither with saving knowledge, nor true faith, nor
unfeigned repentance, nor sincere love, with which graces every worthy receiver
is in some measure qualified: but being sowred with the leaven of hypocrisy do
eat the bread of the Lord, as Judas did, but not panem dominum that is the Lord
who is the bread of life which came down from heaven.

Obedience] Thus much of the worship of God, now we are to speak of obedience.
For, 1. the upright yields simple obedience to the commandments of God, (
Heb 11. 8.) not consulting with flesh and blood, as for the commandments of
men, he observes them no further then in obaying them he may obey God, Ex 1.
17. Act. 4 19. 5. 29. Dan 3. 18. 6. 10.

The hypocrite is more careful to observe the commandments of men, Mat. 15 9.
6. then the commandments of God; insomuch that for the commandments of men he
makes the commandments of God of none effect, yea he scarcely obeys the
commandments of God any further, then as they are commanded by men, insomuch
that he embraces Religion it self, as commanded by the Sovereign Prince,
being ready to change his Religion, as the Prince changes. So that their fear
toward God is taught by the precepts of men, Es. 29. 13.

To this purpose consider these instances. The Lord commands us to receive
the holy communion, when it is administered: and the upright man makes
conscience so often to receive it as it is administered, unless he be hindered by
sufficient occasion. But forasmuch as the law of man in some places does
require the receipt of the Sacraments once a year at the least; and namely at
Easter, hence it is that many will receive but once a year at the most.

The upright man makes conscience of his thoughts, because the law of God is
spiritual, restraining the thoughts as well as the hands. The hypocrite takes
no care of his thoughts, which he thinks to be free because the law of man
does not reach to them

The Lord forbids all railing, and cursed speaking all stealing: and the
upright man makes conscience to abstain from all: but forasmuch as the law of
man does not take hold of all evil speaking, nor of all stealing, therefore
the hypocrite fears not to practice such evil-speaking, and such stealing as
is not punishable by the law of men, though perhaps the neighbor be more
wronged by that ill speaking, or damnified by that stealing, then by that
railing against which lies an action of the case, or by that stealing against
which an action of ^elony lies.

2. The obedience of the upright is voluntary, and from the heart, Romans 6. 17.
proceeding from his will renewed, which appears not only in his good
actions, but also in his sins, whether of omissio^or of commission, for the
good which he does not, he would do: and the evil which he does, he would not
do, Romans 7. 19. But the obedience of the hypocrite is forced from him, because
be dares do no other; for that good which he does, he would not do it; and
that evil which he does not, he would feign do; so that in respect of the
inclination of the will, which God chie^ly regards* the disobedience of the
upright is better then the obedience of the hypocrite.

3. The obedience of the upright is ordinata, well ordered, For he preferr^th
the greater duties before the less, moral duties before ceremonial, and the
substance before circumstances, Matthew. 1 ^. 7. ^ Sam. 15. 22. But it has
always been the hypocrites guise, to prefer the less duties before the
greater; as to tithe mint and cumin, and to neglect the weighty points of the
law, Matthew 23. 23. Luke 11. 42. to strain at a gnat and to swallow a camel,
Mat 23. 24. to stumble at a straw, and to lea^e over a block ( Mat. 12. 17. Luk
15. 13.) to prefer ceremonies before moral duties, yea sometimes to place the
height of their Religion, either in the boistero^s urging, or in the strict
refusing of ceremonies. Thus the Priests and Phariseyes who made no conscience
of delivering our Savior through envy unto death, yet at the same time made
conscience to go into the judgment hall, lest forsooth they should be defiled,
John 18. 28.

They made no conscience to hire Iud^s with 30 pieces of silver to betray his
Lord: but when the pieces were brought them back again, their conscience would
not serve them to put the money into the treasury, because it was the price of
bood, Mat. 27. 6.

4. The obedience of the upright is total, not in respect of the performance,
but in regard of the upright desire, unfeigned purpose, and sincere endeavor,
according to the measure of grace received, to walk in the obedience of all
Gods commandments; to lie in no known sin, but to make conscience of all
his ways. Not, but that the upright contrary to their desire and purpose do
oftentimes fall; but that the Lord accepting of the will for the deed,
esteems the upright and entire obedience of his servants, (who are freed from
the rigor of the law) as total and perfect. Abraham has this testimony in
the Scripture, ( Genesis 26. 5.) that he obeyed the voice of God, and kept
his^mishmereth, his whole charge, that is, whatsoever God requires to be
observed. viz ^his commandments, his (...), and his laws. Zacharias likewise,
and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. and many others are said to have been perfect, and to
have fulfilled after God. that is, fully to have obeyed him, who had
notwithstanding their slips and their falls, as before I noted of Asa in the
same chapter, where it is reported of Zacharias, that he walked in all the
commandments of God blameles, we read that for his incredulity in not
believing the word of the Angel, he was stricken with dumbness, and as it may
seem with deafness also, ( Luk 16. 20 61.) for the space of ten months. In
this evangelicall sense the obedience of the upright is total, in 3. respects;
[ totius legis, hominis, vit^, as being the obedience of the Whole law, of the
whole man, and of the whole life, after our justification and reconciliation
with God, obeying the law in respect of their desire and purpose [ totam, toti,
tota vitae.

The whole law they obey both in respect of the two tables of the law, and in
respect of all the several commandments.

As for the two tables, the upright man joyneth the obedience of them both
together, as here the Lord has promised to all true Christians, that they
shall worship him, not in holiness alone, not in righteousness alone, but both in
holiness and righteousness b^ fore him. Neither can these two, if they be^ in
truth (as they are in the upright) be severed. For a man cannot truly love God,
(John 4. 20.) unless he love his neighbor also; neither can a man love his
neighbor as he ought, that is, in and for the Lord, unless he love the Lord
much more, as I have showed heretofore. And this we see veri^ied in the
examples of those, who have been upright; who have this testimony in the
Scriptures, that they were holy and righteous, as our Savior himself (whom we
are to imitate) Act. 3. 14. and all his upright servants as Noah Gen 6. 9.
David, 1 King. 3. 6. John Baptist. Mark 6. 2 Symeon, Luk 2. 25. Cornelius, Act.
10. 22. etc.

But it is the fashion of hypocrites to sever these two, which God has so
unseparably linked together, that whosoever has the one in truth, has also
the other; and whosoever has not both, has neither. For some content
themselves altogether with a profession of holiness and religion toward God,
not caring or desiring to perform the duties of charity and righteousness
toward men, whereby notwithstanding, as it were by a touchstone, God would
have the uprightness of our piety tried. Others wholly content themselves with
a fair civil conversation before men, having neither true faith in Christ, nor
repentance toward God, nor the fear of the Lord, nor any sanctifying o^
saving grace, living in ignorance, infidelity, impenitency, etc.

Far be it from me to speak, either against the profession of piety, or the
practice of civil honesty; but I speak against the severing of them and the
resting in either of them alone being severed from the other. For so necessary
is civil honesty, as those who have it not, are worse then many among the
heathen that know not God, who were commended^ for moral virtues: against whom
notwithstanding the Holy Ghost denounces that fearful curse, po^re out thine
indignation upon the heathen that do not know thee, and upon the nations that
have not called upon thy name, P^. 79. 6. And so necessary is the profession of
piety, as that those who profess not religion and piety toward God, are worse
then the Pharisees themselves; against whom notwithstanding our Savior
denounces so many woes, Mat 23. Wherefore those that content themselves with a
bare profession of religion, without any desire or care to practice the duties
of charity and righteousness among men, are no better then the hypocritical
phar^^ees, concerning whose obedience our Savior has given us this caveat,
Mat. 5 20. except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of God: and on the
otherside, those, who professing themselves Christians content themselves with
the practice of civil honesty, without any desire or care of religion, being
not only void of all spiritual graces, but also guilty of much outward
profaneness, as inordinary swearing, and profaning the Sabbath, in neglect of
hearing the word, and of prayer, etc. are no better then some of the heathen,
who were alienated from the life of God, strangers from the covenant of
promise, having no hope, and being without God in this World, Ephesians 2. 12. 4 18.

Be not deceived, true piety toward God is always fruitful in the duties of
charity toward men. And on the otherside, the streams of charity and true
righteousness are ever derived from the fountain of piety.

In respect of the several commandments; the obedience of the upright is
universal, in the evangelica. I sense, that is, in respect of his entire
desire, and unfeigned purpose (though contrary thereunto he fail, as we do in
many particulars) ( Iam. 3 2.) having respect to all the precepts of God. Psalm.
119. 6. and walking in all his commandments Luke 1. 6. making conscience of all
his ways, both in performing all known duties, and avoiding all known sin;
not willingly retayning any one, but repenting of all, in respect whereof he is
said, to fulfill after God, Number. 32. 12. that is wholly and universally to
follow him.

The hypocrite fulfilleth not after God. Number 32 11. neither are his works full,
Apoc. 3. 2. he obayeth God by the halves, or not so much: he can be content to
avoid some sins, unto which he is not so much addicted, but his darling
sins, perhaps his usury, or other gainful sins, perhaps whordome, perhaps
drunkenness, etc. he will not leave. Herod reverenced John the Bap^ist, and
observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him (...)
with delight, but for all that he would not leave his Herodias, Mark 6. 20. The
ship of a man's soul may be sunk with one leake, if it be not stopped; and one
breach in the fort of a man's soul, if it be not made up, is sufficient to let
in the enemy to the utter overthrow thereof. The continuance in any one crime
unrepented of is sufficient to drown the soul in perdition* He repents of
no sin, who is not willing to repen^ of all; and he that willingly persi^teth
in the br^ach of any one commandment is guilty of the breach of the whole law,
( sa^. 8. 10.) for the law of God is (...), and copolatively to be understood,
both in respect of the affirmative, and of the negative. For he that is a
keeper of the law ^ keeps both the first and the second and the third
commandment, etc. and he transgresses neither the first, nor the second, not
the third, etc. as therefore in (...) true; and as in a chain consisting of
many links coupled together, if any one link be broken in the draught, the
whole chain is dissolved; so the transgression of any one (...)

(...) to the quality and disposition of the heart; so that he whose heart does
burn with lust is an adulterer in the sight of God; ( Mat. 5. 28.) and he
whose heart does boil with malice, (1 John 3. ^5.) he is a murderer before
God.

And as there is great discord between the heart of the hypocrite, and his
outward appearance; so in the outward man also his works many times agree not
with his words, nor his words with his works. His works, I say, agree not
with his words when he says well, and does ill, having Jacobs voice, and Esaus
hands. Neither due their words agree with their deeds when s^eming (...) to
wrong any man by their deeds make no conscience of speaking evil, thinking
that their words are but wind, and lightly to be regarded. But they should
remember him who says, that of every idle, and much more of every malicious
word, men shall give an account at the day of judgment. For by thy words* says
he, thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. If
therefore any among you, says St. James, ( I am 1. 26.) seem to be religions,
and has not learned (...) as it were with a bitte or a brible to refrain his
tongue; that man deceives himself, and his religion is vain, that is to say,
he is an hypocrite, having a show of religion, but denying the power thereof
For in whom there is any power of religion, they have learned to bridle their
tongues.

Yea in their words i^ a dis^ord, not only between them and their hearts and
between their words and their works, but also between their words and their
words. For as they spea^e with an heart and an heart, that is a double heart,
whence they are called (...) so also with a tongue and a tongue, that is a
double tongue; whence they are called (...) (1 Timothy 3. 8.) and (...) bilingues.
( Eccles. 28. 13.) Out of the same mouth they breath hot and cold, which the
Satyr liked not, out of the same fountain issues both bitter and sweet,
both salt water and fresh; with the same tongue bless God and curse men, (Iam.
3. 9. 16. 11. 12.) out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. It is
strange to see, and lamentable to consider, how some men and women, who would
seem religious, are given to ill speaking, being not only ^^ar^e cen^^rers
and depravers of their brethern, but also detracters, back-biters, and
slanderers, and (which is an evident sign of an hypocrite) thinking, that the
dispraise of other men ^endeth to their (...), and the praise of others to
their disgrace.

3. The obedience of the upright is ^o tall in respect of his whole (...),
after the time of his justification and reconcilation with God, as it is here
said, all the days of our life. Not, but that sometimes he stumbleth in the
way of Christianity, and sometime falls: but yet notwithstanding in respect
of his desire, purpose and endeavor, his obedience is constant and permanent.
For he keeps a constant course in well-doing; as namly, in the practice of
piety, wherein by continual practice he is habituated. He so giverth himself
to prayer, as that in the scriptures he is said to pray always; (Acts* 10.
22.) not, that he does nothing else but pray, but that he prays both
ordinarily at see times every day perhaps thrice a day as Daniel did ( D^^. 6.
10.) and also extraordinarily, a^ oc^asion is offered. Likewise he keeps a
constant course, in reading, meditating, and hearing Gods word, and in other
Christian duties wherein he sted fastly goes on, with desire to increase in
goodness.

And as his obedience is constant so (...) it is permanent. For uprightness is
evermore accompanied with perseverance to the (...) ^ as (...) I shall show.

But the obedience of the hypocrite is neither constant, but as it were by
fits, for the double minded man is inconstant in all his ways, Iam. 1. 8.
neither permanent, but mom^ntany, o^ temporary, like the morning ^^ist or the
early dew. Hos. 6. 4. like the seed sown upon the roc^ie ground, which in time
of heat withers, Luke 8. 13. like the building of the foolish man, which in
^ime of temptation is overthrown, Mat. 7. 26.

Graces] Now I come to the graces; every one whereof in the upright is (...),
that is unfeigned, and as Solomon speaks, Pro. 3. 12. tus^^jak that which
truly is; but in the hypocrite, counterfeit. In these, the general note of
uprightness is desire of increase, and striving forward toward perfections (
Phil. 3. 14) (for in this life we are in (...)) in our growing age) and God
does orowne their righteousness with incr^ase, for to him that has it shall
be given. The hypocrite^ are non-proficien^s, contenting themselves with that
measure of gra^e which they seem to have, and have not, and having not, they
are so far from increasing in grace, that, that which they seem to have, (
Luk 8. 8) is taken from them.

And first, the faith of the upright is lively and effectual, both to
justification apprehending and applying Christ who is our righteousness; and
also to sanctification, because it does purify the heart, ( Acts 15. 9.) and
work by love. ( Gal. 5. 6.) Again the faith of the upright is permanent, by
it he stands, (Romans 5. 2.) and by it he shall live, Heb. 2. 4. by the power
of God through faith he is preserved unto eternal life (1 Pet. 1. 5.) And
therefore those who are of the defection, are not of faith. And contrariwise,
Heb. 0. 39.

The seeming faith to the hypocrite is dead* being nether effectual to
justification as being without root, Luke 8. 13. nor to sanctification; as
being without ^^uit. For as the body without breath is dead, (Iam 2. 26.) so is
faith without works.

Neither is the faith of hypocrites permanent, but temporary, which in time of
trial fails, Luke 8. 13.

Love] The love also of the upright is unfeigned, whether we speak of his love
to God, which appears by obedience, both active, which is obedients legis,
(for this is the love of God, that he keep his commandments, 1 John 5. 3.
Exodus 20. 6.) and passive, which is obedientia crucis. that is to say, patience,
for love suffers all things, 1 Cor. 3. 7. or of his love to man, which
appears in giving and forgiving. But more specially an undoubted sigue of
uprightness is to love and respect the godly, though of mean account in the
world for their godliness sake; ( Iam. 2. 24.) and to disrespect the wicked,
though great in the world, for their wickedness. Ps. 15. 4. following therein
the disposition of God himself. 1 Samuel 2. 30. and the example of Elisha 2
King. 3. 13, 14. for in the eyes of the upright pretty makes men honorable, but
wickedness makes them vile and despicable, Dan. 11. 21. And as the upright
are an abomination to the wicked, so contrariwise. Pro. 29. 27. The world
loves her own, but those, that be not of the world, the world hates, it is
therefore a good sign that we are not of the world, if we love and affect
those whom the world hates.

The love of hypocrites is not true, neither toward God, For they be haters of
God, (Exodus 20. 5. 6.) that will not keep his commandments; nor toward men,
being in word and tongue only, (1 John. 3. 18.) or (as we use to speak) from
the teeth outward. But especially their hypocrisy is discovered, as by hating
or envying the godly, even for his godliness sake, because they cannot endure
that any should be esteemed better then themselves: (Thus Cain hated Abel, (1
John 3. 12.) and Saul David, (1 Samuel 18. 9.) and the Pharisees Christ,) so by
favoring and affecting the wicked. For liking is a sign of likeness.

Hope] The hope of the upright man conceived of a better life does in some
measure weane him from the world; neither will it suffer him ordinarily, cuter
to be drawn away in sin, by the desires of the world, which are but vanities
in comparison of that heavenly happiness, which he ^xspecteth. ( Heb. 11. 24.
26.) no^ to be driven from goodness by the terrors of the world, which he
contemns in respect of the joy that is set before him: but causes him to
purify himself in some measure, even as Christ is pure. 1 John. 3. 3.

The hypocrite, for all his pretended hope, is either so addicted to the
desires of this world, as if he did not expect an other world: or is so daunted
with the afflictions of this life, as a man without hope, and as he lives
without the fear of God; so he dies without hope. For what hope has the
hypocrite, when God takes away his soul? Job. 27. 8.

Feare] The upright man is indu^d with a sonne-like fear of God, which is a
fear to offend him. For such fear and uprightness always; go together. Job
1. 1. 8. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 1 Samuel 12. 24. The hypocrite either has no fear of God
at all, Ps. 39. 1, 2. but is overgrowne with carnal security: or but a servile
fear, which is the fear of bondslaves, who are under the law, whereby he does
not indeed fear sin, or the offense of God, but the punishment only which
sin deserves.

Humility] The upright man is endued with humility. For he that walks with
God, setting God before his eyes, and therefore behaving himself as in the
sight and presence of God, cannot but humble himself to walk with his God.
(Mich. 6. 8.) Abraham when he stood before the Lord, acknowledged himself to
be but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. The holy Prophet Esaias, when in a vision he
beheld the Majesty of God, ^ryed but Woe is (...) because I am a man of
polluted lips Es 6. 5. The Apostle Peter, when by the miraculous draught of
fishes he perceived CHRIST, then present with him, to be the Son of God, ^ell
down at his feet, and said depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O-Lord.
Luke 5. 8. And no doubt, but so many of us, as have that eye of faith, which
Moses had, ( Heb. 11. 27.) to see him that is invisible present with them, are
in some measure affected with his presence, as these men were. But pride is an
evident sign of an hypocrite, who sets not God before their eyes. Behold
(says the Prophet Habakuk) his soul that is lifted up in not upright within
him* Hab. 2. 4. we see it in the example of the Pha^see, Luk 18. 11. who
coming topray, in stead of humbling himself before GOD* ^^^olleth himself
above other men, and for that thanketh GOD: but to this end to praise himself.

Confidence] The upright are confident* For he that walks in integrity,
walks confidently, Pro. 10 9. for confidence is a consequent of integrity, or
that which truly is ((...)) Pro. 3. 21. 23, 24, 25. Keep that which truly is,
that is sound wisdom and discretion, then shall thou walk in thy way safely;
when thou lie down thou shall not be afraid, thou shall not be afraid of
lud^en fear, for the Lord shall be thy confidence, A consequent of truefaith,
Romans 5. 2. Ephesians 3. 12 of the spirit of adoption, which expels the spirit of
fretfulnesse, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. of the true fear of God. For, in the
fear of the Lord there is strong confidence, Pro. 14, 26. of a good and
upright conscience, which fears no evil, Ps 112. 7, 8. The upright (...)
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is stood tursting in the Lord
his her at is established, he shall not be afraid, but is as bold as a lion.
Pro. 28. ^. Neither does he fear the censures or ill reports of men, 1 Cor. 4.
3. but as Job, in the integrity of his conscience desires that his cause may
(...) tried; professing, that if his adversary would write a bill or libell
against him, he would be so far from being daunted there with, that it should
redound to his credit, and he would bind it as a crown unto him. Job 31. 35,
36. Of affiance in Gods al-sufficiency, providence, and protection. For setting
God before his eyes, and knowing, that the Lord is at his right hand, he is
confident, that he shall not be moved. Ps. 1. 6. 8. for he believes, that God
is his buckler, and his exceeding great reward. Genesis 15. 1. a sun and a shield
to them that walk uprightly, Ps. 84. 11. Pro. 27. that the eyes of the Lord
perlustrate the whole earth to show himself strong in the behalf of them,
whose heart is upright toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. that God by his fatherly
providence causes all things to work together for the good of those that love
him, Rom 8. 28. therefore with David he professes, my defense is of God, who
saves the upright in heart, Ps 7. 10. and therefore resolves not to fear, Ps
3. 5. 6. 4. 8. 23. 4 27. 1. 3. 46. 1. 2. 3. 56. 4. 1^ 8. 6. For what should he
fear that needs not to fear death it self, which of all things in this
world it most feared, seeing as it freeth him from all other evil and danger;
so i^ is an entrance unto him, and an intro^^^ion into happiness.

Thus is the upright confident. But fears surpriseth the hypocrites, Es. 33. 14
fearing not only where is occasion of fear, but also where there is no cause
of fear, Ps. 14. 5. 53. 5. They will be afraid at the wagging of a leaf.
Levit. 26. 36. and they will (...) where no mean pursues them. Pro. 28. ^. And
this fear happens unto them for wane of true faith, Mat. 8. 26. for want of
the spirit of adoption, instead where of they are possessed with the spirit of
bondage, and of fear, Romans 8. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 7. For want of the true fear of
God. For they that fear not God, fear all things (...) For want of a good
conscience, for a bad and guilty conscience, conscious to it self of evil,
fears evil. For want of affiance in God, with whom they have no peace. The
conscience of the wicked is like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose
(...) cast up mire and dart, there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Es
57. 20, 21.

The repentance of the upright is entire, (...) a turning unto God with all his
heart heart from all his sins (Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Ezra ^8. 2^. 28.) The repentance of
the hypocrite is neither from the heart, but in outward shows, ( Kings 21. 7.)
as of hanging down the head like a (...)* Es 58. 5. of putting on sackcloth,
and going softly, of rending the clothes, ( Joel l. 13) but not the heart*
Neither is it from all his sins; for he will be sure to retain some darling
sin from which he will not be reclaimed* But as he who truly repents of any
one sin, repents of all, in respect of the desire and purpose of his heart,
being not willing to retain any) so he that repents not of all, repents of
none at all in deed and in truth.

Simplicity] He that walks in uprightness toward God, without hypocrisy,
walks also before men in simplicity and ^inglenesse of heart, without guile.
Both implied in the word: for (...) as Basil says or (...) as Chrysoft
speaks, (...) simplicity of manners, and of speech, the character of an
harmless or upright man. But he that uses dissimulation and guile toward
men, is an hypocrite, and so is called, Mat. 22. 18 Mark. 12. 15.

So much of the notes that respect good things; now follow those which respect
evil. And that either of sin, or of punishment

The (...) man hates sin as well in himself as in others, or rather more,
and more severely censureth it in himself, then in others: not excusing nor
extenuating, but rather amplifying and aggravating the same. The hypocrite
hates sin in others, but not in himself, and to that end he is curious to
pry into other men's behavior and neglects his own. He can see a mote in an
other man's eye, but cannot discern a blame in his own, Mit) 7. 3. 4. he is a
sharp censure^ of other men's faults, but fla^tereth and blesses himself in
his own sins, Ps 36. 2. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. examples hereof in Saul. 1 Samuel 14.
44. in Iud^ Genesis 85. 24. yea in Da^id. whiles (...) conce^led his sin, 2 Sa^.
1. 2. 5.

Affliction^] The evil of punishment (...) afflictions, which God has
ordained as trials to discern the sound and upright, from the unsound and
hypocrite* by the patient bearing whereof the faithful are found to be (...)
that is, found and approved, Iam. ^12. For tribulation being (...) (1 Pet. 1.
7. Iam. 1. 3) the trial of our faith works patience; and patience, (...), (
Romans 5. 3. 4. that is, as Chrysostom (with whom others agree) expounds
(...), it makes him approved that is tried, as we see in Job, and in the three
children, Dan. 3. in the faithful Jews Ps. 44. 7 and in all the faithful,
but chiefly in all that are martyrs. By afflictions likewise the hypocrite being
tried is discovered, and as it were unmas^ed, by the not patient bearing and
enduring thereof. For either he does (...), set light by the affliction, and
not take it to heart; or else (...), he f^inteth under it, contrary to the
counsel of the Holy Ghost, Heb 12. 5 cited out of Pro 3. 11.

He that takes not to heart an affliction, cannot be said patiently to bear
it; for in patiendo est patientia, in suffering is patience, and not (...), in
not suffering, as ^ppeareth in the examples of Job, (Job. 1. 20.) and David.
(P^. 6. 38. 6.) And this is the cause many times, why the hypocrite does not
profit by affections, because he is not sensible thereof, Ier. 5. 3. and being
unsensible, becomes incorrigible, (...). 2 30. And the cause hereof is,
because hypocrites not walking with God; do not acknowledge his hand; but
ascribe their affliction, either to misfortune, or to secondary causes, which
are but the instruments of God, Or if they do acknowledge the hand of God; yet
they are not humbled under it, neither do they bewail their sins, nor crave
pardon of them, nor turn to him that smites them, ( Es. 9. 18.) nor promise
amendment; or if they do, they mean not, or at least afterward they do not
perform, nor submit themselves meekly to bear their affliction, nor learn
obedience by that which they suffer, neither are they bettered by them, but
become worse, Es. 1. 5. If they take it too much to heart, then either they
impatienly bear it, murmuring against God, and fainting in themselves, or they
seek an evasion out of it by some sin, and so fall away from God; by which
their defection, their hypocrisy is discovered.

To these trials by affliction, we may add other temptations, as by the
doctrine of false teachers, either a^^uring to idolatry, which the Lord
sometimes permits to prove us, whether we love him entirely or not, Deuteronomy.
13. 3. or to heresies, which the Lord also suffers, that those which are
approved, may be known 1 Cor. 11. 19.

CHAP. XI.
Of uprightness toward men.
NOw we are to speak briefly of integrity, as it has reference to man. For as
we are to serve God in holiness before him, that is in uprightness of heart,
without hypocrisy; so also in righteousness before him, that is in simplisity
and singleness of heart, without guile. For this simplicity whereof we are now
to speak, is not that which is opposed to discretion, as being want of wit,
(for the simplicity of doves must be tempered with the prudence of serpents; we
must be without guile as doves without gall, but we must not be like Ephraim
Hos. 7. 11. as silly doves without heart) but is opposed to dissimulation,
disguising, doubling, deceit and guile. From which the redeemed of the Lord
are free, according to the testimony of the Prophet Zephany c. 3. 13. and
according to the oath of God in this place, worshipping the Lord in
righteousness before him; That is, performing the duties which they owe unto
men, as in the sight and presence of God.

Now this simplicity is expressed by the same ^ermes which signified
uprightness, being referred to men, and where they are put absolutely, without
relation either to God or man, both are, or may be employed, as always going
together. Thus the word Thamim may be understood in this larger sense. And
therefore where Jacob is called Ish th^^in^ Genesis 25. 27. it is to be understood
as well of his simple and sincere dealing, among men, as of his uprightness
toward God, and so the 72 interpret it by the word (...) free from fayning or
dissembliug, and Aquila by the word (...) a simple hearted man free from
doubling and deceit, and so the word is used sometimes to signify simplicity,
Genesis 20. 5, 6. 2 Samuel 15 11. The like is to be understood of Job and other holy
men to whom that attribute is given in the scriptures; who are also noted to
have performed their duetyes to men in uprightness, or integrity as David, Ps.
78. 72. is said to have sed, that is, ruled the people of God according to the
integrity of his heart. The want whereof is objected by Iotham to the men of
Shechem. Iud. 9. 16. 19. that they had not dealt in truth, and integrity with
Gedeon his father. And therefore even ^uch, as dissemble with men are sometimes
called hypocrites, Mat. 2. 18. and their disguising is called hypocrisy, M^rk.
12. 15. or as Luke terms it (...) c. 20. 23. Deceiptfulnesse, when one by
flattering words and fair shows seeks to entangle another.

The words jashar and shalem, which signify upright and perfect, have also
sometimes relation to men, as 2 Kings 10. 15. 1 Chronicles. 12. 38. so have the
word, which signify sincerity and truth, Iud. 9. 16. 19. 2 Cor 1. 12. The
phrase also of doing our duties to men from the heart, as Ephesians. 6. 6. Col. 3.
23. and out of a pure heart 1 Pet. 1. 22. imports also this simplicity and
singleness of heart.

But the most proper words whereby this grace is signified in the scriptures of
the N. Test. are (...) and sometimes (...) simplicity, or singleness of heart,
opposed to dubling, to dissimulation and guil. The man endued with it, is
called sometimes (...) which in latin is simplex (quasi sine plica) and
sometimes (...) which signifies either harmless being as it were without
horns; or rather sincere, as being without mixture of deceit or guile, Mat.
10. 16. Phil 2. 15. sometimes it is signified by the denial of the contrary,
as 1. (...) Without guile, or sincere, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Blessed is the man in whose
heart there is no guile. John 1. 48. 2 Not with an heart and an heart, that is
not with a double heart, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. but as it is v. 38. with a perfect
heart, 3 Not fained (...) as 1 Pet. 1. 22. brotherly love unfeigned.

To serve God therefore in righteousness before him, is in the duties which we
perform to men, to behave our selves as in the sight and presence of God; not
in dissimulation and guile, not with an heart and an heart, that is a double
heart, not with fayning or disguising, but in integrity, sincerity and truth,
with simplicity and singleness of heart; Which you are to understand, not that
simple men are to be fools, but that wise men are to be si^ple; or as the
Apostle exhorts, wise to that which is good, and simple concerning evil,
Romans 16. 19. or as he speaks, 1 Cor. 14. 20. Babes in malice, but in
understanding men.

And thus we are to serve God in righteousness before him. For howsoever
wordly policy, which is mixed with dissimulation and guile, be commonly
practiced and highly extolled among men, and simplicity contrariwise neglected
and contemned, as folly; yet by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, true wisdom
which descends from above as all good gifts do is not mixed with
dissimulation, Iam. 3. 17. but is tempered with simplicity, as our Savior
teaches his followers, Mat. 10. 16.

Those therefore that will be wise in Gods account, must be content to seem
fools in the estimation of the world, 1 Cor. 3. 18. As for that wisdom which
is mixed with deceit, the Holy Ghost does censure it, as earthly carnal, and
devilish James 3. 15. And although that be accounted the only wisdom among
worldly men; yet the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God. 1 Cor. 3.
19. for such men are, as we use to say, peni-wise and pound-foo^ish who by
their policy to gain their desires in this world do lose their sou^es: which
is not only folly, but madness. I say extreme madness, for the momentany
fruition of worldly desires, which are vain and unprofitable, not only to
deprive themselves of everlasting happiness in heaven, but also plunge
themselves into endless woe and misery in hell. Verily, it were easy for any
man, that is not a fool, to become worldly wise, if he would be so foolish, as
to cast away his soul by making no conscience of dissembling and disguising,
of lying and deceiving, out-facing, of swearing and for swearing which, because
no true Christian w^ll do; therefore as every where in the world true
Christians are by the worldings accounted innocents, meaning fools; so in the
parts of Italy about Rome fools (as I have heard) are termed Christians.

But that we may be moved to embrace simplicity and singleness of heart, and
be swaded from all doubling and guile, let us consider, what arguments the Holy
Ghost affords in this behalf. And first, as touching dissimulation or guile,
it is twofold either in word, or in deed. In word when there is a divorce
between the tongue and the heart; the heart meaning one thing, and the tongue
speaking another with purpose to deceive. This in the scriptures is called
speaking with an heart and an heart. Ps. 12. 2. with flattering lips and with
an heart and an heart, (that is a double heart) do they speak. It is also
called, a mouth of deceit, Ps. 109. 2 a deceiptful tongue. Such as should not
be found in the remnant of Israel. Zeph. 3. 13. a tongue of deceit, when a
man speaks peace^bly to his neighbor, but in his heart he lays wai^e for
him. Ier 98. Ps. 28. 3. having peace in their mouths, but mischeief in their
hearts.

This double tongue and double heart, as it is odious to ingenuous men, in so
much as some of the heathen have protested, that they bate it as the very gates
of hell; (Achilles apud Homerum Iliad. 9.) so and much more it is abominable
unto God; who is the Patron of truth, and avenger of falsehood, Ps. 50. 19. thou
applyest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongus forgeth deceit. For these things
will I reprove thee, etc. Shall not I visit for these things, and shall not my
soul be avenged on such a notion as this? Ier. 9. 9. Ps. 12. 3. Therefore if we
desire to prosper, and to see good, we must keep our tongue from ev^ll, and
our ^^pp^s that they speak no guile. Ps. 34. 12, 13.

Dissimulation or doubling in fact is, when one thing is intended, and another
pretended, with purpose to d^c^ive, which in the Scriptures is forbidden and
condemned Forbidden both in express terms, Levit 19 11. 1 T^ess 4. 6. and by
types and shadows, as Levit. 19. 19. Deuteronomy. 22. 9. 10. 11.

Condemned, as a sin odious to God, (for the Lord abhors the de eiptfull
man, Ps 5. 7. and accordingly punishes them, Ps. 55. 23. Men of deceit shall
not live out half their days. For God is an a^enger of deceit. I These. 46.
Ier. 9. 4. 5. 6. 9.) and as a mark of the wicked and reprobate, who are the
seed of the serpent. Ps. 144. 8. Rom 1. 29.

On the contrary, simplicity and singleness of heart is both commanded and
commended in the Scriptures. Commanded, Romans 12. 8, 9. he that excerciseth the
duty of charity in giving, let him do it in simplicity. Let love be without
dissimulation. For seeing the faithful have purified their souls by the
obedience of the truth (that is by faith. Act. 15. 9) through the s^irit to the
unfeigned love of the brethren, they a^e therefore to l^ve 1 another out of a
pur^seart fervenly, 1 P^t. 1. 22. Our Savior CHRIST, as he commands his
foll^wers to be wis^ a^ (...)? ^o also simpl^^ as d^ver, Mat. 10. 16. that they
may be blame^esse, and simple or sincere, as the so ^nes of GOD without re^uke
P^il 2. 5. For that which in this behalf is required in the duties of
servan^s, is ^o be observed in a^l the duty ^s of righteousness, which we are
to perform unto men in singleness of heart, as unto Christ not with
eye-services, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
GOD from the heart. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. or as the same Apostle speaks to the like
effect, Col. 3. 22. 23. not with eye-s^rvices as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart fearing GOD. And what soever you do, do it from the
heart. As to the Lord, and not to men.

Commended, 1. as an excellent virtue as being that, for which the first
Christians are highly commended, Act. 2. 46 that they conversed together in
singleness of heart. As that, wherein we are to take comfort and to rejoice:
namely when our conscience testifies unto us, that in simplicity, and godly
sincerity not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had out
conversation in the world. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

2 As most profitable, as having the reword, not only of safety and security (
for he that walks in integrity, walks safely. But he that perverteth his
ways, as dissemblers do, she'be known, that is, shall be made an example of
punishment. Pro. 10. 9.) but also of blessedness, Ps. 32. 2. Blessed is the
man in whose heart there is no guile.

3. As necessary, as being the proper mark and cognizance of those that shall be
saved. For the Lord being consulted by David, who is a true Christian, and an
inhe^itour of the kingdom of heaven: returns this answer; he that walks
before God uprightly without hypocricy, and toward men sincerely, and without
guile speaking the truth that is in his heart. Ps. 15. 2. this is Jacob, or
this is the generation of Jacob, that is Israel. Ps. 24. 6. who from his
integrity or uprightness is called Ieshurun. Deuteronomy. 33 5. 26. Es. 44. 2. for he
is not a law that is one outwardly, but he that is inwardly? whose praise is
not of men, but of God. Romans 2. 28, 29. And by the testimony of our Savior he
is a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. Ioh. 1. 48.

For a true Christian does in some measure resemble the disposition of Christ,
who left us an example, that we should follow his steps, who did no sin,
neither in his mouth was found any guile. 1. Pet. 2. 21. 2^. And therefor as
he was called a lamb, so his follwers must be, as they are called, not foxes,
nor wolves, but sheep, But if our mind being corrupted with dissimulation and
guile, do degenerate from that simplicity which becomes those that are in
Christ Jesus. 2. Cor, 11. 3. or if, as Job speaks. chap, 31. 5. we have
walked in vanity and leasing, or if our feet have hasted to deceit, we
discover our selves to be no true Isra^li^es, nor sheep of Christ. For if they
be true Christians, in whom there is no guile, what shall we think of them, in
whom no simple or plain dealing is to be found. If true Christians be the
sheep of Christ, imitating the simplicity of the lamb of God, in whom was
found no guile what may we think of those foxes and wolves, who resemble the
old serpent in guile and deceit? If those which shall inhabit the mountain
of God, be such as walk uprightly, both toward God, and toward man; where
shall all hypocrites and dissemblers have their portion? see Mat. 24. 51. If in
the remnaur of Isreall, that shall be saved, a deceiptfull tongue shall not be
found, Zeph^ 3. 13, then do they not belong to the Israel of God, whose hearts
are fraught with ^uile, and their tongues are full of deceit.

To conclude, this necessity is proved from this oath of the Lord. Who has
sworn, that he will give to all true Christians, who are the children of
Abraham, that they being delivered from the hand of their enemies shall serve
him in righteousness before him, that is, with simplicity and sing^enesse of
heart, without doubling, dissimulation or guile. They therefore whose
conversation is in dissimulation or guile, can have no assurance, that they are
the redeemed of the Lord. But of this argument of integrity and uprightness, I
have now spok^n the more briefly in this, and some other points, because I have
handled the same more largely in my lectures, on Ps. 15. 2, Whereunto I refer
the Christian reader, as to the first treatise, that ever I saw, of this most
p^ofitable, and necessary argument.

CHAP: XII.
Of the certainty of Persev^rance, and the necessity of this doctrine.
THe third property of our new obedience is constancy, or perseverance, noted
in these words All the days of our life.

The meaning of the words.
Sect. 1* Of which words the meaning is not, that all those who are in the
covenan^ of grace do always worship God in holiness and righteousness, from
their first birth, (for who then could assure himself that he is within the
covenant of grace) but from their new birth, and from the time of their actual
redemption and reconciliation with God. For so God has promised to all the
heirs of promise, (Luk, 1. 73, 74, 75) that he will give us, that being
delivered from the hand of our spiritual enemies, we should worship him all
the days of our life. But before we be actually redeemed by the merits of
CHRIST, that is, actually made partakers of the benefit of redemption,
justified by faith, and reconciled unto God? we cannot worship God aright, as
before we have showed.

Neither are the words to be understood of every day and every moment? as tho
the Lord did promise to the faithful, that they shall continue in a perpetual
course of obedience without any interruption or intermission whatsoever. Indeed
every man that is redeemed is bound with his perseverance to join both
assiduity in a continual practice of piety every day, and also to increase
daily in godliness, and in the grace of the Spirit, being renewed in the inner
man from day to day, 2 Cor. 4. 16. But yet this is not the thing which by oath
the Lord has promised in the covenant of grace to all that are redeemed; for
who then might not think himself excluded out of the covenant of grace, seeing
in many things we offend all? (Iam. 3. 2.) and there is not a righteous man
upon earth that does good, (Eccles. 7. 20) and sins not: But they are to be
understood of our whole life, neither do they so much import quando, when, as
quam diu, how long: as being uttered in the accusative case: ((...)) For the
children of God, howsoever they fall in many particulars besides or contrary to
their general purpose, yet for so much as they always rise again, and hold
out to the end, having a constant purpose to serve God always, they are truly
said to worship God all the days of their life. As Asa's heart was said to
have been perfect, (2 Chronicles. 16. 17.) that is, upright, all the days of his
life, (2 Chronicles. 16. 7. 10. 12.) though failed in many particulars.

The faith of the Elect ( that is, of all true children of God, nam qui vere
filij sunt. praesciti and praedestinati sunt Aug. de corrupt and gratia c. 9.)
Which works by love, either fails not at all, or if there be any in whom it
fails, it is repaired before the end of their^ lif: and that iniquity which
came between, being wiped away, it is accounted for perseverance to the end,
as Augustine says Aug. de corrept and gracia c. 7. Horum sides, quae per
dilectionemoper^tur, profect^ aut omnino n^ deficit aut si qi sunt quor^^
deficit, reparatur antequam vita ista ^iniatur, and deleta quae intercurrerat
inique itate, usque in finem perseverantia deputatur.
.

The meaning then of the words is, that God by oath does promise to the
faithful; that he will give them grace to worship him in holiness and
righteousness from the time of their actual redemption and justification,
with perseverance to the end of their life.

Sect 2. The certainty of perseverance grounded upon the text] Where-upon we
do ground this most comfortable doctrine, that the perseverance of the
faithful. I mean of all those that truly believe, and are sound and upright
Christians, is certain, perseveran^e being the perpetual and peculiar
previledge of the upright. But when I say it is certain^, I speak not of the
certainty of the subject, as though the faith^^ull were always certainly
assured of their perseverance (though they are always to labor for that
assurance) but of the certainty of the object, that is, that the perseverance
of the faithf^ll is certain and sure, whether they be assured of it, or not.
Even as the founda^^on of Gods election abides sure,) 1. Tim 2. 19. though the
elect be not always sure of it, but yet are always to give diligence to make
it sure. (1 Pet. 1. 10.)

Sect. 3. The necessity of this doctrine] Here therefore we are to refute the
Papist, and all others who endeavor to bereave the faithful and sound
Christians of this privilege. And in this cause we are to labor the more
seriously, because those that would deprive us of this privilege, do also
endeavor to rob us of all true comforts and consolation, For first, this were
no sound comfort (wherein notwithstanding our Savior CHRIST does bid the
Faithful especially to rejoice.)

Luke 10 20.) that our names are written in heaven; if again they may be
blotted out: that we are the sons and heirs of God, if that notwithstanding
we may become the children of the devil: that we are now the elect of God, if
hereafter we may become reprobates.

2. Again, the maine comfort of a Christian in this life; is assurance of
salvation after this life is ended* For the life (as it were) of the life
mortal, is the assurance of the life immortal. But how can there be assurance
of salvation, if there be no certainty of Perseverance?

3. Those which seek to undermine the certainty of Perseverance in the
children of God, do also overturne the very groundworke and foundation of our
Faith and hope. For what is Faith (I mean special Faith) or hope, but an
assurance of salvation, and consequently of perseverance unto salvation by
Christ; the one, as an assured persausion, the other as an assured expectation?
The ground of which assurance is the maine promise of the Gospel, declaring
the certainty of their salvation, who do truly believe in Christ. From whence
the Christian conscience gathers assurance in this manner. The salvation of
all those that truly believe is certain. This being the maine pr^mise of the
Gospel, (John 3. 16, Mark* 16. 16. Act. 16. 31. Romans 10. 9, 10, 11.) that
whosoever believes in Christ, shall be saved* But I (says the soul of the
faithful man, according to the testimony of his conscience, seconded by the
testimony of the Holy Ghost, (Romans 8. 16.) bearing witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God) I do truly believe in Christ, therefore my
salvation is certain. But the proposition of this ^yllogisme with the proof
thereof, which is the ground of our Faith, and the foundation of our assurance
and consolation, the adversaries of perseverance do deny: no^ fearing to
contradict the maine promise of the Gospel. For whereas the promise of the
Gospel affirms, that all which truly believe in Christ, shall be saved: they
are not ashamed to say, that some, which truly believe in Christ, shall not be
saved. For they say, that some which truly believe, do not persevere, and that
those which do not persevere, shall not be saved.

Lastly, the Faithful in the greatest temptations of Satan and conflicts with
despair, do use to raise themselves ( Psalm. 77. 6.) by calling to mind the
tokens of Gods special favor vouchsafed unto them in former times, and the
undoubted fruits of saving grace, which they have formerly brought forth:
Knowing that the Lord ( who changes not) Mal. 3. 6. whom he loves once,
loves to the end: John 13. 1. and that the saving gifts and graces of God ^are
without repentance. Romans 11. 29. And hereby as penitent children^, are
encouraged to seek unto their heavenly Father for mercy and pardon: Knowing
that howsoever he is justly angry with them, yet he does not hate them, nor
utterly cast off them: whom once he has received into his love* in Christ.
But the adversaries of Perseverance by their doctrine discourage men, when they
have grievously offended from all exercises of faith and repentance, and teach
them to run desperate courses. For if a faithful man upon a grievous, or as
they call it, a mortal or deadly sin committed, be translated from the
state of salvation into the state of condemnation excluded out of* Gods favor,
and made an object of his^ hatred, deprived of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and of
all saving Grace, and withal ceasing to be the child, or (as some say) elect
of God, is become a child of the devil: with what heart can he seek unto GOD,
of whom he is now hated? How can he call upon him, in whom he does not believe?
Or how can he hope to be heard, that has no hope? or how shall he seek to
please God who has no faith (without which it is impossible to please GOD) nor
any desire to please him?

This Doctrine therefore is to be avoided as a downfall of despair: the full
confutation whereof I reserve to a peculiar Treatise purposely written of that
subject. Only here, to make better way thereunto, I thought good to add an
Appendix, for the further clearing of the Doctrine delivered in the 8 Chapter
of this Book, concerning the certainty of Salvation.

An Appendix to the Treatise of the certainty of Salvation.
SInce I wrote this Discourse, there came to my hands a Treatise of the nature
and properties of Grace and Faith, written by a learned and godly man* as I am
persuaded: wherein many things are delievered, which cross diverse points by me
propounded in this book; and more especially in my discourse concerning the
certainty of salvation. ( W. P.) whereat no man is to marvel, and much less to
take offense. For so long as our knowledge is but in part, it cannot be
avoided, but there will be diversity of opinions among the Faithful* who
notwithstanding hold the maine substance and foundation of Faith and true
Religion.

The points of difference are eight.

The first error. Vocation and sanctification confounded.

1. The first, that he confounds our vocation and sanctification, alleging
that in our vocation and first conversion the universal or general habit of
grace, containing in it all sanctifying graces is infused; whereby all the
parts and powers of man, being renewed together and at once, and the image of
God in them all renewed by the infusion of the habites of all sanctifying
graces together, are sanctified throughout.

Res^. To omit his acception of the word Grace, even where of purpose he does
at large discourse of Grace, for one supernatural quality inherent in us, or
habit of grace infused into us, according to the use of the schoolmen (who
thereby have overturned the doctrine of justification and salvation by Gods
grace, magnifying under the name of grace their own righteousness inherent,
which in the question of justification is to be esteemed as dung, (Phil. 3. 8.)
and not once mentioning that which is out of us in him, which most properly is
the grace of God, for it is one of his attributes) and not according to the
scriptures, which never speak of grace in that sense, but always use the
word, either properly for the gracious favor of God in Christ, by which grace
we are elected called, justified, sanctified, and shall be glorified; or
metonymically for the Special gifts of Grace: To omit this oversight, I
answer, it has been the received opinion, and usual practice of all
Orthodox Divines, to hold and set down in this order the degrees of salvation,
which are wrought in this life, viz. Our vocation, justification,
sanctification. And that in order of nature vocation, (wherein justifying faith
is begotten) goes before justification; and that justification, wherein we are
made just before GOD by imputation of CHRIST'S righteousness, goes before
sanctification: wherein we, being already justified from the guilt of sin,
and redeemed from the hand of our spiritual enemies, and reconciled unto God,
receive grace to worship him in holiness and righteousness before him.
Howbeit, we deny not, but that in time our justification does concur with our
effectual vocation, (for as soon as a man does truly believe, so soon is he
justified before God) and that in time the first act of sanctification (which
is our regeneration) does concur both with our justification and effectual
vocation. Now, of our regeneration, which is the beginning of our
sanctification, and of our spiritual life. Which we live by faith, there seem
to be two acts; the one, wherein we are begotten unto God of incorruptible seed
by the word of God; the other, wherein the image of God being in some measure
renewed in us, and our Savior Christ formed in us, we are borne anew. The
former, is our spiritual conception; the latter, our spiritual or new birth,
in the former regeneramur, we are begotten anew, in the latter renascimur, we
are borne anew. And as in natural generation there is a mean time between
the conception and the birth, in which time that which is begotten is formed in
the womb, according to the image of the first Adam; so between the first act
of regeneration and the new birth, there intercedeth a time, wherein the image
of the second Adam is in all parts by degrees renewed, until Christ b^ formed
in us, (Gal. 4. 19.) The former, which also is the first act of our conversion,
is the same with our calling or vocation* wherein our Savior Christ is
conceived in our hearts, when we do receive him by the true and lively assent
of faith; which is the seed, the root, the fountain of all other sanctifying
graces; which whosoever has, (1 John 5. 1) he is begotten of God.

This act the holy spirit works ordinarily by the ministry of the word. For
faith comes by the hearing of the word. (Romans 10. 17.) For how should men
believe in him, of whom they have not heard, and how should they hear without
a preacher, Romans 10. 14. In this regard preachers, being ministers by whom
others believe. 1 Cor. 3. 5. are the instruments of the holy Ghost for our
spiritual regeneration; and are therefore called fathers in the faith, who
beget men unto God. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Phil. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 2. Now in our vocation,
the work of the holy Ghost is partly preparative, and partly operative. The
preparation unto faith is 1. the illumination of the mind, partly by the
ministry of the law, revealing unto us our miserable estate in our selves; and
partly by the ministry of the Gospel, revealing unto us the mystery of our
salvation by Christ. 2. the molifying of the heart by the finger of the spirit,
humbling us in the consideration both of our damnable estate in our selves, and
of the undeserved mercies of God offered in Christ, from which being effectual
arises a desire both to be freed from that damnable estate, and to be made
partakers of that happiness promised in Christ. 3. The invitation of the
hearers, and the stirring of them up, to come out of that woeful estate, and to
accept of Gods mercies in Christ, by the Ministers of the word; who being the
Ambassadors of God in Christ's stead, do beseech you, as if God himself did
entreat you by them, that you would be reconciled unto God. (1 Cor. 5. 18. 20.)

The Holy Ghost having thus knocked at the door of our hearts, does himself in
his good time, open our hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, to assent to, and
to believe the Gospel, By which belief being lively and effectual, we receive
Christ, not only in our judgments by assent, but also in our hearts by an
^arnest desire to be made partakers of him, and in our wills by an earnest
purpose and settled resolution to acknowledge and profess him to be our Lord
and Savior, and to rest upon him for salvation. The Holy Ghost having wrought
this assent, and by it this desire and purpose of applying Christ unto our
selves, and thereby also some beginnings of hope, of the hatred of sin, of
the love of God, and of our neighbor, and of other graces, by which the Image
of God begins to be renewed, and Christ to be formed in us, being yet as it
were Embryones in the womb, he teaches every one of us, who have through his
blessed operation the condition of the promise, to apply the promise to our
selves, and to believe not only that Christ is the Savior of all that do
believe, but also that he is my Savior, that he died for my sins, and rose
again for my justification, so that when the Minister, according to the word,
pronounces this general proposition, whosoever truly believes in Christ has
remission of his sins, and shall be saved, the conscience of every faithful
man may both safely assume, but I through Gods grace do truly believe in
Christ, and also certainly conclude by the testimony of the holy Ghost, bearing
witness with our conscience in the assumption, according to the word in the
proposition, therefore I through the grace of God have remission of sins and
shall be saved. When the holy Ghost has thus taught us to apply the promises
unto our selves, and has sealed us after we have believed, and testified
together with our spirits, that we are the children of God; then it appears,
that we are already born of God, and that we are the sons of God, not only by
regeneration, but also by adoption (Ephesians* 1. 15. Romans 8. 15, 16. Joh. 1. 15,
16.) And being sons, God sends forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts,
crying Abba father Gal. 4. 6. By this faith, first apprehending, and then
applying Christ unto us, we become not only the sons of God, but also members
of Christ; and having union with him as our head, we have communion also with
him, both in respect of his merit unto justification: first before God, and
then in the court of our own conscience; and in respect of his graces unto
sanctification, receiving of his fulness, even grace for grace. (Joh. 1. 16.)

As therefore men are first conceived before they be born, and they are borne
before they are said to lead a life in this world: so we must first be begotten
and born anew in our vocation and regeneration, before we can live unto God
the spiritual life of sanctification. These two therefore were not to be
confounded; sanctification being the end, as of our election, Ephesians. 1. 4. and of
our justification, (Luke 1. 75. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 24.) so also of our
vocation. 1 Thessalonians 4. 7. By our vocation, we are begotten unto God, by
sanctification, we being both begotten and born anew, do live unto GOD. In our
vocation, the spirit of God first draws us unto God: (Joh. 6. 44.) in our
sanctification, we being already drawn, the Spirit of GOD does lead and guide
us in the way which leads to life. (Romans 8. 14. Gal. 5. 18.) Vocation
produces Faith; Faith being begotten, produces sanctification, both habitual
(for the heart is purified by Faith) and actual, for Faith works by love,
producing good works as the fruit both of Faith and Charity. (Act. 15. 9.) I
do not deny, but that Faith is a part of our sanctification, and of our
inherent righteousness: yet this hinders not, but that both it self does
sanctify us, and is also the mother of all other inward graces wherein our
habitual sanctification consists, and of all the works of grace wherein our
actual signification is occupied. For when the Holy Ghost does regenerate us,
he does ingenerate the grace of Faith in us, and by it al other graces*

The second error, That sanctification goes before justification.] The second
(which is a consequent of the former) that sanctification goes before
justification. The contrary whereof I have proved in the discourse, whereunto I
add. 1. That sanctification is the end and fruit of our justification, the
cognizance also and evidence whereby it is known, and therefore a consequent
thereof. (Col. 1. 22. Romans 6. 22.) 2. As we are made siners, first by
imputatio^ of Adams sin, and then being guilty of his transgression, are made
partakers of his corruption* so we are made just, first, by imputation of
Christ's righteousness, and then being justified, we are in some measure made
partakers of those graces, which he received without measure. Again, the
persons of men being sinners in themselves, must be accepted of GOD as
righteous in Christ, before either there^ be qualities or their actions, (which
when they are at the best are defiled with sin) can be acceptable unto GOD.
Therefore we must be justified, before either our qualities or actions can be
holy and righteous before God, Neither can there be any sanctification, without
justification, and reconciliation with God going before in order of nature: as
there is no justification without sanctification accompanying and following the
same. For by the same Faith whereby we are justified, we are also sanctified.
Christ being apprehended by faith to justification, dwells in us by his
Spirit to work in us sanctification, and to whom the merits of Christ
apprehended by Faith are imputed to their justification; to them the virtue of
his death and resurrection is applied by the holy Ghost to the mortifying of
sin, and raising again to newnes of life, to which purpose the Apostle says,
Col. 2. 12. by Faith we are risen with Christ in Baptism. Again, faith, by
which we are justified, in order of nature goes before repentance, wherein our
sanctification consists. It is a resolved Case by Calvin, Penitentiam seu
rescipiscentiam non modo fidem continuo subsequi, sed ex ^a nasci extra
controversiam esse debet. See Calvin* Instit. l. 3. c. 3. sect. 1. 2 and by
Ful^entius, quod vita sancta a fide sumit initium. The same is testified by the
ancient Fathers, as Clem. Alexandr. strom. l. 2. Faith is (...), the first
inclination to salvation, after which follow fear, hope, and (...),
repentance. Ambros. de sacram l. 1. c. 1. In Christiano prima est fides. Chr.
hom. de ^ide spe, and char. fidem esse originem justitia. August. de predest.
SS. c. 7. fides prima datur, ex qua caetera impetrantur. Prosper ad Dubium, 8.
Genev. fides omnium virtutum fundamentum. Greg. Moral. l. 2. 6. c. 13. fidem
primam in cord nostr^ gignit.

If any object that the learned Chamier in his paustrat. l. 10. treats of
sanctification before justification, let him hear his own apology, c 1 n. 2.
Debueramus sanctificationi justificationem preponere, si nostri arbitrij
methodus esset: ut tum re tum ratione priorem; quod ab ea profluat altera, sed
quia Papist^ non distinguunt, cogimur de sanctificatione prius dicere.

The third error, that justification goes before Faith.] 3. The third, that
justification and remission of sins go before faith, which may seem a strange
assertion to be delivered by him, who holds, that sanctification; whereof
faith, as he confesses, is a principal part, goes before justification. But
this absurdity he salveth with a distinction; that he speaks of
justification, not in foro Dei, but in foro conscientiae: and consequently
acknowledges no justifying faith, but that by which we are in our conscience
assured of our justification. But when we speak of justification, as of a
degree of our salvation, it is evident, that justification is to be censidered
as an action of GOD (for it is God that justifies, Romans 8. 30, 33.) whereby he
imputing to a believing sinner the righteousness of Christ apprehended by
faith, absolveth him from his sins, and accepts of him as righteous in
Christ. As for that justification, which is in foro conscientiae, it is not
justification properly, but the knowledge and assurance of it. Neither is that
to be accounted justifying faith properly, by which we are not justified before
God, nor obtain remission of sins. But before and without this faith, by
which we are justified in our consciences, that is, assured of our
justification, we are as he truly says, justified before God.

The 4th error, that all the elect before their conversion, etc. stand actually
reconciled and justified.] The fourth, that all the elect before their
conversion, and before they have faith stand actually reconciled unto God, and
justified before him, may also seem a strange assertion to be uttered by a
godly man. For if this were true, then every one that will persuade himself
that he is elected (which most men are ready to do, who will thank GOD for
their election before they are called) may cast off all care of converting unto
God, of repenting for his sins, of suing unto God for the pardon of them, of
believing in Christ; because without and before either faith or repentance he
has remission of his sins, and stands actually justified before GOD, and
reconciled unto him. And this is the very ground, whereupon carnal Gospellers,
who turn the grace of God into wantonness, do build all their presumptuous
licentiousness, that Christ having dyed for their sins, they need not to dye
to them, that Christ having freed them from sin and from damnation, they may
sin freely, and without danger; that Christ having reconciled them to God,
and purchased Salvation for them, they neither need to sue for reconciliation
or pardon, nor take care of their Salvation: that Christ having fully satisfied
the justice of God by his obedience and sufferings, they neither are obnoxious
to punishment, nor tied to obedience.

But this assertion is most evidently confuted by the Scriptures, which do
teach, that the elect are by nature the children of wrath, servants to sin and
Satan, enemies against God, obnoxio^s in themselves to the fearful curse of
God, as well as others; until they turn unto God, crave pardon of their sins,
and lay hold upon Christ by faith, then indeed, but not till then, they are
reconciled unto God, (Col. 1. 11. Romans 5. 10.) who before were enemies: then,
but not until then, they are actually redeemed, who were before bondslaves;
then, but not until then, they are justified, who before were guilty of sin
and damnation: then, and not until then, their sins are actually pardoned. For
actual pardon is of sins past. ( Orig. in Romans 3. Lib. 3. indulgentia non
futurorum, sed preteritorum criminum datur.) Romans 3. 25. and we may not presume
that our sins are pardoned, before we repent of them, and much less may we
dream, that they are actually remitted, before they be committed. For the
better understanding whereof, we are to consider the merits of Christ, and the
benefits which we have thereby, according to his own intention expressed in the
covenant of grace? the condition whereof is faith,) and are not to extend them
to those, to whom they were not intended, Christ is the Savior of the world,
yet al are not saved, nor to be saved for many still remain in the state of
damnation, he is the Redeemer of mankind, yet all are not actually redeemed,
for many still remain in the servitude of sin and Satan. For they that commit
sin, are the servants of sin. Whereas if the son had made them free, they
should have been free indeed. (2 Cor. 5. 19) Joh 8. 34, 36. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself; and yet very many, as they continue in
their rebellion against God; so the wrath of God abides upon them. Joh. 3. 36.
Neither ought this to seem strange seeing the covenant of grace promises and
assures, neither Salvation, nor remission of sins, nor other benefits of
Christ to all, but only to those that believe. So God loved the world that he
gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have life everlasting* John 3. 16. Mark. 16. 16. he that believes
and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be condemned.
To this purpose consider the diversifying of the phrase used by the Apostle, in
the comparison betwixt the first and the second Adam. Rom, 5. 19. As by the
disobedience of one man (...) the many (that is the multititude of them which
shall be damned) were made sinners: so by the obedience of on* (...) (that is
the multitude of them that shall be saved, he does not say, were made, but)
shall be made righteous. The reason of which diversity is this; because the
Apostle had respect to all those elect, who as yet have not believed, either
because as yet they were not, or as yet are not, or because as yet they were
not, or yet are not called. For it is necessary that all men should confess
and acknowledge themselves to be sinners in Adam ab origin, from their first
being. For by generation the sin of Adam is actually communicated to all his
posterity; and no sooner are they partakers of the humane nature, then they do
participate in his sin. But we may not say, that the righteousness or
obedience of Christ is communicated to all from their beginning, but only (I
speak after the manner of the Scriptures, of those which are adulti) to those
that believe. Neither are they in their generation, or before, made partakers
of Christ's righteousness, but in their regeneration. That no man therefore
should neglect the benefit of justification, as though he had already obtained
it, before his conversion or effectual calling, or regeneration in which faith
is ingenerated by the Holy Ghost in the souls of the elect; he speaks in the
future tense; that men should understand, that they are not borne just or
justified* but that they shall be justified, so soon as they turning unto GOD,
shall believe in Christ, and that they are just, nonnat^sed renati, not born,
but born anew, wherefore before we ought to presume that we are justified, we
must be called, converted* regenerated. For whom GOD has elected, them has he
called* according to his purpose; and whom he has so called* them, and no
other has he justified, Romans 8. 30.

Thus then we are to conceive of Christ's merits, and the benefits which we have
thereby: that howsoever our Savior Christ did in the days of his flesh
meritoriously redeem and save men, paying a price of ransom sufficient for
all, and fully satisfying the justice of GOD in the behalf of all that shall be
saved: yet notwithstanding none are actually redeemed, or reconci^ed, or
justified, but they only to whom the merits of Christ are applied; and they are
applied only to those that believe (I speak of those which are adulti, for to
elect infants, dying in their infancy, they are applied by the Holy Ghost)
neither can any be assured that they truly believe, but such as repent of
their sins* and make conscience of their ways.

This learned man therefore should have distinguished between^ the mer^t of
redemption, and actual redemption: even as well as between the merit of
Salvation, and the actual possession thereof: Christ merited our redemption,
and Salvation long since; yea his merit thereof has ever been in force since
the beginning of the world: (Apoc. 13. 8.) but yet none are actually made
partakers of redemption, but such as to whom it is appyed, that is to those
that truly believe, for they only receive it, and to them only, according to
the Covenant of grace it was intended. Otherwise, he might say, that all the
elect are actually saved, for whom Christ purchased eternal life; who
notwithstanding are not saved, so much as in hope, until they do truly
believe. And if all the elect be actually justified before God, because Christ
did merit their justification, why does he not say in like manner, that all the
elect are actually sanctified: seeing Christ was made unto us* of GOD, not
only righteousness, (1 Cor. 1. 30.) and redemption, but also sanctifycation;
and has as well merited our sanctification for us, as our justification.
Again, what benefits we obtain by Christ we receive them by Faith: and
therefore in the Scriptures, the same benefits which we receive from Christ,
are ascribed to Faith; by which Christ and his merits are ours; by which also
Christ dwells in us, Ephesians. 3 17. we live by Christ, we live by Faith, Gal* 2.
20. by Christ we have remission of sins* by Faith we obtain remission, Act.
10. 43. 26. 18. we are justified by Christ, we are justified by Faith. Romans 3.
28. By Christ we are made the sons of God; by faith we are made the sons of
GOD, Joh. 1. 12. and so in the rest, and therefore to imagine that we are
justified before GOD without Faith, is a dream.

Moreover this assertion cannot stand with the perpetual Doctrine of the
Apostle Paul* who teaches that we are justified before GOD by Faith, therefore
not before, nor without Faith. By faith, says he, without works, that is, by
the righteousness of Christ apprended by Faith, and not by inherent
righteousness. Neither does he in those places speak of justification in the
Court of Conscience, whereby we are assured of our justification; for as before
men we are justified (Jam. 2. ^4.) that is, declared and known to be just by
good works; so much more by our good works (by which we are to make our
election (2 Pet 1. 10.) our calling, our justification sure) we are justified
in our own Conscience, that is, assured of our justification* And to conclude,
this assertion is such a (...) Protestant nor Papist did ever hold, that a man
who is come to years, is actually justified before GOD, before and without
faith.

The fifth er^our, that Faith is not the mother grace*

5. The fifth, that faith is not the root nor the mother of other graces, and
that the soul is not disposed to believe, sooner then to love GOD, or our
neighbor, or to produce the act of any other grace. But this I have
sufficiently disproved in the discourse, showing evidently that as without
faith there can be no other grace; so not only from it all other graces do
spring, but also according to the measure and degree of it, is the measure and
degree of all other graces. We are not disposed to love GOD as we ought, until
we be by faith persuaded of GODS love toward us; we cannot hope for the
performance of Gods promises to us, unless by faith we are persuaded that they
belong unto us: we cannot trust in GOD nor rejoice in him, unless by faith we
are persuaded of his goodness and bounty toward us, and so ^n the rest, and
what is more plain, then that love, which is the fulfilling in the whole law
proceeds from Faith unfeigned, as being the fruit thereof. (1 Timothy 1. 5.)
Chrysostom. and Theophilact call faith (...) seil. (...) the mother and
fountain of all graces, and Calvin, (Justit. l. 3. c. 2. sect 41. sect. 42. c.
3. sect. 1.) sola est fic'es, quae in nobis charitatem primum generat, it is
faith only which first ingendereth charity in us, it begets also hope and
newness of life as he says.

But to omit other testimonies, St. Peter seems to acknowledge this truth, 2
Pet. 1. 2, 3. where he prays for them to whom he w^iteth, that grace and
peace be multiplied unto them, by the knowledge of God and Jesus our Lord,
according as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain to
life and godliness, (...) by the acknowledgement of him that has called us,
etc. that is by faith.

The sixth error that Faith is assiance.

6. The sixth, that faith is assiance, and so to be defined; and that trusting
to the promise is the proper act of faith as it justifies. etc. But I have
proved, that faith is not affiance, nor affiance faith But a fruit^ of faith as
well as hope and that by faith we have affiance. Ephesians. 3. 12. whereunto I add,
that the trust in GODS promises to be in particular performed to us, is not
faith, but ^ope. Yea but promises, faith he, are both true and good, therefore
our assent to them is with adherence, affiance and trust. Answ. The promises
are true, the things promised are good, we believe the promise, we hope for the
thing promised. As contrariwise Gods threatenings are also true, and the things
threatened evil. as therefore he that believes the threatening to be true,
fears (if it be applyable to himself) the thing threatened, and yet this
fear is not of the nature of faith, but a fruit and consequent thereof: so he
that believes a promise to be true, and can apply it to himself, trusts and
hops for the thing promised, which trust in respect of the promise, is no
more of the nature of faith, then fear in respect of the threatening.

But that affiance is of the essence of justifying faith, he will make good by
diverse reasons; first, from the phrases of believing, (John. 1. 12. Romans 10.
1^) ^s (Rom, 4. 5. Act. 16. 31.) (...) or (Ephesians 1. 12.) (...) that is, in or
upon which imply affiance.

A. That as I said in the discourse, affiance is such an unseperable fruit of
faith, that, sometimes it is employed in the phrase of bli^ving in Christ. For
that phrase may and sometimes does imply three acts; the first of assent, that
he is the Savi^^r of all that believe in him: which ass (...) it be lively and
effectual is the proper act of that faith whereby we are justified before God,
and in this sense the phrase, of beli^ving in him, is ordinarily used in the
Scriptures, yea sometimes it is attributed to those, who have assented only by
a bare historical, and temporary Faith, which is the Faith of hypocrites, and
all worldlings, as John, 2. 23. ( To believe on him and one his name is all
one, John. 3. 8.) and 12. 42. compared with John. 5. 44. John. 4. 39. Many of
the Samaritans believed (...) in Christ, upon the report of the woman; who,
being confirmed in their faith by hearing himself, say to the woman, 42. we
believe no more because of thy report; for we our selves have heard him. Now
what was her r^port? that he had told her all things that ever she did, and
therefore that he was the Christ. This is all that they believed, when they
were said to have believed in CHRIST, And what was their Faith, which was
confirmed by hearing himself? that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of
the world. And this, as I said, is the ordinary signification of the phrase in
the New Testament, see John. 7. 31. 8. 30. 31. 33. 11. 26. 27. Act 8. 37. So
the Hebrew is joined with belief, not only in God, but in his Prophets also;
not that we are to put assiance in them, but to give credit to them as to the
messengers of God, Ex. 14. 31. 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. The second act is of
application, when believing truly that he is the Savior of all that believe, I
therefore believe that he is my Savior: which is the act of that special
faith, by which we are justified in our conscience, in which sense the phrase
seems to be used 1 John. 5. 13. in the later clause, but in the first part of
that verse in the former sense. so John 20. 28, 29. Gal. 2. 20.

The third act is of affiance, that because I do believe not only that he is
the Savior of the world, but also my Savior, therefore I rest upon him for
salvation, and thus it seems to be used John 14. 1. But this is not the act
of faith, as it justifies us before God, nor yet the proper act of the
special faith, which does justify us in our conscience, but a fruit and
consequent thereof. For if I truly believe that Christ is the Savior of all
that believe, then must I consequently believe that he is my Savior, (for the
general always includes the particulars) and if I do truly believe that he
is my Savior, then shall I consequently put my trust in him for salvation. Or
more plainly, to use his own terms; he says, that the proper act of faith, as
it justifies, consists in trust, or relyance upon the promise for our own
particular, when the soul depends wholly, or trusts perfectly in the
promise, for remission of sins, and for salvation, But say I, a man cannot at
all, and much less wholly and perfectly trust in the promise to be performed
to himself, unless he be first persuaded, and in some measure assured, that
the promise does belong unto himself, which persuasion is the act of special
Faith. A man cannot be assured at all, that the promise belongs to himself,
unless he have the condition of the promise, which is a true justifying faith,
for the promise is not made to all, but to those that truly believe, Therefore
I must have a justifying Faith, which is the condition of the promise before I
can be as^ured that the promise belongs to me. I must be persuaded that it
belongs to me, before I can confidently trust that it shall be performed to me.

But let us consider his testimonies. For he alleges John. 1. 12. Where to
believe in CHRIST is the exposition of receiving Christ. Now we receive Christ,
first, by assent, and then by application, whereof assiance is a consequent.

2. Romans 10. 14. How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed?
where the phrase is used, as verse 11. whosoever believes on him, shall not be
ashamed, and that as the proof of V. 9. 10, If thou shall with thy mouth
confess the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised
him from the dead, thou shall be saved.: For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness etc. for the scripture says, whosoever believes on him, etc.
For (...) he cites, 1 Romans 4. 5. he that believes on him that justifies the
ungodly (as Abraham did) his Faith is counted righteousness. (verse. 5.) Now of
Abraham it is said, that he believed God, (verse. 3.) (...) and it was counted
to him for righteousness. 2. Act. 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus, says
Paul to the Iaylour which he performed, verse. 34. (...) believing God. for he
quoteth Ephesians. 1. 12. where the word is (...) who have before hoped in Christ, he
might more truly have quoted, Mark. 1. 15 though against himself, (...),
believe the Gospel: and the like he might have alleged for (...) Luke 24. 25.
slow of heart to believe (...) all that the Prophets have spoken.

His second argument is taken from the opposition of Faith to distrust or
doubting; where as he confounds Faith and affiance so he confounds also
doubting (which is opposite to Faith) and distrust which is opposed to
affiance; between which there is a great difference; for doubting is not
contrary to as^iance, but to assent; for to doubt is to withold the assent,
the places which he quoteth, do both concern doubting Romans 4. 20. Iam. 1. 6.
in which sense the word (...) is often used in the Scriptures, (Matthew. 21. ^1.
Mark. 12. 23. Act. 10. 20. 11. 12. Romans 14. 23.) but never in the signification
of distrust.

I deny not, but that distrust, and distrustful fear are Boeth. in Top.
Ci^er. Re P^gnantia dicuntur contrariorum consequentia^adalterum contrariem
relata. vigilare and dormi^e contraria ^ int, stertere a item et vigilare sunt
rep^gnantia.
repugnant to faith: but that proves not faith to be affiance, but because
affiance is a necessary consequent of Faith, hence it is, that distrustful
fear, which is want of affiance proceeds from doubting, which is want of
Faith, Matthew. 8. 26. Why are ye fearful Oye of little Faith, Mark. 5. 36.
fear not, only believe.

His third argument from 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, etc is to
little purpose; for although in the words following the Apostle says, I am
persuaded, that is, I believe, that he is able to keep (...), my depositum, or
that which I have committed to his trust; yet this proves not, that the verb
(...), I have believed, implies trust, unless he understand the words, as if
the Apostle had said (...) I know to whom I have entrusted or concredited my
self. But that is another use of the word, much differing from that which is
in question, signifying as much as concrediting, or committing to ones trust,
and is as well attributed to God, as to man. John 2. 23. 24. Many believed in
Christ, to whom he would not, (...) entrust himself. And in this sense the
word is sometimes used, both in the active voice with the dative of the person,
and accusative of the thing, (John. 2. 14.) as Luke 16. 11. and also in the
passive, and that also with the accusative of the thing. Romans 3. 2. 1 Cor. 9.
17. Gal. 2. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 11. Tit. 1. 3.

The seventh error, that there is no other justifying faith, but that by which
we are justified in our conscience.

7. The seventh, which I take to be the original of some other of his unsound
opinions, that he holds no other justifying faith, but that whereby we are
justified in the court of our conscience. For before God all the elect, as he
teaches, stand actually justi^ied before, and without faith; so indeed they
do before this faith, and so it is also true, that sanctification goes before
this justi^ication; and remission of sins before thi^ says* for how can a
man be assured of that which i^ not?

The proper act of (...) faith by which we are justified in our Consci^nce
(that is) as I understand it, assured in some measure of our justification, is,
as he teaches, to trust wholly and perfectly to the promise of forgiveness of
sin and eternal life, for remission and Salvation. For by this faith as he
teaches, the Lord gives us assurance of our justification by Christ's
righteous^esse, whereupon follows peace of conscience, and that kind of
^iducia, Which we call ( says he) assurance or full persuasion of the pardon
of our sins, this is a fruit of the other ^iducia or trusting to the promise it
self, wherein stands the proper act of justifying Faith. And it follows not
always presently, but after sometime, happily a long time, which he speaks for
the comfort of those, who doubt they have no faith, because they have not that
full assurance.

Here diverse things are to be misliked. 1. That he makes affiance the proper
act of justifying faith, which I have already disproved.

2. That he holds, that there may be a full affiance, whereby a man may
wholly and perfectly trust to the promise, without the like assurance. But this
is a manifest error borrowed from the Papists; who hope well of the remission
of sins, but dare not believe it. For this full affiance in trusting wholly
and perfectly to the promise for the performance of it to a man's self, is that
which the Apostle calls (...) the assurance of hope, which ever presupposes
(...) (...) the assurance of faith, where, by the way, you may take notice of a
threefold (...) mentioned in the Scriptures: the first is (1 Col. 2. 3.) (...)
the assurance or full persuasion of understanding to the acknowledgement of the
mystery of GOD, and the Father, and of Christ, this is the plerophory of
assent, when a man understanding the mystery of the Gospel, gives full assent
thereto, that is true, and that Jesus the Son of the blessed Virgin, is the
eternal Son of GOD, and the Savior of all that truly believe in him. The
second is (...) the assurance of faith, when thou applying the promise to they
self, do assuredly believe, not only that Christ is the Savior of all
that believe, but also that he is thy Savior. The third is (...) the assurance
of hope; when thou being fully persuaded, that Christ is not only the Savior
of the faithful, but that he is also thy Savior; do assuredly trust and
hope to be saved by him. Every one of these plerophories or assurances are
infallible in their kind, nec falsum iis subesse potest: but this is absolutely
to be understood of the first, the object whereof is the word of GOD, which is
principium ^idei (...) the second is not absolutely true, as a principle like
the former, but as a conclusion is necessarily and infallibly true, concessis
praemissis. For if this proposition be true, that Christ is the Savior of all
that truly believe (which is the undoubted word of GOD: and if this assumption
be true also, but I through GODS mercy do truly believe, (which is certainly
true in all the faithful:) then this conclusion cannot be false; therefore
Christ is my Savior; whereupon follows the plerophory of hope; that seeing
he is my Savior, therefore I do assuredly hope for salvation by him.

3 That he makes the assurance of Faith to be a consequent of that assurance
of trust, which is nothing else but (...) the assurance of hope, the contrary
whereof is true, for as hope is a consequent and fruit of Faith; so from the
assurance of faith proceeds the assurance of affiance and hope; and according
to the measure and degree of that, is the measure and degree of this. Neither
is it possible, that a man should have a full affiance wholly and perfectly to
trust to the promise to ^e performed to himself, who is not first fully
assured, that the promise does belong unto himself. And therefore it is but a
cold comfort, to be given to a man distressed in Conscience, to tell him, that
if he have affiance to trust wholly and perfectly to the promise for remission
of sin, he has Faith, though he have not full assurance. But miserable
comforters are they, who teach (as this man does not) that where is not full
assurance, there is no Faith. But if we desire, to minister true comfort to the
distressed Conscience perplexed with doubtings concerning Faith; we must
unteach these Doctrines, either that justifying Faith is an assurance of
remission, and much less a full assurance; or that it is affiance, much less
a full affiance, trusting wholly to the promise for the performance of it to a
man's self; which cannot be had, unless thou have the like assurance that the
promise does belong to thee. For indeed that faith, by which we are justified
before GOD, is neither assurance properly, nor affiance, for assurance is the
second degree of Faith, by which we are not justified before GOD, but in the
Court of our own Conscience; and affiance is a fruit and consequent of both.
Ask then the party distressed this question. Do thou believe, that the
promise of the Gospel concerning remission and salvation does belong to thee?
If thou do, then thou have assurance, that Christ is thy Savior, and that by
him thou have remission, and that by him thou shall be saved. If he cannot
affirm, that he believes the promise to belong unto him, never go about to
persuade him, that he trusts to the performance of the promise unto himself.
But ask him again, do thou truly believe, that Jesus the son of the
blessed Virgin is the eternal son of GOD and Savior of all that tr^^y
believe in him? If he say he does so, ^^ll him then thou have the condition of
the promise, therefore thou may, and thou must undoubtedly conclude, that he
is thy Savior, and that thou shall be saved by him. If h^ say, (...) doubts,
whether he does truly believe, that Christ is the Savior, because many say
they believe, who do not truly believe. Ask him again, do thou believe that
in thy self and by nature thou art no better then a firebrand of hell, a
vassal o^ sin and Satan, subject to ^ternall death and damnation? To this
no doubt he will say* Yes, say then it seems you believe the sentence of the
law concluding you under the curse, but do you not also believe the Gospel,
that notwithstanding (...) guilt of your own Conscience accusing, and the
sentence of the law condemning you, you shall be blessed, if you believe in
Christ? This also, if he have any grace, he will confess, as being the
express Doctrine of the Gospel, ask him then, is there any other me^n^s,
whereby you may hope to be saved, but by Christ? He will say, he renounceth all
other means, well then, you acknowledge (you may say) that in your self you
are a wretched sinner, but yet notwithstanding by Christ you shall be happy* if
you shall believe in him, tell me then, have not you earnestly desired to come
out of that damnable estate, wherein you were by nature, and to be partaker of
that happiness, purchased by CHRIST for all that believe in him? He will say
he has, and that he has often expressed this his desire by hearty prayer. But
you believing (may you say) and desiring those things, have you not also
resolved to acknowledge and profess CHRIST to be the only Savior, and to
rest upon him alone for salvation, renouncing all other means, and to
acknowledge him to be your Lord, and therefore to obey him, and serve him,
making conscience of all your ways? All this have I done (will he say) and yet
I have not assurance. But say I, if thou have done all this, then thou have a
true justifying Faith, for to believe in Christ is to receive him: and tho^
have received him not only in thy judgment by a firm and lively assent, but
also in thy heart and will, by an earnest desire and settled purpose of
applycation, by which thou have received him to be thy Savior. Hereupon I
infer, that thou have the condition of the promise, and therefore that the
promise does belong unto thee, and that thou believing truly, that Jesus is the
Savior of all that believe in him, he is thy Savior, and therefore need
not, yea thou ought not to doubt of thy salvation, for by refusing to apply
the promise to thy self, when thou have the condition thereof, thou make GOD
a liar. 1 John 5. 10. If thou will not believe me, yet believe the Apostle
Paul, Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thine heart, that GOD raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved. For with the heart, man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth, confession is made to Salvation. Believe St. John, whose first Epistle
was written to this very purpose, that those who truly believe that Jesus
Christ is the Savior, might have assurance that he is their Savior. 1 John 5.
13. For so he writes in the same Chapter, verse. 1. Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ, is borne of GOD, and verse. 5. Whatsoever is borne of GOD
overcommeth the world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the World, even
our Faith, who is he that overcommeth the World, but he that beli^veth that
JESUS is the son of GOD? Believe our Savior himself; For, if being asked
with the Apostles what you think he is, thou shall answer with St. Peter, Thou
art the CHRIST the son of the living GOD, he will pronounce thee blessed.
Matthew. 16. 16. If for all this thou can not gather assurance, know then, that
the premises being granted, thou can not but have assurance; unles^e thou will deny the conclusion, which cannot possibly be false, the premises being
true.

But for thy better assurance, tell me, what you are to think of a man
believing truly that Jesus is the Christ, yet in respect of his spiritual
estate is so poor, that he is as it were a mere beggar, who having nothing of
his own, whereby he might hope to be saved, dependdeth wholly upon the mercies
of GOD, and merits of Christ? Even as beggars, who having nothing of their
own, depend upon the Alms of well-disposed people, what think you of him,
who believing that Christ is the Savior, is not yet assured, that he is freed
from that damnable estate wherein he is by nature, but mourns in the sense
and acknowledgement of his woeful condition, desiring to be freed from it? What
think you of him, who truly believing that Jesus is the Christ, but not yet
assured of his justification, does therefore hunger and thirst after
righteousness? Whatsoever you think of them, or whatsoever they be in their
own sense, they are justified before GOD. And that I prove thus. Whosoever are
blessed, are justified, and contrariwise, but all believers though they be
beggars in Spirit, though they mourn, though they do but hunger and thirst
after righteousness, are blessed by the testimony of our Savior himself,
Matthew. 5. 3, 4. 6. Where directing his speech to them that believe, verse. 1, 2.
Compared with Luke 6. 23, 21, 22. He says, Blessed are (...) the beggars in
Spirit, blessed are they that mourn^, blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness.

2. This assertion cannot stand with the ort^odo^ doctrine of justification by
faith. For that teaches the justification of a sinner, or as the word
signifies of an ungodly person before God, this justification is neither of an
ungodly person, but of a man already justified before God, and also sanctified;
neither is it before God, but in the court of conscience, that justification is
an action of God, acquitting the sinner, and accepting of him as righteous by
imputation of Christ's righteousness* in this there is no such matter, in that
we are taught, that by ^aith a sinner does receive remission of sins, and
that he is to believe to that end, that he may obtain pardon* and to the same
end is both to repent of his sin, and to sue for pardon, by this doctrine are
taught, that a man has his sins actually forgiven; not only before he
believe or repent, or sue for pardon, but also before he commit them; there we
are taught that a man is justified before God by faith; here that a man is
justified (...) and without Faith; there we are taught, that faith does
justify, not as it is an habit or quality inherent, or as a part of inherent
righteousness; but only as the hand receiving Christ; who is our
righteousness, and is therefore said to justify, because the object which it
receives, does justify. But according to this new doctrine, faith does neither
justify, as the hand to receive Christ unto justification, not in respect of
the object, but as a part of the general habit of grace infused, not
justifying a sinner before God by apprehension of Christ's righteousness, but
assuring the party already sanctified and justified of his justification and
salvation: in that we are taught, that we are justified by faith alone, but in
this, we are justified, that is, assured of justification, not only by faith,
but by good works, and all other means, by which we are to make our calling
and election sure.

The eighth error, that assent is not the act of justifying faith.

8. The eighth, that faith, as it is an assent, does not justify; the contrary
whereof (speaking of a true, lively and effectual assent) I have fully, and
(as I hope) sufficiently proved. But let us examine his proofs the first is
this. The Act of justifying faith is supernatural, Ephesians, 2. 8, this assent to
the truth of the Gospel, concerning salvation by Christ, is not supernatural.
ergo. I deny the assumption, and affirm, that the true, lively, and effectual
assent is supernatural, and cannot be had without the help of the holy Ghost,
as being a proper work of the holy Ghost, when he does regenerate any of us, No
man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, (1 Cor. 12. 3.) but by the holy Ghost, And
who knows not, that it is the proper work of the holy Ghost in the ministry
of the Gospel, to open the hearts of the elect, as he did the heart of Lydia.
(Act. 16.) to assent unto the word? To use arguments to persuade the hearers to
embrace the Gospel, and to receive Christ, may be the work of the Minister;
but to persuade the hearer thereunto, is the work of the holy Ghost. Again,
that whereby we become the sons of God, is not a work of nature, but of the
regenerating spirit, by this lively assent we become the sons of God. For, By
this effectual assent, as I have showed, we receive CHRIST, But as many as
received him, to them he gave this power to become the sons of God, (John. 1.
12. 13.) even to them that believe o^ his name, which are begotten or borne not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GOD.
Would you therefore know who is borne of GOD? Whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, (John. 5. 1.) is borne of God.

But the assumption he proves thus: Whatsoever the understanding by the only
light of nature judges to be honest and good, that the will can desire or will
by the only strength of Nature, But by the only light of nature the
understanding judges that it is an honest thing to believe Gods authority
revealing any thing unto us.

Therefore (...) will by the only strength of nature ^ay d^sir^ this act of
believing; and so cons^quently there is no need of grace to m^ve the Will (...)
command the understanding.

If a^y man imagine, that this conclusion does contradict mine assertion,
affirming such an assent, as I have spoken of, to be ^aith, he must understand,
that I speak not of a ba^^ assent to whatsoever God reveals unto us; but the
assent must be ^hus qualified. First it must be a willing or voluntary assent,
For the understanding whereof, we must know, that what soever the understanding
conceives and judges to be true and good, that the will does receive as true
and good; for the will is intellectus extensus, And such is the natural
harmony between the understanding and the will that as the will follows the
judgment and resolution of the practicke understanding; so the will having
received for true and good, that which the understanding has so conceived, the
mind or the reasonable soul does both assent to it as true, and approve it as
good. So that the assent and approb^tion of the mind is an act both of the
understanding and of the will. But how the will which naturally follows the
direction of the understanding, should (as he speaks) command the
understanding to assent or approve, I do not conceive. But on the contrary, I
suppos^, that the mind many times does assen^, not only without the command,
but also without the consent of the will: as namely, when the understanding of
a man or devil, does know a thing to be tru^, but does not conceive it to be
good, but hurtful and pernicious to himself. That ther^, is a God who is the
Iu^ge of the world, that this God is just, that he has prepared hell for the
wicked: the devils, and wicked men do conceive and know to be true and
because they cannot d^ny (...), they do acknowledge, and after a sort, assent
unto (...): but yet this truth they do abhor, and with horror they do
believe it, Iam. 2. 19. The legion of (...) did know our Savior CHRIST, and
confess him to ^ee the Son o^ Go^* (...) come to torment them before their
time, Mark 8* (...). so that the wicked, bot^ men and Ang^l^ do many times
believe that, which they do not willingly assent unto, but abhor, and wish
it were otherwise. But the faith of Gods children is a willing assent.

Secondly, it is a true, lively and effectual assent. For in Divinity we are
said to believe; and by Faith to know no more then we believe effectually, and
know by a lively faith. Now where there is a true, lively, and effectual
faith, it works a disposition in us answerable to that which we believe and
know. The wicked do believe after a sort, that there is a God, that he is
just, and good, that he is infinite in essence, power and wisdom, etc. that
JESUS the Son of the blessed Virgin, is the Savior of the world, etc. Yet
none of all this do they truly and effectual believe. For if they did
believe inded; that there is a GOD, they would not deny him in their deeds,
behaveing themselves as if there were no God. If they did truly believe that he
is good, yea goodness it self, they would love him; if just, they would fear
him; if omnipresent, they would walk before him; if omnipotent or
all-sufficient, they would either trust in him, o^ fear him, if omniscient,
they would not play the hypocrites before him. If they did truly believe, that
JESUS is the Savior, they would desire to be made partakers of his merits,
they would be careful to apply them to themselves, they would rest upon him
for salvation, they would obey and serve him as their Lord, But he that says
he knows him, that is, believes in him, and has no desire nor care to keep
his commandments, (John 2. 1.) he is alyar (says Sant John) and there is no
truth in him. That faith therefore, which is not lively and effectual, but a
dead faith, as Saint James calls it, (Jam. 2. 10.) is no more to be accounted
a true faith, then the carcass* or counterfeit of a man is a true man.

3. The formal object of this assent, as it justifies, is not every truth
reavled of God (though it believes whatsoever God has revealed in his word)
but that only which (...) is called truth of God, (John 5. 33. 18 37. 1 Timothy
2. 4.) that is, the Gospel, which is the truth of GOD in CHRIST, or his truth
concerning salvation by CHRIST. Now to give a willing, lively, and effectual
assent to his truth, far exceeds the strength of corrupted nature. John. 6.
44. Matt. 16. 16. 17.

These things thus premised, I come to his argumentation, and first to the
proposition, which if it were universally true, as it is propounded (
whatsoever the understanding by the only light of Nature judges to be honest;
that the will can desire by the only strength of Nature) then might I as
lawfully assume, and conclude thus, to the great comfont of the Pelagians and
Arminians* (whom in diverse other points he does worthily,) But by the only
light of nature the understanding judges it to be an honest and a good thing
to believe in God and to obey him, to believe in him, I say, not only as true
in his word, but also as faithful in his promises; and consequently to trust
in him, for the performance thereof; likewise to obey God commanding us any
duty, as namely to turn unto him by unfeigned repentance* and to lay hold
upon CHRIST by a true faith; therefore by the only strength of nature, the
will may desire or will any of these acts; namely to turn unto God by unfeigned
repentance, to lay hold upon CHRIST by a true faith to (...) unto God for the
performance of his promises to us, which in his conceit is the very act of
Faith, as it justifies.

I come to the assumption: where, I confess, in a confused generality, the
understanding, by the only light of nature, judges it an honest and good
thing to believe what God reveals indefinitely, but when you come to the
particular object of justifying Faith, viz. that JESUS CHRIST is the So^^e of
GOD, and Savior of all that believe in him; this either they will deny to be
revealed by GOD; as to the Jews the preaching of CHRIST crucified was a
stumbling block* (1 Cor. 1. 23.)* and to the Greeks foolishness: or if they
do give a kind of assent unto it, yet they neither do or can believe it by a
lively and effectual assent.

His second reason. That is no act of justifying faith which is f^^nd in
devils, heretics, hypocrites and reprobases.

But this assent to divine revelations; because of GODS authority, is to be
found in devils, heretics, hypocrites, and repr^b^tes.

Therefore this assent is no act of justifying faith.

Answ. The proposition is not univ^^sally true; for so much of faith as is
found in the wicked, either men or Angels, is common to them with the faithful
and elect, and without it there can be no faith. If therefore justifying Faith
do assent to divine revelations, because of GODS authority, and there can be
no justifying faith without this assent; then it follows, that to assent is
an act of justifying Faith.

But I answer to the assumption, that this assent (meaning a willing, lively,
and effectual assent to the truth of GOD in Christ) is not to be found in
devils whose assent is not so much as willing, but with horror, even to that
which they abhor, as himself confesses; not in heretics, who, as they are
heretics, dissent from the truth. For though that assertion of the Papists,
that any one act of infidelity bereaveth a man of faith, be wicked and
desperate; yet this is true, that howsoever the proper object of faith, as it
justifies, is Christ: notwithstanding by the same faith by the which we are
justified, we believe, not only all other articles of the Christian faith, but
also whatsoever GOD has revealed in his word: and whosoever does refuse to
believe whatsoever GOD has revealed in his word, he has not a true faith. Nor
in hypocrites and reprobates, whose seeming faith is neither lively, nor true,
but dead and counterfeit, not formata, but informis. Indeed this distinction of
faith, that it is formata or informis, according to the meaning of the
schoolmen and Papists is to be rejected, and that in two respects, first,
because they propound it as a distinction of a true justifying faith, when as
it is not possible, that that faith which wants his form, and which is dead,
and therefore has not his true being, should justify: neither is it possible,
that that Faith should be (...) that is, effectual, by an active efficacy, as
namely to justify, which is called actus secundus, which has not the formal,
(...) which is called actus primus. Secondly, because the Papists in this
distinction imply, that Charity is the form of faith, and as it were the soul
thereof, which they seem to ground on James 2. 26. For how can one habit be
the form of another, especially such an habit, as is the fruit and consequent
of the other? For Charity which is the end of the law, (1 Timothy 1. 5.)
proceeds from faith unfayned. For when we are by faith persuaded of GODS
love toward us in Christ then are we moved to love GOD, and our neighbor for
GODS sake, and the more we are assured of GODS love, the more is our heart
inflamed with fervent love toward GOD, as I have showed. And if the habit of
Charity cannot be the form of faith, then much less can good works, which are
the outward fruits both of Faith and Charity; or as the Apostle speaks of
faith quae operatur per charitatem, which works by love, Gal. 5. 6.

Neither does the Apostle St. James compare works to the soul, but to the
breath, as the word (...) (which is derived from (...) signifying to breath)
does properly signify, and so is used in many places, where it is called the
Spirit of the mouth, and the Spirit of the nostrils, so that the meaning of St.
James is, as the body without the breath is dead, even so Faith without good
works (which are as it were the breathing of a lively Faith) is dead. Not that
ever it lived, but because it is without life; as many things are said to be
blind which never saw, and dumb which never spoke.

But howsoever this distinction in the Popish sense is to be rejected: yet it
cannot be denied, but that as knowledge is either literal* which is an idle
knowledge swimming in the brain, but not working on the heart and Conscience;
or Spiritual, which is a powerful and operative knowledge: so faith, is
^ither a true lively and effectual, or else a counterfeit and a dead Faith,
which some call a bare historical Faith, answerable to the literal knowledge.
The former is called by the Apostle (...) in diverse places, and Gal. 5. 6. It
is said to be (...) ^fficax, effectual (as that prayer which avails much,
is called (...) Jam. 5. 16.) or effectually working, or active, having in it
duplicent (...) a double act, both the first and the second, the first, which
is as it were the form, whereby it truly is, and in respect whereof it may be
called formata, which as Solomon speaks of other graces, (Pro. 3. 21.)
Tushijah, the very essence and entity, the soundness and integrity of it, in
respect whereof it is called (...) (...) and this is the inward (...) whereby
it lives and is effectual, having efficacy in it self. The other, which is
actus secundus, whereby, it is lively, active, and effectual, in bringing
forth the acts and operations or the fruits and effects of Faith. In respect of
the former, it is said to have root; whereby I understand that apprehensive and
attractive power of Faith in apprehending and receiving Christ; in respect of
the latter, it is said to be fruitful and working by love; the latter, which
is not unfeigned, is counterfeit, having neither root, Luke 8. 13. Nor fruit,
and therefore is, as St James says, dead, (Jam. 2. 20. 26.) Now as the
counterfeit of a man is not truly a man, though called by his name; so this
counterfeit and dead Faith, which is the faith of hypocrites (though it have a
name of faith) is not faith (...) indeed and truly, but aequivoce; and being
not a true faith; is not Faith, for ens and verum convertuntur, and in this
sense it may well be called informis.

That faith therefore which is common to devils, to heretics, to hypocrites*
and reprobates, is not true, but counterfeit; not lively, but dead; not
formata, but informis.

And thus have I defended that necessary, and as I am persuaded most
comfortable truth, which I delivered in the Discourse concerning the certainty
of Salvation.

FINIS.

