THE FORM AND ORDER OF THE CORONATION OF CHARLES THE SECOND; King of Scotland,
England, France, and Ireland: As it was acted and done at SCOONE, The first day
of January, 1651.

1. CHRON, 29. 23. Then Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord as King, in
stead of David his father, and prospered, and all Israel obeyed him.

PROVE. 20. 8. A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away
all evil with his eyes.

PROVE. 25. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall
be established in Righteousne^^



ABERDENE, Imprinted by James Brown, 1651.

Hollars Habits, or the Nobility in their Creation Robes. The Original Plates.
Engraved by W. Hollar, 1664.
The Creation Robe of the Prince of Wales Printed fer John Be^l^^ at (...) in
Cernhill.



CAROLUS Secundus Dei Gratia, Anglioe, Scotioe, Francioe, et Hibernioe Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.


Aspice ^uem Reducem Pictas Patientia P^^sum, DAVIDI CAROLUM fecit (...) parem.
Regius en etiam Psaltes, cui Musica Temple. Et Ch^rus and C^^tus sic placuere
Secri. Hujus ut auspi^i^s merito jungantur in ^^um Hymnus Iessiadae,
Maeonidaeq* Meles. A: Her^^^^^


CORONATION OF CHARLES THE SECOND, King of Scotland, England, France, and
Ireland, Done at SCOONE, The first day of January, 1651.
FIrst, the Kings Majesty, in a Princes Robe, was conducted from his
Bedchamber, by the Constable on his right hand, and the Marishall on his left
hand, to the Chamber of Presence; and there, was placed in a Chair, under a
cloth of State, by the Lord of Angus, Chamberlain appointed by the King, for
that day, and there, after a little repose, the Noblemen, with the
Commissioners of Barons, and Burroughes, entered the Hall, and presented
themselves before his Majesty.

There-after, the Lord Chancellor spoke to the King, to this purpose; Sir,
Your good Subjects desire You may be crowned, as the righteous, and lawful
Heir of the Crown of this Kingdom; that You would maintain Religion, as it
is presently professed, and established, conform to the National Covenant,
League and Covenant, and according to Your Declaration at Dumfermling, in
August last; Also that You would be Graciously pleased to receave them under
Your Highness Protection, to govern them by the laws of the Kingdom, and to
defend them in their Rights and Liberties, by Your Royal Power, offering
themselves in most humble manner to Your Majesty, with their Vows to bestow
Land, Life, and what else is in their power, for the maintenance of Religion,
for the safety of Your Majesty's Sacred Person, and maintenance of Your
Crown, which they entreat Your Majesty to accept, and pray ALMIGHTY GOD,
that for many years You may happily enjoy the same.

The King made this answer; I do esteem the affections of my good People,
more then the Crowns of many Kingdoms, and shall be readies, by, GODS
Assistance, to bestow my Life in their Defense; Wishing to live no longer, then
I may see Religion, and this Kingdom flowrish, in all happiness.

There-after, the Commissioners of Burroughes, and of Barons, and the
Noblemen accompanied his Majesty to the Kirk of Scoone, in order and rank
according to their quality, two and two.

The Spurs being carried by the Earl of Eglinton.

Next, The Sword by the Earl of Rothes.

Then the Scepter by the Earl of Craufurd and Lindesay.

And the Crown by the Marquis of Argyle, immediately before the King.

Then came the King, with the great Constable on his right hand, and the great
Marishall on his left hand, his train being carried by the Lord Ereskine, The
Lord Montgomery, The Lord Newbottle, and the Lord Machlene, four Earls eldest
sons, under a Canopie of Crimson Velvet, supported by six Earls sons; to
wit, The Lord Drummond, The Lord Carnegie, The Lord Ramsay, The Lord Iohnston,
The Lord Brechin, The Lord Yester, and the six carriers supported by six
Noble-mens sons.

Thus the Kings Majesty enters the Kirk.

The Kirk being fitted, and prepared with a Table, Whereupon the Honors were
laid, and a Chair set in a fitting place for his Majesty's hearing of Sermon,
over against the Minister, and another Chair on the other side where he sat
when he received the Crown, before which there was a Bench decently covered,
as also Seats about for Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses.

And there being also a Stage in a fit place erected of 24 foot square, about
four foot high, from the ground, covered with Carpets, with two stairs, one
from the West, and another to the East; upon which great Stage there was
another little Stage erected, some two foot high, ascending by two steps; on
which the Throne, or Chair of State was set.

The Kirk thus fittingly prepared, The Kings Majesty enters the same,
accompanied as aforesaid, and first sets himself in his Chair, for hearing
of Sermon.

All being quyetlie composed unto attention, Master ROBERT DOUGLAS Moderator of
the Commission of the General Assembly, after incalling upon GOD by Prayer,
preached the following SERMON.

SERMON Preached at Scoone, Jan. first 1651. At the CORONATION of CHARLES the
SECOND, King of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland,
By Master ROBERT DOUGLAS, Minister of Edinburgh, Moderator of the Commission
of the General Assembly.
2. KING. 11. verse. 12. 17. And he brought forth the Kings son, and put
the Crown upon him, and gave him the Testimony, and they made him King, and
anointed him, and they clapped their hands, and said, God save the King.

And Jehojada made a Covenant between the Lord and the King, and the people,
that they should be the Lords people, between the King also and the people.


IN this TEXT of SCRIPTURE, you have the solemn enthroning of Ioash a young
King, and that in a very troublesome time, for Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah
had cruelly murdered the Royal seed, and usurped the Kingdom by the space of
six years. Only this young Prince was preserved by J^h^sheba the sister of
Ahaziah, and wife to Jehojada the high Priest, being hid with her in the house
of the LORD all that time.

Good Interpreters do conjecture, though Joash be called the son of
Ahaziah, that he was not his son by nature, but by succession to the Crown.
They say, that the race of Solomon ceased here, and the Kingdom came to the
posterity of Nathan the son of David. Because 2. Chron. 22. 9. It is said,
The house of Ahaziah had no power to keep the Kingdom, which they conceave to
be for the want of children in that house; And because of the absurdity and
unnaturallnesse of the fact. That Athaliah the Grandmother should have cut off
her sons children. I shall not stand upon the matter, Only I may say, if
they were Ahaziah his own children it was a most unnatural and cruel fact for
Athaliah to cut off her own posterity.

Ahaziah went to battle, Athaliah was left to govern the Kingdom, and her
son Ahaziah being slain before his return, she thought the government
sweet, and could not part with it; And because the Royal seed stood in her
way, she cruelly destroyed them, that she might reign with the greater
freedom. 2. She was earnest to set up a false worship, even the worship of
Baal; which she thought could not be so well done, as by cutting off the
Royal race, and getting the sole power in her hand, that she might do what
she pleased.

of His Kirk. All this cannot be done, unless they have the sole power in
their hand, and this they cannot have, till the King and his posterity be cut
off. But I leave this, and come to the present solemnity. There is a Prince to
be inthroned, good Jehojada will have the Crown put upon his head.

It may be questioned, Why they went about this Coronation in a time of so
great hazard, when Athaliah had reigned six years? Had it not been better to
have defate Athaliah, and then to have crowned the King? Two reasons may be
rendered why they delay not the Coronation.

The same is observed in our case, and many wonder that you should crown the
king in a dangerous time, when the usurpers have such power in the Land. The
same reasons may serve to answer for your doing. Bramble, the destroying
usurpers.

I come to the particular handling of the present Text, and to speak from it
to the present time. I have read the 12. and 17. verse. Because of these two
which meet together, The crowning of a King, and his renewing the Covenant.
Amongst many particulars which may be handled from the Text, I shall confyne
my self to these fyve. 1. The Crown, He put the Crown upon his head. 2. The
Testimony, He gave him the Testimony. 3. The anointing, They anointed him.
These three are in the 12. verse. As for that which is spoken of the peoples
joy, we shall give it a touch when we come to the peoples duty. 4. The
Covenant between GOD, and the king and the people. Jehojada made a Covenant
between GOD and the King, and the people; that they should be the LORDS
People. 5. The Covenant between the king, and the people; Between the King also
and the people, both in the 17. verse.







is full of trouble, which if it were well weighed by men, there would not be
such hunting after Crowns. I read of a great man, who considering the trouble
and care that accompanied a Crown, said, He would not take it up at his
foot, though he might have it for taking. Now if a Crown at the best be so
full of troubles, what shall one think of a Crown at the worst, when there
are so great commotions, wherein the Crown is directly aimed at? Surely it
must be a tottering Crown at the least, especially when former sins have
brought on these Troubles. As the remedy of the former is true Humiliation and
turning unto GOD; So the remedy of the latter, is Psalm. 21. 3. (speaking of
David's Crown) Thou set a Crown of pure gold upon his head. GOD set on
David's Crown; and therefore it was settled, not-with-standing of many
troubles. Men may set on crowns, and they may be thrown off again: But when
GOD sets them on they will be fast. Enemies have touched the Crown of our
king, and casten it off in the other kingdom, and have made it totter in this
kingdom; Both the king who is to be crowned, and you who are to crown him,
should deal earnestly with GOD, to set the crown on the kings head, and to
keep it on against all the commotions of this cruel generation.

Is. 62. 3. Thou shall be a Crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, and a
Royal Diadem in the hand of thy GOD. CHRIST accounts His people his Crown
and Diadem; So should a king esteem the people of the LORD, over whom he
rules, to be his Crown and Diadem. Take away the people, and a Crown is
but an empty symbol.

have an eye upon that Crown of glory that fades not away, 1. Pet. 5. 4. And
upon a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Hebr. 12. 28. That crown and kingdom
belongs not to kings as kings, but unto believers; and a believing king
has this comfort, that when he has endured a while, and been tried, he
shall receave the Crown of Life, which the LORD has promised to them that
love Him.

Testimony, by this is meant the Law of GOD, so called because it testifies
of the Mind and Will of GOD. It was commanded Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. When the king
shall sit upon the Throne of his kingdom, he shall write him a copy of the
Book of the Law, and it shall be with him, that he may read therein all the
days of his life. The king should have the TESTIMONY for these three maine
uses.

Deuteronomy. 17. 19. This use of the kings having the Book of the Law is expressed,
that he may learn to fear the LORD his GOD. The reading of other books may
do a king good for government, but no book will teach him the way to
salvation, but the Book of GOD. CHRIST bids Search the Scriptures, for in
thom ye think to have aeternall life, and they testify of Me, John 5. 39.
He is a Blessed man who meditateth in the Law of the LORD day and night, Psalm.
1. 1. 2. King DAVID was well acquainted here-with, as appears Ps. 119. Kings
should be well exercised in Scripture: It is reported of Alphonsus king of
Arragon, that he did read the BIBLE fourteen times, with glosses there-upon.
I recommend to the king, to take some hours for reading holy Scripture; It
will be a good mean to make him acquaynt with GODS Mind, and with CHRIST a
Savior.

Book of GOD. For this cause JOSHUA is commanded IOS. 1. 8. That the Book of
the Law shall not depart out of his mouth; and he is commanded to Do
according to all that is written there-in. He should not only do himself
that which is written in it, but do, and govern his people according to all
that is written in it. King DAVID knew this use of the Testimony, who said,
Psalm. 119. 24. Thy Testimonies are my delight, and my Counselors. The best
Counsels that ever a king gets, are in the Book of GOD: Yea, the
Testimonies are the best and surest Counselors; Because although a kings
Counselors be never so wise and trusty, yet they use not to be so free
with a king as they ought: But the Scriptures will tell kings very freely
both their sin and their duty.

Custos vtriusque Tabulae, The keeper of both Tables. Not that he should take
upon him the power either to dispense the Word of GOD, or to dispense with it:
But that he should preserve the Word of GOD, and true Religion according to
the Word of GOD, pure, intier, and uncorrupted, within his Dominions, and
transmit them so to posterity; And also be careful to see his Subjectes
observe both Tables, and to punish the transgressors of the same.

under the OLD TESTAMENT; and therefore far less under the NEW.

Because it may be said, That in our case there is an interruption by
usurpation, Let it be considered; That the Anointing under the OLD TESTAMENT
was typical. Although all kings were not types of CHRIST, yet the Anointing
of kings, Priests and Prophets, was typical of CHRIST, and His Offices: But
CHRIST being now come, all these Ceremonies cease. And therefore the Anointing
of kings, ought not to be used in the NEW TESTAMENT.

If it be said, Anointing of kings has been in use amongst Christians, not
only Papists, but PROTESTANTS, as in the kingdom of ENGLAND, and our late
king was anointed withoyle. It may be replied, They who used it under the NEW
TESTAMENT took it from the Jews, without warrant. It was most in use with the
Bishops of Rome, who to keep Kings and Emperoures subject to themselves, did
swear them to the Pope, when they were anointed, (and yet the Jewish priests
did never swear kings to themselves) As for ENGLAND, although the Pope was
casten off, yet the subjection of kings to Bishops was still retained, for they
anointed the king and swear him to the mayntenance of their praelaticall
dignity. They are here who were witnesses at the CORONATION of the late king.
The Bishops behoved to perform that rite, and the king behoved to be sworn
to them. But now by the Blessing of GOD Popery and Praelacie are removed. The
Bishops as limbs of Antichrist, are put to the door: Let the Anointing of
kings with oil go to the door with them, and let them never come in again.

The anointing with material oil, makes not a king the Anointed of the LORD,
for he is so without it. He is the ANOINTED of the LORD, who by Divine
Ordinance, and appointment is a King. Is. 45. 1. GOD calls CYRUS His
anointed, yet we read not that he was anointed with oil. Kings are the
Anointed of the LORD, because by the Ordinance of the LORD, their authority is
sacred and inviolable. It is enough for us to have the thing though we want
the Ceremony, which being laid aside, I will give some Observations of the
thing.

John 2. 27. The anointing ye have received of him abides in you; And 2. Cor.
1. 21. He that has anointed us, is GOD, who has also sealed us. This
anointing is not proper to kings, but Common to Believers. Few kings are so
anointed. A King should stryve to be a good CHRISTIAN, and then a good KING:
The anointing with GRACE, is better then the anointing with oil. It is of more
worth for a king to be the Anointed of the LORD with GRACE, then to be the
greatest Monarch of the world, without it.

GOD gave him another heart; And CAP. 11. 6. The Spirit of GOD came upon him,
It is meant, of a heart for his Calling, and a spirit of ability for
Government. It should be our desire this day, That our king may have a spirit
for his Calling; as the Spirit of Wisdom, Fortitude, Justice, and other
Princely Enduements.

Anabaptists, who deny there should be kings in the NEW TESTAMENT. They will
have no king, nor Civil Magistrate. Photinians, who speak respectfully of
kings, and Magistrates; but they take away from them their power, and the
exercise of it in the administation of justice. Absalom and Sheba, who said,
What have we to do with David, the son of Iesse? To your Tents, O Israel.
Beliall, 1. SAM. 10. last. Who said of Saul after he was anointed king, Shall
this man save us? And they despised him, and brought him no Presents.

All these meet in our presentage. Anabaptists who are against the being of
kings, are very ryfe. You may find, to our great grief, a great number of
them in that Army that has injustlie invaded the Land; who have trampled upon
the authority of kings. Photinians in this point, They allow of kings in
profession; but they are against the exercise of their power in the
administration of Justice. Shall this man save us? I wish all had DAVID'S
tenderness, whose heart did smite him, when he did but cut off the lap of
SAUL'S Garment, That we may be far from cutting off a lap of that just power
and greatness, which GOD has allowed to the king, and we have bound our
selves by COVENANT, not to diminish.

I have gone through the three particulars contained in the 12. verse. I come to
the other two in the 17. verse. which appertain also to this days Work; For
our king is not only to be crowned; but to renew a COVENANT with GOD, and His
People; and to make a COVENANT with the People. Answerable hereto there is a
twofolde COVENANT in the words, One between GOD, and the king, and the
people: GOD being the one party; The king and the people the other. Another
between the king, and the people. The king being the one party; The people
the other.

COVENANT with GOD, is the fourth particular propounded, to be spoken of. The
sum of this COVENANT, ye may find 2. King. 23. 3. in Josiah his renewing the
COVENANT, To walk after the LORD, and keep His Commandementes and
Testimonies, with all the heart, and to perform the words of the COVENANT.
The renewing of the COVENANT, was after a great defection from GOD, and the
setting up of a false worship. The king and people of GOD, bound themselves
before the LORD, to set up the TRUE WORSHIP, and to abolish, the false,
SCOTLAND has a Preference in this before other Nations. In time of Defection,
they have renewed a COVENANT with GOD, to reform all; And because the king
after a great Defection in that family, is to renew the COVENANT, I shall
mention some particulars from the LEAGVE and COVENANT.

True Reformed Religion, in doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
established in this kingdom, and to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in
the other two kingdoms, according to the Word of GOD, and the example of the
best Reformed Kirkes. By this Article the king is obliedged, not only to
maintain Religion as it is established in SCOTLAND, but also to endeavor the
Reformation of Religion in his other kingdoms. The king would consider well,
when it shall please GOD to restore him to his Government there, that he is
bound to endeavor the establishment of the Work of Reformation there, as well
as to maintain it here.

Popery, Praelacie, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, and
what-so-ever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of
godliness. And therefore Popery is not to be suffered in the Royal Family,
nor within his Dominions; Praelacie once plucked up by the root, is not to be
permitted to take root again; All Haeresie and Error what-so-ever must be
opposed by him, to the uttermost of his power; and by the COVENANT the King
must be far from Toleration of any false religion within his Dominions.



Iucendiaries, Malignantes, or evil instruments, in hindering the Reformation
of Religion; divyding the King from the people, or one of the kingdoms, from
another, or making aniefaction, or parties amongst the people. Here-by the King
is bound to have an eye upon such, and neither allow of them, nor comply with
them; but to concur according to his power to have them censured and
punished, as is expressed in the fourth Article.

I shall sum up all in this, That a King entering in COVENANT with GOD,
should do as Kings did of Old, when they entered in COVENANT; They and their
people went on in the work of Reformation, as appears here, verse. 18. And all
the people of the land, went into the house of Baal, and brake it down, etc.
And godly JOSIAH, when he entered in COVENANT, made a through Reformation.
There is a fourfelde Reformation in Scripture, and contained in the LEAGUE and
COVENANT. 1. A personal Reformation. 2. A Family Reformation. 3. A
Reformation of ludicatories. 4. A Reformation of the whole land. Kings have
had their hand in all the four; and therefore I recommend them to our KING.

A King should not follow Machiavell his counsel, who requires not that a
Prince should be truly religious, but says, that a shadow of it, and
external simulation, are sufficient. A divelish counsel; and it is just with
GOD, to bring a king to the shadow of a kingdom, who has but the shadow of
Religion. We know, that dissembling kings have been punished of GOD; And let
our King know, that no king, but a religious king, can please GOD. DAVID is
highly commended for Godliness, HEZEKIAH a man eminent for Piety; JOSIAH, a
young king, commended for the tenderness of his heart, when he heard the Law
of the LORD read; He was much troubled before the LORD, when he heard the
judgementes threatened against his fathers house, and his people. It is
earnestly wished, that our Kings heart may be tender, and be truly
humbled before the LORD, for the sins of his fathers house, and of the land;
and for the many evils that are upon that family, and upon the kingdom.

COVENANT, spared not his mothers Idolatry. The house of our king has been
much defiled by Idolatry. The king is now in COVENANT, and to renew the
COVENANT; Let the Royal Family be reformed; And that it may be a Religious
Family, wherein GOD will have pleasure, Let it be purged; not only of
Idolatry, but of prophanitie and loosnesse, which has abounded in it. Much
has been spoken of this matter; but little has been done in it. Let the king
and others, who have charge in that Family, think it lies upon them, as a
duty, to purge it. And if ye would have a Family well purged, and
constitute, take DAVID for a Pattern, in the purgation and constitution of
his, PSALM. 101. The froward heart, wicked persons, and slanderers, he will
have far from him: But his eyes are upon the faithful of the land, that they
may dwell with him. If there be a man better then another in the land, he
should be for the king, and his Family: Ye may extend this Reformation to the
Court; A profane Court, is dangerous for a king, It has been observed as a
provoking sin in ENGLAND, which has drawnedowne judgment upon King and
Court, as appears this day. It is to be wished, that such were in the Court,
as DAVID speaks of in that PSALM. Let the King see to it, and resolve with
DAVID, PSALM. 101. 7. That He who works deceat, shall not dwell within his
house; and he who tells lies, shall not tarry in his sight.

Covetousness, may be placed in them. A King in COVENANT should do, as
IEHOSHAPHAT did, 2. CHRON. 19. 5. 6. 7. He set Judges in the land, and said,
Take heed what ye do; ye judge not for men, but for the LORD, who is with
you in judgment: wherefore now let the fear of the LOR'D be before you, etc.

Jehoshaphat went out through the people, from Beersheba, to mount Ephraim; and
brought them back to the LORD GOD of their fathers. Our Land has great need
of Reformation; For there is a part of it, that has scarce ever yet found the
benefit of Reformation, they are lying without the GOSPEL. It will be a good
work for a COVENANTED KING, to have a care that the GOSPEL may be preached
through the whole Land. Care also would be taken that they who have the GOSPEL,
may live suteably thereto.

If a King would be a through Reformer, he must be reformed himself;
otherwise he will never lay Reformation to heart. To make a king a good
Reformer, I wish him these qualifications according to the Truth, and in
sincerity, wherewith they report TRAJAN the Emperor, to have been endued, He
was 1. Devote at home, 2. Cowragious in war, 3. Justin his Iudicatures, 4.
Prudent in all his effaires. True PIETY, FORTITUDE, JUSTICE, and PRUDENCIE,
are notable qualifications in a Prince, who would reform a kingdom, and
reform well.





By me kings reign, PROVE. 8. 15. Kings have not only their Crowns from
GOD; but they must reign according to his will, which is clear from ROMANS 13.
4. He is called THE MINISTER OF GOD. He is but GODS Servant. I need not stay
upon this. Kings, and all others, will acknowledge this limitation.



in the Land, who share in the burden of Government. No king should have the
fool Government. It was never the mind of these, who received a king to rule
them, to lay all Government upon him, to do what he pleases, without
controlement. There is no man able alone to govern all. The kingdom should
not lay that upon one man, who may easily miscarrie. The Estates of the Land,
are bound in this Contract, to bear a burden with him.

These men who have flattered kings, to take unto themselves an absolute
power, to do what they please, have wronged kings, and kingdoms. It had been
good that kings of late, had carried themselves so, as this question of kings
power, might never have come in debate; For they have been great loosers
thereby. Kings are very desirous to have things spoken and written, to hold
up their Arbitrarie and unlimited power; but that way does exceedingly wrong
them. There is one, a learned man, I confess, who has written a book, for
the mayntenance of the absolute power of kings, called DEFENSIO REGIA, whereby
he has wronged himself in his reputation, and the king in his government. As
for the fact in taking away the life of the late King (what ever was GODS
justice in it) I do agree with him to condemn it, as a most injust and horrid
fact, upon their part who did it: But when he comes to speak of the power
of kings in giving unto them an absolute and illimited power, urging the
damnable Maxim QUOD LIBET LICET, he will have a king to do what he pleases
impune, and without controlement. In this I can not but dislent from him.

In regard of Subordination, some say; That a king is comptable to none but
GOD. Do what he will, let GOD take order with it; this leads kings to
Atheism, let them do what they please, and take GOD in their own hand: In
regard of Laws, they teach nothing to kings, but Tyranny: And in regard of
government, they teach a king to take an Arbitrarie power to himself, to do
what he pleases without controlement. How dangerous this has been to kings,
is clear by sad experience. Abuse of Power, and Arbitrarie Government, has
been one of GODS Great Controversies, with our Kings Praedecessoures, GOD in
His justice, because Power has been abused, has thrown it out of their
hands: And I may confidentlie say, That GODS Controversy with the kings of
the earth, is for their Arbitrarie and Tyrannical Government.

It is good for our King to learn to be wise in time; and know that he
receaveth this day a power to govern; but a power limited by contract; and
these conditions he is bound by Oath, to stand to. Kings are deceaved, who
think, that the people are ordained for the king; and not the king for the
people. The SCRIPTURE shows the contrary, ROMANS 13. 4. The King is the
MINISTER OF GOD, FOR THE PEOPLES good. GOD will not have a king in an
arbitrarie way, to encroach upon the possessions of Subjects, EZEH. 45. 7. 8. A
portion is appointed for the Prince. And it is said, My Princes shall no more
oppress my people; and the rest of the Land, shall he give unto the house of
Israel, according to their Tribes. The king has his distinct Possessiions and
Revenewes from the people; he must not oppress, and do what he pleases,
there must be no Tyranny upon the Throne.

I desire not to speak much of this subject. Men have been very tender in
meddling with the power of kings; yet seeing these days have brought forth
debates concerning the power of kings, it will be necessary to be clear in
the matter. Extremities would be shunned. A King should keep within the
bounds of the Covenant made with the people, in the exercise of his power; And
Subjectes would keep within the bounds of this Covenant, in regulating that
power. Concerning the last, I shall propound these three, to your consideration.

Arms, then they who have power, as the Estates of a Land, may and ought to
resist by Arms: Because he does, by that opposition, break the very
bonds, and over-throweth all the essentialls of this Contract and Covenant.
This may serve to justify the proceedinges of this kingdom against the late
King; who in an Hostile way set himself, to overthrow Religion, Parliaments,
Laws, and Liberties.

Benhadad, king of Syria, an Idolater; He imprisoned HANANI, the LORDS
Prophet, who reproved him, and threatened judgment against that association;
And, at that same time, he oppressed some of the people: And yet, for all
this, they neither lay him aside, nor count him an hypocrite.

Yea, some of them suffered persecution for their honesty and feeedome: Yet
we never read, nor have heard, that any of these godly Pastoures joined with
other private men, did ever remonstrate to Parliament, or Estate, as their
judgment, That the king should be suspended from the exercise of his Royal
power.



It is better to obey GOD, then man. There is a line drawn from GOD to the
people, they are lowest the line; and have Magistrates inferior, and supreme
above them, and GOD above all. When the king commands the people that which
is lawful, and commanded by GOD, then he should be obeyed; Because he
stands in the right line under GOD, who has put him in his place. But if he
command that which is unlawful, and forbidden of GOD, in that he should not
be obeyed to do it; because he is out of his line. That a king is to be
obeyed with this subordination, is evident from Scripture; take one place for
all, ROMANS 13. At the beginning, ye have both obedience urged to superior
powers, at the Ordinance of GOD, and damnation threatened against these who
resist the lawful powers.

It is said by some, that many Ministers in Scotland, will not have King
JESUS, but king CHARLES to regine. Faithful men are wronged by such speeches.
I do not understand these men; For if they think that a King and JESUS are
inconsistent; then they will have no King: But I shall be far from
entertayning such thoughts of them. If they think the doing a necessary duty
for KING CHARLES, is to praeferre his Interest to CHRIST'S, this also is an
error. Honest Ministers can very well discern between the Interest of
CHRIST, and of the king. I know no Minister that sets up king CHARLES, with
prejudice to CHRIST'S interest.

There are three sorts of persons, who are not to be allowed in relation to
the Kings interest. Sectaries. Engagers.

I shall desire that men be real, when they make mention of CHRIST'S Interest;
For these three mentioned, profess and praetend the Interest of CHRIST.
Sectaries cover their destroying of Kings, with CHRIST'S Interest; where-unto
^^-deed, they have had no respect, being Enemies to his kingdom, and
experience has made it undeniable. Engagers alleged they were for CHRIST'S
Interest; but they misplaced it. CHRIST'S Interest should have gone before but
they drew it after the interest of a king; which evidenced their want of due
respect to CHRIST'S Interest.

If to be against the suspending of the king from the exercise of his power,
and to be for the crowning of the king according to the public faith of the
kingdoms, He first performing all that KIRK and SSATE required of him in
relation to Religion, and Civil Liberties If this be, I say, to praeferre a
king to CHRIST, let all men that are unbyassed, be judges in the case. We
shall well avow, that we crown a king in subordination to GOD, and His
Interest in subordination to CHRIST'S, which we judge, not only agreeable to
the Word of GOD; but also that we are bound expresselie in the COVENANT, to
maintain the King, in the praeservation and defense of the True Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and not to diminish his just power and greatness.

We must needs be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.
A necessity to obey, is laid upon all. Many Subjects obey for wrath; but the
Godly obey for conscience sake.

verse. it is said, That the people clapped their hands for joy, and said, GOD
save the King. They had no sooner seen their Native King installed in his
kingdom, but they rejoiced exceedingly, and saluted him with wishes of
safety. What ever be men's affections, or respects, this day, to our king,
certainly it is a duty lying on us, both to pray for and rejoice in his
safety. The very and that GOD has in giving us kings, makes this clear,
1. TIM. 2. 1. 2. That we may live under them in Godliness and honesty: And
therefore Prayers and Supplications, are to be made for all kings; even for
these that are not in Covenant; much more for these that are in Covenant. Ye
are receaving this day a Crowned Covenanted King, pray for saving grace to him;
and that GOD would delyver him, and us, out of the hand of these cruel
enemies; and bless his Government, and Cause us to live a quiet and peaceable
life under him, in all Godliness and honesty.

Enemies; and is bound to hazard his life, and all that he has for their
defense: So the people are also bound to maintain his person and authority;
and to hazard life, and all that they have, in defending him.

I shall not take the Quaestion in its full Latitude, taking in what a people
are bound to, in persuing of a kings Right, in another Nation, which is not our
praesent Quaestion. Our Quaestion is, What a people should do, when a kingdom
is injustlie invaded, by a foreign enemy, which seeks the overthrow of
Religion, King, and Kingdom? Surely, if men be tied to any duty to a
king, and kingdom, they are tied in this case. I have two sorts of men to meet
with here, who are deficient in doing this Covenanted duty: 1. These who do
not act against the Enemy. 2. These who do act for the Enemy.

Enemy, that there is no remedy: And thereof or that it is best, to sit
still, and see how things go.

They may be supposed to scruple upon one of these grounds: Enemies to the
Work of GOD. Our answer to the Estates Quaere Resolves, that such should not
be entrusted: But we do not count these Enemies, who profess repentance,
and declare themselves solemnly to be for the Cause, and the Covenant; and
do evidence it by their willingness to fight for them. If it be said, Their
repentance is but counterfeit. We are bound to think otherwise in charity,
till the contrary be seen. No man can judge of the realitie of hearts; for
we have now found by experience, that men, who have been accounted above all
exception, have betrayed their trust. If any who have not yet repented of
their former course, shall be entrusted, we shall be sorry for it; and
playnlie say, That it ought not to be.

But I think there must be more in this, that men say they cannot act. For my
self, I love not that word in our case. It is to frequent, He can not act,
and He can not act. I fear there be three sort of persons lurking under this
cover. Pusillanimous, who have no cowrage to act against the Enemy. The word
is true of them, They can not act, because they darre not act. Idol credit.
He has been a man of Honor, and now he fears there will be no credit to
fight against this prevailing Enemy: Therefore he can not act, and save his
Credit. Be who thou will that has this before thee, GOD shall blast thy
reputation. Thou shall neither have honor nor credit, to do a right turn in
GODS Cause. Compliars, who can not act, because they have a purpose to complye.
There are, that can not act in an Army; but they can betray an Army, by not
acting. There are, that can not act for safety of a Kingdom; but they do
betray it, by not acting. In a word, There are, who can not join to act with
these whom they account Malignantes (I speak not of declared and known
Malignants; but of such as have been, and are fighting, for the Cause; Yet by
them esteemed Malignants) But they can join with Sectaries, open and declared
enemies, to Kirk and Kingdom. I wish Subjectes, who are bound to fight for the
kingdom, would lay by that phrase, of Not acting, which is so frequent in the
mouth of Complyars, and offensive to them, who would approve themselves in
doing duty for endangered Religion, King, and Kingdom.

That men may be the more clear to act, I shall offer to your consideration,
some passages of Scripture, about these who do not act against a common enemy.

Enemy had invaded the Land: As Reuben, with his divisions: Gilead, Dan, and
Asher seeking themselves, all are reproved, for not joining with the People of
GOD, who were willing to jeopard their lyves, against a mighty oppressing
enemy. But there is one passage concerning Meroz, verse. 23. which fitteth our
purpose, The Angel of the LORD said, Curse ye Meroz, Curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; they came not to the Help of the LORD, to the Help of
the LORD, against the Mighty. What this Meroz was, is not clear; yet all
interpreters agree, that they had opportunity and power to have joined with,
and helped the People of GOD, and it is probable they were near the place of
the fight. They are cursed for not coming to the Help of the LORDS People.
This may be applied to these in the Land, who will not Help the LORD against
the Mighty.

Reuben and Gad having a multitude of cattle, and having seen the land of
Gilead, that it was a place for cattle, they desire of MOSES, and the Princes,
that that Land may be given them, and they may not pass over IORDANE, verse.
6. 7. MOSES reproves them in these words, Shall your brethren go to war?
and shall ye fit still? Wherefore discowrage ye the heart of the Children of
Israel? verse. 16. 17. 18. Reuben and Gad make their Apology, showing that they
have no such intention to sit still, Only they desire their wyves, and little
ones, may stay there; they themselves promise to go over IORDANE, armed before
ISRAEL; and not return before they were possessed in the Land. Then MOSES said
unto them, verse. 20. 21. 22. If you do so, then this shall be your
possession. But verse. 23. If ye do not so, behold, ye have sinned against
the LORD; and be sure your sin shall find you out.

I may apply this, to them that can not act, Will ye sit still, when the rest
of your Brethren are to hazard their lyves against the Enemy? We have reason
to reprove you. If MOSES that faithful Servant of GOD, was still jealous of
Reuben and God, even after their Apology and promise to act, (for he says,
If ye do not so) Have not honest and faithful Servantes of GOD ground to be
jealous of their brethren, who refuse to act? Let them Apologize what they
will; for their not acting, I say, they sin against the LORD, and their sin
shall find them out. It will be clearlie seen, upon what intention they do
not act.

verse. 26. SAUL has DAVID enclosed, that he can hardly escape. In that very
instant, there comes a messen er to SAUL, saying, verse. 27. Haste thee, and
come; for the Philistines have invaded the land. At the hearing of this
message, verse. 28. SAUL returned from persuing after DAVID, and went against
the Philistines. It is true, the LORD did provyde for His Servant DAVID'S
escape, by this mean: But if you consider SAUL, he took it not so. Nothing
moved him to leave this persute, but the condition of the Land, by the invading
of an Ememie.



Philistines be Enemies, yet DAVID is the most dangerous Enemy; for he
aims at no less, then the Crown. It were better to take conditions of the
Enemy, then to suffer DAVID to live, and take the Crown.

Philistines, and be beaten, he will get a power in his hand to undo me,
and my posterity. These may seem strong motives; But SAUL is not moved with
any of these. The present danger, is the Philistines invading the Land; and
this danger is to be opposed, come of the danger from DAVID what will. As if
SAUL had said, I will let DAVID alone, I will meet with him at another time,
and reckon with him; now there is no time for it, the Philistines are in the
Land; let us make haste against them. I wish that many of our Contrymen had
as great love to their Country, and as public a spirit for it as this
profane king had, then there would not be so many questions for acting, as
men make this day.

The Objections I have been touching, are in men's thoughts and heads. 1. Some
say, Now the Malignants are under, for this Enemy is their rod, It is best to
put them out of having any power: yea, there are some who would more
willingly go to undo these, whom they account Malignants, nor against the
common Enemy, who are wasting the Land. If they had SAUL'S resolution they
would say, The Philistines are in the Land, Let them alone, we will reckon
with them at another time; we will now go against the common Enemy.

They have also the second Objection, The Malignants are more dangerous
Enemies, then the Sectaries. I shall not now compare them at aequall distance,
and abstract from the present danger; But I shall compare them in the present
posture of effaires. I am sure, the Sectaries having power in their hands, and
a great part of the Land in their possession, are far more dangerous then
Malignants, who have no power for the present: And therefore the resolution
should be, The Sectaries have invaded the Land, and are destroying it, Let us
go against them.

Malignants, being employed to fight for their Country, may get such power in
their hand, as may hurt the Cause. For answer; a malignant course. Little good
is expected from you, I pray you be honest, and disappoynt them. I wish you
true repentance, which will both disappoynt them, and be profitable to your
selves. common enemy, being only clothed with a capacity to fight for their
Country, Be an argument against rising to oppose a seen and certain danger,
coming from an Enemy, clothed with power, and still praevayling. I conceave,
it ought to be far from any, to hinder men to defend their Country in such
a case. I confess indeed, The Cause which we maintain, has met with many
enemies, who have been against it, which requires much tenderness; Therefore
men are to be admitted to trust, with such exceptions as may keep them out,
who are still Enemies to the CAUSE of GOD, have not professed repentance,
renounced their former courses, and declared themselves for Cause and Covenant.
I doubt not, but it shall be found, that the admitting of such to fight in our
case as it stands, is agreeable to the Word of GOD, and is not against the
former Public Resolutions of KIRK and STATE.

The second sort of persons, we are to meet with, are such as act for the
Enemy against the Kingdom. If they be cursed, who will not come out to help
the LORD against the Mighty; What a curse shall be upon them, who help the
Mighty against the LORD, as they do who act for the Enemy? Three ways is
the Enemy helped against the Cause and People of GOD.



Enemies hands with questions, debates and determinations, in papers, tending
to the justifying of their injust invasion. What ever have been men's inte^tions
in taking that way, yet the thing done by them, has tended to the advantage of
the Enemy, and has divyded these, who should have been joined in the Cause,
to the great weakening of the power of the kingdom, and this
interpretativelie, is to act for the Mighty against the LORD.

Enemy, and going in to them, doing all the evil Offices they can, against
their Native Kingdom. If Meroz was cursed, for not helping, shall not these
perfidious Covenant-breakers, and treacherous dealers against a distressed
Land; be much more accursed, for helping and assisting a destroying Enemy, so
far as lies in their power? Is. 31. 3. May be truly applied to them, who
are helping Strangers, Enemies to GOD, His Kirk, and Religion, Both he that
helps, shall fall; and he that is helped, shall fall down, and they all
shall fail together.



Prayer, for grace to overcome these impedimentes, and for an understanding
heart to govern his people. SOLOMON having in his option, to ask what he
would, he asked an understanding heart, to go out and in before his people;
Knowing, that the government of a people, was a very difficile work, and
needed more then ordinary understanding. A KING also has many enemies (as our
King has this day) and a praying King, is a prevayling King. ASA when he had
to do with a mighty enemy, 2. CHRON. 14. prayed ferventlie, and prevayled.
IEHOSHAPHAT was invaded with a mighty enemy, 2. CHRON. 20. he prayed, and
did prevayle. HEZEKIAH prayed against Sennaheribs hudge army, and prevayled,
2. CHRON. 32.

Sir, You have many difficulties and oppositions to meet with, acquaint your
self with PRAYER, be instant with GOD, and He will fight for You. Prayers
are not in much request at Court; But a Covenanted KING, must bring them in
request. I know, a King is burdened with multiplicitie of effaires, and will
meet with many diversions; But, SIR, You must not be diverted. Take hours,
and set them aparte for that exercise: Men being once acquaynted with Your way,
will not darre to divert You. PRAYER to GOD, will make Your effaires easy all
the day. I read of a King, of whom his courtiours said, He spoke oftener with
GOD, then with men. If You be frequent in Prayer, You may expect the Blessing
of the most high upon your self, and upon Your Government.

Be careful of both; Let neither KIRK nor STATE suffer hurt; Let them go
together. The best way for standing of a Kingdom, is a well constitute KIRK.
They deceave kings, who make them believe, that the governemnt of the KIRK; I
mean Presbyteriall government, can not suit with MONARCHY. They suit well,
it being the Ordinance of CHRIST, rendering to GOD, what is GODS; and to
Caesar, what is Caesar's.

SIR, Kings who have a tender care of the Kirk, Is. 41. 3. are called Nursing
Fathers. You would be careful, that the GOSPEL may have a free passage
through the kingdom; and that the government of the Kirk, may be preserved
intiere, according to Your Solemn Engagement. The Kirk has met with many
enemies, as Papists, Praelates, Malignants, which I pass as known enemies:
But there are two sorts more, who, at this time, would be carefully looked on.

Sectaries, great enemies to the Kirk, and to all the Ordinances of CHRIST, and
more particularly to Preshyteriall government, which they have and would have
altogether destroyed. A king should set himself against these, because they
are enemies as well to the king, as to the kirk, and stryve to make both fall
together.

Erastians, more dangerous snares to kings, then Sectaeries; because kings
can look well enough to these, who are against themselves, and their power, as
Sectaries, who will have no king: But Erastians give more power to kings, then
they should have, and are great enemies to Presbyteriall government: For they
would make kings believe, that there is no government but the Civil, and
deryved from thence, which is a great wrong to the Son of GOD, who has the
government of the kirk distinct from the Civil; yet no ways prejudicial to
it, being spiritual, and of another nature. CHRIST did put the Magistrate out
of suspicion, that his kingdom was prejudicial to Civil government;
affirming, My Kingdom is not of this world. This Government CHRIST has not
committed to kings, but to the Office-Bearers of his house; who in regard of
Civil subjection, are under the Civil power as well as others; but in their
spiritual administration they are under CHRIST, who has not given unto any
king upon earth, the dispensation of spiritual things to his people.

SIR, You are in Covenant with GOD, and His people, and are obliedged to
maintain Presbyteriall Government, as well against Erastians as Sectaries. I
know, this Erastian humor abounds at Court. It may be some endeavor to make
You encroach upon that, for which GOD has punished Your Predecessoures. Be
who he will that meddleth with this Government to overturne it, it shall be
as heavy to him as the burden some stone to the enemies of the Kirk. They are
cut in pieces, who burden themselves with it. Zach, 12.



Amaziah had taken the gods of Seir, and set them up for his gods, a Prophet
came to him, and reproved him; unto whom the king said, Who made thee of the
Kings Counsel, forbear, lest thou be smitten. This contempt of the Prophets
warning, is a forerunner of following destruction. Be a careful hearer of
GODS WORD; take with reproof; esteem of it, as DAVID did, PSALM. 141. 5. An
excellent oil, which shall not break the head. To make much of the faithful
Servants of CHRIST, will be an evidence of reality.

Profane, who love to live looselie. It is usual with profane men, to labor
to bring kings unto a distaste of the Godly; especially when men who have
professed Piety become scandalous; whereupon they are ready to judge all
Pious Men to be like them; and take occasion to speak evil of Piety. I
fear at this time, when men who have been commended for Piety, have fallen
foulelie, and betrayed their trust; that men will take advantage, to speak
against the Godly of the Land. Beware of this, for it is Satan's policy, to
put Piety out of request. Let not this move any. Fall who will, Piety is
still the same, and Pious Men will make conscience both of their ways and
trust. Remember, they are precious in GODS Eyes, who will not suffer men to
despise them, without their reward. SIR, Let not your heart be from the godly
in the Land, whatever has fallen out at this time. I dare affirm there are
very many really godly men, who by their prayers are supporting your Throne.

Maxim, That Trust should not be put in their hands, who have oppressed the
people, or have betrayed their Trust. There is a passage in Story, meet for
this purpose. One SEPTIMIUS ARABINUS, a man famous, or rather infamous for
Oppression, was put out of the SENATE, but readmitted. About this time
ALEXANDER SEVERUS, being chosen to the Empire, the SENATORS did entertain him
with public salutations and congratulations. Severus espying Arabinus, amongst
the Senators, cried out, O Numina! Arabinus non solum vivit, sed in Senatum
venit. Ah! Arabinus not only lives, but he is in the Senate. Out of just
indignation, he could not endure to see him. As all are not meet for places of
trust in judicatories, So all are not meet for places of trust in armies. Me^
would be chosen who are godly, and able for the charge.

But there are some who are not meet for trust.

Of all these we have sad experience, which should not move You to make choice
of profane and godless men, by whom a blessing is not to be expected; but it
should move You to be wary in Your choice. I am confident such may be had,
who will be faithful for Religion, King, and kingdom.

Coronation. Many are affrayed that the exercise of his power, shall prove
dangerous to the Cause; and indeed I confess there is ground of fear, when we
consider, how this power has been abused by former kings. Therefore, Sir, make
good use of this power; and see that You rather keep within bounds, then exceed
in the exercise of it. I may very well give such a Counsel, as an old
Counselor gave to a king of France. He having spent many years at Court,
desired to retire into the country, for enjoying privacie fit for his age; and
having obtained leave, The king his master required him, to sit down, and write
some advise of government, to leave behind him, which he out of modesty
declyned. The king would not be denied, but left with him pen and ink, and a
sheet of paper. He being alone after some thoughts, wrote with fair and
legible Characters in the head of the sheet Modus, in the middle of the sheet
Modus, and in the foot of the sheet Modus; and wrote no more in all the paper;
which he wrapped up, and delivered to the king, Meaning that the best Counsel
he could give him, was, That he should keep temper in all things. Nothing more
fit for a young king, then to keep temper in all things. Take this Counsel,
Sir, and be moderate in the use of your power. The best way to keep power, is
moderation in the use of it.



In speaking of the kings behavior to enemies, One thing I can not pass.
There is much spoken of a treaty with this enemy. I am not of the judgment
of some, who distinguish a treaty before invasion, and after invasion, and
say, Treating is very lawful before invasion; because it is supposed that
there is little wrong done; but after invasion, when a kingdom is wronged, and
put to infinite losses, then they say a treaty is to be shunned: But in my
judgeme^t, a treaty may be lawful after invasion, and wrongs sustained. The end
of war is peace, neither should desire of revenge obstruct it, providing it be
such a treaty and peace, as is not prejudicial to Religion, nor to the safety
of the kingdom, nor to the undoubted right of the king, not to the League and
Covenant, whereunto we are so solemnly engaged.

But I must break off this treaty, with a story related in Plutarch. The City
of Athens was in a great strait, wherein they knew not what to do. Themistocles
in this strait said, he had something, wherein to give his opinion, for the
behoof of the State; but he thought it not fit to deliver himself publicly.
Aristides a man of great trust, is appointed to hear him privately, and to make
an account as he thought meet. When Aristides came to make his report to the
Senate; He told them, that Themistocles his advice was indeed profitable, but
not honest. Whereupon the people would not so much as hear it. There is much
whispering of a treaty, they are not willing to speak publikly of it. Hear them
in private; and it may be the best advice shall be profitable; but not honest.
If a treaty should be, let it be both profitable and honest, and no lover of
peace will be against it.



In the sacred history of Kings, we find a note put upon kings according to
their carriages. One of three sentences is written upon them. He did evil in
the sight of the LORD. They neither begin well nor end well. Such an one was
Ahaz, king of Judah, and diverse others in that history. He did that which was
right in the sight of the LORD; but not with a perfect heart. Such an one was
Amaziah, king of Judah, 2. Chr. 25. 2. He was neither sincere nor constant:
when GOD blessed him with victory against the Edomites, he fell foully from the
true worship of GOD, and set up the gods of Edom. Judah, He did right in the
sight of the LORD with a perfect heart. As Asa, Hezekiah, Iehoshaphat and
Josiah, They were both sincere and constant. Let us neither have the first, nor
the second; but the third written upon our King, He did right in the sight of
the LORD, with a perfect heart. Begin well, and continue constant.

Before I close, I shall seek leave, to lay before our young king, two exemples,
to beware of, and One to follow. The two warning exemples, One of them is in
the Text, another in our own History.

The first exemple is of Ioash. He began well, and went on in a godly
reformation all the days of Iehojada; but it is observed 2. Chro^. 24. 17.
that after the days of Iehojada, the princes of Judah came, and did obeisance
to the king; and he hearkened unto them, verse. 18. It appears, they had been
lying at wait, till the death of Iehojada; and took that opportunity to
destroy the true worship of GOD, and set up false worship, flattering the king
for that effect: For it is said, They left the house of the LORD, and served
groves and Idols; and were so far from being reclaimed, by the Prophet of the
LORD, that was sent unto them, that they co^spired against Zechariah the son of
Iehojada, who reproved them mildly for their Idolatry, and stoned him with
stones, and slew him at the kings commandment. And verse. 22. it is said, Ioash
remembered not the kindness that Iehojada his father had done to him, but slew
his son.

SIR, Take this exemple for a warning. You are obliedged by the COVENANT, to
go on in the Work of Reformation, It may be, some great ones are waiting their
time, not having opportunity to work for the present, till afterward they may
make obeisance, and persuade You to destroy all, that has been done in the
Work of GOD these diverse years. Beware of it; Let no allurement or persuasion
prevayle with You, to fall from that, which this day You bynd Your self to
mayntayn.

Another exemple I give You, yet in recent memory, of Your grandfather king
JAMES. He fell to be very young, in a time, full of difficulties; yet there was
a godly party in the land, who did put the Crown upon his head: And when he
came to some years, He and his people entered in a Covenant with GOD, He was
much commended by godly and faithful men, comparing him to young Josiah
standing at the Altar, renewing a Covenant with GOD; And he himself did thank
GOD, that he was born in a Reformed Kirk, better reformed then England; for
they retained many popish ceremonies: yea, better reformed then Geneva, for
they kept some holy days; Charging his people to be constant, and promising
himself to continue in that Reformation, and to maintain the same.
Notwithstanding of all this, he made a foul defection: He remembered not the
kindness of them who had held the crown upon his head; yea, he persecuted
faithful Ministers, for opposing that course of defection. He never rested
till he had undone Presbyteriall Government, and Kirk Assemblies, setting up
Bishops, and bringing in Ceremonies, against which formerly he had given large
testimony. In a word, he laid the foundation, whereupon his son our late
king, did build much mischief to Religion, all the days of his life.

SIR, I lay this exemple before You the rather, because it is so near You, that
the guiltines of the transgression lies upon the Throne and Family, and it is
one of the sins, for which You have professed humiliation very lately. Let it
be laid to heart, take warning, requite not faithful men's kindness with
persecution; yea, requite not the LORD so, who has preserved You to this time,
and is setting a Crown upon Your head. Requite not the LORD with Apostasy and
Defection from a sworn Covenant: But be steadfast in the Covevant, as You
would give Testimony of Your True Humiliation for the Defection of these that
went before You.

I have set up these two exemples before You as beacons to warn You to keep
off such dangerous courses, and shall add one for imitation, which, if followed,
may happily bring with it the blessing of that godly man's adhere^ce to God. The
exemple is of Hezekiah, who did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
2. king. 18. 5. 6. It is said of him, He trustea in the Lord God of Israel, and
he clave unto the Lord, and departed not from following him, but kept his
Commandments. And verse. 7. The LORD was with him, and he prospered whither
soever he went forth.

Sir, follow this exemple, cleave unto the LORD, and depart not from following
him, and the LORD will be with You, and prosper You whithersoever You go. To
this LORD, from whom we expect a blessing upon this days workm, be glory and
praise for ever. Amen.

SERMON being ended, Prayer was made, for a Blessing upon the doctrine
delyvered.

The King being to renew the COVENANTS, first the National Covenant, then the
Solemn League, and Covenant, were distinctlie read.

After the reading of these COVENANTS, The MINISTER prayed for grace, to
perform the contents of the Covenants, and for faithful steadfastnesse in the
Oath of GOD; And then (the Ministers Commissioners of the General Assembly,
desired to be present, standing before the Pulpit) he ministered the Oath unto
the King; who kneeling, and lifting up his right hand, did swear in the words
following:

I CHARLES, King of Great Britane, France and Ireland, do assure and declare,
by my Solemn Oath, in the Presence of Almighty GOD, the Searcher of Hearts, my
allowance and approbation of the National Covenant, and of the Solemn League
and Covenant above-written, and faythfullie obliedge my self, to prosecute the
ends thereof, in my Station and Calling; and that I for my self and
successors, shall consent and agree, to all Acts of Parliament enjoining the
National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant, and fully establishing
Presbyteriall Government, The Directorie of Worship, Confession of Faith, and
Catechismes in the Kingdom o^f Scotland, as they are approven by the General
Assemblies of this Kirk, and Parliament of this Kingdom; And that I shall give
my Royal Assent, to Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, passed, or to be
passed, enioyning the same in my other Dominions: And that I shall observe
these in my own practice and Family, and shall never make opposition to any
of these, or endeavor any change thereof.

After the King had thus Solemnlie sworn, The National Covenant, the League
and Covenant, and the Kings Oath, subjoyned unto both being drawn up in a
fair Parchment; The King did subscrybe the same, in presence of all.

Thereafter the King ascends the Stage, and sits down in the Chair of
State.

Then the Lords, Great Constable, and Marishall, went to the four corners of
the Stage, with the Lion going before them; who spoke to the people these
words, Sirs, I do present unto you the King, CHARLES, The Rightful and
Undoubted Heir of the Crown and Dignity of this Realm; This day is by the
Parliament of this Kingdom appointed for his Coronation, And are you not
willing to have him for your King, and become subject to his Commandments?

In which action, the Kings Majesty stood up, showing himself to the people,
in each corner; And the people expressed their willingness, by cheerful
acclamations, in these words, GOD SAVE THE KING, CHARLES THE SECOND.

Thereafter the Kings Majesty supported by the Constable, and Marishall,
comes down from the Stage, and sits down in the Chair, where he heard
the SERMON.

The Minister, accompanied with the Ministers before mentioned, comes from the
Pulpit toward the King; and requires, If he was willing to take the Oath,
appointed to be taken at the Coronation.

The King answered, he was most willing.

Then the Oath of Coronation, as it is contained in the eight Act of the first
Parliament of King JAMES, being read by the Lion, The Tenor whereof follows:

Because, that the increase of Virtue, and suppressing of Idolatry, craveth,
That the Prince and the people be of one perfect Religion; which of GODS
Mercy is now presently professed within this Realm; Therefore it is statuted
and ordained, by our Sovereign Lord, my Lord Regent, and three Estates of this
present Parliament; That all Kings, Princes, and Magistrates whatsoever,
holding their place which here-after at any time shall happen to Reign, and
bear rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation, and re^eat of
their Princely Authority, make their faithful promise, in presence of the
Eternal GOD; That enduring the whole course of their lyves, they shall serve
the same Eternal GOD, to the uttermost of their power, according as he has
required in His Most Holy Word, revealed and contained in the New and Old
Testaments; And according to the same Word, shall maintain the True Religion
of CHRIST JESUS, the preaching of His Holy Word, and due and right ministration
of the Sacraments now received, and preached within this Realm. And shall
abolish and gaynst and all false religions, contrary to the same. And shall
rule the people committed to their charge, according to the will and command of
GOD revealed in His foresaid Word, and according to the Loveable Laws, and
Constitutions received in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said Word of
the Eternal GOD, And shall procure to the uttermost of their power, to the
Kirk of GOD and whole Christian people, true and perfect peace, in time
coming. The Rights and Rents, with all just Privileges of the Crown of
Scotland, to preserve and keep inviolated; Neither shall they transfer, nor
alienate the same. They shall forbid and repress in all E^ates, and degrees,
reafe, oppression, and all kind of wrong: In all judgementes they shall command
and procure that justice, and equity be kept, to all creatures, without
exception, as the LORD and Father of Mercies, be merciful unto them: And out
of their Lands and Empire they shall be careful to root out all Heretics,
and enemies to the True Worship of GOD, that shall be convict by the True Kirk
of GOD, of the foresaid crimes; And that they shall faythfullie affirm the
things above written, by their Solemn Oath.

The Minister tendered the Oath unto the King, who kneeling, and holding up his
right hand, swear in these words, By the Eternal and Almighty GOD, Who
lives and reigns for ever, I shall observe and keep all that is contained
in this Oath.

This done, the Kings Majesty sits down in his Chair, and reposeth
himself a little.

Then the King aryseth from his Chair, and is disrobed, by the Lord Great
Chamberlain, of the Princely Robe, Wherewith he entered the Kirk, and is
invested by the said Chamberlain in his Royal Robes.

There-after, the King being brought to the Chair on the North side of the
Kirk, supported as formerlie, the Sword was brought by Sir William Cockburne of
Langtown, Gentleman Usher, from the Table, and delyvered to Lion king of Arms;
Who gives it to the Lord Great Constable, who puts the same in the Kings
hand, saying, SIR, Receave this kingly Sword, for the Defense of the Faith of
CHRIST, and protection of His Kirk, and of the True Religion, as it is
presently professed within this kingdom, and according to the National
Covenant, and League and Covenant, and for executing Equity, and Justice, and
for punishment of all iniquity and injustice.

This done, the Great Constable receaveth the Sword from the King, and girdeth
the same about his side.

There-after, the King sits down in his Chair; and then the Spurs were
put on him, by the Earl Matishall.

There-after, Archibald Marquis of Argyle, having taken the Crown in his
hands, the Minister prayed to this purpose:

That the LORD would purge the Crown from the sins and transgressions of
them that did reign before Him; That it might be a pure Crown, That GOD
would settle the Crown upon the Kings head: And since men that set it on,
were not able to settle it, That the LORD would put it on, and preserve it. And
then the said Marquis put the Crown on the Kings head.

Which done, the Lion king of Arms, The Great Constable standing by him,
causes an Herald, to call the whole Noble men, one by one, according to their
ranks; who coming before the King, kneeling, and with their hand touching the
Crown on the Kings head, swear these words, By the Eternal, and Almighty
GOD, who lives and reigns for ever; I shall support thee to my uttermost.
And when they had done, then all the Nobility held up their hands, and swear
to be loyal and true subjects, and faithful to the Crown.

The Earl Marishall, with the Lion, going to the four corners of the Stage,
The Lion proclaymeth the Obligatorie Oath of the People; And the People holding
up their hands all the time, did swear By the Eternal and Almighty GOD, who
lives and reigns for ever, we become your liege men, and Truth, and Faith
shall bear unto you, and live and die with you, against all manner of folks
what-so-ever, in your service, according to the National Covenant, and solemn
League and Covenant.

Then did the Earls and Vicounts put on their crowns; and the Lion lykewayes
put on his.

Then did the Lord Chamberlayne loose the Sword wherewith the King was girded;
and draw it, and delyver it drawn into the Kings hands; and the King put it
in the hands of the Great Constable, to carry it naked before him.

Then John Earl of Craufurd and Lindsay, took the Scepter, and put it in the
Kings right hand, saying, SIR, Receave this Scepter the sign of Royal Power
of the Kingdom, that you may govern your self right, and defend all the
Christian People committed by GOD to your Charge, punishing the wicked, and
protecting the just.

Then did the King ascend the Stage, attended by the Officers of the Crown, and
Nobility, and was installed in the Royal Throne by Archibald Marquis of
Argyle, saying; Stand, and hold fast from henceforth, the place whereof you are
the lawful and righteous Heir, by a long and lineall succession, of your
fathers; which is now delyvered unto you, by authority of Almighty GOD.

When the King was set down upon the Throne, the Minister spoke to him a word
of Exhortation, as follows:

SIR, You are set down upon the Throne, in a very difficill time; I shall
therefore put you in mind of a Scripturall expression of a Throne, 1. Chron.
29. 23. it is said, Solomon sat on the Throne of the LORD. Sir, you are a
king, and a king in Covenant with the LORD; If you would have the LORD to own
you to be his king, and your Throne to be his Throne; I desire you may have
some thoughts of this expression.

It is the LORDS Throne: Remember you have a king above you The King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, who commands thrones: He sets kings on thrones, and
dethroneth them at His pleasure: Therefore take a word of advice, Be thankful
to Him, who has brought you through many wanderings to set you on this Throne:
Kiss the Son, lest He be angry; and learn to serve Him with fear, who
is terrible to the kings of the earth.

Your Throne, is the LORDS Throne; and your people, the LORDS People; Let not
your heart be lifted up above your brethren, Deutr. 17. 20. They are your
brethren, not only flesh of your flesh, but Brethren by Covenant with GOD: Let
your Government be refreshing unto them, as the rayn on the mowen grass.

Your Throne, is the TORDS Throne: Beware of making his Throne, a Throne of
iniquity: There is such a Throne, Psalm. 94. 20. Which frames mischief by a
Law, GOD will not own such a Throne; It has no fellowship with Him. Sir,
There is too much iniquity upon the Throne, by your Predecessors; who framed
mischief by a Law, such Laws as have been destructive to Religion, and
grievous to the LORDS People; You are on the Throne, and have the Scepter,
beware of touching mischievous laws therewith: But as the Throne is the LORDS
Throne, let the Laws be the LORDS Laws, agreeable to His Word, such as are
terrible to evil doers, and comfortable to the Godly, and a relief to the
Poor, and oppressed in the Land.

puts you in mind, whom you should have about the throne; Wicked
Counselors, are not for a king upon the LORDS Throne, SOLOMON knew this, who
said, Prove. 25. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne
shall be established in Righteousness: And Prove. 20. 8. A King upon the
Throne, scatters away all evil with his eyes.

puts you in mind, that the Judgment on the Throne, should be the LORDS,
Take the exhortation, Jer. 22. from the beginning, The Prophet has a command
to go to the house of the king of Judah, and say, Hear the Word of the LORD,
O king of Judah, that sit upon the Throne, and thy servants, and thy
people, Execute ye judgment, and righteousness, and delyver the spoiled, out of
the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger,
the fatherles, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place. If ye
do this thing indeed, then shall there enter by the gates of this house, kings
sitting upon the Throne of DAVID. But if ye will not hear these Words, I
swear by My Self, says the LORD, This house shall become a desolation. And
verse. 7. I will prepare destroyers against thee.

SIR, Destroyers are prepared for the injustee of the Throne, I entreat you,
execute Righteous Judgment; if you do it not, your house will be a
Desolation: But if you do that which is right, GOD shall remove the
Destroyers; And you shall be established on your Throne; And there shall yet
be Dignity in your House, for your servants, and for your people.

Lastly; If Your Throne be the Throne of the LORD, Take a word of
encouragment against Throne Adversaries, Your enemies, are the enemies of the
LORDS Throne: Make your peace with GOD in CHRIST, and the LORD shall scatter
your enemies from the Throne; And He shall magnify you yet in the sight of
these Nations, and make the misled people submit themselves willingly to Your
Government.

SIR; If You use well the LORDS Throne, on which you are set, then the two
words in the place cited, 1. Chron. 29. 23. spoken of Solomon sitting on the
Throne of the LORD, He prospered, and all Israel obeyed him, shall belong unto
you, Your people shall obey you, in the LORD; and you shall prosper in the
sight of the Nations round about.

Then the Lord Chancellor went to the four corners of the Stage, The Lion king
of Arms going before him, and proclaimed his Majesty's Free Pardon, to all
Breakers of Penal Statutes, and made offer thereof: Whereupon the people
cried, GOD SAVE THE KING.

Then the King supported by the Great Constable, and Marishall, and accompanied
with the Chancellor, arose from the Throne, and went out, at a door prepared
for the purpose, to a Stage; and showed himself to the people without, who
clapped with their hands, and cried with a loud voice, a long time, GOD SAVE
THE KING.

Then the King returning, and sitting down upon the Throne, delyvered the
Scepter, to the Earl of Craufurd and Lindsay, to be carried before him:
Thereafter the Lion king of Arms, rehearsed the Royal Line of the Kings
upward, to FERGUS the first.

Then the Lion called the Lords one by one, who kneeling and holding their
hands betwixt the Kings hands, did swear these words, By the Eternal and
Almighty GOD, who lives and reigns for ever, I do become your Liege man,
and Truth and Faith shall bear unto you, and live and die with you, against
all manner of Folks whatsoever, in your service, according to the National
Covenant, and Solemn League and Covenant.

And every one of them kissed the Kings left cheek.

When these Solemnities were ended, The Minister standing before the King on
his Throne, pronounced this Blessing:

The LORD bless thee, and save thee; The LORD hear thee in the day of
Trouble; The Name of the GOD of Jacob defend thee; The LORD send thee help
from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Sion. Amen.

After the Blessing pronounced, the Minister went to the Pulpit, and had the
following Exhortation, The King sitting still upon the Throne. Ye have this
day a King crowned, and entered into COVENANT with GOD, and his people, Look,
both King and People, that ye keep this COVENANT; and beware of the breach of
it: That ye may be the more careful to keep it, I will lay a few things
before you.

I remember when the Solemn League and Covenant was entered by both Nations,
The Co^mmissionars from ENGLAND being present in the East Kirk of Edinburgh, a
passage was cited out of Nehem. 5. 13. Which I shall now again cite, Nehemiah
requires an Oath of the Nobles and people, to restore the morgaged lands,
which they promised to do; After the Oath was tendered, in the 13. verse. he
did shake his lap, and said, So GOD shake out every man from his house, and
from his labor, that performs not his promise, even thus be he shaken out
and emptied; And all the Congregation said: Amen.

Since that time, many of these who were in Covenant, are shaken out of it;
yea, they have shaken of the Covenant, and laid it aside. It is true, they are
prospering this day, and think that they prosper, by laying aside the Covenant;
But they will be deceaved, That word spoken then, shall not fall to the ground,
GOD shall shake them out of their possession and empty them for their
perfidious breach of the Covenant.

The same I say to King and Nobles, and all that are in Covenant; If you break
that Covenant, being so solemnly sworn, All these who have touched your Crown,
and sworn to support it, shall not be able to hold it on; but GOD will shake it
off, and turn you from the Throne: And ye Noblemen, who are assistant to the
putting on of the Crown, and setting the King upon the Throne, if ye shall
either assist, or advyse the King to break the Covenant, and over-turne the
Work of GOD, he shall shake you out of your possessions, and empty you of all
your glory.

Another passage I offer to your serious consideration, Jer. 34. 8. After that
Zedekiah had promised to proclaim liberty to all the LORDS People, who were
servants, and entered in a Covenant he and his Princes to let them go free,
and according to the Oath had let them go; Afterward they caused the servants
to return, and brought them into subjection, verse. 11. What follows upon
this breach? verse. 15. 16. Ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight
in proclaiming liberty; but ye turned, and made them servants again. And
therefore, verse. 18. 19. 20. 21. I will give the men who have transgressed My
Covenant, who have not performed the words of the Covenant, which they made
before Me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts
thereof, I will even give them into the hands of their enemies, into the hand
of them that seek their life, even Zedekiah and his Princes.

If the breach of a Covenant made for the Liberty of Servants was so punished,
what shall be the punishment of the breach of a COVENANT for Religion, and the
liberty of the people of GOD? There is nothing more terrible to King and
Princes, then to be given into the hand of enemies, that seek their life. If
ye would escape this judgment, Let King and Princes keep their Covenant made
with GOD: Your enemies who seek your life, are in the Land, if ye break the
COVENANT, it may be feared, GOD give you over unto them as a prey: But if ye
keep COVENANT, it may be expected, GOD will keep you out of their hands.

Let not the place ye heard opened, be forgotten, for in it ye have an
exemple of Divine Justice against Joash and the Princes, for breaking that
COVENANT, 2. CHRON. 24. 23. The Princes who intised to that Breach, are
destroyed; and in the 24. verse. it is said, The army of the Syrians came with
a small company of men, and the LORD delyvered a very great host in their
hand; because they had forsaken the LORD GOD of their fathers: So they executed
judgment against Joash. And verse. 25. His own servantes conspired against
him, and slew him on his bed, etc.

The Conspiracy of Servants or Subjects, against their king, is a wicked
course: But GOD in His Righteous Judgment suffers Subjects to conspire and
rebel against their Princes; because they rebel against GOD: And He
suffers Subjects to break the Covenant made with a king; because he breaks
the Covenant made with GOD. I may say freely, that a chief cause of the
judgment upon the kings house, has been the Grandfathers breach of Covenant
with GOD, and the fathers following his steps in opposing the work of GOD, and
his Kirk within these kingdoms; They broke Covenant with GOD, and men have
broken Covenant with them: Yea, most cruelly and perfidiouslie have invaded
the Royal Family, and trodden upon all Princely Dignity.

Be wise by their exemple; You are now sitting upon the Throne of the kingdom,
and your Nobles about you, there is one above you, even JESUS, the King of
Sion; and I, as His servant, dare not but be free with you; I charge you, Sir,
in His Name, That you keep this Covenant in all points; If you shall break this
Covenant, and come against His Cause; I assure you, the Contraversie is not
ended between GOD and your family: But will be carried on to the further
weakening, if not the overthrow of it: But if you shall keep this Covenant,
and befriend the KINGDOM of CHRIST, It may be from this day, GOD shall begin
to do you good, Although your estate be very weak, GOD is able to raise
you, and make you reign, maugre the opposition of all your enemies: And
how-soever it shall please the LORD to dispose, you shall have peace toward
GOD, through CHRIST the MEDIATOR.

As for you who are Nobles and Peers of the Land, your share is great in this
day of Coronation, ye have come and touched the Crown, and sworn to support
it, ye have handled the Sword and the Scepter, and have set down the King upon
his Throne.

to come against the Doctrine, Worship, Government and Discipline of the Kirk,
established in this Land, as ye would eschew the judgment of Covenant
breakers. If the King and ye who are engaged to support the Crown, conspire
together against the Kingdom of CHRIST, both ye that do support, and he
that is supported, will fall together. I press this the more, because it is a
rare thing to see a king and great men for CHRIST; In the long Catalogue of
kings, which ye have heard recited this day, they will be found few who have
been for CHRIST.

2. I charge you also, because of your many Oaths to the king; That you keep
them inviolablie. Be faithful to him, according to your Covenant, The Oaths
of GOD are upon you, if directly, or indirectlie, ye do any thing against
his Standing, GOD, by whom ye have sworn, will be avenged upon you, for the
breach of His Oath.

And now I will shut up all with one word more to You, SIR, You are the only
Covenanted king with GOD, and His People, in the world; many have obstructed
Your entry in it: Now seeing the LORD has brought You in over all these
Obstructions, Only observe to do what is contained therein; and it shall prove
an happy time for You, and Your House. And because You are entered in times of
great Difficulty, wherein small strength seems to remain with You, in the eyes
of the world, for recovering Your just power and greatness; Therefore take the
Counsel which David when he was a-dying, gave to his son Solomon, 1. King.
2. 2. 3. Be strong, and show thy self a man, and keep the Charge of the LORD
thy GOD: to walk in His Ways, and keep His Commandments; that thou may
prosper in all that thou do, and whether-so-ever thou turnest thy self.

After this Exhortation, the Minister closed the whole Action, with Prayer; and
the xx. PSALM being sung, he dismissed the people, with the Blessing.

Then did the Kings Majesty descend from the Stage, with the Crown upon his
head; and receaving again the Scepter in his hand, returned with his whole
Trayn, in solemn manner, to his Palace, the Sword being carried before him.

FINIS.

