Imprimatur,

Martii 29. 1677. Guil. Sill. R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF THE Oracles of God.

Explained in a brief Exposition Of the CREED. The ten COMMANDMENTS. The LORDS
PRAYER. And the SACRAMENTS.


Together With several Hymns, or Psalms of Prayer and Praise, suited to diverse
occasions.

Deuteronomy. VI. 6.7. And these words, which I command thee this ^ay shall be in
thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children; and shall
talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Heb. V. 12. For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers ye have need that
one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, at the three Bibles in Pope's Head Alley.
1677.

TO THE READER.
THE Composer of this Catechism advises such as are otherwise likely to be
discouraged with the thoughts of learning so many Questions and Answers, to
begin first of all with those which are marked with Qu. and Answ. in the
Margin: After which they may possibly be better encouraged to learn the rest;
or at least such as are Printed in the same large Character. But whatever they
learn, let them be careful, to deliver the same distinctly, and without
mistakes, the neglect whereof has occasioned great prejudice to many, which is
much more easily prevented than remedied afterward.

He desires also such as are inclined to think diverse of the proofs to be
superfluous, especially in that part which treats of Relative Duties, to
consider that one Text of Scripture may administer further light than another,
which yet speaks to the same thing: or else the manner of expression, and the
Emphasis being various, it may be to good purpose to produce diverse Scriptures
in some cases, though the main intendment of them be one and the same. In other
places he has omitted the proofs altogether; to avoid prolixity and frequent
quotation of the same Scriptures.

He thinks it requisite likewise to signify, that the following Hymns are
collected out of the Psalms of David; several Verses of diverse Psalms being
placed under the same Head: and most of them different from the common and
ordinary version, or any other heretofore extant.

THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF THE Oracles of GOD.
[I believe in GOD the Father Almighty.]
WHat are the Articles of your Christian Faith?

Answ. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. How is it, that men come to Believe?

A. Men come to Believe ordinarily by hearing God's Word.

Romans 10.14, 17. Faith com^th by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God.
Q. Are all those true Believers, that do hear Gods Word?

A. No Matthew. 13.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. One received Seed by the Way side, another
into Stony places, another among Thorns. Matthew. 22.14. Many are called but few
are chosen. Act. 7.54. When they Heard these things, they were cut to the
Heart, and gnashed on him with their teeth.
; but such only in whom it works effectually 1 These. 2.13. When ye received
the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men,
but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you
that believe.
, being applied to them by Gods blessed Spirit 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. God has from
the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit,
and the belief of the truth, whereunto he called you by our Gospel. 1 Pet.
1.23. compared with Joh. 3.8. Being Born again not of corruptible Seed, but of
uncorruptible, by the Word of God. The Wind blows where it lists, etc. So
is every one that is Born of the Spirit.
.

Qu. When is Gods Word received and entertained aright?

A. When it is received with attention Acts 16.14. Lydia's heart the Lord
opened, that she Attended unto the things which were spoken of by Paul.
, Faith Heb. 4.2. The Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with
Faith in them that heard it.
, Love Psalm. 19.10. Sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb. Acts 17.11. The
Bereans received the Word with all readiness of mind. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved.
, Meekness Jam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the engraffed Word, which is able
to save your Souls.
; and when it is remembered and practiced by us Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I
hid in my heart, that I might not Sin against thee. Luke* 8.15. But that on the
good Ground, are they which in an honest and good heart having heard the Word
keep it, and bring forth Fruit with patience. Jam. 1.22, 23, 24, 25. Be ye
doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
.

Q. What change does there pass on those, who are effectually wrought upon by
Gods Word and Spirit?

A. 1. There is a change in their Understandings Acts 26.16, 17, 18. To open
their eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to light. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. The eyes of
your Understanding being enlightened.
, so as they are brought to the knowledge of their own sinful and miserable
Estate The Publican smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
sinner. Acts 2.37. They were pricked in their Heart, and said, Men, and
Brethren, what shall we do? Acts 13.38, 39. Neither is there Salvation in any
other: For there is none other Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved. 1 Timothy 1, 1. And the Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope. 1 Timothy 2.3. One Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
, and to the knowledge of Christ (c), the only Hope set before them (d). 2.
There is a change also in their wills Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall be willing
in the day of thy power.
, so as that they do heartily lay hold upon Jesus Christ, and receive him
according as he is offered to them Luke 23.42, 43. Lord remember me, when thou
come into thy Kingdom. Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God.
.

Q. What are we to believe concerning God?

A. We are to believe that there is a God, and what this God is.

Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Q. Does it not appear that there is a God by these things which are seen?

A. Yes, the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead.

Romans 1.20.
What do you believe God to be?

A. God is an infinite Job 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God?
Can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what
can thou do? Deeper than Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is
longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea.
Spirit Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit.
, and of himself blessed for ever Exodus 3.14. I am that I am. Romans 1.25. Who
worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for
ever.
.

What are those Attributes, or Properties, which are ascribed unto God?

A. Eternity Deuteronomy. 33.27. The Eternal God is my Refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting Arms. Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever
thou had formed the Earth, and the World, even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art God.
, Immensity 1 Kings 8.27. Behold the Heaven of heavens cannot contain thee.
, Majesty Job. 37.22. With God is terrible Majesty. Psalm. 145.5. I will speak
of the glorious honor of thy Majesty.
, Unchangeableness Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. Jam. 1.17. The Father
of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
, Wisdom Romans 17.27. To God only wise be Glory. 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King
Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, etc.
, Holiness Isa. 6.3. One cried unto another and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of Hosts. 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none Holy as the Lord. Rev. 15.4. Who shall
not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy name, for thou only art Holy.
, Power Psalm. 157.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power. Genesis 17.1. I am the
Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect. Jer. 32.17, 27. Ah Lord God,
thou have made the Heaven and the Earth by thy great power, and stretched out
arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee.
, Justice Deuteronomy. 32.4. All his ways are Judgment, a God of truth, and without
Iniquity, just and Right is he. Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst of
her, he will not do Iniquity.
, Goodness Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy
Goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee, before the Sons of men!
and Truth Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I commit my Spirit, thou have redeemed me
O Lord God of Truth. Jer. 10.10. But the Lord he is the true God, etc.
.

Q. What do you learn from Gods being a Spirit?

A. To Worship him in Spirit and truth. Joh. 4.24.

Q. What do you lear^ from the consideration of Gods Eternity?

A. That he has no need of us, who was in, and of himself God blessed for ever
Romans 1.25.
, before the Mountains were framed, or the little Hills brought forth; that the
happiness of the Godly Psalm. 48.14. For this God is our God for ever and ever.
Psalm. 73.26. God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
and the misery of the Wicked shall never have an end Matthew. 25.41. Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting Fire.
.

Q. What do ye learn from the consideration of Gods Immensity?

A. That he is every where present, filling Heaven and Earth, so that it is not
possible for us to hide our selves or flee from him.

Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him,
says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Psalm. 139.7, 8.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence.
If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in Hell, behold
thou art there.
Q. What do you learn from the consideration of Gods Majesty?

A. To adore and fall down before him Psalm. 95.6.
, and to serve him with Reverence and godly fear Heb. 12.28.
.

Q. What do you learn from the consideration of Gods Vnchangableness?

A. To hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering Heb. 10.23.
, seeing he is faithful that has promised; and to be afraid of his
threatenings which shall accordingly be inflicted 1 Samuel 15.28, 20. The Lord
has rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a
Neighbor of thine that is better than thou. And also the strength of Israel
will not lie nor Repent. Jer. 7.16. Therefore pray not thou for this people,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me; for I
will not hear thee. Deuteronomy. 3.25, 26, 27. I pray thee let me go over and see the
good Land that is beyond Jordan. But the Lord would not hear me; and the Lord
said unto me, Let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this Matter; for
thou shall not pass over this Jordan. Ezekiel. 24.13, 14. Because I have purged
thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I the Lord have spoken
it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back, neither will I
spare, neither will I repent, etc.
.

Q. What do you learn from the consideration of Gods Wisdom?

A. That God will not be mocked Gal. 6.7.
, that he observes all our ways Jer. 23.19. Prove. 15.3.
, and before him all things are naked and open Heb. 4.13.
. I learn also from hence to desire his guidance Psalm. 31.3.
, to serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
, and to pray for the pardon of my most secret Sins Psalm. 90.8. and 19.12.
.

Q. What do you learn from the consideration of Gods Holiness?

A. To abhor that which is evil and cleave to that which is good Romans 12.9.
, purifying my self even as God is pure 1 John 3.3.
.

Q. What are we to learn from the consideration of Gods Power?

A. To fear him above all Jer. 5.22. Matthew. 10.28.
, to humble our selves under his mighty hand 1 Pet. 5.6.
, not to provoke him 1 Cor. 10.22.
, or harden our selves against him Job. 9.4.
, to believe that whatever he has promised he is able to perform Romans 20.21.
, and to trust in him, not fearing what man can do unto us Psalm. 56.4, 11. Romans
8.31.
.

Q. What are we taught from the consideration of Gods Justice?

A. To pass the time of our sojourning here in fear 1 Pet. 1.17.
, to learn righteousness Isa. 26.9.
, not to complain Lam. 3.39.
, but accept of the punishment of our Iniquity Lev. 26.41.
, and acknowledge that the Lord is Righteous in all his ways Dan. 9.14.
: I learn further from hence to do no evil to my Neighbor Psalm. 15.3. Romans
13.10.
, not to go beyond, or defraud him in any matter These. 4.6.
, not to have respect of persons Prove. 24.23.
, to render unto all their dues Rem. 13.7.
, and to commit my cause to him that judges righteously 1 Pet. 2.23.
.

Q. What does the consideration of Gods Goodness teach us?

A. To love him who first loved us 1 John 4.19.
, to give him thanks Psalm. 106.1.
, to cast all our care upon him 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 55.22.
, to do good unto all Gal. 6.10.
, even to the unthankful and evil Luke 6.35, 36.
, and to forgive others as God for Christ's sake forgiveth us Ephesians. 4.32. Col.
3.13.
.

Q. What are we to learn from the consideration of Gods Truth?

A. To draw near to him with a true heart in full assurance of Faith Heb.
10.22. Psalm. 145.18. and 17.1.
, to put away lying, and speak truth every man to his Neighbor Ephesians. 4.25.
, to harbor no guile Psalm. 32.2.
, but in all simplicity and godly sincerity to have our conversation here in
this world 2 Cor. 1.12.
.

Q. Have not Creatures likewise the same Attributes which are ascribed unto God?

A. Some of Gods Attributes are incommunicable and cannot be ascribed to any
Creature: Others are communicable to Creatures. Thus Noah was a just man,
Samson a strong man, Solomon a wise man.

Q. But is there no difference between these communicable Properties; as they
are in God, and as they are in the Creatures?

A. Yes, they differ in three respects. 1. They are only Qualities in the
Creature, but in God they are his very Essence: for whatever is in God is God.
2. They are in God Originally, he is the Fountain of them: but in Creatures
they are only by participation, as they are received from him. 3. They are all
in God perfectly and infinitely: but Creatures have them only in part and by
measure.

Q. How do you then understand those Scriptures; There is none holy as the
Lord. Thou only art holy. There is none good but one, that is God?

A. I understand them thus, That God only is Essentially, Originally, and
Infinitely holy and good. Or, that Comparatively none is holy and good but God,
in comparison of whom all Creatures are nothing and less than nothing.

What have you learned further concerning God?

A. That there are three Persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost Matthew. 3.16, 17. When Jesus was Baptized, the Spirit of God like a
Dove lighted on him; and lo, a voice from Heaven saying, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 28.19. Go teach all nations, Baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor.
13.24. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
; and yet these three are but one God 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one.
.

Q. What are the personal Properties of these three Persons?

A. The personal property of God the Father is to beget the Son from all
Eternity: Of the Son, to be from all Eternity begotten of the Father: Of the
Holy Ghost, from all Eternity to proceed from them both.

Q. How may we come to the enjoyment of God?

A. By observing our Rule, which is the word of God, contained in the Old and
New Mestament.

Isa. 8.10. To the Law, and to the Testimony. John 20.30, 31. And many other
signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not written
in this Book. But these are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name.
2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; and is
profitable for Reproof, for Instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
Q. What is it that the Word of God does teach us?

A. It teaches us what we are to believe, and what we are to practice.

2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in
Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.
[Maker of Heaven and Earth.]
What is the difference between Gods work of Creation, and Gods works of
Providence?

A. Gods work of Creation is his making all things of nothing Genesis 1. Heb.
11.3. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of
God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.
. Gods works of Providence are his upholding Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by
the word of his Power.
and disposing of all his Creatures Genesis 45.7, 8. So now it was not you that
sent me hither, but God.
.

Q. What are the parts then of Providence?

A. Preservation Plal. 36.6. O Lord thou preservest man and beast.
and Government Psalm. 67.4. Thou shall judge the people righteously, and Govern
the Nations upon earth.
.

Q. Does Gods Providence dispose of all things?

A. Yes Plal. 103.19. His Kingdom rules over all.
, even those things which to us seem most casual Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast
into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
and inconsiderable Mat. 10.29, 30, 31. Are not two Sparrows sold for a
Farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father. But
the very Hairs of your head are all numbered.
.

Q. What should the Consideration thereof teach us?

A. Not to quarrel at his proceedings, or distrust him; but submit our selves
to his holy will, and cast all our care upon him, who cares for us.

Which are the principle Creatures God made?

A. Angels and Men.

What have you learnt concerning the Angels?

A. Col. 1.16. For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers. Psalm. 104.4. Who makes his Angels Spirits.
, of whom some continue in their holy state Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man
shall come in Glory, and all the holy Angels with him.
, the bright Inhabitants of Heaven Matthew. 22.30. In the Resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in
Heaven.
: other fell from it and became Devils, who are reserved in everlasting Chains
under darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day John 8.44. Ye are of your
Father the Devil. Jude 6. The Angels which kept not their first Estate, but
left their own Habitation he has reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness
unto the Judgment of the great day.
.

Whereof does Man consist?

A. Of an earthy Body, and of a reasonable and immortal Soul.

Genesis 2.7. The Lord God formed Man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living Soul. Matthew. 10.28.
But rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.
Q. Is not the Soul of man his better part, and chiefly to be minded?

A. Yes certainly; for what will it profit a man to gain the whole world if he
lose his own Soul? So that if I should mind my Body, and my outward estate and
condition more carefully than my Soul and my Spiritual estate and condition, I
shall be guilty of the greatest and most desperate folly and madness; and it
would have been good for me if I had not been born.

In what estate was man at first created?

A. In a state of Innocence after the Image of God.

Genesis 1.27. God created man in his own Image. Eccles. 7.29. God has made man
Upright, but they have sought out many Inventions.
Wherein did that Image of God consist?

A. In Knowledge Col. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in
Knowledge, after the Image of him that created him.
, Righteousness and Holiness Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man, which
after God is created in Righteosness and true Holiness.
, and dominion over the rest of Inferior Creatures Genesis 1.28. And have
Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every
living thing that moves upon the Earth.
.

What are those two Covenants, which God did make with Man?

A. A Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace.

Qu. Which is the Covenant of Works?

A.

Gal. 3.10, 11, 12. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the Book of the Law to do them. The man that does them, shall
live in them.
Q. Did man perform this condition on his part?

A. No, Genesis 3.6. She took of the Fruit thereof and did eat; and gave also unto
her Husband with her and he did eat.
, which God had strictly forbidden Genesis 2.17. But of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely dye.
.

Q. What are those heinous sins which man's eating of the forbidden Fruit did
include in it?

A. Besides the disobeying of Gods express Commandment, this sin of our first
Parents did include in it, 1. A high degree of Pride and Ambition, in that they
aspired to be as God. 2. Unbelief, in that they credited not Gods Threatening.
3. Ingratitude toward God, who had made them, and done so much for them, and
had given them so great a variety to eat of. 4. Credulity in hearkening to
Satan, when he said, Ye shall not surely dye. 5. Discontent with that which was
allotted them. 6. Luxury, in indulging so much to please the sense. 7.
Sacriledg, in taking that which God had so reserved. 8. Murder of themselves
and their Posterity.

Did all man's Posterity sin in the fall of Adam?

A. All that came from him by a natural and ordinary way of Generation; for
they were all in his Loins; and the Covenant was made not with him only, but in
him with his Posterity also.

Romans 5.12. Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. 1 Cor. 15.22.
For as in Adam all dye: even so in Christ shall all he made alive.
What condition did Mankind fall into?

A.

Q. Wherein does the sinfulness of man's fallen Estate consist?

A. In Original sin Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me.
, and in his actual sins Matthew. 15.19. For out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, etc. James 1.15. Then when Lust has conceived,
it brings forth Sin.
.

What is Sin?

A.

1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law: for Sin is
the transgression of the Law. Rom 4.15. Where no Law is, there is no
Transgression.
Q. Wherein does Original Sin consist?

A. In the guilt of that first Sin, which Adam committed Romans 5.19. For as by
one man's disobedience many were made Sinners, etc.
, in the want of that righteousness wherein he was created Romans 3.10. There is
none righteous, no not one.
; and in the Corruption of our whole Nature, from whence proceed our actual
Sins, which are the particular breaches of Gods Law James 1.14, 55. But every
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed, etc.
.

Q. How many ways do we fall into actual sins?

A. By Omission, or leaving undone what we ought to do Matthew. 23.23. These
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
: and by Commission, or doing what we ought not to do Isa. 65.12. But did evil
before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.
.

Q. What miseries did man by his sin fall into?

A. He not only lost the enjoyment of Communion with his Maker Genesis 3.8, 24.
Adam and his Wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the
trees of the Garden. So he drove out the man, etc.
, but brought himself under the wrath and curse of God Ephesians. 2.3. And were by
nature the Children of Wrath even as others. Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the
works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them.
, became liable to all the evils, pains and sorrows of this present life, Lam.
3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his
sins?
to death Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the World, and death by
sin; so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.
, and to the endless woes and torments of Hell Mat. 25.41, 42. Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire.
.

What is the Covenant of Grace?

A.

John 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thine
house.
[And in JESUS CHRIST] his only Son, our Lord, etc.
Q. What do these words JESUS and CHRIST signify?

A. JESUS signifies a Savior Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for
he shall Save his people from their sins.
, and CHRIST signifies Anointed, that is appointed, fitted* commissionated, and
sent by God Luke 4.18* 21. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me to Preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, etc.
.

Q. Who then is Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, who for our sakes became man, and
is the Anointed Savior.

What is it to believe in Jesus Christ?

A. To believe in Jesus Christ is to receive him entirely as he is tendered in
the Gospel, and to rest upon him only for Salvation; or Faith in Jesus Christ
is the hearty accepting of him, as our only Lord and Savior.

John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. Phil, 3.8.9. Yea doubtless,
and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord: For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do account
them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, etc. 1 Timothy 2.5. One
Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.
What are the Characters of this true Faith, whereby it may be known?

A. A true saving Faith may be known by a ready receiving and obeying of Gods
Word 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of us, not as
the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God, which effectually
works on them that believe. Romans 16.26. The Obedience of Faith.
by a high prizing of Jesus Christ Cant. 5.10, 16. The chiefest among ten
thousand; altogether lovely. 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you which believe he is precious.
, by purifying of the heart Acts 15.9. Purifying their hearts by faith.
, by good Works James 2.14, 17, 20. What does it profit my Brethren, though a
man say he has Faith and have not works? Can Faith save him? Will thou know O
vain man, that Faith without Works is dead?
, and by overcoming of the World 1 John 5.4. This is the Victory that
overcomes the world, even our Faith.
.

Q. How is Jesus Christ Gods only Son?

A. By eternal Generation John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. Prove. 8.23, 24, 25. When there were no depths I was
brought forth, when there were no Fountains abounding with water.
. Angels Job 38.7. When the morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of
God shouted for joy.
and men Luke 3.38. Which was the Son of Enos, which was the Son of Seth, which
was the Son of Adam, which was the Son of God. Acts 17.28. For in him we live,
and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own Poets have said, For
we are also his offspring.
are Gods Children by Creation. All true Believers are Gods Children by
Adoption Gal. 4.5, 6. To Redeem them that were under the Law, that ye might
receive the Adoption of Sons. Romans 8.15. Ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
and Regeneration 1 John 3.7. every one that loves, is born of God, and
knows God.
; and enjoy the Privileges of Children, safe Protection Prove. 18.10. The name
of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs into it and is safe. Psalm.
91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways, etc.
, suitable Provision Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou
dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Psalm. 84.11. No good thing will
he withold from them that walk uprightly.
, due Correction Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth and
scourges every Son, whom he receives.
, Audience and Acceptance Psalm. 145.18, 19. The Lord is Nigh unto all them that
call upon him, etc. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he also
will hear their cry, and will save them. John 16.23, 24. Whatever ye shall ask
the Father in my name he will give it you. Matthew. 2.9, 10, 11. What man is
there among you, whom if his Son ask bread, etc. How much more shall your
Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him?
, and a sure title to a glorious Inheritance Romans 8.17. And if Children then
heirs; heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ.

1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again,
etc. To an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for you.


.

Q. How do you prove that Jesus Christ is God?

A. 1. Those Attributes are ascribed to him, which are incommunicable to
Creatures, as Eternity Prove. 8.23. I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the Earth was. John 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.
, Omnipotence Heb. 1.2.3. Who being the brightenss of his Glory, and the
express Image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power,
etc.
, Omniscience John 21.17. Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee.
, Omnipresence John 28.20. Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the
World.
. 2. Divine Honor and Worship is to be given to him Matthew. 28.9. Baptizing
them in the name of the Father and of the Son. 2 Cor. 1.2. With all that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord. Heb. 1.6. When he
brings in the first-begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels
of God Worship him.
. 3. He is in Scripture called God In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. Romans 9.5. Of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever.
.

Q. Has Jesus Christ two distinct entire natures?

A. Yes, John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us. Gal. 4.4. When
the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, etc.
and the Divine Nature Col. 2 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily.
, Romans 9.5. Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all God
blessed for ever Matthew. 22.45. If David did call him Lord, how is he his Son.
both in one person (e).

Q. Why was our Mediator both God and Man?

A. He became Man, that he might be capable of suffering, and that he might
make satisfaction in the same nature that had offended Heb. 2.14, 15. Forasmuch
then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise
took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, etc. 1. Cor. 15.21. For since by man came death, by man came
also the Resurrection of the dead.
. And being God he was able to undergo, and get through his sufferings Acts
2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it. 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has
once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God,
being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.
, and his sufferings were available 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot.
Heb. 10.14. For by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.
.

Was Jesus Christ conceived and born in an ordinary way, as others are?

A. No; He was conceived by the Holy Ghost Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee.
, and born of the Virgin Mary Matthew. 1.25. And knew her not, till she had
brought forth her firstborn Son, and called his name Jesus.
, without sin Luke 1.35. Therefore that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God. Heb. 7.26. Such an High Priest became us, as
was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.
.

Q. What are the Offices of Jesus Christ, our anointed Savior?

A. Three; the Office of a Prophet Acts, 3.22. A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear.
, of a Priest Heb. 5.5, 6. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec.
, and of a King Psalm 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
Isa. 9.6. And the Government shall be upon his shoulder.
.

Q. What is Christ's Prophetical Office?

A. Christ's Office, as he is a Prophet, is to reveal, or make known to us Gods
will.

John 1.18. No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. John 15.15. All things that I
have heard of my Father I have made known unto you.
Q. How does Christ make known to us Gods will.

A. Outwardly by his Word Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ.
, and inwardly by his Spirit John 14.26. But the Comforter, who is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things.
.

Q. Wherein consists Christ's Priestly Office?

A. In Offering up himself a Sacrifice Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the Blood
of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
purge the Conscience from dead works to serve the living God.
once for all Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. 1
Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust.
, and in making continual Intercession for us Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able
also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.
.

Q. What are the two parts then of Christ's Priesthood?

A. Oblation and Intercession.

Q. Why did Christ offer up himself a Sacrifice?

A. To satisfy the Justice of God Heb. 2.17. Wherefore in all things it behoved
him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins
of the people.
, and to purchase for us his favor Ephesians. 5.6. He has made us accepted in the
beloved. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off,
are made nigh by the Blood of Christ: for he is our Peace, who has made both
one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us.
.

Q. How did Christ fulfill and satisfy that first Covenant, whereunto man was
obliged?

A. In performing that Righteousness which the Law of God did require Psalm
40.6, 7. Lo, I come, in the Volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy
will, O God. Romans 8.3, 4. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak
through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin condemned sin in the flesh, That the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us.
, Isa. 53.5, 6. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our Iniquities. 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust.
and in bearing the punishment which was due for the breaking of it (h).

Q. But is it agreeable to Justice, that the innocent should suffer what the
guilty deserve?

A. There is no injustice in (...) ^ince Christ did willingly, and (...) accord
undertake the same, (...) ^ng power so to do.

John 10.18. No man takes my life from me, I lay it down of my self. I have
power to lay it down, etc.
Q. Did the benefit of Christ's death extend to those who were before his
Incarnation?

A. Yes; the Saints of God who before Christ's time, were saved likewise by
Faith in him Romans 3.30. Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the
Circumcision by Faith, and uncircumcisio^ through Faith. Romans 4.6. Even as
David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto who^ God imputes
Righteousness without works.
, who was revea^ed to them by Promises Ge^. 3.15. And I will put enmity between
thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and her seed: ^ shall bruise thy head,
and thou shall bruise his he^ Genesis 22.18. And in thy seed shall all the Nations
^ the Earth be blessed.
, Types John 3 14, 15. And ^ Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness:
(...) must the Son of man be lifted up; That whose ever believes in him should
not perish, but have eternal life. John 6.31, 32, 33. Our Fathers d^ eat Manna
in the desert; as it is written, he gav^ them Bread from Heaven to eat. Then
Jesus sa^^ unto them, My Father gives you the true bread from Heaven. For the
bread of God is he which come^^ down from Heaven and gives life unto the Wor^^
and Sacrifices 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed f^ us. Heb. ^*12,
13. Neither by the blood of Go^ and (...) but by his own blood he obtained
etern^^ Read. (...). For if the blood of Christ, wh^ through (...) Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, (...) ^ev. 13.8. The Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World.
.

Q. How is it that the second Covenant is called a Covenant of Grace seeing
Christ has paid a full price?

A. It is a Covenant of Grace an^ Mercy notwithstanding Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
Being justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his blood
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God: To declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that
he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.
; becau^^ 1. Christ was freely given by the Father John. 3.16. For God so loved
the World that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Romans 8.32. He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, etc.
. 2. What Christ did and suffered was accepted for others in their stead Romans
5.18, 19. By the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men, unto
justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made Sinners:
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of
him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
. 3. Faith it self, which is required of us, is Gods gift Ephesians. 2.8. For by
Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift
of God.
, and he inables us to that Obedience and Service we Pay unto him 1 Cor. 29.14.
But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort. Ezekiel. 46.26, 27. A new heart also will I give you,
and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and
ye shall keep my Commandments, and do them. Philip. 2.13. For it is God, that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.
.

Q. May we then sit still and say, It Is God must do all?

A. No surely; we must strive to enter in at the strait Gate Luke 13.24.
, run that we may obtain 1 Cor. 9.24.
, fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold on eternal life 1 Timothy 6.12.
; give diligence to make our Calling and Election sure 2 Pet. 1.10.
, and because it is God that works in us, therefore we must work out our own
Salvation with fear and trembling Philip. 2.12, 13.
.

Q. How could Christ's Obedience satisfy for others, since he himself being a
man was bound to obey God?

A. Because he was also God, and did freely and voluntarily become man.

Philip. 2.6, 7. Who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal
with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the likeness of men. Heb. 2.14, 15, Forasmuch as the
Children are Partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the
same.
Wherein consists Christ's Kingly Office?

A. In subduing us unto himself Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power.
, in protecting and governing us Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
, and in Restraining, Conquering, and Triumphing over all his Enemies Psalm.
76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall
thou restrain. 1 Cor. 15.25, 28. For he must reign, till he has put all
Enemies under his Feet. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, etc.
Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine Enemies thy footstool.
.

In what respects did Christ humble himself?

A. That he became a man Luke 2.11. For unto you is born this day in the City
of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Heb. 2.16. For verily he took not
on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham.
, and was born in so mean a condition Luke 2.7. And she brought forth her
firstborn Son, and wrapped him in Swadling-cloaths, and laid him in a Manger,
because there was no room for them in the Inn. ver. 22.24. And when the days of
her purification according to the Law of Moses were accomplished, they brought
him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord; and to offer a Sacrifice,
according to that which is said in the Law of the Lord, a pair of Turtle Doves,
or two young Pigeons. Compared with Lev. 12.8. And if she be not able to bring
a Lamb, then she shall bring two Turtles, or two young Pigeons. Colos. 1.20.
And (having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all
things unto himself, etc.
, that he was subject to the Law Gal. 4.4. Made under the Law.
, that he underwent the sorrows of this life Isa. 53.3. He is despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief.
, and was tempted of the Devil Matthew. 4.1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit
into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil.
, that he endured heavy and grievous torments in his Soul Mat. 26.37, 38. My
Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. Luke 22.44. And being in an Agony,
he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling to the ground. Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
, that he submitted to diverse Indignities Matthew. 26.67, 68. Then did they spit
in his face, and buffeted him, and others smote him with the palms of their
hands, saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee. Mark
14.65. And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to say unto
him Prophesy: and the Servants did strike him with the palms of their hands.
Matthew. 27.27, 28, 29, 30. The Soldiers took Jesus into the Common Hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band. And they stripped him, and put on him a
Scarlet Robe. And when they had platted a Crown of thorns, they put it upon his
head, and a Reed in his right hand, and they bowed the knee before him, and
mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews. And they spit upon him, and took the
Reed and smote him on the head.
, and died upon the Cross a shameful, painful, and cursed death Philip. 2.8. He
humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
Heb. 12.2. Who endured the Cross, despising the shame. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us; for it is
written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Deuteronomy. 21.23. He that is
hanged is accursed of God.
, that he was buried Luke 23.52, 53. Joseph went unto Pilat, and begged the
body of Jesus, and he took it down and wrapped it in linen and laid it in a
Sepulcher.
, and that he continued three days in the Grave Mat. 12.40. For as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the Whales belly: so shall the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
.

Q. Who was Pontius Pilate?

A. Pontius Pilate was a Roman sent by Tiberius the Emperor to be a Governor
in Judea, who upon the malicious Matthew. 27.18. For he knew, that for envy they
had delivered him.
instigation Matthew. 27.23, 25. They all say unto him, Let him be Crucified.
They cried out the more, saying, let him be Crucified. All the people answered
and said, His blood be on us and on our Children.
of the Jews (out of whose hands the power of life and death was taken away)
John 18.38. The Jews said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death.
, and to content them condemned Jesus Christ to dye according to the custom of
the Roman Empire, the death of the Cross Mark 15.15. Pilate willing to content
the people released Barrabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus to be Crucified.
Luke 23.24, 25. And Pilate gave sentence, that it should be as they required,
and he delivered Jesus to their will.
.

Q. Why was it requisite to express the person under whom our Savior suffered?

A. 1. To assure us of the time in which he suffered; and thereby the more to
confirm us in the steadfast belief thereof. 2. That the very naming of Pilate
might be a standing Testimony of our Saviors Innocence, which was openly
professed and declared even by him, who (to content the people) did sentence
him to so ignominious a death. 3. That we may understand how it was brought to
pass that Christ suffered according to the Scriptures, the manner of whose
death (though he was to dye near Jerusalem) was not agreeable to the Laws and
Customs of the Jews.

Q. How can it be, that Christ continued three days in the grave, seeing he was
buried the Friday and rose again the first day of the week, or the Lord-sday
early in the Morning.

A. A part of the natural day (which includes both day and night, or twenty
four hours) is taken for the whole day: and then the day in which he was buried
is one, and the day on which he rose is another; or he was buried upon the
first of those three days, and upon the last of those three days he rose. Which
is the ordinary way of reckoning in computation of time. When we read then that
he was three days and three nights in the Grave, we must not look upon those
nights as distinct from the days; but as Moses spoke, The evening and the
morning (i. e. the night and the day) were the first day.

Q. What are the several parts of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His rising again from the dead on the third day Matthew. 16.21. From that
time forth, began Jesus to show unto his Disciples, how that he must go unto
Jerusalem and suffer many things of the Elders and Chief-Priests, and Scribes,
and be killed, and be raised again the third day. Romans 8.34. Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that dyed; yea rather that is risen again. 1 Cor.
15.4. And that he rose again the third day, according to to the Scriptures.
; his ascending up into Heaven Acts 1.9, 10. And when he had spoken these
things while they beheld he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
sight.
, when he had continued after his Resurrection forty days here upon earth Acts
1.3. To whom also he has showed himself alive after his Passion by many
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God.
; his sitting on the Right hand of God the Father Mark 16.19. So then after the
Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into Heaven, and sat on the
right hand of God. Ephesians. 1.20. Which he wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places.
; and his coming at the last day to judge the quick and the dead Acts. 10.42.
And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he
which was ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead. 2 Timothy 4.1. I
charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom.
.

Whom do you understand to be meant by the quick and the dead?

A. By the quick are meant such as shall be here alive when Christ comes to
judgment: by the dead all those departed hence before the time of Christ's
coming to Judgment.

What does the Scripture declare of those, who shall be found here alive at the
last day?

A. They shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye 1 Cor. 15.51,
52.
, and caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
.

In what manner will Christ come to judgment?

A. He will come visibly Matthew. 24.30. And then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man in Heaven. And then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and
they shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Rev. 1.7. Behold
he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him, etc.
in great power and Glory Matthew. 24.30. And they shall see the Son of man
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with power and great Glory.
, accompanied by his holy Angels Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come
in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, etc.
, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God
These. 4.16.
.

What is the Sentence of Absolution, which Christ will hereafter pronounce at
the day of Judgment?

A. Come ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the World. Matthew. 25.34.

What is the Sentence of condemnation, which Christ will then pass upon the
wicked?

A. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Matthew. 25.41.

Q. What are we more especially to learn from the Consideration of this day of
Judgment?

A. 1. Not to be ashamed of Jesus Christ now (a). 2. Not to allow our selves in
any way of evil, how secret soever Eccles. 12.13. For God shall bring every
work unto judgment, with every secret thing. Romans 2.16. In the day, when God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.
. 3. To judge nothing before the time Romans 14.4, 10, 12, 13. Who art thou that
judge another man's servant? To his own master he stands or falls. But why
do thou judge thy Brother? or, why do thou set at naught thy Brother? For
we shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ. So then every one of us
shall give an account of himself to God. Let us not therefore judge one another
any more. 1 Cor. 4.5. Wherefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the Counsels of the hearts. Jam 5.9. Grudge not one against another
Brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold the Judge stands before the door.
. 4. To repent Acts 17.30, 31. But now commands all men every where to
repent, because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained.
. 5. To discover our moderation Philip. 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto
all men, the Lord is at hand.
. 6. To be patient Jam. 5.7, 8. Be patient therefore Brethren unto the coming
of the Lord. Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the Earth,
and has long patience for it until he receive the early and the latter rain.
Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws
nigh.
. 7. To maintain a spiritual watch Matthew. 24.42. Watch therefore, for ye know
not what hour your Lord does come. Luke 1, 2.37. Blessed are those Servants
whom the Lord when he comes, shall find watching.
, and keep our garments clean Rev. 3.4. and 16.15. Thou have a few names, which
have not defiled their garments: and they shall walk with me in white, for they
are worthy. Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments.
. 8. To be charitable Matthew. 25.35. For I was an hangred and ye gave me meat,
etc. 2 Timothy 1.16.18. The Lord give mercy to the House of Onesiphorus, for he
often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. The Lord grant unto him,
that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day.
. 9. To wish and pray for its coming 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day. And not unto me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. Tit. 2.13. Looking for, that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking
for, and hasting unto the coming of the Day of God, wherein the Heavens being
on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. Rev.
22.20. Surely I come quickly. Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.
. And Lastly, To comfort one another with the hopes and expectation thereof 1
These. 4.16, 17, 18. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and the
dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so
shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words.
.

Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed
when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.
Q. What have you learnt further relating to the Day of Judgment?

A. That this World shall then be burnt up 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, 11. But the Heavens
and the Earth which are now, are reserved unto fire against the day of
Judgment, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought we to be, etc.
; and Christ will resign his Mediatory Kingdom to God the Father, that God may
be all in all (b).

[I Believe in the HOLY GHOST.]
Whom do you understand by the Holy Ghost.

A. The Holy Ghost (or Holy-Spirit) is the third Person in the Godhead 1 John
5.7. There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost.
, who proceeds from the Father and the Son John 15.26. But when the Comforter
is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, etc. Gal. 4.6. God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, etc.
, and yet is equal with them both 1 John 5.7. And these three are one.
, and is the Sanctifier of all the elect people of God Matthew. 3.11. He shall
Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
.

Q. Show me more particularly what you have learnt concerning the Operations or
workings of this Holy Spirit in the hearts of Gods people?

A, 1. It inlightens their understandings by convincing them of Sin John 16.9.
And when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin.
, and giving them the knowledge of God 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God. For what man knows the things of a man save the Spirit of man
which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of
God. 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost.
. 2. It inables them to kill and mortify their corruptions Romans 8.13. If ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
. 3. It does cleanse and renew their natures Matthew. 3.11. He shall Baptize you
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of reghteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
. 4. It quickens and inlivens them Matthew. 3.11. He shall Baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of reghteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
, dwells in them Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so
be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not, that ye are
the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
, and makes them fruitful Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, etc.
. 5. It frees them from a servile slavish disposition, and gives them a filial
spirit Romans 8.15, 16. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to
fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits that we are the children of
God. 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Gal. 4.6.
And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father.
. 6. It leads them into all truth, guides and regulates them in their
Conversations John 16.13. Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he
will guide you into all truth. John 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your Remembrance whatsoever I have said unto
you. Romans 1.14. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For as many
as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. Gal. 5.16, 25. Walk
in the Spirit, etc.
. 7. It comforts and rejoices them even in the midst of sorrows with the sense
of Gods love John 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, etc. Acts
9.31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, etc. and walking in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied. Romans
5.5. And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. Romans 14.17. Righteousness and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. And ye became followers of us,
and of the Lord, having re eived the Word in much affliction with joy of the
Holy Ghost. Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, etc.
Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise. Which is the earnest of our Inheritance.
. 8. It helps their infirmities, and assists them in their supplications Romans
8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered, etc. Zach. 12.10. And I will
pour upon the House of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit
of grace and of supplications. Jude 20. But ye beloved, building up your selves
on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the
love of God.
.

Romans 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free
from the law of sin and death.
Q. How do you prove that the Holy Ghost is God?

A. 1, Those Attributes are ascribed to him, that are proper to God only, as
Omniscience 1 Cor. 2.10. For the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God.
and Omnipresence Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, and whither
shall I flee from thy presence?
. 2. We are Baptized in his name Matthew. 28.19. Baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
. 3. He is in Scripture called God Acts 5.3, 4. Why has Satan filled thy heart
to lie unto the Holy Ghost? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God.
, and said to be the same with the Father and the Son 1 John. 5.7. These three
are one.
.

[The holy Catholic Church.]
What do you mean by the holy Catholic Church?

A. I mean by the holy Catholic (or Universal) Church all the people and
servants of God throughout all ages, in the several parts and quarters of the
World, united to one and the same Head, Jesus Christ Ephesians. 2.20, 21. And are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone: In whom all the building fitly framed together
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Col. 1.18. He is the head of the body
the Church.
, quickened by one and the same Spirit Ephesians. 4.4. There is one Body and one
Spirit.
, and embracing one and the same Faith Ephesians. 4.5. One Faith, and one Baptism.
.

Q. What do you understand by the visible and invisible Church?

A. The Visible Church are those, who do openly profess the true Religion,
together with the Children that descend from such Parents, or from one of them:
the Invisible Church are those who do heartily and sincerely embrace the same
true Religion, which they do profess, giving up themselves entirely to the
Obedience of Faith.

Q. Why are they called Invisible?

A. Because we cannot certainly discern them who they are.

1 Cor. 2.11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of a
man which is in him?
Q. Wbat do you mean by the Church Militant and Triumphant?

A. The Church Militant are the people and servants of God here upon Earth,
wrestling and combating with many and various Enemies Ephesians. 6.12, 13. For we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, etc. Wherefore
take unto you the whole Armor of God, etc.
. The Church Triumphant are the faithful servants of God, who by the gracious
assistance and strength of Jesus Christ their Leader and Captain of their
Salvation have conquered all their Enemies, and are now triumphing in Heaven
Heb. 12, 23. And to the Spirits of just men made perfect. Rev. 7.9, 10. After
this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all
Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands; And cried
with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb.
.

Q. Will the Enemies of Gods Church be ever able to overthrow it?

A. No, It has continued hitherto notwithstanding all oppositions, and it will
continue in a constant succession of its members to the end of the World.

Matthew. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Matthew. 28.20.
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World.
[The Communion of Saints.]
With whom do the Saints enjoy Communion?

A. The Saints do especially enjoy Communion with God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost 1 John 1.3. Truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ Christ, and
the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
, and with one another 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us.
.

Q. What does the Communion or Fellowship which the Saints have with God,
include or carry with it?

A. 1. Conformity or likeness Psalm. 4.3. The Lord has set apart him that is
godly for himself. 2 Cor. 6.14. For what fellowship has Righteousness with
Unrighteousness, and what Communion has light with darkness.
. 2. Peace and Union Amos 3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed?
. 3. Mutual interest and right one in another Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine
and I am his. Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband. 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in
them and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
. 4. Mutual converse and correspondence; God communicates his Grace to the
Soul, and the Soul returns the fruits of it to him Cant. 4.16. Awake O North
wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may
flow out. Let my beloved come into his Garden and eat his pleasant fruits. Isa.
61.3. That they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the
Lord, that he might be glorified. 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a
peculiar people, that ye may show forth the praise of him who has called you
out of darkness into his mavelous light.
.

Q How many ways do the Saints enjoy Communion one with another?

A. In admonishing, councelling and comforting one another Luke 22.32. And when
thou art Converted strengthen thy Brethren. Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate
thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and
not suffer sin upon him. Romans 1.11, 12. For I long to see you that I may impart
unto you some spiritual gift, to the end you may be established, that I may be
comforted together with you by the mutual Faith both of you and me. 1 Thessalonians.
5.11, 14. Wherefore Comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even
as also you do. Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day,
etc.
, in serving God together Acts 2.42, 46, 47. And they continued steadfastly in
the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in prayers,
, in confessing their faults mutually, and praying one for another James 5.16.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another.
, in bearing one another burdens Romans 12.15. Weep with them that weep. Gal.
6.2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
, in being good Examples each to other Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be followers
together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an example. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7. So that ye were Ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia.
, and charitably supplying one another wants. Acts 11.29, 30. Then the
Disciples every man according to his ability determined to send relief unto the
Brethren which dwelt in Judea. Which also they did, and sent it to the Elders
by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity
let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of
Faith.


[The forgiveness of Sins.]
What is meant by the Forgiveness of Sins.

A.

Romans 8.8. There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus.
Q. What is the desert of every Sin?

A. The curse of Almighty God Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them.
, both here Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, etc. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and Cursed
shall thou be in the Field, etc.
and hereafter Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire.
Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.
.

May we expect forgiveness of our Sins without Repentance?

A. No, Forgiveness of Sins, and Repentance must go together.

Luke 24.47. And that Repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his name among all Nations. Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and
a Savior, for to give Repentance to Israel and forgiveness of Sins.
Wherein does true Repentance consist?

A. Psalm. 38.4. For mine Iniquities are gone over my head as an heavy burden,
they are too heavy for me. Matthew. 26.75. And Peter remembered the words of
Jesus, which said unto him, Before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. And
he went out and wept bitterly. Acts 2.37. They were pricked to the heart, and
said to Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we
do?
, and amendment of life for the time to come Romans 6.16, 17, 18, 19. Being then
made free from sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. And
how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God.
.

What is it to be justified?

A. To be justified, is to have our Sins pardoned Romans 3.24, 25. Being
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of Sins that are past through the
forbearance of God.
, and our persons accepted as righteous in and through Jesus Christ? Romans 5.19.
By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him.


Q. What are the parts then of justification?

A. Two, Forgiveness and Acceptance.

What is it to be sanctified?

A. To be sanctified is to be renewed after Gods own Image in knowledge Col.
3.10. And have put on the new man' which is renewed in knowledge after the
Image of him that created him.
, righteousness, and true holiness Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
.

Q. What are the parts of Sanctification?

A. Mortification Romans 6.6, 11. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve Sin. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin.
, (or dying unto Sin) and vivification Romans 6.11, 13. But alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Yield your selves unto God, as those that are
alive from the dead. Romans 8.1. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.
, or living unto righteousness.

Q. What have you learnt further concerning Sanctification?

A. That it is neither equal in all Heb. 5.12, 13. For when for the time ye
ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk and
not of strong meat. For every one that uses milk is unskilful in the word of
Righteousness, for he is a babe, etc. 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. I write unto you
little Children, etc. unto you young men, etc. unto you Fathers, etc.
, nor in this life perfect in any 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin, me
deceive our selves. Heb. 12.23. And to the Spirits of just men made perfect. 1
Cor. 13.9, 10. For we know in part, and we Prophesy in part. But when that
which is perfect is come, etc.
, but growing up toward perfection 2 Cor. 7.1. Prrfecting holiness in the fear
of God. Philip. 3.12, 13.14. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended*
but reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark.
.

Q. Do we deserve forgiveness of sins, and eternal Salvation by our Repentance
and Obedience?

A. No certainly, God saves us according to his mercy Tit. 3.5.
, and the riches of his Grace Ephesians. 1.6.7.
, and when we have done all that we can, we are unprofitable Servants Luke 19.10
.

Q. What is required to render a man's work meritorious, so as he may truly be
said to deserve or merit thereby without any consideration of Grace and Favor.

A. It Is required in order to the rendering of a man's work to be thus
meritorious. 1. That it be his own. 2. That it be not due. 3. It must be
complete and perfect, or else 'twill need a Pardon. 4. It must be
proportionable to the Reward.

Q. Does it appear from hence that whatsoever we can do, cannot merit eternal
life at Gods hands?

A. Yes, In every of those respects; For, 1. Faith Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace are
ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God.
Philip. 1.29. For unto you is given not only to believe on him, etc.
, and Repentance Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
Sins. Acts. 11.18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and
glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance
unto life.
Jam. 1.17. 1 Chronicles. 29, 14.16. All things come of thee, and of thine own have
we given thee. All this store comes of thine hand, and it is all thine own. 2
Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of
our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.
are Gods gifts; yea every good and perfect gift is from above (c). 2. We owe
all that we have to God as we are his Creatures made and maintained by him
Prove. 16, 4. The Lord has made all things for himself. Genesis 48.15. The God
which fed me all my life long unto this day. Luke 17.7, 8, 9, 10. Does he thank
that Servant, because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not. So
likewise ye, when ye shall have done all these things, which are commanded you,
say we are unprofitable Servants: We have done that which was our duty to do.
. 3. There are Iniquities in our most holy things Exodus 28.36, 37, 38. And thou
shall make a plate of pure Gold, and grave upon it like the ingravenings of a
Signet, Holiness to the Lord. And it shall be upon Aron's forehead, that Aron
may bear the iniquity of the Holy things which the Children of Israel shall
hallow in all their holy gifts, and it shall be always upon his forehead that
they may be accepted before the Lord.
. 4. There is no proportion between our finite imperfect Services, and a
glorious infinite Reward Exodus 28.36, 37, 38. And thou shall make a plate of
pure Gold, and grave upon it like the ingravenings of a Signet, Holiness to the
Lord. And it shall be upon Aron's forehead, that Aron may bear the iniquity of
the Holy things which the Children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy
gifts, and it shall be always upon his forehead that they may be accepted
before the Lord.
.

Mat. 19.29. And every one that has forsaken houses or Brethren, or Sisters,
or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit eternal life. Romans 8.18. For I
reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us.
[The Resurrection of the Body.] And the life Everlasting.
Q. Is it certain, that all men must dye?

A. Yes, it is appointed for all men once to dye. Heb. 9.27.

What should we learn from hence?

A. To know how frail we are Psalm. 39.4.
, to consider our latter end Deuteronomy. 32.29.
, and to number our days that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom Psalm. 90.12.
, to work while it is day, seeing the night comes, when no man can work John
9.4.
.

When men dye, what does become of their bodies?

A. (d), Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou
return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and
unto dust shall thou return.
and see corruption Acts 13.36. For David after he had served his own
generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers and
saw corruption.
.

What becomes of the souls of men, when they depart hence?

A. And to the Spirits of just men made perfect.
, and received to the immediate enjoyment of God Luke 23.32. To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. 2 Cor. 5.8. Willing rather to be absent from the Body
and to be present with the Lord. Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, and to
be with Christ.
, together with an innumerable company, of glorious Angels Luke 23.32. To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. 2 Cor. 5.8. Willing rather to be absent from
the Body and to be present with the Lord. Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ.
, Heb. 12.22. To an innumerable Company of Angels.
in the Kingdom of Heaven 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of
this Tabernac^e were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens.
. The Souls of the wicked are cast into Hell 1 Pet. 3.19. By which also he went
and preached unto the Spirits in Prison: which sometime were disobedient, when
once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah.
, where they must suffer the vengeance of eternal Fire Jude 7. Even as Sodom
and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, in like manner giving themselves over
to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an Example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
, prepared for the Devil and his Angels Matthew. 25.41. Everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.
.

Shall the bodies of all men both the godly and the wicked be raised again?

A. Yes, There shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust
Acts 25.15.
. All that are in the Graves shall come forth; they that have done good, unto
the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection
of Damnation John 5.28, 29.
.

When shall this Resurrection be?

A. At the last day.

John 11.24. I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last
day.
What will immediately follow upon the Resurrection?

A. The general and final judgment of Angels Jude 6. And the Angels which kept
not their first Estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the Judgment of the great day.
and Men Romans 14.10. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ.
.

What does the Scripture declare to us concerning the godly at the day of
Judgment?

A. That (their bodies being then raised up in Glory 1 Cor. 15.43. It is sown
in dishonor, it is raised in glory. Philip. 3.21. Who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.
, and united again to their Souls Job. 19.26, 27. And though after my Skin
worms destroy this body, Yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for
my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be
consumed within me.
, they shall be openly owned and acquitted by Jesus Christ Matthew. 10.32.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in Heaven. Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, etc.
Acts 3.19. -- that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord.
, set on his Right Hand Matthew. 25.32. And he shall set the Sheep on his right
hand.
, join with him in judgment on all wicked Men and Angels 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Do ye
not know that the Saints shall judge the world? Know not that we shall judge
the world? Know ye not that we shall judge Angels?
, be for ever freed from all sin Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present it to himself
a Glorious Church, not having spot ^ wrinckle or any such thing.
and sorrow Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, n^ crying, neither shall there be
any more pain.
, filled with unconceivable Joy Ps. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of Joy.
Matthew. 24.21. Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things
which God has prepared for them that love him.
, and made perfectly blessed Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father.
, in the immediate 1 Cor. 13.12. For now we see through a glass darkly; but
then face to face.
full Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness 1 Cor.
13.12. Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known.
and everlasting Enjoyment of God 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. And so shall we ever be with
the Lord.
.

Q. What is the difference between Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal (or
everlasting) Life?

A. Natural life consists in the union between the Soul and the Body Genesis 2.7.
And the Lord God formed man of the Dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living Soul.
, Spiritual Life in the union between the Soul and God John 17.21.23. That they
all may be one in us. I in them and thou in me, etc.
, Eternal Life in the perfect happiness both of Soul and Body in the full Psalm.
16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy
and immediate John 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
me be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory.
enjoyment of God for ever Psalm 16.11. At thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore.


Q. Are there not likewise three kinds of Deaths?

A. Yes. 1. Natural or corporeal death, which is the separation of the Soul
from the body Genesis 35.18. And it came to pass, as her Soul was in departing,
for she dyed, that she called his name Ben-oni. Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the
Dust return to the earth, as it was; and the Spirit shall return unto God, who
gave it.
. 2. Spiritual death, which is the separation of the Soul from God; who only
can quicken those that are dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2.1.
, by putting into them his Spirit Ezekiel. 36.26.
, which is the Spirit of Life Romans 8.2.
. 3. Eternal death, which is the utter separation both of Soul and Body from
Gods favorable presence to suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire Matthew. 10.28.
And fear not them which kill the Body, and are not able to kill the Soul; but
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.
.

What shall be the final portion of all ungodly Men?

A. They shall be punished with everlasting separation from God, and most
grievous torments of Soul and Body without intermission in Hell for ever.

2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power. Matthew. 25.42. Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Mark 9.43.44. It is better for thee to
enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into Hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched.
Q. Why is it that the damned must suffer in Hell for ever?

A. Because being finite Creatures they can never make full satisfaction to
Gods infinite Justice.

Q. Will not God have mercy upon poor ignorant people?

A. They shall be destroyed for lack of knowledge Hos. 4.6.
. He that made them, will not have mercy upon them, and he that formed them
will show them no favor Isa. 27.11.
. Christ will come in flaming fire to render vengeance on them that know not
God 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
.

THE Ten Commandments.
Quest. WHich be the ten Commandments?

Answ.

1. Thou shall have none other Gods before me. 2. Thou shall not make unto thee
any graven Image, etc. 3. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc. 4. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, etc. 5. Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, etc. 6. Thou shall not kill. 7. Thou shall not commit
Adultery. 8. Thou shall not steal. 9. Thou shall not bear false witness against
thy Neighbor. 10. Thou shall not covet, etc.

Q. Whereon were the ten Commandments written?

A. Upon two Tables of stone by the finger of God.

Deuteronomy. 9.10. And the Lord delivered unto me two Tables of Stone written with
the finger of God* and on them was written according to all the words which the
Lord spoke with you in the Mount, out of the midst of the fire in the day of
the Assembly.
Q. What rules are there to be observed, in order to our right understanding of
these Commandments?

A. These four especially. 1. That every Commandment both forbids evil, and
requires the contrary good. 2. That every Commandment respects not only our
words and actions, but our thoughts also, and our affections. 3. That the
Duties commanded are not to be done always or at all times: but what is
absolutely forbidden must be always left undone. Or, Every negative Commandment
does bind always, and unto all times: Every affirmative does bind always but
not unto all times. 4. Every general expressed in each Commandment includes all
the particular kinds thereof, and all irregularities tending thereunto.

Q. How many are the Commandments of the first Table?

A. Four; which do immediately respect God: the other Commandments which are
the second Table, do more especially respect our Neighbor.

Q. How are the Commandments of the first Table distinguished one from the
other?

A. The first Commandment respects the object of worship, the Second the means,
the Third the manner, and the Fourth the time.

Q. Proceed now to tell me what is the main and general scope and import of
each of these Commandments, together with some texts of Scripture that respect
the principal Duties therein required. And first of all, what is it that the
first Commandment does require of us?

A. That we own and worship the only true God.

Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, to walk in
his ways and to keep his Statutes. Psalm. 95.6, 7. O come, let us worship and
bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker, for he is our God, and we are
the people of his Pasture, and Sheep of his hand. Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Q. What does the Second Commandment require?

A. That we worship this true God according to his own appointment, Deuteronomy. 42.
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish
ought from it. Math. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of men. Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. Why as though living in the
World are ye subject unto Ordinances (touch not, taste not, handle not, etc.)
after the Commandments and Doctrines of men, which things have indeed a show
of Wisdom in Will Worship and humility and neglecting of the body, etc.
and not by Images Exodus 32.7, 8. Go get the down, for thy people which thou
broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves, they have turned
aside quickly out of the way, which I commanded them, they have made a molten
Calf and have worshipped it and have sacrificed thereunto. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take
ye therefore good heed unto your selves, (for you saw no manner of similitude
on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire)
lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any
figure, etc.
or any of men's own superstitious Inventions. Psalm. 106.39. Thus were they
defiled with their own works, and went a Whoring with their own inventions.


Q. What does the Third Commandment require?

A. That we make use of Gods great and glorious name. Titles and Ordinances
with a holy fear and reverence.

Psalm. 99.3. Let them praise thy great and terrible name, for it is holy. Psalm.
68.4. Sing unto God, sing praises unto his name, extol him that rides upon the
Heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him. Levit. 19.12. Ye shall not
swear by my name falsely, neither shall thou profane the name of thy God, I am
the Lord. Math. 5.34. etc. But I say unto you, swear not all, neither by Heaven
etc. neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black; but let the communication be yea yea, nay nay, for whatsoever
is more then these, comes of evil. James 5.12. But above all things my
Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any
other oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation. Eccles. 9.2. As is the good, so is the Sinner; and he that
swears, as he that fears an Oath.
Q. What does the fourth Commandment require?

A. The observing of a sacred or holy Rest one day in seven, which from the
beginning of the World to our Saviors Resurrection was the last day of the
week, but has since been, and continues to be the first day of the week, or
the Lords Day, which is the Christian Sabbath.

Levit. 23.3. Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of r^st; an holy Convocation, ye shall do no work therein, it is the Sabbath of
the Lord, in all your dwellings. John 20.19, 26. Then the same day at evening
being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the Disciples
were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and
says unto them, Peace be unto you. And after eight days, again his Disciples
were within, and Thomas with them; then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and
stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you Acts 20.7. And upon the first
day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them. 1 Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay
by him in store as God has prospered him, that there be no gathering when I
come. Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day.
Q. What does the fifth Commandment require?

A. That we carefully perform all the duties of our several Relations.

Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God. Romans
12.10. Be kindly affectionate one toward another with brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another.
Q. Who are meant by Father and Mother in the fifth Commandment?

A. By Father and Mother we are here to understand, 1. Our natural Parents
Prove. 23.25. Thy Father and thy Mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shall rejoice.
. 2. Such as are over us in place of authority, either in a Family 2 Kings
5.13. His servants came near and spoke unto him, My Father, if the Prophet had
bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it?
, or Church (c), 2 Kings 2.12. My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and
the Horsemen thereof. Gal. 4.19. My little Children of whom I travel in birth,
etc.
or Commonwealth Isa. 42.23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
nursing Mothers.
. 3. Superiors in gifts Genesis 4.21. Jubal the Father of such as handle the Harp
and the Organ Genesis 45.8. He has made me a Father to Pharaoh.
. 4. Superiors in age 1 Timothy 5.1, 2. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a
Father, and the young men as Brethren. The elder women as Mothers, the younger
as Sisters with all parity. Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary
head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God, I am the Lord.
.

Q. What are the relative Duties (expressly mentioned in Scripture) Of Husbands
and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Magistrates and
Subjects, Ministers and People? And first of all, What are the Duties of
Husbands to their Wives?

A. 1. To love and delight in them Ephesians. 5.25, 28. Husbands love your wives,
even as Christ also loved the Chuuch. So ought men to love their wives as their
own bodies; he that loves his wife loves himself. Col. 3.19. Husbands love
your wives and be not bitter against them. Ezekiel. 24.16. Son of Man, behold I
take away the desire of thine eyes with a stroke. Prove. 5.18, 19. Rejoice with
the wife of thy youth, etc.
. 2. To dwell with them and be respectful of them 1 Pet. 3.7. Likewise ye
Husbands dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as
unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of Life, that
your Prayers be not hindered.
. 3. To be true and faithful to them Mal. 2:14. The Lord has been witness
between thee and the Wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt
treacherously; yet is she thy Companion and the Wife of thy Covenant.
.

Q. What are the Duties of Wives to their Husbands?

A. Love Tit. 2.4. To love their Husbands.
. 2. Helping, and assisting them in their affairs Genesis 2.18. It is not good
that the man should be alone, I will make an help meet for him. Prove. 31.11,
12, 27. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread
of Idleness. The heart of her Husband does safely trust in her, she will do him
good and not evil all the days of her life. 1 Timothy 3.11. Faithful in all things.
. 3. Fidelity (c). 4. Subjection and Reverence Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24. Wives submit
your selves unto your own Husbands as unto the Lord: For the Husband, is the
head of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church. Therefore as the
Church is subject unto Christ: so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in
every thing. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5, 6. Whose adorning let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the Hair, etc. but the ornament of a meek and a quiet
Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after this manner in
old time the holy women, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in
subjection unto their own Husbands; even as Sarah obeyed Abraham calling him
Lord; whose Daughters ye are as long as ye do well, etc. Ephesians. 5.33. Let the
Wife see that she reverence her Husband.
.

Q. What are the duties of Parents to their Children?

A. 1. Tender love and mildness Tit. 2.4. To love their Children. Col. 3.21.
Fathers provoke not your Children to anger, lest they be discouraged.
. 2. Educating of them in the knowledge and Ways of God Genesis 18.19. For I know
Abraham, that he will command his Children, etc. Deuteronomy. 6.7. And thou shall
teach them diligently unto thy Children, etc. Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in
the way he should go, etc. Ephesians. 6.4. Bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.
. 3. Praying for them 1 Chronicles. 29.19. And give unto Solomon my Son a perfect
heart to ^eep thy Commandments, etc. Genesis 17.18. And Abraham said unto God, O
that Ishmael might live before thee! Job. 1.5. He offered burnt offerings
according to the number of them all.
. 4. Correcting of them, when there is need; and keeping them in subjection
with all gravity Prove. 13.24. He that spares the rod, hates his Son: but he
that loves him chasteneth him betimes. Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy Son while
there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying. Prove. 29.15.17. The
rod and reproof give wisdom but a Child left to himself brings his Mother to
shame. 1 Kings 1.5, 6. Then Adonijah the Son of Haggish exalted himself,
saying, I will be King: and he prepared him Chariots and Horsemen, and fifty
men to run before him. And his Father had not displeased him at any time in
saying why have thou done so? 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules well his own house,
having his Children in subjection with all gravity.
. 5. Providing for their comfortable Settlement and Maintenance Genesis 24.
Abraham sent his Servant to take a Wife for his Son Isaac. Genesis 30.29, 30. Thou
know how I have served thee and how thy cattle was with me. For it was
little which thou had before I came, and it is now increased unto a
multitude; and the Lord has blessed thee since my coming; and now when shall I
provide for mine own house also?
.

Q. What are the Duties of Children to their Parents?

A. 1. Inward honor and Reverence Levit. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his
Mother and his Father. Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he, that sets light by his
Father or Mother. Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father, etc.
, 2. Outward Reverence in Speech and behavior 1. Kings, 2.19. Bathsheba went
unto King Solomon to speak unto him for Adonijah, and the King rose up to meet
her and bowed himself unto her. Prove. 31 28. Her children rise up and call her
blessed. Exodus 21.15. He that smites his Father or his Mother, shall surely be
put to death. Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to
obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out and the young Eagles
shall eat it. Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is
right. Philip. 2.22. But ye know the proof of him, that as a Son with the
Father, he has served with me in the Gospel. Mal. 3.17. I will spare them as a
man spares his own Son, that serves him.
. 3. A ready observing of their good instructions and lawful Commands (c). 4. A
meek and patient bearing of their Reproofs and Corrections Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20,
21. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious Son, which will not obey the voice
of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and that when they have chastened
him, will not harken unto them. Then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold
on him, and bring him unto the Elders of his City, and unto the gate of his
Place. And they shall say unto the Elders of his City, this our Son is stubborn
and rebellious, he will not obey our Voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And
all the men of his City shall stone him with Stones that he dye; so shall thou
put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. 1 Samuel 2.23,
24, 25. And he said unto them, why did ye such things, for I hear of your evil
dealings by all this people. Nay my Sons, for it is no good report that I hear,
ye make the Lords people to transgress. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because
the Lord would slay them. Heb. 12.9. We have had Fathers of our flesh, which
corrected us and we gave them reverence.
. 5. Providing for their comfortable maintenance, if they want and their
Children can relieve them Genesis 47.12. And Joseph nourished his Father and his
Brethren, and all his Fathers household with bread. Ruth. 4.15. He shall be unto
thee a Restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age. 1 Timothy 5.4. Let
them learn first to show piety at home, and to requite their Parents, for that
is good and acceptable before God. John, 19.26, 27. When Jesus therefore saw
his Mother and the Disciples standing by whom he loved, he says unto his
Mother Woman behold thy Son; then says he to the Disciple, behold thy mother,
and from that hour that Disciple took her unto his own home.
. 6. Covering their weakness, and bearing with the Infirmities of their age
Genesis 9.23. And Shem and Japhet took a Garment and laid it upon both their
Shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their Father. Prove.
23.22. Hearken unto thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when
she is old.
.

Q. What are the Duties of Masters to their Servants?

A. Gentleness and Mercy Exodus 1.13, 14. And the Egyptians made the Children of
Israel to serve with rigor, and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage:
all their service wherein they made them serve, was with rigor. Exodus 3.7. I
have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard
their cry by reason of their Task masters, for I know their sorrows. Ephesians.
6.9. And ye Masters, forbear threatening, knowing that your Master also is in
Heaven, neither is there respect of persons with him.
2. Engaging them to serve God. Genesis 18.19. For I know Abraham, that he will
command his Children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord. Josh. 24.15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
3. Making convenient provision for them, and paying them faithfully their
Wages Prove. 27.27. For thy food, and for the food of thine household. Deuteronomy.
24.14, 15. Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant, at his day, thou shall give
him his hire, lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.
Col. 4.1. Masters give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing
that ye also have a Master in Heaven. Jam. 5.4. Behold the hire of the
Laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by
fraud, cries; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath.
.

Q. What are the Duties of Servonts to their masters?

A. 1. Honor Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master:
if then I be a Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my
fear? Job 19.16. I called my Servant and he gave me no Answer. 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.
Let as many Servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. And they
that have believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are
Brethren: but rather do them service, etc.
. 2. Obedience Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters
according to the flesh with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart as
unto Christ. Matthew. 8.9. I say to this man, Go, and he goes; and to another
Come and he comes; and to my Servant, do this and he does it. Tit. 2.9, 10:
Exhort Servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please them well
in all things.
. 3. Faithfulness Ephesians. 6.6. -- Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers but as the
Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart with good will doing
Service as to the Lord, and not to men. Col. 3.22. -- In singleness of heart,
fearing God; and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not unto
men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the Inheritance,
for ye serve the Lord Christ. Genesis 24.33. And there was set meat before him to
eat; but he said, I will not eat until I have told mine Errand. Tit. 2.10. not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity.
. 4. Meekness Tit. 2.9. Not Answering again, or not gainsaying. 1 Pet. 2.18,
19. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward: for this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.
.

Q. What is the Duty of Magistrates to their Subjects?

A. To govern them Wisely (a), Impartially Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no
Unrighteousness in Judgment: thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor
honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shall thou judge thy
Neighbor. Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment, but you shall
hear the small as well as the great. Exodus 23.3. Neither shall thou countenance
a poor man in his cause.
, Courageously Deuteronomy. 1.17. You shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the
judgment is Gods. Neh. 6.11, 13. Should such a man as I flee? Therefore was he
hired that I should be afraid, etc. Neh. 5.7. And I rebuked the Nobles, etc.
Neh. 13.21. Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye
about the Walls? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time
forth came they no more on the Sabbath. 2 Chronicles. 19.11. Deal courageously, and
the Lord shall be with the Good.
, with Humility Deuteronomy. 17.20. That his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren.
, Clemency Prove. 20.28. Mercy and truth preserve the King: and his Throne is
upholden by mercy.
and Justice Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all
thy Gates, and they shall judge the people with just Judgment. Thou shall not
wrest Judgment, neither take a gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the
wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. 1 Samuel 8.3, 4. And his Sons
walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre and took bribes and
perverted Judgment. 1 Samuel 12.3. Behold here I am, witness against me, whom
have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any
bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you. And they said,
Thou have not defrauded ut, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought of
any man's hand. Psalm. 82.3, 4. Defend the poor and Fatherless, do Justice to the
afflicted and needy; rid them out of the hand of the wicked.
, in the fear of God Exodus 18.21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the
people able men, such as fear God, men of truth hating covetousness, and place
such over them, etc. 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men must be just, Ruling
in the fear of God. Nehem. 5.15. But so did not I (as former Governors)
because of the fear of God. Psalm. 72.7. In his days all the righteous flourish.
Romans 13.3. Do that which is Good, and thou shall have praise of the same. Esth.
6.3. What honor and dignity has been done unto Mordecai for this? 1 Pet.
2.14. -- For the praise of them that do well.
, encouraging the good (h), and punishing the evil 1 Pet. 2.14. -- Unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers.
Psalm. 101.8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut
off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. Prove. 20.8, 26. A King that
sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes. A
wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them. Romans 13.4.
But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in
vain: for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil.
.

2 Chronicles. 1.10. Give me now Wisdom and knowledge that I may go out and come in
before this people: for who can judge this thy people that is so great? Psalm.
78.72. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them
by the skilfulness of his hands.
Q. What are the Duties of Subjects to their Magistrates?

A. 1. Honor 1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, Honor the King. 2 Pet. 2.10. That walk
after the flesh, and despise Government, Presumptious are they, self-willed,
they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. 1 Samuel 10:27. But the Children
of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and brought
him no presents. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the
ruler of thy people. Eccles. 10, 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought,
etc.
. 2. Subjection Romans 13.1.5. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers,
etc. Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath but also for Conscience sake.
. 3. Defense of them 1 Samuel 26.16. Ye are worthy to dye, because ye have not
kept your Master, the Lords anointed. 2 Samuel 18.3. Thou shall not go forth; for
if half of us dye, will they care for us? but thou art worth ten thousand of us.
. 4. Praying for them 1 Samuel 10.24. And Samuel said to all the people, See ye
him whom the Lord has chosen, that there is none like him among all the
people? And all the people shouted, and said God save the King. 1 Timothy 21 1, 2.
I exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are
in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.
. 5. Paying them tribute Matthew. 22.21. Render unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars. Romans 18.6, 7. For this cause pay you t^ibute also, for they are Gods
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, Custom to whom custom, etc.
.

Q. What are the duties of Ministers to their people?

A. 1. Tender love* and earnest desires of their Salvation 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. We
were gentle among you even as a Nurse cherishes her Children: So being
affectionately desirous of you we were willing to have imparted unto you not
the Gospel of God only, but also our own Souls because ye were dear unto us. 2
Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. Philip. 1.8. For God is my Record,
how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19,
20. For what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our Glory and Joy.
3 John v. 4. I have no greater joy, than to hear that my Children walk in
truth. Jer. 13.17. But if ye will not hear my Soul shall weep in secret places
for your pride. Philip. 3.8. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ,
etc.
. 2. Diligent and faithful instructing and warning them 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. But as we were
allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as
pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts. 2 Cor. 4.2. Not handling the
word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth commending our
selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God. Jer. 6.14. They have
healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people, slightly saying Peace, Peace,
when there is no peace. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19. Son of man, I have made thee a
Watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and
give them warning from me. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely dye,
and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he
turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall dye in his
Iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul. Col. 1.28, 29. Whom we preach,
warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
. 3. Giving them a good Example 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth, but
be thou an Example of the Believers, etc. Tit. 2.7. In all things showing thy
self a Pattern of good works.
. 4. Praying for them Ephesians. 1.16, 17. Making mention of you in my Prayers, that
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory may give unto you the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him. Col. 4.12. -- Always
laboring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete
in all the will of God. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11, 12. Wherefore also we pray always for
you, that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the
good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith with power; that the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, etc. Romans 1.9.
God is my witness, whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that
without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers.
. 5. Blessing of them Deuteronomy. 10.8. At that time the Lord separated the Tribe of
Levi, to bear the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name unto this day. 1 Chronicles. 23.13. And Aaron was separated that
he should sanctifiy the most holy things, he and his Sons forever, to burn
Incense before the Lord, to minister unto him, and to bless in his name for
ever.
. 6. Comforting and encouraging those that do well Col. 4.7. All my state shall
Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved Brother and faithful Minister, and
Fellow Servants in the Lord: whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose,
that he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts. 1 Cor. 14.3. But he
that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, and
Comfort. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. And sent Timotheus our Brother and Minister of God, and
our Fellow Laborer in the Gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort
you concerning your Faith. 2 Cor. 13.11. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one mind. Heb. 10.23, 35, 37. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering (for he is faithful that promised) Cast not away therefore
your Confidence, which has great recompense of Reward. For yet a little while;
and he that shall come will come and will not tarry.
. 7. Rebuking with Authority those that are obstinate Isa. 50.7, 8, 9. For the
Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I
set my face like a Flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. Jer. 1.7, 8,
17, 18. Thou shall go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command
thee thou shall speak. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to
deliver thee says the Lord. Ezekiel. 3.7, 8, 9. Fear them not, neither be dismayed
at their looks, though they be a rebellious house. Tit. 2.15. Rebuke with all
Authority, let no man despise thee.
.

Q What are the duties of people to their Minister?

A. 1. Esteem and Love These. 5.12.13. And we beseech you Brethren to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. Luke 10.16. He that
despises you despises me. Romans 10.5. How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? Gal. 4.14,
15. Ye re^eived me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. I bear you record,
that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have
given them to me.
2. Submission Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you* and submit
your selves, for they watch for your Souls as they that must give give
acccount, that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. Isa. 50.10. Who is he among you, that fears the Lord,
that obeys the voice of his Servant. 2 Cor. 7.15. And his inward affection is
more abundant toward you, whilst he remembers the Obedience of you all, etc.
Philip. 2.12. Wherefore my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, etc.
. 3. Imitation of their graces Philip. 3.17. Brethren, be followers together of
me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an Example. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be
ye followers of me, even as also I am of Christ. Philip. 4.9. Those things
which ye have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the
God of Peace shall be with you. Heb. 13.7. Remember them which have the rule
over you, which have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith follow,
considering the end of their Conversation.
. 4. Praying for them Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, for all Saints; And for me that utterance may be
given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the
Gospel. Col. 4.3. Withal praying also for us, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Finally
Brethren, Pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may have free course and be
Glorified.
. 5. Communicating to them of their temporal things Gal. 6.6. Let him that is
taught in the word, Communicate unto him that teaches in all good things. 1 Timothy 5.7. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. For the Labourer is worthy
of his Reward. 1 Cor. 9.11, etc. If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is
it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things? etc.
.

Q. What are the mutual Duties of Equals?

A. 1. Love Pet. 2.17. Love the Brotherhood. Romans 12.10. Be Kindly affectionate
one toward another with brotherly love.
. 2. Honor Romans 12.10. In honor preferring one another. Philip. 2.3, 4. Let
each esteem other better than themselves.
. 3. Mutual help 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another
wealth. Philip. 2.4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also
on the things of others.
. 4. Rejoicing in each others good, and bearing one another griefs Romans 12.15,
16. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Be of the
same mind one toward another. 1 Cor. 12.26. And whether one member suffer, all
the members suffer with it: or one member be honored, all the members rejoice
with it. Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ.
.

Q. What if any of our Relations fail of their duties to us, or act in
contrariety thereunto; are we thereby excused from the performance of our
Duties to them?

A. No, in no wise. We must look carefully to it that we do our part
notwithstanding, even, for Conscience sake, in obedience to God, who
indispensably requires the same of us.

Q. What does the Sixth Commandment require?

A. That we carefully endeavor the preservation of our own life Ephesians. 5.28, 29.
So ought men to love their Wives as their own bodies. He that loves his Wife,
loves himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. Acts 16.27, 28. And the keeper of
the Prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the Prison poors open, he drew
out his Sword and would have killed himself, supposing that the Prisoners had
been fled: but Paul crying with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm, for
we are all here.
, and the life of our Neighbor Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. Genesis 37.21, 22. And Ruben heard of it, and he
delivered him out of their hands, and said, Let us not kill him. And Ruben said
unto them, Shed no blood. 1 Kings 1.4. Now Obadiah feared the Lord greatly; for
it was so, when Jezabel cut off the Prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an
hundred Prophets and hid them, by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water.
.

Q. Is it not lawful in some cases to take away the life of another?

A. Yes, in case of necessary Defense Exodus 22.2. If a Thief be found breaking
up, and be smitten that he dye, there shall no blood be shed for him.
, lawful War Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he, that keeps back his Sword from blood.
, and public Justice Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's Blood, by man shall his
blood be shed. Nunb. 35.31. Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the
life of a Murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to
death.
.

Q. What does the Seventh Commandment require?

A. All purity, 1. Tim. 5.1.2. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a
Father, and the younger men as Brethren: The elder women as mothers, the
younger as Sisters with all purity.
or Chastity in heart, Math. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart. Math. 15.18. For
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders, Adultery, Fornications. Col.
3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, Fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence.
in speech and in behavior. Ephesians. 5.3, 4 But fornication and all uncleanness or
covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints; neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking nor jesting, which are not convenient. Col.
4.6. Let the speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt.


Isa 3.16. Because the Daughters of Zion are haughty and walk with stretched
forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a
Tinckling with their feet. 1. Tim. 2.9. That Women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefac'tness and sobriety. 1 Pet. 3, 2. While they behold your
chaste conversation coupled with fear. Prove. 6.32. Whosoever commits adultery
with a Woman, lacks understanding; he that does it destroys his own Soul.
Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.
Q. What does the Eighth Comandment require.

A. That every man be careful and laborious in a lawful calling, Genesis 2.15.
And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it
and to keep it. Gen 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till
thou return to the ground. 2. These. 3.11.12. For we hear that there are some,
which walk among you dissorderly, working not at all, but are busy-bodies; now
them that are such we exhort and command by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with
quietness they work and eat their own bread. Prove. 27.23, 24. Be thou diligent
to know the state of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds, for riches are not
for ever. Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, but the
hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 18.9. He also that is slothful in his
work is Brother to him that is a great Waster. Prove. 24.30. etc. I went by the
Field of the Slothful and by the Vineyard of a man void of understanding, and
so it was all grown over with Thorns and Nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the Stone-wall thereof was broken down, etc. Yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep: So shall thy poverty come as
one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. Prove. 28.19. He that tilleth
his land, shall have plenty of bread, but he that follows after vain persons,
shall have poverty enough. Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure, shall be a
poor man; he that loves Wine and Oil, shall not be rich. Prove. 23.20, 21. Be
not among Wine-bibbers, among riotous Eaters of Flesh, for the Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to poverty and dr^wsiness shall cl ath a man with rags.
and yet with due moderation, Prove. 28.20.22. A faithful man shall abound with
blessings, but he that makes have to be rich, shall not be innocent. He that
thirsts to be rich, has an evil eye, and considers not that poverty shall
come upon him. Luke, 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness, for a man's
life consists not in the abundance of the things that he possesses. Matthew.
6.25. etc. Take no thought for your l fe, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink, nor yet for the body what ye shall put on, etc.
and a comfortable enjoyment of what he has; Eccles. 5.18, 19. It is good and
comely for one to eat and to drink and to enjoy the good of all thy labor that
he takes under the Sun all the days of his life which God gives him, for it
is his portion. Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and
has given him power to eat thereof and to take his p^rtion and to rej^yce in
his labor, this is the gift of God. Deuteronomy. 26.11. And thou shall rejoice in
every good thing which the Lord thy God has given unto thee, and unto thine
house; thou and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you. Eccles. 4.8.
There is one alone, and there is not a Second, ye he has neither child nor
brother, yet is there no end of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied
with riches, neither says he, for whom do I labor and bereave my soul of
good. Eccles. 6.12. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is
common among men; a man to whom God has given riches, wealth and honor, so
that he wants nothing for his Soul of all that he desires; yet God gives
him not power to eat thereof, but a Stranger eats it. This is vanity and it
is an evil disease.
that he be true and just in all his ways and dealings, Romans 13.7. Render
therefore to all their their dues. Ps. 15.1, 2. Lord who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He that walks uprightly and
works righteousness and speaks the truth in his heart. Prove. 21.6. The
getting of Treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to and fro of them
that seek death. Prove. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught says the Buyer, but
when he is gone his way then he boasts. Levit. 19.11, 13. Ye shall not steal,
neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another. Thou shall not defraud thy
Neighbor, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with
thee all night until the morning. Prove. 22.22. Rob not the poor, because he is
poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate: for the Lord will plead their
cause, and spoil the Soul of them that spoiled them. Ezekiel. 22.12. In thee have
they taken gifts to shed blood, thou have taken usury and increase, and thou
have greedily gained of thy Neighbor by extortion, and have forgotten me,
says the Lord God. Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not again.
Prove. 11.1. A false Balance is abomination to the Lord, a just Weight is his
delight. Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14, 15.16. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse Weights,
a great and a small; thou shall not have in thine house diverse Measures, a
great and a small: but thou shall have a perfect and just Weight, a perfect and
just measure shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthned in the land which
the Lord thy God gives the: For all that do such things and all that do
unrighteously, are an abomination unto the Lord thy God
and charitable according to his ability. Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8, 10, 11. If there be
among you a poor man of one of thy Brethren within any of thy Gates in thy Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut
thine hand from thy poor Brother; but thou shall open thine hand wide unto and
shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that which he wants. Thou
shall surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give
unto him, because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee. etc.
Ps. 112.5. A good man shows favor and lends. Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stops
his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself and not be heard.
Prove. 28.27. He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack, but he that hides
his eyes shall have many a curse. Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more,
but rather let him labor working with his hands the thing that is good, that
he may have to give to him that needs. Acts. 20.34, 35. These hands have
ministered to my necessities and to them that were with me. -- I^ is more
blessed to give than to receive. 1 John. 3.17. Whosoever has this worlds good and
sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him?


Q. What does the Ninth Commandment require of us?

A. That we speak nothing but the truth at all times; and that when we are
sworn, we speak all the truth.

Ephesians. 4.25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
Neighbor. Acts, 5.3. etc. Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to
the Holy Ghost, etc. Rev. 21.8. -- Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers,
Idolaters and all Liars should have their part in the Lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Zach. 8.16, 17. Speak ye every
man the truth to his Neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in the
Gates, and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his Neighbor,
and love no false oath, for all these are things that I hate says the Lord,
Prove. 14.5.25. A faithful Witness will not lie, but a false Witness will utter
lies. A true Witness delivers Souls; but a deceitful Witness speaks lies.
Prove. 19.5. A false Witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall not escape.
Q. What does the Tenth Commandment require of us?

A. To rest well satisfied in our own condition Philip. 4.11, 12. I have
learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content. Heb. 13.5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have.
* not envying at our Neighbor Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory,
provoking one another, envying one another. James 3.14, etc. But if ye have
bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
truth. This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For where-envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work.
, or greedily desiring any thing that is his 1 Kings 21.4. And Ahab came into
his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite
had spoken unto him, for he had said I will not give thee the Inheritance of my
Fathers, and he laid him down upon his Bed, and turned away his face, and would
eat no bread,
: but rejoicing in his blessings and in our own, which God distributeth as it
pleases him, according to his infinite Wisdom and Goodness Eccles. 3.12, 13. I
know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice and to do good in
his life: and also that every man should eat and drink and enjoy the good of
all his labor, it is the gift of God. Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that do
rejoice. Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?
Is thine eye evil, because I am Good?
.

Q. Can any mere man since the fall perfectly keep the Commandments of God in
this life?

A. No certainly. In many things we offend all James 3.2.
; and there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not Eccles.
7.20.
.

Q. If there be no man able to keep the Law, wherefore then serves it?

A. It serves. 1. As a Rule unto us, according to which we must endeavor to
walk and square our whole Conversation Isa. 8.20.
, 2. As a glass to show us our spots and deformities, thereby to humble us Romans
7.9.
, As a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, when we are thoroughly humbled, and
see the great need we have of him Gal. 3.24.
.

Q. What is that wherein all the Commandments are briefly comprehended?

A, Love to God Romans 13.10.
, and to our Neighbor Matthew. 22.36, etc. Luke 10.26. etc.
. We are to love God with all our heart, and with all our Soul, and with all
our might Deuteronomy. 6.5.
. And we are to love our Neighbor as our selves Levit. 19.18.
.

THE Lords Prayer
Quest. LET me hear you say the Lords Prayer.

Answ. etc.

Q. What are the parts of the Lords Prayer?

A. Three, Preface, Petition, Conclusion.

Q. What do we learn by the preface?

A. To pray with and for others Our Father. Acts 12.5. Peter therefore was kept
in Prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him.
1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men.
, to pray with confidence Our Father. Isa. 63.15, 16. Look down from Heaven and
behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy Glory, where is thy zeal
and thy strength, the sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy mercies toward me,
are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, Though Abraham be ignorant
of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer,
thy name is from everlasting. Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil know how to
give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. Romans 8.15. For ye have not received
the Spirit of bondage unto fear: but ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father. Which art in Heaven. Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart he hasty to utter any thing before God: for
God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few.
, and with Reverence (c).

Q. How many are the Petitions of this Prayer?

A. Six; Whereof the three former do more immediately relate to the glory of
God, the three latter concern our selves.

Q. What do we pray for in the three former of these Petitions?

A. That Gods great and holy name may be ever magnified Hallowed be thy name.
Psalm. 33.8. Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants of the
World stand in awe of him. Psalm. 67.3. Let the people praise thee O God, let
all the people praise thee.
; that his Kingdom of Grace may be advanced, and Kingdom of Glory hastened Thy
Kingdom come. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Finally Brethren pray for us, that the Word of the
Lord may have free course and be gloryfied. Matthew. 9.38. Pray ye therefore the
Lord of the Harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his Harvest. Rev.
22.20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quick^y. Amen,
even so come Lord Jesus
; that we may serve God on earth as the Angels serve him in Heaven, and always
readily obey and submit to the will of his Precept and of his Providence Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Romans 12.11. Fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord. Psalm. 103.20, 21. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that excel in
strength, that do his Commandments, hearken unto the voice of his Word. Bless
the Lord all ye his hosts, ye Ministers of his, that do his pleasure. Job.
38.7. When the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
joy. Isa. 6.2, 3. Above it stood the Seraphims, each one had six wings, etc.
And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts,
the whole Earth is full of his Glory. Psalm. 119.4, 5, 35, 36. Thou have
commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently, O that my ways were directed to
keep thy Statutes! make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein
do I delight: Incline my Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness. 1 Samuel 3.18. And Samuel told Eli every whit and hid nothing from him; and he
said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. And
the King said unto Zadok, Carry back the Ark of God into the City; if I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again and show me both it
and his habitation; But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, Behold here
am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. Matthew. 26.39. O my Father, if
it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as
thou will. Aand's 21.14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying,
The will of the Lord be done.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the three latter of these Petitions?

A. That we may have a competent portion of outward blessings Give us this day
our daily bread. Genesis 28.20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with
me and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat and
raiment to put on, etc. Prove. 30.8. Feed me with food convenient for me.
, that God will be pleased to forgive us all out sins, as we do heartily forgive
others, who have offended us And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us. Psalm. 51.9. Hide thy face from my sins and blot out
all mine iniquities. Hos. 14.2. Take with you words and turn to the Lord, say
unto him, take away all iniqity and receive us graciously. Matthew. 6.14.15. For
if ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
But if ye forgive not men, etc.
; and that he will not suffer us unadvisedly to put our selves upon a
temptation, or suffer any temptation to prevail over us, but now and evermore
save and deliver us from the evil of all temptations and from the evil one And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. John. 17.15. I pray not
thou should take them out of the World, but that thou should keep them
from the evil. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Howbeit in the business of the Ambassadors of
the Princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was
done in the land God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in
his heart. Ps. 119.133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity
have dominion over me. Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the Wicked
and go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and
pass away. Prove. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door
of her house. 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is
common to man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may ^e able to bear it. 2 Cor 12.7.8, 9. And lest I should be exalted
above measure, there was given to me a Thorn in the flesh. etc. For this thing
I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me. And he said unto me,
My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
Luke, 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon Simon behold Satan has desired to
have you, that he may ^f: you as Wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not. Romans 16.20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet.
.

Q. What do we learn from the Conclusion of the Lords Prayer?

A. To enforce our requests with arguments, to join praises unto God together
with our prayers For thine is the Kingdom, and the power and the glory for ever
and ever. Dan. 9.18.19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do,
defer not for thine own sake O my God, for thy City and thy people are called
by thy nams. 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 12.13. Bllessed be thou Lord God of Israel our
Father for ever and ever. Thine O Lord is the greatness and the power and the
glory, and the victory and the Majesty, for all that is in the Heaven and in
the Earth is thine. Thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as head
above all, etc. Philip. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thank^giving let your Requests be made known unto
God.
, and to desire and believe that God will hear us Amen. 2. Chron. 14.11. And
Asa cried unto the Lord his God and said, Lord it is nothing to thee to help
whether with many or with them that have no power. Help us O Lord our God, for
we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O Lord, thou art
our God, let not man prevail against thee. 1 Kings, 1.36. And Benajah the Son
of Jehoida answered the King and said, Amen, the Lord God of my Lord the King
say so too. Jer. 28.6. Even the Prophet Jeremiah said, Amen, the Lord do so,
the Lord perform the Words which thou have prophesied. Rev. 22.20. He which
testifies these things says, surely I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord
Jesus.
.

Q. What are the requisite Qualifications of Prayer to God?

A. It must be made in the name of his Son John. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name, he will give it you.
, by the help of the Spirit Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered.
, for things lawful or according to Gods will 1 John, 5.14. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will
he hea^o^h us.
, and to a right end James. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss
that you may consume it upon your lusts. Prove. 21.27. The Sacrifice of the
Wicked is abomination: how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind.
, with understanding 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also. Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit,
how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say. Amen at thy giving
of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say.
, Humility Genesis 18.27. And Abraham said, Behold now I have taken upon me to
speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes.
, Fervency James, 5.16.17. The effectual fervant prayer of a righteous man
avails much. Elias prayed earnestly that it might not rain etc. 1 Samuel 1, 15.
I have drunk neither Wine nor Strong drink, but have poured out my Soul before
the Lord.
, Faith Mark. 11.24. What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that
you receive them, and ye shall have them. James, 1.5.6. If any of you lack
Wisdom, let him ask it of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering etc.
, Submission Matthew. 26.39. O my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass
from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.
, Sincerity Ps. 17.1. Give ear unto my prayer, that goes not out of feigned
lips. Ps. 145.18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all
that call upon him in truth.
Perseverance Luke, 18.1.2. etc. And he spoke a Parable unto them to this end
that men ought always to pray and not to faint saying, there was in a City a
Judge, which feared not God nor regarded man, etc. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always
with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance.
, Charity Matthew. 6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men their Tresgasses, your
Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, etc. 1. Tim. 2.8. I will therefore that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands without wrath, etc. Prove. 21.13. He that stops his ear
at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself and shall not be heard.
and an ardent Zeal for Gods glory Josh. 7.8.9. O Lord, what shall I say, when
Israel turns their backs before their Enemies? For the Canaanites and all the
Inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut
off our name from the earth; and what milt thou do unto thy great name? John,
12.27.28. Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from
this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour, Father glorify thy name.
.

Q. What are the principal parts of Prayer.

A. Confession Dan. 9.4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God and made my
confession. etc.
, Petition Matthew. 7.11. If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto
your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good
things to them that ask him?
Thanksgiving 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with Thanksgiving let your request be made known unto God.
.

Q. What are Ejaculatory Prayers, or Ejaculations?

A. Ejaculations are short and sudden dartings or liftings up of the Soul to
God.

Genesis 17.18. O that Ishmael might live before thee! Genesis 49.18. I have waited
for thy Salvation O Lord. 2. Sam. 15.31. O Lord, I pray thee turn the Counsel
of Ahithophet into foolishness. Neh. 2.4.5. Then the King said unto me, for
what do thou make request? So I prayed to the God of Heaven: And I said unto
the King, if it please the King etc.
Q. What reasons can you give, why we must pray to God alone, and why we may
not pray to Saints departed?

A. 1. We are to pray to him only in whom we must trust Romans 10.14. How then
shall they cal^ on him, in whom they have not believed?
, and we must not trust in man Je^. 17.^5. Cursed be the man, that trusts in
man.
, but in God Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man, that trusts in the Lord, and
whose hope the Lord it.
. 2. We are required to pray in faith without doubting James. 1.6. But let him
ask in faith, nothing wavering.
; whereas they who are departed hence cannot hear us, nor do they understand
how it is with us 2 Chronicles. 34.28. Behold I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and
thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all
the evil that I will bring upon this place and upon the Inhabitants of the
same. Job. 14.20.21. Thou changest his Countenance and sendest him away. His
Sons come to honor, and he knows it not, and they are brought low, but he
perceives it not of them. Eccles. 9.5. For the living know that they shall
dye, but the dead know not any thing.
. 3. The Scripture requires us to worship God only Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Rev. 22.9. Then says
he unto me, see thou do it not: for I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book; Worship
God. Acts. 10.25.26. And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell
down at his feet and worshipped him; but Peter took him up saying, stand up, I
my felf also am a man.
, and condemns the voluntary humility of worshipping Angels, Col. 2.18. Let no
man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and worshipping of
Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by
his fleshly mind.
though they are such glorious and excellent Creatures*

THE SACRAMENTS.
Quest. HOW many are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

A. Two only, Baptism Matthew. 28.18. Go, teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
Luke 22.19, 20. And he took bread and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them saying, This is my body which is given for you, This do ye in Remembrance
of me. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying This Cup is the New Testament
in my blood, which is shed for you.
and the Lords Supper (b), which answer to the two Sacraments of the old
Testament, Circumcision and the Passover.

What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an institution of Jesus Christ, wherein by some outward and
visible sign he is pleased to represent, exhibit, and seal unto us the benefits
of his Mediation.

What are the parts of a Sacraments?

A. Two, the outward part or Sign, and the inward part or the Thing signified.
Thus in the Sacrament of Baptism the outward part or sign is Water; the inward
part or thing signified is remission of Sins and Regeneration or the new birth:
And in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the outward part or sign is Bread and
Wine, the inward part or thing signified the Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. Where do we read of Sacraments in the Scripture?

A. Though this very word [Sacrament] be not in the Scripture, as likewise we
do not-there find the word Trinity; yet that which we do understand by these
words [Sacrament and Trinity] is there delivered to us in other words.

Q. Is it from any virtue in the Sacramental Elements or him that does ad
minister them, that Grace is exhibited or imparted to those, whom the
Sacraments are administered to?

A. No Romans 2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly; neither is
that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh, etc. 1 Pet* 3.21. The like
figure whereunto Baptism does also now save us; not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, But the Answer of a good Conscience toward God by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not disscerning the Lords
body.
; The efficacy depends upon Gods Blessing on his own Institutions; his Spirit
accompanying the Sacraments, where they are effectual to those blessed purposes
for which they were instituted Matthew. 3.11. He shall Baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire. 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized
into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bound or free; and
have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
.

What is meant by those words, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, which the Minister is to use when he Baptizeth?

A. To Baptize In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, is in the Authority, and into the Faith, Profession and Obedience
of them.

What did you promise in that Covenant, which you entered into in your Baptism?

A. I did promise to forsake the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; to own and
profess Jesus Christ; and ever to continue his faithful Servant; whom I did
then give up my self unto, and accept of, for my only Lord and Savior.

Q. What is required of them that come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. They are required to examine themselves.

Q. Proceed further to show what is their Duty with reference to this Sacrament?

A. They ought, 1. To understand it aright, to discern the Lords Body. 2. To
judge themselves in a truly humble Penitent manner for all their sins. 3. To
quicken their Spiritual Appetites, and enlarge the desires of their Souls;
having their eye of Faith fixed on Jesus Christ, who is that Bread which
perishes not, and the Water of Life. 4. To have a sincere and unfeigned
resolution by Gods gracious assistance, faithfully to observe and keep that
Solemn Covenant with with God, which they come to renew. 5. To cherish and
maintain a thankful Remembrance of Christ's death. 6. To bear a true Christian
Love and Charity toward all their Brethren.

Q. Tell me then what are the chief ends of this Sacrament?

A. 1. A solemn atd thankful Remembrance, or Commemoration of Christ's death. 2.
The Renewing of our Covenant with God. 3. The nourishment, strengthening, and
refreshing of our Souls. 4. The engaging us to mutual Love.

Q. What are the Actions of the Minister at the Lords Supper; or holy Communion?

A. 1. He takes the Bread and Wine. 2. He does Bless or Consecrate them. 3. He
breaks the Bread, and pours out the Wine. 4. He delivers them to the
Communicants.

Q. What should these actions of his put us in mind of, and cause us to
meditate upon?

A. 1. That God did appoint Jesus Christ for the great work of Man's Redemption
Heb. 3.1, 2. Consider the High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus, who was
faithful to him that appointed him.
. 2, That Jesus Christ was furnished and qualified for this work, which he
undertook Psalm. 45.7. Therefore God thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me, etc. Acts 10.38. How God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power.
. 3. That his body was broken 1 Cor. 11.24. This is my Body, which is broken
for you.
, his blood shed Matthew. 26.28. For this is my Blood of the New Testament, which
is shed for many for the Remission of Sins.
, his Soul, or Life poured out unto death Isa. 53.12. Because he has poured
out his Soul unto death.
. 4. That God gives his Son John 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life.
, and the Son gives himself for the Redemption of fallen man John 6.1. And the
bread which I give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World.
.

Q. Are the Body and Blood of Christ in this Sacrament, received and fed upon
in a corporeal and carnal manner?

A. No; they are truly and really received by the worthy Partakers, but it is
in a Spiritual manner: and they who do receive Jesus Christ therein and feed
upon him, do receive him Spiritually into their hearts by Faith.

Q. What do you think then of Transubstantiation, or the converting of the very
substance of Bread and Wine by the Priests Consecration thereof into the very
substance of the Body and Blood of Christ?

A. 1. It destroys the very nature of a Sacrament, which consists of two parts,
The Sign, and the thing signified. 2. It Is a Doctrine very opposite to Sense,
and Reason, and Scripture.

Q. How is it contrary to Sense?

A. We plainly see and taste that the Elements remain Bread and Wine still, And
this Evidence of Sense is the great Argument for the proof of our Christian
Religion made use of by the Apostles 1 John 1.1, 3. That which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the Word of Life. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you. 1 Cor. 15.5, 6. That he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that
he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once.
, and by our Savior himself Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it
is my self, handle me, and see. Joh. 20.27, 28. Then says he to Thomas, Reach
hither thy finger and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand and thrust it
into my side: and be not faithless but believing. And Thomas answered and said
unto him, My Lord and my God.
.

Q. How is it contrary to Reason?

A. It Is contrary to Reason. 1. That Bread should be turned into that which was
in being long before the Bread it self. 2. That Christ's Body should be in
Heaven, which the Scripture declares Mark 16.19. So then after the Lord had
spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of
God. Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God. 1 Pet. 3.22. Who is gone
into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God. Angels, and Authorities, and
Power being made subject unto him.
, and yet here upon Earth at the same time, and in many places upon Earth at
once.

Q. Proceed to declare how it is contrary to Scripture?

A. 1. The Scripture declares, that Christ as man was in all points like unto
us, Sin only excepted Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.
, so that his body was like ours, and therefore it cannot be whole and entire
(as the Papists pretend it is) in many places at the same time. 2. The Heavens
must receive him till the restitution of all things Acts 3.21.
, and at the last day he shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with his
mighty Angels 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
. 3. They only are blessed, who receive Christ Spiritually Luke 11.27, 28. A
certain woman lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the Womb that
bare thee, and the Paps that thou have sucked, But he said, Yea, rather blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
, and this Sacrament is a Feast for the Soul, which Soul of man would be no way
bettered, if he could in a corporeal and carnal manner eat the very Body of
Christ Matthew. 15.17. Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever enters in at
the mouth, goes into the Belly, and is cast out into the draught?
. 4. That the same Body cannot be in diverse places at once, is the Argument
which the Angel made use of to those Women at Christ's Sepulcher; to whom he
said, He is not here, for he is risen Matthew. 28.6.
. Otherwise they could have replied, Though he were risen, yet he might be
there too notwithstanding. 5. St. Paul expressly tells us that it is bread we
eat in this Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29, For as often as ye eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore
whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, etc.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, etc.
.

Q. How do you then understand those words. This is my Body.

A. In like manner as these phrases. The seven Kine, and the seven ears of Corn
(which Pharoh dreamt of) are seven years, i. e. they signify seven years: and
as I understand what the Apostle means, when he says. The Israelites drank of
that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, i. e. that
Rock did denote, represent, or signify Christ. So here This is my Body. i. e.
This Bread does denote, signify, or represent my Body.

Q. Is it ordinary to meet with figurative expressions in such cases?

A. Yes, we meet with them frequently in Scripture. Thus Circumcision is called
the Covenant Genesis 17.10. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between me
and you and thy seed after thee, every man-child among you shall be Circumcised.
, though properly it was not the Covenant, but the Token Genesis 17.11. And it
shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you.
, and Seal of it Romans 4.11. A Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.
. So also the Lamb is called the Lords Pasover Exodus 12.11, 21. Ye shall eat it
in have, it is the Lords Passover. Draw out and take you a Lamb according to
your Families, and kill the Passover.
, which was the Sacrifice of of the Lords Passover Exodus 12.27. It is the
Sacrifice of the Lords Passover; who passed over the houses of the Chidlren of
Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses.
. And there is more than one figure in our Saviors expression concerning the
Cup, This Cup is the New Testament, etc. Where the Cup is put for the Wine, and
the New Testament, for the Seal of the New Testament, or Covenant.

Q. But does not our Savior himself tell us, The Bread which I give is my
Flesh, which I will give for the life of the World? Joh. 6.51.

A. Christ does not there speak of the Eucharist, or Lords Supper, For 1. This
Sacrament was not then instituted. 2. The eating of Christ's flesh there spoken
of is such, that all who eat it are saved and all who do not eat it are damned
John 6.53, 54. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
, which cannot be truly said of this Sacramental eating.

Q. How do you then understand those words?

A. By eating of Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, we are there to
understand Believing in him, a receiving of him Spiritually into our hearts;
and not a carnal eating of his Body.

John 6.63. The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit.
Q. But if this were meant of the Eucharist, or the Lords Supper, would it not
condemn the Papists themselves, who deny the Cup to the people?

A. Yes certainly; for the drinking of Christ's Blood is as indispensably there
required of every one, as the eating of his Flesh.

Q. Can you tell me by what Arguments they endeavor to justify their denying
the Cup to the people?

A. One Argument they urge for it is, The Examples which (say they) are in
Scripture of receiving the Sacrament only in one kind.

Acts 2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. Acts. 20.7. And upon the
first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread.
Q. How do you answer this Argument?

A. 1. There is no mention of the Ministers drinking the Cup neither; and yet
the Papists only deny it to the Laity, or common people. 2. The Scripture
expresses in diverse: place^ a whole meal, or feast, by this one act of Eating
where doubtless the Guests did drink too 1 Samuel 9.19. Go up before me unto the
high place, for ye shall eat with me to day. Luke 7.36. And one of the
Pharisees desired him, that he would eat with him. Luke 14.1. And it came to
pass as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread.
.

Q. What other Argument do they urge to this purpose?

A. That the Blood is in the Flesh, so that in the Bread, that is (say they)
the Body of Christ, the people have his Blood too by concomitancy.

Q. What Answers have you to return thereunto?

A. 1. There is no need then for the Priests to have the Cup neither: yea it
does in effect declare that Christ's appointing of the Cup to show forth his
death and the shedding of his Blood was altogether needless. 2. We are
commanded to drink as well as eat: but a man does not drink Blood, if he do eat
some of it in Flesh.

Q. What Arguments can you give me why the common people ought to partake of
the Cup too?

A. 1. Our Savior says, Drink ye all of it, which is somewhat the more
observable, because he does not expressly say, Eat ye all of it (though indeed
that be a duty too). And the Apostles were at that time in the peoples stead,
and Christ was the Minister or dispenser of the Sacrament. 2. Both Eating and
Drinking belong to the same persons, and there is no more reason to restrain
the one than the other. 3. The Apostle expressly declares himself to the People
of Corinth, that a man is to examine himself and then to drink of that Cup as
well as eat of that Bread, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. What is signified by the Actions of the Communicants, that is to say, their
taking the Bread and Wine, their eating the one and drinking the other?

A. Thereby is signified their receiving Jesus Christ, and their feeding on him
for their Spiritual nourishment, refreshment, and strengthening; even as man's
body is nourished, refreshed, and strengthened by Bread and Wine.

Q. Is it a Duty to receive this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or only a
Privilege?

A. It is not only a Privilege, but a Duty expressly required by our Savior in
these words, Do this in remembrance of me.

Q. Do such as receive this Sacrament unworthily, partake of Christ therein?

A. No verily; though they do receive the Bread and Wine in this Sacrament, yet
in no wise are they partakers of Christ; but are guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Lord, and do drink Judgment to themselves.

Q. Tell me now wherein these two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper do
agree?

A. They do agree in that 1. The Author of them both is God. 2. The inward and
Spiritual part of both is Jesus Christ, and the benefits of his Mediation. 3.
They are both seals of the same Covenant of Grace. 4. They are both to be
dispensed by Ministers of the Gospel and by none other. 5. They are both to be
continued till Christ's second coming.

Q. Tell me also in what respects they differ?

A. In these four. 1. Baptism is to be administered but once: the Lords Supper
is to be administered often. 2. In Baptism the outward part or sign is Water; in
the Lords Supper, Bread and Wine. 3. Baptism is a sign and means, and pledge of
Forgiveness and Regeneration: The Lords Supper, of our Spiritual Nourishment,
Growth, and Confirmation. 4. Baptism is to be administered even to Infants,
whose Parents are not both of them Unbelievers; but the Lords Supper to such
only as are of years and ability to examine themselves, and discern the Lords
Body.

The CONCLUSION.
Q. May we rest satisfied and content our selves in the bare knowledge of these
things?

A. No; We must be careful likewise to practice them, and in all our ways to
walk according thereunto.

Psalm. 119.33, 34. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it
unto the end. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law; yea I shall
observe it with my whole heart. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life.

John 13.17. IF YE KNOW THESE THINGS, HAPPY ARE YE IF YE DO THEM.


The CREED.
I Do believe in God, who made us all.
In Christ his Son, who us redeemed from thrall,
And will at the last day judge great and small.
I do believe in The Holy Spirit of Grace;
The holy Church of God in every place;
The Saints Communion, and Remission
Of Sins, the Body's Resurrection,
And life eternal, when this life is done.
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
SErve one true God, the maker of us all.
Worship no Image, nor before it fall.
Thou shall not take the great and fearful Name
Of God in vain, but reverence the same.
Remember to observe the Sabbath Day.
Unto thy Parents their due Honor pay,
Thou shall not Kill, for Blood will Blood require.
Adultery hate* and every foul desire.
Wrong no man, but all fraud and Theft forbear.
Lie not to any, nor thy self Forswear.
What is another see thou covet not,
But rest well satisfied with thy own lot.
The LORDS PRAYER.
OUR Father, which in Heavens highest frame
Thy Throne have placed: Hallowed be thy name.
Hasten thy Kingdom Lord, and let us love
To do thy will below, as those above.
Give us our daily Bread; and may we be
As others we forgive, forgiven by thee.
Into temptation let us not be led,
But still from evil be delivered.
For thine's the Kingdom, Power, and unto thee
Be given all Glory to Eternity.
Amen, Amen, O Lord. So may it be.
The SACRAMENTS.
THE Sacraments Christ left us in his Word
Are Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.
Psalms of prayer to be used in the Morning.
I.
LOrd in the morning hear thou me,
In th'morning hear my cry;
For I direct my Prayer to thee,
And will look up on high.
I set the Lord still in my sight,
And trust him over all;
Since he does stand at my right hand,
I know I shall not fall.
But who can all his errors see?
O Cleanse my heart within
From secret faults and keep thou me
From all presumptious sin.
How I may always do thy will,
Thy Servants Soul instruct;
Thy Spirit is good, me to the Land
Of uprightness conduct.
Unite my heart to fear thy name,
O make me wholly thine;
Grant me the knowledge of thy Law,
And cause thy Face to shine.
Make me abhor the company
Of him that tells lies;
And gather not my Soul wit^ ^^ose
That hurtful things devise.
Thou art the Rock, whereon I trust,
Preserve O Lord therefore
My going out and coming in,
Henceforth for evermore.
II.
INcline my heart thy Laws to keep,
And Covenants to imbace;
And from all filthy Avarice
Lord shield me with thy Grace.
Of lying and deceitful lips
Remove from me the way:
Grant me the knowledge of thy Law,
And I shall it obey.
Teach me O Lord the way to thee,
And lead me on forth-right.
Many there be that watch for me
To trap me, if they might.
And give thy holy Angels charge
Concerning me, that they
Hold up my steps, and keep my Feet
From stumbling in the way.
O God, let thy exalted name
Above the Heavens stand:
Advance thy Glory, raise thy Fame
Above both Sea and Land.
III.
FRom the beholding of my Sin
Lord turn away thy Face;
O God make clean my heart within,
Renew it by thy grace.
Prove me my God, I thee desire,
And search my very heart;
As men do prove their Gold with fire,
Examine every part
I do confess that I received
My very shape in sin:
My mother has conceived me
And brought me forth therein.
Numberles sins encompass me,
Oh how they do prevail!
More than my very hairs they be,
So that my heart does fail.
But there is mercy to be had
With thee, and pardoning Grace;
Therefore are men encouraged
To fear and seek thy face.
Purge me with Isop, and I know
I shall be clean and free;
And whiter than the driven Snow,
When I am washed by thee.
Hold up my goings, be my guide
Lord in thy paths divine,
So that my footsteps may not slide
Out of those paths of thine.
The meditations of my heart,
And every word I say,
Accept of me, O Lord that art
My Savior and my stay.
IV.
EXcept the Lord do build the house,
Vain pains the Builder takes;
Except the Lord the City guard,
In vain the Watchman wakes.
It Is but in vain that men do eat
The bread of carefulness,
And early rise and sit up late;
It Is God alone can bless.
Thou have upheld me from the Womb,
And thou alone all he,
Who from my very infancy
Have still sustained me.
Make me to understand aright
Thy Precepts perfect way;
So shall I of thy wondrous works
Be talking every day
And let the Lord our God Command
His face on us to shine:
Confirm the labors of our hand,
Confirm them Lord by thine.
V.
THE day is thine and so the night,
Both equally are thine;
Thou do prepare the morning light,
And cause the Sun to shine.
O shine upon thy Servants now,
And on my Soul advance
The comforting and gracious light
Of thy blessed countenance.
As far as The East is from the West,
So far remove from me
All my transgressions Lord, whereby
I have offended thee.
And into thy strict judgment Lord,
Do not thy Servant call;
For with thee can no mortal man
Be justified at all.
Set thou a watch to guard my lips,
And keep my mouth from sin,
That wicked works and fellowships
My Soul partake not in.
That I may never join my self
To wicked ones nor dare
At any time to taste the least
Of their delicious fare.
O let them never catch me in!
Lord keep me from the snare,
And from their close and subtle gin,
That wicked workers are.
Here guide me with thy Counsel that
I may hereafter be
Received into thy glory, there
To live and reign with thee.
Psalms of Prayer to be used at Night.
I.
BLessed be God, that every day
Does us with blessings load,
To whom Deaths issues do belong,
Even our Salvation's God.
Send out thy light and blessed truth,
And lead me with thy Grace,
Which may conduct me to thy hill,
And to thy dwelling place.
Thy hands have made and fashioned me,
Give me thy laws to learn;
And what thy testimonies be,
Lord make me to discern.
From vain desires and worldly lusts
O turn away my sight,
Give me the spirit of life and power,
To walk thy ways aright.
Order my steps so in thy word,
I may not fall from thee:
Suffer not any sin to have
Dominion over me.
Be thou my keeper Lord who do
Thy chosen Israel keep,
Who never slumberest at all,
And who does never sleep.
Grant me that with thy Gracious wing
I may be covered,
And let thy holy Angel pitch
Their Tent about my bed.
Confirm thy gracious promise Lord,
Which thou have made to me,
Who am thy servant, and do love
And fear nothing but thee.
II.
O Teach me Lord thy way and I
Will keep within the same;
Yea all my heart shall magnify,
Thy ever glorious name.
I am a stranger in the earth,
Hide not thy Law from me:
My Soul O Lord does even break,
For longing after thee.
Thou had commanded us to keep
Thy Precepts carefully,
And with our utmost diligence
To steer our course thereby.
O thou that giv'st us this Command,
Give grace to do the same!
That I may all thy statutes keep,
And never shrink for shame
And now O Lord into thy hands
My Spirit I do commit,
For it is thou O God of truth,
Who have redeemed it.
III
O Lord, remember me
Even with thy favor free,
Which to thine own and them alone
Vouchsafed is by thee.
Direct me in thy truth,
And keep me in thy way:
Thou art my God and Savior,
And unto thee I pray.
I will remember thee
Upon my bed at night,
And meditate when I awake,
On all thy glory bright.
Thou art the Fountain, whence
Proceeds all my defense:
Thy wings safe shade shall now be made
My joyful residence.
For it is thou that do
Both make the morning voice,
And th'evenings constant going out
To praise thee and rejoice.
IV.
FRom all the sins that I have done
Lord quit and set me free:
Make me to understand the way,
That leads unto thee.
The greater sort crave worldly goods,
And riches do embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance,
Thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall make my heart
Abundantly more glad
Then they that of their Corn and Wine
Greatest increase have had.
In peace therefore lie down will I,
Taking my rest and sleep;
For thou alone O Lord my God
Wilt me in safety keep.
Thy people and thine heritage
Lord bless, guide and preserve:
Increase them still, and rule their hearts,
That they may never swerve.
V.
INstruct me Lord in the right way
Of thy statutes divine;
And them to keep even to the end
My heart will I Incline.
O how I love thy Law? it is
My meditation still:
I am thy Servant, grant me Lord
That I may do thy will.
Cause me to hear of thy kind love,
When mornings light I see.
Cause me to know what way to go,
For I do trust in thee.
Keep me from every hurtful thing
As the apple of thine eye;
And hide me underneath thy wing,
As a sure Canopy.
Behold, my hearts desire is bent
To walk in perfect way:
Lord strengthen me so with thy grace,
That it perform I may.
VI
O Lord thou have me searched and known,
And thou do plainly see
My lying down, my rising up,
And every thought in me.
Thou hear every word I say,
And compassest my bed:
Thou understandest all my way,
And every step I tread.
The darkness hides not from thy sight,
But night it self shines clear:
To thee the darkness and the light
Do both alike appear.
Search me O God and know my heart;
Try me, I humbly pray,
If any sin do lodge within,
And lead me in thy way.
Lord make me understand my end,
And life's most certain date,
That I may duly apprehend
The frailty of my state.
Of thy good pleasure Sion bless,
Build up Jerusalem's Wall:
Establish peace and holiness
Throughout the Nations all.
Psalms of Prayer for such as are sick.
I.
O Lord have mercy on my Soul,
For I am full of pain:
Lord I beseech thee make me whole,
And send me strength again.
For after Death can no man have
Remembrance more of thee,
Nor in the dark and silent Grave
Extol thy Majesty.
When thou for sin do man rebuke,
He waxes pale and wan,
And like a cloth that Moths have fret,
So vain a thing is man.
My strength does fail, my heart does pant,
Have mercy Lord on me;
And heal my sad and sinful Soul,
That has offended thee.
The days wherein I pass my life
Are like the fleeting shade;
And I am withered like the grass,
That soon does quail and fade.
But thou art still the same, thy years
Abide most firm and sure:
And thy remembrance ever does
From age to age endure.
II.
O Lord depart not now from me
In all my pain and grief,
Since I have none can help but thee,
None else to send relief.
Rejoice O Lord thy Servants heart,
I lift my Soul to thee:
For good and gracious thou art,
And to forgiveness free.
E're that the World was made or wrought,
Thy seat was set on high,
Beyond all time that can be thought
Thou art eternally.
O Lord when for offending thee
Thy hand does me chastize,
Grant that I may instructed be
Thereby, and made more wise.
As Silver in the Furnace tried,
So am I tried by thee:
My feet are set within a net,
O Lord deliver me.
How ever it be, yet God is good,
And kind to Israel,
To every one that is clean of heart
And keeps his Conscience well.
III.
BEhold my anguish Lord,
Consider all my pain,
O pardon mine offense, and make
Thy Servant whole again.
With mercy me behold,
To thee I make my moan;
For I am poor and desolate,
And comfortless alone.
For thy most holy name
O Lord I thee entreat
To grant me pardon for my Sin,
Which is exceeding great.
Why art thou so cast down
My Soul? why do thou grieve?
Why should thou be moved in me?
O still in God believe.
Yet trust upon his name,
His praise shall I record,
Who does advance my countenance,
And is my gracious Lord.
IV.
INcline thine ear unto my cry,
My Soul is filled with grief:
My life unto the grave draws nigh,
O send me some relief.
Before the Mountains had their birth,
The World, or smallest clod
Of all this vast and spacious Earth,
Thou art the eternal God.
The lasting of a thousand years
So seems in thy sight,
As yesterday, when past, appears,
Or as a Watch by night.
But mortal man that is made of Clay
Is soon destroyed, and then
Returns to dust, when thou do say,
Return ye sons of men.
Like to a swift and hasty stream,
Even so man's life does pass:
Or like a transitory dream,
Or like the springing grass:
Which in the morning flourishes,
And looks most pleasantly;
But in the evening It Is cut down,
All withered, dead and dry.
Wherefore my God some pity take,
O Lord I pray to thee,
Do not this Soul of mine forsake,
But help and succor me.
V.
LOrd hear my suit and give good heed,
Regard my tears that fall:
I sojourn like a stranger here,
As did my Fathers all.
O spare a little give me space,
And yet my strength restore,
Before I go away from hence,
And shall be seen no more.
How soon the years are past away
Even of the man that is old!
We spend our time from day to day
Even as a tale that is told.
Lord teach us the religious art
Of numb'ring out our days,
So as we may apply our hearts
To Wisdom's sacred ways.
Grant that I always may confess
How just thy judgments be,
And that in very faithfulness
Thou have afflicted me.
But why art thou so sad my Soul?
Why fretst thou in my breast?
Still trust in God, for him to praise
I hold it always best.
By him I have deliverance
Against all pain and grief:
He is my God, who always does
At need send me relief.
VI.
LOrd hear my prayer, and let my cry
Come speedily to thee:
In day of my calamity
Hide not thy face from me.
Cast me not off for evermore,
Arise, why hid'st thy face,
Forgetting mine affliction sore,
And my distressed case?
Even as a bottle in the smoke,
So am I parcht and dried:
Yet do I not forget thy Law,
But have on it relied.
The Lord that made us, knows our frame,
Our mold and fashion just,
How weak and frail our nature is,
And that we are but dust,
And how the time of mortal man
Is like the withering hay:
Or as the flower now fresh and fair,
That quickly fades away.
O Lord; my God forsake me not,
O be not far from me:
Make have O Lord to help me now,
And my Salvation be.
VII.
O Lord attend unto my cry,
And to my prayer give heed,
That does not in hypocrisy
From feigned lips proceed.
Vouchsafe O Lord, vouchsafe thy grace,
Be merciful to me:
For my distressed Soul does place
Her confidence in thee.
Yea to the shadow of thy wings
I will for refuge fly;
For he it is deliverance brings,
Even he that is most high.
Lord thou have pointed out my life
In length much like a Span:
Mine age is nothing unto thee,
So vain is every man.
Man surely walks in vainest show,
And does himself annoy
In getting, goods, and cannot tell
Who shall the same enjoy.
And now I will to thee confess
Lord, what my sins have been;
O pardon all my wickedness,
And heal me of my sin.
In Heaven I have none but thee,
Nor is there any one
In all the Earth desired by me
Besides thy self alone.
My heart and flesh do fail in me,
But God does fail me never;
The strength'ner of my heart is he,
And Heritage for ever.
Psalms of Praise or Thanksgiving for preservation and Sustenance.
I.
MY Song for ever shall express
The mercies of the Lord,
And all his truth and faithfulness
Most thankfully record.
Thou wast my stay in dangerous day,
To thee my strength I Will sing;
God's my defense and Rock, from whence
My mercy has it is spring.
Out of the Womb which me possessed
Thou did me take, and I
Have ever since I sucked the breast
Found thee my full supply.
I have been cast upon thy care
Even from my birth till now;
And from the womb that did me bear,
My God and guide art thou.
In thee be glad, in thee rejoice,
And to thy name will I
In Songs of Praise lift up my voice,
O thou that art most high.
II.
O Come sing we a Song,
A joyful noise be made
With one accord before the Lord,
Our Rock of saving aid.
When I the Heavens do view,
Wrought so with art Divine,
The Sun at noon, at night the Moon,
And all the Stars that shine.
How poor a thing is man
Think I! what wondrous love,
That he should be thought on by thee,
And visited from above?
Thy blessing makes the field
To yield a joyful crop:
The earth with goodness thou do crown,
Thy paths with fatness drop.
Thou do enrich the land
With Corn at thy command;
And everything do make to spring,
When watered with thy hand.
Thou art the confidence
Of the earths circumference,
And also theirs whom the Ocean bears,
Even far remote from hence.
He that does give thee praise,
He glorifieth thee:
And he that walks in godly ways
Shall Gods Salvation see.
Psalms of Praise or Thanksgiving for Deliverance from Sickness.
I.
COme hearken ye that fear Gods name,
To you declare will I
What favor he has showed to me
And how he heard my cry.
The Lord is kind and merciful,
When Sinners do him grieve:
The slowest to conceive a wrath,
And readiest to relieve.
He has not dealt as our offense
And wickedness has been:
Nor given us a recompense
According to our Sin.
But as the space is wondrous great
'Twixt Earth and Heaven above;
So is his goodness much more large
To such as do him love.
And as the Parent pity shows
Unto his Children dear:
Such pity bears the Lord to those,
That worship him in fear.
Unto the Lord give thanks will I
For all his righteous ways:
And to the name of God most high
Sing cheerful Songs of praise.
II.
MY Soul I charge thee to express
The Lords renown and fame,
And all that is within me bless
His great and sacred name.
Give thanks to God for all his gifts,
Show not thy self unkind:
And suffer not his benefits
To slip out of thy mind.
Who gave thee pardon for thy faults,
And thee restored again:
Who healed thy diseases all,
And eased thee of thy pain.
Who did redeem thy life from death.
And once more set thee free:
His mercy and abundant love
He did extend to thee.
III.
I Love the Lord because he heard
My voice so graciously:
I Will call upon him while I live,
Because he heard my cry.
The sorrows of most bitter death
Like snares did me infold:
Trouble and anguish and the pains
Of Hell on me gat hold.
Upon the name of God most high
Then did I call, and say
Deliver thou my Soul O Lord,
I do most humbly pray.
He gracious is and merciful
To those that simple be;
For I was brought exceeding low,
And he delivered me.
And now I charge thee O my Soul,
Return unto thy rest;
For largely lo the Lord to thee
His bounty has expressed.
My life from death he saved, mine eyes
From tears, my feet from fall:
Think then, what shall I render now
Unto the Lord for all.
I in the land of living men
Will walk before the Lord;
And his compassions plentiful
With grateful mind record.
Salvations cup I will take up,
And on the Lord I Will call;
To him I Will pay my vows, and pray
Before the people all.
In Gods own Courts I Will render them
Even in the midst of thee,
Of thee O Great Jerusalem,
Come praise the Lord with me.
IV.
I Waited long and sought the Lord,
Until at length his ear
He did incline most graciously
My voice and cry to hear.
To me he taught a Psalm of praise,
Which I must show abroad,
And sing new Songs of thanks always
Unto the Lord my God.
Thou made me feel affliction sore,
And yet thou did me save;
And of thy goodness did restore
Thy servant from the Grave.
E're thou did touch me with thy rod,
I erred and went astray:
But now I keep thy holy word,
And make it all my stay.
Since thou have turned my doleful note
Into a cheerful voice,
And have put off my mourning weed,
And made me to rejoice;
Therefore my Soul uncessantly
Shall sing unto thy praise:
My Lord, my God, to thee will I
Give laud and thanks always.
V.
O Lord my God, thy wondrous deeds
In greatness far surmount,
And thine abundant love exceeds
All things that I can count.
When I intend and do devise
Thy works abroad to show;
To such a reckoning they do rise,
Thereof no end I know.
I said in have, thou have me cast
Off from before thine eyes;
Yet heard'st thou when I cried to thee,
My supplicating cries.
The Lord I bless and magnify,
Who turned not away
His favorable face from me,
When I to him did pray.
His anger lasts but a while,
It Is quickly past again:
But in his favor and his grace
Does constant life remain.
The Offerings which with heart and voice
I do most freely give.
Accept, and teach me how I may
After thy judgments live.
VI.
THE Lord is just in all his ways,
His works are holy all:
He Is nigh to those that call on him,
In truth that on him call.
He listens to their humble suit
With his attentive ear:
He also will their prayers fulfill
Whoever do him fear.
For in the day I cried to thee,
Thou answeredst me again:
With inward strength thou strenghnedst me,
And did my Soul sustain.
It Is good for me that I have been
Chastized with thy Rod,
That I might learn thy ways, wherein
I ever since have trod.
I am companion to those
That truly fear the Lord;
Depart from me ye evil doers,
For I will keep Gods word.
As for the Lord his word is tried,
His ways is perfect pure:
To all that have on him relied
He is a buckler sure.
The dead praise not the Lord, nor they
To silence that go down:
But I will bless his name always,
And boast of his renown.
VII.
TO render thanks unto the Lord,
How great a cause have I?
My voice, my prayer, and my complaint
That heard so graciously.
Thy vows are on me O my God,
I Will render praise to thee;
For thou did save my Soul from grave,
When death arrested me.
I on my right hand looked and viewed,
But no man would me know:
No Creature cared for my Soul,
All left me here below.
Then did I cry unto the Lord,
My gracious God, and said,
O help me now in this distress,
Who are my only aid.
O hear me soon, my Spirits faint,
O Lord thy servant save:
I flee to thee to shelter me,
No other God I have.
Yea had not Lord thy gracious word
Been all my hearts delight,
In my affliction certainly
I should have perished quite.
Therefore I never will forget
Thy precepts, which I found
Did stay my sad and sinking Soul,
When it was almost drowned.
Psalms of Praise and consideration of God's wonderful works.
I.
PRaise ye the Lord, for it is meet
Of all his acts to sing:
To praise him is a work most sweet,
Praise is a comely thing.
How many are thy works O Lord,
In wisdom all composed!
The Earth by thee is richly stored
With treasures there enclosed.
So is the spacious Sea, wherein
Are beasts both great and small,
And an innumerable sort
Of creeping things do crawl.
There all the rich and weighty ships
Do make their pathless way;
There Is that Leviathan too, whom thou
Have made therein to play.
These on thy bounty all depend
For seasonable food:
Thy liberal hand thou do extend,
And they are filld with good.
They gather what thou do provide,
Thou hid'st thy face, they mourn;
Thou take away their breath they dye,
And to their dust return.
II.
LEt every thing throughout the earth
Send forth a joyful noise:
The Seas, and Shores, and Hills, and Floods
Clap hands and join in joys,
Before the Lord, whose coming shall
The earth with judgment try,
Judging the world, and people all
With truth and equity.
Know then that he who is above,
For evermore shall reign,
And in the seat of Equity
True Judgment will maintain.
With light as with a princely robe
He Is covered round about;
And has the spacious Heavens made
Like curtains stretched out.
He in the waters lays the beams,
Which do his chambers bear:
He walks on the winged winds,
The Clouds his Chariot are.
His Angels Spirits, a fiery flame
His Ministers he makes;
He laid the Earths foundation-frame
So sure, it never shakes.
Thy works do praise thee every one,
Thy Saints with joint accord
In Songs express the faithfulness,
Of their most gracious Lord.
III.
SIng praise, sing praise unto the Lord,
Who rides on the Sky,
And by his name of JAH extol
His glorious Majesty.
The Father of the Fatherless,
And judge of widow's case
Is God above, who all things views,
From his most holy place.
Who with the Lord can be compared
In all the clouds abroad?
Among the sons of all the gods
What one is like our God?
The furious raging of the Seas
Thou rulest at thy will:
Their swelling waves thou do appeas,
And all is calm and still.
He is Protector of the poor,
What time they be oppressed:
He is their succor in distress,
And their assured rest.
For who except the Lord alone
A God esteemed may be?
And who a mighty Rock but one?
And our Jehovah's he.
IV.
THE eyes of all things wait on thee,
And thou do give them meat:
Thou openest wide thine hand most free,
And they their fill do eat.
The Lord does send the blind their sight,
The lame he makes sound:
He heals the broken in their heart,
And binds up their wound.
The Stranger he does save, and help
The Widow in distress;
He lifts up them that are bowed down,
Relieves the Fatherless.
He tells the number of the Stars,
And names them perfectly:
He gives the ranging beasts their food,
And th'young Ravens that cry,
He gives Snow like Wool, wherewith
Earth's face is covered;
And the hoar-frosts upon the ground
Like Ashes he does spread.
He casts forth great flakes of Ice,
Like morsels from his hand:
His cold is such, that there is none
Who can before it stand.
He sends forth his mighty word,
And melts all again:
His wind he makes to blow, and then
The Waters flow amain.
Thy righteousness O God, exceeds
In wonderful degree:
Thou have performed wondrous deeds;
O who is like to thee!
V.
O Lord our Lord, how wonderful
And excellent is thy name!
Behold thou have thy Glory placed
Above the Heavens frame.
When I behold the Sun and Moon
And glorious Stars above,
What Is man think I, that he should be
The object of thy love!
Praise ye the Lord of Hosts, and sing
To Isral's God each one.
For he does every wondrous thing,
Yea he himself alone.
And blessed be his holy name
To all eternity:
Let all the Earth declare the same;
Amen, Amen say I.
The Blessings and Privileges of the Godly.
I.
O Blessed blessed man is he,
Whose sins God passes by;
And whom the Lord reputeth free
From all iniquity.
Who walks not in the counsel of
Those that ungodly are:
Nor in the way of sinners stands,
Nor sits in scorners chair.
But in the perfect Law of God
Does place his whole delight;
And in that Law does exercise
Himself both day and night.
He shall be like a tree, that grows
Fast by the Rivers side;
That in it is season brings forth fruit,
And still does fresh abide.
What e're he does shall prosper well:
The Lord continually
With favor knows, and views his way
With a most pleasant eye.
Yea all the paths and ways of God
Are mercy, truth, and grace
To them that keep his Covenant,
And do his Laws embrace.
II.
A good man's steps the Lord does guide,
Delighting in his way.
He shall not sink although he slide;
For God will be his stay.
At any evil tidings told,
He shall not be afraid:
His faithful heart, which makes him bold,
On God is firmly staid.
The meek and humble he will guide,
And keep them in the right:
Yea all shall have their hearts desire
Who in the Lord delight.
The Angel of the Lord does pitch
His tents about them round,
Who fear the Lord, and trust in him,
To keep them safe and sound.
I have been young and now am old;
Yet to my hoary head
The just forsook did never behold,
Nor his seed begging bread:
And they that know thy holy name,
Will put their trust in thee;
For they O Lord that seek thy face,
Shall never forsaken be.
III.
BLessed are they that perfect are,
And undefiled in heart:
Who will not from the Law of God
Allowedly depart;
Blessed are they that give themselves
His statutes to observe:
Seeking the Lord with all their hearts,
And never from him swerve.
The loving kindness of the Lord
With them shall ever stand:
Their childrens children shall receive
Much goodness at his hand.
I mean, which keep his Covenant
With all their whole desire:
And not forget to do the thing,
That he does them require.
Come taste and see how good he is;
Who trusts in him is blessed:
O fear the Lord, ye Saints of his,
For that is always best.
The Lions shall be hunger-pin'd,
Their food shall be so scant:
But they that love and fear the Lord,
Not one good thing shall want;
Nor shall be utterly cast down,
Although they slide and fall;
Because the Lord extends his hand,
And saves them therewithal.
IV.
MArk and behold the perfect man,
Observe the upright well;
His end will certainly be peace,
And he with God shall dwell.
Upon the righteous every where
God casts intentive eyes;
And opens his attentive ear
Unto their humble cries.
A little that the righteous has,
Though he seem mean and poor,
Is better far than all the lands
Of many a wicked doer.
As for transgressors, woe to them;
Together they shall fall:
God finally will cut them off,
And judge them once for all.
But the salvation of the just
Does come from God above,
Who in their trouble sends them aid
Of his free grace and love.
O Lord of Hosts, that man is blessed,
And happy sure is he,
That is persuaded in his breast
All times to trust in thee.
The mournful Souls Complaint and Lamentation.
I.
REgard O Lord when I complain,
And make my moan to thee;
Let not my Prayer ascend in vain,
But give good ear to me.
Why do thou Lord stand off so far,
And seem thy self to hide?
O comfort now thy servant's Soul,
That has on thee relied.
All the desires of mine heart
Are spread before thine eyes;
My groaning is not hid from thee;
Thine ear does hear my cries.
O do not cast away from thee
This helpless Soul of mine;
Nor ever take away from me
That Holy Spirit of thine.
The joys of thy Salvation Lord,
Restore to me again;
And thy free Spirit to me afford
Thy servant to sustain.
A broken and a contrite heart
Thou will not Lord despise;
Enable me to offer thee
This Spiritual Sacrifice.
II.
THE troubles of my heart
Are greatly multiplied.
O free me from this misery,
Wherewith thou have me tried.
Trouble and anguish great
Have taken hold on me:
But thy Commandments O my God,
My joy and comfort be.
For I thy mercy made
The Rock, whereon I staid:
My heart in thee shall joyful be,
And in thy saving aid.
Deliver Lord thy flock,
And send them sure relief;
Redeem thy chosen Israel
From all their pain and grief.
III.
O Lord, consider my complaint,
Incline thine ear to me,
And hear my voice my King, my God,
When I do pray to thee.
Have mercy Lord, and pity take
On me in my distress;
For thine abundant mercies sake
Blot out my wickedness.
O wash me clean from mine offense,
And separate sin from me:
For my transgressions I confess,
My sin I always see.
Of joy and gladness make thou me
To hear the pleasant voice:
So as the bones which thou have broke,
May feelingly rejoice.
And wholly will I give my self
To keep thy Laws most right.
Forsake me not for ever Lord,
But show thy grace and might.
IV.
HOW long O Lord of thee
Forgotten shall I be?
How long a space wilt' hide thy face,
And turn away from me?
O bottle up my tears,
With pity on them look:
Reserve them in a Glass by thee,
And write them in thy Book.
Remember not the faults
And frailty of my youth;
Remember not, how I have sinned
Against thy blessed truth.
I pray thee Lord, remember
Thy mercies manifold;
And thy compassions plentiful,
For they have been of old.
V.
TO thee O Lord I make my moan
In these my depths of grief.
I call, I cry, I sigh, I groan,
O send me some relief.
My throat is dry, mine eyes do fail,
My crying wearieth me;
O God, thou know my foolishness,
My sin's not hid from thee.
Do not O Lord in this distress
Thy Servant quite forsake;
Forsake me not, who am the work,
That thine own hand did make.
Upon the rock of thy great power
My woeful mind repose;
Thou art my Hope my Trust my Tower,
And fence against my foes.
The length of all my life and age
O Lord, is in thy hand;
Defend me from the wrathful rage
Of them that me withstand
My Soul for thy Salvation faints,
But Lord I hope in thee;
Mine eyes fail for thy word and say,
When will thou comfort me?
Forsake me not now I am weak,
O Lord thou God of truth;
For I have put my hope and trust
In thee even from my youth.
The believing Souls Confidence.
I.
THE Lord himself my Shepherd is,
And him that does me feed;
Since he is mine and I am his,
What is it that I can need?
Such as do fear and trust in him,
The Lord does bless them all;
He Will still increase them more and more,
And theirs both great and small.
Great peace have they that love thy Law,
Nothing shall them offend;
Nor such want any kind of thing,
Who on the Lord depend.
When both my earthly Parents shall
Dye, and their Child forsake;
Then God my everlasting guide
Of me the charge will take.
My Soul wait thou on God alone,
All I expect is thence;
He only is my Rock of stone,
Salvation and defense.
II.
THE Lord's my saving health and light,
Why should I be afraid?
He is my life, my strength, my might,
Why should I be dismayed?
Although ten thousand of my foes
Beset me round about;
I will not be afraid of those,
Nor of my fafety doubt.
Yea though I walk through vail of death,
Yet will I fear no ill:
Thy rod and staff do comfort me,
And thou art with me still.
It Is better for a man's defense
To trust in God alone,
Than it is to place our confidence
In any mortal one.
Yea it is far better to repose
Our confidence in thee,
Than it is to put our trust in those
That powerful Princes be.
At all times trust in him alone,
Ye Saints with one accord;
Pour out your heart before his Throne,
Our Refuge is the Lord.
III.
THE Lord is our defense and Aid,
The strength whereby we stand:
When we with terrors are dismayed,
He is our help at hand.
Mere vanity the mean man is,
The great man is a lie:
Yea in the Scales you will find them all
Lighter than vanity,
The Waters of the deep arose,
The Floods lift up their waves*
Even to the Skies their uprore flies,
Their voice with tumult raves:
Yet is the Lord who dwells on high,
Far more of might than these;
Though numerous store of waters roar,
And mighty waves of Seas.
IV.
THat Nation's blessed whose God's the Lord;
That people's blessed, whom he
Has chosen of his own accord
His Heritage to be.
A King that trusts in his Host,
Thereby shall not prevail:
And he that of his strength does boast,
With all his strength shall fail.
A Horse too is as vain, and cannot
The least deliverance bring:
But Gods eye saves his faithful ones
From every hurtful thing.
The Lord of hosts does us defend;
He is our strength and Tower:
On Jacob's God we do depend,
And his Almighty Power.
The joyful Souls Triumph.
I.
YE righteous in the Lord rejoice,
For praise becomes you well:
And sweet it is with thankful voice
Of all his acts to tell.
The Counsels, which the ungodly take
The Lord does bring to naught:
He their device does fruitless make,
And frustrate every thought.
But his own counsel stands sure,
And so for ever shall.
Th'intentions of his heart endure
To Generations all.
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings,
Ye Princes understand;
Be well instructed ye that are
The Judges of the Land.
See that ye serve the Lord each one,
With reverence and with fear:
Rejoice with trembling; kiss the Son,
Lest he in wrath appear.
Then shall ye perish from the way,
If his least anger flame;
O blessed, blessed then are they
That trust upon his name!
II.
BUT that the Lord was on our side,
May Israel now say;
The Lord on whom we still relied
Had he not been our stay;
And took our part against our foes,
Who furiously did drive,
We had been overthrown by those,
And swallowed up alive.
The Waters had gone over us;
Proud Seas that did abound
With rolling waves, our feeble Souls
Had overwhelmed and drowned.
Blessed be God who gave us not
Unto their teeth a prey:
But as a Bird escapes we got
Out of their snare away.
The snare did break and we escaped,
Our help is in the name
Of our great Lord, who by his word
both Heaven and Earth did frame.
III.
NOT unto us Lord, not to us,
Do thou the Glory take
To thine own name even for thy truth,
And for thy mercies sake.
O wherefore should the Heathen say,
Where is their God now gone?
Our God is in the Heavens high,
And all he pleased has done.
Their Idols framed by man's device
Of Gold and Silver be:
Mouths have they but do not speak,
And eyes, but do not see.
And ears, but do not hear a jot;
Noses that have no scent;
Hands have they, but handle not;
And feet but never went.
They that do make them like them are,
And those whose trust they be;
But thou O Israel trust in God;
Thy help and shield is he.
IV.
THE Lord does know the thoughts of man,
His heart he sees plain:
His inmost workings he does scan,
And finds them but vain.
And yet those foolish ones do say,
Tush God will never see;
He Is up in Heaven far away,
We shall concealed be.
What shall not he that made the ear,
He that did make the eye;
What, shall not he both hear and see
All things most perfectly?
He Will recompense their bold offense,
And take them in their sin:
The Lord I say, our God will slay
And cut them off therein.
Trust not in worldly Princes then,
Though they in wealth abound.
Nor in the Sons of mortal men,
In whom no hurt is found.
Their breath alas does soon depart,
How quickly are they gone?
And then the counsels of their heart,
Do perish every one.
But he is a happy man indeed,
Whom Jacob's God does aid;
And he whose hope in all his need
Upon the Lord is stayed.
V.
LET all the world O God,
Give praise unto thy name:
O let the people all abroad
Extol and laud the same.
Clap hands ye people all.
And lift ye up your voice:
Sing to the Lord with joint accord,
In Jacobs God rejoice.
Make a Triumphant sound,
To God due praises sing:
Sing praises, O sing praises round,
Sing praises to our King.
For this God is our God,
He is our God for ever:
Yea unto death he will be our Guide,
A guide that fails never.
Wherefore thy holy name
All ages shall record,
The people shall give thanks to thee
For ever more O Lord.
VI.
THE Lords right hand does valiantly,
His right hand is renowned,
The Lords right hand's exalted high,
With valiant actions crowned.
O all ye precious Saints of his
The Lord sincerely love;
For every true Believer is
Preserved from above.
He plenteously rewards proud Doers,
Take courage and he shall
Strengthen that valiant heart of yours,
O ye Believers all.
Give thanks therefore unto the Lord,
For very good is he,
His mercies sure do still endure
Even to Eternity.
Let Israel say this very day,
His mercy fails never;
And let the house of Aron say,
His mercy lasts for ever.
And let them all that fear the Lord,
Now join in one and say,
His mercies sure do still endure,
And never fall away.
VII.
SIng to the Lord O all ye lands,
Make ye a joyful sound;
Show forth his fame and glorious name;
Make ye his praise renown
He ever rules by Sovereign Power.
His eyes all lands descry;
O let not then rebellious men
Exalt themselves on high.
Ye Angels that excel in strength,
That his Commandments do;
Bless ye the Lord, who know his word,
And hearken thereunto.
O bless the Lord ye glorious hosts,
Ye Ministers of his
That do fulfill and execute
Whate'r his pleasure is.
Yea all his works both far and near,
Bless ye Jehovah's name,
Through his Dominions every where,
My soul bless thou the same.
VIII.
TO bless and praise the Lord,
It is an excellent thing,
To magnify thy name most high,
And of thy works to sing.
Thy kindness to set forth.
Betime as soon's it is light,
And to express thy faithfulness
As duly every night.
What time I am afraid,
Lo I will trust in thee:
Thy word will I still magnify,
For it supporteth me.
On God have I relied,
I will not fear for ought
That ever can by mortal man
Against my Soul be wrought.
In God's assured aid
I have reposed my trust:
I fear not you, what ye can do,
That are but mortal dust.
Unto the Lord most high
Sing praises then will I,
Since I have felt how he has dealt
With me most graciously.
IX.
SIng ye with praise unto the Lord
New Songs of joy and mirth;
Set forth his fame and glorious name
All men of mortal birth.
He is a great and mighty God,
And greatly praised must be;
And every where be had in fear
Above all Gods must he.
For all the Heathens-Nations Gods
Are Idols every one:
He is the Lord that Heaven did frame,
Our God is he alone.
X.
O All ye Angels of the Lord,
All ye his Hosts of might,
Praise him. O praise him Sun and Moon,
And all ye stars of light.
Ye Heavens of Heavens which are so high,
Praise him with full consent.
And all ye Waters too, which are
Above the Firmament.
Praise him ye Dragons, and all deeps,
Fire, Vapor, Hail and Snow,
O magnify the Lord most high,
And all ye storms that blow.
Mountains and hills, and fruitful trees,
And all ye Cedars tall;
Ye Fowl with wings, and creeping things,
Ye Beasts and Cattle all.
Kings, Princes, People, all degrees,
Ye Judges praise his name,
Young men and maids, old men and babes,
See that ye do the same.
O praise him all both great and small.
Let every breathing thing
The praise record of this great Lord,
And Hallelujah sing.
Psalms or Hymns for the Lords day.
I.
COme let us bow and praise the Lord,
Before him let us fall:
And kneel to him with one accord
The maker of us all.
He is the Lord our God indeed,
For us he does provide:
We are his flock, he does us feed,
His sheep, and he our Guide.
Ye everlasting doors stand open,
Ye gates up-lifted be;
Fall open wide unto the King
Of glorious Majesty.
Who is this ever-Glorious King?
How may his name be known?
The Lord in battle conquering,
The high and mighty one.
Ye everlastiny doors stand open,
Ye gates up lifted be;
And then shall enter in the King
Of glorious Majesty.
Who may this glorious Person be?
O tell me who is this?
The Lord of hosts, and none but he,
The King of glory is.
II.
EVen as the chased heart,
For brooks of water pants;
So pants for thee my Soul in me,
Which Lords thy presence wants.
O thou that hear prayer,
To thee we all repair,
O blessed are those, Whom thou have chose
To see thy beauty fair!
In thy Courts to reside,
Where they are still supplied
With grace, of which thy house is rich,
And ever there abide!
Praise waits for thee still
O God, in Sions hill:
And unto thee the vow shall be
Performed with good will.
Such as Jerusalem love,
The Lord will prosper them:
O pray, that peace may never cease
From fair Jerusalem.
Peace be within thy walls,
And peace embrace thee round:
Prosperity dwell constantly
Within thee and abound.
III.
THY House I do most dearly love,
To me it does excel:
I have delight in being near,
Where Lord thy grace does dwell.
For I am sure thy word is pure,
As Silver that is tried:
And has no less than seven times
In fire been purified.
Far more than many treasured sums,
Of Gold to be embraced,
Far sweeter than the honey-combs
Can be unto our taste.
O happy, happy sure are they,
Whose stay and strength thou art;
Which to thy House do mind the way,
And seek it in their heart!
For in thy Courts thy name to praise,
Lord, one day's being there
Is better than a thousand days,
A thousand days elsewhere.
For God the Lord is Sun and shield;
He grace and glory gives:
And no good thing shall be withheld
From him that purely lives.
IV.
O come bow down all we
Before him let us fall,
Admire, Adore, and kneel before
The Lord that made us all.
Into his presence come,
Hearts truly thankful bring;
And make a noise to God with joys,
Sweet psalms unto him sing.
Great King, great God he is,
And he all Gods transcends:
The spacious lands are in his hands,
The Deep he comprehends.
The strength of hills is his,
The Sea in his command:
He made the same, his hands did frame
The dry and solid land.
Praise Isreal's God most high
To all eternity;
Come let us then say all Amen,
Amen, Amen, say I.
V.
HOW pleasant is thy dwelling place
O Lord of Hosts to me!
The Tabernacles of thy grace
Most amiable be.
Of all perfections in this World
At length I see an end:
But thy Commandments O my God,
Beyond them all extend.
Thy word's a light unto my path,
A Lamp unto my feet:
More precious than the finest Gold,
And Honey's not so sweet.
As one that finds the richest prize,
I in thy word delight:
I hate and loath the way of lies:
But love thy Laws most right.
From such as thee desire to know
Let not thy grace depart;
Thy righteousness declare and show
To men of upright heart.
VI.
ALL men of mortal birth
That dwell throughout the Earth,
Make ye a noise with highest joys,
And serve the Lord with mirth.
O come before his throne,
With singing every one:
For certainly the Lord most high
Even he is God alone.
He made us and not we,
Not we our selves, but he:
His folk and flock and pasture-stock
He did us make to be.
Enter his Gates with praise,
And in his Courts relate
His noble fame and bless his name,
His honor celebrate.
For God is good for ever;
His truth does still persever;
And shall endure most firm and sure.
His mercy fails never.
Thus will I bless and praise
Thy name even all my days;
And unto thine own name divine
My hands devoutly raise.
VII.
GIve to the Lord ye mighty ones,
Give to the Lord his fame.
O give to him the glory due
To his most holy name.
His great and mighty Acts express,
Worship the Lord most high
In beauteous place of holiness
His glorious Sanctuary,
Holy and reverend is the name
Of our allmighty King,
And only from the fear of God*
Does all true Wisdom spring.
O Lord of Hosts, through thy good grace
Convert our hearts to thee;
Show us the brightness of thy face,
And then full safe are we.
VIII.
ONE thing of God I have desired,
Which I will seek for still;
That I till life be quite expired
May dwell on Sion's hill.
That of his beauteous face I may
There have the lovely sight,
Inquiring for the blessed way
Within his Temple bright,
When as thou said, seek ye my face,
My heart said unto thee
I seek thy face, Lord grant thy grace,
Hide not thy self from me.
That people truly blessed is,
That knows the joyful sound;
The light of thy sweet countenance
Shall them O Lord surround.
Thy testimonies, questionless
Ate sure and alter never;
Pure holiness (the richest dress)
Becomes thy House for ever.
IX.
O God be merciful to us
Of thine abundant grace;
And grant that we with joy may see
The brightness of thy face.
Thy Law entirely perfect is,
The Soul it purifies;
Thy testimonies are most sure,
And make the simple wise.
The Statutes of the Lord are ri^^t,
And do make glad the mind;
His precepts pure, affording light
To eyes by nature blind.
The fear of God is excellent,
And ever does endure;
The judgments of the Lord are just,
And truth it self is truer.
By them thy servants warned is,
How he his life should frame;
And there is a very great Reward
In keeping of the same.
Therefore will I come to thy House,
Trusting upon thy grace;
And reverently will worship thee
Even toward thy holy place.
X.
MY Soul does thirst for thee
The living God most dear;
O when shall I approaching nigh
Before my God appear.
Thy Law to me I hold
Better a thousand fold
Then Millions or endless sums
Of Silver and of Gold.
O Lord vouchsafe to me
That I thy face may see:
My Soul, my flesh with longings fresh
Do thirst and pant for thee.
My Soul with Marrow then
And fatness shall be fed;
Thy power and praise my mouth always
With joyful lips shall spread.
Thy God continually
O Sion reign on high;
And so he shall to ages all:
His name then magnify.
XI.
THY mercy is above all things,
O God it does excel;
In trust whereof as in thy wings,
The Sons of men shall dwell.
Within thy house they shall be fed
With plenty at their will;
Of all delights they shall be sped,
And take thereof their fill.
For lo, the well of life most pure
Does ever flow from thee:
And in thy light we shall be sure
The lasting light to see.
Good understanding have they all,
That carefully endeavor
To practice thy most righteous Laws:
Thy praise endures for ever.
XII.
GIve Glory to the Lord our King
Due to his name most high:
Devoutly bring an offering,
And to his Courts draw nigh.
Give praise to him ye kindreds all:
Let every Stock and Tribe
Unto the Lord with joint accord
Glory and strength ascribe.
Fall down and duly worship him
In his most holy place:
Earth far and near O stand in fear
Before his awful face.
All gods thou art extolled above,
O thou that art most high:
Ye Saints, that do Jehovah love.
His Praises magnify.
To God the ^^ther, God the Son,
God the Holy Ghost be praise:
As it has ever been, is now,
And shall be so always.
A Prayer to be used in the Morning.
[ 5. Ps. 3. My voice shall thou hear in the Morning O Lord, in the Morning
will I direct my prayer to thee, and will look up.]
O most glorious and ever blessed Lord our God, thou searchest the hearts and
tryest the reins and understandest all our thoughts; we thy poor Creatures are
here now humbly presenting our selves before thee, to implore thy mercy in the
forgiveness of all our sins; for his sake, whose Soul was made a Sacrifice for
Sin. We confess O Lord, that we are vile and polluted Creatures, unclean,
unclean, our natures are altogether corrupted, unwilling and backward to that
which is good, prone and forward to that which is We are lost and undone in our
selves; Oh that we may be found in him, who came to seek and to save those that
are lost; that we may be clothed in the white Robes of his Righteousness, and
become amiable in thy sight! Grant that we may hate sin more than ever we loved
it; that we may be truly weary and heavy laden under the weight of it, and feel
no burden so heavy upon us as the burden of Sin. Plant thy fear in our
hearts, that we may not depart from thee; and help us in all our ways to
acknowledge thee, that thou may direct our steps. Let us have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Keep us from
the Snares and temptations of evil Company, and let our delight be in them that
fear thee. Suffer us not to love the World, nor the things of the World, seeing
if we love the world, the love of the Father is not in us. There be many that
say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance
upon us; and that shall make us more to rejoice, th^n they whose Corn and Wine
do increase. Enable us rightly to understand and fait^fully to discharge the
duties of our several Relations. Keep us from all sinful wrath and passions,
from all unchastity in our thoughts, or words, or actions, from injuring and
defrauding others in any matter; from lying, slandering, backbiting, or taking
up a reproach against our Neighbor. Convince us more and more of the emptiness
and vanity of all Creature enjoyments, and that it will no way profit us to
gain the whole World, if we loose our own Souls. Incline our hearts unto thy
Testimonies and not to Covetousness. Grant that we may be clothed with
Humility as with a Garment, and bestow upon us the Ornament of a meek and of a
quiet Spirit, which in thy sight is of great price. Give us a good Concience,
in all things willing to live honestly, serving thee faithfully in our places
and Relations while we are here, that whenever it shall please thee to put an
end to this frail life, we may be received into thy Presence, where there is
the fullness of Joy, and to thy Right Hand where there are pleasures for ever
more.

Let all the Earth fear the Lord, and all the inhabitants of the World stand in
awe of him. Bless these Nations and all ranks among us, from him that sits
on the Trone to hear her that grinds at the Mill; that our King and Nobles and
all inferior Magistrates may act for thee, and promote thy glory; thy Priests
lips may preserve knowledge, and the people receive thy Law from their mouths.
Comfort all thine afflicted, and be thou a present help unto them in the
needful time of trouble.

And now O Lord, accept our Sacrifice of praise for all thy mercies. It Is in
thee, that we live and move, and have our beings; and thou give us all things
appertaining to life and Godliness. We bless thee above all for that
unspeakable Gift, thy beloved Son in whom thou art well pleased, who is the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Through him do thou now
graciously accept of us; and as thou have preserved us in peace the night past,
and refreshed us with comfortable r^st and sleep, blessed be thy name: so now
we humbly commit the keeping of our Souls unto thee in well doing, as unto a
faithful Creator. Let the blessings of the Lord always accompany and follow us.
Suffer not this World to steal away our hearts from thee, but cause us to
rejoice in the ways of thy Testimonies more than in all riches. Herein grant,
that we may exercise our selves, to have always Consciences void of Offense
both toward God and toward man; so as this may be our Rejoicing, even the
testimony of our Consciences, that in all simplicity and Godly sincerity we
have had our conversations here in this world. And all we beg of thy merciful
hands with whatever else thou know to be needful for us in the name and for
the sake of Jesus Christ, who has taught us to pray unto thee, saying Our
Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy will be
done in Eearth as it is in Heaven, Give us this day our daily bread, and
forgiv^ us our Trespasses as we forgive them that tresspass against us; and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil for thine is the Kingdom,
and the Power and the Glory for ever and ever Amen.

A Prayer to be used at night.
[ Ps. 141.2, Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense; and the
lifting up of my hand, as the Evening Sacrifice.]
O most holy and most merciful Lord God, regard us thy poor Creatures who are
hear before thee, have mercy upon us and hear our prayer. We must confess, that
we were conceived in sin and brought forth in Iniquity; and have lived as if
the Lord did not see, and there were no knowledge in the most high. We have
forsaken thee the Fountain of living waters, and hewn out unto our selves
broken Cisterns that will hold no water. We have been crrefull about many
things, and neglected the one thing necessary. And now O Lord, what shall we
say, for we have forsaken thy Commandments? Yet if thou will, thou can make
us clean. Let the blood of Jesus Christ thy Son cleanse us from all sin; and
our iniquities do thou remember no more. Create in us a clean heart O God, and
renew a right spirit within us, and let not sin reign in our mortal bodies,
that we should obey it in the lusts thereof. Thou have commanded us to keep thy
Precepts diligently. O that our ways were directed to keep thy Statutes. Then
shall we not be ashamed, when we have respect unto all thy Commandments. Let
such a mind be in us, as was also in Christ Jesus. Raise our hearts above this
world, and all the things of it; that we may rejoice as though we rejoiced not,
and weep as though we wept not; and use this world as not abusing it, seeing
the fashion of all these things passes away. Feed us with food convenient for
us, and give us Godliness with contentment, which is great gain. Let all thy
dealings toward us be sanctified, and all afflictions work together for our
good. Open our eyes, that we may behold the wondrous things of thy Law; and so
prepare us for Death and Judgment, that after this present life is ended, we
may be received into thine everlasting Kingdom.

Add daily to thy Church such as shall be saved, both of Jews and Gentiles.
Bless these Nations, to which we do belong, forgive our sins, reform and
establish us. Give our King thy Judgments O Lord, and teach our Senators
Wisdom. Bless all the Ministers of thy word, and grant that they may feed thy
people with knowledge and with understanding. Bind up the broken hearted, give
liberty to the Captives, and health to those that are sick. Hear the needy when
he cries, the poor also and him that has no helper. Let all our Friends and
Relations find favor in thy sight, and make this Family an Household of faith.
Be thou pleased to dwell among us, to dwell in every one of our hearts, and
cause us to serve thee our God, and one another in love.

And now blessed be the Lord, who daily follows us with his mercies. Thou
have given us thy Laws and thy Statutes; and brought life and immortality to
light through thy Gospel. God so loved the world as to give his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. Thou have been gracious unto us the day past, blessed be thy glorious
name. Because thou have been our help, therefore do we put our trust under the
shadow of thy wings. Be thou our Sun and our Shield, give us grace and glory,
and withhold no good thing from us. Keep us now in thy fear and favor this
night, who art the Keeper of Israel, and never slumberest or sleep. Cause us
to think on thee last of all when we take our rest, and first of all when we do
awake. And thou who know our down-sitting and our up-rising, and art
acquainted with all our ways, keep us by thine Almighty power through faith
unto salvation. And do far more exceeding abundantly for us, than we can either
ask or think, for the sake alone of Jesus Christ, in whose blessed name and
words we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer to be used in secret.
[ Matthew, 6.6. Pray to thy Father, which is in secret.] Mark. 1.35. Christ rose
up early in the morning, and went out into a solitary place and there prayed.
O Lord, look down from Heaven with an eye of favor and compassion upon me thy
poor Creature, who in and through Jesus Christ do look up unto thee for mercy.
I am a Sinner by nature and by practice, who deserve to be cast into
everlasting fire. But do thou deliver me from all my sins. Give me thy grace,
that I may not harbor any vain or wicked thoughts in my heart, that I may not
lie or swear or take thy holy name in vain, or any other way offend thee with
my tongue. Suffer me not to be guilty of stealing or any deceit; but grant that
I may be true and faithful and diligent in the place where thou art pleased to
set me; knowing that thine All-seeing Eye observes me in the most secret
corner, and that my own conscience is more than a Thousand Witnesses. Enable me
to flee youthful lusts, and to follow after Godliness, and suffer me not to be
a Lover of Pleasures more than of God. Prepare me for Death and Judgment; and
cause me so to live in thy fear and favor while I am here, that whenever it
shall please thee to remove me hence, I may be received into a mansion in
Heaven, and the full enjoyment of that Glory, which neither eye has seen, nor
ear heard, nor has ever entered into the heart of man to conceive.

Bless these Nations, our King and Queen and all that are in Authority. Bless
all thy Ministers, all my Friends and Relations, and all thy people. Bless this
Family and make me a blessing in it. Comfort those that mourn, and supply their
wants.

And now O Lord, as thou have been good unto me this day night
past, so bless me this night day
continue thy mercies to my soul and body; and give me thy grace, that I may be
truly thankful for them and careful to make a good use of them. Above all I
bless thy glorious name for Jesus Christ. Grant, that I may embrace him in a
right manner; and for his sake do thou accept of me and my poor prayers; which
I conclude, as he himself has taught me to pray unto thee, Our father, which
art in Heaven, etc.

Another short Prayer to be used especially on the Lords day in the morning,
for a Blessing on Gods word, which shall be that day delivered.
[ Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
Prayer shall be abomination. Heb. 4.7. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts.]
O Lord, who art a pure and a holy God, Holiness becomes thy house for ever, I
humbly pray thee so to sanctify and prepare my heart, that I may sanctify thee
in the Ordinances of thy worship; and serve thee (who art a Spirit) in spirit
and in truth. Cause me to hide thy word in my heart, that I may not sin against
thee; and grant that it may distill as the dew upon the tender herb and the
new-mown grass. Make me as earnestly to desire bread for my soul, as children
ask bread of their Parents. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and
quicken thou me in thy word. Keep off from me all deadness and drowsiness and
distractions, that I may not offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Fools: and enable
me to receive the good word of God with attention, faith, love, meekness, and
so to understand, remember and practice the same, that it may prove as seed
sown in good ground to the praise of the glory of the grace of God, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and blessed Savior. Amen.

Another short Prayer to be used after the word of God is delivered (and
especially on the Lords day in the Evening), for his Blessing on that which is
heard.
[ Prove. 15.32. He that refuses Instruction, despises his own Soul; but he
that hears reproof, gets Understanding. Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy.]
O Lord, I bless and magnify thy glorious name that thou have caused my ears to
hear the joyful sound and opened the doors of thine house unto me. Follow I
humbly beseeeh thee, with thy Blessing that portion of thy word which I have
heard this day; and enable me to obey from the heart that form of Doctrine
which is delivered unto me; lest I mourn at last and say, how have I hated
instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of
Teachers, nor inclined mine ears to them that instructed me? Let me not be
among the number of those, who are ever learning, and yet never come to the
knowledge of the truth: but fulfill in me all the good pleasure of thy will and
the work of grace with power. Deliver me not up to the fearful Judgment of a
hard and seared Conscience: but make my heart soft and tender, and cause me in
this my day to know the things that belong to my peace, so as I may not
hereafter cry out in the anguish and bitterness of my spirit, that thou gave
me space to repent, but I repented not. Guide me by thy Counsels here in this
World, and hereafter receive me into thy glory, through Jesus Christ my only
Lord and Savior. Amen.

Graces to be said before and after meat.
[ 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word of God and
Prayer. Matthew. 15.35, 36. He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.
And he took the seven Loaves and Fishes, and gave thanks and brake them, and
gave to his Disciples, and the Disciples to the multitude. Acts, 27.34, 35. I
pray you to take some meat, for this is for the health, for there shall not an
hair fall from the head of any of you. And when he had thus spoken, he took
bread and gave thanks to God in presence of them all. etc.]
Before Meat.
Bless me O Lord, and these thy good Creatures, which thou have provided for
me; and make me thy true and faithful Servant all the days of my Life, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and blessed Savior, Amen.

After Meat.
Blessed be thy name O Lord, for the good Creatures I have received at this
time. O grant that I may carefully seek for the spiritual food of my Soul, and
finally by thy mercy obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ my Lord and
only Savior. Amen.

A Grace to be said before Meat in presence of others.
O Lord, bless us and these thy good Creatures unto our use; and cause us to
serve thee faithfully and thankfully in the strength of these and all thy
mercies, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

After Meat.
O Lord, who have made us by the word of thy Power, redeemed us by the blood of
thy Son, preserved us to this day by thy gracious Providence, and at this time
comfortably fed us, thy holy and blessed name be praised both now and
forevermore. Amen.

Another before Meat.
O Lord forgive us all our sins, and bless these thy good Creatures unto our
nourishment and strength. And give us thy grace, that we may hunger and thirst
after the food of our Souls and the water of life; so as finally we may obtain
everlasting peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

After Meat.
We bless thy glorious name O Lord, for Jesus Christ, and all thy mercies that
pertain to this life and a better. Grant, we beseech thee, as thou have now
graciously fed our bodies with this perishing food, to feed our souls likewise
with that food which will never perish, but endure unto everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen

[ 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.] FINIS.

