TRUE NEVVES FROM CORK.

BEING, The Copy of a Letter sent from thence to Master Oliver Daniell
Citizen, Inhabitant in the Borough; from his Brother, now resident in CORK.

WHEREIN, (...) declared the several Proceedings of the Protestant Army, from
the fifth of May, to the 12. 1642.

LIKEWISE, (...) true and real Intelligence of a great Insurrection made by
the Papists in Cork, on the 7. day of this instant Month.

With a Declaration, how by the valor and approved courage of my Lord of Cork,
and Sir Thomas Moor, they were appeased, disarmed, and their store and munition
seized on, for the use of our English.

(...)lso many other remarkable Passages, concerning the Heroic Actions of the
Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coot, Sir Christopher Loftus, Captain Marro, and
the Protestant Army in the Neweries.

(...)hereunto is annexed, another Remarkable Passage; concerning Oneal late
Prisoner in the Tower.

May. 17. LONDON Printed for F. Rogers. 1642.

TRUE NEWS FROM CORK.
LOVING BROTHER,
AFter my love to your self and my Sister, with the rest of my friends; I will
take leave to give you notice of what has happened since my last Letter. My
Lord of Cork has behaved himself valiantly, otherwise we in Cork by this time
might have taken leave of this world, the manner I will relate at large in the
ensuing discourse.

On the fifth of May.
My Lord of Cork marched out of the City with 2000 men to relieve a Castle that
was beset with a Party of the Rebels, leaving Sir Thomas-Moor only 500 foot
to guard the Town, he not suspecting what happened, the Rebels Army being above
four days march distant from Cork, only there was in Cork many Papists of the
old Pale, indeed almost two Papists for one Protestant; Amongst whom, as it
appears, there was some of the Rebels faction (though concealed) which
privately had conspired to rise, not fearing but that all the Catholics would
have rose with them; which had they, both people and City had been buried in
sin and slaughter.

On the sixth day.
My Lord of Cork arrived within ken of the besieged Castle, where he found them
sending sad greetings unto one another, for the English had drawn forth all
their strength before the Castle, resolving either to free themselves, or die
in the performance: The Rebels seeing their numbers, and finding themselves
much stronger, began to vaunt, and promise themselves an assured victory; but
in the height of this supposed victory, my Lord of Cork fell on upon their
Rere, and slew almost a hundred before they knew they had an enemy, which
startled so the Rebels, that they stood amazed, leaving their Arms as
useless, some fled, some yielded, choosing rather to be hanged like Cowards,
then die manfully; which was their fortunes, for there was 20 of them hanged
for scare-Crowes, upon the next trees they came at: Which victory obtained, my
Lord marched toward home, and Billited that night at a small Village called
Cardhagen.

On the seventh of May.
The Papists began their exploits; a matter of 500 of them falling upon the
Court of Guard, ceizing the Gates, which they Baracadoed, to keep out my Lord
of Cork; which effected, they beat an Alarm round about the City, making
Proclamation, that all those that would declare them-selves true Sons of
Rome, should presently take Arms and fall upon the Heretics, in the mean time
the English mustred their forces, and put themselves in opposition, many
Papists joining with us; which had they not, we surely had bin murdered, for
their numbers were very great, almost 5000, besides multitudes flockt to them:
in this hurley-burly my Lord of Cork arrived at the City, wondering to see this
unexpected Tumult, and finding himself denied entrance, he dreadless of their
shot, with his fieldpieces, battered down the gates, and like an enraged Lion
in the toil, despite of all opposers forct his way.

Likewise Sir Thomas Moor with his men, played his part most valiantly, so that
in one three hours we had apeas'd them, putting 100. and 50. to the sword, some
of the chief was likewise taken and hanged in several places of the City,
which done, there was a general search made through the City, and in a Vault
which there was in a house belonging to one Mac-Brian a Ringleader in this
tumult, there was found great store of Powder and other Munition; thus was this
dismal morning converted to a pleasant night, each man giving thanks to God
for his delivery.

On the eleventh day.
In the Neweries there was a great battle fought between the Earl of Ormond and
Oneal, who as it is reported, was marching to entertain a kinsman of his, which
they say fled from England, but for the truth of that I cannot inform you; only
this, that in this march, he was met withal by our Prot^^^ant Army, and if he
was there, I Will be sworn he had a very course entertainment; for our Englishmen
played their parts so well, that if the Rebels heels had not bin quicker then
their hands, they had gone short home by a thousand, many there was slain, some
taken' prisoners, and hanged, till the rest amend.

On the ninth Day.
Sir Charles Coot skirmished with a partv of the Rebels, and slew 50. losing
but 5. men*

On the tenth day.
Sir Christopher Loftus and Captain Marro surpised a Castle, where a party of
Rebels were insconsed, putting them to the sword, and firing the Castle. Many
other skirmishes has happened, too tedious for me to relate; Wherefore I will
refer them to the next opportunity, and rest, Your loving Brother

Benjamin Daniell.
Dublin the 12. May 1642. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that
the Lord Howard of Char, shall attend upon the King, and present some Reasons
unto His Majesty.

John. Brown. Cler. Parl.




