A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE QUEEN AT White Hall, February the Fifteenth,
1690/1. By HENRY DOVE, D. D. Chaplain to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.



LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church
Yard, 1691.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
Psalm. 18. 23. And I kept my self from mine Iniquity.
THis Psalm contains a general Thanksgiving, which David made unto God, after
he had delivered him from his Potent Enemies, but especially, from the hand of
Saul, who was the most furious and implacable of all his Adversaries: And here,
as he ascribes his Deliverance wholly to the Divine Goodness, so he comforts
himself in his Innocence and Integrity, and ascribes that also to GOD's
restraining and assisting Grace, which kept him back from that Iniquity to
which he was strongly tempted, and did not suffer him to do as the wicked would
have done in the like Case.

What that particular Case and Sin was, is not here mentioned; but if we
consult the History of his Life, it seems to referr to that known Instance,
when Saul fell into his hands at Engedi; so that he could as easily have slain
1 Samuel 24. 4.
him, as he cut off the Skirt of his Garment; and yet he would not do such an
Unlawful and Wicked Act, no not to save his Life; and he gives the Reason in
the Words before my Text; For I have kept the ways of the Lord, Ver. 21. 22.
and have not wickedly departed from my God. For all his Judgments were before
me, and I did not put away his Statutes from me. As though he had said, I had
more regard to God's Righteous Laws, than to my private Interest, and when I
had a fair Opportunity of putting an end to all my Troubles, I chose rather to
suffer, than to do evil: Had I consulted Flesh and Blood, or the Dictates of a
Revengeful Spirit, I could easily have secured my own, by taking away his Life;
but I had rather venture the utmost Effects of Readiness Hatred, than incur the
Displeasure of God, my great Deliverer and Defender; the Fear of that could not
make me forgo the Fear of him; and therefore, though I could not hinder Readiness,
yet through the Grace of God, restraining me, I kept my self from mine Iniquity.

From mine Iniquity, that is, from the Sin, to which I was strongly tempted;
for some (says he afterward to Saul himself) bad me kill thee; 1 Samuel 24. 10.
and which I was also prone to fall into, had not the fear of God kept me back;
for so the Chaldee Paraphrast explains the whole Verse, I was perfect in his
fear, and he was the Saver of my Soul from Sin, and from Iniquity.

The Words thus Opened and Explained, would afford us many useful Points, both
for our Instruction and our Practice; the Chief of which I shall endeavor to
speak to, under these Three Heads, which seem to comprise their main Importance:

1. That there is some particular Sin, which every one may call in a more
peculiar manner, His own Iniquity. 2. That it is possible to keep our selves
from such Sins, as David did, by using the Means which David used. 3. What
Helps and Directions are needful for this Purpose, that so we may learn to
maintain our Integrity, and keep our selves from those Sins, to which we are
most inclineable.
First, There is some particular Sin, to which every one is more prone than to
another, of which he may say by way of Emphasis, it is mine Iniquity, at which
he may point with his finger, and say, That Is it.

But what that is, as it is certainly known to GOD, who searches our hearts,
and spyeth out all our ways; so may every Man likewise know it himself, by
Communing with his own heart, and Psalm. 4. 4. Hag. 1. 5. 7.
considering his ways: By looking into his own breast, and impartially
examining his own Conscience; by laying his Life to the Rule of his Conscience,
and measuring his Conscience by the Rule of God's Law: This is the best
Examiner and Informer too, a Faithful Witness, and a most Incorrupt Judge,
which will easily discover and arraign, convict and condemn the Criminal,
maugre all Endeavors to bribe or stifle the Evidence: This must needs find out
the Sin, to which it is always privy, and a Man's own heart cannot choose but
tell him what he loves best, and what he is most addicted to.

That therefore there is greater Proclivity in every one to some peculiar Sins,
is sufficiently evident from every Man's private Conscience: But how it comes to
pass that so it is, besides the general Corruption of our Natures, which is
common to us all, will be further manifest from these following Considerations.

I. We are more inclineable to some Sins, than others, through our Natural
Tempers and Complexions: For though the first Principles whereof we all
consist; I mean the Soul and Body, be vastly different in their first Frame and
Make, the one being Heavenly, the other Earthy; yet such is their near
Conjunction, while we are in the Body, that they strongly influence one
another: The Corruptible Body Wisd. 9. 15.
presses down the Soul, and the Earthly Tabernacle weighs down the Mind,
(says Solomon, Wisd. 9. 15.): And such is the Predominancy of some Elements and
Humors, to which the Naturalist ascribes the Diversity of Constitutions, that
from thence also the Moralist derives the different Tempers of Men's Minds and
Inclinations: Thus the Sanguine inclines most to Lust and Wantonness,
Incontinence and Intemperance; the Choleric to Anger and Passion, Pride and
Contention; the Melancholic to Envy, Discontent, Distrust and Despair; the
Phlegmatic to Covetousness and Idleness, and Luke-warmness in Religion: So
that, according to the different Constitutions of Men's Bodies, there arise
different Inclinations in their Souls and Minds; and as it is the proper
Business of Reason, to find out and restrain, so it is the Great Work of Grace
and Religion, to subdue and mortify the predominant Passion. From whence,

II. We may further observe, That at some certain Periods of our Lives, we are
more inclineable to some Sins than others; that every Age of humane Life, has
some peculiar Darling, that commonly bears the sway: Thus, in Old Age, Men
generally are prone to such as most conduce to their Temporal Advantage in the
World, to hoard and heap up Riches, when they least need 'em; and when they are
just leaving the World, they are commonly most solicitous about it; in our
Youth to such, as most gratify our sensual Appetites, and promote our
Pleasures; letting loose the Reins to every inordinate Affection, and rushing
headlong to Sin and Folly: Then we are apt to be covetous, and by consequence
crafty, and deceitful, and unjust; and now we are apt to be riotous and
disorderly, impatient of Reproof, and heedless of Instruction; then self-ended,
and now self-willed; then griping, and now profuse; then carking and caring, as
though we dreamed of an Immortality upon Earth; and now taking such Courses, as
help to shorten Life, as though we were afraid of living too long: So true is
that of the Psalmist, which he backs with a strong Asseveration, Verily every
Man living Psalm. 39. 5.
in his best Estate, is altogether Vanity. But then,

III. We are more inclineable to some Sins, than others, by reason of our
Education, or our Company; the former being seldom so strict and severe, but
that it gives us opportunity to see and hear in others, and permits likewise in
our selves, a great many Follies and evil Customs, which commonly grow up with
us: And the latter seldom so choice and pure, (especially in this Licentious
Age) but that they have a great many Spots and Blemishes, and frequently foul
Stains too; as is his Company, such is the Man also; He that touches Pitch,
shall be defiled therewith; and Eccl. 13. 1.
he that has Fellowship with a proud Man, shall be like unto him; so great is
the Power of Education, and the Influence of Converse and Example: And yet by
these things, Men's Minds and Manners are as much, if not more fashioned, than
by Nature it self: From hence proceeds that great habit of Swearing, so common
among Children, as well as Men; they learn to blaspheme the Name of God, before
they are taught to call upon it, and that chiefly by hearing others swear: For
whatever Temptation there is to other Sins, from the Flesh or the World, there
is none in Nature imaginable for this, unless it be from the Devil, or from bad
Example: And from hence too proceeds that which is grown so Notorious and
Epidemical of late Years, viz. Luxury in Eating, Excess in Drinking,
Profuseness in Apparel, and so great Mispence of Time and of Estates, by
immoderate Sports and Gaming: Men do as their Neighbors do, and then think
their Numbers will excuse 'em; their love to the Company inclines 'em to their
Follies, and nothing more common, than to follow a Multitude to do evil.

IV. We are prone to some Sins, more than others, through the several States
and Conditions of Life, into which Providence does bring us, or from the
different Professions and Courses of Life we take upon our selves: Thus for
Instance, When we are healthy and strong, we are apt to forget God, and give
our selves the Swing; and Sickness tempts us to be impatient toward Him:
Prosperity for the most part, makes men proud, and abundance insolent and
wanton; and Adversity tempts 'em to be envious and querulous, fraudulent and
pilfering: No sooner do we wax fat as Jesurun, but with him too, we kick and
spurn at the Giver of all good things; and when we are brought low and
afflicted, we are ready with Job's foolish Wife, to curse GOD and dye: From the
Consideration of this Danger, in each extreme, it was, That Agur made that
excellent Petition unto God, Give me neither Prove. 30. 8, 9.
Poverty nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient for me; lest I be full
and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor, and steal, and take
the Name of my God in vain: And thus also in the Church it has been observed,
That in perilous Times and Persecution, some have turned Apostates from the
Faith, and run over to the Enemies Quarters; and through the Peace and
Prosperity of the Church, some have grown careless and secure, others envious
and quarrelsome at all that is above 'em: The one has frighted Men to sacrifice
to Idols, and comply with any thing to save themselves; the other has ensnared
'em to serve Mammon, Ambition, or their own Bellies, more than the Lord Jesus.
Again, there are more Temptations to some Sins, than others, from the different
Professions or Courses of Life, Men take upon themselves; if they follow the
Court, I need not tell you, what Temptations and Snares there are to diverse
Sins, and what danger there is of falling into 'em, unless your Vows for
Virtue, and a tender Regard to the Honor which comes of God only, keep you
upright: If they be listed in the Camp, that tempts them most to Rapine and
Violence, neglect of God's Worship, and Profaneness: If they exercise Trading
and Merchandise, they meet with greater Enticements to Lying and Cozening,
Overreaching and Unjust Dealing; and the Mystery of some Trades, as bad Men
manage 'em, is a downright Mystery of Iniquity: If Husbandry, to Anxiety about
the things of the World, a Distrust of God's Providence, or murmuring against
it: Nay, I could wish, that in the most sacred Profession of all, there might
be an Exception made in this Particular; but St. Paul tells us, that even in
his days, Some Preached Christ out of Envy and Strife, some for filthy Lucre
only, as Phil. 1. 15.
well as some out of Good Will: And History Titus, 1. 11.
will make it good, that in all the succeeding Ages of the Church, some through
their Eloquence in Preaching, have been betrayed to Pride and Vainglory, and
through the Conceit of their Parts and Learning, and being cried up by others,
have been the chiefest Authors of those Heresies and Schisms, that have all
along infested the Church. From whence,

V. I may add in the last place, That there are some particular Sins, to which
Men are liable, through Religion it self: By which I mean, a false Opinion, or
a strong Persuasion, which they call by the Name of Religion, though perhaps it
be really no such thing. Thus many Men's Confidence of their own way, is often
attended with great Censoriousness and Uncharitableness toward all that differ
from 'em, and a strong Presumption that it will excuse all other Defects or
Miscarriages in themselves: It Is no new thing we know, for two Persons or
Parties, to be mighty confident, even of both parts of a Contradiction, though
at the same time we know also, that it is utterly impossible for both to be
right: What then shall we do? Believe neither; so the Atheist indeed concludes,
who laughs at all Religions alike, and hardens himself in his Impiety, because
the several Professors are not agreed about the true: But if we would lay by
Prejudice, and judge indifferently in the Case, the Wrong may be generally
known from the Right, by this easy and safe Rule; wherever there is least
Humility, and least Charity to be seen, there to be sure is least of the True
Religion: And if we would seriously apply our selves to the Practice of these
two Christian Graces, the rest of the Gospel-Vertues would soon attend 'em, and
thereby we should make it evident to all Men, that we our selves are in the
Right.

The time would fail me, should I instance in all the Errors and Mistakes of
this nature; but that they are strangely improved by some Opinions more than
others, will appear from those of the Roman Communion chiefly, who must needs
by their Principles, be not only more forward than others, to Un-Christian all
the World besides, but also neglect to be true Christians themselves; their
Superstition about smaller things, eating out their Zeal and Care of the
weightier Matters, their Doctrines about Mortal and Venial Sins, Confession and
Penance, Indulgences, Purgatory, and the like; bolstering up their Proselytes
in a Carnal Security, and quite undermining and destroying the Necessity of an
Holy Life. And thus we know by a sad Experience, that there are some Principles
among 'em, which lead Men to be seditious and turbulent, perfidious and
inhuman; such as these I mean, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics,
(and every one is such with them, who protests against their Erroneous or
Wicked Tenets) that the End legitimates the Means, That a good Intention
justifies an evil Action, That it is lawful to do whatever will advance, or to
deny any thing that may prejudice their own Cause, (for we should do 'em too
much Honor to call it Catholic.) I will not indeed say, that all of that
Communion will professedly own, at this time especially, these and the like
Doctrines, there is sufficient reason why they should not; nor yet will I say,
that all believe 'em, though then I know not how to call 'em Members of that
Church, which has asserted 'em with all the Arguments of their most Celebrated
Doctors: And if there be any such among 'em, as neither believe nor practice
'em, they seem to have gained one of the hardest Conquests in the World, even
to have kept themselves from that Iniquity, which the very Principles of their
Religion did prompt and persuade them to.

And thus having shown, how it comes to pass, That every one is inclined to
some Sin or other, which he may call in a more peculiar manner, His own
Iniquity, I leave the Particulars to the Search of every Man's private
Conscience, (God knows, and your own hearts know which is yours) and so
proceed to the

2. Prop. That it is possible to keep our selves from such Sins as David did;
who professes here of himself in great sincerity, That he had kept himself from
that Iniquity, to which he was strongly tempted, and which he was prone to fall
into.

And there is none of us all but may go and do likewise, if we be willing to
follow his good Example; by cherishing the Grace that is freely given us of
God, and remembering the Vows we have so often made Him; by using the Means, and
observing the Method prescribed in His Word; by consulting the Dictates of calm
Reason, and sound Religion, and a well informed Conscience; by considering the
Consequence of all such Darling Sins, and asking our selves that sober
Question, What we shall do in the end thereof? In a Word, by maintaining, as
David did, a mean Opinion of our selves, an humble Dependence upon God, and by
keeping his Judgments and his Fear before us. This will certainly secure us, if
not from the Temptation, at least from the Compliance, and Commission of the
Sin; it may importune us, but it cannot prevail against us; it may solicit
our Consent, but it cannot gain in upon us, so as to lead us Captive at its
pleasure, deliberately to commit it, and habitually to practice it.

But of this I shall speak more particularly by and by, and only mention it
here, because I find it so common for Men to palliate or excuse their Sins,
either from the strength of the Temptation, or from their own Weakness, or from
some fatal Impulse, and what is the genuine Offspring of their own Wills, they
generally lay at the door of Necessity: Alas! What would you have 'em to do?
It Is next to impossible to do otherwise; they inherit such a weak and depraved
Temper, or they are born under such a Malignant Aspect, or they are cast, by
the Decree of Heaven, into such unhappy Circumstances, that they are not
Masters of their own Actions: And how then can ye blame 'em for what is not in
their Power and Choice to avoid? Or, How can that be called their Sin, which
they are even necessitated to commit? Thus, rather than take to themselves the
shame of their Sins, Men will belie their own Natures, asperse the Majesty of
God, the great Lover of Souls, and cast a Scandal upon the Efficacy of His
Grace and Gospel: For how (I beseech you) can Man be more excellent than a
Brute, nay than a Stock or a Stone, unless he be a Rational and a Free Agent,
endued with Understanding to discern, and a Will to choose the Good, and refuse
the Evil? Or, How can it consist with the Justice and Goodness of God, to leave
him under the Power of the most uncontrollable Destiny, and yet punish him
severely, for not obeying his Laws? To what Purpose are all the Commands and
Exhortations, all the Invitations and Expostulations, the Promises and
Threatenings in the Gospel; nay, To what Purpose is our Preaching, and your
Hearing, the Word, the Sacraments, and Prayer, which are the Means of Grace; if
it be not possible by the Use of these Means, and through the Help of this
Grace, to resist Temptations, to restrain our inordinate Affections, to weaken
and subdue, and at last to mortify our Lusts, and so to keep our selves from
that Iniquity, whatever it be, to which we are most prone?

Whatever therefore our Corrupt Hearts may pretend (as indeed we are all very
favorable to our own Sins) we may easily Confute our selves, that there is no
Impossibility, or Necessity in the Case: For if the very Suspicion of Poison in
the Cup, will make the Drunkard startle and forbear it; if the Unclean Person
will refrain from his unlawful Embraces, when he is sure to incur the
Punishment of Zimri and Cosbi; if Men will pass by their unjust Advantages,
when their Credit and Repute shall be certainly blasted by 'em; if they will
defer an intended Wickedness, till they are favored with Secrecy, or
encouraged by Impunity; if the Presence of a Child will awe 'em into good
Manners, and teach 'em so much Religion, at least, as to pretend and
counterfeit it; With what Face can they say, it is impossible for 'em to cease
from Evil, or to change a vicious Custom; and that there is a Necessity of
yielding to the Temptations, either of the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, when
it is plain, they may be all baffled and withstood, upon lesser Motives, than
either the Grace of the Gospel, or the Terrors of the Lord, the Apprehensions
of a Future Life, and a Judgment to come affords 'em. Which brings me to the
last thing I proposed to speak to.

Third, To subjoin such Helps and Directions as are needful for this Purpose,
that we may maintain our Integrity, and keep our selves from those Sins, to
which we are most inclineable.

And here again the Method which Holy David made use of, gives us the first,
and the best Direction; and that is,

1. By Constant and Fervent Prayer, to implore the Divine Aid, and the
continual Assistance of his Holy Spirit, that God would not only keep us from
falling into 'em, but even turn our hearts from inclining to 'em, and help us
to see our Folly, and our Danger: For alas! We are not able of our selves, to
help our selves, not so much as to think a good Thought, much less to resist an
evil Inclination, or a strong Temptation; but our Sufficiency is of God: It is
God (says the Psalmist here) that girdeth me with Ver. 32.
strength, and makes my way Perfect; and through Christ, who strengthens me
(says St. Paul) I can do Phil. 4. 13.
all things. Without the Divine Grace and Assistance, it is impossible we
should be kept from any Sin, and without Prayer, there is no way imaginable of
obtaining either: That was the vain Presumption of the Pelagian Heretic, who
thought to do it in his own Strength; and this is the too common, but dangerous
Mistake of some that would be thought more Orthodox Christians, who think to
have help without asking: Hence those manifold Exhortations and Commands in SS.
to pray continually, to pray without ceasing, to watch and pray: Watch ye Luke
21. 36.
therefore, and pray always (says our Savior); Continue in Prayer, and watch
in the same (says St. Paul); Col. 4. 2.
Be ye sober, and watch unto Prayer (says St. Peter): 1 Pet. 4. 7.
And for our Encouragement to pray, we have the greatest Assurance that it
shall be granted: Ask, and it shall be given you, says our Blessed Luke 11. 9.
Savior, which he strongly enforces, from the kindness of Earthly Parents; If
ye then, being evil, Ver. 13.
know how to give good things to your Children, how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? And, If any Man lack
Wisdom, says St. James, let him ask of God, and it shall Jam. 1. 5.
be given him: What more positive promises in the Book of God?

But here, if any one object, as I believe some are apt to do; if God be so
liberal in granting His Grace and Spirit, how comes it then to pass, that so
many run into Sin, for want of it, who yet perhaps are frequently asking it? To
this I Answer, That such, either ask it not in Faith, that is relying on those
Ways, and using the Means, which God in His Word directs 'em to; or else they
ask it not in Sincerity, and so draw near with their Mouths, while their Hearts
are far from desiring what they ask; as St. Augustine somewhere says of
himself, That when in his Youthful Heat, he prayed against his beloved Sin, he
did it so coldly, as though he was afraid, lest God should hear him: Or else
they neglect to stir up the Grace of God, that is already bestowed on them, and
cease to second it with their own Endeavors. For,

2. We must always remember, that though the Grace of God prevents us, that we
may have a good Will, and works in us, when we have it, that so we may find
Success, yet in Vain do we expect the Continuance of His Help, without our
diligent Endeavors: While He assists our Weakness, He does not intend to
encourage our Laziness; and therefore we are also to labor, and Col. 1. 29.
strive, according to his working, which works in us mightily; as the Apostle
expresses it: It Is the Might of His Power that works in us, but we are to
labor according to it, or else we provoke Him to withdraw it from us. And this
I observe the rather, because there are some in the World who think they have
nothing to do, but only to sit (as it were) with folded Arms, under the
Influences of Heaven, and wait for their Work to be done to their hands, by the
Almighty Power of God, and the sole Operation of His Grace and Spirit; and
though they would gladly be helped, yet never stir a foot to help themselves:
But surely a Christian, one that is in Covenant with Christ by Baptism, and a
Member of his Body, should know and consider better things; and such as
accompany his Salvation, viz. That though God be always before hand with us, in
giving us His Spirit, yet when it is once bestowed, He expects our Compliance,
and humble Concurrence with it, that we should manage His Grace with
Carefulness, and improve His Talents with Diligence, most unfeignedly ascribing
all the Glory to Himself, who is the sole efficient Cause of all that is good
in us. Wherefore, as we must always pray, that God would keep us from such
Sins, so we must labor also to keep our selves, since we have now no Excuse
from Weakness, no Pretense for Disability, having the Promise of Divine
Assistance, and of further Supplies of Grace, upon using the former well; for
to him that has shall be given, Mat. 13. 12. and He gives more Grace, Jam. 4.
6. In order to which, I shall add;

3. That we take care to avoid such things, and decline such Occasions, as are
most likely to snare us, and gain upon us, lest one thing hook in another, and
we be caught in the Gin, before we suspect the Danger. The Neglect of this, was
the Cause of the First Sin, to which we owe our Inclinations to all the rest;
for Adam was not deceived, says the Apostle, but the Woman being deceived, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
was in the Transgression. The Man was not deceived, till he hearkened to the
Woman; nor was the Woman beguiled, till she listened to the Charmer; when once
she began to parley with the Tempter, to come near the Tree, and to contemplate
and admire the Goodliness of the Fruit, she was more than half overcome: The
Command and the Threatening of God [ In the day thou eatest, thou shall dye the
Death] are soon overlooked and forgotten; and we presently read, That she took
of the Fruit of the Tree, and did eat, and Genesis 3. 6.
gave also unto her Husband with her, and he did eat. And certainly it is a
shrewd sign we do not much desire to keep our selves from the Sin, when we
court or seek out the occasion; nay, it is an Argument rather, that we long to
fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh and of the Mind, when we encourage the
Temptation and make provision for 'em.

Tertullian tells us of a Christian Woman, who going to see the Heathen
Sacrifices and Shows, was immediately seized on by the Evil Spirit, to whom
those Sacrifices were made; and when the Holy Man, in the Name and Power of
Christ, had cast him out, and demanded the Reason, Why he meddled with one that
was a Christian? he replied, What did she make there? He found her within his
own Territories, in the midst of his Votaries and Vassals, and so he took her
for his own. The Application of the Story is briefly this: When we willingly
rush upon a Temptation, or contentedly close with the occasion, we give the
Tempter the greatest advantage against us; we do (as it were) proffer him our
Service; and if God be no kinder to us than we are to our selves, to withold
and restrain us by his Grace, and rescue us by his mighty Power, he leads us
away Captive at his will and pleasure. Let us then avoid the Occasion, shun the
Place, the Company, the Counsel and Converse of Evildoers, and abstain (as the
Apostle advises) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
even from all appearance of Evil.

Fourthly, Let no man think either the Evil and Malignity of Sin, or God's
Hatred to it, to be less than it is; For he that is not truly sensible of the
Evil of all Sin, will scarce be afraid of any; and he that does not believe
that God really hates it, will never be solicitous, lest he offend him by it.
And indeed, these are commonly the Grounds of Men's indulging themselves in Sin;
they frame specious and plausible Arguments to excuse themselves, and with
fallacious Reasonings, endeavor to lessen their Guilt, while they sometime
color a downright wilful Sin, with the specious Name of an Infirmity, and
then, with Lot, think their Zoar may be spared, because it is but a little one:
Is it not Genesis 19. 20.
a little one? And my Soul shall live. Or else they are willing to compound
with the Almighty, and ready to say with Naaman, Only in this thing 2 Kin. 5.
18.
the Lord pardon thy Servant; If God would dispense with 'em in this or that
beloved Lust, He shall command 'em in all other things: or else they presume
upon God's Mercy, without sufficient Warrant from his Word; and though they will
confess themselves to be Sinners (as indeed there is no man lives and sins
not) yet they are apt to think, that God's Mercy being over all his Works, it
will overlook theirs too; and though they know that he hates Sin, yet they fondly
imagine he will be reconciled to them, though they venture to continue in it:
It Is true indeed, God will be reconciled to any Sinner, provided that he
repent; but it is every jot as true, that except he repent, he shall infallibly
perish: Nay, I doubt not to add, That whosoever refuses to forsake his beloved Sin
now, in hopes he shall do it hereafter, is, in all probability, nearer
perishing than he is repenting. Lest any man therefore should thus perversely
argue himself into his own Ruin, let him seriously and sadly consider, that
every Sin of it self is of a condemning nature, and that God perfectly hates
every evil way. And let no one presume to say, My Sin is inconsiderable, and
therefore I need not leave it; It is a far-better Consequence, My Sin is
inconsiderable, and therefore I need not keep it: For, even the Smallness of
the Sin, may in some cases, enhaunce the Guilt, because the Temptation is less,
the Motive of little or no value, and the Resistance easy: And surely it
argues a strange fondness and love of Sin, and a very light esteem of God and
our own Souls, when one poor contemptible Lust shall be able to exclude or
over-poise him in our Hearts. Settle therefore in your Souls a true Estimate of
the Baseness of all Sin, and as deep a sense of God's Hatred to it; not that it
may drive you to despond, but lead you to a quick and speedy Repentance, and so
to hope for a Share in his Mercy, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. Be tender and cautious of violating your Consciences, even in the smallest
matter; for he that has once debauched his Conscience even in lesser Sins, it is
much to be feared he will not stick at greater; for one Sin willingly admitted,
brings on another, and Sin added to Sin, often ends in Presumption, Hardness of
Heart, and Contempt of God's Word and Commandment. Now Conscience of our Duty
toward God, with an habitual and holy fear of offending him, is the best
Preservative in the World against all sorts of Temptations; and that Regret of
Mind which is natural to Men upon the Commission of Evil, and is supernaturally
improved by the Grace of Christ, and the Influence of his Spirit, if Men do not
wilfully stifle and suppress it, is Armor of Proof against the most furious
Assaults of Sin or Satan. Remember the Example of holy Joseph, who put by a
strong Temptation in all its charming Addresses with this single Question, How
can I do Genesis 39. 9.
this great Wickedness and sin against God? Confront the boldest or the sliest
Tempter with the same Question; if he cannot satisfy thy Conscience, how thou
may close with him, and yet not sin against God, he will quickly cease his
Request: Or if he be so impudent, as to trouble thee still, yet while this
Thought is warm in thy Heart, so long as the Fear and Love of God are uppermost
in thy Thoughts, thou may easily resist even the Devil himself, and all his
accursed Agents: But he that breaks the Force of his Conscience, and has learnt
to silence its Whispers and Checks in the Commission of lighter and lesser
Evils, it is not to be doubted, but he will e're long be deaf to all its louder
Reproofs. So great reason have we to be tender of our Consciences; so great is
our Security while we keep 'em undefiled through an awful Fear of God, a
continual sense of the Divine Presence and Inspection, and an humble regard to
that great Day of Accounts, when we must all appear before 2 Cor. 5. 10.
the Judgment Seat of Christ.

To these may be added some more particular and special Helps, for the same
purpose, which I can only mention.

I. That we set apart some Portion of our Time to examine our selves, and to
state the Accounts of our Souls; that we sequester our selves a while from the
Business and Bustle of the World, and enter into our Closets, even into the
inner Closets of our own Hearts, that so we may search out the Sin which does
so easily beset us, and resolve against those Temptations especially which have
formerly foiled or overcome us.

II. That we be diligent in reading and hearing the Word of GOD, and take more
especial notice of those Places and Passages in Holy SS. whether Precepts,
Examples, Comminations, or Judgments, which more immediately concern our own
Case: For the Book of God is a Glass that flatters no man.

III. That we exercise our selves at convenient Seasons, with some piece of
godly and prudent Discipline, such as Abstinence and Fasting, which are so
often recommended in the SS. that so by denying our selves sometimes in things
that are Lawful, we may learn by degrees, to tame our unruly Appetites and
Wills, whenever they are tempted, or inclined to Unlawful Objects.

IV. That we thankfully make use of the Means, which Christ himself has
appointed in the Sacrament of his Death, as a proper Remedy against our
peculiar Sins: For this is not only the Spiritual Food of our Souls, but
Physic also, to cure their Distempers, and to prevent Relapses: If it be duly
received with unfeigned Contrition and Penitence going before, with serious
Vows, a lively Faith, and universal Charity accompanying it, it cannot fail to
convey to us the Power of Christ's Death, the Virtue and Efficacy of his
precious Blood; it will heal the Wounds that have been made in our Spirits, and
keep 'em from fretting afterward, and Cleanse us at last, through the Supply
of the Spirit of Christ, (which is never wanting to his own Institutions) from
the Spot and the Pollution, from 1 John 1. 7. Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 1 19. Rev. 1.
5.
the Power and Dominion, from the Guilt, and from the Punishment of all Sin.
Which God of his infinite Mercy grant to us all, for Jesus Christ his sake.

To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God, be
ascribed of us and his whole Church, all Honor and Glory, now and evermore.
FINIS.

