GREAT BRITAINS VISITATION.

By the Lady ELEANOR.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year, 1645

THE APOCALYPSE PROLOGVE.
WHerein a revolution or return, Expressed, as in those days it came to pass,
when as City and Country oppressed so: By such an universal imposed taxx: Inns
so full that for our only Savior to be borne in. No place but an open Stable
afforded: And thus like the truth which no Corners or Curtains requires. The
joyful tidings they in the wide field, First saluted with them: Shepherds
that kept watch the glory from the Lord by night which shone round about them.

So lastly at his second coming, or return also reveald to be before hand, the
watchful Pastors saluted: over Spiritual Flocks from him, saying: I am Alpha
and Omega, the morning Star and evening both: the first and the last. As this
the Lord of Sabbaths Angel whose countinance as the Sun, and lighted at the
evening of time with the seven Stars, etc. And Golden Candlesticks all watch
Lights round about him, even so farther for the little Book of Life, who had
its Swadle-Bands (as it were unloosd: with Seven fold Seals bound so fast up,
when wonderful acclamation such in heaven and Earth (Revel. 5) as came to
pass with the Angel; a multitude of the Heavenly Host suddenly praising God:
Luke 2 such Corispondencie ever between the Son of God, and Gods Word which for
ever and ever indures. Maugre the Old Serpents malice. And his Angels, let
loose again, as in the days of the Gospels first progress.

And therefore to say the truth, Though the Bottomless pit freely opend, no
wonder: affording beside evil Spirits their Fellowship, Munition also of all
Kinds, And the winds let loose out of their Prisons, And Wrathful Vialls the
last powrd out, Who shall commisserate their Condition? when open house or
Court (as it were) kept in Heaven, inviting all, Darkenesle notwithstanding
preferred at last shall be before Light: Like those frivolous and light excuses
made of marriage: its mutability preferred above the estate of Angels: And before
eternal life: Farms their Leases or the like, as sold their life in blessed
Paradise for such a toy.

Thus no marvel, although the infernal pit opend, where those Legions of
Worms or Locusts swarming out. Our Pruining Hooks have turned into Swords, our
union into division; And so much for these present vigilent days of ours from
which nothing conseald is, or hidden, even the things in the little golden
book as with no little expedition are presented here.

THE REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST Interpreted.
Shows how ONE Isle calls unto another, The Jle of Pathmos, unto the Isles of
Great Britain. The great day of the Lords coming revealing it: Whereof let
the Jsles be glad, Now or Never.

Of whose Visitation from him which is, and which was, and which is to come:
what date the time bears, the first witness these, And from the seven Spirits
in sight of the Throne or nearest there unto, verse. 4. Which as it signifies or
figures the present Century, or the last seven hundred years Also points at the
present reign, when it began, about Easter, witness these: And from Jesus
Christ the first begotten of the dead, And the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood,
verse 5.

Even as two for failing can witness, Son and Father both: crowned or
created Kings, about the aforesaid Resurrection feast kept, concluded thus: And
has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father, to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever Amen. verse 6. Behold he comes, etc. as much to
say, the last father and son of that kind from the Conquest: since when has
been 24. of them, making up the blessed Prophets and Apostles number.

And so farewell the blessed years of Grace, and time to be longer as in the
year 1625. was revealed to his Handmaid, the first year of his reign, to
whom the day of Judgment being at hand declared: was dedicated in a book by
her: And the general Resurrection to be in his days as from the Prophet
Daniels mouth given to understand: concerning the aforesaid time: And at that
time shall the great Prince Michael stand up, which stands for the children
of the people or defender of the Faith, even Great Britains troublesome time,
pointing thereat with the plagues pursuing one another for mortality as never
since a Nation the like: Of whose Jnauguration or standing up at the aforesaid
Resurrection feast thus signified: Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
Earth shall wake, some to everlasting life, etc. Dan. 12.

And for a faithful witness So go thy way Daniel, as no few in their Mother
Earths Bosom daily take up their lodging of free cost, till Michael his alarm
awakens them, where also the year 1625. (until which days Daniels visions to
wait) Thus cast up two Hundred and ninety days and three hundred and five and
thirty, 625. ( Dan. 12.)

But going on with John whose name to no Nation better known then unto Ours,
who styles himself your Brother and companion in tribulation, in the Isle that
is called Patmos, where confined was on the Lords day visited by the Holy
Ghosts Angel, the First voice saying, J am Alpha and Omega, and what thouseest
write in a Book and send it, etc. Whereupon being turned, saw that dreadful
appearance, ONE all looking from head to foot like fire, that stood in the
midst of those candle sticks of Gold, and thereupon falling dead at his feet by
a touch of his Septer, the seven Stars in his right hand, being aagaine
revived come to himself: was again charged to write the things to come, the
mystery of the seven stars which he saw in his hand, the Lord of Sabbath Even
to display times Coat by CHARLES Wagon or Wayne, to wit the seventh present
Century, about the midst of it, even to look for the general Resurrection
time, as present, past, and future here with times voice testified from him
which is, and which was, and is to come.

Wherefore in the day of Judgments likeness was presented unto him the Book
of the Old and new Testament, that Alpha and Omega: Whose Body as it were
clothed and girt. The Bible in gilt paper bound with brass Clasps which in
such a year bears date, 1700. When interpreted the book of the Revelation as
whatsoever spoken in darkness or in the Ear assured to be made clear as the
light. And he that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit of prophecy
says, and in time repent and amend, or expect a blow for his pains, when he
stands at the door and knocks so long, the Comforter sent saying, behold J
come quickly. And he shall Sup, and sit with me that hears my voice opens the
door.

CAP. 4.
THough hastening with winged time: yet some more Evidence requisite in this a
matter of such weight the day of judgment: And so shows a door opened here,
as much to say, Nothing conseald or hidden, as heavens cathederall showed here,
the voice saying come up heither, J will show thee things to come. The
Resurrection prophetical alarm verily, like that before, J am he that was dead
and am alive, etc. and have the Keys, etc. First saw where the ancient of
days sat, Inthroned under a Canopey, rain bow like: Where all in Priestly
Vestments round about those Elders with restless Thundering voices extolling
his name who lives for ever and ever. And Holy, Holy, Holy, crying out as it
were glory be to the Father, etc. Amen. For whose pleasure all things created.
As for the lamps before the Throne, to wit the year of God called the seven
Spirits of God, of the same influence with the seven Stars, requires no farther
repetition being both one: Neither these in the likeness here of Saints and
Angels, in Heaven whose wings so full of eyes before and behind signifying
those eye witnesses their watchfullnesse and as personating the blessed
Prophets and Evangelists: So lastly farther for the mystery or moral of these
crowned Elders expressly shows, How many intered Princes in this Isle since the
conquest which in the space of seven hundred years last past in Alablaster
Shrowds clothed, That have cast their Crowns before the Throne or before the
great day.

CAP. 5.
ANd without boasting or amplifying, these the truth in few words: This blessed
Book first cried, He that has an ear let him hear. And here by a strong
Angel proclaimed: Who is worthy to open the book in the right hand of him
sitting upon the Throne: No other then the mystery of times and seasons, in
the year of the worlds Redemption, 1625. to be reveald or unseald. And because
this so difficult (no man found worthy etc.) John that therefore much wept, by
that Elder willed to weep no more. Jnformed ECCELEO radix David, vicet, to open
the book and loose the sevenfold seals: being not improper to explain this
likewise, as he said, J am Joseph, so am I David, This name of mine enterd
here: by that Elder even Daniel, as much to say, Go thy way John, let those
words satisfy thee spoken to Daniel: The words are sealed up until the time
of the end, Thou shall stand in thy lot, etc. ( Dan. 12.) Reservd till a time
and times and half: Pointing to the present Century so signified in behalf of
it, three periods and a part, etc.

So dignus est agnus, viz. Anno Domini, in such a year of our Redemption, the
first year of such a reign. These Sabbaticall Seals unloosed witness, For
thou have redeemed us and made us Kings and Prophets and we shall reign.

Even so let every Creature in the sea, namely the Isles Bless those right
hand years, with that Grand Jury, the 24. Elders before the Throne falling
down. Who give up their Verduit, David's Keye has prevaild honor, glory, and
blessing, etc.

CAP. 6.
ANd the Son of Thunder this fourth Evangelist that heard the day of
Judgments Sommons, The noise of thunder as it were, one of the seven Seals
being unloosed: One of the four Beasts saying come and see. As much to say,
displayed times and seasons mystery: Jn the seventh Century, And unto what
Nation, this new Song of the Lords coming dedicated: as no unnecessary
circumstance time, a thing observed of old, when the word of the Lord came unto
them.

For evidence hereof the Conqueror and Rufus, here behold their ancient Seals:
Where first saw a White Horse, and He that sat on him a Bow, and a Crown
given unto him. The English bow renoun'd far and near: (verse 2.) Whereby
clear as day given to understand the Son of God reveald out of the Scripture
to these very Jsles. Wherefore listen O Jsles.

And this mystery of time sealed with the years four seasons, their
discriptions, The Sun like a Conqueror: and Gods word like the Sun which
overcomes whatsoever Dispells all darkness, saying: He that has an eye come
and see: The worlds eye, like an expert Horseman upon his Carreer: running his
restless course about, who first enters the victorious crowned yuory Ram,
the Wholesome Spring more then Gold to be embraced, the Odorifferous Spring
giving to every creature Life.

The second Rider so furious, he on the Red Horse, giving all one word, Come
and see: Not difficult to be discerned, the Crabb at all points armed, Summers
scorching rays: when red as fire all: Slaying in Arms as it were with Sythes
and such like no short weapon.

The third a Black Horse, he that sat on him, a pair of Balance in his
hand, in his proper colors and complexion signified not inferior to his
fellows, as Automes voice cleeres it, who these Celestial Horsemen, or Riders
were, a voice heard in the midst of them, saying, A measure of Wheat for a
penny, and three measures of Barley. And hurt not the wine and oil, even the
Sun in his circuit passing by the Equinoctial, weighing equal hours to day
and night: Thus all the world come and behold also the fourth seasons mystery,
explained in this new Calender or Prognostication.

The fourth a pale Horse, he that sat one him called Death. Or like the last
day so ghastly and paile the grizled Goat with his Beard. Hoary Winter its wann
visage that starvs with hunger young and old, shaking every Limb.

And these Characters pointing at those four Beasts, Aries, Taurus, Leo,
Capricorn, Like as the four Evangelist. By winged Beasts four, full of eyes.
Which Motto, come and see, may serve them to which rests not Day nor Night.

And after four of the Seals opened the mystery showed of the four seasons,
the Suns restless course (to say) finished. The next offered to considerations
veiw, in this Story or Treatise, is the blessed case of those poor Souls
entreated a little Season to rest: till their Fellow Soldiers and Brethren
killed as they, Whose Blood for the Testimony they held crying so loud, How
long Lord, etc. to wit, to the day of vengeance, as behold defferd no longer
the day of Judgment immediately which follows in its dreadful likeness, when
as fullfild, white robes given likewise to the rest of their brethren arrayed,
(to wit) in clean Shrowds.

Then Time to his untimely end comes, whose thride of life suddenly cut off,
of whose sable Hearse thus, and what mourners accompanying the corpse of time,
about 44. aged in the midest of his days: First the quaking Earth Mother of
all in such a consumption. The Sunn next as black as Sackcloth of hair,
coverd all over. And the Moon over watched with her red face looking like
blood, the condoleling Heavens shedding their stars in stead of tears as fast,
impatient winds as loud: their shrill Throat setting forth, ready to rent all
assunder with Sighs hollow Groans.

So all departing as they came: the Heavens as it were quartering those Ancient
Coats the four Seasons, which were like Scutchens roled up together like a
Scrole: The Islands carried away with the violence of the Seas uproare: Each
acting a part, the Kings and Great men ringing out such a Peale, all flying
away and hyding themselves for the great day of his wrath to come as who able
to stand, routed all, surprised in such a moment darkness.

CAP. 7.
ANd these like Jacobs Ladder reaching at last to Heaven Gate: (Ascendentem
abortusolis:) Behold saw four Angels standing on the four Corners of the
Earth holding the four Winds that they should not blow, etc. Even gives to
understand in what year the Final blow, saying: hurt not, etc. till we have
sealed so many, And there were sealed a hundred forty and four, etc. of the
servants of God in the fore heads, as much to say, the year of God, 1644. when
complete, then the disolution comes quickly or is at hand. And thus like the
Covenant of late sealed, whereso many names also the months of the year,
setting their hands at it were twelve times twelve. verse 4.

And as including the year complete or accomplished, 44. till when those
pernicious winds restrained not to hurt the Earth nor any Tree: So Aludes to
that fruitless tree after the fourth year to be for borne, no longer
interceded, for in the Gospel. Wherefore Sir, these are to let you know it is
spoken to your Majesty, the last of those crowned four and twenty Elders,
being full forty four aged, and reigning since aged 24. saying Sir thou
know who they are, verse 14.

That Albion Regiment, these Folk in white Robes fleeced and famished as ye
see, the very condition of Prisoners taken by you: The Prophet Jsaiah gives
notice of it, They are his words too, Listen O Jsles, etc. 49. Cap. That thou
may say to the Prisoners go forth, to them that are in darkness they
shall hunger and thirst no more, neither shall heat nor Sun any more smite
them, for the Lamb in the midest of the Throne having the seven eyes, which
are the seven spirits of God, shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

And more over for these words aforesaid, as serving for the midest of the
Century, about the year, 44. So points at the very half year, about Michael
the Arch Angels Feast, the aforesaid Blow, or last Blow, there about till when
those hurtful winds restrained, Michaelmas riggs so called.

As aforeshewed forbidden to hurt the Wine and the Oil: all speaking as it
were with Automns boisterous voice, a greater Blow then great Babylons, when
that hand writing appeared, written by that Angels hand, that Prince affrighting
and his numerous Peers, not a little.

CAP. 8.
ANd like as about half an hour after the clock had stricken, shows about
the space of half an hour there was silence in Heaven, after the seals were
opened which imports not only when a vacancie in the Church. These Angels their
standing before God then, preparing themselves to sound, but shows withal a
space of time allotted to repent of their contempts stood in, and cruelties
before his men of war sent forth. But the marriage of the Lamb being ready
they unworthy that were bidden: The censure filled with Alter Coals is cast
down the curse deferred no longer, the aforesaid seven Angels so highly
preferred, sound fire and sword, woe to Land and Sea.

And so the great Ship its being lanchd forth, showed at large, ver. 12.
likened to Etnas burning mountain with like Sulpharous smoaks smiting of Sun
Moon, and Stars, the third part: and with such a spacious Lamp like a Star
even well named Wormwood: verily the Arch Bishops Charecter, His lanching out
or advancing both goes together: Bishops and Ships able both to choke all with
their smoakes and the like. The very root of bitterness made of it, and this
the meaning of this unluckey Stars falling burning as a lamp. The contriver of
this third kingdoms cumbustion this aforesaid high Officer in the Church, also
with the year of God 1633. September accompanied, when he transtated as in
truth this Prognostication serves from the year 1625. until 44. complete. The
third Angels proclaims it: Witness Woe, woe, woe, treble woes to the Earths
Jnhabitants to wit, England, Scotland and Jreland. And so much for these
Ange^ls alarm imparted concerning the third part of creatures in the Sea
distroied: and the third part of Ships. And the third part of the lights of
Heaven smitten, and to slay the third part of men, Saying come and see or
behold great Britains Mapp, as visible as the Heavens four Seasons showed in
the Calender.

Even Lucifers being cast down lik lightning in our days First the Arch
Bishop in whose custody the Keys of the AByss power given him to imprison,
Levy Taxes, wage war at his pleasure, the loose Reins laid on his Neck
that break his own the portion of that aspiring Hypocrite full of the
mystery of Jniquitie: And so much for the mystery of that malevolent Star.

CAP. 9.
PRoceeding one with these calculated for this Kingdom showing, as Heaven
opened and those horsemens coming proclaimed come and see. Also opened the
bottomless pit, ecclipsing the Sun and Air, set open by him the Son and
Heir of perdition, father of that generation of Vipers: So Dragons and Deeps,
like the evil spirits confess and praise God when men fail. For discovering
whose coming at hand the day of judgments standing at the door, the very
current coin demonstrated of this Kingdom all horsemen, money made their Gold
that odored Mass occasion of evils all, Begetting such uunatur all doings,
Wars, and Jmprisonments, desired death where it flees away, of late like Hell
thronged as full every where. Of which flying current half crown pieces
Currentium in Bellum, with Crowns on their heads, what pieces of Plate they
are no need to ask or go far to inquire, whose Image with deformed hair,
Hermophradite Locks, none of that maiden Queens doubtless with Breast plates
all, etc, such tormenting doings and Dolers unknown in her days.

And so much for those signs with that star of the bottomless pit in the
likeness of Scorpio and Sagitarious, with faces like men, but as the nose in
the face or the like so difficult whose to discern, whose superscription or
description, and with our old Gold plainly called the Angel of the aforesaid
AByss (that Distroyer) not without a double signification like those names,
Abbadon and Apollyon, giving to understand withal as under the Angels feet the
Scorpion or Dra- Anglia giving the Angels name fatal to the Old Serpent to
receive there his fall.

And here one woe is past (The sower of debate and division Anatamiz'd) And two
woes more coming after, passing over how far Civil war exceeds other. the
Navyes preparation comes next, those winged Horses of the Seawith Lions heads
and Serpents tails.

The winds withal prepared for an hour, a day, amoneth, and a year, which
Angels four commanded to be loosed bound in the East as it were: or Babylons
great river Euphrates, not only points at that sudden hand writing sent but to
the year of 1644. past as much to say, then the third woe the day of judgment
comes after or quickly, like a These. Of which Horse men even bound in the
narrow Seas saying. He heard the number of them or list of their names, with
fire and smoke and Brimstone issuing out of their tails the very fiery Lake,
to behold with stinging great Gunns or pieces chargd as here pieces of all
kinds numberd, of late since discovered the Jndies, And so far for a
discovery of the time also, and these serving to explain the rest: And the
rest of the men that were not killed, etc: (verse 20.) repented not that they
should not serve Devils of Gold and Silver, etc. (Daemonia) neither repented
they of their though not unforetold how bitter a pille it would prove: So might
be infisted on his writing to a LADY (willing her) not to salute with God
speed them of the faction of Antichrist. But unwilling to be voluminus to
intrude too far on the bounds of patience in distracted times.

FINJS.

