THEANTHPOPOS OR THE Great Mystery OF GODLINESS, Opened By way of Antidote
against The Great Mystery of Iniquity, (now a work in the Romish Church.)

In a Sound and Seasonable Treatise; WHEREIN 1. The INCARNATION of the Son of
God (and Evangelicall Love, Wisdom, Humility, etc. expressed in that
Contrivance) is fully explicated and displayed. 2. CEREMONIES in Point of
Divine Worship are concluded to be by Christ (the true Messiah) abrogated; and
examined whether they are not since Christ, Jewish-Anti-Christian; where the
Jew and Judaizing Christian are deservedly taxed. 3. CHRISTIAN LIBERTY with its
VIII Steps and V Boundaries, is modestly and briefly asserted; And Many other
Matters of Consequence and Moment are imparted: But now PUBLISHED For
VINDICATION of the Truth and its Assertor. By Thomas Douglas, M. A. Minister of
the Gospel at Olaves-Silverstreet, in LONDON.

The LAW was given by MOSES, but GRACE and TRVTH came by JESUS CHRIST, John 1.
17. Praesente Veritate, Typus and Vmbra cessavit. Origin. in Jes. Nave. cap.
13. hom. 17. LONDON; Printed for H. C. in Pope's Head Alley, and T. P. against
the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside. Ann. Dom. 1661.

An Epistle PREMONITORY To the JUDICIOUS And Impartial Reader.
Worthy Reader,
BE pleased to know, that I once intended an Epistle Reprehensory to the Romish
Church, the Whorish Mother of THE MYSTERY of INIQVITY (for there it was Born
though her Pharisaical Emissaries would compass Sea and Land, that it might be
elsewhere Nursed) but upon more mature thoughts, I concluded to be at the
expense of no more then this Epistle Premonitory; whose Scope and Errand is to
acquaint the World with the Occasion of this (my first) appearance in Print.

I am now by Personal Experience schooled in the Truth of that, Veritas odium
parit. Never was there an Age, wherein TRVTH had more Daughters, and fewer
Sisters; But the misery is, the Brood is ILLEGITIMATE, and HETEROGENEAL.

I was about two months ago brought to Pulpit of some honest Truths (suitable
to the Text, as that was to the Occasion) which were CONCEIVED (I hope) by a
DIVINE (though now necessitated to a (Printed) Sheet by a MALIGNANT) Influence.
And though (the Lord knows) my Discourse was all along levelled and
commensurated (as near as I could) by the Necessary Laws of 1. Piety, in
respect of my God. 2. Loyalty in respect of my King; and 3. Charity, in respect
of my Neighbor; Yet have (innocent) I, been since, in such a O how sad is it,
when what is said for Antidoting of Superstition is presently construed to be
(at least) Sedition!
horrid manner, by some (whom God forgive) censured, condemned, calumniated,
and misrepresented (what their ground was, let the Impartial judge) as that
(fearing lest Silence might be Interpreted Guilt, a pleasing Gloss, in such a
case, to Malice) I concluded, it was needful to Publish to the world, what I
delivered, (with diverse other things) Innocence and Ingenuity, those
Bosome-Solicitors, prompting me on; for VINDICATION.

Hic murus Aheneus esto, etc. Thus,

What the Reason and End of the Publication is, I have showed; That the work is
performed no better, let it be imputed to Mine, and not to the Weakness of my
Cause, for that is not Guilty; neither let Men make use of Mine as Premises to
Infer other Men's Weaknesses. Alas! I am less then the least of ten thousand. No
marvel the Birth be condemned as Abortive, since the Parent is one born out of
due time. I confess the Subject had better become both Age and Ability; but
though the want of both, (especially of the latter) did incline me to stand for
a Mute, yet the Case was so urgent, that it pressed hard for a Consonant. What
Censures soever I shall undergo, even while I endeavor to suppress or prevent
Censures, I am resolved (through Grace) to be Passive under them; Only my Suit
is to thee (Worthy Reader) that thou would 1. Forbear to Tax me (further)
till thou have read me through; (and then I hope, thou will not Tax thy
Forbearance:) And 2. Pray for him, who is

Thy Servant in and for Christ, T. D.

Praemonitiuncula.
LIbenter velim Eruditioribus innotescat, passim in hoc opusculo Graecum
Accentum, perperam collocari, quod partim Typographo, vitio vertendum est,
partim mihi ipsi, utpote qui a teneris usque, Vocalis, Valorcm, magis quam
Accentum respicere memet assuefecerim; quae Legenti maximopere praemonenda esse
duxi; ut illius facilior evadat censura; cui, si (nihilominus) steterit MOMVM
agere; per me (quidem) licebit.

Gal. 4. 4, 5. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son, made of a woman, made under the Law.

To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
sons.


THe Apostle's design in the Context, is to demonstrate the Christian Churches
Exemption and Redemption from Legal Rites and Ceremonies, and her emancipation
from a servile state by the Son of God Incarnate, the true Messiah.

This he illustrates by a plain and familiar Simile, taken from the Civil Law;
the sum is this. As the Heir while he is under age, and in his minority, is
subject to Tutors, Governors, and Guardians, from which he is freed, when he
comes at age, being then sui juris, at his own disposal; even so the Church,
under her Legal Constitution, and Minority, was subject to the Mosaical
Pedagogie, and Ceremonial Shaddows, Pigures, etc. as to a Schoolmaster, and
Rudiments, suited to her Infant-State; but when the fullness of the time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law. So that the Church in her mature and adult age,
and under her Christian and Evangelical Constitution, is by Christ, God-man,
the prefigured Body and Substance of Levitical shaddows, exempted from the
servile yoke of Jewish Rites and Ceremonies. The words then are Demonstrative,
and in them there be two general parts, viz.

1. Christ's Person. 2. Christ's Portion.
1. The Person of Christ, considered as our Mediator, lies in these words; But
when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
made under the Law. Where there be two great things observable, viz.

1. The Incarnation of the Son of God. 2. The Legal Qualification of his
Person. 1. The former, in these words; But when the fullness of the time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman. 2. The latter, in these words;
made under the Law: whereby is intimated Christ's humble (but Notat, Non
Obligationem, sed usum. Anselm
voluntary) subjection to the Law; which was threefold.

1. The first was his submission to the Civil or Judicial Law, the Jewish
Policy; in that he condescended to derive his humane Body and Being from the
Jews, for the Jews were the Fathers of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ
came, Romans 9. 5. Christ was a Native Jew, and therefore subject to the Jewish
Policy.

2. The second was his subjection to the Ceremonial Law, and thus Christ was
Circumcised, Luke 2. 21. It was in pursuance of this Law, that Christ went up
three times in the year to Jerusalem, to wit, at Festival Solemnities;
according to that in Exodus 23. v. 14. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 16. etc.

3. The third was Christ's Obediential Conformity to the Moral Law, which was
twofold, viz.

1. Original. 2. Actual.
1. The former was the Native Righteousness of Christ's Person: Christ is the
only Person that was born holy; Adam was created holy, every Believer is in
sanctification made holy; but Christ (the immaculate Lamb of God) was born holy.

2. The latter, was Christ's Actual Obedience, which again was twofold, viz.

1. Active. 2. Passive.
1. That was the Legal Righteousness and Obedience of his Life, answering to
the Active condition of the Law, Do this and Live.

2. This was Christ's Passive Undertakings in behalf of Mankind; it implies,
his voluntary submission to the Curse and Malediction of the Law, to a
miserable life, and an accursed death, to a Cross and a Curse at once, (not
only nostro bono, but even nostro loco, in our room; which the Socinians deny)
in answer to the poenal demands of a violated Law, and the Threats and
Comminations annexed. In a word, the Apostle in saying Christ was made under
the Law, does intimate, the Quality and Nature of his Estate of Humiliation.

made the Law, should be made under the Law! That the Scepter Royal, and
Legislative Power of Heaven should stoop to Obedience! Here the Lawmakers was
made under the Law! Here God was subject to his Subjects Law. This is the only
case wherein (be it spoken with reverence) In forma fervi scipso minor est Aug.
de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 7.
God was subject to Himself; O Beloved! This is at once matter both of
Thankfulness and wonder.

2. Christ's Portion lies in these words, To redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the Adoption of sons. This was the great design and
Loveplot of the Son of God in assuming to himself our Nature; here are
specified two great Captial Privileges accrewing to Believers from and by the
Son of God Incarnate, viz.

1. Redemption. 2. Adoption. Of which hereafter.
The Theme that I intend to pitch upon and prosecute, is the Incarnation of the
Son of God, That great Mystery 1 Timothy 3. 16.
of Godliness, the very Sunshine of the Gospel, and all Evangelical
contrivances, in the Application whereof, I may very pertinently take into
consideration those signal Benefits, viz. Redemption and Adoption.

But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
woman.

Here is asserted the Incarnation of the Son of God; where we have four
Observables; viz.

1. The Subject Matter out of which Christ's Body was made. 2. The Manner of
the production of it. 3. The Father's Commission. 4. The Circumstance of Time
when, etc.
1. The Subject Matter out of which Christ's Body was made, was the very
substance of the Virgin Mary, its Material and Passive Principle; she was the
Vox Hebr. (...) and Gr. (...) notant Sexum aeque ac conditionem. (...).
Procopius.
woman mentioned in the Text. In Virginem introducendum erat Dei Verbum,
exstructorium vitae, ut quod per ejusmodi Sexum abierat in perditionem, per
eundem Sexum redigeretur in salutem. Tertul. lib. de Carne Christi.

2. The Manner of the production of Christ's Body, is intimated in the word
Made, -- Made of a woman.

It is observable that the Son of God is here said to be * made, and not (...)
non (...).


1. Begotten of a woman. Christ as God was not Made but Begotten; Christ as
Man, was not Begotten, but Made. Nor

2 Born of a woman. Valentinus, Schwenckfeldius, Marcion, the primitive
Anabaptists, Familists, etc. did grant that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary,
but denied that his Body was made of the Real substance of the Virgin; now
says our Apostle (by the impulse of the holy Ghost) The Son was not (only)
born, but made of a woman.

In a Word;

In that the Son of God is here said (not to be begotten, nor to be born, but)
to be made of a woman; we may gather, That

1. Christ's Body was a Real Body, and a true Corporeal substance, and not a
mere Phantasme, or Imaginary Body, as Marcion, and after him the Manichees did
affirm; the first Author of which Heresy was Cerdo, says Tom. 6. lib. de
haeres.
S. Augustine.

2. This Real Body was made of the very Matter and Corporeal substance of the
Virgin Mary; and not a Celestial, Sydereal, or Elementary substance, conveyed
into the world, modo transmeatorio, through the Virgins womb or Belly, tanquam
per canalem Si Maria non filium sed hospitem in utero gestabat Iesum, quomodo
dixit Elizabetha, Beatus fructus Uteri tui? etc. Tertul. lib. de Carne Christi.
vel hospitium, as through a channel or hespitage, per Virginem, non, ex
Virgin; as the Valentinians and Schwenckfeldians vainly conceit.

3. Excluditur concursus Maris; the concurrence of the Male Sex, and by
consequence, Natural Generation, and sinful propagation is excluded. Christ was
ab Adamo, but not per Adamum. As sin and misery came by a Woman, made of a Man,
without a Mother; so happiness and salvation came by a Man, made of a Woman
without a Father. Eve was from Adam without a Mother; Christ came of Therefore
Mary is truly defined to be (...), and Dei para.
Mary without a (Natural) Father. So that damnable was the opinion of Ebion,
viz. That the Body of Christ was procreated of Joseph's Seed; as also that of
Helvidius, viz. That Christ was not born of a Virgin, he denied the Virginity
of the Mother of our Lord.

The Son of God did assume to himself the Nature of Assumpsit Deus naturam
peccatorum, non naturam peccatricem.
Sinners, (but) not a sinful Nature. The Corporeal substance which he took to
him, was free from all impurity, and corrupted Qualities, by the omnipotent
virtue of the holy Ghost, the Active Principle, (as Aquinas) and Efficient
Cause thereof; by the Preparatory Acts of whose purifying and sanctifying
power, the Bodily substance was fitted for Personal Union with the Godhead:
for the (...). Damascen. lib. 3. Orthodoxa Fidei, cap. 2.
holy Ghost did come upon the blessed Virgin, and the Power of the Highest did
over-shaddow her; Luke 1. 35. And thus we professedly believe that Christ was
conceived of the holy Ghost, viz. not as a Material cause, but as a
supernatural Effective and sanctifying Cause; non de substantia, sed de
potentia; non generatione, sed fussione, and benedictione. Aug. Sermon. 6. de
Tempore.

So that Christ's Conception in the womb of the Virgin, was without all
exception pure and immaculate.

3. The Father's Commission is specified in these words, God sent forth his
Son; This is the Authority of the Son's undertaking, it is no less then that of
Heaven, and the blessed Trinity; He did not assume our Nature without a special
Commission: Which may condemn those that run when they are not sent forth into
the great work of the Ministry, and irregular engaging therein. The Son of God
himself came not in the flesh without a Commission, his undertaking was
Dispensatio authentica. Musculus in locum.
Authentic. God sent forth his Son, etc. which argues not an inferiority of
Nature to the Father, but only a Voluntary subjection in state and condition;
now an in-equality of condition, and a co-equality of Nature, a Natural Parity,
and a Voluntary Disparity, are not inconsistent.

4. The circumstance of Time, when the Son of God came in the flesh, is
intimated in these words; When the fullness of the time was come, etc. Where it
may be enquired, What are we to understand by the fullness of the time, or the
full time?

Answ. Aquinas notes here a threefold fullness, viz. Annus Incarnationis est
Lambardo. Annus benignitatu, lib 3 Sent. Did. 1.
1. Of Grace. 2. Of Promises. 3. Of Types, and Legal shaddows. In a word.

By the fullness of the time, we are to understand tempus praesinitum a Patre,
(say the Ambrose. Carnel. a lap. Estius. Luther. Calvin.
Learned) the time appointed of the Father, (as it is in v. 2.) and Divina
ordinatione non fatali necessitate. Aquin.
infallibly destined for the manifestation of his Son in the flesh, and the
Redemption of his Church from the Legal yoke and bondage of Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies, by Him, of whom these were Typical Shaddows and Adumbrations.

This fullness of time, notes the accomplishment of all Prophetical Predictions
and Promises of the coming of the Messiah, and the abrogation of all Legal
shaddows and Figures whereby he was typified.

But more particularly, for our more distinct knowledge, of what is meant by
the fullness of the time.

The Son of God did take upon him our Nature, 1. A little before the end of
Daniel's seventy weeks, mentioned Dan. 9. 24, 25. which contain from the end of
the Babylonish Captivity till the death of Christ, (as is una voce granted by
Chronologers) four hundred and ninety years. De Incarnat. lib, 2. Quaest. 6.
Zanchy is of opinion, that about the space of thirty and three years (the time
of Christ's bodily commoration in the world) before the end of the seventy
weeks, the Son of God came in the flesh. I confess it were the more remarkable,
if Christ and Daniel's seventy weeks did both expire together.

2. Under the Roman Empire, which was the fourth Monarchy, mentioned Dan. 2. In
the time of Augustus Caesar, Christ was born in the 42d year of his Reign, say
Epiphanius and Eusebius; in the 41st, say Tertullian and Irenaeus.

3. Three thousand and nine hundred years from the Creation of the World; this
is undoubted: but what the particular year of the Incarnation of the Son of God
was, is variously resolved upon by Bullinger. ann. 3970. Funccius, ann. 3965.
Melanchthon ann. 3965. Luther, ann. 3960. etc.
Chronologers; but Chron. Genevae Edit. Anno Christi 1575. lib. 3. cap. 7. and
8. Notus Christus anno Mundi 2929. Aequinoct. Autumnali, ab Vrbe condita, anno.
752. anno 4. Olympiad. 194. etc.
Beroaldus his computation is most received, as the exactest of all. According
to his Calculation, Christ was born in the year of the World 3929. in the year
of Augustus Caesar his Reign 42. in the year of Herod's Reign 33. at or about
the Autumnal Equinoctial, etc. This was (according to him) the fullness of the
time mentioned in the Text; even the set and predestined time of the
Manifestation of the Son of God in the flesh, and the Churches Immunity and
Exemption from a servile-state by and through him.

Quest. But why did the Son of God come in the flesh at that time of all
others? Why not sooner? Why not later?

Answ. This is a curious Question; ( Hidden things belong unto God,) but were
we to resolve it, we could assign no other reason for it, then To Velle
Divinum, the absolute good pleasure of the All-wise God, who in his great
wisdom, pitched upon this season as most proper and convenient for the
manifestation of his Son to the World in our Nature. Men can but admire the
Wisdom of God in this Circumstance, as well as in the thing. From Aquinas we
may reverence the Wisdom of God in this in two respects. 1. Christ was a great
person, (though he came not in great State) the King of Saints, the Sovereign
Majesty of Heaven, (though he came not into the World in Majesty) therefore it
was fit that some preparation (of some thousands of years) should be made for
his coming into the world, especially in the hearts of the little World. 2.
Christ was a Physician, the Physician of souls, therefore it was fit that his
coming should be deferred for some thousands of years after his Patients
indispensable need of him; that so, though his Merits were of perfect virtue
and efficacy for the salvation of believing sinners, from the beginning of the
world, yet) they might insatiably long after even his Bodily appearance, and
inestimably prize him when come. The Old Testament Saints might have come to
this, O that the Deliverer were come out of Zion! O that our Physician were
once come! When shall the promised Seed of the woman come? O how acceptably did
the Son of God appear in a Body in the Heb. 1. 2.
last days, to the sinful, undone, captive sons of men.

De Incarnat. lib. 2. Quaest. 6.
Zanchy after many pious and solid reasons given for the convenience and
seasonableness of the fullness of the time for the Son's assumption of our
Nature, does well observe, That this was, of all others, the fittest season for
God's producing to the world at once two most signal instances, viz. of Justice
and Mercy: Of Justice toward the rebellious and unbelieving Jews, (once God's
peculiar people) in rejecting of them: Of Mercy toward the Gentiles; in
electing and making choice of them for his Christian Church; and in Genesis 9. 27.
Hic (Jesus) in novissimis temporibus apparens, lapis summus angularis, in unum
collegit, and univit, eos qui long and eos qui prope, hoc est circumcisionem
and praeputium, dilatans Japhet, constituens eum in domo Sem. Iren. adver.
Haeres. lib. 1.
persuading Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem.

O the profound depth of the Wisdom of God! How unsearchable are his
judgments? His ways past finding out.

Thus the words of the Text have been in a Theological manner divided and
opened. -- When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made
of a woman.

In the words, this great Evangelical Truth lies clear, viz. That

Doctr. Dominus noster in novissimus temporibus venit ad nos, non quemadmodum
ipse poterat, sed quomodo illum videre nos poteramus. Iren. advers. haereses,
lib. 4.
The Son of God was in the fullness of the time, (viz. sixteen hundred and sixty
years ago) according to the determinate and infallible counsel of God's Will,
made of a woman.

In the prosecution of my intended Discourse, this shall (...).
be my method. 1. I shall first discover what is comprehended under that, viz.
That the Son of God was made of a woman. 2. I shall next prove, That the Son of
God was made of a woman, and that in the fullness of the time. 3. I shall in the
third place allege the principal Reasons why the Son of God was made of a
woman. And 4. Lastly, I shall endeavor to bring this down to Use and
Application.

1. As touching the first.

The import of that, viz. That the Son of God was made of a woman, is very
comprehensive; for this is the great Gospel-Mysterie of the Incarnation,
wherein the Son of God did assume to himself the Humane Nature, and so became
(...), God-man in one Person.

This Assumption of our Nature, considered in a full Extent and Latitude, may
be understood to comprehend under it two memorable things. viz.

1. Union. 2. Communion.
1. Union.

There is a Hypostatical and Personal Union between the Divine and Humane
Natures in Christ. The Son of God, though for Nature, Co-essential; for Dignity
Coequal; for Time, Coeternal with the Father; did notwithstanding assume the
Human Nature into a Personal Union with the God head.

This Personal Union is the most intimate Conjunction of the Manhood with the
Godhead in (...). Dam. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Christ, wherein those two whole perfect and distinct Natures are without 1.
Conversion of the one into the other; Or 2. Composition of a Third by both; Or
3. Confusion and mixture, inseparably conjoined in one Person; which Person is
(...). id. Cum legitur, Verbum caro factum est, in verbo intelligo verum Dei
filium; in carne agnosco verum hominis filium, and utrumque simul, unam
personam, etc. Aug. de Trin. lib. 13.
very God, and very Man, ((...),) yet (but) one Christ, the only Mediator
between God and Man.

The two Natures of Christ are united,

1. * (...), without any change or mutation in the (...) Dam. Assumpsit
(filius) carnem, non se conversit in carnem, Aug. Verbum caro factum est, non
in carnem mutatum, ut non desisteret esse quod erat, sed caperit esse quod non
erat. Id. Dial. ad. Orosium.
Divine Nature, or conversion of the one Nature into the other; and therefore
damnable was the opinion of Apollinaris, who stuck not to affirm a kind of
alteration in the Divine Nature.

2. (...), without Division; contrary to Nestorius, Accessit Deo hum ana
substantia non persona. Fulg.
who alleged (not a distinction, but) a division between the two Natures of
Christ, attributing to each Nature its proper hypostasis; and so obtruded to
the world an Union of Persons, instead of a Personal Union; (...), non (...); a
Social, not a Personal Conjunction.

This Nestorian heresy was anathematized by the first (...). Justin. Imper.
contess. Rectae Fidei.
Ephesin Council, under Theodosius the younger, and Celestine the first,
whereof Cyril was President, anno Christi 430.

There is in Christ Aliud and Aliud, but not Alius and Alius; two Natures, but
one Individual Person.

3. (...), without confusion and mixture, or a composition of a Third Nature by
both; Christ's two Natures remain still distinct by their several Essential
Proprieties, contrary to Eutyches, and (after him) Dioscorus, who alleged a
mixture in the two Natures; so that according to them, Christ is a compound
made up of the Divine and Humane Natures intermixed.

This Eutychian heresy was anathematized by the Council of Chalcedon (which
was the fourth cecumenical (...), etc. Dam. lib. 3. cap. 3. vid. Dam, lib. 3.
cap. 2.
Council) Act. 5. under Martian and Leo the first, anno Dom. 451.

4. (...), Inseparably. Christ's two Natures are indissolubly conjoined. The
Personal Union is a Perpetual Union. That Nature (Christians) which the Son of
God did sixteen hundred years ago, assume into Hypostatical Union with the
Godhead, is by an everlasting conjunction united to him. And certainly this
will be matter of everlasting joy and wonder, to the consanguinal Saints in
Heaven.

This is the Nature of the Personal Union of the Deity and Humanity in Christ.
Super hac re, vid. Symb. Antioch. Nicen. Constantinop. Athan. Chaleed. Act. 5.
and Dam. lib. 3. cap. 2.

From this Personal Union of the Humane with the Divine Nature in Christ,
follows 1. A Mutual Communion of Proprieties, wherein what is proper to either
of the Natures, is attributed to the whole Person; as in these Scriptures, No
man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son
of man which is in heaven. John 3. 13. The Church has God purchased with his
own blood. Acts 20. 28. God will judge the world by that man whom he has
ordained. Acts 17. 31. and such like. 2. The Excellency of the Humane Nature,
both in respect of the gifts, (as Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, etc.) with which
he was qualified for his Mediatorship; and the honor and adoration due unto it
by virtue of its Union with the Godhead. 3. The Concurrence of both Natures,
in operibus Theandricis, in the works which Christ produces as God-Man,
wherein both Natures cooperate; each Nature contributing its own.

2. Communion.

There is a threefold Communion between Christ and Mankind, viz.

1. A Communion of Natures. 2. A Communion of Properties. 3. A Communion of
Infirmities.
1. There is a Mutual Communion of Natures and Essential Parts between Christ
and Man. The Son of God did assume to himself, the true Essentials of Man, viz.
(...). Symb. Chalced. Act. 5.
The Entire substance of a Real Body, and a Reasonable Soul, the very Humane
Nature; so that Christ is Consubstantial with Us, as well as with the Father. *
(...). Symb. Chalced. ibid.


This is a Communion of Essential Parts.

2. There is between Christ and Mankind a Communion of Essential Properties;
the Son of God did assume the Powers of Life, Sense, Motion; the Faculties of
Reason, Will, and Affection; a Body with its just Quantity and Trin-dimension;
even all the Natural Properties of Man, considered as a Corporeal, Animal,
Sensitive, Reasonable Creature.

3. There is between Christ and Mankind a Communion of Infirmities: The Son of
God did assume not only our Natures and Essential Properties, but also our
Infirmities, viz.

1. Natural.

Not Personal Infirmities; Those were such as do generally accompany the Humane
Nature, as its common Attendants since Man's fall and prevarication from his
Primitive Integrity; and they were of two sorts; viz. 1. Body-Infirmities; as
heat, cold, hunger, thirst, sleep, etc. 2. Soul-Infirmities; as grief, anguish
and sorrow, fear, ignorance, etc. (I mean Ignorantia pura Negationis. Non
ignoravit aliquid privative quod tenebatur scire, sed nescivit negative, absque
peccato, quod aetati (...) conditioni non competebat. Dr. Prideaux Manuduct. ad
Theol. Polem. loc. 3. (...). Dam. lib. 3. cap. 21.
Negative Ignorance; that was ignorance (not of that which he ought ex officio
to have known; but of that which was not congruous for him quoad statum,
according to his condition to know; and thus Christ is said to be ignorant of
the particular day and hour wherein he himself is to come to judge the world, (
Mark 13. 32.)

These, and such like infirmities did the Son of God take upon him, but not
Men's Personal infirmities, as blindness, lameness, dropsies, gouts,
consumptions, etc. which are not universal, or necessary concomitants of the
Humane Nature, but attend upon Persons, rather then upon the Nature, and
proceed from some particular causes, as the malignity of the Constitution, the
inequality of the Temperament, the predominancy of some corrupted humor, or
such like, not incident to Christ.

2. Christus similu suit carni nostra peccatrici n^n in culpa sed in p^na.
Lombar. Sent. lib. 3. did. 3. lit. D.

Infirmitates miserabiles, non damnabiles, poenales, non Peccatrices. Dr. Pride.
Montidust. ad Theol. Polem. loc. 3. Infirmitates merae privationis, non pravae
dispositionis.


Penal.

Not sinful infirmities; Christ's infirmities were miserable, but not damnable;
the infirmities of sinners, but not the infirmity of sin; which is not only an
imperfection, but an infection; now Christ was the holy and just One, free from
all (both) Natural and Personal guilt.

Christ was by way of Passion here on earth (as he is now by way of compassion
in heaven) touched with the feeling of our infirmities (yet) (...). Symb.
Chalced. Inter Trinitatem and hominum infirmitatem and iniquitatem, Mediator
factus est homo, non iniquus, sed tamen infirmus, ut ex eo quod non iniquus
jungeret te Deo, ex quod infirmus, propinquaret tibi. Aug. Praes. in enarrat.
2. Psalm. 29.
without sin, Heb. 4. 15. Christ did partake of our infirmities, but not of our
iniquities.

The Son of God was in all things made like unto his Brethren, (...). Dam. lib.
3. cap. 20.
but that wherein (we) his Brethren are like unto Satan. In a word, Christ's
Infirmities were wholly inculpable.

2. As to the second thing proposed;

That the Son of God was made of a woman, and is already come in the flesh, is
a truth which runs clear in the veins of the Gospel, as the great Theme thereof.

The (...)
Word was made flesh, John 1. 14. He was made in the likeness of Men, and found
in fashion as a Man, Phil. 2. 7, 8. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col. 2. 9. For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2. 14. Verily, he
took upon him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. He was made of a woman, Gal. 4.
4. etc.

From these and such like Scripture proofs it is evident, that the Son of God
was made of a woman, he being the only true Messiah who was promised from the
beginning, and prophesied to come in our Nature; which yet the incredulous Jew
will by no means admit of, what is Gospel-testimony to him? But

2. This Truth is also clear from the manifest accord and consent of the
Evangelist St Luke his History of the Nativity of Christ, with the Prophetical
Predictions, concerning 1. The particular Time of the Messiah his coming, Genesis
49. 10. 2. His Family and Pedigree, Jer. 23. 5. 3. His Virgin Mother, Isa. 7.
14. 4. His Country, Mic. 5. 2. 5. His Condition, Isa. 53. 2. which is apparent
to any that compare them together. Yea,

3. The 1. Prophesied places of the Messiah, 1. His Birth. 2. Education, 3.
Teaching. 4. Suffering, are destroyed; and 2. The prophesied time of his coming
is elapsed; Ergo, etc. It was prophesied

1. That Christ should be born in Bethlehem, Mic. 5. 2.

2. That he should be brought up in Nazareth, Isa. 11. 1.

3. That he should enter into Jerusalem while the second Temple was yet
standing, Hag. 2. 7. 9. and Zech. 9. 9. compared; and in this sense it was
said, and verified that the glory of the second Temple should exceed the glory
of the first Temple.

4. And that under the fourth Monarchy, Dan. 2. 44. That was the Roman Empire,
which together with the other three, viz. the Syrian, Persian, and Grecian,
were subverted by him, the King of Kings, The Stone out out of the Mountain,
Dan. 2. 45. whose Kingdom is firm and everlasting, and destructive to all
Kingdoms contrary to it.

5. That the Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his feet, till Shiloh (that is, the Messiah) came, Genesis 49. 10. But Bethlehem,
Nazareth, Jerusalem, and the Temple, are razed and destroyed; the fourth
Monarchy is totally subverted; The Scepter is wholly taken away and departed
from Judah. For the better understanding whereof we must know, that the Scepter
(that is, the Jewish Form of Government) continued until the time of Herod the
Ascalonite (an Idumean) Vid. Joseph. Antiqu. lib. 14.
a Proselyte-Jew, who began to reign in Judea about thirty and three years
before the Nativity of our Savior, being created King of Jury by the Roman
Senate; He in the thirtieth year of his Reign, slew the Jewish Sanhedrin, (a
Convocation in whom did reside the Legislative pre-eminence) and so deprived
the Jews of the Scepter and Principality, and defaced their Government, (which
was afterward at the destruction of Jerusalem, with all their Fundamental
Laws, and Civil Customs, and Rites, utterly abolished, insomuch that there
remained no form nor face of a Commonwealth at all among them, as before.) Now
near upon this time, Shiloh (that is, the Messiah) came, being lineally
descended of the Royal Tribe of Judah; Ergo, etc. Nay,

4. Not only Prophetical Predictions concerning the Messiah, but even the
Messiah his own Predictions are fulfilled. O that the poor Jew would hearken to
this! Had I to do with a Jewish Synagogue, I should hope (through strength from
the Almighty) to urge this Argument with good success; not only Prophesies
concerning Christ, but Christ's own Prophesies and Personal Predictions are
accomplished. What? Did he not in the days of his Matthew. 24. 2. Luke 19. 43,
44.
flesh prophecy concerning the Temple, That there should not be left one stone
upon another, which should not be thrown down? And did he not foretell with
tears in his eyes, the future desolation and depopulation of Jerusalem? O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem! etc. -- Behold your house is left unto you desolate. And
was not this accordingly fulfilled not long after? It was accomplished some
forty years after Christ's Ascension by Vespasian the Emperor, and his Son
Titus, say Eusebius and Josephus. It is a strange thing to me (but that
Unbelief is become Penal, a curse as well as a sin) that the Jews are not
convinced from the very ( vocally-silent) Ruins of their Temple and
Metropolis. Oh Lord convince them!

3. As touching the third thing proposed, viz.

The Reasons why the Son of God did take upon him our Nature.

1. The Prime Impulsive cause hereof was, a Principle (...)
of free and infinite Love. That Intrinsecal Motive, and Primum Mobile of all
Evangelical Contrivances. The Assumption of our Nature into Personal Union with
the Godhead, was the prime piece of God's gracious design and Love-plot
concerning sinners. The Son of God was induced thereunto ab intra, from an
impulse of Omnipotent Love; By this the whole Trinity was (as it were)
overpowered. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
John 3. 16. Love was Mightier then the All-mighty: Here God was his own
Captive; (be it spoken with reverence.) Sure, there was a strange Omnipotency
in Love. O wonderful Love! The most powerful Motive with God in God! The
Project of Man's salvation was a Love-plot; It was laid in Love; It was carried
on in Love, It was accomplished in Love: The Son of God did out of Love to our
Persons assume our Natures. The Incarnation was purely the Product of Infinite
Affection; That then which moved the Son of God to cloth the Deity with flesh
and blood (as I may express it) and to take upon him our Nature, was not 1. Any
Meritorious Qualification in Man; O no! We could as soon have merited Salvation
as a Savior, and so there had been no need of God-Incarnate. Nor was it 2. Any
Created Excellency; O no! So Angels had been Gainers, and Men irrecoverably
Losers; whereas (admired be rich Grace) God took not upon him the Nature of
Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. But it was purely an Internal
Principle of free, boundless, and illimited Love. This (Beloved) is a Reason
far above Reason.

2. A second Reason why the Son of God was made of a woman, may be drawn from

The Nature of Christ's Mediatory Office.

It was proper and requisite that the Son of God undertaking the Office of
Surety and Mediatorship between God and Man, should partake of both Natures;
the Humane as well as the Divine, and so become (...), God-Man, else he had not
been duly qualified thereunto; Hence Christ is a Mediator, not only qua
Medians, in respect of Office; but also qua Medius, in respect of the
Concurrence of the Divine and Humane Natures in Him. Christ as he is God, bears
a Proportion to his Fathers Majesty; In Christ as he is Man, there is a
propinquity to our Meanness. In a word, Nota, Ter Medius est Christus, viz. 1.
In S. Trinitate est Media Persona. 2. Inter Deum and Hominem Medians ex part
Officii. 3. Respectu Naturarum, est Medius.


The Mediator between God and Man, must be both for Nature and Condition a
Middle-Person, Ergo, etc.

3. A third Reason why the Son of God became Man, may be taken from

The Order of Divine Justice.

As the Nature of Divine Justice is such, that God cannot salva justitia
gratify sin with impunity, or suffer the least guilt to go unpunished, (for
that were Partiality) contrary to Socinus his soul-deceiving-fancy) so it
requires satisfaction to be made in the same Nature wherein the offense is
committed, and accordingly God does punish sin in the sinners Nature. True it
is, God might have given a Commission to an Angel to assume our Nature; yea,
and that Angel might have suffered in our Nature; But an Incarnate Angel could
never have satisfied wronged Justice. Therefore the Son of God interposing as
Surety and Mediator, between a just God and sinful Mankind, condescended to
become Man, that he might answer and satisfy the strictest demands of
Impartial Justice in the same Nature that he came to save. Had not Christ been
God, his sufferings could never have been by condignity meritoricus; had he not
been Man, they could never have been satisfactory to Justice. Therefore he
became (...), God-Man.

4. Lastly,

The Attributes of God, viz. The Love of God; The Goodness and Mercy of God;
His Power; His Wisdom, etc. shine clear in the Incarnation, as in a Glass.
Here they concur by way of Eminency, as in the Trinity's Masterpiece (so to
speak) and the very Flower of the Evangelical Economy. O how gloriously
conspicuous are they here, not only for kind, but even for Degrees! Now one
thing that the Son of God designed in taking upon him our Natures, was the
Illustration of the Glory of his Attributes. For these Reasons was the Son of
God made of a woman.

If any should enquire, What is the Reason, why the Son of God was made of a
woman in the fullness of the time (viz. sixteen hundred and sixty years ago)
rather then at any other time sooner, or later; This is answered before.

Thus I have fully opened and demonstrated that Evangelical Conclusion, viz.
That

The Son of God was in the fullness of the time, according to the infallible and
determinate counsel of God's will, made of a woman. Come we now to the last
thing proposed, viz.

The Application.

Use 1. Here is matter of Wonder and Admiration, and that fourfold, viz.

1. An Evangelical Mystery.

(...), The Incarnation of the Son of God; That (...).
Great Mystery of Godliness; What? That God should be made of a woman! Is not
that a Mystery? That God should become Man! The Immortal God, Mortal! That the
Maker of all things should be made! That God should be made what He made!

God sent forth his Son made of a woman. Here God was made of her whom He
made! Here Isa. 9. 6.
Mary's Everlasting Father became Mary's Son! These are R^ddles to flesh and
blood, Beloved!

God sent forth his Son made of a Virgin! Here is Miraculum in miraculo, a
Mystery in a Mystery; That the Son of God should become the Son of Man!
David's Lord, David's Son! This was a great Mystery, a case so intricate, that
it plunged and non-plusd the greatest Rabbis among the Pharisees, Matthew. 22.
42, 43, 44, 45, 46. But

That the Son of God should become the Son of a Virgin! -- Here is a Mystery
in a Mystery. That a Virgin should become a Mother! This was a Thing so
Mysterious, that Mary her self, the Royal Mother of our Lord, was a stranger to
the manner of the accomplishment of it, How shall this be (...).
? said she to the ( Angelical) Angel, Luke 1. 34. So strange, that (as worthy
Bishop Usher notes in his Emmanuel) it was proposed as a sign and wonder to
Unbelievers, seven hundred and forty years before it was accomplished, Isa. 7.
14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son! etc. What? For a Virgin to
conceive, and bear! etc. O! What Paradoxes be these? Angels wonder, Devils
tremble at these astonishing Verities. Finally,

The Personal Union of the Humane and Divine Natures in Christ, is a
stupendous Mystery, (that which S. Augustine did so much admire) and a thing
which is able to plunge the Celestial Intelligences themselves.)

There be two great Mysteries, viz.

1. One Nature in Three Persons.

2. Two Natures in One Person. And I dare (almost) be bold to say, That

Three in One in the B. Trinity, is not a greater Mystery, then Two in One in
Christ. O! Wonder Christians, wonder at this great Mystery of Godliness!
Wonder, That the Word should be made flesh! That the Son of God should be made
of a woman! I, of a Virgin! etc. I am persuaded that This is, and will be to
all eternity, matter of admiration and wonder in Heaven.

2. Evangelical Love.

Here is the most signal Demonstration of the Love of God to Mankind that is
possible. What? That the Son of the Living God should be made of a woman! etc.

This Love may be considered in a twofold respect, viz. As a

1. Superlative Love, and in its Dimensions. 2. Soparative and Distinguishing
Love.
1. This Love is superlative, and (for degrees) transcendent.

Such are the Dimensions of the Love of God, that it is (like God Himself)
Incomprehensible; it (...). Ephesians. 3. 19.
passes knowledge: O the height, depth, length, and breadth of this Love! It
is the work of Angels and Glorified Saints to admire it. That God should send
forth his Son made of a woman, was an unparalleled instance of Love. God SO
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son into the world, etc. John
3. 16. Note that particle ((...)) SO, Thereby is intimated, the very Maximum
Quod Sic of Love (and that may be termed without any Derogation from the Deity)
the very Maximum Quod Sic of Omnipotency: The highest pitch and Degree of Love,
that God could possibly express to Angels or Men. Such was God's Love to Man,
that He gave the Son of his Love unto Him; O what a Mirandum of Love did God
exhibit in that Deed of Gift! The Result of God's Love to Man was no less then
the great Emmanuel Isa. 7. 14. Matthew. 1. 23.
, God with us! If ever God did (as I may say) excel Himself, it was in this
same Love. Herein the B. Trinity is most Eminent.

Two of God's Holy Attributes were in this Evangelical Economy extended to (a
non-ultra) their Outmost, (be it spoken with reverence) viz.

1. Love. 2. Wisdom. (Of the latter of which hereafter.)
A greater Love then that which God did express in the Assumption of Our Nature
into Personal Union with the Godhead, is (I dare say, to the praise of rich
grace) ultra posse Divinum, an utter Impossibility with God; A thing Impossible
to Omnipotency it self; Hoc non potest Omnipotens. There be two great and
signal Loves of God to Man, observable from Scripture, viz.

1. The Love of God, in making Man in his own likeness. 2. The Love of God in
making Himself in Man's likeness.
God made Man like Himself in the first Man, Adam: God made Himself like Man in
the second Adam, Christ. There God was the Pattern, and Man the Pourtaicture;
Here Man was the Pattern, and God the Pourtraicture. Now Christians, the latter
is the greater Love. In the former God communicates Himself to the Creature But
it the latter, God does by an infinite condescension assume the Creature into
Personal Union with the Deity. That God should take upon Him the Humane Nature,
intimates greater Love, then that Man should partake of the 2 Pet, 1. 4.
Divine Nature. O Matchless Instance of Affection! Beloved, Heaven it self
could not answer the demands of a soul touching a greater Love then this is.
Quo Nite Dei? Quo tua flagravit Charitas? Quo crevit tua Benignitas? etc. Aug.
l^b. Med. cap. 7. page 698. Tom. 9. Basil. 1569.
Whither? O Son of God! Whither flamed thy Charity? Whither increased thy
Benignity? Whither reached thy Love? Whither amounted thy Compassion? etc. Here
we may say much, and speak but little.

2. This Love of God is a Distinguishing Love. Signal is that Discrimination,
which this Love has made between Angels and Men, in the favor of Mankind.
The Son of God was made of a Woman; so that God became Man; but we do not read
that God became an Angel. God took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but he
took upon him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. Angels did eminently partake of
the Divine Nature, (that is) of God's Communicable Graces and Excellencies) but
God did not partake of the Angelical Nature; But

As God made Man like Himself in the first Creation, so he made Himself like
man in the Gospel-work of the Incarnation, etc.

God sent forth his Son made of a woman. The Personal Union of the Humane
Nature with the Deity, was a Capital and Distinguishing Honor conferred upon
Mankind. O highly honored Man! Angels are not fit Competitors with thee. I
challenge the whole * nine Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Principalities,
Dominions, Thrones, Cherubims, Seraphims.
Orders of them. What Angel can plead Consanguinity to the Son of God? This Man
can do. What Angel can say that of Christ, which Adam said of Eve; Genesis 2. 23.
This is Bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh? This Man can say. Thy Nature,
O Man! is Personally One with the Godhead in Christ; The Angelical Nature is
not thus honored.

There is a Royal Dignity conferred both upon the Natures and upon the Persons
of Men.

1. Upon their Natures; for

Our Nature being Personally United to the Deity in Christ, partakes of the
Legislative Power of Heaven, and is Entitled to the Crown Royal thereof. The
Deity and Humanity of Christ (though distinct Natures, yet) wear not distinct
Crowns, but are (as has been often said) Personally One in King Christ. Now,
the Father and the Son divide neither Crowns nor Scepters, but (jointly)
exercise one and the same Jurisdiction. The Man Christ is the King of Angels. O
what a Pre-eminence of Nature is that!

The Humane Nature, is by virtue of its Personal Union with the Godhead,
promoted (as I may say) to Regal Authority over the Angels.

2. Upon their Persons; for

Men may be said to be of the Blood Royal of Heaven, and are (so to speak) more
nearly related to the Imperial Crown of Heaven, then Angels. Now Beloved, what
is this other then the fruit of a Distinguishing Love?

This Distinguishing Love of God may be further illustrated from this
consideration; namely, That Angels are Spiritual; and men, Corporeal
Substances; so that there was a greater conformity in Nature between God and
Angels, (for both are Spirits) then between God and Men; Now that God should
condescend to assume to himself a Body, rather then a Spirit, was merely from
the discriminating Love of God. What? And must Clay be encircled with the Rays
of Divine Majesty? Would not the Angelical Nature have been a more proper
Receptacle for the Deity Alienum erat a Natura and Divinitate (Dei) sanguinem
and carnem suscipere, propter nos autem ea quae sibi erant aliena suscepit,, vt
domesticos sibi saceret, qui sueromus alioni per peccatum. Origin. in Esaium,
Hom. 7.
then Dust and Ashes, that inferior piece of the Creation?

Such was the Love of God to Mankind, that he Illos neglexit Illos dilexit.
passed by the fallen Angels, and took upon him the Nature of fallen Man, being
made of a woman.

Hence Angels and not Men are Devils to day; O what an Impression should this
make upon us! What? That Man by the Order of Creation, Satan's Inferior,
should be honored with Consanguinity to the Son of God, and near Relation to
the B. Irinity! And that Satan once an Angel of Light, should be the first
Inhabitant of outer darkness! That the Angels which kept not their first
estate, should be left irrecoverably in their lost and accursed estate, and be
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness! Jude 6.
Whereas the Son of God has graciously condescended to unite to Himself the
Nature of fallen Man, that Man might be recovered out of a miserable estate,
and restored to a better estate then that from which he had fallen! Is not that
a distinguishing Love? Though I could speak with the Tongues of Men and of
Angels, yet should I fail in this so amazing an inquisation: This is Soraphical
Divinity, Christians! Eternity it self is little enough to admire, and with
praise to Comment upon this Theme of God's superlative and distinguishing love
to Mankind, in.

3. Evangelical Humility.

That the Son of the living God should be made of a woman, was the greatest
Instance of Humility that is imaginable, Christ's Humiliation was gradual;
there were these two steps in it, viz.

1. The Assumption of our Nature. 2. Obedience, Active and Passive in that
Nature.
These were the two gradual parts of the Lord Christ's Self-denial; but the
former was the greater of the two.

That God should become Man, was a greater argument of Self-denial in Christ,
then that God-Man should become Obedient (even) unto death; in that there is an
infinitely greater distance between God and man (in respect of Being) then
there is between Man and death; (for God is of an Infinite Being, and Man (but)
of a finite and limited capacity,) whereas (in a sense) it is as Natural for
Man to die as to live.

That He who for Nature was co-essential with God, should become co-essential
with man!

That He, who for Dignity was coequal with God, should become a Isa. 53. 11.
Mat. 12. 28. Phil. 2. 7.
servant.

That He who for Time and Duration was coeternal with God, should condescend
in the fullness of the time to be made of a woman!

That Christ should be made of Her whose Maker he was! Is not that Humility?

That the Incomprehensible Majesty of Heaven, * whom 1 Kings 8. 27.
the Heaven of heavens cannot contain, should stoop to nine months confinement
in the womb of a poor Virgin!

That the Glory of God should fill a Tabernacle of Clay!

That * the High and Lofty One should pitch in dust and Isa. 57. 15.
ashes! That the Sun of Divine Glory should suffer an Eclipse by the
Interposition of Earth! O what a stupendous condescension was that! Beloved,
Heaven seemed in this to have been wholly devoted to Man. The whole Trinity,
(ever admired be Free Grace) seems to have been Self-denied here; The Father
was (in a manner) denied to his Dear and only Begotten Son; and the Son to
Himself; to his Connatural Glory (which he suffered to be clouded for a time)
in condescending to become Man; as he was to life it self, in condescending to
die like a Man; though he thought it not robbery to be equal with God, yet he
made himself of no reputation (he degraded himself) and took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, etc. Phil. 2. 6, 7. Quo nate
Dei? Quo tua descendit humilitas? etc. Aug. lib. Med. cap. 7. page 698. Tom. 9.
Basil. 1569.
Whither! O Son of God! Whither descended thy Humility? I have been proud, and
thou bast been humbled; etc.

4. Evangelical Wisdom.

That the Savior of mankind should be the Son of God, made of a woman, is an
Instance of astonishing Wisdom. What?

1. That God should contrive such a method of salvation, as that he could
punish sin, and (yet) spare the sinner! What is that other then the plot of
infinite Wisdom? God did punish sin in the Nature of sinners, and (yet) did
spare the persons of sinners; Justice received satisfaction in our Nature, and
(yet) Mercy was glorified in the salvation of our Nature; and (which is a
glorious soul-refreshing truth) the same Justice which obliged God to punish
sin in our Nature, does now oblige him to pardon sin in our Persons.

2. That God should at once glorify both Justice and Mercy in a Savior, is
the memorable product of Divine Wisdom. Those two Attributes, viz. Justice and
Mercy, are both at once glorified in Christ; Justice, In that God did
indispensably require satisfaction in order to the sinners salvation; Mercy, In
that God did from an impulse of free Love to sinners, provide a Surety and
Mediator in order to satisfaction; God satisfied Himself in Himself: So that
here is a sweet Attemperation (so to speak) of Justice and Mercy. Those two
Attributes (however they may seem to represent God with a contrary Aspect, yet)
are (as it were) reconciled in Christ; Here Mercy is acted in the severest
piece of Justice; never was there a more severe Act of Justice, then that God's
own Son should become a sacrifice, rather then Justice should not be satisfied.
Again, Never was there a more signal Act of Mercy, then that God's own Son
should become a sacrifice, rather then Mercy should not be glorified. O the
Wonder-working Wisdom of God!

Had God called a General Assembly of the Peers of Heaven, those Celestial
Intelligences, they could never have devised such a method of salvation for
poor sinners, as God has in love to their souls, contrived in his own Son,
made of a woman; O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God!

Thus I have endeavored to display matter of Wonder and thankful Admiration.
Beloved, these are things which the very glorious Angels desire to look (and
pry) into. * 1 Pet. 1. 12. (...).
Angelical Speculations! And I dare say, that it will be a great part of the
work of Angels and Saints in glory, to celebrate those Mirabilia Dei, and
Evangelical wonders, with praises, to all eternity.

Reprehension.

Was the Son of God in the fullness of the time made of a woman? This may serve
sharply to reprove two sorts of persons.

1. The Jew. 2. The Judaizing Christian.
1. The Jew.

Although it is palpably manifest, and clear (as the light) from the infallible
Oracle of Gospel, the visible accomplishment of Prophetical Predictions, etc.
That the Son of God is already (long ago) come in the flesh; that the Messiah,
the promised Seed of the woman, is come; yet Jews (poor wretches!) will not
believe it. To this day do they continue in obstinate incredulity, and a vain
expectation of the Messiah their King; and so (alas! alas!) through a vain
expectation of the Savior, they miss of a Savior. That which my soul most
pities them for, is, That during these sixteen hundred years darkness and
desertion, hundreds of thousands of them (yea, for ought I know) as many
hundred thousands as there are centuries of years, have dyed irrecoverably in
their sins! (But just is God in all his ways) And if God in mercy to their
souls, hasten not their Conversion, and the re-ingrafting of those * Native
Branches into the common Root, Romans 11. 21. 24.
(Christ;) how many thousands more may yet perish, the Lord knows! For (oh
Lord!) they dye daily! Ah! Thus it fares with them, who (once) were God's
peculiar people! his Portion! the dearly Beloved of his soul!

Poor Nation! Whose sweet sap and juice,
Our Cyens have purloyn'd, and left you dry:
Whose streams we got by the Apostles sluice;
And use in Baptism, while ye pine and dye:
Who by not keeping once, became a Debtor;
And now by keeping lose the Letter.
O that my prayers! mine, alas!
O that some Angel might a Trumpet sound;
At which the Church falling upon her face,
Should cry so loud, until the Trump were drowned,
And by that cry, of her dear Lord obtain
That your sweet sap might come again!
The Metrical Apostrophe of a Mr. George Herbert of Cambridge, in his Sacred
Poems.
holy Poet to that Nation

It is observable of that people, that by adhering to the Law, they lose the
Gospel; by cleaving to Moses, the Typical Messiah, they miss of the Messiah,
the true Moses. Were I able by my voice to reach the land of Jewry, or the
dispersed Jews wherever they are scattered as forlorn Vagabonds, to day, I
would a little expostulate with them. Oh, obstinate and incredulous Jews! Are
ye in Covenant with perdition? Are ye resolved to perish in Unbelief? But, will
ye not admit of Gospel (which presents us with this great Evangelical truth,
viz. That in the fullness of the time, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman?
the only true Messiah) What? Are ye in league with Moses? In love with
servitude and bondage? The Prophesies concerning the Messiah are fulfilled; yea
(as I have showed above) the Messiah his own Prophesies and Personal
Predictions are fulfilled: O that ye would learn the belief of the Truth, from
the very Prophesied Ruins of your Temple, City, Laws, whole State, Policy,
and Commonwealth! Ah! poor Jew! The Lord convince you, that there is no
possibility of Life for you, but in him who dyed by you! Ye cannot be saved but
through him, whom by wicked hands ye have crucified and slain: The only
(possible) way and method of salvation, is that very blood which (you are
guilty of, and) has these sixteen hundred years layn upon your heads through
your crucifying of the Lord of glory; and that direful Imprecation, His blood
be upon us and our children, wherein the Curse of that execrable sin of
bloodshed is entailed upon your Posterity! And, O how sad is it, when Persons
are guilty of that very blood which alone is effectual for the pardon of guilt!
for peace with God! for the salvation of precious souls! etc.

2. The Judaizing Christian.

By Judaizing Christians, I understand those that contend for Ceremonies in
point of Worship, in a professed Christian Church: For a Ceremonial kind of
Worship being peculiar to the Jewish Church, (as wholly Typical,) it follows
by necessary Consequence, That an Introduction of Ceremonies in point of
Worship (into the Christ an Church) is a Reduction of Judaisme. Now such are
liable to a just Reproof from hence, namely, That the Son of God was in the
fullness of the time made of a woman. (Where Adulterate Rome, with her
Jewish-Popish Trumpery, falls shrewdly under the lash, (only what pity is it
that so strong a weapon is in so weak a hand?) For the Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies being but Shaddows and Typical Adumbrations of the promised Messiah,
must needs be abrogated now, since the Messiah, the Body and Substance
prefigured by them, is come: When the Body is come, the Shadow evanisheth;
Types cease in the Antitype. So that to retain Jewish Ceremonies in the
Christian Church, were Antichristian Judaisme; for that were (virtually) to
deny that the Son of God is come in the flesh.

I lay down no other (as to the sense) then what a great D. Downam, in his
Treatise of Christian Liberty.
* Doctor of the Formalists has asserted before me. The Ceremonial Rites
(says he, they are his own words) because they were principally ordained to
prefigure Christ, are so abolished, that it is not lawful for Christians to
observe them; for that were to deny that Christ is come. (I confess I am of his
judgment) and he cites S. Augustine, Contra Faustum Manich. lib. 19. cap. 18.
Ea non observant Christiani, per quae Christus promittebatur, nec adhuc
promittuntur, quia jam impleta sunt. Christians observe not those things by
which Christ was promised; neither are they as yet promised, because they are
already fulfilled.

For my own part (it is true, I am less then the least of ten thousand, and
therefore no wonder that men in this Learned Age overlook me, as little
objects which escape the sense, however) it is a conclusion with me, that
Ceremonies in point of Worship, are altogether unlawful in Gospel Times; since
Christ, who was typified by them, is come; (for when the fullness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman:) as (blessed be God) we
read, preach, hear, and believe to day. I do not now plead either Conscience or
Covenant that forbidden Argument; But My ground is Scripture-Evidence. For,

Was not this God's great design in sending forth his Son made of a woman,
namely, That he might redeem them that were under the Law? The Jewish Church
was subject to the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses. As 1. A Yoke in
respect of her servile-state. And 2. A Schoolmaster, and Rudiments, in respect
of her Infant-state; (and hence the Apostle calls them, The * Elements of the
(...).
world, v. 3.) But the Son of God did in the fullness of the time, (when the
Church was grown up to maturity and an adult age) take upon him our Nature, and
was made under the Law, that he might redeem his Church from that bondage and
subjection. Exemption from Legal Rites and Ceremonies, whether we consider them
1. As a Pedagogie; Or 2. As a Yoke, being that part of Christ's purchase which
is peculiar to the Christian Church. And

What other is the drift of the blessed Apostle in the Context, then to prove
the same? -- When we were children (says he) that is, the Church in her
Infant-state and minority,) we were in bondage under the elements of the world)
that is, a Mosaical Pedagogie of Puerile Ceremonies and Rituals) v. 3. But when
the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, etc.
And hence it is that he so roundly checks the Galatians (a Judaizing people in
many things, as appears) v. 9, 10, 11. But now (says he) after that ye have
known God, or rather are known of God, How turn ye again to the (...).
weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? Ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years; I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you labor in vain. What? (would be say) Are ye in love with
your Bonds? Will ye return to your first Rudiments and A B C? A notable
Sarcasme! And hence is that Cautelary Advice of the Apostle to the Colossians,
chap. 2. v. 17, 18. Let no man judge (or condemn) you in meat, or in drink, or
in respect of a holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which
are a shadow of the things to come, but the Body is of Christ. Legal
Observances, and Festival Times were mere shaddows of Christ to come. He is the
Body that was prefigured by them. Now this Body being come, to what purpose are
shaddows? Oh! that men should contend so eagerly for shaddows!

Once more,

Carnal Ordinances, Rites, and Ceremonies, were imposed upon the Jews. (...),
until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9. 9, 10. (O what pity is it that they
should be pursued by professed Christians instead of a Reformation!) Now the
time of Reformation, was the time of the Churches Emancipation and deliverance
from these carnal Ordinances, Rites, and Ceremonies by her Redeemer, the Son of
God, made of a woman. In a word, Ceremonial Worship in a Christian Church,
seems (to me) to be contrary to God's design in coming in the flesh, not to
say, to the design of Gospel.

But let us examine what the Ceremonialists say for themselves.

Ceremonies (say they) be of two sorts, viz.

1. Typical. 2. Symbolical.
1. Typical Ceremonies (say they) being ordained to presigure Christ, the
promised Messiah, are by him abolished, and (by consequence) unlawful in the
New Testament times; But

2. Symbolical and Mystically-significant Ceremonies may very lawfully be
continued in the Christian Church, as useful for edification (besides Order and
Decency;) (by Dr Burgess of the lawfulness of kneeling. etc. cap. 17. page 52.
virtue of some spiritual signification, which they attribute to them, calling
them sacred signs of spiritual Mysteries.) Thus the Surplice (for instance)
being (say they) a Symbolical Ceremony, as that which signifies the Ministers
pureness and Innocence, may be lawfully (yea profitably) used (even) by the
Christian Clergy.

Answ. It is not my purpose to debate the lawfulness of those
Mystical-significant Ceremonies. I leave that to be learned of those, of whom I
may learn. The Learned Author of the Dispute against the English-Popish
Ceremonies, has by diverse arguments disproved it, etc. Only,

I shall presume to speak my own thoughts (having respect to the Text) in a few
particulars, which I am humbly bold to offer to the Ceremony-mongers for
satisfaction.

1. If Types and Legal shaddows be abolished by Christ, (the true Messiah) who
was (as has been often said) prefigured by the same, and therefore is called
John 1. 17.
The Truth in answer to Types; and Col. 2. 17, 18. Praesente viritate Typus and
Vmbra cessavit, Origin in Jes. Nave. cap 13. Hom. 17.
The Body in answer to shaddows, which they do and must acknowledge; Then I
desire for Conscience sake to be resolved, in order to three things, namely,
what ground there is for

1. The Introduction of Altars. 2. The nice observance of Holy Days, (I
approve of a holy observance of days.) 3. Organical Music in the Gospel
Church?
1. As touching Altar.

Who knows not that the Altar (both That of Incense, Exodus 30. and That of
Burnt-offering, Exodus 27.) was an eminent Type of Christ? I dare say there was
not a more Altar suit prius, and sacrificia celebrabantur, sed ut venit verus
Agnus, qui seipsum Hostiam obtulit Deo, cuncta illa velut pro tempore posita
cessaverunt. Origin. in Levit. cap. 16. Hom. 10. Cum in adventu Salvatoris
nostri Dei e Coelis descendens veritas, de terra orta est, Vmbra and exemplaria
ceciderunt. Cecidit enim Jerusalem, cecidit Templum, Altar sublatum est, etc.
Id. in Jos. Nave. cap. 13. Hom. 17.
memorable Type under the Law, then the Altar was. Now then, if Types be
abolished by Christ, why not Altars? Under the Old Testament (says Hospin. de
Templis, de orig. Altarium.
Hospinian) there were two Altars, and both did prefigure Christ; but because
all Types and shaddows are past and evanished, Nulla Altaria deinceps in
Ecclesia, excitari sen erigi debebant; It is unlawful afterward to erect
Altars in the Church; and he quotes the Prophet Isaiah, prophesying of the
Kingdom of Christ, chap. 17. v. 7. At that day shall a man look to his Maker,
and his eyes shall have respect to the holy One of Israel; and he shall not
look to the Altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his
fingers have made, etc.

2. As touching Festival days.

Those also were under the Law Figurative and Pedagogical, as is clear from the
letter; Let no man (says our Apostle) judge you in meat, or in drink, or in
respect of a holy day, etc. (...), which are a Shadow of things to come, but
the Body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17, 18. Those were Legal shaddows and
adumbrations of Christ, the Body; therefore they are abrogated. Quis nesciat,
ubi jam est corpus ibi umbram desinere, says Zanchy upon the place; Who knows
not that shaddows cease and evanish when the Body is come? But

It is objected, That Jewish Festivities only are abolished, because those were
Typical; but Christian Festivities are warrantable, etc.

Answ. It is well observed by Hospin. Do Fest. Christ. cap. 2.
Hospinian, That Christianorum festa ab hominibus tantum, Judaeorum vero, a Deo
fuerunt instituta. Christian Festivals were ordained by Men only, but the
Judaical by God himself. Now if those of God's own Institution which he
ordained for his own honor be abolished by Himself. 1. How presumptuous is the
Papist which dares to press the observation of feasts of their own devising,
and that for the honor of Men like themselves? Nay 2. It seems not a little
strange to me, That when God has abolished what he himself did institute, Men
should presume to re-institute the same. God is willing that Festivals should
evanish as mere shaddows; and is Man unwilling? But The Papist loves to
supererogate.

It is replied,

They do not observe their Festivities after the manner that the Jews did, to
whom they were Pedagogical, and mere Figures.

Answ. It is remarkable that the Apostle does sharply check the Galatians for
observing of days, and months, and times, and years, Gal. 4. 10. Now, who
does doubt but that the Galatians (before whose eyes Jesus Christ was Gal, 3.
1. See Cartwright against the Rhemist, on Gal. 4. 10.
evidently set forth) did believe that the Son of God was come in the flesh? So
that we cannot imagine them to have observed those days, months, years, the
Anniversary Solemnities, and other Festival Times, as Figures and Adumbrations
of Christ to come; but rather, as Memorials and Commemorative signs that he
was already come, and yet behold here they are taxed as culpable! Ergo etc.

3. As touching Organical Music in the Worship of God.

That was also Pedagogical and Figurative; and therefore peculiar to the Jewish
Church: What ground is there then for the retention of it in the Christian and
Gospel Church? Since (as is granted even by those that are sticklers for it)
all Types and Figures are abolished.

Two things are incumbent upon me here, viz.

1. To evidence that Organs in the Worship of God were Types. 2. To instance in
the Antitype, or the thing (particularly) typified thereby.
As touching the former.

That Organs in the Worship of God in the Old Testament times, were Types,
Figures, and merely Jewish, may appear from the impregnable testimonies of
Classical Authors, (whom I have consulted in the thing.)

1. Justin Martyr that ancient Father (who lived in Justin Martyr Quaest. 107.
the second Age and Century of the Christian Church,) says, That the Primitive
Christian Church did explode that Pedagogical Custom of Organical Music in
the worship of God, as rather beseeming (...), Children, and the Infant-State
of the Church, then the Gospel Church; and retained Vocal singing.

2. * Chrysostom (who lived about two hundred years (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 150.
after him) says, That Organs in Divine worship were permitted to the Jews
because of their weakness; and he makes a moral Application of it to us under
the Gospel. As (says he) the Jews praised God with all Instruments of Music,
so Christians are commanded to praise him with all the members of their Bodies;
Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Hands, etc. (...). They are his own words on Psalm. 150.)
then Man himself becomes (as it were) a manifold Harp to God.

3. Isidorus Peleusiotus his Disciple, asserts the very * Isidor. Pelous. lib.
1. Epist. 457. lib. 2. Epist. 176.
same thing, and puts the Jewish Music (in Divine worship) into the same rank
with the Jewish Sacrifices, which who can deny to have been Typical? Since
(says he) the Lord permitted to the Jews their bloody Sacrifices because of
the Infancy and Puerile state of that Church; (...). Why should thou wonder
that he permitted to them also the Harp and Psaltery?

4. S. Nemo se convertat ad Organa Theatrica quod ei jubetur in se habet; sicut
alibi dicitur. In me Deus vota tua, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 32. Conc. 1.
Augustines testimony is very remarkable, Let no man (says he) betake himself
to Theatrical Organs, (to wit, in the worship of God) thou have within thy self
(O man) what God requires of thee; according to that which elsewhere is said,
Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render praises unto thee, Psalm. 56. 12.

But further,

5. Aquin. 2. 2 de Quaest. 91. Art. 2.
Aquinas asserts the very same thing, Instrumenta Musica, sicut Citharas and
Psalteria, non assumit Ecclesia in Divinas lauds, ne videatur Judaizare. The
Christian Church makes not use of Musical Instruments, as the Harp or Psaltery,
in the celebration of Divine praises, lest she should seem to Judaize. And
again says he, In veteri Testamento usus erat talium instrumentorum, tum quia,
populus erat magis durus and carnalis, etc. Tum quia hujusmodi instrumenta
corporalia aliquid figurabant. The Old Testament Church made use of such
Musical Instruments, both because she was more obdured and carnal, etc. and
also because those Instruments did typifie and prefigure somewhat. Mark that.
Hence Cardinal Cajetan commenting upon that Article, observes, That the Church
did not use Organical Music in the days of Aquinas.

* Hospinian, after that he has cited diverse Authors, Hosp. de Templis, de
Orig. Organ.
and noted many things concerning the first use and introduction of an Organ
into the Christian Church, has these words; Colligimus ex his Organorum
hujusmodi usum, veteri and Apostolicae Ecclesiae prorsus incognitum seroque
inventum and receptum fuisse. We gather (says he) from those, that the use of
Organs was altogether unknown to the Ancient Apostolic Church; and that they
are but lately invented and received into the Church; and he brings in Cardinal
Cajetan confessing the same thing, and withal adding, That for confirmation
thereof, the Romish Church uses no Organs before the Pope; and Suarez Tom. 2.
de Vi^t. and Stat. Relig. lib. 4. cap. 8. number. 5.
Suarez that Jesuitical Champion gives the reason of it: Musical Instruments
are not used in the Pope's Chapel, because (says he) the use of them, non
tani gravis judicatur, is not judged to savor of gravity enough. Ah! That
British Cathedrals should come short of Popish Chapels in point of gravity!

(The same Suarez speaks of a Pope that did by Edict * Suarez ib. viz. Tom. 2.
de Verit. and Stat. Rel. lib. 4. cap. 8. number. 1.
so bid Organical Music in the Worship of God, and he brings in Navarrus
affirming the unlawfulness of using Organs at Mass, or other Divine service, by
virtue of that Prohibition.

Baron. Anal. Eccles. ann. Christ. 60. page 578.
Caesar Baronius that great Popish Annalist affirms the same thing that
Hospinian upon the matter, Sane quidem Musica Instrumenta, haud antiquitus in
Ecclesiam introducta and recepta esse videntur, says he, Musical Instruments
seem not to have been received into the Church in the Primitive times. And he
quotes Justin Martyr asserting Justin. q. 107.
the same thing. Nay,

Bellarm. lib. 1. de bonis oper. cap. 17.
Bellarmine himself, that great light of the Romish Firmament, confesses that
Organical Music, was at first introduced into the Christian Church in the
days of So says Balaeus an English Bishop according to Hospinian de Tem. de
orig. Organ.
Pope Vitalian, Ann. Christ. 660. according to Platina. Or (says he) if we
will credit Almoinus, (lib. 4. de gestis Francorum, cap. 114.) not until the
days of Lodovicus Pius, 820. years after our Lord's Incarnation, and that by
the indu^try of one Georgius Venetus a Priest, (as I find in H^^^nian de
Templis, de origin Organorum; where he ^^^teth Aventinus, affirming the same
thing ( lib. 4.) t^^t Almoinus.

Thus I have made a Collection of Testimonies (having perused my Authors
severally.) From which it is evident, that Organical Music in the Worship of
God, was under the Law a part of the Jewish Pedagogie, and figurative, and (by
consequence) Peculiar to the Jewish Church.

I might have argued from the Authentic Example of Christ and his Apostles,
whom we find singing Hymns and Psalms; Christ and his Disciples sung an
Hymn, Matthew. 26. 30. They had not an Organ there, at least we read of none.
Paul and Silas sung praises unto God, Acts 16. 25. Vocal praise is the Gospel
praise. This Christ commends to the Apostles, and they to their Christian
Flocks and Churches (respectively) as Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. Col. 3. 16. James 5. 13.
But let our Musical Zelots instance, when and where Christ or his Apostles did
either command or commend Organical Music to the Gospel Church if they can. But

I was willing to trace them in their own Element, for, they are professed
Antiquaries, and many of them (I doubt) Vid. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 33.
Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 4. Hierom. in Ephesians. 5. Hospin. de Temp. de orig. Organ.
Erasm. in 1 Cor. 14, Zepper. de Polit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 13. Muscul. Epist.
Dedicat. ante Comment. in Psalmos, etc.
more ready to interpret Orthodoxy by the Fathers then by the SON. If
notwithstanding those pregnant testimonies, men remain obstinate, I can but
turn them over to the lash of the more sober sort of Papists, as Erasmus,
Cajetan, etc. who have both lamented and sharply inveighed against the sad (and
too too frequent) profanation of Divine Worship, by their Organical and
Theatrical Music; (quae carnis potius voluptati, quam Spiritus aedificationi
inservit. Lactanct. lib. 2. cap. 24.

As touching the latter.

The Antitype. That which was prefigured by Organical Music in the
Old Testament Church.

Were I worthy to speak my own thoughts in the thing, I would say, That

Legal Adumbrations and Types might be conceived to have had a threefold
reference, viz. to

1. Christ Personal. 2. Christ Mystical. 3. The Glory of Gospel-Ministery.
1. As they did respect Christ Personal, they had a more especial reference,
either to his Incarnation, or to his Offices, or to his Death, etc. and
accordingly were abrogated as to their Typical signification.

2. As they did respect Christ Mystical, that is, the Church (consisting of her
Head and Members mystically united) they were (according to the successive
promulgation of the Gospel, and Plantation of the Christian Church) gradually
abolished, (even) as to their continuance and observation. And hence S. Paul
did at the beginning, and (as it were) the first dawning of Gospel, in the
Gentiles Hemisphere, Circumcise Timothy (though by his Fathers side a Greek)
because of the Infirmity of the Jews, Acts 16. 3. But afterward when the
Gospel was more generally published, and the Christian Church more ripened, he
would not Circumcise Titus, Gal. 2. 3. Now

3. Organs, and other Musical Instruments (we may include the silver Trumpets,
Numb. 10.) in the Jewish Church, may (as I humbly conceive) be said to have
prefigured the Glory of Gospel Ministry. That Organical Music was under the
Old Testament Figurative and Typical, is I presume (now) apparent; and why it
may not be said to typifie the Glory of Evangelical Administration, I cannot
learn.

Why may not Organs, etc. be said to have prefigured the same thing that the
Silver Trumpets did? But the Silver Trumpets did (if we credit the Significant
praedicationem Evangelicam toto Orb resonantem. Cornel. a lap. in Number. 10.
(...). Cyrill. in Exodus lib. 3. page 323. vid. page 322.
Learned) prefigure Evangelical Preaching and Ministry. Ergo etc.

And

What could be more properly typified by the Musical sound in the Jewish
Church, then the Psalm. 89. 15.
joyful sound in the Christian Church, even the glorious sound of the
Everlasting Gospel? etc.

Thus I have endeavored to show, both 1. That Organical Music under the Old
Testament was a Type. And 2. What was the Antitype; Now, since it was Typical,
why is it introduced into the Gospel Church?

Possibly it will be said that an Altar, Organ, Candlesticks, etc. are retained
in the Christian, (though they were Typical in the Jewish) Church, but not as
Typical. And then 1. What Type was there under the Law, which may not (as well
as those) be received into the Gospel Church, so it be not received as a Type?
Why not a Tabernacle as well as an Altar? (For my part, I would fain learn,
what reason there is for the one more then for the other.) Why not a Brazen
Serpent? etc. Again, 2. They must be at the expense of coining a new
distinction, (for that of Typical and Symbolical Ceremonies will not bear them
out) which we have not heard of as yet.

This is my first answer.

2. Membra coincidunt.

The Members of that distinction of Ceremonies, Typical and Symbolical, are
co-incident. Even those Ceremonies which are said to be (and retained as)
Symbolical, were under the Law Typical. Now this is contrary to the Rules of a
right Division.

To instance. The Surplice and other Vestments are retained as Symbolical and
significant Ceremonies; for a Mystical signification is attributed to them; the
Surplice being a sign (as is said) of the Minister's Purity, etc. Now the
Priestly and Levitical Garments, to which these answer, were all Typical.
Multiplex illa Vestium Sacerdotalium distinctio and varietas, erat in Veteri
Testamento Typica; Veritate autem exhibita quid amplius Typos requirunt? says
Syntag. Theolog. lib. 9. cap. 38.
Amandus Polanus. The distinction of Priestly Vestments under the Law was
Typical, but the Truth and Antitype being exhibited, why do men contend for
Types any longer?

Christ's threefold Office was shaddowed by the High Priest's Apparel; (as is
observed by Polanus, and others) viz. His Kingly Office, by the Mitre which the
High Priest did wear upon his Head: His Priestly Office by the Plate of pure
Gold, whereon was engraven Holiness to the Lord; and the Ephod and Breast Plate
whereon were engraven the Names of the twelve Tribes. His Prophetical Office by
the Vrim and Thummim in the Breast Plate, from which he answered as from an
Oracle, as also by the Bells and Pomegranates; the one typing the sound of his
Doctrine; the other the sweet savor of his Life. As for the four extraordinary
Garments which the High Priest wore only once a year, to wit, when he entered
into the Holy of Holies upon the Propitiation day, which were for color white,
(and therefore called Vestimenta alba, (...)
white Garments) and for number four, viz. 1. The linen Breeches. 2. The
linen Coat. 3. The linen Girdle. 4. The linen Mitre, Lev. 16. 4. These (give
me leave to say it) were not so much signs of Aarons; as Levitical Shaddows
and Types of the Lord Christ (that immaculate Lamb of God, the Holy and Just
One) his Purity and Innocence, the holiness of his Person, and the
Inculpableness of his Life; He was our holy, harmless, and undefiled High
Priest, Heb. 7. 26.

Amandus Polanus indeed says, that S. Paul in describing and prescribing the
Christians Panoplia and complete Armor, Ephesians. 6. does allude to the
Sacerdotal Vestments under the Law, viz. the Mitre, Breast Plate, Girdle, etc.
But if the Christian Clergymen ground the Mystical significancy of Vestments
upon this, I know no reason why the Laity, and every Private Christian may not
challenge as good a right to the use of Mitre, Girdle, Surplice, etc. as they,
since it is incumbent upon every Christian to put on the whole armor of God,
etc.

From what has been said it may appear, that the Priestly Vestments under the
Law, were Levitical shaddows, and Typical; and yet those under the Gospel are
said to be Symbolical only, and Mystically significant; then the same
Ceremonies are both Typical and Symbolical: Now if they were Typical, why are
they not abolished? If they were Symbolical according to our Bishops (else why
are they retained in the Gospel Church?) and (yet) Typical according to
Polanus, and (as it is evident) then it is needful that they study another
distinction then that of Typical and Symbolical Ceremonies; saying, that
Typical Ceremonies are all abolished, but Symbolical Ceremonies may be retained
in the Gospel Church.

In conclusion,

I desire to be resolved, what is the Mystical signification of a Mitre in a
Christian Bishop? Not Dominion (I 1 Pet. 5. 3.
hope) over God's heritage? O! Leave that to the Antichristian Bishop of Rome,
who is taught of his Father the John 8. 44.
Devil to usurp power over God's Inheritance, and to Lord it (as much as he
can) over Consciences, yea, over Crowns too, (but surely it was not so from the
beginning, that the Crown should be subject to the Mitre). Now

The High Priest's Mitre, was (as I have showed above) a Type of Christ's Regal
Authority and Kingly Office.

This is my second answer to that distinction of Typical and Symbolical
Ceremonies; more I might say, but I forbear.

Only give me leave to add, That a Ceremonial Worship is abolished, not only
Christi CORPORE, but even Christi ORE; not only by the Body, but even by the
Doctrine of Christ, and his Personal teaching in the days of his flesh; The
hour comes (said he to the woman of Samaria) and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, John 4. 23. By
worshipping the Father in spirit and in truth, we are to understand a Now and
Evangelical manner of Worship.

Here then is principally intimated; Not

1. The Indispensable Need of the Concurrence of God's Spirit with a soul in
Divine Worship. Nor

2. Sincerity, or the Absolute necessity of joining the Inner with the Outward
Man, the Soul with the Body in Divine Worship; for, did not the Religious and
Devout Jews, (yea, and for ought I know, many Samaritans) worship God thus,
viz. by the special assistance of God's Spirit, and by a sincere joining of the
Soul with the Body in his Worship, before? (it were an uncharitable part for
me, or others to think otherwise) Now Christ does here mean some New manner of
Worship, by worshipping the Father in spirit and in truth; Woman (says he)
believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem worship the Father, v. 21. But etc. v. 23.

That then which is chiefly intended here, is,

3. The Utter Abrogation of the Old Carnal and Ceremonial Worship, as a thing
merely Typical (worshipping in Spirit, being opposed thereunto, as Carnal;
worshipping in truth being opposed thereunto, as Typical) and the substitution
of a New, and Evangelical Worship, free from Jewish Ceremonies.

It is probable that the Ceremonians will say,

Though we make use of Ceremonies in Divine Worship, yet ours is not a
Ceremonial worship; for we place not worship in the Ceremonies.

Answ. 1. Holiness is placed in the Ceremonies, Ergo Worship. lib. 5 s. 69.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy, says expressly, that some days ought to
be with men more holy then others; Contrary to de Fest. Christ cap. 2.
Hospinian, who affirms that one day is not holier then another, in it self,
else (says he) the Heathens are not to be blamed, who, attributing events to
inevitable fate, distinguish of lucky and unlucky days. But what shall I say?
Are not men's adulterate practices shrewd symptoms thereof? as, Their
Incurvations and cringings before an Altar of stone; a nice and superstitious
regard to a table of wood, which they enclose as if it were a second Holy of
Holies; their devout respect to a material structure and fabric, (which (yet)
possibly in the days of old, was a Receptacle of Idolatry, yea and devoted
thereunto); their declared singularity (not to say sanctity) of Vestments,

Procul O procul este prophani -- and such like; Are not (these I say) shrewd
symptoms of the truth of what I say? But

2. Ceremonies are pursued as things necessary to Divine Worship; Ergo etc.
Possibly they will not say that Ceremonies are Essential parts of the Worship
of God, (though as I shall presently show, some have even gone this length) yet
I appeal to themselves, whether they ground not a Necessity (yea an
indispensable one) at least, on the Mystical significancy, or pretended,
teaching virtue (They are resolved to teach, if not Ore, yet more. Ah! dumb
Teachers!) or pleaded order and decency of Ceremonies, (though it were an easy
matter to disprove, as the necessity, so the expediency, yea, the pretended
lawfulness and indifferency of them.) Now, Quaecunque observatio quaesi
necessaria commendatur, continuo censetur ad cultum Dei pertinere, says De
vera Eccles. resorm. p. 367.
Calvin.

Nay,

3. Dr. Burgess of the Lawfulness of kneeling, etc. cap. 3. See D. Burgess cap.
15. p, 41, 42.
A great Formalist says, That Ceremonies may be called Worship of God, not
only ratione modi, but even ratione medii; not only as additional things
belonging to the reverend use of God's prescribed Worship; but also as a mean,
though not by virtue of any thing in it self, but by virtue of somewhat else. If
so, with what face can they blame Papists, who place worship (indeed) in their
Cross and Crucifix, but not by virtue of any thing in it self, but in respect
of Christ crucified, whom (say they) it represents? Once more,

4. A thing pertains to the Worship of God, say the Ad cultum Dei pertinet
aliquid dupliciter, uno modo, cum cum aliquid Deo offertur; alio modo, cum
aliquid Divinum assumitur. Aquin. 2. 2. Quaest. 95. Art. 2.
Schoolmen, two manner of ways; viz. vel quoad oblationem, vel quoad
assumptionem; either when we offer to God any thing in point of Worship, or
when we add and receive any thing into his Worship: Hence they are guilty of a
superstitious and Ceremonial Worship, not only who offer to God for Worship,
but also who assume in God's worship as sacred, what God himself has not
ordained. Such are Jewish-Popish Ceremonies, Ergo etc.

Thus I have pursued at large the Use of Reprehension, having respect to my
Text: O that the Lord would second it with the powerful convictions of his
Spirit!

Consolation.

Beloved; Here is a Summary of Evangelical Comfort, here is the choicest thing
that is displayed in Gospel. What? A Redeemer for undone Mankind! A Savior
for sinners! And that one of their own flesh and blood too! viz. The Son of God
made of a woman. Here is Semen Mulicris, the * Seed of the Woman, which was
five thousand Genesis 3. 15.
years ago promised and preached, by God Himself, the first Evangelist, and
Preacher of Christ and Gospel; I will put enmity (said he) between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed, and her seed; and IT shall bruise thy head, etc.
This was the first Gospel that ever was preached. The second Evangelist was an
Angel, who made a comfortable Sermon upon the same Text: Fear not (said he to
the Shepherds) for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy; for unto you
is born this day, in the City of David, a SAVIOVR, etc. Luke 2. 10, 11. This
Angelical was a truly Evangelical Sermon. It is well worthy of our observation,
that an Angel was employed in the first publication of the Nativity of our
Lord; and Gospel-comfort redounding from thence to sinful, undone, Man. But I
would not, I must not be too prolix here. The comfort that does accrue to poor,
broken, captive sinners, from God-Incarnate, may appear from an inspection into
the capital benefits, mentioned v. 5. viz.

1. Redemption. 2. Adoption.
God's great design in assuming to himself our Nature, was (says our Apostle)
That he might 1. Redeem them that were under the Law. 2. That we might receive
the Adoption of Sons.

These be privileges of the first magnitude, and they are gradual. In the one
we are exempted from a Servile; In the other we are dignified with a Filial
condition: By the one, we cease to be Slaves; by the other, we become Sons. I
shall (through mercy) speak to both; (but to the latter more briefly) for
displaying to the Saints Gospel-comfort; which divides it self here (as it
were) into two streams or channels.

Of Christian Liberty.

1. The first is Redemption.

This is a Believers Christian Liberty, (that great Evangelical Privilege)
wherein he is freed from his Native Bondage and Captivity, intimated while he
is said to be under the Law. Now

Christian Liberty considered in its full Extent and Latitude has in it these
eight steps.

1. The first is, Exemption from the Curse and Condemning power of the Moral
Law.

There is a twofold Power in the Law. viz.

1. Mandatory. 2. Damnatory.
A Commanding and a Condemning Power.

And accordingly the Legal Obligation is twofold, viz.

1. Active. 2. Penal.
That is an Obligation to Duty; This is an Obligation to a Penalty.

1. The Mandatory and Directive Power of the Law is ever in force; for the Law
is a standing and Irreversible Rule of Life and Obedience. But

2. The Damnatory and Maledictive Power of the Law (by virtue whereof sinful
Delinquents are bound over to death; to a curse and condign punishment; ( on
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, said God to Adam concerning
the Probational Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2. 17.) is fully
answered and disanull'd for Believers, by Christ; for he has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has
redeemed the Saints from the curse, though not from the command of the Law. And
in this sense it is said, that the Law is not made for a righteous person, 1 Timothy 1. 9. which therefore we must not understand in the Antinomians and loose
Libertines sense, as if the Law were not at all Obligatory to a righteous
person, binding him to holiness and obedience; O no! The Law is ever
recti-dica, but never male-dica to Believers. In a word;

Believers are by Christ exempted from the Penal curse, malediction, and
condemnatory sentence of the Law. So that

Though ( temporal) death is inevitably common both to the Redeemed, and to
Reprobates; for it is (by an old infallible Statute) appointed unto (all) men
once to die, Heb. 9. 27. yet the Redeemed of the Lord are not liable to death
(nor indeed to any affliction whatsoever) by virtue of any maledictive
influence of the Law upon them. Mors illis nec abest, nec obest: though death
is inevitable, yet it is not hurtful. Death is necessary in the Saints, not by
way of satisfaction to injured Justice, (for Christ has performed that, and
Justice were not Justice if it should require sarisfaction twice): but (as I
may say) by way of Introduction into Glory; they are by a blessed exchange
possessed of Eternal Life, with the loss of a Natural life. Death is not a
Penal or Judicial thing in the Saints; for Inane est delirium illud Papisticum
de exemptione a poeno aeterna, sed non a poena temporali.
the curse and sting is taken away. The same may be said of all the Saints
afflictions; they are not properly penal, but rather probational or
castigatory; chastisements rather then punishments; they are crosses, not
curses; Medicinal, not Maledictory; Physic, not poison; for instruction, not
for destruction. O! What comfort is that. There is not now mors in olla, the
deadly pottage are healed; though I die, yet I shall not be damned, etc.

2. The second is exemption from the Rigor of the Law, and its Exaction of
Inherent Righteousness. (...).


The Law in its strictness and first constitution, did require of us perfect
and personal Obedience, and that upon pain of death, according to its Active
condition, Do this and live; Now the Son of God has in our Nature satisfied
the Active demands of the Law, for Believers, as effectually, as if they
themselves had made perfect and personal satisfaction thereunto: by virtue
whereof they are exempted from the Rigid Exaction of the Law; that is, They are
no longer obliged to the performance of Obedience Legally perfect; nor
obnoxious to vengeance of the curse for their Legal defects.

There is a twofold Perfection to be considered, viz.

1. A Perfection of Degrees. Perfectio graduum. Perfectio partium.
2. A Perfection of Parts.
The former is Legal Perfection, and it stands in opposition to Imperfection.

The latter is Evangelical Perfection, and it stands in opposition to
Hypocrisy only; for this is that indispensable Gospel-Qualification,
Sincerity; This is new and Evangelical Obedience. Now

Redeemed ones, are, by Christ, who performed Obedience, Personal and Perfect
for them, exempted from the former, viz. the severe demands of obedience,
absolutely perfect upon pain of death; O what comfort is that to poor sinners!
Though many weaknesses attend our duties, and many enormities our life; though
it be as Natural for us to sin, as for the spark to fly upwards; for (the Lord
knows) It is Natural for us to do that, which without mercy, would undo us. Yet
the poor sincere sinner is in Christ accepted, his failings and defects being
covered with the robes of the Lord Christ's righteousness. God brings a
Believers Obedience to the Touchstone rather then to the Balance; He tryes,
not weighs it; He eyes the Quality, more then the Quantity; the thing, more
then the degrees; He judges of Evangelical Obedience, more by the Principle
then by the Rule, by the Heart, then by the Law (considered in rigore); It is
not; this, or that have thou done; this or that duty have thou omitted; this or
that sin have thou committed, etc. But, thus, and thus was thy heart: If there
be first a willing mind, it is (now) accepted, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
etc.

3. The third is Exemption from the guilt of sin.

This is the Remission of sin in Justification; which is God's gracious Act of
Oblivion and Juridical Acquittance (so to speak) wherein he pardons sin in
the blood of Christ so, as that it shall not redound to the sinners punishment.
This is a singular piece of the Lord Christ's purchase. God gives his Son, and
God does in him forgive sin. As the Reigning power of sin is taken away in
Reatus peccati. Regnum peccati.
sanctification, so the guilt of sin is taken off in justification; that is,
the justified person is acquitted in Christ, so that God will never deal with
him as a Christus suscipiendo poenam and non suscipiendo culpam, and culpam
delevit and poenam. Aug. de verb. Dom. sermon. 37.
guilty person, or by way of punishment properly; for God does remit both the
guilt and the punishment: so that the afflictions and crosses which justified
persons are exposed to in the world (to speak properly) are not penal, but
rather probational, (as is showed before) Chastisements, not punishments; for
probation, not for reprobation; Tollitur peccatum si non ne SIT, tamen ne
OBSIT. O but this is matter of great comfort! I am pardoned now! the Articles
of my peace are confirmed now! God is reconciled! I am acquitted! Although
there is a defiling power in sin, yet there is not a damning power in sin! etc.

4. The fourth is Exemption from the Reign and Dominion of sin.

As in Justification, the vis Damnatrix and Guilt of sin is removed; so in
Sanctification, the Vis Dominatrix and Reign of sin is removed. There tollitur
peccatum, ne OBSIT; Here tollitur peccatum, ne PRAESIT; There sin loses its
Jam non stimutus sed jubitus, Bernar. Sermon. 26. in Cant.
sting, Here sin loses its strength. A Person is in Sanctification exempted,
though not from the Presence, yet from the Power of sin; though not from the
Tyranny, yet from the Romans 6. 14.
Dominion of sin; though not from the Rage, yet from the Reign of sin; though
not from the permanency, yet from the predominancy of sin; from the power of,
though not from a power to sin. A sanctified soul is neither a Throne not a
Sepulcher to sin; though sin remains there, yet sin reigns not there; Romans 6.
1, 2.
though sin continues in It, yet It continues not in sin; O poor Soul! though
sin do sore press thee, yet it shall not oppress thee; the Spirit of
Sanctification frees the soul from its Native Captivity and bondage to sin.
This is a special part of our Redemption.

5. The fifth is Exemption from Satanical bondage and subjection.

Men are by Nature (as Sins, so) Satan's Captives; but the Son of God made of a
woman, has led captivity captive. He is the Seed of the woman, that should
bruise the Serpents head. He is the LION of the Tribe of Judah, who has over
powered that Roaring Lion, and has spoiled Principalities and Powers: The Son
of God took upon him our Nature, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. The Son of God became
Man, that he might destroy the Devil, in the same Nature that the Devil had
destroyed. Satan is now become subject to those, who once were subject to him.
Lord, even the DEVILS are subject to US through thy Name, said the Disciples,
Luke 10. 17. O how is our captivity turned! The Prince of Darkness is become
subject to the meanest Disciple of Christ. Besides the Natural tie that is upon
Satan, (he being a creature, and therefore of a limited capacity) by reason
whereof he cannot do the evil he would; there is a Providential tie, by reason
whereof he does not the evil he can; yea, and a purchased exemption from
subjection to him.

We must distinguish between 1. Subjection to temptation. And 2. Subjection to
the Tempter. The least of Saints are freed from the latter; though the best of
Saints are not (in this life) secure from the former. O what comfort is this to
a Militant Saint! What though Satan attempt thy ruin? yet know, that Christ
will ruin the attempt; He may disquiet thee, but he cannot destroy thee; he
may bruise thy heel, but is it not the work of the Seed of the woman to break
his head? Satan is Christ's Captive in chains.

6. The sixth is Exemption from Legal terrors, and fear of Wrath, Hell, Death,
etc.

The former was a freedom from bondage to Spirits, this (...), Romans 8. 15.
(...), 2 Timothy 1. 7.
is a freedom from the Spirit of bondage.

O what fears and terrors is a Reprobate Conscience possessed withal! The Law
is violated, Wrath is incurred, Hell and damnation is deserved, as condign
punishment; the dreadful pursuits of sin-revenging Justice are unavoidable; my
own Conscience accuses me. O the condemnatory voice of Conscience! that
Bosome-hell! Miserable Man that I am; What will become of me? Where shall I
dwell for ever? Who shall be my companions to all eternity? Damned Spirits? or
the Spirits of just men made perfect? Such terrors and fears are (as it were) a
Preface and Introduction to hell. Now Redeemed ones are free from those Legal
terrors, and in stead of a Spirit of bondage, they are possessed of the Spirit
of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba, Father; And this is that which breeds
comfort in life, and confidence at death in the children of God.

7. The seventh is Exemption from the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses;
That Unsupportable Yoke, which neither the modern Jews, nor their fathers were
able to bear. Acts 15. 10.

This freedom and Immunity are we in a more especial manner to understand by
Redemption in the Text. The Jewish Church, like an Heir during his minority,
was subject to a Pedagogie, viz. the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses, in
which respect the state of the Jews seemed to be a servile-state; but when the
fullness of the time was come (even the time of the Churches maturity and riper
age) God sent forth his Son made of a woman, to redeem his Church from that
bondage and servitude.

There were three Laws committed to the Jews, viz.

The 1. Moral. 2. Ceremonial. 3. Judicial.

The Moral Law was ordained to be a standing and Unalterable Rule of Life and
Obedience, both to the Jewish and Christian Church. The Ceremonial and Judicial
Laws were Appendices of the Moral Law. The Ceremonial, of the first Table,
determining the particulars of that Worship which was peculiar to the Church of
the Jews; The Judicial, of the second Table, determining the particulars of
that Policy, which was peculiar to the Commonwealth of the Jews. So that the
Ceremonial contained the Ecclesiastical Laws of that Church, and did respect
God. The Judicial, the Civil Laws of that Commonwealth, and did respect their
Neighbor. Now

Christ did in the fullness of the time redeem his Church both from the
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, as a Gal. 5. 1.
yoke of bondage, imposed not upon the necks, but even upon the Consciences of
the Jews, binding them to a strict and accurate observation of the same.

As touching the Judicial and Civil Law.

What things soever contained therein were communis juris, of common Equity,
and had a foundation in the Law of Nature, and might be enforced by the Law
Moral, are still Obligatory to Christians: But, what was peculiar to the
constitution of the Judaical Policy, and are not enforceable by any common
Right, but were the particular positive Laws of the Jews; do not more bind
Christians then any other Municipal Law. For Christ destroying the Jewish
Commonwealth, their Temple, and City, according to the Prophecy of Daniel,
chap. 9. v. 26, 27. did withal abrogate and destroy the whole Jewish Policy
and Laws. And thus it is said, The Priesthood (namely of Aaron) being changed,
there is made of necessity a change also of the Law (namely of Moses) Heb. 7.
12.

As touching the Ceremonial and Ecclesiastical Law.

That (together with the Judicial Law) might be condered in a fourfold respect,
as is evident from Scripture, viz. as

1. A Badge of distinction between the Jews and all other Nations, Genesis 17.
13, 14. 2. A Ratified sign of Guilt, Col. 2. 14. 3. A Typical Adumbration of
Christ and his Benefits, Heb. 9. 9, 10. 4. A Tutor and Schoolmaster to the
Infant-Church, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3. Now
The Christian Church is freed from the Ceremonial, (as from the Judicial) Law,
in all these respects. For,

1. Christ has broken down the middle-wall of partition between Jews and
Gentiles, etc. Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.

2. Christ has abolished and taken out of the way the handwriting of
Ordinances, which was against us, etc. Col. 2. 14.

3. Christ, the Typified Body of Levitical shaddows and Adumbrations (Col. 2.
17.) is come.

4. When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, etc. to redeem them that were under the Law, (his Church) from a
Mosaical Pedagogie and Elements. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Then

1. The Ceremonies are not things Indifferent in the Christian Church. They
were abrogated by the Son of God, whose design in coming in the flesh, was, to
redeem his Church from that Legal Yoke; so that to obtrude them upon the
Gospel Church, were to frustrate Christians of one great End of the
Incarnation; and to infringe their Christian Liberty. (O! How sad is it when
men pursue Iniquities for Indifferencies!) Ergo, etc.

Do Cas. Cons. lib. 4. cap. 11. Cas. 3.
Baldwin in his Cases of Conscience has a passage which I cannot omit. Charles
the fifth caused a wretched book called INTERIM, to be published, wherein
yiedling to the Cross, Surplice, Holy Days, and other Ceremonies was enjoined,
conformity thereunto being much urged by some furious Zelots, who pleaded the
Emperors Commandment in a thing Indifferent; the nonconforming Protestants
replied, That the Question was not about a thing Indifferent, etc. The same
Reply might we make to those that urge the Ceremonies as Indifferent things:
How can those be said to be things Indifferent; which Christ has abolished?
From which he has Redeemed his Church?

2. How impudent is the Church of Rome in burthening Christians, with a yoke
which neither they nor their fathers were ever able to bear; namely, a heap of
superfluous, yea ridiculous, yea impious and Antichristian Ceremonies? But Sunt
pompae istae omnes and Ceremoniae Papisticae, nihil aliud quam furi meretricii,
ad hoc excogitati, ut homines ad spiritualem scortationem alliciantur. Zanchy
ad Regin. Elizab. Epistol. lib. 1. page 112.
this is like her. Though they are a burden to the better sort of Christians,
yet they are a part of her Whorish paint, whereby she endeavors to allure
Christians to partake of the cup of her Fornications.

3. The Ceremonies of the Jewish imposed upon the Christian Church were an
Antichristian yoke. What insolent Tyranny is it then in the Romish Church, to
obtrude old Rotten Ceremonies, together with a monstrous heap of her own cursed
hatching, upon Christians? (I pray God professed Protestants take not pattern
by her) its sufficient proof that she is Antichristian, and that THE MYSTERY
OF INIQUITY is at 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
work there. By reason of such execrable Tyranny, the case of Christians (I
speak it with much regret) is abundantly more sad, and their condition more
servile then was that of the Jews; O what pity is that! Observe,

1. The Ceremonies were imposed upon the Jewish, by God himself; They are
imposed upon the Christian Church, by Men like our selves: There the Jews were
the servants of God; Here Christians are made 1 Cor. 7. 23.
the servants of Men. Nay,

2. The Jewish was an Infant-Church, the Christian is a ripe and Adult-Church;
The Jewish-Church was like an Heir under Age, and more servile; The
Christian-Church is like an Heir come at Age, and a Redeemed Son, so that
Ceremonies are more intolerable in the Christian Church. O how derogatory are
they to the Ripe and Mature age of the Church? Number puerescit Ecclesia? Shall
the Church always be a child? Away then with Pedagogical and childish
Ceremonies. For my part, I think, that the Riper and more Mature the Church is,
the more impertinent (to say no more) are Ceremonies; and therefore, the
sixteen hundred years (the Age) of the Christian Church considered, the
Ceremonies are infinitely more impertinent and slavish (I say no more) now,
then they were in the time of her Infancy, yea, then they were in the fifth,
yea, then they were in the tenth Century, ( and sic deinceps) Ergo, etc.
Further,

3. The Ceremonies were abolished by Him, of whom they were appointed, namely,
by Christ, the Col. 1. 18.
Head of the Church: In the Christian Church they are appointed to them, for
whom they were abolished; namely, by some Members (rather The Pope is so far
from being the Head, that I had rather call him a Monster in, then a Member of
the Church.
Monsters) of the Church.

But

4. What more horrid Sacrilege, then to rob Christians of that Liberty and
Freedom, which the Lord Christ has procured and purchased for them with the
meritoricus price of his dearest blood? Now such is their Exemption from the
servile yoke of Rites and Ceremonies in the Worship of God under the Gospel
Ergo, etc. Ah! Rome! Rome! The Lord rebuke thee.

Quamvis enim neque hoc inveniri possit, quomodo contra fidem sint; ipsam tamen
Religionem, quam Dei miserecordia liberam esse voluit, servilibus oneribus
premunt: ut tolerabilior sit conditio Judaeorum, qui etiamsi tempus libertatis
non agnoverunt, legalibus tamen sarcinis, non Humanis praesumptionibus
subjiciuntur. Aug. ad Januar. de Ritibus Eccles. Epist. 119. cap. 19. Vid. Aug.
ad Januar. de Variis Consuetud. Region. Epist. 118. cap. 2.
S. Augustine complained grievously of Ceremonies wherewith the Church was
burdened in his time; (O how much more may we complain of the same in our
time!)

Although (says he) they were not things contrary to the Analogy of Faith,
yet Religion which God in mercy and pity (to his Church) would have to be free,
is burdened thereby, as with a slavish yoke; insomuch that the servile
condition of the Jews was more tolerable (then that of Christians) because
they were subject to LEGAL and Divine Impositions, not to HUMAN Presumptions.

Thus S. Augustine complained that in his days the Christian Church was more
plagued and burdened with rotten Ceremonies, then was the Jewish Church in her
time. I pray God We have not cause to complain, that the Church is burdened
with a heavier yoke in our days, then she was in S. Augustines time; Where
then were our Christian pre-eminence to the Jews? Men's fiercelyzealous
contentions for a numerous heap of Jewish-Popish Ceremonies and Innovations in
the Worship of God, are sad, sad Prognostics thereof. Give me leave to add,
That the Retention and pursuance of such things in the Christian Church, would
prove,

1. A Load and burden to Religion; and then might it not justly be feared,
that Religion it self would become burdensome? O let Men take heed, lest, by
burthening Religion (as S. Augustine phraseth it) they make Religion become a
burden!

2. A Bar to the Jews conversion. I much wonder, with what confidence we could
Woo or Court the Jew to our Religion, as long as we press or retain a Legal
yoke of Ceremonies in the Worship of God, which in the respects aforesaid, is
more intolerable, then was that, which neither the (later) Jews, nor their
fathers were able to bear, we should urge them but with mean success, to cast
off a Divine, and to submit their necks to a Human yoke; Sure the Jew might
hope for Exemption from the handwriting of Ordinances, and burdensome
observance of Legal Types and Shaddows, by the Messiah, when come; But alas,
their hopes would receive little life or strength from the Gospel Church! Nay

Is not their Unbelief and Incredulity touching the Messiah strengthened and
confirmed from the retention of those very things in the Christian-Church,
whereby he was typed and presigured? Is it not probable that this might prove
an Obstruction to their conversion? For ought I know, had not adulterate Rome
been in the way, JERUSALEM had borrowed as much from LONDON (long ere now) as
ROME has from JERUSALEM, in point of Divine Worship; What? And are Ceremonies
still a Ephesians. 2. 14.
middle wall of Partition between Jews and Gentiles?

3. A Hinderance and Impediment to the Churches gradual Excellencies, growth,
and propagation. The Riper and more mature the Church is, she should be for
Knowledge more Eminent; for Doctrine more Powerful; for Discipline more
Regular; for Worship more Pure; etc.

In conclusion.

Ceremonies may not be retained;

1. As a Wall of Partition between Jews and Gentiles. Nor 2. As a sign of
sin-guiltiness. Nor 3. As Typical and Figurative. Nor 4. As Rudimental or
Pedagogical.

(For that were to Judaize.)

Nor 5. As things Sacred and Holy. Nor 6. As matter of Worship. Nor 7. As
matters of Necessity, and Obligatory to Conscience. Nor 8. As things of a
Spiritual Efficacy. Nor 9. As matters of Merit. Nor 10. As matters of
Perfection. Nor 11. As things of a Teaching Quality. (The Church of Rome is
like to be well taught) but do they not in point of Use, tend more to
destruction then to instruction?) Well,

That were to Romanize.

Nor 12. When Scandal does from thence accrue to tender Consciences. Nor 13.
When they are abused to Idolatry or Superstition.

If these respects be excluded from the Ceremonies, a very little matter would
make me ( caeteris paribus) turn Proselyte. I am for Ornamenta, but not for
Onera in the Church. They miserably err (in my mind) who interpret the
Churches Burden to be the Churches Beauty!

Thus I have dispatched the seventh step of Christian

Liberty.

8. The eighth (which is consequentially dependant thereon) is Exemption from
all Bond of Conscience in respect of things Indifferent; these are things
neither commanded nor forbidden in the Eternal Law of God. This is in a more
especial manner called Liberty of Conscience, and it has a twofold reference;
namely,

1. To the Creatures of God. 2. To Humane Ordinances in things Indifferent.
1. As touching the Creatures.

Christians are freed from scrupulosity of Conscience, in respect of them, and
from the Legal observance of the difference of meats, clean and unclean, made
by the Ceremonial Law, that being taken away under the Gospel: Hence said
Christ, Not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man, Matthew. 15. 11. And
the Apostle Paul after him, I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean (or common) * of it self, Romans 14. (...).
14. Now, Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with Thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 4. Now, all things are lawful, 1 Cor. 6.
12. Now, unto the pure all things are pure, Tit. 1. 15. This Liberty is an
Evangelical Privilege, whereby a true Christian may with a safe and free
Conscience, use or forbear any of the Creatures of God appointed for his use.

2. As touching the Ordinances of Men in things Indifferent. Certain it is,
that the Conscience of a Christian cannot be bound thereby, but is free from
the Obligatory virtue of all Human Commandments. For my more distinct
proceeding, I shall express my self in these following propositions, whereof
some be gradual.

1. Vid. Ames. de Cons, lib. 1. cap. 2. Perk. Treat. of Cons. cap. 2. sect. 3.
Alsted. Theol. Caf. cap. 2.
He is said to bind the Conscience, who has such a strict and Immediate
Authority over it, as that Conscience ought to be subject thereunto; insomuch
that what is contrary to it, is sin. A binding Power, is an Ordering and (as it
were) a Coactive Power. To urge and enforce Conscience ad assensum vel
dissensum, to assent to a thing as lawful, or that ought to be done, or to
dissent from a thing as unlawful, or that ought not to be done, may be said to
bind Conscience. Vid. Ames. de Cons. lib. 1. cap. 3. Item Calv. Instit. lib.
4. cap. 10. 5.

2. God alone can bind Conscience. And in this sense, He is said to be our only
Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12. Imperial Authority and Jurisdiction over Conscience is
peculiar to God alone. Hence says Com. in 1 Pet. 5. 3. Neque enim cum
huminibus sed cum uno Deo, negotium est Conscientiis nostris, Calvin. Instit.
lib. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 5. Erga animas and conscientias nostras, nemini quicquam
juris nisi Deo. Tilen. Synt. part. 2. Disp. 32. Thef. 4. Liberi sumus ab
omnibus humanis Ritibus, Quantum quidem ad Conscientiam attinet. Hemming.
Enchyr. clas. 3. cap. 14. Ab omni traditionum humanarum jugo, liberas habent
conscientias (fideles) cum solius Dei sit, res ad Religionem pertinentes
praescribere. Profess. Leidens. Synt. pur. Theol. Disp. 35. etc.
Luther, Vnum Dominum habemus, qui animas nostras gubernat; We have but one
Lord and Governor of our souls.

From hence it is evident, that the binding and obliging Power over the
Conscience is peculiar to God, (...) But

3. The Laws of God, wherein were determined those particulars which are
neither commanded nor forbidden in the Moral Law of God, are abrogated; Now
those were the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses; the one determining
Ecclesiastical, the other Civil matters, peculiar to the Jewish Church, and
Commonwealth. From both which Christ (as has been said) has exempted the
Christian Church. Now

4. The Laws of Men (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical (as such) are not properly
Binding or Obligatory to Conscience. God is (as has been said) the sole Lord
of Conscience. As for Human Laws and Ordinances; neither is simple Obedience
due unto them; neither does a thing which in respect of the Law Moral is
Indifferent, that is, neither commanded nor forbidden, by virtue of them become
simply necessary. They are Declarative only, not Authoritative: that is, they
declare what is fittest to be done in things which are Indifferent, and cannot
be enforced, either by the Law of God or Nature. There is in them a Directive
Power, but not a Coactive Jurisdiction. They have only vim dirigendi and
monendi says Synt. part. 2. Disp. 27. These. 39. Vid. Marcum Antonium de Dom.
de Repub. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 2. N. 12 Chem. exam. 2. de bon. Oper. p. 179.
Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 6. Ames. de Cons. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Tilenus.

And hence is that charge of the Apostle to the Corinthians, Ye are bought with
a price, be not ye the servants of 1 Cor. 7. 23.
men, (which we are not to understand of subjection to Magistrates, or of
External servitude, but of the bondage of Conscience.) And that to the
Colossians, Let no man Col. 2. 16.
judge you (or usurp power over the Conscience) in meat, or in drink, or in
respect of a holy day. And hence is that sharp reproof, Why are ye subject to
Ordinances, Touch not, Col. 2. 20, 21.
Taste not, Handle not? that is, Why do ye observe Human Traditions, as if the
Conscience were bound by them? etc. Conc. Trid. ^^ss. 4.
Cursed is the Tyranny of the Romish Church, which imposes her Heterodox
Traditions upon Conscience, teaching that they are with like reverence to be
embraced, a^ the Written Word of God.

5. The Oligatory and Binding Power of Human Laws, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil, is, Vis quaedam Divina, Divine Authority. This is Ratio Legis, the very
Reason of the Law; without which the Law it self can never bind. There must be
more of REASON then of WILL in all Human Ordinances; though WILL without
enquiry after REASONS, is Obligatory in Divine Ordinances: Now the REASON of
Man's Law, can be no other, then the WILL of God in his Law.

As touching Ecclesiastical Laws.

It is not the Authority of the Church, of Councils, or Convocations, but the
Matter of the Canon, not Ratio Precipientis, but Ratio Praecepti, that binds.
In a word,

There must be in all Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions, 1. Conformity to
the Word of God, that is the Rule. 2. They must Manifestam Vtilitatem prae se
far (says Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 32
Calvin) they must serve as to the Glory of God, so for the Public Good; this
must be the End. They must tend to the maintaining of Unity, (as of Verity)
these must not be separated) Order and Decency, to the preventing of Scandal,
without Impositions upon Conscience, or the infringing of the purchased Liberty
thereof: Else to Obey Ecclesiastical Canons, were not (believe it) Vid. Jun.
Animadv. in Bellarm. controv. 3. lib. 4. cap. 16. Item These. Theol. de lib.
Christ. These. 11. Tilen. Synt. part. 2. disp. 27. These. 39. Item These. 9.
Alsted. Theol. Cas. cap. 2. Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Christ. cap. 2. Bez. Conf.
cap. 5. art 16. Paraeum, comment. in 1 Cor. 14. Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap.
10. sect. 32. Item Resp. ad lib. de Pii viri officio, page 413. Prof. Leid.
Synt. pur. Theol. Disp. 35. These. 19. Jus Canon. decret. part. 1. dict. 61. c.
8. Perkins Treat. of Cons. cap. 2. sect. 8. etc.
CANONICAL OBEDIENCE.

As touching Civil Laws.

We are bound in Conscience to observe the Magistrates Commandments. Though we
are not bound in Conscience Quamvis ad Justas Leges humanas, justo modo
observandas, obligentur homines in Conscientiis suis a Deo; ipse tamen Leges
humanae, qua sunt Leges hominum, non obligant Conscientiam. Ames. de Cons. lib.
1. cap. 2.
BY those Commandments, as such.

Obedience (Active or Passive) to the Magistrates commands is necessary; though
not Necessitate consequentis, yet Necessitate consequentiae; that is, Though
they are not Obligatory to Conscience ( Pros. Leid. Synt. pur. Theol. Disp. 35.
These. 39.
primo and per se) primarily, directly. and by virtue of any Genuine binding
power In themselves, and as such; yet they are binding by virtue of 1. The
Lawfulness of the matter commanded; and 2. God's Exodus 20. 12. Romans 13. 1, 2. 1
Pet. 2. 13, 14.
General Precept touching indispensable Obedience (Active or Passive) to the
Magistrates Commandments. In which respect we must Romans 13. 5.
be subject even for Conscience sake. Thus, though this, viz. The lawful
Commandments of the Magistrate are necessarily to be obeyed, is not true by the
simple necessity of the Consequent, as an Axiom and Principle manifest of it
self, or by a simply necessary Connection between the Antecedent and Consequent,
or Subject and Predicate, viz. The Lawful Commandments of the Magistrate, and
Necessary Obedience. Yet, it is true by the In Divinis ad Praecipientem, In
Humanis ad Praeceptum respiciendum est.
necessity of consequence, that is, such a necessity as may be soundly
concluded from the Law of God, wherein Obedience to the Lawful Commandments of
Magistrates is Indispensably commanded; so that it is a Conclusion manifest by
Discourse; and thus, upon these Premises, viz. 1. That all lawful Commandments
of Magistrates are necessarily by virtue of God's Commandment to be obeyed. And
2. That this or that is a lawful Command of the Magistrate. It will follow
Necessitate consequentiae, That This or that Commandment of the Magistrate, is
necessarily to be obeyed. In a word,

There be two things which oblige us to obey the Magistrates Commandments. 1.
The one is, the Matter of the Human Precept, which must be Consonant, at least,
not Repugnant to the Law of God. 2. The other is, The Authority of the Divine
Precept, wherein (as has been said) Indispensable Obedience to the Lawful
Commandments of Magistrates is enjoined.

From what has been said, it is evident, That

Human Laws are Obligatory and Authentic, only by virtue of the Law of God;
their binding Power being purely Mutuatitious. We are to obey the Magistrate,
and all that are in Authority, so far forth, as that in obeying them we obey
God; the Great Lawgiver. Vid. Alsted. Theol. Cas. cap. 2. Prof. Leid. Synt.
pur. Theol. Disp. 35. These. 19. But

Quaest. What if the Magistrate command things which Conscience will not suffer
to conform unto?

Subjection to Magistrates and Loyalty is an Indispensable duty; It is very
observable, that none of the Apostles did more urge and enforce that Duty, then
S. Paul did, though he was a Subject to the greatest Tyrant that ever lived,
namely that Monster of Mankind, Nero Caesar, who was the Author of the * First
Persecution, and is called Nero ex Caesaribus primus in Christianos distrinxit
gladium.
by Apolog. 5.
Tertullian, Dedicator Damnationis Nostrae, the first that made a Law to
condemn Christians to death.

2. There is (according to some of the Learned) a great difference between
Subjection and Obedience; Subjection (says Of the Church. lib. 4. cap. 34.
D. Field) is generally and absolutely required, where Obedience is not; as
when Conscience suffers not a Man ( Actively) to Obey, yet Duty leads him (by
Passive Obedience) to submit and subject himself to Authority; and thus the
(...), Romans 13. 1. (...), 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Greek word notes Submission or Subjection in Scripture; which is much to be
observed, lest in stead of submitting, Men either (by Active Obedience) conform
contrary to Conscience, or (which Piety abhors) rebel contrary to duty. Thus,
had I been an Inferior Note, It is one thing to obey Nero the Magistrate,
another to obey Nero's Commandment.
Magistrate under Nero, and by him commanded to execute that cursed Edict of
his, touching the condemning of Christians to death, I would not have (
Actively) obeyed him, neither would I have rebelled: What then? Why, I would
have offered him my Neck (through passive strength from the Almighty) not my
hand. The same may be said in respect of the contraverted Ceremonies, when
imposed by Authority; though I cannot conform to them, yet (through the Grace
of God) I shall never rebel; but according to Scripture injunction, I will
submit to the Higher Power, whether it be to the KING 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by Him. Let men
know then, that there is a Medium between Active Obedience and Rebellion, viz.
SUBMISSION. The Lord forgive them that interpret Nonconformity to the Mitre,
to be no less, then Disloyalty to the Crown; The latter (I thank God) I am
taught of him to abhor. Again,

3. I like well that distinction of Parker of the Cross, cap. 5. sect. 14, 15.
Non Obedire, and Nolle Obedire; the one is no more then not to conform by
Active Obedience. The other is, Obstinate Disobedience and Contempt, which is
ever to be avoided.

But

Quest. How are Magistratical Injunctions in things Indifferent, and
Indispensable Obedience thereunto, consistent with Liberty of Conscience?

Answer.

6. Liberty and Limitations are not inconsistent. A Spiritual and Internal
Liberty may very well consist with Extrinsecal Limitations. That we may the
better apprehend this, let us consider, That

There is a twofold Restraint; namely,

1. One upon the Conscience and Inner Man. 2. Another upon the Person, and
Outward Man.
Now,

There may be a Restraint upon the Person, when (yet) there is no Constraint
upon the Conscience of a Man; and therefore we must distinguish between 1. The
Right and Truth of Liberty, and 2. The Use and Exercise of Liberty. Libertas
Conscientiae, and Ligatio Conscientiae (considered (...), etc.) are
inconsistent; Liberty of Conscience is opposed only to bond of Conscience, not
to an Extrinsecal Restraint of the Outward Man, in respect of the Exercise of
our Liberty. Undoubtedly there may be a Restriction upon the Practice, or upon
the Person, as to the Use of his Liberty; and yet 1. Nothing derogatory to the
Indifferency of the thing in it self. Nor 2. Any violence offered to the
Internal and Real Liberty of Conscience; even as the Actus Imperati may be
hindered or restrained, without any violence offered to the Actus Eliciti of
the Soul. And thus, who does doubt but that the King (our Dear and Dread
Sovereign) may on a Civil account, for the public good of his Kingdoms,
enjoin his Subjects abstinence from such and such Meats, etc. Now, here were a
Restraint upon Persons, in respect of the Use and Exercise of their Liberty;
and yet no violence offered (upon the Kings part) to the Internal Liberty of
Conscience; for though the Outward Man is restrained by the Civil Sword, yet
the Inner Man, and Conscience is left free; that is, My Conscience is not bound
by the Magistrates Commandment, though I be bound in Conscience by virtue of
the Law of God, to yield Obedience to that Commandment, the matter thereof
being a thing Indifferent, and (therefore) lawful. Though I be tied up by the
Command as to practice, yet my Conscience is still free, while I am persuaded
in Conscience that the thing is in it self Indifferent: Why may not I give my
neck to my King, and yet keep my Conscience for my God? Why may not I yield my
Outward Man to the Civil Scepter of the King, Qui (vel) Nolentibus praeest,
says Jerome, and yet resign my Inner Man to the Divine Scepter of my God, to
whom appertains Interior Animae Gubernatio, as Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 5.
Calvin words it?

The same may be said in respect of Clothing. Doubtless the King may for the
good of his Subjects, on some emergent occasions, confine them to one kind of
Cloth, one kind of Color, one kind of Habit, while neither Conscience is
imposed upon, nor a Religious account urged; for the Restraint would in such a
case be; not upon the Conscience, while it is still persuaded of the
Indifferency of the thing in it self, and that it is not urged on a Religious,
but a Civil account, and for the Weal-Publique; but only upon Persons in
respect of the Indifferent Exercise of their Liberty.

Once more,

What reason is there to doubt but that the King may for the Public Good of
his Kingdoms, tie his Subjects to eat Swines flesh for some weeks, once a year?
Yea, (and as the occasion shall vary) at other times to abstain from Swines
flesh for some weeks? Now, here were a Restraint upon the Person in respect of
the Exercise of his Liberty, and yet none upon the Conscience in respect of the
Reality of his Liberty, while he is persuaded in Conscience, that the thing is
Indifferent in it self, and in respect of the Law of God, though now it cease
to be Indifferent in its Use, by reason of the Law of Man, viz. the Magistrate,
whose Commandments in things Indifferent we are bound in Conscience to observe.

All which, that we may the better understand, let us consider, That

1. Christian Liberty in respect of things Indifferent, consists, in usu vel
abstinentia, (says Synt. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 33.
Polanus); tam in abstinendo, quam in utendo (says Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19.
sect. 10.
Calvin); in use or abstinence, indifferently. Now

2. Here is Liberty, namely, That I may with a Conscience free from all Divine
Obligation to the contrary, observe Human Constitutions made, pro re nata, upon
various (yea contrary) occasions emergent, for the Public Good, that is, the
good of that City, Kingdom or Body-Politick, whereof I am a Member. For
instance, Possibly it is necessary at one time, for the Public good, that
rhere be an Universal Use of Swines flesh (it may be to save other Beasts, or
because of excessive plenty) Now, by virtue of my Christian Liberty, I may with
a free Conscience, observe a Statute made by the Magistrate, for the Universal
Use of Swines flesh: A Jewish Magistrate might make no such Law. Again,
possibly it is as necessary at another time that there be an Universal
Abstinence from Swines flesh, (it may be for Healths sake, or scarcity, etc.)
Now by virtue of my Christian Liberty, I may with a free Conscience observe a
Statute made by the Magistrate, (upon a quite contrary occasion viz.) for an
Universal Abstinence from Swines flesh, etc. Whither we use or abstain, the
Conscience is never the less free; yea, therefore because we are free; libera
Conscientia (utimur vel) abstinemus, we use or forbear with a free Conscience.
Vid. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. Sect. 10.

Nay,

By virtue of my Liberty, I may abridge my self of Liberty. By virtue of the
undoubted Reality of it, I may limit my self as to the Indifferent use of it.

Here is Liberty, that I may freely impose a Necessity upon my Liberty, Calv.
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 32.
quatenus (...), aut Charitatis ratio exigit.

Here is Liberty, namely, That (notwithstanding the Indifferency of things in
themselves, yet) I may freely tie my self to, or from such and such meats or
such and such Clothes, in respect of Decency or Charity, or warrantable
Congruity and Pleasingness to my own mind, etc.

Finally,

They are much mistaken, who think that the Magistrates Imposition in a thing
Indifferent, takes away, or infringeth Liberty of Conscience; for who knows not
that This is a thing Indifferent, namely, to begin Sabbathical Duties at four
or six a clock in the morning? I prove it, (Though, the Observance of the
Christian Sabbath be of Indispensable Necessity, (I am no Anti-Sabbatarian,
yet) to begin the Sabbath then, is neither Forbidden nor Commanded; to begin it
then, or sooner, or somewhat later, is not repugnant to the Word, Ergo, etc.
Now, May not the Magistrate tie me (yea, and all his other Subjects) to six or
four a Clock in the morning for the beginning of the Sabbath? Yes, That he may;
and yet say, if in so doing, he does infringe Christian Liberty. No Imposition
is repugnant to Liberty of Conscience, but Imposition upon Conscience. What I
have said does not at all countenance Ceremonies, since (as is evident from
what has been said above) they are justly denied to be Matters of
Indifferency, (about which Liberty of Conscience is most properly Conversant.)
I would they would decide the Controversy, by their, unheard of, Achillean
proofs. Parturiunt montes etc.

Thus I have endeavored to show (which is a difficult theme to such a raw
head) how the Magistrates Impositions in things Indifferent; and Necessary
Obedience thereunto are consistent with Liberty of Conscience.

The Boundaries or Rules of Liberty of Conscience follow, which may be said to
be five. Viz.

1. Piety; This is Loyalty to God, specified, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever See Romans 14. 7, 8 Etiam illaeactiones quae sunt
sua natura Adtaphorae debent tamen a Christianis fieri in nomine Christi, hoc
est juxta voluntatem Christi, and ad gloriam Christi. D. Davenant in locum.
ye do, do all to the Glory of God. The End of our Liberty is Gods GLORY;
this should be the Scope of all our Actions, even of Indifferent ones. Our Own
Good is subordinate not coordinate to That.

2. Loyalty. This is enjoined Subjection to the Magistrate, who is (as it were)
Gods Viceroy here on earth in respect of the Civil Sword entrusted by the King
of See Romans 13. 1, 2.
Kings to him; Submit your selves (says Peter) to every Ordinance of Man for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
-- as free, etc. v. 16. Observe, As free, there is Liberty; but yet submit AS
free; there is a Limitation. Then ours is a Limited Liberty.

3. Charity. By this we are restrained from the use of any thing from whence
scandal and just offense might accrue to weak Brethren. Take heed (says our
Apostle) lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a stumbling block to
the weak. 1 Cor. 8. 9. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor
any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Romans 14.
21. Hence said S. Paul, If meat make my Brother to offend (or stumble) I will
eat no flesh while the World stands. 1 Cor. 8. 13. Cum charitas semper sit
colenda, scandala semper sunt vitanda, said Synt. part. 2 disp. 27. These. 31.
Tilenus. Since Charity is ever to be entertained, Scandal is ever to be
avoided. By virtue of this Law of Charity we are tied not only from the use of
what might prove Scandalous and Offensive to weak Brethren, but also to the use
and pursuance of such things as are Vid. Par. in 1 Cor. 10. 23. Vid. Calvin
Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. sect. 12.
Expedient and Edisicatory. Let us therefore follow after the things which make
for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. Romans 14. 19. etc.

Quest. Is there not sometimes a repugnancy between the Law of Charity and the
Law of Loyalty: as when the Magistrate commands That, which if we should
observe, we should offend and scandalize the weak? Let us suppose, the
Magistrate to enjoyne a Common Prayer to be read; If I should read it, I should
scandalize weak Christians; if I should not read it, I should seem to disobey
the Magistrate; what shall I do in such a case? I must not scandalize him for
whom Christ dyed; I but neither must I disobey the Magistrate.

Answ. Doctrine of Christian Liberty.
Dr. Downame, presents us with This, as an expedient in this case of seeming
Antinomy; namely, That if we answer or obey the Superior Law, viz. that
concerning the Magistrate, the Inferior, viz. that concerning the weak
Brethren (which gives place to the other) is not broken or disobeyed, etc. And
I must confess there is much in it, and I can but commend the Drs Invention;
but yet under favor,

2. There had been more in it, if this had been supposed, namely, That not only
the Magistrates Command but also his Conscience comes in competition with the
weak Brothers Conscience; that is, If the Magistrate himself had been supposed
to be of a tender Conscience. For then, we should seem by gratifying others,
not only to disobey the Magistrate, but also to offend and scandalize his
tender Conscience. However,

3. Since I am so weak as not to pick satisfaction here, I should betake my
self to Passive Obedience: I dare not conform by Active Obedience, for then I
should with my Romans 14. 15.
meat destroy him for whom Christ dyed. I dare not out of a respect to the
Consciences of Inferior Christians oppose or contemn Authority; God forbid.
Rebellion and Religion my principles could never yet reconcile; and I have ever
thought, that it is not only sin, but even a misery Quod ad scandalum atimet.
Vid. Magdeburg. Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 441. Aug. Epist. 36. ad Casul.
Zanch. de Imag. Page 390. Chemnit. exam. part. 1. page 179. Par. in Romans 14.
dub. 1. Calv. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. sect. 11, 12, 13. etc.
to labor with Anti-Magistraticall Principles. Therefore I would choose that
which I am persuaded in Conscience, to be the pars tutior, the safer way;
namely, to Submit: this is Passive Obedience; whereby I shall hope to eshun
both the one and the other evil.

4. Purity. This is another Rule and Boundary of Liberty of Conscience, which
is mentioned Romans 14. 14. I am persuaded that there is nothing unclean (...).
of it self, there is Liberty; but to him that esteems any thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean; there is a Limitation. He that doubts is
damned if he eats, because he eats not of faith, for what is not of faith
is sin. Romans 14. 23. That In this case the Magistrate may Command lawfully,
and (yet) the Subject obey sin fully.
is, if a man be not fully persuaded of the Lawfullness of what he does, he
sins: Hence says the Apostle, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind; Romans 14. 5. This is that Plerophory of Conscience without which a thing
is Unclean and Unlawful to us, though it be Lawful in its own Nature. Hence
says In Romans 14. 7, 8. Vid. Calv. in v. 14.
Calvin, Nefas omnino est quipptam aggredi quod putes (Domino) displicere, imo
quod non persuasus fis illi placere; It is unlawful for thee to attempt any
thing which thou think may displease God, yea, which thou do not persuade
thy self to be a thing that will please God. Thus, If a thing should be
enjoined whereof (though) I could question neither the Composition nor the
Imposition; (yet) if I should use or attempt it against or with a Reluctance
of, Conscience I should sin; For Vid. Calv. in Romans 14. 5. Alsted. Theol. Cas.
cap. 2.
Quicquid fit repugnante Conscientia peccatum est, whatever is done contrary to
the Voice, Dictates and Testimony of Conscience, that Bosome-Guide, is a sin:
yea, The Vid. Hemming. Enchyr. Class. 2. cap. 7. Aquin. 1. 2. Quest. 19. Art.
5. Tanner. Jesuit. to 2 in 12. disp. 2. q. 4. dub. 2. n. 21. Baldwin. de Cons.
Cas. lib. 1. cap. 7. Ames. de Cons. lib. 1. cap. 4. etc.
Learned tell us that in things Indifferent (at least), even an Erroneous
Conscience ligat, though non obligat. It binds, by a Negative tie; that is,
though we are not obliged to do what it prescribes, yet we are bound not to do
what it condemns or forbids. The reason whereof must be, the
Representation of the Will of God therein; for an Erroneous Conscience judges
it self to act by Rule.

5. Sobriety. This is another Boundary of Liberty of Conscience. Brethren
(says the Apostle) ye are called to liberty, only use not your liberty as an
occasion to the flesh. Gal. 5. 13. That were to pass the bounds of Sobriety,
Temperance, Humility, Frugality, Modesty, etc. That were not a holy Liberty but
a sinful Licentiousness. That were not the Use but the Abuse of our Liberty.
These are the Bounds of our Liberty of Conscience.

And thus I have dispatched the last step of Christian Liberty; and the first
Capital Privilege, viz. Redemption. O how does it concern us, to contend for
what Christ has procured! Periculosum est in divinis rebus ut quis cedat jure
suo, said Cyprian, de Haeret. baptiz. vid. Par. Comment. in 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Tilen. Synt. part 2. disp. 44. These. 33.

The other great Evangelicall Privilege is, Adoption.

One great design of the Son of God, in assuming to himself our Nature, was;
That we might (...).
receive the Adoption of Sons. Here is noted the filial state of the Church;
not, but that all the Saints in the Jewish Church, were Sons, but because the
condition of the Jewish Church considered as a Collective Body, was by reason
of the Legal Non dixit Apostolus, accipiamus, sed, recipiamus, ut significaret
hoc nos amisisse in Adam ex quo mortales sumus. Aug. in loc.
YOKE of Rites and Ceremonies more servile then that of the Christian Church.

Adoption is that Evangelicall Privilege, wherein the Natural Sons of sinful
Men, become the Adoptive Sons of the Living God. It is peculiar to Believers,
the Lords Redeemed ones. Christ is the Son of God by Natural, Eternal, and
Ineffable Generation, Angels are Sons of God by Creation; but Men (viz.
Believers) are Sons of God by Adoption. There be two great and admirable truths
in the Text.

1. Here, The Son of God became the Son of Man. God sent forth his Son made of
a Woman. 2. Here, The Sons of Men became the Sons of God. That we might receive
the Adoption of Sons.
(...). Chrysostom. in Joh. cap 1.
The Son of God became the Son of Man, that the Sons of Men might become the
Sons of God.

O what Comfort is this to Redeemed Ones! what? that Slaves should become Sons!
that such as are by Nature the children of wrath, should through Grace, become
Ephesians. 2. 3.
the Children of the Most High God! etc.

This Theme does well deserve another Treatise; but I must conclude.

Use 4. Here is a Motive to Thankfulness.

Here is the most quickening Motive to Gratitude, Praise, and Thanksgiving,
that Heaven can afford to Mankind: What? That the Son of God should be made of
a woman, for the Redemption, Adoption, Salvation of Sinners! Angels paid a
Tribute of Praise for this Contrivance; Glory to God in the highest, said they.
Surely Men are much Luke 2. 14.
more concerned, since God took not upon him the Nature of Angels but the Seed
of Abraham. O Let Men henceforth Heb. 2. 16.
become Tributaries to the most High God! bless God Christians, write a Law of
thankfullness upon your hearts, and Copy it out in your Lives. Bless God
Captives, here is a Redeemer! Bless God Sinners, here is a Savior! One of
your own flesh and blood! O let us begin our eternal work, where I end. I dare
say, this is a Theme, which ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands Rev.
5. 11.
of thousands, even the whole Host of Heaven will with praises Celebrate and
Comment upon to all Eternity.

(...).
FINIS.

