THE DANGERS OF NEW DISCIPLINE, TO The STATE and CHURCH Discovered, FIT TO BE
CONSIDERED By them who seek (as they term it) the Reformation of the CHURCH
of ENGLAND.

COMPOSED BY A TRVE PROTEstant, a Loyal Subject, a Loving Fellow Member of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, who daily prays for KING and
PEOPLE and a Settled peace in all three KINGDOMS.

Printed for W. R. ANN. DOM. 1642.

A DISCOVRSE to them who seek the Reformation (as they term it) of the CHVRCH
of ENGLAND.
BRETHREN,
way. The rather, for that they have seen already some small beginnings of the
fruits thereof in them, who concurring with you in Judgment, about the
necessity of that Discipline, have adventured without more ado to separate
themselves from the rest of the Church, and to put your speculations in
execution. These men's hastynesse, the waryer sort of you do not Commend, you
wish they had held themselves longer in, and not so dangerously flowne abroad
before the feathers of the cause had been grown. Their error with merciful
terms ye reprove, nameing them in great commiseration of mind, 1. Pet. 22.
your poor Brethren.

2. They, on the contrary side, more bitterly accuse you as their false
Brethren, and against you they plead, saying, From your breasts it is that we
have sucked those things, which when ye delivered unto us, ye termed that
heavenly, sincere, and wholesome milk of Gods word, howsoever ye now abhor
as poison, that, which the virtue thereof has wrought and brought forth in us.
Psalm. 55.13.
Ye sometimes our Companions, Guides, and familiars, with whom we have had
most sweet consultations are now become our professed Adversaries, because we
think the statute-Congregations in England to be no true Christian-Churches,
because we have severed our selves from them, and because without their leave
or license that are in civil Authority, we have secretly framed our own
Churches according to the platform of the word of God. For, of that point
between you and us, there is no controversy. Alas! what would you have us to
do? At such time as ye were content to accept us in the number of your own,
your teachings we heard, we read your writings: and though we would, yet
able we are not to forget with what zeal ye ever have professed, that in the
English Congegations (for so many of them as be ordered according unto their
own Laws) the very public service of God is fraught, as touching matter,
with heaps of intolerable pollutions, and as concerning form, borrowed from
the shop of Antichrist; hateful both ways in the eyes of the most holy: the
kind of their Government by Bishops and Archbishops Antichristian; that
Discipline which Christ has essentially tied, that is to say, so united unto
his Church that we cannot account it really to be his Church, which has not
in it the same Discipline, that very Discipline, no less there despised, Pref.
against Docter Baner.
then in the highest Throne of Antichrist; all such parts of the word of God,
as do any way concern that Discipline, no less unsoundly taught and
interpreted by all authorized English Pastors, the^ by Antichrists factors
themselves; at Baptism Crossing, at the lords supper kneeling; at both, a
number of other the most notorious badges of Antichristian recognisance usual.
Being moved with these, and the like your effectual discourses, whereunto we
gave most attentive ear, till they entered even into our souls, and were as
fire within our bosoms, we thought we might hereof be bold to conclude,
that since no such Antichristian Synagogue may be accounted a true Church of
Christ, ye by accusing all Congregations ordered according to the Laws of
England, as Antichristian, did mean to condemn those congregations, as not
being any of them worthy the true name of a Christian Church; Ye tell us now,
it is not your meaning. But what meant your often threatenings of them, who
professing themselves the inhabitants of Mount Sion, were too loath to depart
wholly, as they should, out of Babylon; Whereat our hearts being fearfully
troubled, we durst not, we durst not continue longer so near her confines,
least her plagues might suddenly overtake us, before we did cease to be
partakers with her sins: for so we could not choose but acknowledge with
grief that we were, when they doing evil, we, by our presence in their
Assemblies, seemed to like thereof, or, at leastwise not so earnestly to
dislike as became men heartily zealous of Gods glory. For, adventuring to erect
the Discipline of Christ, without the leave of the Christian Magistrate,
happily Ye may condemn us as fools, in that we hazard thereby our estates
and persons, further then you (which are that way more wise) think necessary:
but of any offense or sin therein Committed against God, with what Conscience
can you accuse us, when your own positions are, that the things we observe,
should every of them be dearer unto us then 10000 lives? that they are the
peremptory Commandments of God; that no mortal man can dispense with them,
and that the Magistrate greivously sins, in constraining thereunto; Will Ye
blame any man for doing that of his own accord, which all men should be
compelled unto, which are not willing of themselves? when God Commands, shall
we answer that we will obey, if so be Caesar will grant us leave? Is
Discipline an Ecclesiastical matter, or a Civil? If an Ecclesiastical, it
must of necessity belong to the duty of the Minister. And the Minister (Ye
say) holds all his Authority of doing whatsoever belongs unto the
spiritual Charge of the house of God, even immediately from God himself,
without dependency upon any Magistrate. Whereupon it follows as we suppose,
that the hearts of the people being willing to be under the scepter of Christ,
the Minister of God, into whose hands the Lord himself has put that scepter,
is without all excuse, if thereby he guide them not. Nor do we find that
hitherto greatly ye have disliked those Churches abroad, where the people with
direction of their Godly Ministers, have even against the will of their
Magistrate, brought in either the doctrine, or discipline of JESUS CHRIST. For
which cause we must now think the very same thing of you which our SAVIOR
did sometimes utter, concerning falsehearted Scribes and Pharisees, THEY SAY
AND DO NOT. Thus the foolish Barrowist deriveth his schism, Mat. 3.23.
by way of conclusion, as to him it seems, directly and plainly out of your
principles. Him, therefore, we leave to be satisfied by you from whom he has
sprung. And if such, by your own acknowledgment, be persons dangerous,
although as yet, the alterations which they have made are of small and tender
growth; the changes likely to ensue within this land, in case your desire
should take place, must be thought upon.

3. First, concerning the supreme power of the highest, they are no small
Prerogatives, which now thereunto belonging, the form of your discipline will
restrain it to resign. Again, it may justly be feared, whether our English
Nobility, when the matter came in Trial, would contentedly suffer themselves
to be always at the talye, and to stand to the sentence, of a number of mean
persons, assisted with the presence of their poor Teacher, a man (as sometimes
it hapeneth) though better able to speak, yet no whit apter to judge, then the
rest, from whom, be their dealings never so absurd (unless it be by way of
complaint to a Synod) no appeal may be made unto any one of higher power, in
as much as the order of your discipline admits no standing inequality of
Court, no spiritual Judge to have any ordinary superior on Earth, but as many
supremacies as there are Parishes and several Congregations.

4. Neither is it altogether without cause, that so many do fear the
overthrow of all Learning, as a threatened sequel of this your intended
discipline. For, Sapien. 6.24.
if the Worlds preservation depend on the multitude of the wise; and of that
sort the number hereafter be not likely to wax overgreat, Eccle. 26 29.
when (that wherewith the son of Syrack professes himself at the heart
greived) men of understanding are already so little set by: how should their
minds whom the love of so precious a Jewel, filled with secret Iealousy, even
in regard of the least things, which may ny way hinder the flourishing estate
thereof, choose, but misdoubt least this discipline which always you match with
divine doctrine, as her natural and true Sister, be found unto all kinds of
knowledge a stepmother? seeing that the greatest worldly hopes, which are
proposed unto the chiefest kind of learning, ye seek utterly to extirpate as
weeds; and have grounded your Platform on such propositions, as do in a sort
undermine those most renowned habitations, where through the goodness of
Almighty God, all commendable Arts and Sciencies are with exceeding great
industry hitherto (and so may they for ever continue) studied, proceeded in,
and professed. To charge you as purposely bent to the overthrow of that wherein
so many of you have attained no small perfection, were injurious; only
therefore I wish that your selves did well consider how opposite certain your
positions are unto the state of Collegiate Societies, wherein the two
Universities consist. Those degrees which their Statutes bind them to take,
are by your laws taken away; your selves who have sought them ye so excuse,
as that ye would have men to think ye Judge them not allowable, but
tolerable only, and to be borne with for some help which ye find in them
unto the furtherance of your purposes, till the corrupt estate of the Church
may be better reformed. Your Laws forbidding Ecclesiastical persons utterly
the exercise of Civil power, musts needs deprive the Heads and Masters in the
same Colleges of all such authority as now they exercise either at home, by
punishing the faults of those, who, not as Children to their Parents by the Law
of Nature, but altogether by Civil authority are subject unto them, or abroad,
by keeping Courts amongst their Tenants. Your Laws, making permanent
inequality amongst Ministers, a thing repugnant to the Word of God, enforce
those Colleges, the Seniors whereof are all or any part of them Ministers,
under the government of a Master in the same vocation, to choose as often as
they meet together a new President. For, if so ye judge it necessary to do in
Synods, for the avoiding of permanent inequality amongst Ministers, the same
cause must needs, even in these Collegiate Assemblies, enforce the like. Except
peradventure ye mean to avoid all such absurdities by dissolving those
Corporations, and by bringing the Universities unto the form of the School of
Geneva. Which thing men the rather are inclined to look for, in as much as the
Ministry, whereinto their Founders with singular providence have by the same
Statutes appointed them necessarily to enter at a certain time, Humb. motion
to the L. L. P. 50.
your laws bind them much more necessarily to forbear, till some parish
abroad call for them.

Your opinion concerning the Law Civil is, that the knowledge thereof might
be spared, as a thing which this Land does not need, Professors in that kind
being so few, ye are the bolder to spurn at them, and not to dissemble your
minds concerning their removal: in whose studyes, although my self have not
much been conversant, nevertheless, exceeding great cause I see there is to
wish, that thereunto more encouragement were given, as well for the singular
treasures of Wisdom therein contained, as also for the great use we have
thereof, both in decision of certain kinds of causes, ariseing daily within
our selves, and especially for commerce with Nations abroad, Whereunto that
knowledge is most requisite.

5. The reasons wherewith ye would persuade, that Scripture is the only rule
to frame all our Actions by, are in every respect as effectual for proof,
that the same is the only Law whereby to determine all our Civil
Controversies. And then what does let, but as those men have their desire, who
frankly broach it already, that the work of Reformation will never be
perfected till the Law of Jesus Christ be received alone; so pleaders and
Counselors may bring their books of the Common Law, and bestow them as the
Students of curious and needless Arts did theirs in the Apostles time? Act.
19.19.
I leave them to scan how far those words of yours may reach, wherein ye
declare, that whereas many houses lie waste through inordinate suits in Law,
Humb. motion P. 74.
This one thing will show the excellency of Discipline for the wealth of the
Realm, and quiet of Subjects; that the Church is to censure such a party who
is apparently troublesome and contentious, and without REASONABLE CAUSE upon a
mere will and stomach does vex and molest his Brother, and trouble the
Country. For my own part I do not see, but that it might agree very well with
your Principles, if your discipline were fully planted, even to send out your
writs of surceace unto all Courts of England besides, for the most things
handled in them. A great deal further I might proceed, and descend lower.

6. But for as much as against all these and the like difficultyes your answer
is, Counterp. 6. P. 108.
that we ought to search what things are consonant to Gods word, not which be
most for our own ease; and therefore that your discipline being (for such is
your error) the absolute commandment of Almighty God, it must be received,
although the world by receiving it should be clean turned vpside down, herein
lies the greatest danger of all. For whereas the name of divine Authority is
used to countenance these things which are not the commandments of God, but
your own erroneous collections; on him you must father whatsoever ye shall
afterward be led either to do, in withstanding the Adversaries of your cause,
or to think, in maintenance of your doeings; and what this may be God does
know: In such kinds of errors, the mind once imagining it self to seek
execution of Gods will, labors forthwith to remove both things and persons
which any way hinder it from taking place, and in such cases if any strange or
new thing seem requisite to be done, a strange and new opinion concerning the
lawfullnesse thereof is withal received and broached under countenance of
divine Authority.

7. One example herein may serve for many, to show that false opinions touching
the will of God to have things done are wont to bring forth mighty and violent
practices against the hindrances of them; and those practices new opinions
more pernicious then the first, yea most extremely opposite unto that which
the first did seem to intend, where the people took upon them the Reformation
of the Church by casting out Popish superstition, they having received from
their Pastors a general instruction, Mat. 15.13.
that whatsoever the heavenly Father has not planted must be rooted out,
proceeded in some foreign places so far, that down went Oratories and the
very Temples of God themselves. For, as they chanced to take the compass of
their Commission stricter or larger, so their dealings were accordingly more or
less moderate. Among others, Anabaptists.
there sprung up presently one kind of men; with whose zeal and forwardness
the rest being compared, were thought to be mavelous cold and dull. These
grounding themselves on rules more general; that whatsoever the Law of Christ
commands not, thereof Antichrist is the Author, and whatsoever Antichrist or
his adherents did in the world the true Professors of Christ are to undo; and
found out many things more then others had done, the extirpation whereof was in
their Conceit as necessary as of any thing before removed. Hereupon they
secretly made their doleful complaints every where as they went, that albeit
the World did begin to profess some dislike of that which was evil in the
kingdom of darkness, yet fruits worthy of a true repentance were not seen;
and that if men did repent as they ought, they must endeavor to purge the
truth of all manner of evil, to the end there might follow a new World
afterward, wherein righteousness only should dwell. Private repentance they said
must appear by every man's fashioning his own life contrary unto the custom
and orders of this present World, both in greater things and in less. To this
purpose they had always in their mouths those great things, Guy des Bres
contre l'erreur des Anabapt. page 4.
Charity, Faith, the true Fear of God, the Cross, the Mortification of the
flesh. All their exhortations were to set light of the things in this World, to
count riches and honors vanity, and in token thereof, not only to seek
neither, but if men were possessours of both, even to cast away the one and
resign the other, page 5.
that all men might see their unfeigned conversation unto Christ. They were
sollicitours of men to fasts, page 16. page 118. page 119.
to often meditations of heavenly things; and as it were conferences in secret
with God, by prayers not framed according to the frozen manner of the World:
but expressing such fervent desires as might even force God to hearken to them.
Where they found men in diet, attire, furniture of house, or any other way
observers of Civility and decent order, page 120. page 116.
such they reproved as being carnally and earthly minded. Every word otherwise
then severely and sadly uttered, seemed to pierce like a sword through them.
page 124.
If any man were pleasant, their manner was presently with sighs to repeat
these words of our Savior Christ, Luke 6.12.
Woe be to you which now laugh, for you shall lament. So great was their
delight to be always in trouble, that such as did quietly lead their lives,
they judged of all other men to be in most dangerous case. They so much
affected to cross the ordinary custom in every thing, page 117.
that when other men's use was to put on better attire, they would be sure to
show themselves openly abroad in worse, the ordinary names of the days in the
week they thought it a kind of profaneness to use, and therefore, accustomed
to make no other distinction then by number; the 1, 2, 3, day.

8. From this they proceed unto public Reformation. First, Ecclesiastical,
and then Civil. Touching the former they boldly avouched that themselves only
had the truth. page 40.
Which thing upon peril of their lives they would at all times defend; and
that since the Apostles lived, the same was never before in all points
sincerely taught. Wherefore that things might be brought again to that ancient
integrity which Jesus Christ by his word requires, they began to control the
Ministers of the Gospel, for attributing so much force and virtue unto the
scriptures of God read; whereas the truth was, that when the word is said, to
engender faith in the heart and to convert the soul of man, or to work any
such spiritual divine effect, these speeches are not thereunto appliable as it
is read or preached, but as it is ingrafted into us by the power of the Holy
Ghost, opening the eyes of our understanding, and so revealing the mysteries of
God, according to that which Jeremy promised before should be, Ier. 31.34.
saying, I will put my law in their inward parts, and I will write it in their
hearts. The book of God they notwithstanding for the most part so admired, page,
29.
that other disputation against their opinions, then only by allegation of
scripture, they would not hear, page 27.
besides it they thought no other writings in the World should be studied,
insomuch that one of their great Prophets exhorting them to cast away all
respects unto humane writings, so far to this motion they condescended that
as many as had any Books, save the holy Bible, in their Custody, they brought
and set them publicly on fire.

9. When they and their Bibles were alone together, what strange fantastical
opinion soever at any time entered into their heads, their use was to think the
spirit taught it them. Their frensies concerning our Saviors Incarnation: the
state of souls departed and such like, are things needless to be rehearsed.
And forasmuch as they were of the same suit with those, of whom the Apostle
speaks, saying, 2. Tim. 3.7.
They are still learning but never attaining to the knowledge of truth, it was
no marvel to see them every day broach some new thing never heard of before,
which restless levity they did interpret to be their growing to spiritual
perfection, and a proceeding from faith to faith. page 65. page 66.
The differences among them grew in a manner infinite, so that scarcely was
there found any one of them, the forge of whose brain was not possessed with
some special mystery. page 135.
Whereupon although their mutual contentions were most fiercely prosecuted
among themselves, yet when they came to defend the common cause, common to them
all against the Adversaries of their factions, they had ways to lick one
another whole, the sounder in his own persuasion excusing The dear Brethren,
page 25.
which were not so far enlightened, and professing a charitable hope of the
mercy of God toward them, notwithstanding their swarving from him in some
things. page 71.
Their own Ministers they highly magnifyed, as men whose vocation was from
God: the rest, page 124.
their manner was disdainfully to term Scribes and Pharisees, to account their
calling an humane creature, and to detain the people, as much as might be,
from hearing of them. page 764.
As touching Baptism administered in the Church of Rome, they judged to be an
execrable mockery, and no Baptism, both, because the Ministers thereof in the
Papacy are wicked Idolaters, lewd persons, Thieves and Murderers, cursed
creatures, ignorant beasts; and also, that for to baptize is a proper action
belonging unto none but the Church of Christ, whereas Rome is Antichrists
Synagogue. page 748.
The custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers at Christnings they scorned.
Baptizing of Infants, page 512.
although confessed by themselves to have been continued even sithence the very
Apostles own times, yet they altogether condemned, partly, page 518.
because sundry errors are of no less antiquity: page 722.
and partly because there is no commandment in the Gospel of Christ which
says Baptize Infants, but he contrariwise saying, Go preach and Baptize, does
appoint that the Minister of Baptism shall in that action first administer
doctrine, and then Baptism, as also in saying, whosoever does believe and is
Baptized, page 688.
he appoints that the person, to whom Baptism is administered, shall first
believe, and then be Baptized; to the end that believing may go before this
Sacrament in the receiver, no otherwise then preaching in the giver, since
equally in both, the law of Christ declares, not only what things are
required, but also in what order they are required. page 38.
The Eucharist they received (pretending our Lord and Saviors example) after
Supper: and for avoiding all those impieties which have been grounded upon the
mystical words of Christ, This is my body, this is my blood, they thought it
not safe to mention either body or blood in that Sacrament, page 122.
but rather to abrogate both, and to use no words but these, Take, eat, declare
the death of our Lord; Drink, show forth our Lords death.

In Rites and Ceremonies their profession was, hatred of all conformity with
the Church of Rome: for which cause they would rather endure any torment, then
observe the solemn festivalls which others did, in as much as Antichrist (they
said) was the first Inventor of them.

10. The pretended end of their Civil Reformation was, that Christ might have
dominion over all; that all Crowns and Scepters might be thrown down at his
feet; that no other might reign over Christian men but he; no Regiment keep
them in awe but his discipline; amongst them no sword at all to be carried
besides his, the sword of Spiritual Excommunication. For this cause they
labored withal their might in overturning the Seats of Magistracy, because
Christ has said, page 841.
Kings of Nations; in abolishing the execution of Justice, because Christ has
said, resist not evil; in forbidding Oaths the necessary means of Judicial
Trial, because Christ has said, Swear not at all; finally, page 849.
in bringing in community of goods, because Christ by his Apostles has given
the World such example, to the end that men might excel one another, not in
wealth, the pillar of secular authority, but in virtue.

11. These men at the first were only pitied in their error, and not much
withstood by any; page 40.
the great humility, zeal and devotion, which appeared to be in them was in
all men's opinion a pledge of their harmless meaning. The hardest that men of
sound Judgment conceived of them, was but this, Lactant.
O quam honesta voluntate miseri errant; with how good a meaning these poor
souls do evil! Luther made request unto Frederick Duke of Saxony, that
within his dominion they might be favorably dealt with and spared, Just. lib.
5. cap. 19.
for that (their error exempted) they seemed otherwise right good men. By
means of which merciful toleration they gathered strength, page 6.
much more then was safe for the state of the Commonwealth wherein they lived.
They had their secret corner-meetings and assemblies in the night, the people
flocked unto them by thousands. The means whereby they both allured and
retained so great multitudes were most effectual; Page 4. 20.
first, a wonderful show of zeal toward God, Page 55.
wherewith they seemed to be even rapt in every thing they spoke. Secondly, an
hatred of sin and a singular love of integrity, which men did think to be
much more then ordinary in them, by reason of the Custom which they had to
fill the ears of the people with invectives against their authorized Guids,
as well Spiritual as Civil. Thirdly, the bountyfull releife wherewith they
eased the broken estate of such needy Creatures as were in that respect the
more apt to be drawn away. Fourthly, a tender Compassion which they were
thought to take upon the miseries of the Common sort, over whose heads their
manner was, Page 6. 7.
even to power down showrs of tears, complaining that no respect was had unto
them, that their goods were devoured by wicked Cormorants, their persons had in
contempt, all liberty both temporal and spiritual taken from them, that it
was high time for god now to hear their groans and to send them deliverance:
Lastly, a cunning slight which they had to stroke and smooth up the minds of
their followers, as well by appropriating unto them all the favorable Titles,
the good words and the gracious promisies in Scripture; as also by casting the
contrary always on the heads of such as were severred from that retinue.
Whereupon, the Peoples common acclamations unto such deceivers was, These are
verily the men of God, these are his true and sincere Prophets. If any such
Prophet or man of God did suffer by order of law condign and deserved
punishment, were it for Felony, Rebellion, Murder or what else, the people (so
strangely were their hearts enchanted) as though blessed Saint Stephen had been
again Martyred, Page 27.
did lament that God took away his most dear servants from them.

12. In all things being fully persuaded, that what they did it was Obedience
to the will of God, and that all men should do the like; there remained after
speculation, practice, whereby the whole world thereunto (if it were possible)
might be framed. Page 6.
This they saw could not be done without mighty opposition and resistance:
against which to strengthen themselves, they secretly entered into a league of
association. And peradventure, considering that although they were many, yet
long wars would in time wast them out; they began to think whether it might
not be that God would have them do for their speedy and mighty increase, the
same which sometime Gods own chosen people, the people of Israel did. Glad
and feign they were to have it so: which very desire was it self apt to breed
both an opinion of possibility, and a willingness to gather arguments of
likelihood that so God himself would have it. Nothing more clear unto their
seeming, then that a new Jerusalem being often spoken of in Scripture, they
undoubtedly were themselves that new Jerusalem, and the old did by way of a
certain figurative resemblance signify what they should be and do. Here
they drew in a Sea of matter by applying of all things unto their own company,
which are any where spoken concerning divine favors, and benefits bestowed
upon the old common wealth of Israel, concluding that as Israel was delivered
out of Egypt, so they spiritually out of the Egypt of this Worlds servile
thraldom unto sin and superstition; as Israel was to root out the
Idolatrous Nations, and to plant instead of them a people which feared God, so
the same Lords good will and pleasure was now, that these new Israelites should
under the Conduct of other Ioshuas, Sampsons, and Gideons perform a work no
less miraculous in casting out violently the wicked from the earth, and
establishing the kingdom of Christ with perfect liberty: and therefore as the
cause why the Children of Israel took unto one man many wives, might be,
least the casualties of war should any way hinder the promise of God
concerning their multitude from taking effect in them, so it was not unlike
that for the necessary propagation of Christ's kingdom under the Gospel, the
Lord was content to allow as much. Now whatsoever they did in such sort collect
out of Scripture, when they came to justify or persuade it unto others, all
was the heavenly fathers appointment, his commandment, his will and charge.
Which thing is the point, in regard whereof I have gathered this declaration.
For my purpose herein is to show, that when the minds of men are once
erroniously persuaded, that it is the will of God to have those things done
which they fancy; their opinions are as thorns in their sides, never suffering
them to take rest till they have brought their speculations into practice; the
rests and impediments of which practice, their restless desire and study to
remove, leads them every day forth by the hand into other more dangerous
opinions, sometimes quite and clean contrary to their first pretended
meanings; so as what will grow out of such errors as go masked under the
cloak of divine Authority, impossible it is that ever the wit of man should
imagine, till time have brought forth the fruits of them; for which cause it
behooveth wisdom to fear the sequells thereof, even beyond all apparent cause
of fear. These men in whose mouths at the first sounded nothing but only
mortification of the flesh, were come at the length to think they might
lawfully have their six or seven Wives a piece. They which at the first,
thought judgment and justice it self a mercylesse cruelty; accounted at the
length their own hands sanctified, with being imbrued in Christian blood;
they, who at the first were wont to beat down all dominion and to urge against
poor Constables, Kings of Nations, had at the length both Consulls and Kings
of their own erection; finally, they which could not brook at the first, that
any man should seek, no not by law, the recovery of goods injuriously taken or
withheld from him; were grown at the last to think, they could not offer unto
God more acceptable service, then by turning their Adversaries clean out of
house and home, and by enriching themselves with all kind of spoil and
pillage, page 41.
which thing being laid to their charge, they had in all readiness their
answer, that now the time was come, when according to our Saviors promise, The
meek ones must inherit the earth, Mat. 5.5.
and that their title hereunto, was the same which the Righteous Israelites had
unto the goods of the wicked Egyptians. Exodus 11.2.


13. Wherefore since the World has had in these men so fresh experience how
dangerous such active errors are, it must not offend you, though touching the
sequel of your present misperswasions much more be doubted, then your own
intents and purposes do happily aim at. And yet your words all-ready are
somewhat, when ye affirm that your Pastors, Mart. in his 3. libel. P. 28.
Elders, Doctors, and Deacons, ought to be in this Church of England, whither
his Majesty and our State will, or no; when for the animating of your
Confederates, ye publish the Musters which ye have made of your own bands,
and proclaim to amount unto, I know not how many thousands; when ye threaten,
that since neither suits to the Parliament, nor supplications to our
Convocation-House, neither your defenses by writing, nor challenges of
disputation in behalf of that cause are able to prevayle, we must blame our
selves, if to bring in discipline some such means be used hereafter, as shall
cause all our hearts to ache. Demonstr. in the Preface.
That things doubtful are to be construed in the better part, is a principle
that ought not to be followed in matters concerning the public state of a
Commonwealth. But howsoever these and the like speeches be accounted as
arrows idly shot at random, without either eye had to any mark, or regard to
their lighting place: has not your longing desire for the practice of your
discipline, brought the matter already unto this demurrer amongst you; whether
the people and their godly Pastors, that way affected, ought not to make
separation from the rest, and to begin the exercise of discipline, without the
license of Civil powers, which license they sought for, and are not heard?
Upon which question, as ye have now divided your selves, the warier sort of you
taking the one part, and the forwarder in zeal the other; so in case these
earnest ones should prevail? what other sequel can any wise man imagine, but
this; that having first resolved, that attempts for discipline without
superiors, are lawful, it will follow in the next place to be disputed what
may be attempted against superiors, which will not have the scepter of that
discipline to rule over them?

14. Yea even by you, which have stayed your selves from running headlong with
the other sort, somewhat notwithstanding there has been done, without the
leave or likeing of your lawful Superiors, for the exercise of a part of your
discipline amongst the Clergy thereunto addicted. And least examination of
principal parties therein, should bring those things to light, which might
hinder and let your proceedings; behold for a bar against that impediment,
one opinion ye have newly added unto the rest, even upon this occasion, an
opinion to exempt you from taking Oaths; which may turn to the molestation
of your Brethren in that cause. The next neighbor opinion, whereunto when
occasion requires, may follow for dispensation with Oaths already taken, if
they afterward be found to import a necessity of detecting ought which may
bring such good men into trouble or damage whatsoever the cause be. O
merciful God! what man's wit is there able to sound the depth of these
dangerous and fearful evils, whereinto our weak and impotent nature is
inclinable to sink it self, rather then to show an acknowledgment of error
in that, which once we have unadvisedly taken upon us to defend, against the
stream, as it were, of a contrary public resolution? Wherefore if we any
thing respect their error, who being persuaded even as ye are, have gone
further upon that perswation then ye allow, if we regard the present estate
of the highest Governor placed over us, if the quality and disposition of our
Nobles, if the Orders and Laws of our famous Universities, of the profession
of the Civil or the practice of the Common Law amongst us, if the mischieves,
whereinto even before our eyes, so many others have fallen headlong from no
less plausible and fair beginings, then yours are: there is in every of these
considerations most just cause to fear, least our hastiness to embrace a
thing of so perilous Consequence, should cause posterity to feel those
evils, which as yet are more easy for us to prevent, then they would be for
them to remedy. The Concl. of all.


15. The best and safest way therefore for you, my dear Brethren, is, to call
your deeds past to a new reckoning, to examine the cause ye have taken in
hand, and to try it even point by point, Argument by Argument, with all the
diligent exactness ye can; to lay aside the Gall of that bitterness wherein
your minds have hitherto overabounded, and with meekness to search the Truth;
think ye are men, deem it not impossible for ye to err; fifth unpartially
your own hearts, whether it be the force of reason or vehemence of affection
which has bred and still does feed these opinions in you. If truth do any
where manifest it self, seek not to smother it with glosing delusion,
acknowledge the greatness thereof, and think it your best victory when the
same does prevail over you.

16. That ye have been earnest in speaking and writing again and again the
contrary way, shall be no blemish nor discredit at all unto you. Amongst so
many so huge volumes as the infinite pains of Saint Augustine has brought
forth, what one has gotten him greater love, commendation, and honor then the
book wherein he carefully collecteth his own oversights, and sincerely
condemns them? Many speeches there are of Iobes, whereby his wisdom and
other virtues may appear: but the glory of an ingenious mind he has
purchased by these words only, Job. 39.37.
Behold, I will lay mine hand on my mouth, I have spoken once, yet will I not
therefore maintain argument: yea twice, howbeit for that cause, further I will
not proceed. Far more comfort it were for us (so small is the joy we take
in these strifes) to labor under the same yoke, as men that look after the
same eternal reward of their labors, to be enjoyed with you in bands of
indissoluble love and amity, to live as if our persons being many, our Souls
were but one, rather the^ in such dismembered sort, to spend our few and
wretched days in a tedious prosecutio^ of wearysome contentions, the end
whereof, if they have not some speedy end will be heavy even on both sides.
Brought already we are, even to that estate, which Gregory Nazianzene
mournfully described, saying.

G. Naz: Apol.
My mind leads me (since there is no other remedy) to fly and to convey my
self into some corner out of sight, where I may escape from this cloudy tempest
of maliciousness, whereby all parts are entered into a deadly war amongst
themselves, and that little remnant of love which was, is now consumed to
nothing. The only godliness we glory in, is to find out somewhat whereby we
may Judge others to be ungodly. Each others faults we observe, as matter of
exprobration, and not of grief. By these means we are grown hateful in the
eyes of the heathens themselves, and (which wounds us the more deeply) able
we are not to deny, but that we have deserved their hatred. With the better
sort of our own, our fame and Credit is clean lost. The less we are to
marvel, if they Judge vilely of us, who although we did well, would hardly
allow thereof. On our backs they also build, that are lewd, and what we object
one against another, the same they use to the utter scorn and disgrace of us
all. This we have gained by our mutual home dissentions. This we are
worthyly rewarded with, which are more forward to strive, then becomes men of
virtuous and mild disposition. But our trust with the almighty is, that with
us, contentions are now at their, highest floate, and that the day will come
(for what cause of despair is there,) when the passions of former enmity being
allayed, we shall with ten times redoubled tokens of our unfainedly reconciled
love, show our selves each toward other the same, which Joseph and the
Brethren of Joseph, were at the time of their intervew in Egypt. Our
comfortable expectation, and most Thirsty desire whereof, what man soever
amongst you shall any ways (...) to (...) (as we truly hope there is no one
amongst you but some way or other will) the blessing of the God of peace, both
in this world, and in the world to come, be upon him, more then the stars of
the firmament in number. AMEN.

ECCLES. POLIT. LIB. 5.. 79. ad fin.
Such is the general detestation of robbing God or the church; that whereas
nothing does either in peace or war more uphold men's reputation then
prosperous success, because, in common construction, unless notorious
improbitie be joined with prosperity, it seems to argue favor with God,
they which once have stained their hands with these odious spoils, do thereby
fasten unto all their actions an eternal prejudice; in respect whereof, for
that it passes through the world as an undoubted rule and principle, that
sacrilege is open defiance to god, whatsoever afterward they undertake, if they
prosper in it, men reckon it but Dionysius his navigation, and if any thing
befall them otherwise, it is not, as commonly, so in them ascribed to the great
uncertainty of casual events, wherein the providence of God does control the
purposes of men, oftentimes much more for their good, then if all things did
answer fully their hearts desire, but the censure of the world is ever
directly against them, both Novimus multa regna and reges eorum propterea
cecidisse, quia Ecclesias spoliaverunt, resque earum vastaverunt, alienaverunt
vel diripuerunt; Episcopisque and sacer^otibus, a^que quod majus est, Ecclesiis
eorum abstulerunt, and pugnantibus dederunt. Quapropter nec fortes in bello,
nec in fide stabiles fuerunt, nec victores extiterunt, sed terga multi
vulnerati, and plures interfecti verterunt, regnaque and regiones, and quod
pejus est, regna coelestia perdiderunt, atque propriis haereditatibus
caruerunt, and hactenus carent. verba Caroli Mag. in Capital. Caral. l. 7. c.
104.
bitter and peremptory.

To make such actions therefore less odious, and to mitigate the envy of them,
many colorable shifts and inventions have been used, as if the world did hate
only wolves, and think the fox a godly creature. The time Turno tempus erit
magno cum optaverit emptum. Intactum Pallanta, and cum spolia ista, diemque
Oderit. virgil Aeen. lib. 10.
it may be will come, when they that either violently have spoiled, or thus
smoothly defrauded God, shall find they did but deceive themselves. In the
mean while, there will be always some skillful persons, which can teach a
way how to grind treatably the Church, with jaws that shall scarce move, and
yet devour in the end more then they that come ravening with open mouth, as if
they would worrie the whole man instant. Others also who have wastfully eaten
out their own patrimony, would be glad to repair if they might their decayed
estates, with the ruin they care not of what, nor of whom, so the spoils were
theirs; whereof in some part if they happen to speed, yet commonly they are
men borne under that constellation, which makes them, I know not how, as unapt
to enrich themselves as they are ready to impoverish others; it is rheir lot to
sustain during life, both the misery of beggars, and infamy of robbers.

But though no other plague and revenge should follow sacrilegious violations
of holy things, the natural disgrace and ignominy, the very turpitude of such
actions in the eyes of a wise understanding heart, is it self (...). Demost.
Poenam non dico legum, quas saepe pe^rumpunt; sed ipsius turpitudinis quae
acerbissima est, non vident. Cic. Off. lib. 3. Impunita credi^ esse quae inviso
sunt, aut ullum supplicium gravius existimas publico odio? Senec de Benef. l.
3. c. 17.
a heavy punishment. Men of virtuous quality, are by this sufficiently moved to
beware, how they answer and require the mercyes of God with injuries, whether
openly or indirectly offered.

By means whereof the church most commonly for gold has flanell, and whereas
the usual saw of old was, Glaucus his changeing, the proverb is now, A Church
bargain.

And for fear lest covetousness alone should linger out the time too much,
and not be able to make havocke of the house of God, with that expedition
which the mortal enemy thereof did vehemently wish, he has by certain strong
inchauntments, so deeply bewitched religion it self, as to make it in the end
an earnest solicitor. and an eloquent perswader of sacrilege, urging
confidently, that the very best service which men of power can do to Christ,
is without any more ceremony, Hu^ ventum videtur (quod non sieve gemitu dixeri^)
ut magna hominum pars credat sese tum demum vere regnum Antichristi evafisse,
fi sum bonis Ecclesiae ludant pro libitu. Calvin. Ep. 33. vide etiam ep.
13.65.68.108. vbi de hac sacrilega dissipatione queritur.

In the time of Popery, the Church of Geneva was very richly endowed with great
revenewes. At the reformation, Calvin and Farell called upon the magistrates,
as they would answer it to God, to employ all that holy stock only to pious and
holy uses, assureing them they could not any other ways bestow any part of it,
without the guilt of horrible Sacrilege. (So it is a degree of Sacrilege, any
way to alter the wills and intentions of founders, so far as they are
tolerable* They promised fairly; but having possessed themselves of the goods
and patrimony of the Clergy, they set apart some small portions for the
University, and the ministers, bestowing the rest in fortifieing their walls,
and furnishing their magazine against the Bishop (the lord and owner of the
town) and other more base uses.

Calvin seeing this Sacrilege, and detesting it, was wont to say with great
grief, I see we have taken the purse from Judas, and given it to the Devil.
Several men of credit have heard this related by a grave learned French
minister yet liveing (or very lately) in England.


to sweep all, and to leave the Church as bare, as in the day it was first
borne; that fullness of bread having made the children of the househould
wanton, it is without any scruple to be taken away from them, and thrown to
dogs; that they which laid the prices of their lands, as offerings at the
Apostles feet, did but sow the seeds of superstition; that they which did endow
Churches with lands, poisoned religion; that Tithes and oblations are now in
the sight of God as the sacrificed blood of goats, that if we give him our
hearts, and affections, our goods are better bestowed otherwise; that Irenaeus,
Policarps disciple, should not have said, we offer unto God our goods, as
tokens of thankfulness for what we do receive; neither Origin, he that
worshippeth God, must by gifts and oblations acknowledge him the Lord of all;
in a word, that to give unto God is error, reformation of error, to take from
the Church, that which the blindness of former ages did unwisely give. By
these or the like suggestions received with all joy; and with like sedulity
practiced in certain parts of the Christian world, they have brought to pass,
that as David does say of man, so it is in hazard to be verified concerning
the whole religion and service of God; The time thereof may peradventure fall
out to be threescore and ten years, or if strength do serve, unto fourscore,
what follows, is like to be small joy for them, whatsoever they be that
behold it.

Thus have the best things been overthrown not so much by puissance, and
might of adversaries, as through defect of counsel in them, that should have
upheld and defended the same.

FINIS.

