THE Blasphemous Charge Against her.

Matthew. 10. And ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my sake,
against them and the Gentiles.

Printed in the Year 1649.

For King Charles Prisoner, these.
SIR,
UPon a reference from you (1633.) to these your Commissioners, I being
Sentenced by them, as upon Record appears, because took upon me to be a
Prophetess; first was Fined, and then to make public Submission at Paul's so
many times; that Jericho for ever cursed, and farther a close prisoner to
continue at your pleasure.

So be it known, you are hereby required to make a public acknowledgement of
such your capital Trespass and high Offense; and first to Ask me foregiveness,
if so be you expect to find Mercy in this world or the other.

Jan. 1648. ELEANOR DOUGLAS.

At the Court of Whitehal, October. 8. 1633.
HIs Majesty does expressly command the Lord Archbishop of Canterburies Grace,
and His Highness Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, That the Petitioner
be forthwith called before them, to answer for presuming to Imprint the said
Books, and for preferring this detestable Petition.

Sidney Mountague.
Concordat cum etc. Tho: Maydwell.

Registro Curiae Dominorum Regiorum Commissionariorum ad Causas Ecclesiasticas.
Extract.
Tertia Sessio Termini Michaelis, 1633.
DIe Jovis vicesimo quarto viz. die mensis Octobris Anno Dom. millesimo
sexcentesimo tricesimo tertio Coram Reverendissimo in Christo Patre and Domino,
Domino Guilielmo providenc' Divina Cantuar' Archiepiscopo totius Angliae
Primate and Metropolitano, Richardo eadem providenc' Angliae Primate and
Metropolitano Archiepiscopo Eboracensi, Honorandis and praenobilibus Comitibus
Portland, Dorset, and Carlisle, Episcopis Elien', and Roffen' and Oxon, Dominis
Iohanne Lamb, and Nathanaele Brent militibus legum Doctoribus, Matthaeo VVren
de Windsor, Montford, and VVorral Sacrae Theologiae professoribus
Commissionariis Regiis ad Causas Ecclesiasticas apud Lambeth, Judiciarum seden'
present Thoma Mottershed Regnerarii Regii Deputato.

Con' Ellenoram Audeley.
Dr. Worrall: She appeared, and the Articles and Answers were publicly read;
She was Fined in Three thousand pounds, Imprisonment till she enter Bond with
sufficient Security to write no more.

Mr. Dr. Wren, Dean of Windsor, he consents to that which is already said.

Dr. Montford, Similiter with Dr. Worrall.

Sir Nathanael Brent, Similiter with Dr. Worrall; and payment of Costs.

Sir John Lamb, and my Lord of Oxford, Agrees with the highest, with the
highest; and to acknowledge her Offense at Paul's Cross.

My Lord of Rochester, with the highest; and if the Court will bear it, he
would send her to Bedlam.

My Lord of Ely, Three thousand pounds, Excommunication, condemned in Costs,
and committed ut prius, till she give, etc.

My Lord Portland, and my Lord of Carlisle, desired to be spared from their
Sentence.

My Lord of Dorset agrees with the highest.

My Lords Grace of York, Imprisonment, and not to have pen, ink and paper, and
so with the highest.

My Lord of Canterbury, Three thousand pounds, close Imprisonment, and to
continue till His Majesty's pleasure be further known.

She was committed to be Gatehouse.

Officium Dominorum con' Elleanorum Tichet, alias Davyes, alias Douglas.
THe Council for the offense insisteth on her Answers, she to appear this day
and place by Bond, to hear and receive the final Order and Judgment of the
Court.

At which day and place the said Lady Eleanor Douglas being called for,
appeared personally; In whose presence the Articles objected against her, and
her Answers made thereunto were publicly read, with certain printed Schedules
and Exhibites thereunto annexed, which she acknowledged to be of her own
penning and publishing in print; and the said Answers to be her true Answers,
and to be Subscribed with her own hand: By all which it evidently appeared to
the Court, by her own Confession, That she had lately compiled and written, and
caused to be printed and published, the three several Schedules annexed to the
said Articles, some containing Expositions of diverse parts of the Chapters of
the Prophet Daniel, some other scandalous matter, by way of Anagram or
otherwise, against Ecclesiastical persons and Judges of eminent place, and some
others, both derogatory to His Majesty and the State. And first as touching
those matters of high nature, which concerned his Majesty, the Court did not
any ways proceed against her, as holding them of too high a nature for this
Court to meddle withal. But forasmuch as she took upon her (which much
unbeseemed her Sex) not only to interpret the Scriptures, and withal the most
intricate and hard places of the Prophet Daniel, but also to be a Prophetess,
falsely pretending to have received certain Revelations from God; and had
compiled certain Books of such her fictions and false Prophesies or
Revelations, which she had in person carried with her beyond the Seas, and had
there procured them to be printed without License, and after brought them over
here into England, and here without License, vented and dispersed them, or some
of them, contrary to the Decree of Star Chamber, made in the xxviii. year of
Queen Eliz. of famous Memory, for the restraining of unlawful printing and
publishing of books, and to the manifest contempt and breach thereof, and to
the great scandal of our Church and State, and the reproach of the true
Christian Religion here professed, and established within this Realm. And
forasmuch as by virtue of the Statute of Primo Eliz. and by virtue of Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, this Court has full power and
authority to punish as well all transgressors and offenders against the said
Decree of Star Chamber, touching the printing and publishing of unlicensed
Books, as such bold attempts as those of hers, in taking upon her to interpret
and expound the holy Scriptures, yea, and the most intricate and hard places
therein, such as the gravest and most learned Divines would not slightly or
easily undertake, without much study and deliberation. For these her said bold
attempts and impostures, tending to the dishonor of God, and scandal of
Religion, whereof she was found and adjuged guilty by the Court, she was
thought well worthy to be severely punished; and was first Fined in the sum of
3000 l. to his Majesty's use, ordered to make a public Submission in
conceptis verbis, at so many times, and in such places as this Court shall
appoint, and as shall be delivered her under the Registers Hand of this Court;
And she was further committed close Prisoner to the Gatehouse, and ordered
there to remain during his Majesty's pleasure, who had taken special notice of
her and her Cause, and referred the Examination and Censuring thereof into this
Court. And lastly she was condemned in Expenses and Costs of Suit, which are to
be paid before her enlargement: And the Keeper of the said prison was required
and commanded not to suffer her to have any pen, ink or paper to write any
thing, in respect that she has so much abused her liberty in that kind
already.

Concordat premissa cum originalibus in veria Predicta facta collacione fideli
perme Jo: Donaldson, Notartum Publicum.


