THE RESTITVTION OF REPROBATES.

Malac: 3 Behold I will send my messenger, etc. Printed in the Year, 1644.

A GENERAL PARDON for Reprobate Rebels, all of them: Their restitution, as
authorized and affirmed;
Math.18. ELIAS truly shall first come and restore all things.
ANd before the great and dreadful day of the Lords coming: When sent that
Prophet which for a sign of it, foreshewing what Plagues with; He will smite
them, and truly never greater known, then at this very time: So take this into
consideration, as probable as other things, before they come to pass; For
Mercy, and Judgments going together, in these last days revealed.

The time being come of the end then and no more occasion to continue
threatening any longer, and terrifyings against wickedness amongst US here
raignning, with that prohibited old proverb out of date: The fathers have
eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth set an edge. Shall cansell that
oppinion of old, of Hell to be a place or prison without redemption, as it
stands not intruth well with Equity, where mercy is so unmeasurable for the
offense of our first deceived parents; Who knew not what they did: That for
their cause, so many without compassion, and commisseration, utterly should be
undon and cast away, whereas SODOM for so few, their sakes had been spair'd
when pressed, shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

But, for this redemption of theirs; however seeming a thing of impossibility:
Yet nothing unpossible with GOD, or too hard for him in his time.

Take, and receive these mystical words to your comfort all of you: saying;
Whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven:
But blaspheming against the Holy Ghost, neither in this world, nor the world to
come shall be forgiven.

But shall be in danger of eternal Hellfire: To wit, though punishment
inevitable, yet the perpetuity in suspense; as by the word DANGER, given to
understand.

And furthermore, as given under the same hand for their release or new pardon
sea^'d here with this saying also. Ye have heard it said of old time,
Whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of a judgment. But I say unto you,
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of a
judgment: And whosoever shall say to his brother Racha, shall be in danger of
a counsel. And whosoever shall say Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire.
Whereby as here possible sometimes for old sayings to be disanul'd and revoked,
so the day of judgments very case, how reviled and menaced the tidings, with a
great council or high court, faireing both alike, foreshewed likewise
reproachfully styled by their Enemies, in this most strick and severe Sermon,
handled, or set forth upon the Mountain, etc. concluded with mercy being
showed; Nevertheless, appointed for Reprobates, and Rebels both.

Etsi salutaveritis fratres vestros tantum quid amplius facitis and ethnici hoc
faciunt, etc. Even their charge, as by the mystical name Racha expressed, how
brethren missecalling one another, as it were high treason, and blasphemy no
less.

And here beati pauperes, beati mites, etc. with GOD in such esteem, the
despised by the world, and they on the other side receiving their consolation
here, such an impossibility for them to escape torment, as for an Elephant, or
Camel, to go through the Eye of an needle: Then the least of his words, not
lightly to be set by so needful, where such may be proud, to be the least in
that Kingdom or Court, any door keeper or the like: Whose word gives light
in this darkness, for that gulf between US and them, to be a passage to Life
through those straits, etc. As he able to bind and loose, and so with Paul
able to say; Sirs, be of good cheer, for GOD is as good ever as His word, ye
are but in jeopardie of eternal Hellfire.

And thus as no light in many days apppeared, then in his dangerous voyage and
sailing slowly, even like those prisoners, though in so much danger, yet
escaped drownding and killing, both ( Acts) so in that hopeless estate of
theirs whose Anchors as it were cut off, for that capital offense, the sin
against the Holy Ghost, it is possible with GOD to pardon it, to release them of
those chains seeming endless.

So again, this for another, Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means
come forth thence until paid the uttermost farthing. The verity of which
place of Scripture: So wrested for Purgatory, those fictions founded or laid
thereon overthrowing that principle. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? Therefore no other way but this to overthrow that; as in truth
concerning utter darkness intended the utmost mite paid to be there: and not
extended in that gross manner, for these souls justified by GOD: To make
Merchandise of them, cried up and down, and sold as Romes Kitchin-stuffe, etc.

And thus far for clearring that mistake of utter darkness, taken for that
third place. So here shall not pass over, his being taken up into the third
heaven: there heareing things not lawful to be utterd, that Apostle made of
GODS counsel. Beside the Resurrections mystery showed him, even this very
Thing, heard the same, as most probable of Reprobation and Election. The
dispute whereof prohibited: With what art thou O man, made of clay, to
question thy Maker, Quid me fecistisic? And so a thing of too high a Nature
then to be published, reserved for the worlds last time: And th^n as dust thou
art, and to dust disolv'd; Likewise all reduced to their first estate, as all
things very good in the beginning, therefore return and live, etc. and in a
day the world made, no more times without their determined Bounds and
precincts, all things at once manifested, neither the very Disciples forbears
to satisfy them in some cases. Saying, He had many things to say unto them,
which they could not bear at that time: That in his Fathers House were many
Mansions, (to wit) privy Chambers and Closits, and the like, how officious so
ever they were to be informed, as that for one. When the time of restoreing
again the Kingdom to Isarell, Acts 1 Chap.

And although their last suite yet put back as it were with these, Ye know
not of what spirit ye be, In taking ELIAS office upon you: Or it is not for you
to know times and seasons which the father has put in his own power. But the
power of the Holy Ghost shall come upon you. Linguae tanquam ignis, super
singulos, etc.

And again requested another time to know what should be the sign of his
second coming, were put off with those unwellcome tokens, etc. bidden to
watch, because the day and hour unknown, a reserved point; and yet nothing
covered, which shall not be revealed, as much to say, the Apocalypse or
Revelation, that sevenfold sealed Book which no man could so much as look
upon, etc. And his sealed Commission he bidden go thy way Daniel for the words
till the end are closed up, etc. even how long it was to end, which he longed so
to understand.

And so still pressed, Lord are there many that shall be saved; are commanded to
strive themselves to enter at the strait gate, sent as it were to Noah's Cabin
door; when saved those few souls, a cold comfort, had it not included the
mystery of Noah's time, the Gospells progress paraleld by those days before
the flood shortened also or cut off, came short of 2000. years, etc.

And thus for those hungry souls, craving the least crumbe or drop of mercy
falling from our table, have gathered up these multiplied fragments for them,
whose multitude as the sand of the sea: GOG and MAGOG, showing His unlimitted
plentiful Redemption.

And in no wise, So much as a tittle of these blessed words to be lost, or cast
away, etc. Blessed is he that has his part in the first Resurrection, for on
such the second death has no power. Inferring for all such having bin
partakers of the second death, to have a second resurrection: Therefore return
and live, for as I live I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, says
the Lord: Ezekiel, etc. for all souls are mine, etc. So Satan's being bound a
Thousand years, even seals a finite or fixed time, including beside Hell in
the last days, (as it were) broken loose, also the general delivery or
loosing of the damned at last.

For above reach, as his Mercy exceeds in height, so his Judgments in depth,
difficult to search into them. Let this suffice therefore, from Lazarus finger
so much, though much more the Scripture affords, for Ishmaels comfort and his
brethren, of the Concubine: and thus as when God opened her eyes and she saw a
spring, Genesis etc. The free woman's son being none of them, stands in no need
of the water of life with them.

But these their portion fallen from the table of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
sitting in the Kingdom of Heaven, reserved for those very Hell Hounds of
Cerberus; rathter then Abraham's seed: Although calls Him, Son; remember that
THOU in thy Life time, etc.

And here one drop more, fallen from that Sopp given Him, that ArchBlood-Sucker
Judas, though speaking on this wise, Good had it been for that had he never
been borne. Yet HE having a being before his birth, is not deprived of that
estate, though borne Never. Therefore not disinherited utterly but in state of
Salvation, nevertheless at last, for whose too late Repentance, Hell of old
prepared for Him, where a Million of times Not too many for such, etc.

And thus much for them, whose doleful language of desperation, that good man
whose name was Job, seems to borrow and restored also: Saying, Shall we
receive good from the hand of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil? Borne
under the same planit, as it were with them or very sencible of their estate,
powrs forth like ample, execrations upon the day and hour of his Nativitie,
that disinale day, all the maledictions under the Sun imposed thereon, like
the day of Judgment, sentenced to such utter darkness: testifies, though he
knows his Redeemer livs; and saying: Therefore have I uttered that which I
understand not, Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. (Job 42.) And
Nebuchadnezar his excellent Majesty? That after so many times gone over him,
was restored, come to be himself in the end, as he had come out of Hell in
their slavish Condition, and as the day of Judgments Alarm hadbeene
affrighted so, that was driven away, etc.

And thus his ways equale, as this most proper to be done by that Sex: a
Woman being the occasion of the worlds woe and undoeing: Therefore this
PLAJSTER or PARDON by a Woman's hand; showing after condign punishment, the
reward of sin, He the propitiation of the whole world, and not the Elects only,
saying: Father forgive them they know not what they do, as proclaimed on the
cross, that last Petition or prayer of his. And if they forgiven, the Actors
and Authors, of that most horrid crime, and abominable blasphemy, of all others
that could plead ignorance least: His Brethren the Jews for so many good
turns, such ungratfullnessere turning, doubtless others of seventy times
seven forgiveness better worthy, then they of seven times.

But the light, an evil sight overcomming: so he their stumbling Block became
a rock of offense: Thus stock blind, and stuborne hearted the world by
Nature: though that day as amazed or ashamed, borrows the nights veil, and
departed Ghosts restless; Leaveing their graves below, and coming forth, yet
know not what they have done to this day: When Cains murdering his only
brother, and Ishmaels deridings and the like; But as a gnate to a Camel or
Elephant: And like a grain of mustardseed with a Mountain weighed; or to be
compared.

Whose figure or prototype accursed Caine sent forth, banished from the
presence of GOD saying, his punishment was greater then could be borne, like
these

Vagabone fugitive people ever since, Having circumcisions mark. And thus
their Pardon folded up first in HIS: That by the LORD had a Mark set upon him
also:

And so far for Marks of a Future forgiveness, for the whole World, etc.
from Adam to the Worlds end: Even as that Salutation, peace and good will
toward men proclaimed at His first Coming or Arrival: so a Larges before his
second Coming, for such in utter Darkness, setting in the shadow of Eternal
perdition, for their enlargement at Last, etc.

And Eloi Eloi, as one forsaken etc. not without a twofold signification truly
(to wit) Ye shall not see me till ye say, Blessed is he that coms in the Name
of the Lord, the name of Elias being not far from Eli or Lord, as they came
very near it: Saying, Let us see it Elias will come, etc. In whose likeness or
forlorn estate: of a truth, Lazarus set forth how it fares with the Prophets.
John for example put in prison; and others, etc.

And for the gulf, as in truth signifying a space of time, between our
Resurection and theirs, so that even the water of life begged but to cool his
scorched tongue: And thus that Prophet, the Lords second messenger, styled by
his name (Elias,) because before the change, not tasting death, but taken up
alive, like him the resurections figure: and with Elijah going on saying: As
thy soul lives, I will not leave thee, here posting away briefly showing his
progress: The Prince of life shall relate somewhat of his sermon bestowed upon
those disobedient spirits, imprisoned sometimes in Noah's days (Peter. 3.
chap.) Who certainly would not have afforded them the high favor of his
presence: Had he intended to cast them away utterly, as she told her husband.
If the Lord had meant or been pleased to kill us, He would not have she'wd us
all these things, Judge. etc.

Thus he the Judge of quick and dead, declaring the veil, etc. not taking
away of their atonement: then was clothed in a cloud, as this likeness in
most probable did appear: ( Revel. 10.) Crowned with the Rain Bow, his Feet
as pillars of fire, a little book in His hand open, the Gospel all fulfilled
etc. By whose posture or standing, setting HIS right Foot on the Water, the
left on the land: giveing to understand the Gospels pilgrimage, or preaching
how long to continue by Sea and Land, before published through the World, and
before the flood That time, as before showed, so the worlds last Age paced forth
thereby. The Arc Baptismes figure, when a few saved; wherefore said: So shall
the Coming of the son of man, be as the days of Noah also: According to
that pattern, which days coming short of two thousand years, likewise this
assured to be shortened; And therefore no marvel Since amongst us such VVatch
kept by all. The LORD having watched over US, to bring this evil upon US, even
at their wits end: which remember not the end, nor regard at all His tokens.

And so decending amongst them those disobedient, etc Having in his hand Gods
word, as much to say: I am the word of God: Alpha and Omega. And without the
word made nothing that was made according to all Equity, have made good all
faylings, to wit, upon his own innocent person, has taken the faults of all
the world, as none but one good: And thus like them: stunge by fiery Serpents,
by the sign of the Serpent were cured and healed: Again. Our first parent not
being let or hindered of the tree of Knowledge, because so requisite to let
them know themselves, though Satan never the more to be excused in the
discovery of their naked estate.

And so these words at Last, etc. father forgive them etc. Though expressed in
the voice of that Time present, yet extends to pardoning of all Adams proginie:
Whose ignorance or Error not imputed to the utter ruin of the whole World.

And as that Apostle heard Things unutterable: Also in this of theirs, (a Thing
as difficult to express it: viz. Their release, Pardoned after their being
punished so:) in respect of the word, Eve lasting and Perpetual; an ordinary
word indeed, as in the Cerimoniall LAW: those called perpetual Statutes
afterward abolished. And so all fulfilled etc.

And thus like that Cloudy robe; these in a Mystery folded up, opened here, or
disclosed: Their future estate of Bliss, and Restitution, a Thousand times
happy in the End, that shall see GOD; Though a thousand Years, or Times:
punishment to endure, in that hot BATH or BOILING Lake for the purging of their
boyles and soars to be cleansed of them, as Origin that Father partly his
Opinion, cast out of the Churches favor for his pains, by whom Original
sins purgation held by this way expiated, etc.

And Purgatory having thus undermined: Yet rests another wall between US and
THEM; as requisite to be cast down, and one figurative speech opening another:
Here Is one reserved for ELIAS coming: As bold as a LION, His riddle: Out of the
Eater, came forth MEAT: And out of the Strong, came forth Sweetness:
Signifying even the Ovensmouth: And the Barrel or Butt, its Ribbs or Belly,
etc. The bread and wine in the Sacrament, viz: And thus Samson eat of the same
spiritual meat, and drank of the same spiritual drink.

And also of this Ambiguous word (till) a Word of it for example, in Matthew.
the first, not without some reserved meaning: known to the Holy Ghost by whom
SHE conceived, since HE without doubt did never know Her: Although showed, HE
knew Her Not, till she had brought forth Her first borne Son:

And so again, in a double sense contrary to the former: Go thy way DANIEL,
for the words are closed up, till the time of the end; where though it rests
doubtful before the end, whether disclosed at all, those words: yet there is
hope left, etc.

Nor stands for a Cipher here either: And his Lord delivered him to the
Tormentors, till paid all was due, etc. That is to say: till the utmost minuite
there, that Mite of time expired, due to Sin.

Hereupon the Apostles not in vain saying, Lord increase our FAITH: As some new
Article were added to their Belief (Luke 17.) upon that etc. I say unto Thee,
Not until seven times: But until seventy times seven times: And what ye
bind and loose on earth, shall be bound and loosed in Heaven, etc.

Spoken not to Peter: By him having the keys of Death and Hell: For such
intent, for this prerogative of His to be wrested: That Legions such of Pardons
should be bought up, as fold by His Successors; able quench at their pleasure
that Fire: As many possessed with a belief thereof, for those keys of supposed
purgatory resting in their power or Custody.

In truth whereas intended by the Holy Ghost to concern the Commission of
Apostles and Prophets, those words of such Extent and Latitude, the Holy Ghosts
meaning being able to explain it, sent Therefore. Peter 1. And hope to the
End, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ.

By the Lady ELEANOR:

FINIS.
ANd so to make toward the shore (or end this) these broken pieces offered or
imparted here, taken out of the flowing Scripture: As when all hope that they
should be saved was taken away: Yet in Romes dangerous voyage escaped all,
Acts, etc. So making no doubt when in such a fearful estate so many, but these
hopfull WORDS will be no less embraced by them whose part in Etnas
unquenchable Gulf so deep were, although the fire everlasting and eternal,
And where the never dying Worm and the like: Nevertheless implies or proves
not their pains to be of like nature, and that God is implacable or not to be
entreated, which God forbid.

NOw a larger PARDON: so who can wish, or imagine to make then These? Who so
speaks a Word against the Son of man, etc. ALL Blasphemies and Sins
soever forgiven the Sons of men: Math. 12. Mark. Luke: no doubt able upon true
repentance made in ashes, mingled with tears: ( That precious gift) for to
remit, etc:

And one of the second Table, that Commandment Thou shall not kill: like as it
refined and altered: ( Math:) Even he the Lawmakers and fulfiller both; what
fine soever, or pain imposed by old days but in terror: In former Ages he
likewise able, as the second death, That also to change and abate it.

And Nothing then impossible with Him, although in the highest degree; The
unspeakable offense against the Holy Ghost, though Left without form (as it
were) and void: The pardoning of it yet, verily a Thing not only possible (as
appears) by these words of his added to the former; But shall be of Eternal
damnation in danger: BUT VERY CERTAIN, for Reprobates after due punishment,
undergon to be released from utterdarknesse, and pardon all at the Last: since
as much given from his mouth, That made every thing so very good in the
beginning. The least tittle of whose words and sayings Not in vain, Then
dangerous not a little, to make Them utterly void, as to miscall what GOD has
cleansed out of a dangerousnesse and Niceness, to make it a common thing
abstaining from it, alike to disalow what the Holy Ghost has Cleared and
Licensed.

And now lawful, that which without Blasphemy heretofore, could not be
disputed, to wit in judging of GODS ways, whether equal or no, since the
wicked ( Adams Children for His disobedience:) not left in Hell, but in state
of Redemption, as without doubt also: That of the two debtors reflects on all,
both frankly forgiven.

Although instanced in ADAM and EVES case those two, etc. When he that charge
forgetting himself so mu^^, so mildly Him reproved, who as one beholding to
none or, no Physician needed, and being displeased for her Repair to the
House, therefore was bidden to go in peace.

Delivered that was at once of so many spirits or DEVILS, that disposessed
Woman whereby forbids any to murmur and grudge at his goodness, HE giving to
the first and last both, Even forgiveness: So take heed least HE have
somewhat to say unto Thee also: Or should but say, take what thine is, and go
thy way, etc. An non licet mihi? etc. Mat. 20. 15.

NOW here with this not unlawful News and Tidings, a degree above their
purgatory Pardon: Being not ignorant of old Distinctions, between the
Sufficient and Efficient cause, as all constran'd to confess for the whole
worlds sin his suffering alsufficient, whose Soul tasted of very Hell.

Though no corruption saw, Nor of that difference, either unwitting between the
cause and the occasion, Nor how straightly Schoolmen beseiged unwilling to
yield original sin the only and sole cause of reprobation. And yet if granted
ESAU rejected because of some particular or Actual sin or evil foreseen in
him: Consequently the others ELECTION from somewhat which GOD foresaw to be
good, etc.

Even so to him who overcomes when he is Judged, and nothing with him
impossible, be ascribed all possible Praise and Thanksgiving, whose Judgments
( Romans 11.) unsearchable and Way past finding out, so even increase our FAITH
LORD.

Charitas non ae mulatur; omnia credit.

1644.

