A SERMON preached to the RENOWNED Company of the ARTILLERY, 1 September, 1640.

Designed To Compose the present Troubles, by Discovering the Enemies of the
Peace of the Church and State.

Published by the honorable house of Commons.

By Calybute Downing LL. D. Pastor of HACKNEY.

LONDON Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

TO THE JUDICIOUS READER.
THe strange representations and false charges that have been laid upon this
service, press me to give way to the publishing, for though I conceive it no
ill manners in an evil time to decline the bringing in of private papers to
serve in suggestion, for an inquisition, yet I concluded myself bound in due
season to give satisfaction to pious and prudent men, so that were it not
suspicion of a work of darkness impends over this sermon, I should never let
these lines pass as worthy the light, but being universally required to it
both by friends and enemies, I beseech the wiser well minded world to judge by
the intent, the action and the event, whether I meant mischief, or my
adversaries were mistaken, which I confess they could hardly avoid considering
their principles and the present coniuncture of affairs: so that to what any
shall affirm, I say no; to what some have lately informed, I say nothing, as
willing to distinguish betwixt doing me a personal displeasure, and the state
a service; I could say no less, nor will say no more, but only desire such men
to remember that they forget not honesty nor humanity when they accuse others
for dealing falsely in divinity, and then I believe we shall have more peace and
fewer pamphlets.

DEVT. 25. 17. Remember what Amaleck did unto thee by the way when you were
come out of Egypt.


IT is no man's wisdom, nor business, to provoke a quiet enemy; but it is
every wise man's work (especially if trusted in any public way) to consider,
discover, and represent their foes as they find them affected, which is most
assured by their actions. So that, though the ordinary motions of prudent
Christians are moderate, even, and equal, and required to be so (as these
Israelites were not to first offend or invade the children of Esau) yet when
we have to deal with men, whose counsels and practices are like their ends,
dareing and driving in destructive ways, and can conclude no better upon us,
if they keep close to their own fundamental principles; we have reason, and
it is religon, safe, and therefore seasonable, to change our temper and
constitutions of our counsels, and that before dangers and difficulties grow
too great, and the work prove an impossible pull. For if when the face of
affairs is so altered, we keep our sober, solemn, passive pace, and in a
suffering modesty, or confident security, invite an ambitious incroaching
adversary, to advance and make imbracements upon us, we may thank our own
folly and weakness, that would not prevent pregnant fears while they were
future, but only hope to play an after-game, when they are turned into
pressing, great, and growing grievances, of a disabling destructive nature,
when there is no way left of relief, but by their mercy, or mistaking, both
which it should much trouble any judicious rational man to trust, as if it
were not a most irrecoverable error, to cast our selves into our old sworn
enemies arms, to be embraced, or crushed as they see occasion.

These words therefore that I now read unto you, are laid in by meek Moses, a
man of no cruel counsels, whose natural temper carried him to peace and
pardon, yet you see here he crosses and condemns his nature, commends and
commands those counsels that press and put on to arms and action, and with
such full force and freedom, that in cool blood, as a business not to be
forgotten, he goes out of his way, with an inconsequence, to bring it in, for
you shall find no dependence of these words, nor any suitableness in their
subject, but very dissonant, being the former passages of the chapter tending
to ending of controversies by arbitration and relaxation by common equity
mitigation of corporal punishments, that no brother should have above forty
stripes, but here it is commanded to be laid on without limits.

So that if you will survey and consider this Scripture, you will find it of
great occasional concernment, and uttered to the chief Commanders of the
Camp and Commonwealth of Israel: and being of an historical nature, and not
the original, but the repetition of a record* entered as an act of State, upon
a Counsel of war, to revive, and rivet it home hot unto the heart (as you
may find the rite and reason of it, Exodus 17.
Exodus 17. with an express command for the rehearsing of it in the ears of
Joshua and the victors some few days after the discomfiture of Amalecke.

Now for the discoursing upon this historical relation, that was laid in, as a
law to be executed by succeeding generations, we co^ceive it convenient being
point of fact, to open the terms, to consider the fundamental right, in the
reasons of it, and so put it home in a particular practicke parallel, as we
have the like occasion for reflexive work. Amalecke was a people that
descended of Esaus line, Genesis 36.
by his first wife of the three, which he took to vex his father Isaac, Genesis
28.
borne of a concubine to Eliphaz, Esaus eldest son who was begotten in the
height of his hatred to his brother Jacob, Ezeck. 25.
and so all proceeded, as revenge from an old hatred, and yet of the seed of
Abraham (you see) by extraction, and upon that ground, Israel inhibited to
invade them. What is meant here by remembering, It is to be be interpreted by
action and occasion; Canaan, and they past doing of mischief. Remember them
Cum effectu, so soon as you have peace abroad, remember to war with them.
Let them not rest, nor roost among you; but disquiet, distress, and vex the
Amalekites, recompense tribulation to them that thus troubled you, as far as
the sword can reach, cut them off that trouble you. The rest of the meaning we
shall work in occasionally.

The nature of this Scripture falls into two considerations, A judicial law of
that Nation, Remember A. maleck, and the ground of it in a particular
grievance, what he did to you when you came out of Egypt: wind them up
together, and they amount to this conclusion, That this penal Proviso, this
Law of diffidation or defiance concerning Amaleck, was most reasonably made.

The Jesuits, that are the Novell College of Austrian Augurs, but too
perfidious to be Feciales, and yet have given to themselves a faculty to
determine all cases in ordine ad spiritualia; never measuring truths or titles
by the line of equity, but the last of ambition; these creatures that have more
of the diviners in them than of the divine, will be content to hold Amaleck a
type of Antichrist, and so this proceeding plausible, if we will but hold the
great Turk, or the Puritans to be the Antichrist, These. 22.
but they must excuse us, and Arminius shall judge for me (in his public
determinations) before he went to Rome who is clear and conclusive, that the
Pope is that man of sin, that servant of servants that began to beat his
fellow servants: But whether these men and their politic party conceive it
reason or not, none but an Amalekite would require the disusage or repealing of
it, or charge it as a bloody Law.

Moses did conceive it justifiable, who was no cruel Lawgiver, and yet he
sets it home by all means to preserve the memory (as see the original
relation at large, Exodus 17.
Exodus 17.) which he drew up not by private or only ordinary discretion or
assistance; but by the clear immediate word and warrant of the Lord of hoasts,
as the express was to write it in a Book, not to trust tradition in the case,
but it was a Bookt record past in terminis to posterity; and further he built
an Altar upon the place of victory, with the Lords name and power exercised in
the cause that it might be a remembrancer, and the times to come admonished by
this monument of Gods mercy, and the Amalekites cruelty, and here lays it
fully and close home in a most pat particular precept, as a manifest of the
Lords mind for the future in this business.

First, consider it must needs be without peradventure right, because the Judge
of all the World has so declared it, and that in most express words, leaving
no room for any mitigation, restriction, limitation or interpretation
favorable, gave no ground for quarter: that the Lord of grace, mercy, peace,
should thus bind up this business of a perpetual war, you must needs
conceive, and conclude there was great reason for it, and that will appear, if
you do but consider the grievance that gave ground for it.

There is in their injurious usage all the justifiable causes of a legal
war. I do not say that it was just or reasonable for a private Israelite
upon home bred hatred to prosecute a private Amalekite to the death, or to
reserve revenge upon personal injuries, but to use particular men as David did
the single cashiered servant of an Amalekite, fed him well to discover his
master. 1 Samuel 30.
No the Lord is not like Molech that loves to have blood in the unsavory
sacrifices of cruel private duels; let them singly subsist as civil men
according to the laws of nature, and humanity, Non obstante the National
quarrel. This I propose not either as justifiable, or plausible to be
practiced, but this is the point that we shall speak to, That states that
move not neither upon anger nor haupon hatred but upon judgment and interest,
necessity, public utility, universal safety may move for ever to those
points, and cannot be mistaken in those affairs: Consider to what the wisest
statists, politics and Civillians, reduce the reasons of a justifiable war,
and you will find them all in this cause.

A war in it self is an appeal to heaven, by asword, when otherways of
justice upon earth, either by witnesses, oaths or leagus are made void and
invalid, that being forelaid we will reduce these grounds to 3. heads.

these divellish men, for they would have fallen in with any side to molest
them (as after they did in the lives of the Judges) so that it was not wisdom
to forget them, Psalm. 83.
that were resolved to make the name of Israel no more in remembrance. If they
were aware of such deep designs fixed as foundations of their ruin, they had
reason by way of prevention, to anticipate future ruin by present revenge, for
fear of a great neighbor, a just ground of war, if it be a legal fear, which
may fall in constantem Societatem and senatum, raised not only from present
preparations, but also from pregnant intentions and pretentions, as well
assured as a moral matter may be, of a professed protested enemy, whose mind
and will is to injure for ever, and has begun to do it, and not from a
floating resolution that may be conjectured to be better toward us, but from
malignant malice: but this was the case of the Israelites having to do with
these enemies, therefore they had reason to provide for future security which
could not be had so long as these men subsisted in any strength to hurt.

damnum emergens, in prosecution, or lucrum Cessans, if they had not bin
molested. But these Amalekites cut off those persons, that the Lord valued at a
great rate and ransom, and they could not recompense the Lord his damage by
one days victory. And it may be they being the hindmost who^ they smote in the
rear, were laden with the riches of Egypt. So that the succeeding generation
of Amalekites were to make satisfaction: especially considering that their
posterity would inherit their bloody hearts, and thirst to destroy and vex
Israel upon old grounds and grudges, as see an instance in the last of that
cursed, Hest. 3.
devoted stock, hauty Haman the Agagite; his anger upon a fancy, soon
rankled into a national hatred, and broke out into an universal practice of
his resolution of revenge, 2 Chro. 20. See how they reward us for sparing of
them.
the reserving of Agags race had like to have cost dear; and therefore
Mordecai did wisely to follow the blow, to ruin and root out all the faction
that were his dependants, distributed into all Provinces, and to trouble
Israel, had got all trust into their own hands, for the execution of his
cruel conspiracy against the Jewish Nation, and his wife well foretold him
when he began to fall, that he should fall flat, being Mordecai was a Jew, and
the quarrel admitted no medium work: Mordecai did well to heave him high, and
lay him low, because all must down, because not bow, and be so base as to
fall flat in a Persian prostituting prostration, Briston. de Regn. Persico^. 1
with his hands behind him to execution. He would not so far forget himself,
who was of the Jewish seed ^ovall, whose place was to stand, not to fall in the
Kings gate, to bow before the base remains of a conquered people and a
perfidious Traitor to the Persians Monarchy.

Psalm. 109.
illegal irregularity to persecute the poor and needy man, that they might
even slay the broken in heart, that if Israel had not been able and resolved
to revenge and make this people passive in a penal way, their neighbor
Nations (specially had it been in these or the times of the Grecian or Roman
Monarchs) had been engaged, though not called for by the tacit, common consent of
Nations, concurring for the good of mankind, as a sociable creature, they had
been bound I say, to come in and assist to their uttermost. For it is in the
power and is the work of supreme States and Princes, not only to defend and
revenge injuries done to their own subjects, but even to resist those that
violate the Laws of Nature, or Nations, and that not as they are over others,
but as they are under none, and it seems, and sounds better, to vindicate
others injuries then their own. Now they did come upon them against the Laws of
Nations, being they fell upon such as were weak, sick, strangers, unarmed,
unable, men that were newly delivered out of cruel bondage, almost famished
before Manna came, and if it had not been miraculously suitable, it may be
accidentally weakened with a new kind of diet, Amos 16.
paid for all as they past, and professed they meant it.

These and such like, as deal injuriously, against the law, and light of
Nature, and the common good of Nations, are outlawed, and de jure proscribed,
by these Laws, especially these men that were the Banditi of the God of Heaven,
that had banished his fear, and so they were to be punished for a manifest
National contempt of God, as those that teach treachery, perfidiously
practiced perjury, permit piracy to the destroying of Civil society, and such
like Enemies of Mankind, a process punitive is to be executed upon them.
Bellum cum belluis bonum est. Yea, when the Lord himself commanded Saul upon
this service, 1 Samuel 15. He does not barely say, 1 Samuel 15.
Do you remember what Amalek did, but I remember what Amaleck did; therefore
do you execute to the uttermost and destroy and spare not: and the revenge of
this wrong may most rightly be proportioned, not only to what they did, but
what they would, intended, and were prepared to do, and drive upon design,
that is to be considered, future, possible, probable mischief, to prevent a
pernicious unpleasing president. For if these men, had bin flesht with
success, that first invaded Israel, or had procured, past, and paid, for their
peace at an easy rate, it would have invited others to invasive violence, yet
what they did made such an impression of fear, that the Spies used the name of
Amaleck, as an argument that they dwelt in the South, when they aimed to
disparage the Land of Promise, and discourage them from entering. And therefore
the Lord by Moses had reason to raise their spirits, Numb 13. 29.
by hopes of their ruin, who had shaken their confidence, by fear of being
ruined by them. See what it cost the Israelites in hard measure, whenever
they faild in the execution of this command; God was revenged upon them, when
ever they faild to take his vengeance. See what Saul lost by saving some of
Amaleck, upon pious, peaceable, pretentions, as if he so long after as a King
had power to give pardon and relaxation from that penal Law; he that would
not cut off their posterity from the Earth, deprived his own of succession,
though he was not put out of personal possession; that forgetting, neglecting,
cast him out, and cut him off, 1 Samuel 1 8.
and an Amalekite had a hand in his death, or he braggingly belyed himself:
yea, if he had done it fully, he had saved the burning of Ziglag, avoided much
mischief and misery, 1 Samuel 30.
spared David's pains in the Case, and what he faild in is recorded as a good
work, of the sons of Simeon, that they killed the rest of the Amalekites, and
dwelt in their rooms, and fat pastures, did not leave a good land to them, and
seek subsistence in the Wilderness, but beat them out as intrenching,
incroching intruders. Well, 1 Chronicles. 4.
the Prophet Samuel from God, and the Witch of Endor from the Devil, did both
tell Saul that this was his ruin.

The advice and Counsel that I would give to you upon this practick Conclusion
is, Counsel.
that being you ex professo are the guard of good Laws, have the permission and
approbation of the State, for a school of war, are the Chief Legionaries of
this royal City, have or ought to have all privileges and accommodations, for
exercise of arms, Pani^ral. de (...) Occid. nalis Imp^^ c. 20.
as the old ruling Romans, when they were in statu pacato, their Empire at the
highest pitch, and had done with enlargment of Dominion, they gave more
privileges to the armed schools, then to the schools of Peace: Let me desire
you to make these inquiries.

First, see if you have not such conditioned Enemies.

Secondly, Whether there be not such Records, and Acts of State entered against
them.

Thirdly, if there be not reason to petition the execution of them.

Fourthly, whether you be not to be blamed for forgetting Amaleck. Deal
clearly, and lay these considerations close, it will be your wisdom and your
safety.

First consider if you, and all that are Israelites, in whom is no guile, have
not such blood-thirsty, and deceitful Enemies, that should not live out half
their days; Let us speak out, they are the Jesuits, and the Iesuited
faction, with their adherents, for they are of our kindred in Religion, by
extraction a Bastard brood, that when we came out of Egypt mystical, they
smote the hindmost, yea they have tried all ways to ruin Church and State, by
Treasons, Rebellions, Invasions, Divisions, Civil wars at this time, are a
fruit of their faction, fome^ted from cunning and mystical hatred, they have
been the Abettors and plotters, the great Sticklers in all the Disturbances of
the Western World. Ever since the Spanish sword-man Loiola left the Leaguer,
clapped himself up in a Cloister, lapt in a gown, all the destructive designs
that have cast Christendom into confusion, have bin hatched under the covert
and cunning of a Canonick weed; These men love always to fish in troubled
waters, and have blotted out Beati pacifici out of their Latin Liturgy: where
they set their foot, and settle their society, Commonly they shake the peace,
the Liberty and the Religion of the Country; honest men come thin, all their
actions public merit to be writ in Rubric, not as of Saints, but as of
sanguinary men who work any way, by a Sicilian Vespers, or Parisian Matins,
and in the name of Jesus do the work of Judas; so that a man cannot tell
whether their Trentish tyranny, and treachery, taste more of the new Roman
Catholic or the old Roman Politic, sure they conclude of us, that the surest
and shortest way to make us of their new Religion is first to make us of none,
and so pitch down principles of Atheism, as men mad with reason, in stead of
being Masters of it, and as they are Enemies of Grace, so they are Haters of
peace, and work against conscience as the Enemies of mankind.

Secondly consider if we have not Ordinances of State and Penal Proviso's,
against this factious fraternity, which were good and wholesome, and a work of
necessity, which were not made against them for their mere Religion, as it
rests in opinion, but as their doctrine does engage them to Antichristian,
Rebellious practices, that ruin by undermining Church and State if they keep
close to the practicke Principles of their modern Monkery: as to instance, was
it not a necessary Law and full of reason, to deny those men the freedom of
their country, that plead exemption from the Laws, and condemn them, that
they may serve a foreign false friend, and live in these Dominions, and yet his
subjects. Yea it well deserved to be Capital punishment, if they offered to
enter against this Proscription, and indeed, they have met with this measure,
in all well tempered states in times when they were well awake, and aware; as
consider in France, the Ordinances, Arrests, Requests, Decrees, Remonstrances,
Advertisements, Defenses, and Resolutions of the Council of State, the
Parliaments, Universities, and the whole Clergy. See the Protests, and
State-Edicts of Polonia, the Restrictions, Deliberations, Proscriptions, and
Clauses Conservative of the state of Venice, and University of Padua; Now if
this Society was upon judgment discarded in these States, of their own
religion, (when they were not ruled by their Papaline faction) as common
Enemies of humane society, sure our Laws have much more reason to be laid on
with more load to assure our safety being in greater danger.

tot vigiliis concessa and promulgata, we should be tender of disparaging, or
disusage. If they be not to be executed, then we are not the same Christian
men, or they are not the same Instruments, and Enemies: But we profess our
selves Protestants, and they Protest us for Heretics, and therefore we are no
further safe, then they are cut short in power, or follow and fall in with
their admonitions: which are to tolerate them so far to advance, as that they
will not at last suffer us to subsist. (...) 1610 (...) p. 11.
See Bellarmines advise to King James of peaceable memory. Si securus vitae
suae velit regnare smat Catholicos frui religione. If this be their counsel,
the doing otherwise is dangerous: and therefore all that conceive mitigation,
or connivence, safe or seasonable, are very much, miserably, and mischievously
mistaken. Let us keep our selves as far as we can from Popery; for they are
resolved, upon reasons of state, never to come near us: they have always the
same Ends, but go several ways to work. Complying is of a Confounding nature
with these men whose Counsels admit no medium, nor moderation; they are
resolved to make good a defection by a faction, expect not their favor, trust
not their Faith, if they can but change their Fortune; yet they will be so
wise, not to offend, till they can confound. Let us take a transitory view what
they and their adherents work at this time, and you will say, not only old
Laws, but even new ones, need be made, and executed upon them. Look not about
you in these Cases, but above you; It is a better bargain to be eaten by a
Lion, then by Vermin. Enquire who they be, that breed ill blood betwixt the
King and his people, that have pulled so hard, to draw a Civil sword to the
breaking of the happy Union of these Kingdoms, which hitherto have been able
to bid the World do, as they would be done to. Believe it they go
Antichristian ways by the Emperors favor to ruin the Empire; And King JAMES
wishes woe to them that durst divide the weal of the King, His Speech in
Parliament 16^9.
from the weal of the Kingdom.

Where they cannot move sedition among the people, against their Prince, to
make Conquests easy, there they will work any way, to provoke the Prince
against the people, they will join with any party, to ruin the whole; set
Kingdoms together, and beat them single, when they are poor, and passive;
they deal with us, yea, with the best in the State, Hest. 3.
as Haman the Amalekite did with Mordecay, suppress all their good service,
tho it be upon record; they will be the only good subjects and seek to cast
all into an ill case, that they may make themselves necessary by engaging the
public power, to serve their ends and interests; Call other men Traitors, when
they themselves are the rankest Rebels; render religious Christians as ill
affected civil subjects: and revile the wisdom, conscience, and
representation of a State in Parliament, as a Faction, a Combination, a pack of
Puritans; but we hope before long, the word Puritan shall prove a good name,
when some of theirs may degenerate. This party are they that have taught the
Princes of Christendom Principles of tyranny and then accuse Religion for
breeding seeds of Rebellion.

Fourthly, Consider, whether we be not to be blamed, for forgetting Amaleck.
Take these several subordinate ways, to consider whether you remember them or
not: and let no man say, I might have showed more moderation and discretion to
come off at large, fair, and afar off; active circumspection is to be praid for
in the Case; but for this omissive, dim, dissembling Neuter, negative good
manners, I understand it not, but as the fault, and folly of the times: and yet
I shall keep within my bounds; though these Jesuits statizing would call us out
of our station, to study Politics, if it be but to countermine them, who are
so devoted to Court, with such secular solicitude; as if they were able to
prove, there were no other Heaven; and I shall plead for peace, if it be but
because some of the Clergy are charged, as the Authors of the War.

First, Consider if you have remembered to pray against Amaleck, and so hold up
the Magistrates hands that they may fall under a Civil sword; these men would
surely hold you off from coming to God, that urge it so odiously, as an
intolerable insolency, to petition the King against those grievances, that
arise from their false suggestions: whereby the wisest of Princes may be
misinformed, though they cannot be mistaken; (as I heard his Majesty say in the
Case) who graciously invites to petition. It Is a most prodigious course, to deny
that to the best, which was never denied to the worst of men, in the worst
times, which is leave to petition. That we should undergo the worst of
government, under the best of Princes, is the depth of misery, and therefore
pray that God would remember their iniquities that have thus reached to Heaven.
Rev. 18.


Secondly, Consider if you do not contradict, and cross your own prayers, by
presuming to save, some of the fattest for a sacrifice, to comply withal;
Mercy to these upon affection, is cruelty to your selves upon judgment. David
gave a command, upon private, paternall affection, to spare Absalom; and
grieved beyond measure, upon the same grounds, when he was cut off; and
therefore Ioab did well and wisely (and David had reason to take it well in
cool blood) as to take off an evil instrument, so also respectively to
remember the King, that he was mistaken in his passion, when the State had lost
so great an Enemy. Samuel was no cruel man, and yet he was resolved, to hew
Agag in pieces: If we show pity because they come with halters about their
necks, they will soon shift them, and strangle us.

Thirdly, Consider what you positively perform against them, to second, and
give success to your prayers: I speak not that mere private men, should upon
mere personal malice, prosecute the particular persons of any Romish
Recusants, that are otherwise Civil subjects, and disturb not the State: or
that a Prince should publicly, and solemnly invade, only to settle Religion,
or extirpate Heresy, without the mixture of Civil Titles; that is the Jesuits
Divinity, and I wish them enough of it: but this is it I would have you do,
Take care that Apostates be severely punished, and those that seduce them, or
lay grounds for it: for if these Amalekites, that were external Enemies, far
from home, were to be remembered, and ruined, how are ours to be regarded, that
are in the Commonwealth, but not of it, but fully and foully against it,
knotted into a great party, tied in dependence to the greatest foreign Enemy.
These men strike at Church and State at a blow, being the anchor of the State
is Religion, which if shaken, the State will float; and for fundamental Laws
they pull them up, that they may pull us down; and that against the original
of all Civil government. For when by common consent, men fell upon a Regiment,
and at first permitted all, to the wisdom and discretion of Governors, chosen
by themselves, Hooker l. 1.
and after by experience found, the remedy in this Course, Numb. 10.
worse then the disease; they saw, I say, to live by one man's will, was the
ground of all men's misery: then they were constrained to Come to Laws, (not
only admit a Council for assistance:) and whosoever infringes such Laws, is an
absolute, insolent Enemy of the Common good. But you will still demand of me
what you must do? I can better tell you what you must not suffer, them to do.

And let no insolent, obnoxious Disturber, or Innovatour in Church or State,
say that these Discourses must not be brookt. I must tell them, it is true, that
in peaceable times, when all pass calmely along, the Locrians Law was of
force: but in statu perturbato, and quasi in maligno posito, in a Common and
Calling Calamity (as Religion is a Calling Cause) advice is welcome from any
hand, being there is a tacit consent of States, in extraordinary times, to
allow extraordinary undertakings; witness on the wrong side, their Quotidian,
double-tertian, distemperd projects, which depend, like sickmens Dreams: they
that like not this, I wish they mean no worse; for that State that can bear a
Civil War, may very well away with Civil Memento's, to prevent it. Take
therefore these Considerations, which I desire to lay down, with Cautions
restrictive, and directive, to keep within the compass of obedience, and the
peace of Church and State, which I leave to wise and active men to accommodate.

This was delivered the day after the Lords Petition.
First, consider, that in an Exigent, and unexpected turn of State, perniciously
procured by these British malekites: there are Certain ways to come to the King
for relief and redress, which at other times are not allowable, see it in
Hesters Case, Though it be not according to Law (says she) yet if you will
fast and pray, I will go to the King, whatever come of it. Indicious Bishop
Bilson speaks close in the Case, and I dare not condemn him, neither need I,
being allowed by the State, when this Monarchy was in a most Majestic height.

Secondly, consider that when a party by power breaks the Laws of the Land,
that they may break the Laws of God, and thereby force you to go along as
their friends, or put you to make a stand, and so conclude you the States
Enemies, where the Laws of the Land are thus by them made too short for your
security, the Laws of Nations come in for relief, till it can be otherwise
provided: for it was never intended by Lawmakers, to lay them on, with so rigid
a will, but that still, salus populi should be sola, and suprema lex; and no
State did ever intend, to cast it self into a desperate Case, by good Laws; so
that as for the good of the person of a Prince, there are not only allowed,
jura dominationis, but also arcana dominationis: so for the safety of the body
of the State, there are arcana, Latitudes allowed for security; especially when
the Enemies (who are not true Instruments but Tools of State, Dominationum
Provisores, Purveyers of usurpation, that work through Alps, or Conscience)
have concluded, they lose not reputation, nor abuse Religion, if they get their
Ends: In such a Case Rational Grotius is clear, (...) belli and (...) 40.
that in gravissimo and certissimo discrimine, lex de non resistendo, non
obligat; but I hope he meant it tenderly.

Thirdly, consider that the States of a Kingdom, either actually assembled in
a representative body, or virtually concurring in a common resolution,
Consiliarii nati ratione nobilitatis licet non ratione officii Ordinari.
for the common good, and only hindered from assembling by the common Enemy; it
is affirmed, by the greatest Assertors of Regal Royalty, that they may go
very far, before they can be counted Rebels, or be mistaken. 'Twas foolish,
churlish Nabals judgment, 1 Samuel 25.
that called David, and his Company Runnagates, when wise Abigail, tho she
submitted to Saul, as her King, yet acknowledged David to fight the Lords
battails.

Fourthly, Consider, and make a real difference betwixt the Christians
suffering with prayers and tears in the Primitive Church, under Heathenish
Emperors, when their Religion was not so much as tolerated, but condemned by
the Laws of the Empire, Bishop of Durham Sermon before the King 1639.
and the sufferings of State, where the Religion is Lex terrae, settled and
protected by the Civil Laws and power, and all caution, that can be given to
assure it, and affronted by a schismatical faction, not so much tolerated, but
protested, and condemned, Idolatrous and Antichristian, and cannot consist,
with the standing of the state. The thus appearing not for a popular but a
politic liberty, must be interpreted by clemency, (a virtue of as much
policy as piety in a Prince) as serious Seneca, Senec de Clement. l. 2. c. 7.
Clementia hosts dimittit salvos, aliquando laudatos, si honestis causis, pro
fide, pro foedere vel pro liberate: Be wise, be resolute for you have
Amalekites amongst you.

At a Committee of the Honorable the Commons House of Parliament, It is
ordered that this Sermon be published in print.

Sir Edward Dering Knight and Baronet.


