THE WORD OF GOD, To the City of LONDON, from the Lady ELEANOR: OF THE EARL
OF Castle-Haven: Condemned, and Beheaded: April 25. 1631. etc.

LUKE, 21. And some of you shall They cause to be put to death, etc But there
shall not a hair of your head perish. Printed in the year 1644.

THE WORD OF GOD TO The City of LONDON: Luke Evangelist the 19. From The Lady
Eleanor: 1644.
TO confirm it out of the mouth of two witnesses: The time of your
Vissitation, as formerly out of the Old Testament. (2 of Kings 20. etc.) A
sign given of the Resurrection at what time it is reveald by the times
paraleld. So here is one out of the New from a Parable: (Luke the 19.)
witnesses the same, concerning when our Saviors return not fare off. As when
thought then the Kingdom of God was near: or immediately should appear.

Wherefore of the very year of God 1631. April 25. thus what then came to
pass no inferior token or sign of it, as witness such a one, etc. And he
said therefore a certain Nobleman went into a far Country to receive a
Kingdom, and to return. And called his ten servants and gave them ten pounds,
etc. As moreover in what reign followed that, needs no more date but this. But
his Citizens hated him, and sent a Message after him saying. We will not have
this man to reign over us.

And thus proceeding on, as it were with the ten Commandments, then came the
first saying, Lord thy pound has gaind ten: and said have authority over ten
Cities: And the second came saying, Lord thy pound has gaind five: and he said
also be thou Ruler over five Cities. And another came saying, Lord behold here
is thy one pound, that wrapped up in the heavy Handcherchifeor Napkin, which
amounts to Anno Dom. 1631. April 25. And so THREE of them come to their Last
account too, the EARL of Castle-Haven first: One as evil requited by his
family, As reputed free to his followers, and accounted just to all and
charitable, etc.

So farther for explanation of this piece of Substraction and Addition, saying
Lord he has ten, whose reply was: That unto every one that has shall be given
and from him that has not, shall be taken away that he has. When he said or
gave command, take from HIM the pound and give it to him that has ten, where
besides the aforesaid year of God the mystery thereof as manifested, also
refers to a certain principle so distasteful to his Majesty, the Parliament
saying he can receive no loss: That has nothing of his own, or to that
purpose.

And so much added concerning these words, how he shall be recompencd so evil
a steward of his Lords money: That from him that has not: (Notwithstanding)
shall be taken away that which he has. Accompanied with that voice of the
present reign: Bring them forth and slay them before me mine enemies.

And farther more to bring this home to the time: though in no small have
passing on with great Britains progress or story in this of the 19. of Luke
etc. When he wept over that hard hearted City vissited in that manner, coming
neigh Bethphage and Bethania, etc. which also draws near great Britain, as
shows the things belonging to their peace hidden from their eyes, saying
withal. Jf these should hold their peace when peace in Heaven proclaimed and
his coming, very stones would not be silent, but liken'd to a woman's travel,
would immediately cry out.

And thus having denounced their heavy sentence vissits the temple, to purify
it, casting out those making their markets there, as no news is refullfild
with us.

And as this clear and out of question this parable or portion of Scripture,
directed to our days where the faithful rewarded with so many Cities; and the
like, so evident likewise where that Publican pardond, (Luke 19,) Saying
salvation was ^ome to his house, bidden to make have, etc. The very true
Portrature of him, his ^astie departure or death. The son of ^ld ancient
Abraham also: The house of Audeley no obscure one, though one much envied, and
such a one then come of no Sodom seed, but like Isaac rather sacrified, who
as he sufferd for the misdemenors of an unrulie household sufferd by him, laying
on him their faults, so had the honor to have this added.

To suffer between those two the one clearing him at that hour, affirming for
that fact whereof the Earl of Castle-Haven was accusd by his wife (such a
wicked woman) He was as innocent as the child newborn. Though by the other an
Impudent Idolater not cleared, calling out upon Saint Bennet, but cursing the
said Earl, wishing him and all his Generation except his son hanged and damnd.

And now Sirs you of this Honorable City as you have heard these: Shall add
a word of His Majesty's Attorney general that day after they had heard the^^
examination (fallen to a low ebb of what was expected (saying my Lord. You see
this odious crime, and therefore you must be curious you admit of no
Mittigation, who came short of this first promise. That His Majesty's intent
was like God to show mercy, who from fifty did come down to ten when he
interceeded for Sodom.

And so what the prisoner answered to them: when his Majesty's Chaplins came
and told him the King had a gracious purpose to alter the manner of his death.
And that he should be beheaded like a Noble man: Replied he should esteem that
Haulter which should draw HJ M to Heaven before a collor of pearl or the like.
And for the Gallows likewise that should bring him to his Savior and Redeemer
that despised not the cross for him; and so much for him a man of a mean
stature too, who clmbed that tree at Tower Hill, when as a like no little
throng or press: A Peer of two Kingdoms a Noble man here, a Prince or Earl
in Jreland, whose estate sometime inferior to none. And thus stands forth like
that Noble Zacheus called by his name to come down.

The EARL of Castle-Havens Confession.
In the name of God Amen.
I Mervin, Earl of Castle* haven being in my full strength and memory thanks
be given unto my maker, having been branded and openly accused for chang,
alteration, and doubtfullnes of my Faith and Religion. I thought fit like a
Christian man to give satisfaction upon what grounds I stand for my belief,
and to express it under my band for the satisfaction of all charitable people
and Christians.

First, I do believe in the blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons, one
eternal and everliving God, God the Father, God my Redeemer, and God my
Sanctifier.

I do rely upon the merit, death, and passion of our blessed Savior Christ
Jesus, and upon his Mediation for the remission of my sins.

I do believe and use with most humble reverence our Lords prayer, the Creed
of the Apostles and the tenn Commandments, as they are set down and allowed
in the Church of England.

I do believe the Canonical Scriptures and that they are written by the
inspiration of the holy spirit.

I do believe the Book of Common Prayer, as it is allowed in the Church of
England, to be a good for me in those days for the service of God and to use
the same, and for the rest of my belief I do refer it to the true Orthodox
faith of our Church of England. And from the Articles received at this present
in the Church of England, and confirmed by authority of Parliament, I do not
differ in any point, renouncing all the superstitions and errors taught or
believed in the Church of Rome or any other Church, in which faith I will, God
willing continue to my lives end

in Testimony whereof I have hereunto subscribed my hand this first of May
1631. Castle-haven.

LJkewise of whose Letter, making bold to show the beginning thereof: When
without MERCY Castaway: how well resolved He was, who had such ill luck at one
and Thirty.

( Anagram. Eleanor Audeley.)
Reveal O Daniel, J send thee 1631. farewells with thanks for thy letter and
advice. But J am bound for Nineveh: And having bidden Tarshish farewell. Not
fearing death, J do not desire life.

CASTLE-HAVEN

ANd for more manifestation of what nature this unnatural strange trespass.
Whereof this man Mer: Lord Audeley was accusd, his undeserved death is referd
to Geneses 38. Judahs sons Er: his eldest, and O N an his trespass: And how
the Lord slew them both: with her disguising: putting off her widows garment,
with child by whoredom, Tamer travaling with twinns those sonns: with that
ominous Scarlet, or Red thread bound, etc.

And therefore shall but name them, the contrivers of it. Ann his wife, and his
brother Ferdinando: the one for envy, she being an Heir, and such a notorious
one, (O Ann) The other a perverted Papist wanting no malice: wherefore to cut
him off, some time gone that way astray too: but recald himself, no aspertion
was held too soul for him. And for saving her honor an adultresse by promisd
preferment, a Page and a fo^t man was brought forth: Those VVitnesses rewarded
in their kind, condemned out of their own mouths, like silly Sheep for their
labor: Who came against a Peer of two Kingdoms, as Broadway by name, charged
with that breach made on her:

The other one Fitz Patricke, or O Donel a very Vagarant: Accusing himself of
O Nans uncleanness or trespass with his LORD. Upon his Oath believed, which
had never received the Sacrament, or at least but one kind before him; that
thrice took it upon his death And one never heard to have an Oath come out of
his mouth, That in that kind he was not guilty, never intending to reserve
oaths to that purpose to make himself forsworn before his death.

And so much for those twinns or fellow servants. Themselves falling into the
pit dig'd for another, though guilty of that: as much as those Babes Then born;
Yet worthy of no other, witness out of their own mouths. Therefore the
Executioner, or Man-midwif, as the one helps them into the world, be others out
of it: This work though sooner dispatched, where Jrelands heavy blow at hand
inclusive in these. And after came his Brother with the Red thread, etc.

Also farther for the time of the year, about sheep-shering time or S. Georges
feast: as Times circumstance requisite, when it came to pass of the LORD
Keepers giving sentence; Keeper of the great Seal, made Lord high Steward.
That Judge, Judah like in this, though not acknowledged, condemned one, more
righteous then himself. Yet discern J pray you whose are these, the Signit or
Seal, the Staff, or white Rod, and Bracelets or Color, of what office these
are the Enfignes.

And more over how it came to pass with him, behold his own brother Sir
Ferdinando Touchet what end he came to, That day twelve month in the morning
at the same hour his brother was condemned, how he dyed suddenly, which had
polluted his own Nest or House, the just hand of God displeased: This
unnatural brother, in a House of Office or the like, stroke^ dead coming but
from the Tennis on Holborn Hill, without any servent with him. This O Nan ready
to be torn in pieces before the breath out of his body: some their hands in his
pockets; Others for his Clothes, was found thus by His Servants which came to
ask for HIM. Thus rewarded as They no other deserved: JVDAS-like, rather then
of Judahs Race or Kind, (Luke 21.) in betraying HIM betrayed by Friends and
Brethren so openly: Mervin LORD AVDELEY, of the Manor of Straw-Bridge, which
never suspected or did know that the Word to be of his house, or appertaining
to Parsonages and Tithes, that Mat. 25. Thou knew J reap where J sowed not,
and gather where J have not strawed. Where although the Arch B. of
Canterburies burying his Lords money (as it may well be no little or hidden of
that kind in the earth) with the loosing of his head also tied up with that
Napkin or Kircheife: the one gone to his own place, Little-Ease or Esaus Rest.
The other a chief Peer, though his hard hap to loose his Head first, yet
nevertheless in Abraham's bosom or Paradise, as his Savior saying I come to
save that which is lost, Luke 19. As when the ancient of days his return
showed there, so referd to Malachi, shall come as a swift witness in
judgment, against adulterers, and adultresses and false swearers, and for
Tithes that robery and the like. For ye have Robbed me, etc.

So come LORD, and cut off such an evil time, defer us not.

FINIS.
AS these farther the sum and substance of the matter, showed in Luke the 19.
and Mat. 25. When the day of judgment immediately follows, like as those
servants three of them, no obscure ones doubtless to their account called
then. So lastly with the Earl of Castle Haven betrayed, and his sentence:
follows theirs as slow. The Earl of Strafford Deputy, etc. And the Arch BB.
Which could plead no Ignorance, as referd to his own mouth. those Traitors,
for evidence of the end so long waited for.


