A Brief Sum OF DIVINITY, Showing The plainest way, how a man ought to
examine his ways in this life, to the attainment of ETERNITY. Wherein The
whole Doctrine of Christian Liberty is briefly handled, and may serve for
instruction of all such as desire to exercise their Gifts aright, which are in
these our days very much abused.

Published by G. DOWNHAM: B of D. Minister of the word of God.

PROVE: 8.32. Now therefore harken unto me, O ye children, for blessed are they
that keep my ways.

Printed for W. WEBB Bookseller in Oxford, and W. GRAVES of Cambridge. 1652.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE creation of our first Parents in the image of Genesis 1.26.
GOD, was blessed with four excellencies. 1. Reasonable and immortal souls or
spirits, called Job. 10.12.
the life of men. 2. Divine knowledge Jo. 1.4.
true wisdom, Col. 3.10.
and holiness Ps. 51 6.
adorning their souls, wherein especially they resembled their Creator. 3.
Bodies endued with beauty, strength, and immortality, Ephesians. 4, 24.
answerable to their souls. 4. Dominion over the creatures 1. Cor. 11.7.
When created holiness without teinture or sinful blemish shined in them,
Genesis 1* 26.
they conversed familiarly with the God of glorious majesty, their corporal
nakedness (not having tra^sgressed) caused not their confusion of face, the
perfection of all parts added thereunto a glorious seemlinesse and decency.
God in them found absolute contentment Genesis 1.26.
, they in God enjoyed a full fruition and assurance of the favorable blisfull
presence Psalm. 17.15.
Adams sanctity by creation, his own innocence and integrity before his
prevarication, gave him to name Luke 3.38.
the son of God. This sonship was accompanied with power dispositive, and
ability preparative, with skill and will, and strength of grace to do that
which was pleasing to Almighty God. The natural sons of mortal men, having
(by original corruption, traduced from the loins of Adam) l^st this liberty
unto that which is good, and contracted to themselves an aptness and
proclivity unto all manner of evils, they can be but, as our Savior says
Math. 7.^3.
, workers of iniquity. They cannot think a good thought, (for that is gratia
infusa;) nor speak a good word, (for that is gratia effusa;) nor do a good
work (for that is gratia diffusa.)

We that are Saints by calling, and the sons and daughters of a heavenly
Father by spiritual regeneration, are by our natural birth abominably defiled
with the blood of original corruption. Our Fathers were Amorites, Ezekiel 16 3
our Mothers Hittites. In this state there is none that does good, no not one.
Jam. 3.2.
In many things (says S. James) we offend all: nay, in all things we sin
all, coming short of the glory of God, that is, of that righteousness and
holiness which leads unto glory. And albeit no man can justify his own
integrity, saying, Mine heart is clean, and my righteousness c^mpleat and
perfect, yet a renewed justified child of grace, from whom the Lord has taken
away the Ephesians, 4.17, 18, 19.
blinded mind, misleading the understanding Isay 44.20.
; that pravity of nature, which benumbed Tit. 1.15 Ephesians. 4.19.
or abused the conscience Mar. 10.20. 2 Cor. 87.
; enthralled Rom, 7.23.6.20.
and hardened the will; disturbed, and disordered the affections Iam. 4.1. G^l.
5.17. Job. 15.16
, and having rectified and renewed those corporal senses, which were treacherous
Porters Math. 5.29*30.
to let in sin unto the soul, or forward instruments to execute it Romans
3.13.6.12.13.
This Newborn Christian, who has not only the restraining, but renewing
spirit, he may in a qualified sense be said not to commit sin. For, 1 His
sins committed are not imputed, because in Christ he is justified. 2
Comparatively he is no sinner but a Saint, his errors and erregularities not
resembling for nature and degree others foul enormities. 3 The Newborn
Christian seldom sins purposely, never plenary, with full and pleasing
consent; neither totally and finally unto the end, because his seed remains
in him.


How far Gods general providence in the effectual restraining power of the
spirit, Joh. 3 9
works in them to preserve them from sin, and of what force the grace of
regeneration is unto them, to keep them unspotted of the world, and prepare
them for growth unto full holiness, thou have (courteous Reader) herein
described and discovered unto thee.

Make use of this Model of Divine instructions, apply the meditations thereof
to thine own heart and conscience, then Gods grace prevailing in thee shall
thou not be indulgent to thy sinful corruptions, as others unrenued; but
intercept the course, and stop the sloudgates of sinful concupiscence, from
making an inundation to overspread thy soul: then shall thou not favor sin,
foster, or harbor it within thine heart, but detesting, resist it
courageously: being at any time through thine own infirmities, and Satan's
temptations, drawn to commit sin, thou shall do it unwillingly* grieve for it
heartily, weep with Peter bitterly, endeavoring constantly for the time to
come, to hold fast thine innocence, to preserve thine integrity, and in all
things to approve thy self unto thy heavenly Father, by a gracious antipathie
and contrariety unto sin, by holiness of affection, and pliablenesse of
imitation, so from thy religious conversation shall thou reap the blessings of
this life, health, wealth, peace, and prosperity; grace, joy, godly
contentment, the assurance of thy sins remission, and souls salvation:
howsoever, in the life to come thou shall be sure to receive thy reward, having
purged thy self as God is pure, and beheld Gods face in righteousness, in the
resurrection when thou awakest, thou shall be satisfied with his image, and by
beholding of it, shall be changed into the same from glory to glory. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, G. D.

An Examitation of a man's estate before God.
COLOSS. 4.8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he may know
your estate and comfort your hearts.
THE estate of a man before God is the relation that he stands in unto God,
What a man's estate before God is.
as God is the free fountain of all spiritual life and salvation, and the
determiner of men's everlasting conditions, either in heaven or hell: So that
when we question about a man's estate, we question, Whether he be in Christ or
not; Whether he have true grace, yea or no; Whether he be one of Gods children
or no; or whether he be yet no better then a reprobate.

There be three things to be considered in this definition of every man's
estate. First, it is a relation unto God; not as a man is in himself, it may
be rich, it may be poor in the world; but I speak here as he is in relation
toward God, Whether he be rich toward God, yea or no, I do not speak as a
man in regard of others; it may be he is a father or a son, a master or a
servant, a king or a subject: but in relation to God, Romans 16.10.
Whether Gods servant or no, Gods child or no. Salute Apelles, says Paul; and
he tells us in what estate Apelles was in before God, namely, in an estate of
approbation, approved in Christ. And the same Apostle speaks on the contrary
of the unconverted Gentiles, that they were strangers from the life of God,
Ephesians. 4.18.
Ephesians. 4 18. Secondly, As it is a relation unto God, so it is a standing
relation: That wherein he stands toward God, that is a man's estate before
God. There is a difference between one that does sin and one that is in the
state of sin: A child of God may sin, but he is not in a state of sin: you
cannot call him a wicked man. So also there is difference between one that
does some good actions and one that is in a good estate: A carnal man may do
some good things, but he is not in a good estate. The estate of a man is a
standing thing, it is the relation that he stands in toward God. Thirdly, It
is the relation that a man stands in toward God as he is the free fountain
of spiritual life and salvation. It is not every standing relation toward
God: For a man may be considered in relation to God as a Creator, and so the
heavens and the earth and the very brute beasts stand in relation to God as
they are his creatures; but they have not this estate that we speak of, which
is a relation to God as the free giver of spiritual life and salvation (He is
free, he may choose whether he will give it or no.) Now this is a man's estate,
the relation he stands in unto God, Whether the Lord has given him his
saving grace, yea or no; spiritual life in Christ Jesus, yea or no; title to
heaven and salvation, yea or no? This is the meaning when we speak of a man's
estate. It is said of Sodom, Genesis 13.13
They were sinners before God: that is, they were in a bad estate, a state of
sin. It is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.
They were both righteous before God; that is, they were both in a very good
state.

All Christians believe that there is a God: Observe. Ministers are to enquire
after the estate of their people.
It behooves every one now to consider in what estate he stands to this God.
This is a great question that we which are Ministers ought to demand of our
people, to know their estates.

First, Reasons 1.
because we are sheepherds, and are bound to look well how it stands with our
stock. If we do not labor to know your estates, we can never look well to
your souls. Consider that place in the Proverbs, Prove. 27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock and look well to thy herds. Where
the wise man first requires that we should look well to our flocks, and then
directs us in the manner how, viz. by being diligent to know their estate how
it stands with them.

Secondly, we are Gods laborers; and we must know in what estate our work
stands: else we may labor and labor and all in vain; we may preach and
exhort and call upon our people to hear and to believe and obey, and all this
may still be in vain, if we do not enquire in what estate they are. This is
the reason why Paul could not forbear sending and enquiring how it stood with
the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
in what estate they were in, how it went with their faith, whether they kept
it or no, lest the tempter had tempted them, and his labor should have been in
vain; for so it had been for all his preaching and teaching them, if they had
not been in a good estate: therefore he sent to know.

3.
Thirdly, we are to take the care and the charge of your souls: Now then how
can we be quiet if we do not know in what estate your souls be? A good
father cannot be at quiet if he do not know how it is with his children: How
if they should be sick? How if undone? Oh it would comfort a good father to
know his children to be in good case: But if it were otherwise with them,
though it would grieve him much, yet he had rather know it then not; for if he
know it he can better tell what to do. So it was with the Apostle; his very
bowels yerned upon the Philippians, Oh my poor people, Philip. 2.29.
thought he, I wonder what estate they be in. How if they totter? How if they
miscarry? How if the devil have tempted them to sin and to apostatize? How
if they be troubled of conscience? He could never be at quiet till he knew
their estate: I trust in the Lord Jesus, says he, to send Timotheus shortly
unto you, that I also may be of good comfort when I know your estate. He had a
great care of their souls, and therefore it would comfort his heart to know
what estate they were in.

Fourthly, we are teachers, 4.
and therefore we must know the estate of our people: otherwise we are ignorant
what doctrine to provide for them, what points to handle among them. Paul in
this Epistle to the Collossians, knowing only their estate in the general,
delivers abundance of general precepts and exhortations unto them: he
describes unto them the mystery of Christ, admonishes them to continue
steadfast therein, to embrace the preaching of the word, to beware of Philosophy
and the vain traditions and sophistry of men, to take heed of doting upon
ceremonies, which are all ended in Christ, to set their affections on heaven,
to mortify the deeds of the flesh, to put off the old man; he warns them to
be loving and humble: he bids wives do their duties to their husbands, and
husbands to love their wives; children to obey their parents, and parents to
encourage their children; servants to obey their masters, and masters to deal
well with their servants; all to continue in prayer, watchfulness,
thanksgiving, to walk wisely toward them that are without, to be careful of
godly and holy communication: Thus knowing their estate only for the general
he teaches them in general, and therefore now he concludes, Col. 4.8.
as if he should say, I speak somewhat generally because I do not know your
estates in particular; and therefore I send to you Tychicus, a faithful good
minister, that he may learn your estates in particular, and deal with you
answerably. It may be some of you want corrosives; it may be some of* you want
cordials; it may be some have need to be searched and humbled, some of you to
be encouraged and comforted: I have sent him to enquire into your estates in
particular, that he may do accordingly. Whom I have sent unto you for the same
purpose, that he may know your estate and comfort your hearts.

Uses. 1 Instruct.
The use of this is threefold.

First, for instruction. Hence we may see that a minister does but his duty
when he enquireth into men's estates how they stand before God: It is not prying
into other men's matters; it is not busie-bodinesse in other men's affairs; it
is not a spirit of meddling: No, a minister does but his duty when he does it.
How can a Physician apply true and proper physic unless he enquire into the
state of men's bodies? Now a minister is a physician to men's souls; Ier. 8.12.
and therefore he is to enquire of the state of men's souls how they stand
before God. They are men of Belial that say, What? must the minister know all?
and, Can there be nothing done but the minister must hear of it? These are
very evil speeches. The minister does but his duty when he is inquisitive.

The second use may be for reproof. 2. Reproof.
If it be the duty of a minister to enquire of men's estates before God, then
those people are too blame that will not make known their estates. What is the
reason that so many men abide in a ro^ten estate, but because they are loath to
open truly and fully what they are to Gods minister? Nay many are like them in
the prophet Who say to the Seers, Isai. 30.10.
See not. They would not have God^ ministers see what they do, nor see what
they are. I confess there be some that will open something about their
estates, but will not all they know by themselves: They keep in the main; like
some foolish clients who misinform their Counsel, making the^r case better
then indeed it is, and so their cause mis-carrieth: So some keep in that which
would give most light to judge of their estates: But this ought not so to be. I
can tell you an example of one that being troubled about his estate before God,
and some ministers being by, Oh, says he, I will tell you all that I know of
my self; I Will not hide a syllable from you: and, if I be yet no better then a
wretch, I beseech you tell me plainly that I am so; and if I be in Christ, I
beseech you prove it plainly unto me. This man took a right course, and thereby
through Gods mercy came in a little space to the assurance of his own blessed
estate and condition.

3. Exhortation.
Thirdly, for exhortation. Let Gods ministers know of your estates, that they
may be able to speak to you accordingly. By this means they may speak words in
due season, and likewise house-holders give every one his portion. If you had
but a cut finger, would not you be glad to have the right plaster? and if you
had a burning fever, would you not desire the right remedy? How much more in
curing the sickness of the soul.

Now from the text it self without any cutting up of the words, we may gather
four propositions: 1. That there is an estate that every man is in, either an
estate of grace, or an estate of sin. 2. That this state may be known. 3. That
every man should be willing to have his estate examined, that it may be known
whether it be good or no. 4. That a man can never have true comfort till it be
known that he is in a good estate.


Observe. 1
1. For the first, That there is an estate that every one is in, either of grace
or sin; See this in Simon Magus: Act. 8.23.
I perceive, says S. Peter, thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the
bond of iniquity. See, he tells him what estate he was in, viz. a very bad
estate, in a desperate and damnable condition. In this state of sin and misery
are all they that are not renewed by Christ Jesus. And for the other see an
example, Romans 16.7. Romans 16 7.
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord: The text there tells us what estate he was
in, a very good estate; He was a man in Christ, a choice man, that is, a man in
the state of grace and salvation. In this estate are all they that are called
and sanctified, and made new creatures unto God. Every man is in one of the two
estates. there is no middle estate which is neither the one nor the other, but
in one of these two are all the whole world. The reason is, 1. From everlasting
the world was divided only into two ranks, either Elect or Reprobates. 2. Here
in this life the world is divided only into two companies, either Godly or
Ungodly. 3. Math. 25.32.
At the day of judgment the Lord will divide the whole world only into two
sorts, either Sheep or Goats.


II. 2. Prop. Election may be known.
For the second proposition, This estate may be known: Especially every man may
come to the knowledge of his own estate before God. I do not say that every man
may know whether he be elect or reprobate: yet this I say too, That a godly
soul may know that it is elected to life. The Apostle exhorts all that are
godly to give diligence to make their election sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. He that
attaineth to that says which the Apostle calls the faith of Gods elect,
Titus 1.1. and receives the word of God, as Paul says the Thessalonians did,
and thence concludes they were chosen of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4.5. he may attain
to much assurance of his election. But though a godly man may know he is
elected of God, yet for reprobation the case is not alike: 1. Because
ungodliness is not always joined with perseverance. 2. Besides, God has many
reasons why he does not reveal means reprobation unto them: They would then be
outrageous in evil, desperate in wickedness: there could be no order or
government in humane life: Besides that, the form of Christ's administration of
his kingdom could not be so as it now is* for Christ has bid his ministers
preach the Gospel to every creature, to whole parishes and towns, and except
none: Christ will not tell his ministers which be reprobates and which not,
that they may preach unto all, and labor to work upon every soul; and there is
none in a parish but the minister must look upon him as one who may be saved:
Christ will not tell his people which be reprobates, that they may look upon
every one as one that may be won to the faith for any thing they know; Christ
will not tell the reprobates themselves that they are reprobates, that every
one of them may come ^o the use of the means; How do: they know but they may
find grace? Yea, and the Lord does seriously ca^l them; and it is their fault
if they obey not. It is Gods infinite mercy, that election, which is such a
comfortable point, may be revealed to Gods children, and that reprobation,
which is so intolerable and bitter, is not revealed to the reprobate.
Nevertheless let me add That some particular men have known their own
reprobation, as Cain and Judas, Shred signs of it
etc. And there be shrewd signs of it: (I do not speak it as though I meant
to persuade any man that he is one, but only that he may take heed of them.

1. Maliceing the known truth is a very shrewd sign: As, when men know that
godliness is pleasing to God, and yet they hate a man for it; when men know
the minister is commanded to rebuke sin, and yet they will spite him for so
doing: this is a very shrewd sign^: Paul persecuted the truth; but yet, says
he, I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13. intimating that
if he had done it against knowledge he had been in danger to have found no
mercy. And therefore ye that mock and hate those ways which God has
commanded, I beseech you, take heed lest ye sin unpardonably.

2. Absolute apostasy is a shrewd sign too of reprobation: When men have been
very forward in the profession of the truth, and fall totally away and prove
miserably profane, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 6.6.

3. Final impenitency. This is an infallible sign of reprobation, when a man
lives in sin, dies in sin, and goes away without repentance. Luke 13.3.
Except ye repent ye shall likewise perish. There be many of us have stood out
long in impenitency; let us take heed lest if we stay any longer we fall upon
this great evil.

That a man may know his estate proved.
I return to the point: A man may come to the knowledge of his own estate
before God. I do not mean, Whether he be in the state of election or
reprobation; but he may know, Whether he be in the state of salvation or
damnation, that is, Whether he be in the way that leads to heaven or hell,
Whether he be in such a case that if he die now he shall be saved or not saved:
Every man may thus know in what estate he is.

Reasons I.
1. Because the word of God shows a man this: As for example, He that
commits sin is of the Devil. 1. Job. 3.8
Mark; the Apostle tells us what estate that man is in that lives in sin, in
a very bad estate. 1. Ioh. 3.3.
So on the contrary; He that has his hope purges himself. Mark; the Apostle
tells us what estate that man is in who purges himself; he is in a very
good estate, in estate of true hope in Christ. And so 1. Cor. 6.10. the Apostle
names diverse who are not in the state of salvation but of damnation: if they
die in such case they cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven. So that if a man
will but search the word, and believe that God does say true, he may know his
estate.

2. Without this knowledge a man cannot have an accusing or an excusing
conscience in respect of his estate: II.
but men may have, yea many men have, a conscience accusing them of being in a
very bad estate; and many men have an excusing conscience that plainly does
witness that they are in a very good and gracious estate. Exodus 9.27
I and my people are wicked, says Pharaoh. His conscience did accuse him of
being in a bad estate. Psalm. 86.2
I am holy, says David; I am thy servant. His conscience told him he was in
the state of grace. So that ye need not go far to know what estate you are
in: there is that in your bosom that can decide the matter.

3. Men cannot desire nor fly from an unknown estate: III.
But men are commanded to fly from a bad estate, and seek out a good one:
Therefore they may know the one and the other. Mat. 3.7.8.
O generation of vipers, who has warned you to sly from the wrath to come?
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, says John to the Pharisees.
He supposes these men might easily know that they were in a very bad est, or
else how could he say thus unto them?

Before I come to the Uses let us consider these three things.

1. That every man living is borne in a very bad estate. We all know it well;
but oh that we would consider it! We are all by nature children of wrath. ^h.
2.3.
Now here lies the question, When did we change our estates? We are in the
same state of damnation wherein we were born, except we are come out of it. I
say, here lies the question, Whether we are come out of it or no, whether we
have mended our estate.

2. Consider that the greatest part of the world never mend their estates: But
as they were born in a cursed estate; so they live and die in it. And I speak
not this of heathen only; but alas! how many in the visible Church do so?
^il. 3.17. Cor. 1.
How many were there in the Church of Philippi whom the Apostle could not think
of without weeping when he considered in what estate they were. So in the
Church of Corinth, not many wise, not many rich, not many noble called; but
commonly the meanest in the eye of the world were in the best estate toward
God. Nay more then so: Many of them who seek to get into a good estate miss of
it and perish. See Luke 13 24 Strive to enter in at the straight gate: Mark;
it is a strait gate, and lets but few in: for many shall seek to enter in and
shall not be able. Here and there a few even where the constant ministry is.

3. Consider that it is a mavelous hard thing to pass from state unto state,
from a bad to a good estate. There is a very vast gull between the state of sin
and the state of grace, and it is mavelous hard to pass it. These things
premised, the uses follow.

1. This point may be many ways useful. Use 1. Of Instruction. It is even
man's dut^ to enquir^ after his estate.
First, for instruction. If God has made it possible unto us to find out what
estate every one of us is in, then sure he would have us go about it and
enquire after it. God might have left us to perish in our natural blindness,
never to have known in what case we had been until we were past recovery.
First, we are all wanderers from God and from the ways of peace; and
therefore God might justly have suffered us for ever to have wandered, and never
to have been able to find out whether we had been right or wrong. Secondly, God
has dealt so with some: He has suffered some to go on all their days
blindfold to hell. Thus the Lord dealt with the Scribes and Pharisees; Let them
alone, Mat. 15.14
says he, they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind lead the blend
they will both fall into the ditch. Ye see the Lord has dealt so with some;
and it is his mercy he has not dealt so with us. Since God has made it
possible for us to know, it is our duty to enquire after it: And that yet
further for these reasons: 1. First, because the Lord commanded it: Reasons 2.
Cor. 13.5
Examine your own selves whether ye be in the faith prove your selves: know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
Where ye see the Apostle commands the duty of selfe-triall: And consider how
he presses it upon us: 1. Do ye not know what an estate you are in? Then
examine and enquire. 2. Do ye think ye are in a good estate? Look ye prove
it, and be sure ye be not in an error. Do ye object ye do not know,
neither can ye know? No? then your estate is very bad: find out some good
tokens in you, except ye be reprobates. This command makes it a clear duty. 2.
But a second reason to prove it our duty to enquire what estate we are in, is,
because without the knowledge thereof we can never have any true peace in our
consciences: The conscience must needs be without peace so long as we are
ignorant of what estate we are in: Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
First the Apostle shows their estate; they were in a state of justification:
and from the knowledge thereof they had peace. We are bound to get true peace
to our consciences: Oh, what a lamentable maze are we in till our consciences
have peace! And this they cannot have until we are fully acquainted in what
case we stand before God: Acquaint thy self with God, Job. 22.21
and be at peace. 3. Thirdly, we can neither be fit for any duty of Gods
worship as long as we know not what estate we are in: We can never be fit for
any holy duty, 1. Cor. 11.28.
to hear, pray, receive the sacrament: Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat, etc. First he must examine in what estate he is before he can be fit
for that high service. So for repentance: Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: first find our
selves in an ill estate, and then return. So for joy; It is a duty to rejoice
in the Lord: but we are never fit for rejoicing till we have proved what estate
we are in: Gal. 6 4.
Let every man prove his own work; so shall he have rejoicing. We can never be
fit for any duty until we know in what estate we are in, because every duty
varieth according as the estate of every man is. To instance in prayer; He that
is not in the state of grace must pray one way, and he that is in the state of
salvation must pray another way: the one, that he may be converted and brought
home to God; the other, that he may be strengthened and increased in grace.
And so for the duty of hearing, etc.


The second use is for direction; Use 2. Of Direction. Means to know what
esta^e we are in.
to let us understand by what means we may know what estate we are in, there be
4 means to know this 1. By our outward and inward actions. I do not say, by our
outward actions: For a man may be in the estate of hypocrisy, and yet his
outward actions may be good. Neither do I say by our inward actions alone: F^r
a man may be in the state of selfe-deceit, and yet say his heart is good, and
his meaning and mind good. But I say, by them both put together. Our Savior
sets it out by a tree; every good tree brings forth good fruit: but a
corrupt tree brings forth corrupt fruit. (...). 7.
So if the heart brings forth the fruit of righteousness, joy in good
things, patience, meekness, gentleness, love, obedience, godly conversation,
etc. These evidence a good estate: but if the heart brings forth deadness,
earthlinesse, impatience, evil conversation, etc. these are corrupt fruits and
signs of a very bad estate. 2. Ye may know what estates ye are in by your
inclinations and dispositions, from whence these actions proceed. Psalm. 119.112
Are your hearts inclined heavenward and Godward, as David's? Are ye bent to
holiness and self-denial, etc. as a bow is bent to shoot the arrow? This is
a sign of a good estate: as 1. Chron. 22.19. there is speech of setting the
heart to seek God. Ye know when a man will do a thing indeed, we say he is
set on it. It may be ye do some good duties, make some fair offers of seeking
God* but are your hearts set on it? or are they set on the world and inclined
earthward? The inclinations of every creature in the world do ever show what
the creature is, How do we know that a stone is heavy? Because it inclines
downward. How do we know that a man is choleric? Because he is inclined unto
wrath. So a man's estate may be known by his constant inclination either to
good or evil. 3. One may know what estate he is in by reflexive act which is
proper only to man. There is an act in man's soul (we call it a reflex act)
which no creature has but only man, whereby he can perceive what himself is
and does. When a man thinks or speaks, he can reflect upon himself and
perceive what he thinks or speaks: when he prays, he can reflect upon his
own heart, and perceive how it carries it self all along in his prayers. I say
no creature in the world has in it this reflexive act but only man. The fire
burns, but it cannot reflect upon its own burning: Oculus non videt se
videre, The eye sees, but it does not see that it does see; that is, That
creature does not perceive what it does when it sees. But every man has this
reflexive act in him, whereby he is privy to what himself thinks, 1. Cor. 2.11
does, is. None knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man that is
in him. This is the reason why some know not what estate they are in, because
they choke their own spirit, and hoodwink their consciences. Thine own heart
knows how it is with thee, and would faithfully tell thee if thou would
enquire of it and hearken unto it. Search with Gods candle, and thou may
easily find what is in thee. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord,
Prove. 20.27.
searching all the inward parts of the belly. 4. Ye may know what estate ye are
in by a certain kind of feeling. As there is a kind of bodily feeling whereby
every man knows the estate of his body whether he be sick or in health, so
there is a spiritual feeling. The two Disciples did feel their hearts burn:
Luke 24:32
Paul did feel a great combat in him between the flesh and the spirit: Ephesians.
4.19.
So if men be covetous and worldly, they may feel it. Yet indeed some men be
past feeling, Their case is the worse because they cannot feel how bad it is:
But for the most, they may easily feel what their estate is.


Use 3. Impediments.
The third use is, to show you the impediments that hinder this knowledge. If
you would attain to know what estate you are in, then remove the impediments;
which are

1. Vain thoughts. Men who are in a state of sin and wrath, yet have many vain
thoughts lodging within them keeping them from knowing it: God is merciful;
and Christ died for sinners; and, There be worse sinners then they; why should
they think so ill of themselves? and, they may be better all in good time:
These vain thoughts hoodwink their eyes that they cannot see their estate, nor
resolve that it is so dangerous as indeed it is. Ier. 4.14.
O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness: how long shall these vain
thoughts lodge within thee? They were in a very bad estate; and yet they had
such vain thoughts that they could not see it.

2. Presumption is another impediment. Men pray, and hear, and do other good
duties, and so take all to be well without serious examining. This was the case
of the Laodicean people They thought they had that in them which they had not,
Rev. 3.17.
and that their estate was good, when it was nothing so.

Another let is the Cares of this life: Whereby the heart is so occupied that
it does not find to search its own estate. Therefore our Savior says, Luke
21.35
Take heed that your hearts be not overcharged with the cares of this life,
lest that day come upon you unawares; intimating that these cares are great
lets from considering our estates.

4. Another let is an Evil conscience: which affrighteth a man so soon as he
begins to stir, and makes him afraid to go on to look soundly into his
estate. Ioh. 3.20. Romans 3.11
He that does evil hates the light

5. Another let is Ignorance. There is none that understands, none that
seeks after God. Mark; they did not seek in what case they stood before God
because they did not understand.

6. Another let is Spiritual sloth and sluggishnesse of heart. Men cannot
endure to take pains with their own hearts till they have made out a true
judgment in what case they are: They begin and quickly give over; and so for
want of diligence and paines-taking make nothing sure.

The last use is for exhortation; That all men would bestirre themselves and
set in earnest upon this inquiry That we may every one know in what state we
stand.

1. Consider, this is an enquiry about our souls. We enquire about our outward
man, about the estate of our bodies, and worldly affairs, etc. oh, let us not
neglect this main enquirry, Am I in Christ, yea or no? Am I a new creature, yea
or no? Does my soul live to God or no?

2. Consider, this is a question about our everlasting estate. We can never
have comfort until we have put this out of question, and therefore this is a
question which all questions must give way unto. If ye be not in Christ, ye had
need lay aside all, and look about it only. How can men eat, drink, sleep, etc.
since the wrath of God abides upon all unbelievers? Me thinks our souls should
take no content, do nothing else but faint after Christ, until we know our
interest in him. I say again, This is the grand enquiry, that business which
all businesses must give place unto. Oh, the sloth of our souls! Let us in time
awake and rouse them up, and never rest until we know our own estate to be
good before God, that so our hearts may have comfort, and that with God,

FINIS.

