THE DOCTRINE OF Practical Praying: TOGETHER, With a Learned Exposition ON THE
LORDS PRAYER.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, George Downam, late Ld Bishop of Derry in
Ireland.

Pray without ceasing, etc. 1 These. 5. 17.

After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. Mat. 69.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Nicolas Bourne at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1656.

To the Christian Reader.
THere is no duty more excellent in it self or profitable to us then that of
Prayer: Wherein we have sweet communion with God and free access to the throne
of grace, laying open to a gracious Father all our wants and grievances, in
hope and confidence to have our suits granted, our sins pardoned, our
necessities supplied, and our griefs removed and relieved. It is that hand and
key which helps to unlock and open the treasury of all Gods graces for the
enriching of our souls with all his blessings, the horsemen and chariots of the
Israel of God, whereby they get victory over all their enemies, yea they
prevail with God when he seems to oppose against them as an enemy, and to
wrestle with them that he may foil and overthrow them, as he did with Jacob. In
all which and innumerable other respects as it is to be esteemed the chiefest
exercise of a godly and Christian life, which can never be too much practiced,
as the Apostle implies where he injoyneth us to pray continually, and in all
things to give thanks; so can it never be sufficiently insisted upon in the
doctrine of it, whereby we are pressed and persuaded to the frequent exercise
of it, and taught to perform it in a right and acceptable manner. In which
regard though much already has been excellently spoken and written upon this
subject, yet let no man think it superfluous to have more published of this
argument; seeing that can never be too much taught which is never sufficiently
learned and loved.

The ensuing Treatises were the labors of that learned, judicious and godly
Divine D. Downame, late Bishop of Dery in the Realm of Ireland, my most dear
brother, which were penned with his own hand for his private use, but for the
public service of that part of Gods Church over which he was a painful and
faithful Pastor, containing the sum of many of his sermons which he
preached on this argument. The which if he had been pleased to have polished
and perfected with his own learned hand, no doubt much would have been added to
their luster and beauty. Yet seeing this was not done according to his better
abilities, I thought it a damage to Gods people, that they should lose the
substance for the want of some circumstance, and have no use of a
well-compacted body, fit to do God and his Church good service, because it was
not decked with gay ornaments. And therefore I have presented it to the view of
the world, and endeavored to perform the duty of a brother to him that is
deceased, though not to raise this spiritual seed to him (for it was of his
own begetting and composing) yet to give unto it birth and being in the world,
without which it would have proved abortive, and so have been buried in
perpetual oblivion.

The which service I have the more willingly undertaken for the benefit of all
that will take pains to peruse this work, because I am now disabled by age and
many infirmities to produce any further labors of mine own in this kind;
wherein I have not been wanting in my more able and mature times, according to
the proportion of my small talent which my great Lord and Master has entrusted
me with: Herein imitating the example of the weaker sex, who after they have
been fruitful in bearing children themselves, and now being come to older age
are disabled to have any more conceptions, do some of them become midwives, who
are helpful to those who are young and fruitful for the bringing of their
children into the world.

The Lord, whose only blessing makes all our endeavors profitable by giving
efficacy unto them by the inward operation of his holy Spirit, bless these
and all other labors of his servants, that they may bring forth plentiful
fruits for the advancement of his glory and the benefit of all his children,
who are willing to make use of them to these ends.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, to do thee any Christian service, JOHN DOWNHAM.

The contents of the Chapters of the first part of this Treatise, viz. The
Doctrine of Prayer; together with the chief points therein handled.
Chap. 1. OF the definition of Prayer, and of the persons who are to pray Page
1 Of the name of Invocation and Prayer 2 Of the general nature of prayer 3 Of
the proper nature of prayer 4 What is required in invocation acceptable to God
5 Who ought to pray 6, 7, etc. 2. Reasons moving to the duty of prayer 8, 9,
etc. 3. Other motives to the duty of prayer 11 4. Three questions cleared 14
Whether prayer be efficacious to obtein our desires 15 That prayer is necessary
notwithstanding Gods decree 16, 17, etc. 5. Of the great and wonderful
efficacy of prayer 21 6. Whether by prayer we always obtein our desires 26 7.
Of the profit of prayer 29 8. A threefold necessity of prayer 32 9. Who are to
perform the duty of prayer 33 10. None but the faithful can pray effectually
and acceptably 37 That the impenitent cannot pray acceptably 39 In what respect
God hears the wicked 47 11. That God alone is to be called upon 51 12. That
we ought not to invocate any creature 58 That Angels and Saints are not to be
invocated. 59 That Saints departed are not to be invocated 61 Chap. 13 That we
must conceive of God in prayer as he has revealed himself in his word 64
Whether Christ as Mediator is to be invocated 66 14. That Christ alone is the
Mediator of intercession as well as of redemption 68 15. That we must pray
only in the name of Christ 77 16. Of the manner how we are to call upon God 80
That we must pray with upright hearts 82, etc. That we must not pray with
feigned lips and wandering thoughts 83, 84, etc. 17. Of knowledge required
necessarily in prayer 89 That prayer ought to be made in a known tongue 92 18.
Of Faith which is required in prayer 101 19. Of Humility required in prayer
106 Faith and Humility must be joined in prayer 110 20. Of Reverence required
in prayer, and Heartinesse 113 21. Of the Gesture to be used in prayer 116 22.
Of the Voice to be used in prayer 125 Of Battologie in prayer 129 Of the
quantity and quality of our prayers 133 23. Whether a set form of prayer may
be used 135 What we are to think of extempor all prayer 137 Of conceived
prayers and set forms 139 24. Of things required out of the action of prayer
141 Of Preparation unto prayer 142 Of duties to be performed after prayer 144
25. Of the Subject matter of our prayers, and what is required thereunto;
namely, that it be good and according to Gods will 146 That being unable to
pray we are assisted by the Spirit 147 Chap. 26 Of the circumstances of prayer
150 Of Public prayer 151 Of Private prayer in the family, and alone 154 27. Of
the time of prayer 156 The Euchetae confuted 157 28. Concerning the Place of
prayer 161 The vanity of Pilgrimages 163 29. Of Prayer or Petition: and what is
required unto it 164 Prayer and thanksgiving must be joined 165 What things are
required in prayer 167 We must pray in sight and sense of our wants 169 We must
pray with fervency of desire 172 30. Of Faith, which is chiefly required in
prayer 173 We must pray in faith and submission to Gods will 176 31. Of duties
to be performed after prayer 178 32. Distinctions of prayer in regard of the
object 181 For whom we must pray 184 Of prayer against others 188 Of
Imprecations 189 33. Of the real object of prayer, or the things to be prayed
for 191 We must pray for temporal blessings 193 34. Of Deprecation 195 Of
Confession of our sins 196 How this Confession is to be made 197 35. Of
Thanksgiving 201 What is required in Thanksgiving 202 36. Special duties
required in Thanksgiving 206 37. Of the outward expressing inward thankfulness
by praising God 212 38. Duties to be performed before and after thanksgiving
216
The chief things handled in the second part of this Treatise, viz. The
exposition of the Lords Prayer.
THe generals of Invocation applied to the Lords Prayer 226 The Preface 231 How
God is called Father ibid. Of the name Father; and what duties it teaches us
234 What is meant by the word Our 237 The meaning of these words, Which art in
heaven 244 The division of the Petitions 251 The meaning of the first Petition
252 How Gods name is sanctified by us 255 How Gods name signifying his Glory is
sanctified by us 257 How it is sanctified, signifying his Titles 259 How it is
sanctified, signifying his Word 263 How it is sanctified, signifying the
Doctrine of religion 264 How it is sanctified, signifying his Works 265 How God
himself sanctifies his name 269 The second Petition handled 271 What Gods
kingdom is 272 What it is for Gods kingdom to come 275 Christ's kingdom
comes by means 279 The impediments of Gods kingdom to be prayed against 282
Uses concerning the coming of Gods kingdom 289 Of the coming of the kingdom
of glory 293 We must expect and pray for the second coming of Christ 294 How we
must expect the second coming of Christ 298 The third Petition explained 301 Of
the will of God, and things which he wills 303 How Gods will is done on earth
307 How Gods will is done on earth as in heaven 310 The matter and manner of
our obedience 314, 315 Wherein our obedience resembles that of the Angels 319
The exposition of the fourth Petition 324 Why we ask temporal blessings before
spiritual 325 What is meant by Bread 327 What is meant by daily bread 330 How
God is said to give us daily bread 333, etc. Duties to be performed by them
that ask daily bread 339, 340, etc. The fifth Petition expounded 350 We must be
justified before we can be sanctified 352 That our sins are debts 355 What is
meant by forgiving our trespasses 359 By this petition we are put in mind of
our misery and Gods mercy 361 No man can satisfy Gods justice for his sins
362 Several duties arising out of the fifth petition 368, 369 Our forgiving no
cause of Gods forgiving us 376 How we can be said to forgive 379 Reasons moving
us to forgive 385, etc. The sixth petition expounded 390 Those whom God
pardons the devil tempts 391 The necessity of this prayer, Not to be lead
into temptation 392 Of probations and trialls, 1. by prosperity, 2. by
afflictions 394, 395 Of diverse sorts of temptations 396 1. Of the flesh ibid.
2. Of the world 397 3. Of the devil 400 Of the diverse sorts of the devils
temptations 401, etc. How God may be said to tempt 406 Satan can neither tempt
or overcome without Gods permission 409 That temptations are good for Gods
children 410 How we must pray against the temptations of the flesh, the world,
and the devil 413, 414, 415, etc. The Conclusion of the Lords Prayer both
authentical and necessary 419 Our faith confirmed by this Conclusion 420 What
is meant by, thine is the kingdom 422, 423 What is meant by, the power and the
glory 424, 425 Everlasting kingdom, power and glory belongs to God 427 What
the word Amen signifies 429
CHAP. I. Of the definition of prayer; and of the persons who are to pray.
AMong all the duties of Christianity, as there is not any more honorable in
it self, more glorious to God, more profitable and necessary for us then the
exercise of prayer and invocation, so is there none wherein we do more need
direction and instruction, and consequently nothing wherein my labor in
speaking and yours in hearing may better be employed. For, as Chrysostom
says, Pulcherrima est scientia vereque Christiano homine digna quae docet
recte precari: That is the most excellent knowledge and truly worthy a
Christian man which teaches rightly to pray. In treating whereof I purpose (by
the help of The method observed in this tractate, Of prayer.
God) to observe this order: First, I will set down the doctrine of invocation,
and then explain that absolute form or pattern of prayer prescribed by our
Savior Christ, wherein the practice of the doctrine is contained.

The doctrine must first be general and common to both the sorts of
invocation, viz. prayer and thanksgiving; and then special and peculiar to
either.

The general doctrine consists of such points as are either more
substantial, (...)* or accidental, (...).

The substantial points are all of them comprised in this definition;
Invocation or prayer is a The definition of Pray^r.
religious speech of the faithful, directed unto God in the name of Christ,
framed according to the will of God by the help of the holy Ghost, concerning
good things apperteining to his glory and our good.

The phrase of invocating or calling upon the name Of the name of Invocation
and Prayer.
of God sometimes signifies the profession of the true religion whereby we
take the name of God upon us, and are called after his name: as Genesis 48. 16.
and 4. 16. Isa. 63. 10. Acts 9. 14. 1. Cor. 1. 2.

And first, as touching the name; This part of Gods worship is usually in the
Scriptures expressed by the phrase of calling upon the name of God, and
therefore is fitly called invocation, that is, calling upon God, whether it be
by way of praying or praising. In which general sense the Hebrew word (...),
tephillat, is sometimes used; 1. Sam. 2. 1. Psalm. 86. 1. Isa. 56. 7. Domus
orationis, oration, and invocatio in Latin: and by a Synecdoche prayer in the
English tongue; though properly it signifies that species or kind of
invocation whereby we crave any thing at the hands of God. By a Metonymie of
the sign it is sometimes called the lifting up of the hands, Psalm. 141. 2. and
44. 20. sometimes, the lifting up of the eyes, Psalm. 123. 1. more properly, a
lifting up of the heart unto God, Psalm. 25. 1. whereof the other are but
sign^s. Which must teach us when we pray, to lift up our hearts with our hands
unto God in the heavens, as Jeremie speaks Lam. 3. 41. So much of the name.

In the definition the nature of Invocation is set Of the general nature of
Prayer.
forth: both the general, which Logicians call the genus; and proper, in that
which is called the difference. The general, in that I call it a religious
speech. For of religious speech there are two special sorts: the one of man
unto man in the name of God and in the stead of Christ; which is preaching: the
other of man unto God in the name and mediation of Christ; which is prayer or
invocation: And both of them somewhere in the Scriptures are expressed by one
and the same name of prophesying: which for Preaching is used, 1. Cor. 14. 3,
4. and elsewhere for Invocation, both in the sense of praying, 1. Kings 18. 29.
with 26. and of praising, 1. Chron. 25. 1, 2, 3. First, I say, it is a speech.
And because the religious speech is the chief speech which we can use,
therefore as preaching is called Sermo, so prayer is of the Latins (...)
called Oration.

But where I say prayer is a speech, you are to understand, that whereas there
is a twofold speech, (...), outward and inward, the inward being also called
(...), or (...), a speech conceived in the mind: the outward, (...), or (...),
a speech uttered with the voice: prayer is not the outward speech chiefly or
only, but the inward of the soul; either alone, when in prayer the voice is
not used, as Genesis 24. 45. Exodus 14. 15. 1. Sam. 1. 13. and is called oration
mentalis, which is usuail in meditation, Psalm. 5. 1.
and is sometimes so called: or chi^fly when the voice is used, as most
commonly it is: Whereupon some define prayer to be (...), Da^asc. O^thodoxa
^ide, lib. 3. cap. 24.
the speech or communication of the soul with God; others, (...), the ascending
of the mind unto God. In which respect the holy Ghost calls it the lifting up
of the heart unto God, Psalm. 25. 1. and the pouring forth of the soul before
the Lord, Psalm. 62. 8. 1. Sam. 1. 15. As for that prayer which is only the
outward speech of the mouth without the inward of the heart, it is not a prayer
in truth, but a mere lip-labor. For to call upon God in truth, is to pray with
our souls, and to call upon him with our hearts, to lift up our hearts and to
pour forth our souls before the Lord, as I shall show more fully hereafter.

But I add, that it is a religious speech, to note that prayer is a part, and
indeed a principal part of that religious adoration and worship which we ow
unto God: and consequently to teach us, that it is a duty to be performed
religiously and devoutly, as intending thereby an holy and acceptable service
unto God. So that true prayer is not a bare reading or recital of any form of
prayer without understanding, without affection, without devotion, without
faith; but a religious service devoutly offered unto God out of an upright and
pure heart, 2. Tim. 2. 22. Psalm. 119. 7.

The proper nature of Invocation is described in (...) prop^r nature o^
In^ocation.
the rest of the definition, containing six substantial points necessarily
required in all prayer, viz. Quis, Quem, Cujus nomine, Quomodo, Cujus open, De
quibus; that is, Who must pray, Whom we must pray unto, In whose name, In what
manner, By whose help, and For what. For in all invocation that shall be
acceptable unto God, there is required, 1. That What is required in all
invocation acceptable to God.
the person which prays be faithful; 2. That the party to whom we pray be
the only true God; 3. That the prayer be made in the name of Christ; (For
sin having made a separation between God and us, there is no access for us
unto God in our own name.) 4. For the manner, that it be (...), according to
God, Romans 8. 27. or, as S. John speaks more fully, 1. Epist. 5. 14. according
to the will of God, that is, that in our invocation or prayer we perform those
things which God has willed and required in his word to be performed in
prayer. 5. Because we are not able of our selves to perform any of those things
which God has required, I add, that we are to call upon God by the help of
the holy Ghost. 6. And lastly, I show that the object of our invocation, that
is, the things concerning which we do speak unto God in prayer, are good things
apperteining to his glory and our good; as namely and especially, the benefits
and blessings of God, for which we do either pray unto him, or praise him. Of
these six in order: And first for the party which is to pray. When I say that
prayer is a speech of the faithful, you are to understand, 1. That we speak of
prayer as it is officium via^orum, a duty enjoined unto men living here upon
earth as pilgrims in the Church militant, unto whom alone the doctrine of
Invocation does appertein; and not as it is exercitium spirituum beatorum, the
exercise of the Saints and Angels in the Church triumphant in heaven, to whom
neither the commandments injoyning this duty, nor the promises made to prayer,
nor the directions which teach how to pray are directed. For although the word
of God has revealed that they are conversant in the one part of invocation,
that is, in praising and glorifying God (wherein we are to imitate them, that
we may do this will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. as the Saints and Angels do it in
heaven) yet as touching the other part, which is prayer or petition, for what
or for whom they pray in particular, the Spirit of God in the Scriptures has
not revealed: and it is but foolish curiosity to seek to be wise above that
which is written. For herein especially is that verified, Qu^ supra nos nihil
ad nos, that is, Things above us belong not unto us: much less ought we with
the superstitious Papists upon an erroneous conceit of theirs, I mean the
Saints and Angels in particular, that is, such Saints and Angels praying for us
in particular, ground an idolatrous practice of our praying unto them. But of
this also more hereafter.

2. Seeing we consider it as the duty of the living, Isa. 38. 19. we are more
particularly to consider both who in this world are required to pray, and also
what is required in them that do pray. This duty is required of all men living
without exception: All are to call upon God. And that their prayer may be
accepted of God, it is required of all that they should have faith. For as much
therefore as we are to define prayer as it is effectual and acceptable, for
that cause I defined it to be the speech of the faithful: not but that all are
bound to pray, but that none pray effectually and acceptably but they only
that believe. Concerning the party therefore which is to call upon God, I am
to show these two things: 1. That it is required of all to pray; 2. That it is
required of all which do pray that they be faithful. The former I am the
rather in this place to perform, lest when I have defined Quid sit, and so
taught how we are to pray, I leave place to the question An sit, Whether we are
to pray at all or not.

For howsoever it is a great honor and favor for a sinful man who is but
dust and ashes (as Abraham upon this occasion confesses, Genesis 18. 27.) that
the Lord should admit him to familiar speech with his great and glorious
Majesty (For as Chrysostom says, Quis non admiraretur tantam benignitatem De
(...) Deo, l^b. 1. cap. 1.
quam in nos declarat Deus, qui nos mortales dignos habuerit qui cum ipso
colloquamur, nostr aque vota apud ipsum deponamus? that is, Who would not
admire this so great goodness which God declares toward us, who esteems
mortals worthy to talk with him, and to lay before him all our suits?) and
that he should be near unto us in all that we do call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
and therefore a thing greatly to be desired and highly to be esteemed of us;
yet naturally men abhor from the performance of this duty: which caused the
Prophet Isaiah to complain that there was none that called Isa. 64. 7.
upon the name of the Lord. The reason is, because sin having made a
separation between God and us, the man whose conscience condemns him of sin
unrepented of, as not being reconciled unto God, flies from his presence as
the guilty person or malefactor from the sight of the judge; so far is he
from presenting himself voluntarily before the Lord: as we see in the examples
of our first parents, Genesis 3. 8. in Peter before his effectual calling, who
perceiving by the miraculous draught of fish the Divinity of our Savior
Christ, desires him to depart from him, for I (says he) am a sinful man: in
the Gergasines or Gadarenes, who being stricken with fear at the miraculous
dispossessing of the legion of devils, besought our Savior to depart out of
their coasts, Matthew. 8. 34. Luke 8. 37. It shall be needful therefore to use
some reasons and motives to move us to the performance of this duty.

CHAP. II. Reasons moving to the duty of prayer.
FIrst therefore the law of nature teaches all 1. Reason, taken from the law
of nature.
men this principle, That there is a God, and that this God is to be called
upon and worshipped. For which cause all nations being never so barbarous,
though they know not the true God, yet by the instinct of nature think
themselves bound to call upon that which they suppose to be God. If therefore
those nations which did not call upon the true God, whom indeed they did not
know, are subject to the curse of God, Psalm. 69. 6. Jer. 10. 25. how shall they
escape the curse of God who knowing him do not call upon him? for by their not
calling upon him they do deny him, Tit. 1. 16. and therefore this is observed
as a note of the foolish Atheist, who says that there is no God, that he does
not call upon the Lord, Psalm. 14. 4.

Secondly, It is a principal part of that worship 2. Because it is the end of
our creation and redemption.
of God for which the nature of man was at the first created according to his
image, and for which it was redeemed, viz. that we might worship him in
holiness and righteousness: and therefore those who will not call upon him
rob God of that honor that is due unto him, and as much as in them lies go
about to frustrate that end for which they were created and redeemed: So
principal, that sometimes the duty of invocation is put for the whole worship
of God, as Genesis 21. 33. and 26. 25. as if it were all in all. In which regard
the temple which was provided for Gods worship was called the house of prayer,
Esa. 56. 7. And no marvel, for by this one duty of invocation we exercise and
testify our religion, our faith, our love both of God and man, our affiance
and hope, etc.

Thirdly, It is enjoined in the moral law of 3. Because it is enjoined in the
moral law.
God, which is general and perpetual, and is therefore also required in the
gospel. And if you ask in what part of the law; I answer, In both tables; as a
duty of religion to God, and of charity to our neighbor, for whose good we
either pray or give thanks: In every commandment; as the common means whereby
we are enabled to perform the several duties, and to attein those virtues
which are therein prescribed: But chiefly it is commanded in the commandments
of the first table; the obedience whereof in a great part consists herein:
For hereby God is worshipped in the spirit or inwardly, praecept. 1. adored in
the body or outwardly, praecept. 2. sanctified or glorified in the mouth,
praecept. 3. and a good part of the sanctifying of the sabbath praecept. 4.
stands in this.

Now if any man shall object, That he is a sinful Object.
man, and that by his sin he has made himself unworthy to tread upon the
earth or to look up unto heaven, and much more unworthy to present himself
before the Lord with hope to be heard; and consequently, that it were great
presumption for him to call upon the Lord: I answer, That it Answ.
were indeed greater presumption to come before God then it was to rush into
the presence of the Esth. 4.
kings of Persia, were it not that the Lord did in like manner hold out unto us
the scepter of his word, therein by his manifold commandments injoyning us this
duty, and by his gracious promises encouraging us thereunto. This therefore may
be a fourth argument or motive: For if God has commanded us to call upon him,
and has promised to hear us, in obedience to his commandment and in faith in
his promises we are to call upon him, being assured that he who has commanded
us to pray and has promised to hear will graciously accept our prayers.

The special commandments are dispersed in Special commandments injoyning
prayer.
many places of the scripture, and so likewise the promises. I will cite a few
places where they are conjoined: Psalm. 50. 14, 15. Offer unto God thanksgiving:
and call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Matthew. 7. 7, 8. Ask and ye shall have; seek and ye shall find;
knock and it shall be opened unto you: for whosoever asks receives, etc.
Joh. 16. 23, 24. Verily verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name he will give it you: Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy
may be full. To these commandments add 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. Pray without
ceasing; in every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you. And to the promises that in Psalm. 145. 18. belongs, The
Lord is near to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. And
therefore they can no sooner call but he hears, Dan. 9. 23. Yea, before we
call the Lord has promised to hear, Esa. 65. 24. Which shows that he is
more ready to hear then we are to call upon him.

CHAP. III. Other motives to the duty of prayer.
UNto these we may add three principal motives; 1 From the excellency of it.
viz. the excellency, the profit, the necessity of invocation: that the
excellency may invite, the profit allure, the necessity draw us to the
performance thereof.

First therefore it is excellent and honorable: For this is a great honor and
high favor for a sinful and mortal man, who is but dust and ashes, to have
ordinary access unto God and free conference with him; but especially to have
the Lord near unto us in all things that we call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. For
it is no small honor for a man to have free access to his prince who is made
of the same Lib. De (...). p. 120.
mould, and to have as we say the kings ear. Illud maximum (says Chrysostom)
quod quisquis orat cum Deo colloquitur. Quantae autem dignitatis sit hominem
cum Deo miscere sermonem, nem^nem l^tet: That is the greatest privilege, that
whosoever prays talks with God. And how great a dignity it is for a man to
be admitted conference with God none can be ignorant.

But it is not only honorable unto us, but (which is much more to be
regarded) unto God himself: For hereby we asscribe unto him omniscience,
omnipotency and all sufficiency, infinite mercy and goodness, acknowledging
him to be the author and fountain of all good things. And therefore he
prefers the sacrifice of praise and of prayer, which are the calves of our
lips, before the sacrifice of goats and bulls; Psalm. 50. 8. ad 16. [For as
touching the sacrifice of a broken and humble soul poured forth in prayer, the
holy Ghost testifies that the Lord esteems it in stead of all sacrifices,
Psalm. 51. 17. And for the other of praise, the Lord professes Psalm. 50. 23. He
that offers or sacrifices praise honors me. By prayer we glorify God:
for magna est Dei gloria, says Augustine, ut nos simus mendici ejus; that is,
It is the great glory of God that we are his beggars. But by praising much
more: for to praise God is to magnify and glorify him, and by these terms it
is expressed in the scriptures.

But profit is that respect which most men look 2 From the profit of it.
after: Psalm. 4. 6. There be many which say, Who will show us any good? And in
this particular; What will it profit us if we shall call upon God? Job 21. 15.
First, for praise: If we glorify God he will glorify us; 1. Sam. 2. 30.
Secondly, for prayer: The profit is so great, that it is the ordinary means of
obteining all good things which we do desire, and of avoiding all evil which we
fear. It has the promises both of this life and of a better: neither is there
any good thing which the Lord has ordained for us, whether temporal for our
good, or spiritual for our salvation, but he has appointed that we should
obtein it by prayer. Prayer is the key of Gods treasury, yea it is clavis
coeli; that is, the August.
key of heaven: It is armor of proof against all Chrysostom.
tentations, serving for all parts, and therefore not assigned to any one,
Ephesians. 6. 18. flagellum diaboli, (...). De Psalm. 6^.
the scourge of the devil; (...) ^ sovereigne remedy against all evil. In the
spiritual life it is as the hand in the temporal, (...), the instrument of
instruments. But the profit is best manifested by the promises of God which are
infallible, especially if ye will compare Matthew. 7. 7, 8. with John 16. 23. and
1. John 5. 14. Whosoever asks any thing whatsoever in the name of Christ
according to Gods will, it shall be granted. What promise can be more large
then whosoever and whatsoever? In a word, God is rich unto all that call upon
him; for whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans
10. 12, 13.

CHAP. IIII. Three questions cleared.
NOw for the further clearing of this point concerning 1. Whether prayer be
efficacious to obtein our desires.
the profit and efficacy of prayer there are three questions to be decided:

1. Whether prayer be opu^ impetratorium or of any efficacy to obtein our
desires. 2. And if it be, Whether by prayer we do always obtein our desires.
3. Whether there be any other profit or fruit to be expected by our prayers
besides the obteining of our desires.
The decision of the first question is needful, not only because some
heretics have held prayer to be superfluous, but chiefly because our
adversaries father this heresy upon us.

Those that take away the use of prayer ground their fancy on the knowledge
and providence of God. For first, If God our heavenly Father do know Object. 1.
our wants, and be of himself ready to supply them, shall not we seem to doubt
either of his knowledge or of his goodness if we pray unto him. Answ. Answ.
Our Savior indeed does teach us that God our heavenly Father does know our
wants, and is willing to supply them, Matthew, 6. 32. but yet in the same chapter
he teaches us to pray, and promises that by prayer we shall obtein, Matthew. 7.
7, 8. and therefore in obedience to the commandment, and in faith in the
promise, we are to call upon God, whatsoever flesh and blood can object to the
contrary. Gods knowledge of our wants and readiness to supply them must free
us from distrustful care, and move us with affiance to seek unto God in all
our necessities; to which end our Savior Christ informs us of Gods knowledge
and fatherly love. And so the Apostle Phil. 4. 6. (...), Be not distrustfully
careful for any thing, but in every thing let your requests by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving be made known before God. The persuasion
therefore of Gods knowledge and love must not hinder us from prayer, but rather
encourage us with faith and affiance to call upon him. Neither do we call upon
God either to inform him in that which he knows not, or to move him to that
which he has not purposed, but to do our duty to God and our selves: to God,
in worshipping him by this exercise, and acknowledging him by prayer and
thanksgiving to be the author of all good things: to our selves, in using that
means which God has ordained for the obteining of our desires. God has
purposed and promised to give good things, not to all but to those that use the
means: There is a promise of receiving and obteining, but to those that ask; of
finding, but to those that seek; and of opening, but to those that knock. And
moreover, as Augustine says, the Lord would have us to exercise and increase
by prayer our desire, our hope and our faith, that so we may be the more
capable of those good things which God has promised to give; For they are
great, sed nos ad accipiendum parvi and angusti Epi^t. 121. ad Probam.
sumus. Tanto quippe illud quod valde magnum sumemus capacius quanto and
sideliks credimus, and speramus sirmius, and desider amus ardentius, But we are
little and strait to receive: For that which is very great we take more
capaciously when as we do more faithfully believe, and more firmly hope, and
more ardently desire.

The second objection is taken from the decree of Object. 2.
Gods providence. For whereas we teach that all things come to pass according
to the counsel of Gods will, Ephesians. 1. 11. which is unchangeable because it is
always the best, hereupon some object that we take away the use of prayer: For
if all Hunnius, De Providentia.
things come to pass according to the immutable counsel of God, then to pray
for any thing is needless or bootlesse: Needless, if God have already
appointed that which we desire: bootlesse, if he have determined the contrary;
for we may not think that by our prayer we can alter his decree which cannot be
changed. Answ. It may Answ.
well be that some do thus abuse the doctrine of Gods providence, as many do to
the like purpose the doctrine of predestination, falling into the erroneous
conceit of the Predestinatours. For if I be elected (say they) a godly life is
needless; if not, it is bootlesse. But the same answer will serve for both: 1.
Where God has appointed any thing as the end, he has also preordained the
means whereby it is obtained. Finis imponit necessit^tem (...). (...). 2.
his quae sunt ad finem, The end imposes a necessity unto those means which
conduce to the end. Wherefore as it is necessary in respect of Gods decree,
that the end appointed shall come to pass; so is it as necessary in respect
of the same decree, that it should be obtained by the preordained means whereby
it is to be obtained. Now prayer is the means which God h^th ordained whereby
we are Th. (...). 2. 2. (...). 83. 2. c.
to obtein good things, etc. Non propter hoc oramus (says Thomas) ut Divinam
dispositionem immutemus, sed ut id impetremus quod Deus disposuit per orationes
sanctorum esse implendum: ut, scilicet, homines postulando mereantur accipere
quod iis Deus omnipotens ante secula disposuit donare: that is, We do not
therefore pray that we may change the Divine disposition, but that we may
obtein that which God has disposed to be accomplished by the prayers of the
Saints; to wit, that men by praying may deserve to receive that which God
omnipotent has before all times ordained to give them. 2. God in his word has
enjoined us the use of this means, and graciously promised a blessing; and
therefore far be it from us, under a pretense of conforming our selves to the
secret will of God which we know not, to rebel against his will revealed which
we know. 3. God in his word by his gracious promises has revealed his will
concerning those that do pray as they ought, that they shall obtein. If
therefore God has enabled thee to pray effectually, thou may be assured
that thou shall obtein thy desire, or that which is better: For much avails
the prayer of a righteous man: and the Jam. 5 16. Romans 10. 12.
Lord is rich to all that call upon him. 4. Though the will and purpose of God
for the granting or denying thy desire were revealed unto thee, yet were it thy
duty notwithstanding to call upon God. First, for denying by threatenings: for
though God non novit mutare consilium, yet novit mutare sententiam, knows not
to change his counsel, yet he knows to change his sentence. The threatenings
of God are conditionally to be understood, namely if we do not use the contrary
means, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Jer. 18. 7, 8. Jon. 3. Joel 2. 12, 13, 14. When Hezekiah
was sick unto the death, the Prophet Isaiah brought this message from the Lord,
Set thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live: notwithstanding by
effectual prayer he obtained the prolonging of his life, Isa. 38. 1, 2, 5. So
Judge. 10. 13, 16. Matthew. 15. Secondly, For granting by petitions and promises.
For Daniel though he knew by reading the prophecy of Jeremie, that the
captivity of the Jer. 2^. 11, 12
Jews in Babylon should continue but seventie years; yet when the seventy
years were expired he thought it his duty to beg the deliverance of the
people by fasting and prayer, Dan. 9. 2, 3. To Isaac was the promise made of
Seed in which all the nations should be blessed; and yet he prays to the Lord
that he might have seed, Genesis 25. To Elias the Lord had revealed his purpose
concerning rain, which Elias believed, and in the name of God promised to Ahab;
and yet notwithstanding he goes up into the mount Carmel to beg it of God: And
the obteining of this rain after the long drought, though purposed and promised
by God, is ascribed to the efficacy of Elias his prayers, Jam. 5. 16, 18.
Confer Acts 27. 24, 25, 31. God has promised and purposed to give good
things, sed roganti, quaerenti, pulsanti, to him that asks, seeks,
knocks, and not to those who tempt him in the neglect of means. See Jer. 33.
3. Luke 18. 41. Psalm. 2. 8.

Moreover, the Papists object against us, that we Bellarm. De bonis operib. in
particul. lib. 1. cap. 3.
take away the efficacy of prayer in obteining remission of sins or any
other good things. The former, because we teach that faith alone justifyeth:
the latter, because we teach that the prayer which must obtein any thing
proceeds from special faith, which cannot be had. But more worthily the
Papists may be charged for denying the efficacy of obteining remission both to
faith and to prayer, which they ascribe to the Sacraments, especially of
Baptism for sins going before, and Penance for sins following after
Baptism, which they hold do free from sin, and confer the grace of
justification ex opere operato; whereunto they require neither prayer nor
faith, nor any other good motion or disposition in the party, save only that
he do not ponere obicem peccati mortalis, put in the way the bar or stop of
mortal sin; affirming that the Sacraments do contein grace as vessels, and
that they are physical causes of grace, justifying by efficacy put into them
by God, as the heat of fire is the cause of burning; abusing that place, Acts
22. 16. Be baptized and wash away thy sins, having called on the name of the
Lord. But let us come to their objections. To the first I answer, That we do
teach that remission of sins is obtained by prayer; and that to that end our
Savior has taught us to crave remission and has acquainted us with the
example of the Publicane who by prayer obtained justification; as David,
Manasseh, and the faithful and penitent sinners in all ages have done: which
hinders not but that we are justified by faith alone. For it is not every
prayer, but the prayer of faith, as S. James calls it, which is impetratory;
I say, it is the prayer of faith which by prayer obteineth pardon.

To the second: Where our Divines define faith to be a full and certain
persuasion of Gods love toward us in Christ forgiving our sins, etc. they
define it in the highest degree and perfection thereof whereunto we must
always aspire. But there are two principal degrees of faith: The first is an
assent to the truth of Gods word, and more especially to the promises of the
Gospel, assuring salvation to all that believe in Christ. This assent in the
judgment to the Law and Gospel, if it be true, lively, and effectual, works
in the heart and will a lothing of our sins, a resolution to leave them, a
desire of grace, and a hungring and thirsting after Christ's righteousness, and
a resolution to acknowledge Christ to be our Savior, and to rest upon him
alone for salvation. And howsoever those who have but this degree cannot say
that they are assured of forgiveness and salvation, yet their desire of grace
proceeding from this lively faith expressed in their prayer is acceptable
before God, and obteineth that which is desired. Now they which have this
degree must proceed to the second: For seeing the promises belong to them
concerning justification and salvation, they ought to apply them to themselves.
And look how sure a man may be that he believes, that is, gives a the and
lively assent to the doctrine of the Gospel, so sure ought he to be of the
remission of sins and salvation by Christ. And of this assurance there are
degrees according to the measure of grace received.

To conclude therefore this point; We ascribe to faithful prayer efficacy to
obtein that which we desire in the name of Christ according to the will of God,
and by the Scriptures do demonstrate the efficacy of prayer; which now we are
to show by the wonderful effects which by prayer have been brought to pass.

CHAP. V. Of the great and wonderful efficacy of prayer.
AS first in the elements, the earth, the water, the Of the efficacy of prayer,
in respect 1. of the elements:
air, the fire. At the prayer of Moses the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed up Korah, Dathan, and Abiram with their families, Numb. 16. At his
prayer also the hard rocks sent forth rivers of waters, Exodus 17. Samson having
slain a thousand Philistines with the jaw bone of an ass, Judge. 5. 18, 19.
(whereupon the place was called Lehi, which signifies a jaw bone) and being
ready to perish with thirst, by prayer obtained a well of living water which
continued to posterity, which the Lord opened unto him in Lehi (not the
jaw bone, but the place so called) which for a perpetual monument of the
efficacy of prayer, he called Enhakkore, the fountain of him that prayed. At
the prayer of Moses, Exodus 14. the waters of the red sea gave place to the
Israelites and overwhelmed their enemies.

But come we to the air. Elias being a man subject (...).
to the like passions with us (which the Apostle James notes chap. 5. 17, 18.
that we might in like manner hope to be heard) prayed a prayer, that is, prayed
effectually, that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for three
years and six months: and he prayed again, and the heavens (that is, the
air) gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

Concerning fire, we have two examples of the same Elias: the former, 1* Kings
18. where by prayer he brought down fire from heaven to consume the sacrifice:
the latter, 2. Kings 1. where also by prayer he brought down fire from heaven
to destroy the two captains with their fifties.

But leaving the elements, let us in our cogitations 2. of the heavens and
heavenly bodies.
ascend into heaven. For most admirable is that example Josh. 10. 15. where at
the prayer of Joshua (for he is said to have spoken to the Lord, and the Lord
to have hearkened to his voice) the sun stood still in the midst of heaven
for the space of one whole day, until the Israelites were avenged on their
enemies. And no less admirable is that example of the Prophet Isaiah, 2. Kings
20. 11. at whose prayer not only the shadow in the sunne-diall but the sun
it self in the firmament went back ten degrees, Isa. 38. 8. Ecclus 48. 23.

Neither is the efficacy of prayer seen upon those creatures alone which are
without sense, but upon those also which are endued with sense and reason.
Jonah when he was swallowed up of the whale, and lay in the belly thereof as in
a grave for the space of three days and three nights, having cried to the Lord
de profundis, he was restored safe to land, Jonah 2. As touching men; the
efficacy of prayer 3. of men.
appears in the deliverance not only of particular men, but also of whole
cities and countries from the fury and force of their enemies were they never
so mighty or so many. When Peter was by Herod cast into prison, and kept by
four quaternions of soldiers, lying in the night before he should be put to
death between two soldiers bound with two chains, the keepers also before the
door keeping the prison, at the instant prayer of the Church which effectually
prayed for his deliverance, the Lord sent his angel to set him at liberty,
Acts 12. 5. Elias the Prophet being armed with the spirit of prayer when
Ahaziah the king had sent three captains of fifties one after another to
apprehend him, he not only brought down fire from heaven to destroy the two
first with their fifties, as I said before, but also he brought the third
captain upon his knees, humbly entreating him that his own life and the lives
of all his company might be precious in his sight, 2. Kings 1. Elisha also,
upon whom the spirit of Elias was doubled, when Ben-hadad king of Syria had
sent an army of men with horses and chariots to apprehend him, the army
having by night environed the city where the Prophet was and besieged it, by
prayer he had them in his power, strikes them blind, leads them to Samaria,
and having 2. Kings 6.
by prayer opened their eyes that they might see their present danger, he
victualleth them, and sends them away as vanquished.

Now for the defense and deliverance of whole peoples and commonwealths, such
is the efficacy of prayer, that those who are endued with the spirit of
supplication may not unworthily with Elias and Elisha be called the horsemen
and chariots of Israel. By prayer Asa, 2. Chron. 14. Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20.
25. Hezekiah, 2. Kings 19. overcame most mighty armies of their enemies, which
by their own strength they were in no sort able to resist. But most remarkable
is that example of Moses at the battle of Rephidim: whereby it appears to be
true which Chrysostom upon that occasion notes, Ch^ysost. De o^at. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
Preces justorum plus valere quam arm^, the prayers of the righteous more
prevail then arms. For whilst Moses being on the hill with Aaron and Hur
holds up his hands and is fervent in prayer, Israel has the better; but when
his hands fall down and he cease to pray, Israel has the worse; as if the
welfare of Gods people did depend upon his prayer.

But what speak I of men? That which subdueth 4. of sickness, death, and
devils.
all men gives place unto prayer, as sickness and death. For the former; Jam.
5. 15. The prayer of faith shall save, or make whole, the sick. Examples, Number.
12. 13. in Miriam; Acts 28. 8. in the father of Publius; but especially in
Hezekiah, who, though he had received the sentence of death, obtained by prayer
the prolonging of his life, 2. Kings 20. 2. For the latter; we read of many
who by prayer have been restored from death unto life: as namely, the widows
child of Sarepta, 1. Kings 17. 21. the son of the Shunamite by Elisha, 2.
Kings 4. 35. Dorcas by Peter, and all by prayer. Yea, the devils themselves,
who are said to have the power of death, give place to prayer: yea, that kind
of devil which by no other means can be cast out, is cast out by prayer, Matthew.
17. 21.

And yet we stay not here: For the efficacy of 5. of God, prayer is of
greatest efficacy.
prayer is not only seen in and upon the creatures; but the effectual prayer
of a righteous man avails much with God, Jam. 5. 16. For the Lord being
omnipotent and of a most simple and pure nature, and therefore not subject to
passive power, cannot properly be said to suffer any thing: yet having by most
gracious promises bound himself to grant the faithful prayers of his children,
they are said to prevail with him; both because they obtein such blessings at
his hands as otherwise would not be granted, and turn away such judgments as
otherwise would have been inflicted. For else when the Lord was ready to have
destroyed the Israelites for their idolatry, had not Moses stood up in the gap,
Psalm. 106. 23. why did the Lord bid him let him alone, Exodus 32. 10. but that
Moses by prayer laid hold upon God, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 64 7. and
staid his hand? And why is Jacob said to have prevailed with God, and thereupon
is called Israel, but that the Lord suffered himself as it were to be overcome
by his prayer? whereby he laid hold upon Christ, who is meant by that Angel,
and would not suffer him to depart until he had granted him a blessing, Genesis
32. 26, 28. And so the Prophet Hosea teaches, that when Jacob wrestled with
the Angel, he prevailed with him not so much by strength of body, as by earnest
and effectual prayer: He had power, says he, chap. 12. 4. over the Angel and
prevailed, he wept and made supplication to him, etc. And in this sense the
Apostle exhorts the Romans, chap. 15. 30. (...), together with him to
wrestle in their prayers for him. And Epaphras in like manner is said, Col. 4.
12. to have wrestled for the Colossians in prayer. And what else means the
parable of the widow and the judge, Luke 18. 2. and of the two friends, Luke
11. 5. but that the importunity of our prayers prevails with the Almighty?
And thus the woman of Syrophenicia, Matthew. 15. 22, 28. having taken diverse
repulses, yet at the length by the importunity of her faithful prayer
prevailed with Christ.

The use of this doctrine is, 1. That by consideration The uses.
of the great efficacy of prayer we should be moved upon all occasions to pray
without fainting: Luke 18. 1. Jam. 1. 16. 2. That we may be encouraged to pray
with confidence and assurance to be heard. And so much of the first question.

CHAP. VI. Whether by prayer we always obtein our desire.
THe second, Whether we do always obtein our desire. The promises are general
as you have heard, Matthew. 7. 7, 8. John 16. 23. Notwithstanding some ask and do
not receive, Psalm. 22. 2. some seek and do not find, Cant. 3. 1. some knock to
A three^old limitation of Gods promi^e to hear.
whom it is not opened, Luke 13. 25. Wherefore the promises are to be
understood with a threefold limitation; in respect of the Person, Prayer, and
Thing. Of all which we are hereafter to speak more fully.

For first, if the party be an impenitent sinner, the 1. God hears not the
impenitent sinners.
Lord has not promised to hear such, John 9. 33. Examine therefore thy self
whether thou do lie in any sin unrepented of: for that does make a
separation between God and thee, Isa. 59. 2. and that being repented of, God
will hear thee, Isa. 1. 15, 18.

The second limitation in regard of prayer is, That 2. That we must pray
according to Gods will.
it be according to Gods will, 1. John 5. 14. in regard of the manner or the
end. For the manner: In general it is required that it be (...), Jam. 5. 16.
that is, efficax, effectual.

To be effectual and to avail is all one: and so we Object.
shall make S. James say, that prayer which avails does avail.

There is duplex actus, (...), or (...): the first Answ.
inward, as being the form or nature of a thing: the second outward, as the
motion or effect. And as in respect of the latter, the word (...) is of an
active signification, as Gal. 5. 6. Ephesians. 3. 20. Col. 1. 29. so in regard of
the former it is passive, as 2. Cor. 1. 6. In which sense they are said to be
(...) who are acted by a spirit either good or bad: So prayer is (...) when it
has the inward (...), it being acted and effectuated by the Spirit of God, who
helps our infirmities, and teaches us to pray (...), Romans 8. ingenerating
this inward efficacy in our prayers which we in our selves are not able to
give them. So that the oration of an orator is efficax in respect of the
inward efficacy, when therein is performed what art requires; in respect of
the outward, when it persuades; and that efficacy depends on the hearers
pleasure. But prayer which is effectual in it self, always prevails with
God.

In particular, that we pray in truth, fervencie, What in particular is
required to effectual prayer.
and faith. In truth: for to that is the promise restrained, Psalm. 145. 18. In
fervencie, Jam. 5. 16. In faith, Mark 11. 24. Jam. 1. 5, 6, 7. With out the
first prayers are dead: without the second, cold: without the third,
uneffectuall: for it is the prayer of faith which is effectual, Jam. 5. 15.

For the end: Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye
might consume it on your lusts. The end must be good or the prayer is bad. The
end must be that God may be glorified, Psalm. 50. 15.

The third limitation is in respect of things. God The third limitation, in
respect of the things prayed for.
has promised to give good things to them that ask, Matthew. 7. 11. But if the
thing which thou desire be not good, either in it self, as if it be
unlawful, or not to thee, as if it be unprofitable, it is not within the
compass of the promise, nor ought to be within the compass of thy desire. Or
if it be good, perhaps it is not yet good for thee to have it, but in due time
thou shall find grace. In the former case the Lord seems to deny, in the
latter to delay our suits; and yet in both he does grant our prayer, if it be
rightly conceived. For first, we must not circumscribe God, or prescribe unto
him the time and means, but so desire that our request may be granted as he
shall judge most fit both for his glory and our good. Secondly, when as the
good things which we ask are either necessary to salvation or otherwise; the
former we are to ask absolutely, and absolutely we are to believe that we shall
obtein them. Yea, know this for thy comfort, that if God has given thee grace
to ask spiritual and saving graces effectually, thou have already obtained:
for the sincere desire of any grace is the beginning of that grace which is so
desired. But those blessings which are not necessary to salvation, whether
spiritual or temporal, we are not to ask absolutely, but with condition if
the obteining thereof may be for Gods glory and our good. So shall we be sure
to obtein our desires of the Lord, who always hears his children, if not ad
voluntatem, according to their will, yet ad utilitatem, for their profit (as
wise parents deal with their children) seeming many times to deny to his
children in fatherly love that which in anger and indignation he grants to
others. Perhaps therefore, as Augustine says, negat tibi propitius quod aliis
concedit iratus, In mercy he denies that to thee which in anger he grants
unto others. And therefore the hearing of our prayers is not to be measured by
sense but by faith.

CHAP. VII. Of the profit of prayer.
THe third question: Whether any further profit is to be expected from prayer
besides obteining our requests.

The profit is twofold: the one of reward freely Two benefits accrewing by
prayer.
bestowed by God on him that calls on his name: the other, the increase of
grace wrought in them by Gods Spirit who give themselves to prayer.

As touching the former; Though by reason of our wants and imperfections in
prayer the Lord if he should deal in rigor with us might justly reject our
prayers, yet such is his mercy that he does not only cover our wants, and for
the intercession of Christ accepts our prayer, but also grants our desire;
and not only that, but because prayer is a duty of piety, and a principal
part of that worship whereby we glorify God, he does graciously reward it,
godliness having the promise of this life and that which is to come. Our
Savior therefore promises, Matthew. 6. 6. that when we call upon God, though it
be but in secret and private prayers, and much more in public, our heavenly
Father will reward us openly. The Lord is rich to all that call upon him: for
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, Romans 10. 12, 13.

For the other: By the frequent and religious exercise of this duty our faith
and affiance in God is increased, our experience of his bounty and goodness
toward us in hearing us confirmed, our love to his majesty augmented, Psalm.
116. 1. our hope nourished, our patience exercised. By it we grow in
acquaintance with God, and taste how good and gracious the Lord is: By it we
learn, being Gods daily suitors, so to behave our selves as not to be ashamed
to appear before him: By it we elevate our minds above earthly cogitations to
mind things that are above, and to have our conversation in heaven: By it we
grow into assurance of our election, because the same spirit, which is the
spirit of supplication, is also the spirit of adoption whereby we cry in our
hearts, Abba, Father; and which testifies Romans ^. 26.
to our spirits that we are the sons of God; and if sons then also heirs,
etc.

But the Papists not content herewith, ascribe two The Papists confuted, who
hold that prayer is satisfactorie and meritorious.
other fruits to their prayers; that they are also Satisfactorie for their
sins, and Meritorious of eternal life. Satisfactorie, as being penal works;
and therefore both voluntarily undertaken, and by their Priests enjoined by way
of penance. So that this exercise which is so honorable and so profitable as
you have heard, being also a chief prerogative to the faithful to have free
access to God, is to them a punishment or work of penance to satisfy for
sins. But their prayers performed with these conceits of satisfaction and merit
are sacrilegious and derogatorie to the all-sufficient satisfaction and merit
of Christ, though otherwise they were commendable. But the impiety of their
assertion will better appear, if we take a brief survey of their prayers. For
first, whereas our prayers ought to be directed unto the Lord alone, they pray
to Saints and Angels, yea before images and crosses, and by their prayers
commit most horrible idolatry. 2. Neither do they pray in the name and
mediation of Christ alone, but unto him join other mediators of intercession,
by whose merits and intercession they desire and hope to be heard. 3. The most
of them pray without understanding for that which they utter in prayer, as
praying in an unknown language; and consequently pray without attention or
actual intention, which they say needs not; without faith or hope, without
reverence. 4. They number their prayers upon beads oftentimes by most gross
^attologie, repeating the same words, persuading themselves that the more Pater
nosters, Ave Mary's, and Creeds (for those also are prayers with them) they
shall mumble upon their beads, the more satisfactory and meritorious their
prayers b^. Now their prayers being thus every way abominable and odious, what
horrible impudency and impiety is it to obtrude such prayers upon God, not
only as acceptable service unto him, but as satisfactory and meritorious? by
which they can merit nothing but damnation, and for the wickedness whereof
they shall never be able to satisfy but with endless torments.

Let this suffice us, that prayer is of so great profit and admirable
efficacy, that our prayers rightly conceived and made are always heard and
granted; that besides the benefit of obteining, our prayers have their reward
with God, and notable fruits, conferring and increasing Gods graces in us.

CHAP. VIII. Of a threefold necessity of prayer.
NOw I come to the necessity of prayer: which is necessary by a threefold bond
of necessity: 1. Necessitate praecepti, necessity of precept; as being a
duty most straightly enjoined, and a principal part of that worship and service
which we ow unto God. This necessity is not absolute, but if we will avoid his
curse, Jer. 10. 25. 2. Necessitate medii, necessity of the means; as being the
means ordained by God for the obteining of all good things which he has either
purposed or promised to bestow upon us for our good: so that if we ask aright,
we have; if we ask not we have not, as S. James says chap. 4. 3. Necessitate
signi, necessity of the sign; as being a necessary sign and cognizance of
all true Christians, who are described in the Scripture to be such as call upon
the name of God: As contrariwise the foolish Atheist who says in his heart,
There is no God, is deciphered by this note, that he does not call upon the
Lord, Psalm. 14. 4. In which respects the holy man Daniel held the performance
of this duty so necessary, that when the king had published a decree which
might not be revoked, That whosoever should ask a petition of either God or man
save of the king for thirty days, he should be cast into the lions den, he
chose rather to be cast into the den of the lions, then to omit this duty but
thirty days, Dan. 6. neither did he omit it one day; see verse. 10.

CHAP. IX. Who are to perform the duty of prayer.
ANd thus you have heard that it is required of all to call upon God: Now let
us consider That the (...) only (...) admitted to pray.
what is required in all those that do call upon him. That I expressed in the
definition, when I defined prayer to be a speech of the faithful, or, as the
holy Ghost styleth them also, the righteous, the godly, the Saints of God.
Where by the way note, that all faithful and true Christians are righteous,
are godly, are the Saints of God. And thus are they to be qualified who will
either pray unto God or praise him. For prayer, the holy Ghost says, that
every one that is godly shall pray unto God, Psalm. 32. 6. and the prayer of a
righteous man avails much, Jam. 1. 16. For praise and thanksgiving; unto God
be glory in the Church, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 21. that is, in the
company of the faithful. And so David, Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his;
give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness, Psalm. 30. 4. It is true that
all the works of God do praise him, as the matter of his praise; but the Saints
do bless him, as the instruments of his praise, Psalm. 145. 10. For both, see
Psalm. 50. 14, 15, 16. where the Lord, as he commands the faithful (to whom
his speech is directed v. 5, 7.) to offer unto him thanksgiving, and to call
upon him in the day of trouble; so he takes exception against the wicked: But
unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that
thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction,
and castest my words behind thee?

But here we are carefully to consider who are the godly and righteous, lest we
exclude from hope of being heard those whom the holy Ghost does not exclude.
There is therefore a twofold righteousness Th^e is a (...): Legal;
mentioned in the Scriptures; the one Legal, the other Evangelicall. According
to the legal righteousness none can be said to be righteous who does not
perfectly and perpetually perform whats^ever the law (which is the Divine rule
of perfect righteousness) does prescribe: For if a man do not abstein from all
things forbidden, if he do not also the things commanded, if he do not all, and
that in that manner and measure which the law prescribes, if he do not
continue in doing all the things required, but breaks the course of his
obedience by any one sin, though but of omission, though but in thought, he
is notwithstanding all his obedience by the sentence of the law not only a
sinner but also accursed, Gal. 3. 10. By this righteousness no man since the
fall of Adam could be said to be righteous, Christ only excepted: but we had
all need to pray with David, Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified: viz. by
the works of the law, Gal. 3. 16. For there is not a just man upon the earth
that does good and sins not, Eccles 7. 20. Yea, in many things we offend
all, says S. James, chap. 3. 2. And if we say we have no sin, says S. John,
1. epist. 1. 8. we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Wherefore
the law concludes all under sin, and consequently under the curse, Gal. 3.
22. So that there is no man so godly and righteous, but in himself by the
sentence of the law he is a sinner. Which serves notably to confute the Popish
hypocrites, which teach that none are justified but such as are formally just
by a righteousness inherent in and performed by themselves (that is, habitual
and actual) according to the law of God; and that no man who is a sinner in
himself, by reason of sin inherent can be said to be justified. But
whatsoever Pope-holy men do conceive of themselves, we must confess with the
forenamed Apostles, that we are sinners in our selves, and had need daily to
pray as our Savior taught them, for the forgiveness of our sins, and so to
appeal from the sentence of the Law to the promise of the Gospel: for the law
has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe, Gal. 3. 22.

The Evangelicall righteousness is that which Evangelical: what it is.
without the Law is revealed in the Gospel, whereby men that are sinful in
themselves, I mean believing sinners, and penitent sinners, are accepted of God
as righteous in Christ. And it is twofold: For it is either imputed to a
believing sinner, as the righteousness of justification; or infused and so
inherent in a repentant sinner, as the righteousness of sanctification. The
former is perfect and not inherent, being the righteousness of Christ
apprehended by faith: The other is inherent but not perfect, being our new
obedience wrought in us by the spirit of regeneration. In respect of the former
it is said, that the righteous H^v. 2. 4.
man shall live by his faith: In respect of the lat^er, that he is a righteous
man which works righteousness. And this twofold righteousness must of
necessity concur in the same party, etc. By the doctrine therefore of the
Gospel he is a righteous, a godly man, a Saint of God, who does believe and
repent. And this is to be understood not only of those who are endued with
perfect faith and repentance, or the higher degrees thereof, but even of the
lowest degrees of true faith and unfeign^d repentance. So that whosoever truly
assenting in ^is judgment to the promises of the Gospel concerning salvation
by Christ, does earnestly in his heart desire to be made partaker of Christ and
hi^ merits, and unfeignedly resolves in his will to acknowledge Christ to be
his Savior, and to rest upon him alone for salvation, he does believe to
justification. And whosoever being displeased with himself for his sins does
unfeignedly desire and truly purpose amendment of life, he does repent to
sanctification. And he that but thus believes and repents is within the
latitude of those faithful and righteous men whose prayers are acceptable unto
God, and whose persons are accepted, yea, blessed of him; Matthew. 5. 3, 4, 5.
and 11. 28. Psalm. 34. 18. Examples, of Manasseh, 2. Chron. 33. 13. the
Publicane, Luke 18. And these beginnings of faith and repentance do always
concur in our regeneration or conversion unto God. For in regenerating us the
holy Ghost does ingenerate in us the grace of faith; and contrariwise.

CHAP. X. None but the faithful can pray effectually and acceptably.
NOw how necessary it is that he which prays acceptably should be a
righteous or faithful man endued with some measure of true faith and unfeigned
repentance, it may appear both by manifest reasons and manifold testimonies of
holy Scriptures: wherein the promise of hearing the prayer is restrained to the
righteous, and all hope of being heard denied to the wicked.

First then it is necessary that he who calls upon God should be endued with
faith: For how shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Romans
10. 14. and, Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. and
likewise with repentance: For unless a man repent he reteineth a purpose to go
on in sin; and this his impenitencie or sin not repented of is as a wall of
separation between God and I^. 59 1, 2. John 9. 31.
him. God hears not impenitent sinners, as hereafter we shall show.

Secondly, before our prayers or other actions can be accepted of God, our
persons must be accepted in Christ: Neither can the fruit be good while the
tree is bad: neither can we hope to prevail with God by entreaty, whiles we do
not desire to be reconciled unto him; but as we were born the children of
wrath, so his wrath abides upon us, John 3. 36. and we do continue in our
enmity against God.

Thirdly, there is no access to God but through Christ by the holy Ghost,
Ephesians. 2. 18. and 3. 12. But the unbelieving and impenitent sinner, as he has
no part in Christ, so is he void of the holy Ghost.

Fourthly, it cannot be but that the prayer of the unbelieving and impenitent
sinners is very absurd and odious in Gods sight, because they ask many times
such things as they do not desire, and promise such things as they do not mean
to perform, and bear the Lord in hand that they be such men then whom they are
nothing less, going about to deceive the Lord with their mouths, and with
their lips speaking lies unto him, Psalm. 78. and in all their prayers and
praises concerning spiritual things playing the notorious hypocrites before
God. For the manifestation whereof let us take a brief survey of the Lords
prayer, whereof the impenitent sinner is not able to utter one word aright; and
if not of that then of none, for that is the sum of all.

First therefore they call God their Father in That the impeniten^ is not able
truly to utt^ any petition in the Lor^s Prayer.
Christ, when as they are nothing less then his children: For he that
commits sin is of the devil, 1. John 3. 8. and, his children they are
whose works they do, John 8. They say, Our Father, Give us, as though in
brotherly love they prayed for the whole brotherhood of the faithful, whereas
they being void of Christian charity seek only themselves, and have no part
in the communion of Saints. They direct their prayers to God who is in heaven,
infinite in majesty, glory and power, themselves being on earth vile and base
creatures, Eccles 5. as if they came in great humility in respect of their own
unworthiness, and reverence in respect of the glorious majesty of God;
whereas indeed they rush into the presence of God with less regard, and speak
unto him with less reverence then they would to a mortal man, who is but a
little their superior. They call him Father, noting his love, which art in
heaven, noting his power, as if they believed that their prayers should be
granted, as being assured that God is both willing and able to grant their
desires, and yet have no faith in God, and therefore call not upon him aright
in whom they have not believed.

In the first place they beg the advancement of Gods glory, as if that were
more dear unto them then their own good; whereas in truth they have no zeal of
Gods glory, but unto it prefer the obteining of any worldly and sinful
desire. They pray that his name may be sanctified, which they do daily pollute
with their mouths, and by their lives do cause it to be blasphemed. They
desire that his kingdom may come, and that his will may be done, as though
they did first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, whereof indeed
they have no study or care, but are wholly addicted to worldly desires. They
pray that the kingdom of grace may be advanced, and that God would rule and
reign in them by his Spirit according to his word; when they are in the number
of those who say, We will not have this man to reign over us, resisting the
spirit, and casting the word behind their backs. They pray that the kingdom of
glory may be hastened by the speedy coming of Christ unto judgment, and yet
desire nothing less then the second coming of Christ. They desire that Gods
will may be done, which themselves will not do. The will of God is their
conversion and sanctification, that they should abstein from those sins
whereunto they are more specially addicted: but though they know it to be the
will of God that they should turn unto him, they will not turn; that they
should leave their special sins, they will not leave them, as the drunkard
his drunkenness, the whoremaster his fornication, etc. and yet like egregious
hypocrites do pray that they may do the will of God as it is done in heaven,
that is, after an angelical manner, readily, cheerfully, speedily, uprightly,
faithfully, constantly, fully; when as in truth they do the will of God no
otherwise then the devils in hell, which howsoever in respect of their intent
rebel against the will of God, yet if you respect the event, they become
(maugre their spite) the instruments to bring to pass that which God has
willed and decreed.

They crave bread at the hands of God, as if a small thing would content them,
when they desire excess of riches, neither can be satisfied with abundance.
They crave daily bread, or, as the word signifies, such a portion of temporal
blessings as God shall judge most expedient for them; as if they meant not to
be their own carvers, but in these outward things resigned themselves into the
hands of God, and submitted themselves to his fatherly providence, when they
are such as have set down with themselves that they will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.
and will come to great matters whether God give them good means or not, and
will frame their own fortune. They beg for a day, as if they would depend upon
God for tomorrow, and yet distrustfully hoard up for many years. They desire
temporal things to be given them of God, and yet seek them by wicked and
unlawful means.

They desire God to remit their sins, as if they repented of them; which they
still retein, as if they did in mockery desire the Lord to forgive the sins
which they will not forgo. Yea, they desire the Lord in hypocrisy so to
forgive them their trespasses, as they forgive those that trespass against
them, when as they nourish hatred and a desire and purpose of revenge: and so
in stead of obteining mercy and forgiveness at Gods hands, they call for the
fierce wrath and vengeance of God to be executed upon them.

They desire that God will not lead them into tentations, and yet themselves
run into tentations, and seek occasions of evil. They desire that they may be
delivered from evil, and yet wilfully go on in evil, and will not be reclaimed,
as though they had made a covenant with hell.

They ascribe kingdom to the Lord, and yet will not obey him as his subjects;
power, and yet neither fear nor trust in him* glory, and yet do not glorify him

They subscribe to their prayers and say Amen, as though they unfeignedly
desired and assuredly believed that their requests should be granted, when as
they neither desire that which in hypocrisy they ask, nor believe the granting
of that which without faith they have begged. And finally, in all these
requests they draw near to the Lord with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor him, but they remove their hearts far from him, Isa. 29. 13.

It is evident therefore, that as the prayer of the righteous is acceptable to
God as the evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141. 2. so the prayer of the wicked is
detestable unto him. Which may further be proved by express testimonies of the
holy Scriptures. The sac^ifice of the wicked, says Solomon, is an abomination
to the Lord; but the prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto him, Prove. 13.
9. and again, v. 29. The Lord is far from the wicked, but he hears the
prayers of the righteous. The same does David testify Psalm. 34. 15, 16. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their erie:
but the face and angry countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
cut off the remembrance of them from the earth. The man which had been blind,
John 9. 31. delivers this as a received truth in the Church of the Jews: This
we know, says he, that God hears not sinners, that is, impenitent sinners:
but if a man be a worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears.
Wherefore it is manifest, that the promises made to them that call upon God,
are restrained and (as it were) appropriated to the godly. And therefore
whosoever desires to pray unto God with hope to be heard, must turn unto the
Lord by repentance, and lay hold upon Christ by faith, unfeignedly purposing
amendment of life: For the name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous
runs unto it and is exalted, or set in safety, Prove. 18. 10.

But it will be objected, That the promises are general; That all promises are
limited with the condition of faith and rep^ntance.
and therefore belonging to all they are not to be restrained to some. I
answer, That they and all other promises of the Gospel are to be understood
with the condition of faith and repentance, which many times are expressed, and
where they are not, they are always to be understood, as restraining the
promises to the faithful. For whereas Joel says, chap. 2. 30. that whosoever
calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, our Savior restrains it to
the righteous, Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
(that is, which calls upon me) shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven: and the Apostle, Romans
10. 13, 14 to the f^ithfull; But how shall they call upon him in whom they have
not believed? And whereas our Savior says, That whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name the Father will grant it, John 16. 23. that also is restrained in the 1.
epistle of John 3. 22. to the righteous; Whatsoever we ask we receive of him,
because we keep his commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his
sight. And so our Savior, John 17. 7. If ye abide in me and my words abide in
you, ask what ye will and it shall be done unto you.

As for the wicked, the Lord denies to hear them, though they cry loud in his
ears, and make many prayers unto him: Isa. 1. 15. When ye spread forth your
hands (says the Lord to the impenitent Jews) I will hide mine eyes from you;
yea, when ye make many prayers I will not hear: whom not withstanding upon
their repentance he promises to hear and to receive into favor, v. 16, 17,
18. So in Ezekiel. 8. 18. Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet
will I not hear them. Psalm. 18. 41. and Micah 3. 4. They shall cry unto the
Lord, but he will not hear them; he will even hide his face from them for
their wickedness. Jer. 14. 12. When they fast I will not hear their cry.
Neither does he only refuse to hear them, but the godly also praying for
them, 1. Sam. 16. 1. Jer. 15. 1. Ezekiel. 14. 14, 20. and therefore forbids
many times the godly to pray in their behalf, Jer. 14. 11. or if they do he
protests that he will not hear them, Jer. 7. 16. and 11. 14. When as
therefore impenitent sinners do call upon God and are not heard, let them not
think that the Lord is not able to hear or help them. Behold, says the
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 59. 1. the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot
save, nor his ear he^vy that he cannot hear; but your iniquities have made a
separation between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you
that he will not hear. And then he descends to particulars: For this mercy
of hearing our prayers is not only denied unto ungodliness in general, but
also to particular sins; as contrariwise it is promised to particular graces,
which being linked together in a golden chain, are each of them several
evidences of a true faith:

As first to Cruelty and Oppression, Isa. 1. 15. Though ye make many prayers I
will not hear, for your hands are full of blood. And not to cruelty only, but
also to Unmercifulnes, and Want of pity toward the poor: For, he that
stops his ear at the crying of the poor, shall cry himself and not be
heard, Pro. 21. 13. Whereas contrariwise those that be merciful shall find
mercy with God, Matthew. 5. 7. Then shall thou call and the Lord shall answer;
thou shall cry, and he will say, Here I am, Isa. 58. 9. If we love not in word
and tongue alone, but in deed and truth, hereby we may have confidence before
God, 1. John 3. 18, 19.

Secondly, to Want of love in forgiving offenses; and contrariwise: Mark 11.
25. When ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought against any, that your
Father also which is in heav^n may forgive you your trespasses. But if ^e do
not forgive, (...) will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.

Thirdly, to the Not-hearing or hearkening to the word of God: For as we hear
so we shall be he^rd; Prove. 28. 9. He that turns (...) his care from (...)
the law, his prayer shall be abominable. For as we speak unto the Lord in
prayer, so the Lord speaks unto us in the preaching of the word: and
therefore good reason it is that if we will not hear the Lord when he speaks
unto us, he should not hear us when we speak unto him, as the Prophet Zachary
says, chap. 7. 13. It is come to pass, that as he cried and they would not
hear, so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord. On the other side,
If the word of Christ abide in us, we may ask what we will and it shall be
granted us, John 15. 7. If men harden their hearts against the word of God, the
wisdom of God has threatened not to hear them, Prove. 1. 24. He covers
himself with a cloud that our prayer should not pass through, Lam. 3. 44. But
if men humble themselves before God and tremble at his word, being of humble
and contrite hearts, the Lord has promised to hear, Psalm. 66. 2. and 34. 18.
and 51. 17. The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds, Ecclus 35. 17. If men
choose not the fear of the Lord, the Lord will not hear them, Prove. 1. 28, 29.
on the other side, He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he will
also hear their cry an^ will save them, Psalm. 145. 19.

Neither does the Lord refuse to hear those alone who are open and notorious
sinners, but those also which making outward profession of piety do play the
hypocrites: Job 27. 9. Will God hear the cry of the hyp^crite when trouble
comes upon him? To which purpose there is a notable saying of David, Psalm. 66.
18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, says he, the Lord will not he^re m^.
Whereas contrariwise, if men would walk uprightly before God, he would deni^
unto them nothing that is good, Psalm. 84. 11.

Wherefore it behooves every one that names the name of Christ to depart from
iniquity, 2. Tim. 2. 19. and to purge his hands from sin, Jam 4. 8. and to
wash them in innocence, Psalm. 26. that so he may without doubting lift up holy
hands unto the Lord, 1. Tim. 2. 8. (...), 2. Tim. 2. 22. Heb. 10. 22. with true
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience: Mala conscientia januam nobis
claudit, An evil conscience shuts the gate against us, Calv. Institut. 3.
20. 7..

But against this doctrine it may be objected, That Object.
the Lord many times hears the wicked when they call upon him; and therefore
that the promises made to prayer are not peculiar to the godly, but common to
them with the wicked.

For answer hereunto we are to remember, That Answ. God hears not the wicked
for spiritual blessings.
prayers are made unto God either for spiritual blessings belonging to a
better life, or for temporal blessings apperteining to this corporal life.
The former are peculiar to the children of God, as belonging to their
inheritance, and are never bestowed on the wicked, who never have so much grace
as truly to desire them; and therefore if they do at any time ask them, they do
pray in hypocrisy, asking with their lips that which they do not desire with
their hearts nor labor for in their lives. That God often hears the wic^ed
for t^mporall (...); and how.


As for temporal benefits, I cannot deny but that the Lord many times in
respect of them does grant unto the wicked their hearts desire. But yet even in
these also there is great difference betwixt the Lord his hearing of the godly
and the wicked. For in temporal matters the Lord hears men either as a
gracious and loving Father, or as a merciful Creator, or as a severe Judge.

1. In special favor as a gracious Father in Christ he hears his faithful
children, ever subordinating their good to his own glory; not always
satisfying their carnal or worldly desires, but always granting their
requests as shall be most for his glory and their spiritual and everlasting
good: under which conditions our prayers for temporal blessings ought always
to be framed, and being so conceived they are ever granted.

2. As a merciful Creator the Lord hears men crying unto him in their
extremity: And thus he hears all sorts of men, but especially the godly: for
he is the savior, that is, the preserver, of all men, but chiefly of the
faithful, 1. Tim. 4. 10. The godly have a promise of deliverance when they
call upon God; Psalm. 50. 14, 15. and 145. 19. and 91. 15. and 34. 17, 19. So
have not the wicked; Psalm. 51. 16. and 18. 41. Yea, in many places, as ye have
heard, he threatens that when they cry unto him in their trouble he will not
hear them. The affliction and deliverance of the godly do both turn to their
singular good; Romans 8. 28. and being delivered they glorify God, consulting
with themselves what to render unto the Lord for his benefits, and t^king the
cup of salvation, that is, of thanksgiving for their salvation and deliverance;
Psalm. 116. 12, 13. The wicked not being bettered by their affliction, are many
times delivered according to their desire, the Lord giving them over as
incorrigible: Isa. 1. 5. Jer. 2. 30. and when they are delivered they seek not
to glorify God, nor repent of their sins, but return to their vomit, making
show of repentance no longer then the hand of God is upon them: And so both
their affliction and deliverance (through their own default) turns to their
ruin. Notwithstanding deliverance out of affliction when men cry unto God is a
common benefit, the Lord hearing and delivering men of all sorts as a merciful
Creator and Preserver, as is testified Psalm. 107. where it is often repeated,
that diverse sorts of men when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he does
deliver them out of their distress. But because many are unthankful, the holy
Ghost does as often repeat this exclamation, O that men would therefore praise
the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders which he does for the
sons of men. For though the Lord does hate the wicked in respect of their
sins, and therefore many times does refuse to hear and to deliver them; yet
he loves them as his creatures, and therefore sometimes as a merciful
Creator he does deliver them: And thus he promises to hear the cry of the
poor, the fatherless, and the widow, because he is merciful; Exodus 22. 23,
27. Psalm. 22. 24. And howsoever the cry of men in distress cannot many times
be said to be a prayer, but only that voice which the extremity of their grief
expresses from them, yet it is vox creaturae clamantis ad Creatorem, the voice
of the creature crying to the Creator; and the Lord as a merciful Creator
hears the same. So he is said to have heard the cry of the child Ishmael,
Genesis 21. 17. And thus also he hears the cry of the young ravens, and lions,
and of the rest of the creatures, giving them their food in due season, Psalm.
147. 9. and 104. 21, 27, 28. and 145. 15. Which I do the rather note for the
comfort of the faithful: For if the Lord does hear the cry not only of
carnal men but also of those creatures which want reason, yea sometimes of the
devil himself, Mark 8. 12. Job 1. and 2. how shall he not hear the cry of his
own children?

3. As a severe Judge the Lord hears the wicked, God heare^h the wicked as a
(...) Judge.
granting unto them temporal things in his wrath, which it were better for
them to want. Thus he granted flesh to the impenitent Israelites, and fed them
with quails: but while the flesh was between their teeth he struck them with a
grievous plague, and they were burned in Kibroth-hattaavah, that is, the graves
of lust, Number. 11. 31. So in his anger, when they would needs have a king, he
granted a king unto them, 1. Sam. 8. 7. Hos. 13. 11. And thus when worldlings,
whose hearts are wholly addicted to earthly things, desiring and begging them,
the Lord in his anger gives them over to their own lusts, and satisfies their
desire, giving them their portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 14. where they
receive their good things, Luke 16. 25. and all the consolation they are to
look for, Luke 6. 24. whereas to them that first seek Gods kingdom and his
righ^eousnesse, he does not only give that which principally they seek; but
also by way of advantage over and besides he gives them temporal blessings as
shall be most convenient for them.

So that in spiritual things the wicked are not heard, but the godly. In
temporal when he seems to deny the request of the godly, he hears them in
special mercy, though not ad voluntatem, yet ad utilitatem, not to their will
but profit: and when he seems to grant the prayer of the wicked, August. ad
P^bam, Epi^t. 121.
he hears them in judgment, ad voluntatem, though not ad utilitatem, to
their will not their profit; impiis concedens iratus quae piis negat propitius,
granting in his wrath that to the wicked which in his mercy he denies to the
godly.

CHAP. XI. That God alone is to be called upon.
HAving spoken of the person which does invocate, we are now to entreat of the
party who is called upon, that is, God. Where we are to show two things: 1.
That God alone is religiously to be called upon; 2. That in our prayers we are
so to conceive of God as he has revealed himself in his word. Both which
points are of great moment: for if we do religiously invocate any besides the
true God, we commit sacrilegious idolatry; or if we shall conceive of God,
either in respect of his nature or of the persons, otherwise then he has
revealed, we shall in stead of the true God worship an idol of our own brain.

That God is to be called upon I have already showed, and it needs no further
proof. Call upon me, says the Lord, Psalm. 50. 15. When ye pray, say, Our
Father, Luke 11. 2. The true worshippers shall worship the Father, John 4. 23.
But that God alone is to be called upon religiously, though it follow upon the
former, (for God will be worshipped alone or not at all, praecept. 1.) yet it
is gainsaid by the Antichristian church, the mother of spiritual fornications,
which in this part of Gods worship adds to him both Angels and Saints
departed. For the confutation of which blasphemous er^our, I will first prove
in general, That God alone is to be called upon; and then particularly, That
neither Angels nor Saints are.

For first, Whomsoever we do religiously invocate, 1. Reas^n.
him do we worship and adore: For invocat^on is a principal p^rt of worship
and adoration, as I have showed, the Lord esteeming the sacrifice of praise and
prayer above all outward sacrifices of the law, Psalm. 50. But God alone is
religiously to be worshipped and adored. For the exhibiting of religious
worship unto any that is not God, is idolatry; such as is religious adoration,
invocation by prayer and thanksgiving, reposing our affiance and trust, vows,
oaths, sacrifices offered to any creature: 1. Sam. 7. 3. Direct your hearts
unto the Lord, and serve him only. Matthew. 4. 10. Thou shall adore the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou worship or serve.

Against which allegation they do object, That An ob^ction of the (...); (...).
the words do appropriate not adoration but Divine worship unto God: so that
notwithstanding this place, (...), adoration, may be given to the creature,
though (...), Divine worship, be reserved as peculiar unto God; Rhem. in Matthew.
4. 10.

For answer of which shift we must consider what the tempter demanded of
Christ, verse. 9. All these things will I give thee, (...), if thou shall fall
down and worship me: which demand our Savior might have yielded unto if he had
allowed this Popish distinction: But it appears by his answer that there is
no such difference to be made betwixt (...) and (...), that is, between Divine
worship and religious adoration. For he would not (...), that is, adore, the
tempter, as he required, because he must (...), that is, worship, God alone;
thereby plainly showing, that if he did (...), he should also (...). Indeed
(...) or adoration may be either civil; which may be performed to creatures,
Genesis 23. 7, 12. or religious; and that as well as (...) must be reserved as
proper to God.

The like distinction they have forged between The distinction of (...) and
(...) discussed.
(...) and (...), that is, Service and Worship: whereof the former, as they
say, may be given to the creatures, the latter only to God. If by these words
they distinguished civil worship from religious, as Augustine does, they might
be born with: For, as De civit. Dei lib. 10* ^p. 1.
he says, both is servitus, Sed e^ servitus quae debetur hominibus, secundum
quam praecipit Apostolus, SERVOS DOMINIS SUIS SUBDITOS ESSE (...), alio nomine
Graece nuncupari solet, scilicet (...): ea vero servitus quae pertinet ad
colendum Deum, dicitur (...): Both is Service: But that service which is due to
men, according to which the Apostle commands servants to be subject to their
masters, in the Greek it is used to be called by another name, to wit, (...),
and that service which belongs to the worship of God is called (...); But
when under the name of (...) they would cloak religious service performed to
creatures, they are intolerable. For between religious service and (...) there
is no difference: and both (...) and (...) are alike in the Scriptures ascribed
to God, and both of them used as A^ 20. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Romans 7. 6. and 12.
11.
the translation of the Hebrew (...), Exodus 23. 33. SI SERVIERIS DIIS EORUM.
Hic Graecus, says S. Augustine, (...)* habet, non (...). unde intelligitur
(...). (...) Exodus lib. 2. 94.
quia and (...) debetur Deo tanquam Domino, (...) vero non nisi Deo tanquam
Deo: IF THOU SERVEST THEIR GODS. Here the Greek has (...), not (...) whence it
is understood that (...) is due to God as unto our Lord, but (...) to none but
God as God. Lodovicus Vives in August. De civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 1. says,
Valla docet, (...) and (...) idem esse, and utrumque significare Servitutem.
Suidas ait, (...), servitus mercenaria. Lev. 23. 7. opus servile dicitur (...).
18. 21. Desemine tuo non dabis servire (...), principi: (...), juxta
Septuaginta: Valla (says ^e) teaches us, (...) and (...) to be the same, and
that both do signify Service. And Suidas says, that (...) is service for a
reward, or mercenarie service. Lev. 23. 7. a servile work is called (...). and
chap. 18. 21. Thou shall not give any of thy seed to serve the prince (or, the
idol Molech:) which service the Septuagint expresses by the word (...), Heb.
8. 3. But if a difference between these words is to be urged, it will be found
that (...) is the greater, and (...) the less; the former being derived of
(...), which signifies (...)
a bond slave, the latter of (...), which si^nifieth an hired (...): For Suidas
tells us that (...), that is, service, for a reward. And so by this
distinction they shall gain thus much, That they give the greater to the
creatures, and reserve the less for God. Neither can this distinction be
applied to either of these places alleged; 1. Sam. 7. 3. Matthew. 4. 10. in both
which the vulgar Latin has servire: in the former, eique soli servite, and
serve ye him alone; where the Greek also has (...): in the latter, eique soli
servies, and thou shall serve him alone.

Secondly, he that is to be called upon is to be believed 2. Reason.
in: Romans 10. 14. How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed?
God alone and none but God is to be believed in: Psalm. 73. 25. whom have I in
heaven but thee? According to the Creed the object of our faith is God and the
Church: but with this difference, that we believe in God; but as touching the
Church, we do not say that we believe in it (for the Church is not God, but
domus Dei, as Augustine has observed) but only that we believe the holy
catholic Church. Now if we are not to believe in the Church, much less in the
members thereof, whether they be of the Church militant or triumphant.

Thirdly, no part of Gods glory is to be communicated 3. Reason.
to any thing else: Isa. 42. 8. My glory will I not give to another. To be a
hearer and granter of our requests is a great part of Gods glory: Psalm. 65. 3.
O thou that hear the prayer, to thee shall all flesh come: and in the
conclusion of the Lords prayer; thine is the glory, namely of hearing and
granting our prayers. And therefore this glory is not to be communicated to any
other: and consequently no other is to be called upon.

Fourthly, the commandment of Christ is broken 4. Reas^n.
if in prayer we call upon any to whom we may not say, Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, etc. For thine is the
kingdom, etc. When ye pray, say, Our Father, Luke 11. 2. But without horrible
blasphemy we cannot use this form of words to any but only to God: therefore
if we call upon any other we break the commandment of Christ. If the Papists
allege, that in their prayers they usually do say their Pater noster, I
confess they do, but in so doing they commit blasphemous idolatry, saying this
prayer to the Rood or to the Cross, which they worship cultu (...), saying
with the old idolaters to a piece of wood, Pater meus Jer. 2. 27. Thom. part.
3. qu^t. 25. (...). 4. ^. Reason.
Thou art my father, and before the images not only of men but also of women
departed.

Fifthly, all acceptable prayers are made in faith that they are accepted, and
in hope that they shall be granted: For without faith it is impossible to
please (...). 11. 6. (...). 14. 23.
God; and what is not of faith is sin: and prayer which is made without hope
is in vain. But those prayers that are made to God, and they only, are made in
faith and hope: In faith, because God has commanded us to call upon him, and
has promised to hear us: In hope, because God to whom we pray is omnipresent;
and therefore is acquainted with our wants, and secret desires, Psalm. 38. he is
omnipotent, and therefore able to do for us exceedingly above all that we can
ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. and for his bounty and goodness more ready to
hear and to grant then we are to ask, Isa. 65. 24. On the other side, prayers
made to creatures are made neither in faith: For there is no warrant in the
Scripture for such a prayer, no doctrine which teaches it, no precept that
injoyneth it, no promise to confirm it, no example to commend it. And this is
confessed by Eckius, viz. That neither it is warranted or taught in the Old
Testament, because the people were prone to idolatry, and the fathers deceased
were in Limbo; nor in the New, lest the Gentiles should return to their old
idolatry, and lest the Apostles should seem to direct Christians to invocate
them after their decease. And therefore by their own confession no testimony
of Scripture can be alleged to this purpose. Neither can such prayer be made
in hope: because none but God is either omniscient or omnipresent to know the
wants or hear the desires of men in all places calling upon them, nor
omnipotent to grant their desires. Hereunto may be added the testimonies of the
Fathers: Origin Contra Celsum, lib. 8. Solus adorandus est Deus, God only is
to be worshipped. Eusebius, De praeparat. Evang. 4. 5. Solum Deum adorare
didicimus, We have learned to worship God only. Nazianzen, De Spir. sanct.
(...); If it be to be adored, why is it not to be worshipped? if it be to be
worshipped, how is it not God* Ambrose, De Spiritu, lib. 3. 12. Neque adorandum
quicquam praeter Deum legimus, We do not read of any thing which ought to be
worshipped except God alone. Cyrill, Thesaur. lib. 2. 1. Vnanatura Deitatis est
quam solummodo adorare oportet, There is one nature of the Deity which alone
ought to be worshipped.

CHAP. XII. That we ought not to invocate any creature.
THus have I showed in general, That no creature is to be called upon. Now
more specially, That neither Angels nor Saints. Civil honor indeed is due to
both, as to our fellow-citizens of the same city: but religious honor done to
either is idolatry.

First, for Angels. Our fellow servants are not to That Angels ought not to be
worshipped. 1. Reason.
be adored of us: Angels are our fellow servants, being ministering spirits sent
forth into the ministry for their sake that shall be heirs of salvation, Heb.
1. 14. And by this reason the angel, Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 19. disswadeth S.
John from adoring him, and in both places appropriateth (...), adoration, to
God. Likewise the Apostle admonishes the Colossians, chap. 2. 18. to take heed
that none ber^ave them ^ide Am^ in Romans 1. page 177.
of their prize (which is their salvation) under show of humility (as the
Papists do, as though it were too much boldness to go directly to Christ)
commending unto them the worshipping of angels: whereunto those countries of
Phrygia were very much addicted, as Theodoret shows in Col. 2. And therefore
it was decreed in the council of Laodicea, the mother-citie of those parts,
that no man should pray unto angels.

Moreover, he that is the author and fountain of 2. Reason.
all good things, and is only able of himself to help us, he is to be
invocated, and not those who being but his instruments are not able to help us
otherwise then he appoints. But God is the author and fountain of all good,
James 1. 17. Our only help and refuge, Psalm. 46. 1. and 124. 8. The angels are
but his instruments, who neither can nor will help us further then God himself
appoints.

Objection out of Jos. 5. 13. and Judge. 13. 20. That Object.
Joshua and the parents of Samson worshipped the angels which appeared unto
them.

He that appeared unto them was not a created angel, Answ.
but the Angel of the great covenant, the second Person in Trinity, who
oftentimes in assumed forms appeared to the Patriarchs. He that appeared to
Joshua calls himself the Prince of the Lords armies, Jos. 5. 14. and 6. 2. he
is called the Lord. He which appeared to Samsons parents being demanded his
name, said it is Wonderful, which is the name of Christ, Isa. 9. 6. And such
was their opinion of him; for Manoah calls him God, and his wife terms him
Jehovah.

Now that Saints are not to be prayed unto it shall That Saints departed ought
not to be invocated 1. Reason.
appear by these reasons:

I. To them which neither hear us nor know us, prayer is made in vain: But the
Saints departed neither hear us nor know us. That they do not hear us it is
manifest. For what is it which they do hear? the voice of the mouth or the
speech of the heart? If the voice of the mouth, then the voice which moves the
air for a small distance and so vanishes, shall not only pierce all the
regions of the air but the heavens also, where the air, which is the medium,
cease. If the speech of the heart; then are they (...), the searchers of the
heart, and therefore gods: for it is a property peculiar to the Lord, 1. Kings
8. 39. Jer. 17. 9. Acts 1. 24. That they know us not it is testified by Isaiah,
chap. 63. 16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not: Eccles 9. 5.

The Papists except, First, That the Saints having 1. Exception of the Papists.
the blessed vision of God, they do see in speculo Trinitatis the things done
in earth. By which reason they should know all things which God himself does
know, neither should the day of judgment be hid from them. But this glass is
a forgerie of their The glass of the Trinity forged.
own brain: For if they say it is the essence of the whole Deity, then is it
most simple and unvariable; if the glory or splendor of God whereby he
enlighteneth the place of the blessed, it will no more fellow that they
beholding this light should see those things which God beholds, then that he
which looks on the sun should see all that the sun shines upon.

Secondly, That God acquainteth them with our A second (...) of the Papists
(...).
prayers made to them, which they understanding become intercessours for us
unto God. But what a foolish circumstance is this? They will not have us go
directly unto God or our Savior, but (as in Princes courts) to some that are
near unto them, that they may mediate our cause; and in the upshot, we cannot
go directly unto them, I mean the Saints, but God himself must be fain to be a
mediator between us and them, to acquaint them with our prayers, that so they
may pray unto him for us.

Thirdly, That they do not worship the Saints as A third p^etense avoided.
gods, but as the friends of God. As if a woman taken in adultery should
allege for her self, that she loved the adulterer not as her husband but as
her husbands friend. For religious worship does as properly belong unto God as
conjugall love unto the husband. But do not they give Divine worship to the
Saints whom they invocate, prescribing thereby unto them omnipresence,
omniscience, omnipotency, and thereby also professing themselves to repose
their trust in them? For when they pray to Saints departed, do they speak unto
them as present or as absent? If as to present, they being in heaven and they
on the earth dispersed in many places and countries, then they ascribe unto
them omnipresence; if as to absent, they ascribe to them omniscience: Both
which are blasphemous. Besides, when they invocate they ascribe omnipotency to
them, and therefore repose their trust in them: But God alone is to be trusted
in, because he alone is omnipotent; and cursed is he that trusts in man, Jer.
17. 5.

II. Again, mere men are not religiously to be 2. Reason.
adored: It is Peter's reason, Acts 10. 26, and Paul's, Acts 14. 15. If Christ
himself had been but a mere man or a creature, though a god by creation, yet
ought not he religiously to be adored; and much less the Saints, who are but
the servants of Christ. Therefore the ancient Fathers termed the Arians (who
supposed Christ to be God by creation, and yet worshipped him) idolaters; and
the Nestorians likewise, who supposed the humanity of Christ to be a distinct
person from the Son of God.

III. To leave God, who has commanded us 3. Reason.
to call upon him, and has promised to hear us, and is most willing and only
able to help us, and to run to the Saints, who neither have commanded us, as
having no such authority, nor have promised to hear and help us, as having no
such power, yea are so far from hearing and helping that they neither know us
nor our desires, and so far from commanding us to call upon them as they have
forbidden us so to do, and always directed us to call upon God, Acts 10. 26.
and 14. 15. is a thing in religion impious and in reason absurd.

IV. To call upon Saints is a thing most injurious 4. Reason.
unto God and Christ our Savior: d^ogatorie from the glory of God, as though
they were either more ready to hear, or more willing or more able to help us;
or that we had more confidence in their love then in the mercies of God and
intercession of Christ our Savior.

But it is lawful to entreat the Saints upon earth Object.
to pray for us; why then may we not desire the Saints in heaven much more to
pray to God for us?

To entreat the Saints living on earth to pray for Answ. 1.
us has warrant in the Scriptures, as having been a duty enjoined by God,
Genesis 20. 7. Job 42. 8. Jam. 5. 14, 16. and also practiced by the faithful,
Romans 5. 30. Ephesians. 6. 19. But praying to Saints departed has no warrant in the
Scriptures, as the Papists themselves are forced to confess. Nay, it is
directly forbidden; and those which do it commit two evils, forsaking God the
fountain of living waters, and digging out to themselves cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water, Jer. 2. 13. They worship the creature (...),
Romans 1. 25. praeterito Creatore, passing by the Creator, ut Hilarious
interpretatur De Trinitate lib. 12.

2. The Saints living with us are acquainted with our persons and our wants,
and therefore may pray in particular for us, and so cannot the Saints departed.

3. The request made in this behalf to the faithful living is a civil entreaty
of a Christian duty, but as it is made to the Saints departed, it is a
religious invocation of them to do that for us which is the peculiar office of
the Mediator. Neither do they only entreat the Saints to pray for us, and
desire God that for the merits and intercession of the Saints he would grant
their desires, which is to give the office of Christ to them: But also they
desire the Saints themselves to bestow upon them such blessings as they desire
both spiritual and temporal, and to avert from them such evils as they fear.
Wherein the Papists have made the Saints to succeed the heathen gods, ascribing
unto them their several offices and functions, insomuch that there is no
country, city, or town, but has certain Saints to patronize them, as the
heathen had their tutelares deos: no trade or occupation which has not a
peculiar Saint; no kind of cattle or tame fowl which have not their patrones;
no kind of disease but some Saint or other is called upon for the curing
thereof, as the dii averrunci, or (...), among the heathen: So that if there
were no other fault in Popery, their idolatry were sufficient cause of
separation from them.

But the Saints departed do pray for us, therefore Object.
we ought to pray unto them.

It may well be supposed that the Saints departed Answ.
do pray in common for the faithful upon the earth, as fellow members of the
same body. But they are not acquainted with particular persons, or their
particular wants or desires; or if they were, yet it would not follow that we
should pray to them, no more then we are bound to invocate religiously the
Saints upon earth, whom we know according to their duty do pray for us.
August. contra Faust. Manich. lib. 20. c. 21. Colimus martyrs eo cultu
dilectionis and societatis quo and in hac vita coluntur sancti homines, We
worship the martyrs with that worship of love and society with which even in
this life holy men are worshipped. Notwithstanding the Papists think this
consequence to be so strong, as they take it for granted, that if the Saints
make intercession for us we must pray to them: Insomuch that Bellarmine In
Apoleg.
when he would prove against our King, That invocation of Saints was taught by
the ancient Fathers, in stead of that he proves ridiculously the intercession
of Saints for us.

CHAP. XIII. That we must conceive of God in prayer as he has revealed himself
in his word.
SEeing then the Lord alone is to be called upon religiously, it remains that
we consider how we are to conceive of God when we do call upon him; viz. not
according to the fancies of our own brain, but as he has revealed himself in
his word; both in respect of the Divine nature and also the Divine persons. In
respect of his nature, that he is a spirit invisible and incomprehensible,
omnipotent and infinite, most holy, wise, just and merciful, etc. And in
regard of the Divine persons, that being a God in essence and substance one and
indivisible, he is notwithstanding distinguished into three persons, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who as they be not in nature disjoined,
so are they not to be severed in their worship, but the Unity in Trinity and
Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped and adored.

Whosoever therefore in respect of Gods nature Rom 1. 23. Psalm. 106 20.
do circumscribe God, worshipping him under any form, whether outwardly
expressed or inwardly conceived, as namely in the form of an old man, etc. in
stead of the true God they do worship an idol. Such was the erroneous conceit
of the Anthropomorphites, and such is the superstitious worship of the Papists
at this day. Likewise in respect of the persons, whosoever shall call upon God
as not distinguished into three persons, howsoever they may profess that they
invocate one only true God maker of heaven and earth, yet they do not worship
the true God but an idol: for the true God is the Father, the Son, and holy
Ghost. Forasmuch therefore as the Jews and Turks do not worship the Trinity,
they are not worshippers of the true God; but as our Savior said of the
Samaritanes, They worship they know not what, John 4. not acknowledging the
true God, nor Jesus Christ whom he has sent: John 5. 23. Hc that honors not
the Son honors not the Father, and, Whosoever denies the Son has not
the Father, 1. John 2. 23.

Here therefore it may be demanded, That seeing we are to worship the holy
Trinity, whether it be Whether it be lawful to direct our prayers unto any
one person in the Trinity.
lawful to direct our prayers to some one person, as to the Father, to the
Son, or to the holy Ghost.

He that acknowledges the Trinity, when in his prayers he names one only
person, he does not exclude the other persons but rather includes the^. For in
every person or supposite that is named the Divine nature is presupposed: so
that when the Father is nominated, Christ and so the holy Ghost is the same God
which is invocated; and therefore as there is one essence of all the persons so
one worship.

Furthermore, concerning our Savior Christ it may also be demanded, That
seeing God is the only Whether Christ as Mediator (...) to be invocated.
object of religious invocation, whether he being the mediator between God and
man is to be invocated: and if he be, how and in what respect we are to call
upon him.

That he is to be called upon as our Lord and Savior, in whose name we are
baptized, in whom we believe and trust, there is no doub: All men must honor
him as they honor the Father, John 5. 23. and, All the angels must adore him,
Heb. 1. 6. and, to his name must every knee bow, Phil. 2. 10. Examples:
Stephen, Acts 7. 59. Thomas, John 20. 28. the Apostles, Luke 24. 52. (...)
worship Christ in his whole person, and not in his manhood alone.


But all the question is, Whether we are to call upon Christ as God alone, or
as man alone, or as both God and man. Since our Savior Christ was incarnate
and did personally and inseparably unite unto himself the humane nature, his
whole person as he is (...) or Immanuel, God manifested in the flesh, is to be
worshipped by one and the same act of invocation and worship, without
separation or division. The Papists have found out a peculiar worship for the
humanity of Christ, and for the blessed Virgin, which they call (...). But the
humanity of Christ, as it does not subsist of it self, so are we not severally
to worship it with Nestorius, but the whole person both God and man: But yet so
as that our prayer be not directed to the humanity, which is a creature, but to
the Son of God having assumed and united unto himself the humane nature. So
says Cyrill, Non igitur tanquam hominem Ad Theodu^. De rect. fide.
adoramus Emmanuelem: Absit. Delir amentum enim hoc esset, and deceptio ac
error. In hoc enim nihil differremus ab his qui creaturam colunt ultra
Conditorem and Factorem: that is, We do not therefore worship our Emmanuel as
man alone: God forbid. For this were a dotage, a false conceit and error:
neither should we in this differ from those which worship the creature more
then their Creator and Maker.

To conclude this second point. Whereas the whole world almost is overflown
with idolatry, as with an universal deluge, the Paganes invocating a multitude
of false gods; the Jews and Turks worshipping one God, but not in the Trinity
of persons, nor acknowledging Jesus Christ; the Papists (which call themselves
the Catholic Church) invocating besides the true God a multitude of angels and
Saints, images, the cross and Eucharist, and in their prayers representing the
invisible and incomprehensible God in a visible form: notwithstanding God in
his great mercy has taken us who profess the reformed religion into the ark
of his Church, teaching us by his word and spirit to call upon him the true God
in the name of Christ his Son, himself also being near unto us, as he was to
the Church of Israel, in all that we call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4. 7.

CHAP. XIIII. That Christ alone is the Mediator of intercession as well as
redemption.
HAving spoken of the subject of invocation, viz. men; and the object, viz.
God: we are now in the third place to enquire, how it comes to pass that man
being stained and polluted with sin, and by reason thereof an enemy to God,
should have any access unto God, or be admitted to any speech with him, who is
most just and terrible, a consuming fire, and hating all iniquity with perfect
hatred. Indeed it must be confessed, that sin makes a separation between God
and man, and that both we are unworthy in our selves to appear before God, and
our prayers also by reason of our manifold wants and corruptions unworthy to be
offered unto him. And therefore of necessity a mediator was to come between
God and man, who reconciling us unto God, and covering our imperfections, might
make both our persons and our prayers acceptable unto God. And for as much as
it was needful that the justice of God should be satisfied in the same nature
wherein he had been offended, neither could obedience be performed to the law
given to man, nor the punishment due to the sins of man be satisfied but by
man, neither could the righteousness be meritorious for all, nor the price of
ransom sufficient, if the person which should perform both were not God. It
was likewise needful that the mediator who should reconcile us unto God and
make us and our prayers acceptable unto him should be both God and man:
therefore God in his unspeakable mercy has appointed and given his only
begotten Son to be our Mediator, Advocate and Intercessour, who having
assumed our nature should therein satisfy his justice and appease his wrath;
and having performed perfect obedience for us, and given himself a ransom for
our sins, should ascend into heaven, and there sitting at the right hand of
the Father should make intercession for us, that both the persons of such as
believe in him and their prayers which call upon God in his name should be
accepted of him.

But as in the former points we were forced to prove two things, not only that
God is to be invocated, but that he alone is to be called upon, and not Saints
and Angels; so in this we are by the like superstition of the Papists compelled
to demonstrate two things: first, that Christ is the onel^ Mediator of
intercession; and secondly, that we are always to call upon God in his name.
For as they invocate others besides God, and so are indeed worshippers of more
gods; so have they appointed other mediators and intercessours besides Christ.
And the reason is alike in both. But the Apostle teaches us, That as there is
but one God, so there is but one Mediator ^. (...). ^.
between God and man, the man Christ.

The Papists make two sorts of mediators, the The P^pists make two sorts of
med^atours.
one of redemption, the other of intercession; and they do confess in word
that Christ is the only Mediator of redemption, but of intercession they
adjoyn other mediators unto him, viz. the Saints departed.

Here therefore I will show two things: 1. That they seem to acknowledge other
mediators of redemption, and so in deed overthrow that which in word they
confess; 2. That none can be mediator of intercession who is not also of
redemption. For as touching the first; in many of their authorized prayers they
desire God to have mercy on them in forgiving their sins, and in giving unto
them good things as well spiritual as temporal for the merits and
intercession of the Saints; and so plainly thrust the Saints into the office of
Christ. And not only so, but they invocate also the Saints as they do Christ
to bestow good things upon them, and to aveit evil from them, substituting
them, as I have showed before, into the room of the tutelar gods of the heathen.

But let us see whether there be any mediators of intercession who are not
also of redemption. We deny not but that in a large sense they may be c^lled
mediators and intercessours who are med^i inter, namely between God and man.
So Moses is termed (...), Gal. 3. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 5. and 27. 31. Pastors likewise
and preachers, who are both the mouth of God to the people in preaching and of
the people to God in prayer: But they are not in that sense intercessours as we
acknowledge Christ, and the Papists do esteem the Saints, that we for their
merits and intercession should hope to be heard. In like manner the Saints upon
earth, who in mutual charity do pray and make intercession one for another, as
they are required 1. Tim. 2. 1. Jam. 5. 15, 16. may be called intercessours,
but such as whose intercession depends wholly upon the intercession of
Christ, and whose prayers are always made in his name.

Why then may not the Saints in heaven be Object.
esteemed intercessours?

For the intercession of Saints departed there is Answ.
no testimony of Scripture. It is not to be doubted How the Saints in heaven
may be said to pray, and for what.
but that they do use to invocate the name of God by praise and thanksgiving,
bearing a part (as it were) in the quire of Angels. And it is not unlikely but
that they pray for that which is wanting unto them whilst their bodies sleep
in the dust, that is, their full redemption; that the number of the elect being
accomplished, the Lord would hasten the second coming of Christ for their full
redemption. In which prayer also they pray for us, as we also do for them; and
in regard thereof we are as well intercessours for them as they for us. It is
also probable, that they being members of the same mystical body, endued with
perfect charity, do in general pray for their fellow members upon earth. But
that in particular they pray for any of us it is improbable, because they know
not our persons, nor hear our prayers, nor understand our particular wants: or
if they did, yet would it not follow that either we should pray to them, as I
have showed before, or that we should desire the Lord for their merits and
intercessions to grant our desires. Neither is it to be doubted, but what
praises or prayers they utter unto God, they offer them only in the name and
mediation of Christ, desiring that for his merits and intercession their
invocation may be accepted.

And in this sense Christ alone is the Mediator of intercession. So Augustine
speaking of those words (...) Epist. (...). lib. 2. cap. 8.
of S. John, 1. Epist. 2. 1. says, John does not say, You have an advocate,
for so should he separate himself from sinners: nor does he say, You have me
for a mediator (as Parmenianus in a certain place makes the Bishop a
mediator between God and the people) for then what good and faithful
Christian could endure him? who would look upon him as an Apostle of Christ and
not as Antichrist? And again, All Christians do mutually commend themselves
unto God in their prayers: pro quo autem nullus interpellat sed ipse pro
omnibus, hic unus ver usque mediator est: that is, but for whom none
intercedeth but he for all, he alone is the true Mediator.

Now that Christ is the only Mediator of intercession as well as of redemption
it is evident; because these being the two parts of his mediation, and not two
sorts of Mediators; the latter of intercession depends on the other of
redemption, as being the representation of it unto God, and the application
thereof to the faithful: the dignity, I say, efficacy and virtue of his
intercession depends on the merits of redemption. For had Christ not been the
Mediator of redemption he could not have been the Mediator of intercession.
For when it is said that Christ makes intercession for us in heaven, we are
not thus to understand it, that he falls down upon his knees and prays to
God for us (John 16. 26. I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for
you) but that sitting at the right hand of his Father he represents his own
merits unto him, and offers the prayers of the faithful unto God perfumed
with the odours of his own sacrifice, as he is described, Revel. 8. 3, 4. So
Anselme in Romans 8. Vnigenitum Filium pro hominibus interpellare, est apud
coaeternum Patrem seipsum hominem demonstrare: The only begotten Son is said
to make intercession for men, when he shows himself man before his coeternall
Father. And the Apostle describes his intercession to be, (...): his appearing
in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24.

The holy Ghost therefore joyneth both the parts The holy Ghost joyneth
intercession and redemption both in one.
together, 1. Tim. 2. 5. where speaking professedly of prayers, and saying that
Christ is the only Mediator between God and man, he adds, who gave himself
a ransom for all. So 1. John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin we have an advocate
Christ Jesus the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. He only
is the advocate, because he only can plead his merits for us. He only is
perfectly and fully just, he only is the propitiation for our sins. And as
he is the only Intercessour because he is the only Savior, Acts 4. 12. so is
he the perfect Savior, because he ever lives to make intercession for us,
Heb. 7. 25. For whereas they ordain other intercessours for whose sake they
desire to be heard, they do it altogether without warrant of Scriptures,
wherein there is no doctrine, no precept, no promise, no example to warrant it:
and consequently such prayer cannot be made in faith, neither can it please
God. And with what forehead can they take from Christ his office and the honor
thereof which he purchased with his blood, and without any warrant from him
assign it to others: as though Christ having for a short time exercised the
office of mediation, should to the end of the world have resigned it to his
servants. But the holy Ghost teaches the contrary Heb. 7. 25. that Christ is
therefore able perfectly and fully, (...), to save those which by him do come
to God, because he lives ever to make intercession for them. Yea, the
Scripture every where directs us unto Christ and to no other mediator, and
therefore to no other must we sly, Ephesians. 3. 12. Heb. 4. 16. and 7. 19. Christ
is the only way and the only access unto God: Those that leave this way and
this access, they have no way nor access to God with hope or comfort; or if
any will go to God any other way, in stead of a throne of grace they shall find
a tribunal of justice and terror, and in stead of a merciful Father a just
and terrible Judge. Our Savior Christ in plain terms says, John 14. 6. No man
comes to the Father but by me: and the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 5. That as there is
but one God, so but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ, who is
both God and man. For as S. Augustine, The Mediator between God Cont^a Parmen.
lib 2. Epist. cap. 8.
and man ought to have something like to God, something like to man, lest being
in both like to men he should be far from God, or being in both like to God
he should be far from men, and so should be no Mediator. But Christ alone is
both God and man, and therefore he alone is Mediator.

The high Priest in the law was a type of Christ: The high Pri^st a type of
Christ.
but the high Priest in type was mediator both of redemption and expiation in
offering sacrifices, and of intercession in making prayers for the people* to
which purpose bearing the names of the twelve tribes, he entered into the holy
place to make intercession for them; therein representing Christ, who being
entered into the heavenly sanctuary makes intercession for us.

But to what purpose do they fly to other mediators? is it because the
mediation of Christ is not sufficient? or is it because the Saints are in
greater favor with God? or lastly, because the Saints are more favorable to
us then our Savior Christ? If the first, they deny Christ to be a perfect
Savior, which the Apostle affirms Heb. 7. 25. If the second, they deny him
to be the Son of God in whom he is well pleased with the Saints themselves.
If the third, they deny him to be their loving and merciful Savior, who has
loved us with the greatest love, unto which the love of the Saints being
compared is as a little spark to agreat flame, or a drop of water to the great
sea. He took our nature and infirmities, that he might have compassion on us,
Heb. 2. 17, 18. and 4. 15, 16. He graciously inviteth us to come unto him, and
who do come he promises not to reject, Matthew. 11. 28. John 6. 37. Injurious
therefore and blasphemous are they against Christ, esteeming him as austere,
and seeking to the Saints as more propitious; especially when they commit the
administration of justice to Christ, and of mercy to his mother; and therefore
appeal from the tribunal of his justice to the throne of his mothers mercy. But
besides the horrible superstition and idolatry, besides the sacrilegious
injury offered unto Christ, besides their own infidelity and unthankfulness
toward Christ, it is extreme folly and madness rather to seek to other
mediators, seeing in Christ nothing is wanting which is required in a perfect
Mediator. For by his all-sufficient merits he has satisfied the justice of
God, so that for his merits we may trust to be heard: He is in highest favor
with God, in whom the Lord graciously accepts whomsoever he loves; and
therefore we may be bold to pray that for his sake we may be heard: He hears
our prayers and is acquainted with our persons and wants, and he is most
gracious and favorable in commending our suits unto God: He has commanded us
to call upon God in his name, and has promised that we shall obtein: Whereas
the Saints have no merits to plead for themselves, and much less for others,
but those of Christ. In Christ they are loved and graciously accepted. They
hear not our prayers, neither are acquainted with our persons or wants; and
all the love they have is but a small reflection of the beams of Christ's love
shed abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost: neither have they either by
commandment or promise moved us to seek to their mediation, but always have
directed us unto Christ.

If it be objected, That for Abraham's or David's sake the Lord is said or
requested to do something; In these examples not the merits of those Saints,
but the covenant of grace which the Lord made with them is interpofed. If they
plead antiquity for their using the mediation of Saints, the first that
brought in this superstition into the East-churches was Petrus Cirapheus the
heretic, about the year 500, and in the West Gregory about the year 600.

The Scriptures in this case give us the like counsel to that which was given
to Themistocles: For having occasion to use the favor of Admetus the King of
the Molossi, who was offended with him, he asked counsel of the Queen how he
might obtein the Kings favor; and being instructed by her, when the King
returned from the Temple, held the Kings son between his arms, as desiring
that for his sake he would receive him into favor, by which means the King was
pacified toward him.

CHAP. XV. That we must pray only in the name of Christ.
BUt to leave them. For our own instruction we are to learn, that we are
always to call upon God in the name of Christ. Now they are said to pray in
the name of Christ, who believing in him and reposing their affiance in the
merits and intercession of Christ, do desire the Lord that not respecting their
own unworthiness or demerits, he would be pleased to hear them for Christ's
sake, and for his merits and intercession accept of their prayers.

The which includes two things: 1. A desire that for Christ's sake we may be
heard. 2. A belief that for Christ's sake we shall be heard. Of the desire we
are here to speak; of the belief or faith afterward.

That we are thus to pray in the name of Christ, is proved, 1. by the
commandment of Christ, John 16. 24. 2. by his promise, John 16. 23. and 14. 13,
14. 3. by his prediction, John 16. 26. 4. by the practice of the faithful not
only since the ascension of Christ, who have always used to conclude their
prayers with this clause, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, through our Lord
Jesus Christ; but also before the incarnation, Dan. 9. 17. for the Lords sake.

And this was diversely figured in the law. For 1. Whereas by the propitiatory
which covered the ark Christ was represented, therefore the faithful when they
were to pray turned their face toward the place where the ark remained.

2. Hereunto tended their sacrifices, which were a figure of Christ's sacrifice,
that for the merit thereof the prayers of them which did offer the sacrifice
might be accepted.

3. Thirdly, as the high Priest once a year entered the sanctuary, bearing on
his shoulders the names and on his breast twelve stones the tokens of the
twelve tribes, prayed for the people, who stood in the courts of the house:
even so Christ being entered into the heavenly sanctuary makes intercession for
us, Heb. 10. 19. Apoc. 8. 3, 4. Therefore as Augustine says, If you require a
priest, he is above the heavens, where he makes intercession for thee who in
earth died for thee. He is the only way by whom we have access unto God, John
14. 6. he is the only Mediator by whom we have access with boldness, Ephesians.
3. 12. he alone in whom God is well pleased with us, and appeased toward us,
Romans 3. 25. so that coming in his name, neither the sense of the dreadful
majesty of God, nor the conscience of our own unworthiness shall dismay us.
He is the altar, Heb. 13. 10. on which the sacrifice of our prayer or praise
being offered is thereby sanctified, verse. 15. He is, as Ambrose says, our
mouth by which we speak unto the Father, our eye by whom we see the Father, our
right hand by which we offer our selves to the Father, without whose
intercession neither we nor the Saints have ought to do with God. And herein
especially the prayers of true Christians do differ from the prayers of others,
that we call upon God in the name and mediation of Christ alone.

The use of all is, Heb. 4. 16. and 10. 19. that seeing we have such an high
Priest who makes intercession for us, that we should with boldness and
assurance of faith offer up our prayers unto God: For 1. the Spirit of Christ
helps our infirmities, Romans 8. 26. 2. God the Father justifies and accepts
of us in Christ, v. 33. Who therefore shall lay any thing to our charge? who
can condemn us seeing Christ died for our sins and rose again for our
justification, and now sits at the right hand of God making intercession for
us, v. 34. and with the odours of his own sacrifice perfumeth our prayers,
making them acceptable unto God, Revel. 8. 3, 4.

CHAP. XVI. Of the manner how we are to call upon God.
IN the fourth place we are to entreat of the manner 1. In respect of the soul,
in truth and uprightness ^f heart.
how we are to call upon God. The manner is set down Romans 8. 27. according to
God, that is, as S. John speaks, according to the will of God, 1. John 5. 14.
So I said in the definition, That invocation is a religious speech of the
faithful made unto God in the name of Christ according to the will of God:
where by the will of God we are to understand, not his secret will and counsel
which we know not, but his will revealed in his word. Prayer is therefore made
according to the will of God, when in our prayer those things are performed
which God in his word prescribes to be performed in prayer.

This and the former point are of great moment: for when a man prays and is
not heard, it is, as Bernard says, because out praeter verbum petis, aut
propter verbum non petis, that is, because thou prayest either beside the word
or not for the word; whereas on the other side we have this confidence in him,
that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us, 1. John 5. 14, 15.

Now for the manner of prayer there are duties to be performed not only in the
action it self, but also out of the action, that is to say, both before and
after. In the action of invocation the duties respecting the manner belong
either to the internal form or external. The former are the inward duties of
the soul, the latter the outward speech and gesture of the body.

Unto the speech refer
words quantity. quality.
voice.
In the soul we are to consider what is required That our prayer must be the
speech of the soul.
first in general, and then in particular. In general it is required that our
invocation be a speech of the soul: and therefore as I said in the beginning,
some define prayer that it is (...), that is, the communication of the soul
with God: Others, that it is (...), that is, the ascending of the mind unto
God. David expresses his prayer to be a lifting up of his soul unto God, Psalm.
25. 1. and 86. 4. and elsewhere he calls it a pouring Psalm. 62. 8.
forth of the soul before the Lord; as Anna also speaks, 1. Sam. 1. 15. So
that true prayer is not the lifting up of the voice, of the eyes, or hands
alone; but a lifting up of the heart with the hands unto God that is in the
heavens, Lam. 3. 41. To the same purpose in the Scriptures we are directed to
pray in the heart, Col. 3. 16. and in the spirit, that is, the soul, Ephesians. 6.
18. to pray with the whole heart, Psalm. 111. 1. that is, with an upright heart,
Psalm. 119. 7. with unfeigned lips, Psalm. 17. 1. in truth, that is, in
sincerity and uprightness of heart, Psalm. 145. 18.

The necessity of this praying in truth appears, The necessity of praying in
truth proved by ^ivers reasons.
1. By testimony of our Savior Christ, John 4. 24. God is a spirit, and they
that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth: 2. By all those
testimonies even now cited, wherein we are stirred up to lift up our hearts and
to pour forth oursouls, etc. 3. If the Apostle require servants to perform
their duties to their masters (...), as unto the Lord; how much Ephesians. 6. 6.
more is it our duty to the Lord himself to perform our service from our
hearts? 4. The uprightness and sincerity of the heart is the soundness of
all our worship and service of God, without which it is hypocrisy: therefore
David professes that he would call upon God with an upright heart, Psalm. 119.
7. and with lips unfeigned, Psalm. 17. 1. and to the same purpose we are
exho^ted to seek the Lord with an upright heart, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Jer. 29. 13. 5.
The promise of hearing our prayer is restrained to this praying in truth: Psalm.
145. 18. The Lord is near to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in truth: for bodily exercise profits little, 1. Tim. 4. 8. and the Lord
respects especially the voice of the heart. As for those that call upon him
with their lips and not with their hearts, the Lord abhors their prayer, and
takes himself to be abused by them, and therefore he reproves them by his
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 29. 13. This people comes near me with their lips, but
their heart is sarre from m^: and elsewhere he complains of the hypocrites of
his people, that when they howled unto him they cried not with their hearts,
which he calls speaking lies, Hos. 7. 13, 14. for what else does a man but
lie when he speaks otherwise then he thinks? This divorce of the heart and
the tongue in all speech, even betwixt men, is detestable: Psalm. 12. 2. it is
called speaking with a heart and a heart: But when men speak so unto God it is
ridiculous and impious: ridiculous, because they go about to deceive God, who
beholding he heart as well as the tongue, sees them dance as it were in a net:
impious, because it is not to lie unto men but unto God. Both which folly and
impiety the Psalmist notes in the Israelites, Psalm. 78. 36. That when the
hand of God was upon them slaying diverse of them, they sought him and called
upon him: nevertheless they did flatter, or go about to deceive him, with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not
right with him.

Here therefore two faults are to be avoided: the Praying wit^ feigned lips to
be avoided, and what it is.
one, praying with feigned lips; the other, praying with wandering thoughts. He
is said to pray with feigned lips whose lips agree not with his heart, nor his
words with his desires and thoughts; So says Beda, Labiis dolosis or at quis,
cum vox oris non convenit voci cordis; A man prays with deceitful lips, when
the voice of the mouth agrees not with the voice of the heart. This is to pray
with an heart and an heart, and thus prays every one which asks that with
his mouth which he does not desire with his heart, and pretends that in his
prayer which he does not intend, which promises that in his prayer which he
means not to perform, or praises God for that whereof his conscience does
not acknowl^dge either God to be the giver or himself the receiver. This is the
condition of all impenitent sinners, to play the hypocrites before God in all
their prayers concerning spiritual things.

We must learn therefore with David to pray with unfeigned lips, Psalm. 17. 1.
and to praise God with an upright heart, Psalm. 119. 7. For if it be the
property of a sound Christian, to speak unto his neighbor the truth which is
in his heart, Psalm. 15. how much more shall we think it to be our duty when we
call upon God who tries the heart and searches the reins, to speak from the
ground of our hearts. And if we will not stick to speak dissemblingly unto the
Lord, who sees our thoughts long before, Psalm. 139. 2. what hope is there that
we will make conscience to speak the truth unto men, who see no further then
our mouths? Let us therefore avoiding this leaven of hypocrisy, which sowreth
our prayers, embrace integrity and uprightness of heart, setting the Lord
before our eyes, and behaving our selves in our prayer as those who sought to
approve themselves to him who tries the heart. Thus seeking the Lord with
upright hearts we shall be sure to find him, and calling upon him in truth we
shall obtein our desires.

The second thing to be avoided is praying with 2. We must not pray with
w^ndring t^oughts.
wandering thoughts: Which fault arises partly from the suggestions of Satan,
who is most busy to withdraw our minds from this heavenly exercise; partly
from our own spiritual sluggishnesse and carnal security, and the worldly
vanity of our minds; whereby it comes to pass that we behave our selves as
those who neither have reverence of the majesty of God to whom we speak, nor
sense of those things whereof we speak: For if we considered that we are
speaking to the most mighty and glorious God, could we imagine that we ought to
think of any thing rather then of that which we speak unto him? Do not men (as
it were) gather their wits and cogitations together, so that no part thereof be
derived to any thing else, when they do speak before any whom they do
reverence? Or if our affections were unfeignedly set upon those heavenly things
whereof we speak, would we suffer our cogitations to wander about trifles on
the earth? Wherefore as at all other times so especially when we pray we must
(as the Wise man advises) above all observations observe and keep our hearts,
Prove. 4. 23. that they wander not from God, (for, as Bernard says, nihil cord^
fugacius, nothing is more fugitive then the heart) and that with David, 2. Sam.
7. 27. we may find our heart to call upon God. And to the same purpose let us
pray, that as at all times so especially in prayer the Lord would knit our
hearts unto him, Psalm. 86. 11. that they go not astray after vanities. Let us
resist the suggestions of Satan, let us shake off our own sluggishnesse; and to
that end let us set before us the infinite majesty of God to whom we speak,
the excellency and necessity of those graces for which we pray and give
thanks: let us also pray with David, Psalm. 141. 3. that the Lord would set a
watch before our mouths, and keep the door of our lips, that neither our
minds go a whoring after vanities, nor our tongues, which should be as the pen
of a ready writer, be rash to utter any thing before God; and to utter nothing
but that which the mind does indite. And therefore we must take heed that the
speech of the mouth do not go before but always follow the conceit of the
mind. For many times it comes to pass, that as the musicians fingers will run
over a song which he has been used to play although his mind be otherwise
occupied, so in prayer the tongue will run over that form of words which it
has been used to utter, though the mind be roving about other matters. But
this ought not so to be: for howsoever the Schoolmen do not require an actual
intention of the mind in prayer, but only a purpose to pray in the beginning
(therein framing their doctrine to their practice, and not their practice to
Gods word) yet seeing this kind of prayer proceeds from the mouth and not
from the heart, it is but lip-labor in the sight of God. For as Cyprian says,
Quae est enim segnitia abalienari and capi ineptis cogitationibus Ser^. de
Orat. Domini.
and profanis cum Deum deprecaris, quasi sit aliud quod magis debeas cogitare,
quam quod cum Deo loquaris? Quomodo te audiri a Deo postulas, cum te ipse non
audias? Vis enim Deum memorem t^i cum rogas, cum tu ipse memor tui non sis?
that is, What a negligent sloth is this, to be alienated and carried away with
foolish cogitations and profane when thou prayest unto God, as though there
were something else which thou ought rather to think on then of that whereof
thou speak with God? How do thou desire that God should hear thee, when
as thou do not hear thy self? For will thou have God mindful of thee when
thou ask, seeing thou art not mindful of thy self? And so G. Baldwin; Inter
Ort^doxogr. 1399.
Quomodo se audiri postulat qui seipsum non audit and quid loquatur ignorant?
Nunquam enim orare dicitur qui flexis genibus orat, si vagatione distrahatur.
Nihil igitur aliud cogitare debet animus orantis quam quod precatur: that is,
How does he desire to be heard who does not hear himself, and is ignorant of
what he speaks? For he cannot be said to pray who prays with bended knees,
if he be distracted with wandering thoughts: and therefore the mind of him that
prays ought to think of nothing else then what is prayed. And likewise
Chrysostom, Si corpore Tom. 4. Homil. 79. 641* B. in F.
humi prostrato and ore incassum nugante men's totam domum and forum circumeat,
quomodo talis dicere poterit, quod in conspectu Dei precatus sit? Nam orat in
conspectu Dei totam colligens animam suam and nil habens cum terra commune, sed
in ipsum se transferens coelum, and omnem ex animo pellens humanam
cogitationem: that is, If the body lying prostrate upon the ground and the
mouth vainly trifling the mind wandreth throughout the whole house and market,
how can such a one say that he prays in Gods sight? For he prays in the
sight of God who recollecteth his whole soul, that he may have nothing to do
with the earth, but may wholly raise himself into heaven, and banish all humane
cogitations out of his mind.

And to conclude, let the absurdity of the fault it self, and the gross
abusing of the majesty of God, breed in us a lothing of this fault and a care
to shun it. For when at any time our minds have wandered in prayer, let us
endeavor to join into one speech the prayer of the mouth and the speech of the
heart, both which do sound in the ears of the Lord, and then consider whether
we would make such a speech, I say not, according to Malachi's rule, to our
Prince, but, to any man whom we regard, which we are not abashed to offer unto
the Lord.

And thus have you heard the two faults opposed to praying in truth: whereof
the former is a note of hypocrites and impenitent sinners; the latter, though a
foul fault and carefully to be avoided, yet incident to the children of God:
For even in this sense the best of us may complain with David that our heart
forsakes us, Psalm. 40. 12. and as Augustine cites ^entra Julian. lib. 2. ex
Ambros. De suga seculi.
out of Ambrose; Ipso in tempore quo elevare mentem paramus, insertis inanibus
cogitationibus ad terrena plerunque dejicimur: In the very time wherein we
endeavor to lift up our minds, vain thoughts being inserted we are for the
most part cast down unto earthly things. Wherein if we please our selves and
are satisfied with such wandering prayers, as though such wandering thoughts were
not to be regarded, as the Schoolmen teach, we also play the hypocrites in our
prayers, and speak in vain in the air without fruit or efficacy; for such a
prayer is dead and without life.

But if we come with upright hearts, intending a religious service unto God,
though sometimes our devotions be hindered with wandering thoughts, yet if we be
grieved for them and pray and strive against them, this infirmity through Gods
mercy and intercession of Christ shall not be imputed unto us.

CHAP. XVII. Of knowledge which is required necessarily in prayer.
THus much of that which is generally required in the soul: Now let us see what
is more particularly required in the mind and in the heart. In the mind two
things are required, Knowledge and Faith.

Knowledge 1. Of God to whom we pray, and First, we must know God.
of his will according to which we are to pray; 2. Of that which we in our
invocation do utter in the presence of God. First, there is required knowledge
and acknowledgement of the true God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent:
otherwise we are subject to the censure of our Savior given to the
Samaritanes, John 4. 22. You worship you know not what. First we must know God
before we can believe in him, and we must believe in him or else we cannot call
upon him, Romans 10. 14. Therefore David exhorts his son Solomon, 1. Chron.
28. 9. first to know, then to worship the God of his fathers with a willing
mind and an upright heart. For all worship of God which is not guided by
knowledge is mere will worship and superstition. Neither is that to be
accounted religion or piety which proceeds from ignorance; as the Papists
hold ignorance to be the mother of devotion. But that devotion is blind
superstition. Knowledge is as it were the stern which guides us in the right
way of serving God according to his word, without which we wander into
will worship and superstitious inventions. And therefore as of God there is
knowledge required, so also of his will revealed in 2. We must know Gods will*
and pray accor^ing unto it.
his word: For we can have no assurance that we shall be heard, unless we pray
according to his will, 1. John 5. 14. Neither can we pray according to his
will, unless in some measure we do know it, Col. 3. 16.

Secondly, there is required knowledge and understanding of that which we do
pray; otherwise we are subject to our Saviors reproof, Matthew. 20. 22. You ask
you know not what. Prayer not understood is the lifting up of the voice, and
not of the soul unto God, and a pouring forth of our breath and speaking into
the air, and not a pouring forth of our hearts and souls unto the Lord: for as
Augustine says; Seeing as it is Psalm. 89. 16. Beatus populus In Psalm. 99.
qui intelligit jubilationem. Curramus ergo (says he) ad hanc beatitudinem,
intelligamus jubilationem, non eam sine intellectu fundamus. Quid opus est
jubilare and non intelligere jubilationem? ut vox nostra sola jubilet, and cor
non jubilet? Sonus enim cordis intellectus est: that is, Blessed is the people
which understands the joyful sound. Let us therefore haste (says he) after
this happiness, let us understand this joyful sound, and not vent it out
without understanding. What use is there of a joyful sound and not to
understand it? that our voice only should make this joyful sound, and not our
heart? For the sound of the heart is understanding. Wherefore the Apostle, Col.
3. 16. exhorts us that the word of God dwell in us plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing our selves in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord. Where the
Apostle as he does in general require in every Christian a plentiful
knowledge of the word of God to direct him in his worship of God, so he
teaches us the use of our Psalms and songs which we sing unto the Lord, to
wit, that we and those that hear us may be instructed and edified thereby,
which without understanding of that which is said cannot be done, as the
Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 14. And to the same effect does the Prophet David
exhort us, Psalm. 47. 7, 8. (...), which words though diversely translated do in
every sense require understanding in those that call upon God: whether you read
it, Sing praises every one that has understanding, or sing praises
understandingly, or with understanding, or (as (...) also signifies, as
appears by the titles of diverse psalms) sing a Psalm of instruction whereby
you may (according to the exhortation of the Apostle, Col. 3.) instruct and
edify your selves and others.

Here therefore two sorts of men are condemned: the first of those who pray in
an unknown tongue; the second of them who praying in their own tongue do not
understand their own prayer.

The former fault is committed in the Church of The doctrine and practice of the
church of Rome confuted, who pr^sse prayer in an unknown tongue.
Rome both in public and private prayers. And first for public, the Church of
Rome has ordained that all the public Divine service in the Westchurches
should be done in the Latin tongue. And although this their practice be
directly repugnant to the word of God, and contrary to common sense and reason,
yet they do not only stiffly retein and Council. Trid. sess. 22. can. 9
maintein it, but also pronounce Anathema against him that shall say that the
Divine service ought only to be celebrated in the vulgar tongue: and yet this
expressly is the doctrine of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. From whence I reason
thus:

First, That which the Lord by his Apostle has commanded to be done, that is
necessarily to be observed: But the Lord by his Apostle has commanded that the
sacred service should be done in a language known, and not in a strange
language unknown to the people. For what he there teaches he testifies that
they were the commandments of God, v. 37.

But let us hear the Popish shifts used to avoid the force of this testimony.

1. That the Apostle speaks not of prayer but The Papists shifts avoided
which they use to clude the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 14.
of preaching and exhortation, which they confess are to be made in a known
tongue, otherwise that they are unprofitable and edify not. Why then by the
same reason do they not read the holy Scriptures in a known tongue unto the
people, but hide the light of Gods word under the bushel of a strange language?
But I answer, That the Apostle speaks of the whole Divine service of God, the
Church as well praying and praising of God, as preaching and prophesying, v.
14, 15, 16, 17.

2. Yea, but the Apostle speaks of such as having Object.
the gifts of tongues, did pray in a tongue which themselves knew not; and of
them he says, that in their spirit, that is, in their affection, they pray;
but their mind, not understanding what they say, is unfruitful, namely to
themselves.

It is not credible that they which had the gift of Answ.
tongues did not understand the language which they spoke (though some of the
Fathers have so conceived) for that had been an unprofitable gift to them and
others. Chrysostom in 1. Cor. 14. Homil. 35. You will say, Does the tongue
edify no body? Not so. For he that speaks, says he, with tongues edifieth
himself, v. 4. which verily cannot be except he understand what he says.
Neither is it the Apostles verse. 14.
meaning, that his understanding is unprofitable to himself (as Bellarmine
affirms) for he says that he edifieth himself, but to the hearers who
understand him not. Neither is it to pray in the spirit in that place, to pray
in affection without understanding himself: but to pray in the spirit, is to
pray in the closet of a man's soul, being not understood of others; and to pray
with understanding, is to pray that others may understand. So the Apostle
seems to expound the phrase v. 19. In the Church I had rather speak five
words with my understanding, that I might teach others also, then ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue.

Secondly, the people of necessity ought to understand the public prayers
made in the Church: therefore they ought to be made in a language known to
them. The antecedent is denied by the Papists under this pretense; Public
prayer is made Object.
not to the people, but to God for the people, which may be as available for
them in an other language as in their own.

If God understood or regarded no language but Answ.
Latin, there were some show of reason in this answer: but all tongues are
alike known and esteemed of God; and he is no accepter of persons, much less
of tongues. Again, public prayer as it is made for the people, so it is the
prayer of the congregation; and we shall prove that every one ought to
understand his own prayer. The Minister does pray, but the people ought to
concur with him in their prayers, and to give their consent thereunto by
saying, Amen: which they cannot do if they understand not what is said, v. 16.
Else when thou shall bless in the spirit, how shall he which occupies the
room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands
not what thou say?

But the Papists say, That the Apostle means not every one unlearned in the
Laity, but the clerk of the Church, who supplieth the place of the Laity. But
the words do signify not him who supplyeth the place or stead, but he that
fills or occupies the place of the unlearned, that is to say, one of that
rank, and so is expounded by the Greek Fathers.

Moreover, why is speech used at all in public prayer? and why do the people
assemble themselves thereunto? For speech is not needful in respect of God,
who searches the heart; neither is the presence of the people necessary at a
prayer which is only made for them: but words in public prayer are used that
the people both might be guided and edified, and also that they might join with
the speaker and add their consent, in which respect also their presence, is
necessary. So Augustine, Lib. De Man, cap. 1.
Opus est locutione in publicis precibus, non ut Deus sed ut homines audiant:
Speech is needful in public prayers, not that God but that men may hear.

But that the people ought to understand the public That the people ought to
understand public prayers.
prayers, I prove, 1. Because, as I have said, it is their prayer, whereunto
also they are to give their consent, which the Apostle says they cannot do
unless they understand what is spoken, v. 16.

2. Prayer uttered in a language unknown is unprofitable to the congregation,
as the Apostle says; If I come to you speaking with tongues, what shall I
profit you? v. 6. such an one speaks in the air, v. 9. that is, says the
Greek Scholiast, (...), in vain and unprofitably; and, his understanding is
unprofitable, v. 14. So Basil, (...), Basil. in desbreb. 278.
that is, When as the words of the prayer are not understood of those that are
present, the understanding is without fruit, so that no man so prays with the
profit of another. So Oecumenius; (...), We are not unprofitable unto you.

Thirdly, all things must be done to edification: Which general the Apostle
applies to this particular, v. 26. For it is a most true saying of Augustine,
De Genes ad literam, lib. 12. cap. 8.
Nemo ^dificatur audiendo quod non intelligit: No man is edified by hearing
that which he does not understand.

Fourthly, all things must be done decently and in order, v. 40. But when
public prayers are made in an unknown language, there happens much disorder
and confusion, like that of Babel. The Minister though he speak Latin is a
barbarian to the people, and the people to the Minister, v. 11. If ^ know not
the meaning of the voice, I shall be to him that speaks abarbarian, and he
that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me; not simply, but to me, says
Chrysostom. In 1. Cor. 14.
Hierome truly says, Omnis sermo qui non intelligitur barbarus judicatur: All
speech not understood is deemed barbarous. So Ovid in banishment, Barbarus hic
ego sum, quia non intelligor ulli, De (...). lib. 5. cleg. 11.
I am barbarous here, because I am not understood by any. 2. The minister and
people meeting to public prayer use not public prayer but private, for it is
not the place but the congregation that makes it public. But the minister
praying in an unknown language, his prayer is private; and the people when they
do pray at all, betake themselves to their private devotions.

Hereunto add examples and precedents. For the Patriarchs and Prophets under
the law, the Apostles and Primitive Church did always pray in a known tongue.
Neither can any sound testimony or approved example be produced to the
contrary for six hundred years after Christ. Vitalicus the Pope about the
year 666, which is the number of the beast whose name is (...), is thought to
have been the first author of this ordinance, concerning Divine service to be
done in Latin. Origin says, Contra Celsum, lib. 8.
That every nation in their mother tongue make their prayers unto God and yield
him due praises. So Basil, Epist. 63. ad cler. Neocaesar. And to the examples
of the ancient Church we may add the practice not only of the reformed
Churches, but also of the Ethiopians and Egyptians, Syrians, Armenians,
Moscovites, Moravians, and Sclavonians; all which at this day observe the
ancient form of praying in their vulgar languages.

De Cyrillo Moraviorum praesule, qui vixit 900, Aeneas Sylvius Hist. Bohem.
cap. 13. scribit, Ferunt Cyrillum cum Romae ageret Pontifici supplicasse ut
Sclavorum lingua ejus gentis hominibus quam baptizaverat rem Divinam faciens
uti posset. De qua re dum in sacro senatu disputaretur, essentque non pauci qui
contradicerent, auditam vocem tanquam de coelo in haec verba missam, OMNIS
SPIRITUS LAUDET DOMINUM, Chemnit. Exam. par. 2. 172. a.
ET OMNIS LINGUA CONFITEATUR EI. Indeque datum Cyrillo indultum, etc. They
report that Cyrill when he was at Rome sued unto the Bishop, that executing
Divine service he might use the tongue of the Sclavonians to the men of that
nation which he had baptized. About which when they disputed in the sacred
senate, and there were many that gainsaid it, a voice sent as it were from
heaven was heard uttering these words, Let every spirit praise the Lord, and
let every tongue confess unto him. And so Cyrills suit was granted, etc. And
yet will the Papists be counted Catholics, who in this point, as in many more,
go against the practice and doctrine universal of the Primitive Church for six
hundred years after Christ.

But, say they, the Latin tongue does better become Object.
the majesty of the Divine service, which is diminished in vulgar languages.

The commendation of prayer consists not in Answ.
the language, whereof there is no difference to be made in respect of God, but
in the sense of the words and devotion of him that prays. That which the
Apostle speaks against praying in unknown tongues, is as much verified
concerning the Latin tongue, in respect of them which understand it not, as
concerning any other.

Yea, but holy mysteries are not to be communicated Object.
to the vulgar, nor precious stones are to be cast unto dogs and hogs.

But holy mysteries are to be expounded to the Answ.
people of God; who may not be compared to dogs or swine, by whom are meant
profane persons and scorners of religion.

But since prayers have been made in vulgar Object.
tongues devotion is waxed colder in those parts and religion decayed.

Many are made worse by the preaching of the Answ.
Gospel; and where best means are used, the people if they be not the better
are the worse. In respect of them devotion is decayed, but in respect of all
sound Christians it flourishes. Neither was that true devotion or religion
which they say by vulgar prayers is decayed, but will worship and superstition,
in which men are usually more fervent then in the profession of the truth. For
such is the common hypocrisy of men, that when they think to satisfy the Lord
with outward observations, they will be forward in that kind; Micah 6. 7.

Now as touching private prayers in an unknown Of private prayers in an unknown
tongue, and the evils thereof.
tongue, it is certain that they which so pray do scarcely perform any duty
that is required, or exercise any grace which is to be showed in prayer. For
first, he prays without understanding, and therefore not as a man, but rather
as an unreasonable creature, as Augustine says; Quid hoc sit quod in In Psalm.
18. Expos. 2.
Psalmo dicitur, AB OCCULTIS MUNDA ME, intelligere debemus, ut humana ratione
non quasi avium voce cantemus: Nam and merulae and psittaci and pici and
hujusmodi volucres saepe ab hominibus docentur sonare quod nesciunt: What this
should be which is said in the Psalm, Cleanse me from secret sins, we ought to
understand, that we ought to sing with humane reason, and not (as it were) with
the voice of birds: For even black-birds, parrots, pies, and such like birds
are often taught by men to sound that which they do not understand. So Cassiod.
in Psalm. 46. Nemo sapienter facit quod non intelligit: No man does wisely that
which he understands not.

2. Neither does he pray in spirit, but the prayer not understood is a mere
lip-labor. The sound of the soul is the understanding. Neither is that any
speech of the soul which it does not understand, neither can they pray but with
continual wandering thoughts: For the mind will not attend that which it does
not understand: or if they do, they do but attend to the words, and not to the
matter, which they do not understand.

3. As he which prays before others in a language unknown to them, his
understanding is unprofitable to them, neither are they edified thereby; so
when a man prays in a language which himself understands not, his
understanding is unfruitful to himself. And as he which praying in an unknown
tongue to others, is to them a barbarian; so he which prays in a tongue which
he does not understand, is a barbarian to himself.

4. Neither can he pray with faith that his request shall be granted, when he
knows not what his request is.

5. What reverence is here showed to the majesty of God, when men presume to
babble before him they know not what? And what conceit have they of God, when
they hope by such lip-labor to satisfy for their sins and to merit eternal
life?

6. How can men either ask with fervencie of spirit or give thanks with
alacrity of heart when they do not so much as know whether they pray or give
thanks?

7. Bodily exercise profits little, 1. Tim. 4. 8. for God respects not the
mouth but the heart: But this prayer in an unknown tongue is a mere bodily
exercise; and so in the church of Rome is usually enjoined to penitents as a
penal work.

8. Battologie is to be avoided in prayer, Matthew. 6. But this babbling and
multiplying of prayers without understanding, especially joined with numbering
of them on their beads, as though by how much the more and longer so much more
meritorious and satisfactorie, is most gross battologie.

I conclude with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. 37, 38. If any man think himself to
be a prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge what the prophet has written
concerning the use of a known tongue in the service of God, to be the
commandments of God: But if any, says he, be ignorant let him be ignorant.

The like may be said of those who praying in their mother tongue, do not
understand what they say. For the prayer which is made without understanding
Prayer unprofitable in our mothertongue, if we pray not with understanding.
is also without faith, without feeling, without true devotion: neither is it a
lifting up of the mind but of the voice unto God, and a bare recital of a set
form of words without any inward grace; such as parrots might be taught to
make. Wherein many are so gross that they use the Creed and the ten
Commandments for prayers, and recite them with the like devotion as they do the
Lords prayer. I deny not but that it is good for the simpler sort to meditate
both of the Creed and of the Decalogue, the one containing the sum of that
which we are to believe, the other comprising the sum of that which we are to
do; and likewise to pray unto God that he would increase our faith in the one
and our obedience to the other. But neither of both is to be used as a form of
prayer, because in neither we do either ask any thing which we want, or give
thanks for that which we have received. Let men therefore which would call upon
God, labor for knowledge and understanding. For a prayer of five words (such
as was the Publicanes prayer, Deus, propitius esto mihi peccatori, God be
merciful unto me a sinner, uttered with understanding is better then a prayer
of an hour long not understood.

CHAP. XVIII. Of faith which is required in prayer.
SEcondly, in the mind is required faith. For faith being a persuasion, and
therefore called (...), the Psalm. 5. ^.
proper seat thereof is the mind. Howsoever it is to be granted, that where
this sound persuasion and assurance is in the mind, it works affiance and
hope in the heart, as a proper fruit and necessary effect thereof. And
therefore in the phrase of believing in this affiance is employed. For to
believe in God, is not only to believe that there is a God, and that he is
such an one as he has revealed himself in his word, but also that he is such
an one to me: as that the Father is my Father, etc. and consequently, that
therefore I repose my trust and affiance in him.

In invocation there is a double faith required: The A double faith required in
invocation.
one more general, apprehending the main promise of the Go^pel; whereby we
stand righteous before God in Christ, and whereby we are to be persuaded that
both we and our prayers are accepted of God in Christ: The other more special,
apprehending the special promises made to our prayers; whereby we are
persuaded that our special request shall be granted unto us. The former,
because it does generally belong to all invocation, as well thanksgiving as
prayer, is now to be entreated of. The other specially belongs to prayer, and
therefore in the special doctrine of prayer is to be considered. The former is
that persuasion or assurance of the soul, whereby we believing in Christ are in
the same measure persuaded of Gods love toward us in Christ, and therefore are
encouraged to come with confidence to the throne of grace, not doubting but
that both we and our pray^rs are acceptable unto God in Christ, Heb. 4. 16. And
this assurance of faith is grounded partly on the will and love of God, and
partly on the merits and intercession of our S^viour Christ. On the will of
God, 1. in general, appearing 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18.
in his commandments injoyning this duty, and his gracious promises. For if
God has commanded us to call upon him, and has graciously promised to hear
us, why should we doubt but that this our service is acceptable unto him? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. Pray continually; in all things give thanks: for this is the
will of God (the acceptable will of God in Christ) concerning you. But chiefly
on the promises of God is our faith to be grounded: Which promises are either
general; and those not only that he will hear and accept, but also
graciously reward this exercise of piety performed to him, Matthew. 6. 4.
Godliness has the promise both of this life and of that which is to come: or
special, for the granting of that which we desire, as Genesis 32. 9, 12. Exodus
32. 13. 2. Sam. 7. 27, 28. 1. Chron. 17. 25. Secondly, in particular, that the
thing which we either pray or praise be good; as being referred to Gods glory
and our good. For if it be not good, we are neither, if we have it not, to
desire it, and much less to pray for it, nor if we have it to praise God as
the author and giver of it. We must have warrant in Gods word that the thing
for which we call upon God be such as God has promised to give, otherwise our
prayer is turned into sin. And in this sense the Apostle says, Let every man
be persuaded in his mind: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.

Likewise our faith must be grounded on the love of God and goodness: First,
in general, that is, Psalm. 5. 7. his bounty and readiness to hear and reward
all those that call upon him. Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to
please God: For he that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that seek him. Romans 10. 12, 13. The Lord is rich toward all
that call upon him. Psalm. 86. 5. Thou art plenteous in mercy to all that call
upon thee. Isa. 65. 24. Secondly, in particular, to our selves in Christ: John
16. 27. Romans 8. 32. and 5. 5. and 8. 15, 16. Psalm. 55. 16, 17. I will call upon
God, and the Lord will save me. Evening and morning and at noon will I pray,
and he will hear my voice. Psalm. 4. 3. The Lord will hear when I call unto
him. Psalm. 56. 9. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this
I know, for God is for me. Psalm. 86. 7. In the day of my trouble I will call
upon thee, for thou will answer me.

In the merits of Christ, whereby we are accepted, and in his intercession,
whereby our prayers are made acceptable, Heb. 10. 22. And in this sense also we
are to pray in the name of Christ, that is, not only with desire that for
Christ's sake we may be heard, but also with persuasion and some measure of
assurance that for Christ's sake we shall be heard, John 16. 23. To call upon
God in the name of Christ implies two things: 1. To desire that for Christ's
sake we may be heard; 2. To believe that for Christ's sake we shall be heard.

That we are thus to pray in faith, appears both That we must pray in faith,
prove^, 1. By t^timonies;
by testimonies and reasons. Romans 10. 14. How shall they call upon him in whom
they have not believed? Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is imposible to please
God. For as Bernard says, How shall he please God whom God does not please?
for he that believes not makes God a liar.

1. God is to be worshipped with a willing ^ind 2. By reasons
and cheerful heart, 1. Chron. 28. 9. which cannot be done in prayer unless
we be persuaded that our prayers are accepted of God.

2. There is no access unto God but by Christ, John 14. 6. nor to Christ but
by faith. To come unto God, Heb. 11. 6. and unto Christ, is to believe in him,
John 6. 35. Through Christ we have boldness Ephesians. 3. 12.
and entrance with confidence; but it is by faith in him.

3. What benefit we reap by Christ we receive by faith: For which cause the
same benefits which we have by Christ are ascribed to faith: And therefore as
without Christ we can do nothing, John 15. 5. nothing belonging to a spiritual
life which may be acceptable to God: so without faith we can do nothing, and
much less pray as we ought. For without faith we are without Christ, and by
faith we are ingrafted into him. I believed, and therefore I spoke: that is,
with faith I called upon God, Psalm. 116. 10.

4. It is the prayer of faith which is available and acceptable, Jam. 5. 15, 16.

5. The promises made to prayer are to be understood with the condition of
faith: Matthew. 21. 22. If ye believe. Which may be understood of this more
general faith, or the special.

This is hard to be performed by a sinful man, Object.
etc. impossible to be performed by a Papist without special revelation. For
he comes in his own worthiness; yet knows not whether he be worthy or not.
Qualis ^rit ista oration, O Domine, ego quidem an exaudire me velis dubious sum:
sed quia anx^etate premor, ad te confugio; and si dignus sum, mih^ succurras.?
What a kind of prayer is this, O Lord, I am doubtful whether thou will hear
me or no: But because I am pressed with anxietie, I fly unto thee: and if I be
worthy, help me? Vide Calv. Instit. 3. 20. 12.

But we know that in our selves we are unworthy, Answ.
and yet believe that in Christ we are accepted. Our faith is grounded not on
our own worthiness in our selves, but on the love and promises of God, and on
the merits and intercession of Christ. For though we be sinners in our selves,
yet believing in Christ, God the Father justifies us. Though we know not how
to pray or what to ask as of our selves, yet God the Spirit makes intercession
for us, in helping our infirmities, and teaching us to pray according to God.
And though our prayers be unperfect and unworthy to be offered to God, yet
Christ our Savior sits at the right hand of his Father making intercession
for us, Romans 8. 26, 27, 33, 34. and perfuming the incense (that is, the prayers
of the faithful) with the odours of his own sacrifice, Revel. 8. 3.

CHAP. XIX. Of Humility required in prayer.
HItherto we have spoken of the mind: Now we are to enquire what is required in
the heart. In the heart three things are requisite; humility, reverence, and
heartinesse: The first respecting our selves; the second, God; the third, the
things for which we do invocate. For the first, That properly is said to be
humile which is even with the ground. Where therefore it is required that we
should humble our selves before the Lord when we call upon him, it is meant
that we should abase our selves as it were to the ground, (to which purpose the
faithful were wont in the Eastern Churches to cast themselves down to the
ground when they called upon God) laying aside all manner of conceit of our own
worthiness whereby we might be lifted up in our selves, and acknowledging our
own nullitie and unworthiness in our selves to appear in the presence of God.
For compared unto God we are as nothing, or as less then nothing, Isa. 40. 17.
And therefore when our Savior took upon him our nature, he is said as it were
to have annihilated himself, Phil. 2. 7. For this cause prayer in Hebrew is
called (...): which has affinity with the verb (...), which fignifieth to
fall or cast down our s^lves: To teach us to humble our selves before God when
we call upon him. And to the same purpose Augustine Tem 3. 632.
defines prayer thus, Oration est mentis devotio, i. conversio in Deum per pium
and humilem affectum: Prayer is the devotion of the mind, that is, a conversion
unto God by an holy and humble affection.

How necessary and profitable this is, to be endued The necessity and profit
of humility proved by (...) and ^xamples.
with humility when we call upon God, may appear both by the testimonies of
Gods word and examples of the godly. Psalm. 10. 17. Lord, thou hear the
prayer of the humble: thou will prepare their heart; thou will ^ause th^ne care
to h^are. Psalm. 7. 12. He forgets not the cry of the humble. Luke 18. 9. our
Savior tells us a parable of a Pharisee and a Publicane which went to pray:
The Pharisee comes in a conceit of his own worthiness; the Publicane, in
conscience of his sinfulness: The Pharisee in a brave manner thanketh God that
he was not a sinner like other men; the Publicane in most humble manner
acknowledges himself to be a sinner, and craveth pardon for his sin. But what
was the issue of their prayer? Which speedeth better? the humble sinner, or the
proud justitiarie? The Publicane goes home justified; the Pharisee remains
in his sin: according to that John 9. 41. And the reason is, because, as our
Savior says, every one that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he
that humbles himself shall be exalted. To this accords Psalm. 138. 6. The
Lord is high, yet he beholds the lowly: but the proud he knows a far off.
Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of the Lord (that is, that which he esteems
above all sacrifices) are a contrite spirit: a broken and contrite heart he
will not despise; meaning, that he does in special manner regard it. Esa. 66.
2. To him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit.
Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is near to them that are of a broken heart, and saves
such as be of a contrite spirit. For thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth ^ternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy places,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of them that be contrite, Esa. 57. 15.
Ecclus 35. 17. The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds, and will not
depart till the most High shall behold to execute judgment, etc. But to speak
more particularly: Humility has the promise both of temporal benefits, Prove.
22. 4. The reward of humility is riches, glory, and life: and spiritual, Prove.
3. 34. grace; Prove. 11. 4. wisdom; Prove. 22. 4. the fear of God; and finally,
blessedness, Matthew. 5. 3. And therefore let us follow the counsel of James,
chap. 4. 10. to cast down our selves before the Lord, and he will lift us up;
and of Peter, 1. epist. 5. 6. to deck our selves inwardly with lowliness of
mind: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

In the examples also of the godly we may observe Examples of the humility of
the godly.
that the most holy men have most abased themselves when they have come into
Gods presence. Abraham the father of the faithful making request to God in
behalf of the Sodomites acknowledges himself to be but dust and ashes, Genesis
18. 27. Jacob, who was called Israel because by his wresting in prayer he
prevailed with God, confesses himself less then the least of Gods mercies,
Genesis 32. 10. David a man according to Gods own heart in the humility of his
soul desires the Lord not to enter into judgment with him, etc. Psalm. 143. 2.
And 2. Sam. 6. 22. he professes that he would be vile before the Lord. Isaiah
the prophet, at whose prayer the sun went back, being admitted into the
presence of God, cries out that he was a man of polluted lips. Daniel, a man
greatly beloved, humbly acknowledges his sins, and refuses to come in his
own worthiness, Dan. 9. 18. and likewise Ezra, chap. 9. 6. The Centurion, of
whom our Savior testifies that he had not found the like faith in Israel,
Matthew. 8. 8. professes himself to be unworthy that Christ should come under
his roof. The woman of Syrophenicia, to whom our Savior gave testimony that
great was her faith, confesses her self to be but as a dog in comparison of
the Israelites, Mat. 15. 27. The repenting prodigal received to favor
confesses himself unworthy to be called a son, Luke 15. 21. The Publicane who
went home justified, showed Luke 18. 13.
great signs of humility. Let us therefore, avoiding the proud conceit of all
Pharisaical and Popish justitiaries, who are not afraid to present themselves
before God trusting in their own merits, follow the advice of Paul, Romans 12.
16. (...), that is, as some expound it, to go the same way with the humble: and
so we shall come to the same end of the way, which is the salvation of our
souls: the which unless we be humble even as children, we cannot attein; But
he that is humble as a child shall be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven,
Matthew. 14. 3, 4.

Now these two graces whereof I have last spoken, Faith and humility must be
joined together.
faith and humility, must necessarily go together. For we must not be so
humbl^d in regard of our unworthiness in our selves, but that notwithstanding
we are to trust in Gods mercy accepting of us in Christ; and we are so to have
affiance in the mercies of God and merits of Christ, that we disclaim all
worthiness in our selves. Here therefore they offend

1. Who come to God in a Pharisaicall conceit of their own worthiness, for
which they presume to be heard. If it be objected, that the faithful sometimes
Object.
allege their own piety in their prayers as an argument to obtein their
desires: as David, Psalm. 86. 2. Hezekiah, Isa. 58. 3. I answer; 1. They allege
Answ.
their own piety as a gift of God, and testimony of his favor, to confirm
their fait^, not ascribing it to their own desert, but to the favor and grace
of God, by which they do confess that they are what they are, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
For it is the nature of true faith to strip him where it is of all praise, that
all glory may be given unto God, Psalm. 115. 1. Non dignitatem suam sed
dignationem Divinam allegant: They allege not their own dignity but Gods
acceptance. 2. Because the promises of hearing our prayers are restrained to
the godly, they allege their piety as a testimony to their own souls that the
promise belongs to them; 1. John 3. 22. Non hoc dico quin acc^a Bernard. De
triplici modo orationis, se^m. 5. ^ol. 22. D.
gratia siduciam donet orandi: Sed non oportet ut in (...) constituat quisquam
fiduciam impetr andi. Hoc solum conferunt haec promissa dona, ut ab cadem
misericordia quae tribuit haec sperentur etiam ampliora: that is, I do not say
this because grace received does give confidence in praying: For none ought in
it to place their trust of obteining. But these gifts promised do only
confer this, that of that mercy which gives these things we may also hope
for greater. More particularly for David's prayer, Preserve my soul, for I am
(...), one on whom thou have showed great mercy: save thy servant that
trusts in thee: For Gods promise is, not to fail them that put their trust in
him. For Hezekiah; The Lord had promised David, That his sons, if they walked
before him in uprightness, should not want a son to succeed them in the
crown. Whereas therefore the prophet Isaiah brought this message to Hezekiah
being sick, that he should die; having yet no issue, he desires the Lord to
remember that he had walked uprightly before him, and therefore entreats the
Lord, that according to his promise he might not die without a son to succeed
him: and so obtained the lengthening of his days for fifteen years; in which
time God granted him a son to succeed him.

2. Those that pray ambitiously to be seen and praised of men: for such
hypocrites have their reward, Matthew. 6. 5. Nisi humilitas omnia quaecunque
August. Epist. 56.
been fecimus praecesserit and comitetur and consecuta fuerit, and praeposita
quam intueamur, and apposita cui adhaereamus, and imposita qua reprimamur, jam
nobis de ali^uo bono facto gaudentibus totum extorquet e manu superbia. Vitia
quippe caetera in peccatis, superbia vero etiam in recte factis timenda est, ne
illa quae laudabiliter facta sunt ipsius laudis cupiditate amittantur: Unless
humility do precede, accompany and follow all whatsoever we have well done,
and be preposed that we may behold it, and apposed that we may adhere unto it,
and imposed that thereby we may be repressed, pride will wring out of our hand
all we have done, whilst we rejoice of our doing any good deed. For other
vices are to be feared in our sinful actions; but pride only is to be feared
in our good deeds, lest those things which are laudably done be lost by our
greedy coveting of praise.

3. Those that pray with spiritual pride and ostentation, as the Brownists,
being proud that they are able to conceive as it were ex tempore a prayer unto
God, and with such variety as to use no set form, nor twice to use the same
words.

4. Those that by their prayer look to satisfy for their sins and to merit
at the hands of God, as the Papists. For prayer made with such a proud conceit
is abominable unto God.

CHAP. XX. Of Reverence required in prayer, and Heartinesse.
THe second thing required in the heart is a reverence of the Majesty of God to
whom we speak, according to David's both advice, Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord
with reverence, and rejoice with trembling; and practice, Psalm. 5. 7. I will
come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy (that is, trusting therein)
and in ^he fear or reverence of thee will I worship toward thy holy temple.

That we are thus to call upon God, I shall not need to prove: For if when we
are to speak to a Prince, we are touched with great reverence of an earthly
Majesty, how are we to be affected when we speak unto God? And if the blessed
angels being in Gods presence and sounding forth his praise, are described in
the Scriptures as having six wings, whereof two pair serve to cover their face
and their feet, Isa. 6. 2, 3. thereby betokening their wonderful reverence of
God; how much more should we, who inhabit these houses of clay, subject to
infirmities and corrupted with sin, be stricken with an awful reverence of
God?

If therefore we did but seriously consider, That we Meditations to stir up
reverence.
are to speak unto God, and did set him before our eyes who is in Majesty most
glorious, and therefore to be reverenced; for power omnipotent, and therefore
to be feared, Luke 12. for greatness or infiniteness rather in every place,
and therefore present with us to hear what we say and to behold what we do;
for knowledge omniscient and a searcher of the heart, and therefore thoroughly
acquainted with what disposition and affection we do come before him; for
holiness and justice a most pure Spirit, and therefore will be worshipped in
spirit and truth; finally, who is, as Malachi speaks, our Father, and
therefore to be reverenced; our Lord, and therefore to be feared, chap. 1. 6.
If, I say, we did set him before our eyes, and our selves in his presence (as
we ought always to do, but especially when we call upon him) it cannot be but
that we shall be touched with great reverence of his glorious Majesty, and
therefore shall behave our selves accordingly, doing speaking thinking nothing
but that which may become his presence, and whereof we may be bold to admit him
to be the hearer and the judge; all light behavior, all wandering thoughts
being far removed and abandoned, and we for the time being elevated above all
earthly cogitations and having our conversation in heaven, supposing (as
Chrysostom says) our selves to be in the midst of the Angels, and performing
the like exercise with them.

You see our duty: But what is our practice? Do no we vile wretches when we
present our selves before the Lord behave our selves many times with less
reverence or regard then if we were speaking to a mortal man that is our
supe^iour? Insomuch that we hold it for good advice, (as indeed it is,
respecting our weakness) In such sort to speak to men as if God did hear us, so
to speak to God as if man did hear us. And is not this an evidence that we are
ca^nall, that our hearts are affected with no more then our senses apprehend,
and that we want those eyes of faith which Moses had, Heb. 11. 27. whereby we
might be moved to behave our selves in the presence of God as seeing him that
is invisible.

Now to move us both to humility and reverence, let us consider, as Solomon
advises Eccles 5. 1, 2. that God to whom we speak is in the heaven, full of
majesty and power; (which consideration our Savior also teaches us to have
in the beginning of our prayer, Matthew. 6. 9.) and we which do speak are on the
earth, base and vile, not only in respect of our mould, being but dust and
ashes, but especially in respect of our sins, whereby we have made our selves
unworthy to appear in his presence. And unto both these we are excited Psalm.
95. which is prefixed as a preparative to our Liturgy, v. 6. Come let us
worship and fall down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker: For he is our
God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands.

The third thing is heartinesse, devotion, or ardour Of heartinesse, ferven
cie, and devotion r^quired in prayer.
of the mind, when we are thoroughly affected with those things whereof we
speak, calling upon God with our whole hearts. For if that be good counsel
which the wise Solomon gives, That what we do we do it with all our might,
Eccles 9. 10. it is especially to be followed in prayer, wherein we are not to
be cold or careless^. This heartinesse in prayer, is servencie or earnestness
of desire; in thanksgiving, alacrity and cheerfulness: the former arising
from the sense of our want, the latter from the sense and experience of Gods
goodness toward us: And it is that which gives wings to our prayers, and
causes them to ascend before God: This is called li^ting up our prayer, Isai.
37. 4. Jer. 7. 16.

Here therefore two things are to be avoided: The first is coldness; when men
call upon God without sense either of their wants in prayer, or of Gods
blessings in thanksgiving; calling upon God for fashion or custom sake, usu
mag^s quam sensu orantes, praying rather out of use then sense. Such a prayer
wanting lively affections is dead, and therefore counterfeit and hypocritical,
and a mere bodily worship. For this is to call upon God with our mouths but
not with our hearts; this is to pray without desire, and to give thanks without
grace in our hearts. The other is taedium in orando, weariness in praying;
That is, when men's hearts being set on other matters, all time that is bestowed
in prayer is thought too long: and therefore the prayer as it is unwillingly
begun so is it wearisomely performed, the end of the prayer many times being
more desired then the end for which prayer was ordained. But our invocation
must be as a free-willoffering, and our service of God must be performed with a
willing mind: neither is that to be accounted a service of the soul which is
without either the understanding (as I said before) or the will.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Gesture to be used in prayer.
HItherto we have spoken of those things which in the action of Invocation are
required in the soul. Now we are to speak of those things which are required in
the body: For though bodily exercise being severed from the inward worship is
little worth, yet being joined with the inward it is of some moment. For where
the Lord commands any duty or forbids any sin, there also he commands
or forbids the signs and appearances thereof; and therefore where he
requires the inward worship of the soul in prayer, as honorem facti, the
honor of the deed, there also he requires the outward of the body when it may
be conveniently exercised, as honor^m signi, the honor of the sign. Now our
bodies and members thereof, as The signs of worship ought outwardly to be
expressed with our bodies: and the reasons why; 1. Reason.
they are the instruments so also the indices and manifesters of our souls: and
therefore the signs of those graces which we contein in our souls must (when
they may conveniently) be expressed in the body; and that for these reasons: 1.
As at the first the Lord created and afterward redeemed both our souls and
bodies, so must we worship him in both, 1. Cor. 6. 20. therefore where the
worship of God may be performed in both conveniently, both must be used.

2. In the two first commandments where the 2. Reason.
Lord forbids this outward worship which we call honorem signi to be given
to any other, there he requires that it should be performed to himself, and he
is jealous thereof. And so in other places, as the yielding of outward worship
to any other is condemned, Isai. 2. 9. Psalm. 44. 20. and the denial thereof
commended, Dan. 3. in the three children; 1. Kings 18. 19. so the performance
thereof unto God is commanded, Isai. 45. 23. Psalm. 95. 1, 2, 6.

3. Neither is it for nothing that the holy Ghost, 3. Reason.
where mention is made of invocation, is so careful everywhere almost to
speak of the voice of the mouth and gesture of the body. Yea, so much he
seems to esteem the outward worship, that as the sign many times is put for
the thing signified, so the voice of the mouth and gesture of the body are
oftentimes put for invocation it self; as we shall show in the particulars.

4. The gesture and voice do greatly serve to help 4. Reason.
both the atte^tion of the mind and intention of the affections; as every man's
experience can testify. In public prayers they are also good means to excite
and stir up one another.

In the outward worship to be performed in invocation Of the ge^ures which
ought to be used in prayer*
we are to consider the gesture of the body and the speech of the mouth: For
neither of which can there any certain universal rule be prescribed as
necessary to be observed always in private prayer. In public prayer we are
to follow the custom of the Church where we live, if it be without scandal and
superstition. For as there is commanded inward unanimitie in the public
assemblies, so also outward unif^mity: and to dissent from the Church in these
outward things, being (as I said) free from scandal and superstition, is
schismatic.

Now the Church is to direct it self by the examples of the godly recorded in
the Scriptures, and practice of the Primitive Church. First for gesture:
Concerning which thus much in general may be prescribed: 1. That it be decent
and comely, according to the general rule, 1. Cor. 14. 40. The which decency
is for the more part to be measured according to the custom of the country.
2. That it be correspondent to the affections and disposition of the soul,
serving as to express so also to incite and enlarge the same, otherwise the
devoutest gestures are but histrionicall, that is, hypocritical.

The variety of gestures mentioned in the Scriptures do show that we are not
perpetually tied to any particular as necessary in it self: but that in
themselves they are indifferent and arbitrarie if not determined and prescribed
by the Church. By the examples of the godly in the Scriptures admonemur Ad
Simplician. lib. 2. qu. 4. To^. 4.
(says Augustine) non esse scriptum quomodo corpus constituatur ad or andum,
dummodo animus Deo praesens peragat intentionem suam: We are admonished that it
is not written how the body is to be disposed to pray, so that the mind
present with God do perform its intention. But first I will show the variety
of gestures which have been and may be used; and then I will commend that which
is most convenient to be observed usually.

The gestures to be considered in prayer are either of the whole body, or of
the parts. As 1. the turning of the body toward some part of the heavens, east
or west, etc. Among the Jews it was required and observed, that wheresoever
they were when they prayed they turned themselves toward the temple, wherein
was the ark, which was a type of Christ, in whom alone we are to come unto God.
If therefore they were in the east from it, they were to turn into the west;
and to pray toward the east, turning their backs toward the temple, was a
fault, Ezekiel. 8. 16. Daniel, when the edict was given against prayer, went into
his house, and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, ^e
kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and gave thanks before his God as he
did aforetime, Dan. 6. 10. And this was first intended in the building of the
temple and placing of the ark there, 1. Kings 8. 29, 30, 35, 38, 44, 48. where
Solomon by the spirit prays, that if any being absent from the temple should
pray toward it, they might be heard. The ancient Christians prayed toward the
east: D^mascene Vide Damas. De o^thod. fide, lib. 4. cap. 13. 1. Praying
toward the (...).
says, Trad^tionem esse Apostolicam ut ad orientem convers^ precemur, That it
is an Apostolical tradition that we should pray turning our selves to the
east. And to that end the Churches were built east and west. In which respect
we are in public prayer to conform our selves to their practice, putting no
superstition therein. But in it self the thing is indifferent which way we turn
our selves; because God who is in heaven is everywhere present, and heaven it
self is every way alike distan^ from us; and Christ our Savior, to whom we are
to turn in our prayer as the Jews to the temple, is ascended into heaven, and
thither are we to direct our prayers, as the Jews did to the temple.

2. Standing: For that is a token both of reverence 2. Standing.
and of service: as 2. Kings 5. 25. 1. Sam. 16. 21, 22. 1. Kings 10. 8. Job 29.
8. Dan. 1. 4. Psalm. 135. 2. and 134. 2. This gesture is used by Abraham, Genesis
18. 22, 23. and 19. 27. by Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20. 5. by the Publicane, Luke
18. 13. by Stephen, Acts 7. 59. approved by our Savior Christ, Mark 11. 25.
When ye stand praying; and practiced by him, John 11. 41.

3. Kneeling: Which is a fit gesture to signify 3. Kneeling.
our humility and earnestness also in prayer, and is warranted both by the
word of God, as Psalm. 95. 6. Con^erre 1. Kings 8. 22. with v. 54. and 2 Chronicles.
6. 12, 13.
Isai. 45. 23. insomuch that sometime it is put for prayer, Ephesians. 3. 14. and
by the practice of the godly, as of Solomon, 2. Chron. 6. 12, 13. Daniel, chap.
6. 10. Ezra, chap. 9. 5. Stephen, Acts 7. 60. Peter, Acts 9. 40. Paul, Acts 20.
36. and finally by the example of all examples, Christ himself, Luke 22. 41.
Which serves to confute certain heretics called Damasc. De haeres.
Agnoe^ae, who always stood in prayer, holding it unlawful to kneel.

4. Prostration, or falling on the ground, or falling 4. Prostration.
on the face: A gesture of the greatest humiliation, but not in use among us,
or in these parts of the world: but used by Moses and Aaron, Number. 16. 23. and
20. 6. by Joshua, chap. 5. 14. by Ezekiel, chap. 9. 8, 11, 13. and by our
Savior Christ, Matthew. 26. 39.

5. Sitting: Which though among us it do not 5. Sitting.
seem a fit gesture in public prayer, yet privately it has been and may be
used. Examples: of David, 2. Sam. 7. 18. of Elias, 1. Kings 19. 4. and when he
put his face between his knees praying earnestly for rain, Jam. 5. 18. he
prayed sitting as Augustine says; Ad Simplic. lib. 2. quaest. 4.
Sede^s or avit Elias quando pluviam or ando impetravit, Elias prayed sitting
when by prayer he obtained rain.

6. Lying in bed: So David, Psalm. 6. 6. and Hezekiah, 6. Lying in bed.
Isai. 38. 2. and is usually practiced by the faithful not only in their
sickness but at other times.

7. Walking, riding, journeying, Genesis 24. 12, 36. 7. Walking, riding, etc.
Jehoshaphat in his chariot, 2. Chron. 18. 31.

The gesture of the parts.

First, the uncovering of the head in men, which Of the gesture of the several
parts: 1. The uncovering of the head in men.
among us is an usual sign of reverence. In the female sex it is otherwise;
in which the covering of their head and face is noted in the Scriptures to have
been a token of subjection, 1. Cor. 11. 4, 7. But in men it is a fit gesture to
betoken their reverence, being the uncovering and so abasing of the highest and
chiefest part; and by some is called depositio magnificentiae, the laying aside
of magnificence: as we see in the four and twenty elders, Apoc. 4. 10. which
fell down and cast their crowns before the throne.

2. Of the eyes; as the lifting up or casting down 2. Of the ^yes.
of them. The former is most usual, betokening the lifting up of our hearts
unto God, and our faith in expecting help from him; and is sometime put for
prayer it self, Psalm. 123. 1, 2. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that
dwell in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants, etc. Psalm. 141. 8.
But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord, in thee is my trust, Psalm. 25. 15.
2. Chron. 20. 12. To omit other examples, Christ himself is ofen noted in the
Gospel to have lift up his eyes to heaven when he called upon God: as Matthew.
14. 19. John 11. 41. and 17 1.

The casting down of the eyes is a note of great dejection and humiliation,
whereby we being confounded in our selves, as knowing our selves unworthy to
look up unto heaven, do cast down our eyes on the earth. Example, the
Publicane, Luke 18.

3. Of the hands. 3. Of the hands.


As 1. the Lifting up and stretching forth of the hands: A gesture fit to
express our humility, our earnest affection, as being the gesture of
suppliants and earnest suitors; as also to testify our faith and hope, and to
signify the lifting up of our souls. And it is a gesture of such moment that
it also is put for prayer, Exodus 9. 33. Psalm. 28. 2. and 44. 20. and 63. 4. and
88. 9. Isai. 1. 15. Examples, in Moses, Exodus 9. 29, 33. and 17. 11. David,
Psalm. 141. 2. and 143. 6. Solomon, 1. Kings 8. 22, 54. It is commanded Psalm.
134. 2. Lam. 2. 19. and 3. 41.

The other gesture of the hands is the Knocking of the breast: Which is most
fit in deprecation; for thereby is signified both our acknowledgement of guilt,
and an earnest desire of pardon; as Luke 18. 13. and 23. 48.

Thus have you heard the several gestures: Among which I would commend unto you
as fit most usually and ordinarily to be observed, uncovering of the head in
men, standing, or rather (if we may conveniently) kneeling, lifting up of the
hands and of the eyes to heaven. For whereas in the soul are required faith,
humility, reverence, and ardour of affection, which we are to express in the
bodily gestures, whereby we give God honorem signi, the honor of the sign;
these gestures are most fit to express these inward graces. For the uncovering
of the head signifies reverence and humility; which also are more expressed by
kneeling: Faith and hope is represented in the lifting up of the eyes and
hands; in which also, as in kneeling, the ardour of affection is expressed.

But here our greatest care must be (because it is easy to observe these
outward gestures) to give God in truth the inward worship of the soul as well
as the outward of the body, which without the other is hypocritical: And
therefore as we uncover our heads, so to lay aside all opinion and conceit of
our own worthiness, and with all reverence to set our selves in the presence
of God; and as we kneel outwardly, so to bow the knees of our hearts and to
humble our souls before the Lord; and with our eyes and hands, to lift up our
souls unto God who is in the heavens. And withal we must be careful to lift
up pure and innocent hands to God, 1. Tim. 2. 8. For if our hands be stained
with sin or polluted with blood, the Lord will not hear, Isai. 1. 15. Quid
manuum in oratione vult extensio? Ch^ysosi. Hom ad pop. 79. T. 4. page 643. ^.
Hae multis sceleribus ministerium exhibent, and propterea jubemur eas
extollere, ut orationis mi^isterium sit eis vinculum nequitiae and a malitia
separatio; ut cum rapturus vel oppressurus vel alterum sis percussurus,
recorderis quo^ has ad Deum pro patronis emissurus es, and per has illud
spirituale sacrificium offerre debeas, nec illas confundere, nec actionis
pravae ministerio fiduci a privar^. Eas igitur emunda per eleemosynam, per
misericordiam, per indigentium tutelam, and ita ^as offer a^ orationem: that
is, What means the stretching out of the hands in prayer? These offer their
service to much wickedness; and therefore we are commanded to lift them up,
that their ministry in prayer may be unto them a bond to tie them from
wickedness and a separation from maliciousness: That when thou art about to
use rapine or oppression, or to strike another, thou may remember that thou
must lift up these hands to God for thy patrones and benefactours, and that
with them thou must offer unto God a spiritual sacrifice, and therefore
ought not to confound or disable them, nor spoil them of their confidence by
making them instruments in an evil action. Cleanse them therefore by alms, by
mercy, and defense of the needy, and so offer and lift them up in prayer.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Voice to be used in prayer.
COncerning the voice it may be demanded whether Quest.
it be needful in prayer, seeing the Lord hears as well and regards more
the prayer of the heart then the voice of the mouth. And this does Elias
signify 1. Kings 18. 27. when he mocketh Baals priests, saying, Cry aloud: he
is a god, insinuating that if he were a god he could hear them though they did
not cry aloud. I answer, That the Answ.
voice is needful not in respect of the Lord, who hears and respects
especially the cry of the heart, but in respect of us and others with whom we
pray, and therefore is to be used when it may conveniently, for the reasons
before alleged. Indeed sometimes in the private prayer of one alone it is more
convenient to use the inward speech of the heart alone, when the outward speech
of the tongue cannot be used but that it shall be heard or perceived of others.
For private prayer must be made in secret, as Christ commands Matthew. 6. 6.
lest we pray, or at least seem to pray, that we may be heard or seen of men.
When as therefore we are occasioned to pray by our selves alone in presence of
others, we must pray in the closet of our heart, using no voice nor making any
outward show of prayer: and the Lord which sees the secrets of the heart will
reward openly. Thus Abraham's servant standing at the well, unto which was
ordinary resort, prayed in his heart, Genesis 24. 45. and Moses being among the
people, Exodus 14. 15. and Nehemiah being in the Kings presence, Neh. 2. 4. and
Annah the mother of Samuel in the presence of Eli, 1. Sam. 1. 13. Otherwise in
private prayer it is most convenient, and in prayer with others, whether in the
Church or family, it is necessary that the voice in prayer should be used: for
otherwise those that are present cannot consent to our prayers and say Amen;
neither can they be edified thereby unless they hear and understand the
prayer.

Our duty is (as I have said before) to worship God both in body and soul: And
as we are to glorify God with all our members and powers, so especially by our
tongue and speech: For therefore has God given us the faculty of spee^h above
other creatures, that we might not only be the matter of his glory as they
are, but also the instruments to sound forth his praise. And therefore is our
tongue called our glory, Psalm. 16. 7. and 108. ^ because it is that instrument
by which we are to set forth Gods glory.

Moreover, as the gesture of the body so much more the voice of the tongue does
serve both to stir up the affections of the heart and also to contein the
cogitations from wandering about other matters. And of such moment is the voice
in prayer, as that first the voice, or cry with the voice, is put sometime for
the prayer it self, 1. Sam. 7. 8, 9. Psalm. 66. 17. and 77. 1. and 142. 1.
Secondly, the holy Ghost in many places where he speaks of invocation is
careful to mention the voice; as in the places even now cited out of the
Psalms, and elsewhere, as Psalm. 71. 23, 24. and 119. 171. my lips shall utter
praise. For which cause prayer and praise are called the calves of our lips,
Hos. 14. 2. Thirdly, David prays, Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
show forth thy praise, Psalm. 51. 14, 15.

But here we must always remember, that with our voice we must lift up our
hearts to God, and that the cry of the voice must proceed from the cry of the
heart: For the Lord respects the heart; and if the cry come not from thence
he will not hear it, Hos. 7. 13, 14. no, though men should cry loud in his
ears, Ezekiel. 8. 18.

The voice used in prayer is either inarticulate, or articulate.

The inarticulate is that which is uttered in sighing, groaning, and weeping:
For the children of God many times do best express their desires by sighs and
groans and tears* The which proceed from an humble and servent spirit, and are
wrought in us by the spirit of God, which teaches us to pray with sighs that
cannot be expressed, Romans 8. 26. And he that searches the heart knows what
is the mind of the spirit, v. 27. For as David says Psalm. 38. 9. Lord, all my
desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Thou tellest my
wanderings: put my tears into thy August. ^pist. 121.
bottle; are they not in thy book? Psalm. 56. 8. Plerunque hoc negotium plus
gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur, plus sletu quam affat^. For the most part
this business is acted more with groans then with words, more with weeping
then with speech. Hezekiah professes that he did chatter like a crane or a
swallow, and did mourn like a dove, Isai. 38. 14.

The articulate voice is the external speech it self whereby the prayer is
expressed: Wherein we are to consider two things, the words which be uttered,
and the language wherein they are uttered.

In the words we are to con^ider the quantity, the What is to be considered in
our words. Prolixity not to be affected. Rea^ons.
quality, and the form.

For the quantity; We must not affect prolixity, as though for the multitude of
our words we did look to be heard. Neither may we use any superfluity of words
or idle repetitions: First, because our Savior Christ forbids all battology
in our prayers, Matthew. 6. 7. which Theophylact interprets (...), futilitie:
Hesychius, (...), idle and unseasonable speech. But the meaning may best be
gathered from the notation: for, as the Etymologist says, the word is
compounded (...) of Battus a certain Grecian who was accustomed to adorn images
with long and ted^ous inscriptions which were full of vain repetitions: For so
Ovid also speaks of him, Montibus, inquit, [sc. Battus] erant, and erant in
montibus illis: and therefore he says it signifies (...), verbosity. Which
agrees with the exposition of Christ, who is the best expounder of himself:
For in the words following he calls it (...), for so he says, (...). But
when ye pray, use not vain repetitions as the heathen do: for they think that
they shall be heard for their much speaking. So that (...), according to the
meaning of our Savior, is in p^ayer to use multitude of words and idle
repetitions with this conceit, That for the multitude of our words we shall be
heard.

Secondly, For the reason which our Savior gives; Christians in their prayer
must not be like to the heathen. The heathen affected prolixitie and used
superfluity of words and idle repetitions with this persuasion, that for their
much babbling they should be heard. But why must not Christians be like the
heathen? Because the God on whom we call is most unlike. The heathen might well
imagine concerning their gods (the best whereof were men deceased) that by
multitude of words they might be persuaded; and that always they did not
hearken unto them, as being otherwise employed, as Elias tells Baals priests,
1. Kings 18. 27. and therefore thought it needful to repeat the same things
often, that if they did not hear them at one time they might at another. As we
see those priests of Baal to call upon him from morning, v. 26, 29. until the
time of the evening sacrifice, crying again and again, O Baal, hear us. But
the true God on whom we call, he is our heavenly Father; and therefore for his
love most ready and willing to hear us, even before we call upon him, Isai.
65. 24. And for his knowledge he knows what we stand in need of before we
pray, as our Savior shows v. 8. Which may be a third reason.

Fourthly, Solomon, Eccles 5. 1, 2. dehorteth from the same fault by two
reasons: First, God is in heaven, and thou on earth: therefore let thy words be
few. God sits in the heavens, as his throne full of majesty, power and
glory; and we are on the earth, base and vile, being as nothing in comparison
of him: therefore in great humility and reverence we are to speak unto him,
framing and moderating our speech so as there be nothing idle or superfluous
therein. For when a man is to speak to his prince or any whom he does
reverence, he will labor that his speech may be pithy, avoiding all vain, idle
and superfluous talk.

Fifthly, Because in multitude of words folly is committed; For as multitude of
business causes dreams, so multitude of words argues folly, v. 2, 3.

Sixthly, If in our speech with men ther^ wants not iniquity in multitude of
words, as Solomon says Prove. 10. 19. and if of every idle word men must give
an account at the day of judgment, as our Savior testifi^th Matthew. 12. 36. If
it be true as one says, Non est ejusdem and multa and oppor^na d^ere; (...),
i. sejuncta sunt haec, (...) how much more are these true of our speech with
God, wherein all superfluity of idle words is joined with irreverence and
abuse of the majesty of God?

Seventhly, Plato, though an heathen Philosopher, yet in his wisdom, for which
he was called divine, he saw that brevitie and pithinesse in prayer was to be
affected rather then prolixite; and therefore prefers the short prayer of
the Lacedaemonians, That God would give them (...), Al^ibiad. 2.
far before the longer prayers of the Athenians, wherein they studying to be
long, uttered many things which neither became the majesty of God nor were
expedient for themselves: and therefore he says, as if he had read that
counsel of Solomon, (...).

But never did the heathen so grossly offend in their battologie as the
Papists at this day; who numbering upon their beads their prayers which
themselves understand not, persuade themselves that the more often they do
repeat their Pater-nosters and their Ave-Maries, the more satisfactory and
meritorious their prayer is before God: yea, and to the greater multitude of
such idle repetitions the Popes have granted the greater indulgences. For
whereas according to the invention of Dominick their rosary or string of beads
consists of 55 beads, whereof five (that is, every eleventh) be greater, to
signify that to every Paternoster they must recite ten Ave-Mari^; they have
devised since that time the Ladies Psalter containing three rosaries, that is,
(...) fifteen Pater-noster^, an hundred and fifty Ave-Maries, according to the
number of David's Psalms. Not to speak now of that Ladies Psalter; in which
what is spoken in David's Psalms of God or Christ our Lord, is transferred to
the virgin Mary most sacrilegiously and blasphemously: to the saying whereof
diverse Popes have given large indulgences, which in all arise to threescore
thousand years pardon.

What then? is it not lawful to make long prayers? I answer, That prayer is
not condemned of battologie or too much prolixity, wherein nothing is
superfluous, neither is made with that opinion that for the lengths sake it
shall be heard. Where is variety of good matter uttered with the attention of
the mind and vigor of affection, there the longer we continue in prayer the
better it is. We are exhor^ed in the Scriptures to continue in prayer, and to
watch in the same with thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2. and our Savior himself, to
give us example, sometime continued in prayer whole nig^ts. Absit ab oratione,
says Spist. 21. page 403.
Augustine, multalocutio; sed non desit multa precatio si fervens perseverat
intentio: Let much speech be absent from prayer; but let not much praying be
wanting if the intention persevere to be fervent. But we are to moderate the
length of our prayers according to the measure of grace received, of faith and
devotion, appearing both in the attention of the mind and intention of the
affections: for, as Augustine says, Intentio sicut non est obtundenda si
perdurare I^d page 402
non potest, ita si (...) non ^ito est relinquenda: As the intention is not to
be dulled if it cannot hold out, so if it can last it is not to be easily left.

Howbeit men may pray long and continue in prayer though their prayers be not
long. To which purpose Chrysostom gives this advice, Deum Homil. 74. Tom. 4.
page 641, 642.
orans non longos extendat sermones, nec in longum orationem producat, sed
pauca simpliciaque dicat verba. Non ^nim in verborum multitudine sed in mentis
solertia positum est ut exaudiatur. Oportet igitur orantem neque longos
extendere sermones and jugiter orare. Breves enim and frequentes orationes
fieri Christus and Paulus praeceperant parvis ex intervallis. Nam si sermonem
in longum extender is, in negligentiam frequenter l^psus multam diabolo
surrependi facultatem dederis, and supplantandi and abducendi cogitationem ab
his quae dicuntur. Si vero continuas and crebras orationes facias, totumque
tempus interpo^ans frequentia, facile poteris modestiam exhibere, and ipsas
orationes cum multa facies solertia: He that prays unto God let him not make
long speeches, nor draw out his prayer into length, but let him utter few and
simple words: For his hope of being heard is not placed in multitude of words,
but in the right disposition of the mind. Therefore he that prays must not
extend his speech to a great length in a continued prayer: For our Savior
Christ and S. Paul have enjoined short and frequent prayers to be made, with
small pauses between them; for if thou draw out thy speech in a continued
length, thou will become negligent, and wilt give great occasion to the devil
of stealing in and of supplanting thee, and of withdrawing thy thoughts from
those things which are spoken. But if thou continuest and make many prayers,
and throughout the whole time do refresh them with frequencie, thou may
use moderation and make thy prayers with much skill.

Agreeable to which advice was the practice of the faithful in Egypt; of whom
Augustine, Dicuntur ^pist. 121. 402.
fratres in Aegypto crebras quidem habere orationes, sed eas tamen brevissimas
and raptim quodammodo jaculatas, ne illa vigilanter erecta (quae oranti
plurimum necessaria est) per productiores moras evanescat atque hebetetur
intentio: The brethren in Egypt are reported to have made many prayers, but
withal such as were very brief, and in a manner suddenly darted, lest that
intention vigilantly raised (which is very necessary to him that prays)
should by long continuance vanish and be blunted. And herein our Savior Christ
has given us a precedent. Matthew. 26. 39, 42, 44. Wherefore howsoever some do
carp at the short prayers in our Liturgy, calling them shreds, and wishing
that in one continued prayer all our requests should be joined; notwithstanding
the wisdom of those learned and godly men who out of the most ancient
Liturgies compiled ours is to be commended, who considering that our long
continued prayer would to the greatest sort seem tedious and breed distraction
and wandering thoughts, have set forth many short prayers to avoid
wearisomenesse, and to keep the mind of the people attentive.

CHAP, XXIII. Of the quality of our speech in our prayer; and of the form
which is to be used.
AS touching the quality of our speech; As we need not to be curious in respect
of the style, because God looks to the uprightness of the heart rather then
the elegancie of the speech, so must we not be more careless and negligent for
the manner of speech then we would be if we were to speak to any mortal man.
And because we are but too carnal, let us make use of Malachi's rule, chap. 1.
8. Offer it to thy Prince; that is, Let us examine our selves whether we be as
careful to speak unto the Lord as we would be unto a Prince: and herein also
let us show that reverence which we ow unto the Lord. The godly in the
Scriptures have been very exquisite and accurate in those prayers and Psalms
which are recorded in the Scriptures.

Concerning the form it may be demanded, Whether Whether a set form of prayer
may be used.
we may use a set form of prayer: for that is denied by our Separatists,
insomuch that they hold it unlawful to pray in that set form which Christ
himself has prescribed. But they are plainly confuted by the words of our
Savior, Luke 11. 2. When ye pray say, Our Father, etc. unless they will
persist in their contradiction against Christ himself, forbidding us when we
pray to say, Our Father.

Besides that prayer of Christ there are other set forms in the Scriptures
prescribed to be used in the Church of God. The whole book of the Psalms was
penned and committed to Asaph and other musicians, as is mentioned in diverse of
their titles, to the end that they might be sung in the congregation. More
especially, the ninety second Psalm was penned to be used on the Sabbath Day;
and the hundred and second Psalm is A prayer of (or f^r) the afflicted when he
is overwhelmed and pours out his complaint before the Lord.

But why may not a set form be used? Because the faithful praying in the holy
Ghost, as Jude speaks v. 20. must pray as they are moved by the Spirit, and
not as they are provided beforehand.

The assistance of the Spirit is seen not so much in helping our invention,
(The gift of invention or conceiving a prayer, is a gift of the Spirit, but a
common gift, and not a proper grace of the sanctifying Spirit: for a man of a
present wit and good speech wanting the spirit of sanctification may do much
that way, especially if he be studied in Divinity) as in these three; 1. in
rectifying our judgment, teaching us to ask that which is good for us,
especially in time of affliction. For we being led by sense know not what to
ask; but the Spirit helps our insirmities, and teaches us to pray according
to God, asking those things which tend to his glory and our good. 2. His help
is seen in inslaming our affections, teaching us to pray with sighs and groans
that cannot be expressed, v. 26. And to the same purpose the Prophet Zachary
foretells, that the faithful by the spirit of grace and supplication shall
be moved when they look upon him whom they have pierced, to mourn as one
mourns for his firs^-born son, Zech. 12. 10. 3. The spirit of Adoption
cries in our hearts, Abba, Father, that is, teaches us to pray in faith, and
to call upon God as our Father in Christ, Romans 8. 15, 16. Gal. 4. 6.

Moreover, where they say that they must pray as the Spirit moves them, they
seem with the Enthusiasts to look for extraordinary inspirations, and are in
the number of those which tempt God: for this conceit of theirs as well takes
away all meditation and preparation beforehand as set prayers. But we are to
follow the counsel of the Wise man, Ecclus 18. 23. Before thou prayest prepare
thy self, and be not as one that tempts the Lord.

The promise made the faithful, that they should not need to study beforehand
what they should speak, but that they should speak as the Spirit should move
them, is to be understood of the extraordinary gift of Gods Spirit wherewith
they were filled in inspiring them in their preachings, apologies and prayers,
without their own study and industry. Wherefore as in preaching, to neglect
study, and to expect extraordinary inspiration of the Spirit, that we may speak
ex tempore as the Spirit moves, when a man is not upon some present exigent
and necessity put to it, is to tempt God; so likewise in prayer. And therefore
we must not presume ((...) it be upon some present necessity) to conceive a
long prayer, especially prayer ex tempore, without some former study and
meditation used either against the instant or in former times; but we must come
prepared either with some set form (which notwithstanding with help of
meditation we are to vary upon occasions) or with such a form as we have
conceived in our meditation, that so we may with David call our prayer our
meditation. Neither do I doubt, but that a good desire, vow or promise made in
prayer upon former deliberation is more accepted of God, and is like to be more
constant, and may likewise be uttered with better fervency of affection and
begged with more assurance of faith then that which is rashly uttered upon a
sudden. And therefore Solomon says. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not
thy heart be hasty to utter any word before God, Eccles 5. 1. Neither do I
condemn all that seem to pray ex tempore: For as his faculty is to be commended
that is so well studied in Divinity and exercised in preaching as that he is
able to preach as it were ex tempore; not that he casts himself upon
extraordinary inspirations, but is enabled by the help of his former studies
and exercise: so is his faculty to be commended who is so well studied in
Divinity and exercised in applying the several parts of religion to the use of
prayer that he is able as it were ex tempore to conceive a prayer; not that in
so doing he casts himself upon the extraordinary inspiration of the holy
Spirit, but is enabled by the help of his former studies and meditations.

Now if I be asked the question, Whether is A set form is to be preferred
before ex tempo^ pray^r without preceding meditation.
better, a set form of prayer or a prayer conceived; I answer by distinction:
For if they speak of such a prayer as is conceived ex tempore without former
study and meditation, by such an one as expects extraordinary inspiration,
meaning to pray as the spirit shall move him; I answer, that a se^ form is to
be preferred before such an extemporall prayer. First, because it wants due
reverence of God, Reasons: 1.
when men dare speak to God quicquid in buccam venerit, whatsoever first comes
into the mouth, when as if they were to speak to their prince or any whom they
reverenced, they would use preparation; and directly against the advice of
Solomon, Eccles 5. 1. Secondly, because it is joined with 2,
the presumptuous fancy of the Enthusiasts and tempting of God. Thirdly,
because in prayers 3,
rashly and suddenly made many times things are uttered which beseem not the
majesty of God nor are expedient for men. Such sudden prayers are of the mind
rather then of the heart. Fourthly, 4.
Though the thing uttered were good without exception, yet that good which is
uttered upon premeditation and mature deliberation is more acceptable unto God
then that which proceeds from a sudden motion.

If they speak of a prayer conceived upon due meditation, I distinguish again,
in respect of private prayer of one, and that which is common and public. For
private prayers, that course is to be followed for which most do find
themselves best qualified, being always careful to avoid those inconveniences
to which either a set form or a conceived prayer is more subject. The set form
is more subject to wandering thoughts and want of attention of mind; the
conceived, to want of affection, the powers of the soul being wholly occupied
in invention. But for the most this will be found the most behooffull course,
to have a set form or forms rather for the general and the many blessings for
which we are either to pray or to praise God ordinarily, whereunto
extraordinarily something is to be added as occasion is offered: I say, forms
rather, for the avoiding of distraction and wandering thoughts. And because our
prayers are defective, it shall be expedient to conclude them with that
absolute form which Christ has taught us.

As for prayers public and common with others; Though a conceived prayer be
more commendable in the speaker if it be performed without spiritual pride and
ostentation, yet a set form or forms is more profitable for the hearers, who
with a known form may easily concur in prayer with the speaker, which in a
conceived form unheard of before they cannot so well do. All which I have the
rather noted, because I understand that in these times both many hearers do
erroneously magnify extemporall prayers, contemning all set forms, and also
the orators or speakers themselves in great ostentation and spiritual pride
affect such variety of extemporall prayers, as if they scorned to use the same
form twice; when as our Savior in the garden is recorded to have prayed thrice
and to have used the same form, Matthew. 26. 29, 42, 44.

CHAP. XXIV. Of things required out of the action of prayer.
HItherto we have spoken of such things as are required in the action of
invocation: Now we are to treat of those things which must be done out of the
action, that is to say, both before and after. I. Preparation. The reasons why
preparation is necessary.


Before there is required preparation. For ^. if we ought to prepare our selves
when the Lord is to speak unto us in the ministry of the word, that we may be
fit to hear; as Exodus 19. Eccles 4. 17. then much more are we bound to prepare
our selves when we our selves are to be speakers, that we may be fit to speak
to so great a Majesty. 2. If we will not speak to our superiors, especially
our Prince, without preparation, how much more ought we to come prepared when
we are to speak to the King of kings, and that concerning matters of great
importance? Thirdly, we may not be rash with our mouths, nor let our hearts be
hasty to utter any thing before God, Eccles 5. 1. But as the son of Sirach
advises, Before we pray we ought to prepare our selves, and not be as those
that tempt God, Ecclus 18. 23. Fourthly, we have the example of David Psalm.
108. 1. and 57. 7. O God, my heart is prepared, so is my glory; I will fing and
give praise.

Now this preparation consists partly in removing This preparation
consists, 1. in removing impediments
the impediments, and partly in the using of the means. For first, We must look
to our feet, Eccles 5. 1. that is, with what affections and dispositions we
come to prayer* and consequently are to lay aside all carnal thoughts and
worldly cares which might distract our minds. Quicquid ante orationis horam
Cassian. Collat. 9. cap. 3.
anima nostra conceperit, necesse est ut orantibus nobis per ingestionem
recordationis occurrat. Quamobrem quales orantes volumus inveniri tales nos
ante orationis tempu^ praeparare debemus: Whatsoever before the hour of prayer
the mind has conceived, it is necessary that whilst we are praying it offer
it self by the ingestion of the remembrance. Wherefore such as we would be
found to be whilst we pray, we must prepare our selves to be such before the
time of prayer. Secondly, we must put off the shoes off our feet; as Exodus 3.
Jos. 5. that is, our pollutions and corrupt affections: as carnal lust, which
makes the heart speak lewd things; and anger, as 1. Tim. 2. 8. 1. Pet. 5. 7.
Matthew. 5. 23, 24. Thirdly, we must not suffer our heart to be made heavy with
surfeting and drunkenness, Luke 21. 34, 36. but contrariwise, with prayer upon
extraordinary occasions to join fasting, 1. Cor. 7. 5. and with the ordinary a
moderate diet. Fourthly, if we be guilty of any sin unrepented of we must
repent thereof, promising and purposing amendment for the time to come; for
sin not repented of is as a wall of separation between God and us, Isai. 59.
1, 2. God hears not impenitent sinners, John 9. 31. Isai. 1. 15, 16, 18. and
therefore, as Psalm. 26. 6. we must wash our hands in innocence, and so come to
the altar of the Lord to offer the incense of our prayers, lifting up holy
hands unto God, 1. Tim. 2. 8.

The means. First, because the Lord prepares the 2. In using the means.
heart, Psalm. 10. 17. we are to desire him to prepare our hearts unto prayer.
Secondly, we must use meditation: In which regard David calls his prayer his
meditation, Psalm. 5. 1. that is to say, that which he had meditated of, Psalm.
142. 2. Effundam coram eo meditationem meam, I will pour out my meditation
before him. There is such affinity between meditation and prayer, that the
Hebrew word (...) signifies either of both, to meditate, or to pray: and
therefore Genesis 24. 63. some read that Isaac went out to meditate; others, to
pray: And it is likely that he did both; first meditate, and then pray.

Now the end of this preparation being to make Meditation required before
prayer.
us fit to perform such duties as are required in prayer, our meditation must
be referred thereunto. And first if we find ourselves backward in the duty it
self, we may meditate on those reasons which before we used to this purpose.
And that we may perform it in an holy manner, we must stir up our hearts, as
David does in many places, as Psalm. 103. 1. that so we may call upon God with
our hearts. And if our knowledge be so small that we are notable to conceive a
prayer of our selves but must be fain to use a form prescribed by others, we
must beforehand meditate thereof, that we may be able both to understand it and
to use it aright. And that we may pray in faith, we are to meditate on the
promises of God made to our prayers, and on the mediation and intercession of
our Savior Christ, on which our faith is to be grounded. Likewise we are to
meditate on our own unworthinsse, that so we may pray in humility; of the
glorious Majesty of God our heavenly Father, that we may call upon him in
reverence; of the excellency, profit, necessity of those blessings for which
we either pray or give thanks, that so we may pray with fervencie and give
thanks with alacrity. And further, if we conceive a prayer before not used, we
are to meditate not only of the matter but also of the manner and order of our
speech, that we may be able to say with David, My Psalm. 108. 1.
heart is prepared, so is my tongue; I will now call upon the name of the Lord.
And thus much of Preparation.

After the action there ought to be such a disposition II. Of the duti^s to be
performed after prayer.
as the several kind of invocation does especially require: Whereof in due
place. In the mean time this admonition in general may be given, That when we
have at any time called upon God, we take heed that we do not end our prayers
as we end epistles, with a Vale, bidding the Lord Farewell till the time of
prayer come again, as though we had then ended our task and had performed all
the service we ow unto God, in the mean time neither thinking of God or
godliness, but following our own corrupt ways. For howsoever we cease to
speak unto God for a time, yet we cease not to be in his sight and presence;
and therefore cannot do as untoward children and unchaste wives, who though in
absence they have behaved themselves lewdly, yet approve themselves to their
parents and husbands by their demure carriage in presence: But we are
continually in Gods sight and presence; and therefore if after we have called
upon God we play the lewd children even in his sight, and go a whoring after
vanities in his presence, how cannot this but greatly amaze us against we shall
pray again, and put us out of hope to be heard. Wherefore the frequent exercise
of prayer is a notable bridle to restrain us from sin, whether you respect
that which is past or that which is to come. For when a man is about to commit
sin, let him call to mind his prayer past; Am I that man who so lately called
upon God, making such show of piety, pretending a zeal of Gods glory in
advancing his kingdom and doing his will? etc. or that which is to come; With
what face can I appear before God guilty of such offenses? with what affiance
can I lift up these eyes unto God, that behold vanities; these hands unto God,
that commit such sins? etc. Let us therefore with David use to meditate, If I
regard wickedness in my heart the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66. 18.
following the advice of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2. 19. Let every one that names
the name of Christ depart from iniquity. For, not every one that says unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the
will of my Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 7. 21. Inessicax est petitio cum
precatur Cyprian.
Deum sterilis oration, i. sine operibus: Petition is uneffectuall when we call
upon God with a barren prayer, that is, without good works. And thus much of
the manner of Invocation.

CHAP. XXV. Of the matter and subject of our prayers, and what is required
thereunto; namely, that it be good and according to Gods will.
NOw follows the matter or the subject; that is, the things for which we
either do pray or give thanks. Concerning which this is to be noted in
general, That we have a sound persuasion grounded on the word of God that they
be lawful and good: First, because what is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.
Secondly, for what we do either pray or give thanks to God, thereof we
acknowledge God to be the author: but it is blasphemous to make God the
author of that which is wicked and unlawful. Thirdly, prayers must be made in
faith, viz. that God accepts our prayers and will grant them unto us. This
faith must be grounded on Gods promise; and God promises to give good things
to them that ask, Matthew. 7. 11. Evil things are not within the compass of Gods
promise; for the foretelling of that which is evil is rather a threatening then
a promise. Fourthly, the assurance that we have to be heard, is when we ask any
thing according to Gods will, 1. John 5. 14. but to ask evil things is not
according to Gods will. Fifthly, they that call upon God for evil things are
like the wicked, Psalm. 50. who think that God is like unto them. Sixthly, if we
ask good things we have assurance to be heard, Matthew. 7. 11. 1. John 5. 14.
(...) Menande^.
.

For our direction in this behalf our Savior Christ has prescribed a most
perfect form of prayer, which is summa petendorum, the sum of things to be
desired: So that whatsoever may be referred thereunto we may be assured is
according to Gods will; but what cannot be referred to some part of the Lords
prayer, that our Savior has not taught us to ask nor the Father promised to
give.

There remains the last point: For now it may How we may be enabled to pray
according to Gods will.
be demanded, How we being so corrupt and sinful in our selves, should be able
to pray according to the will of God.

Of our selves indeed we are not able to think a good thought, and much less
to conceive an acceptable prayer? Of our selves we cannot say that Jesus is the
Lord, and much less call upon God as our Father in Christ: But the Spirit of
God helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray as we ought;
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with gronings which cannot be
uttered. And he that searches the heart knows the mind of the Spirit,
because he makes interc^ssion for the Saints according to God, Romans 8. 26, 27.
Quodnon sic est intelligendum, says Epist. 121.
Augustine, ut existimemus sanctum Spiritum Dei, qui in Trinitate
incommunicabilis Deus est, and cum Patre and Filio unus Deus, tanquam aliquem
qui non sit quod Deus est interpellare pro sanctis. Dictum quippe est,
INTERPELLAT PRO SANCTIS, quia interpellare sanctos facit. Sicut dictum est,
TENTAT VOS DE^S VESTER UT SCIAT SI DILIGATIS EUM: hoc est, ut scire vos faciat:
Which is not so to be understood, that we should think the holy Spirit of God,
which in the Trinity is God incommunicable, and with the Father and Son one
God, should pray for the Saints unto one who is not that which God is. But it
is said, He prays for the Saints, because he inableth the Saints to pray: as
it is said, Your G^d tempts you that he may know whether ye love him: that
is, that he may cause you to know it. It is well said of Chrysostom,
Supravires hominis est facere cum Lib. 2. De ^do De^. 120.
Deo colloquium nisi adsit vis and actus Spiritus sancti: It is above the
strength of man to confer with God unless the virtue and operation of the
Spirit be present. And therefore when we pray we are to crave the assistance of
Gods spirit, which is the spirit of grace and prayer, Zech. 12. 10. which God
has promised to give to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. and in and by his holy
spirit we are to call upon God, Jude v. 20. For whereas many graces and duties
Zech. 12 10.
Heb. 10. 29.
are required in prayer all which are above our own strength, the spirit of
God, which is the spirit of grace and supplication, effects them all in the
children of God. It is he that prepares our hearts to prayer, Psalm. 10. 17.
that open^th our lips that our mouth may show forth his praise, Psalm. 51. 15.
It is he that anointeth our blind eyes that we may see, and touches our
senseless hearts that we may feel our misery and want, that in true humility
of soul we may pour forth our hearts before God. It is the spirit of the f^ar
of God that makes us to come with due reverence of his Majesty. It is the
spirit of supplications that makes our frozen and benumbed hearts to pray
fervently with sighs that cannot be expressed. It is the spirit of adoption who
testifies unto our spirits that we are the children of God, by which we do cry
in our h^arts, Abba, Father. Finally, it is the spirit of grace which helps
our infirmities, and furnishes us with those graces which be requisite in
prayer, and teaches us to pray according to God. And this is that which Paul
teaches us, that we have access to the Father through the Son and by the
holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2. 18. that is, in the name and mediation of Christ, by the
help and assistance of the holy Ghost. For being both unworthy in our selves,
and of our selves unable to call upon God as we ought, if we come in the name
of Christ craving the assistance of the holy Spirit, in Christ we shall be
accepted, and by the holy Ghost enabled to pray according to God.

But here we are to take heed that we abuse not this doctrine concerning the
help and assistance of the holy Ghost in prayer, by neglecting our own
endeavor and presuming of the extraordinary inspiration of the holy Ghost: for
that is to tempt God: But in doing the uttermost of our own endeavor, we are
to crave the assistance of Gods Spirit, who will not be wanting to those who
are not wanting to themselves. Now if it be demanded how these Quest.
things may stand together, that no man can pray without the spirit of God and
without faith, and yet both the spirit and faith is to be obtained by prayer; I
answer, God by his preventing grace Answ.
works in us a true desire of grace and of faith; which desire of grace is
the beginning of the grace desired. And therefore the grace of the spirit and
faith in order of nature go before prayer, which is the effect of that desire,
and yet prayer goes before the knowledge or feeling of either of both.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the circumstances of prayer.
ANd thus much of the substantial points of Invocation: Now follow the
accidental, which 1. Of the persons: In which respect it is public or private.
are the circumstances of Person, Time, and Place. Prayer in regard of persons
is either public or private. Public invocation is the prayer of a
congregation, as of a parish or college. Of public prayer we are to make
special account: For if the prayer of Of public prayer.
some one man can avail so much (as heretofore I have showed) what shall we
think of public, where the prayers of so many ascend together unto the Lord?
As the flame of one faggot-stick to the flame of the whole faggot or bundle, so
is the prayer of one man to the prayer of the whole congregation: for Vis unita
est fortior, force united is so much the stronger; and a threefold cable is
hardly broken. Our Savior Christ has bountifully promised that where two or
three be gathered together in his name, there is he in the midst of them,
Matthew. 18. 20. Yea, such is the presence of the Lord in public assemblies,
that those which have been excluded thence have thought themselves banished
from the presence of God, and to be put away from his face. It was the
punishment of Cain; and so he esteemed it, Genesis 4. For when the Lord had
banished him from that earth which had received his brothers blood from his
hand, v. 11. which was the place of the visible Church, v. 14. he says, that
by reason of this punishment. he should be hid from Gods face. We see the same
in the practice of David; Who when he was in banishment desired nothing more
then to have liberty to come into the assemblies of the saints: and when he
had liberty he rejoyceed in nothing more. For the first, read Psalm. 27. and
42. and 84. In Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I
require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple. Psalm. 42. 1,
2. As the heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so pants my soul after thee,
O God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come
and appear before the presence of God? etc. And v. 4. he says that his soul
languished when he considered, that had it not been for the tyranny of his
oppressors he might have gone with the rest of the assembly into the house of
God. Psalm. 84. 1. O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles! My soul
longs, yea and faints, that I might come to the courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh cry out after the living God. In the third verse he seems
to envy the sparrows and the swallows which had liberty to lay their young
ones there where he had no access: And then he cries out abruptly with a
wonderful patheticall exclamation, O thine altars, Jehovah, my King and my
God! In the three next verses he pronounces them happy not only that dwell in
the Lords house to praise him, but also those who have liberty to come to the
Church, although it were by redious and troublesome journeys, both in respect
of the way and the weather: thereby signifying, that he would think himself
happy if he might have liberty to come to the assembly, although he went
through thick and thin: and that no way or weather should hinder him. And
again, v. 10. he says, that one day spent in the house of the Lord is better
then a thousand ^lsewhere, and that he had rather be a doore-keeper in the
house of God then to dwell in the tents of iniquity. Thus we see David's
affection to the assembly of the Saints, when he might not enjoy them. And as
he placed happin^sse therein when he wanted them, so when he enjoyed them his
chief joy was therein: Psalm. 122. 1. I rejoiced when they said to me, We will
go to the house of the Lord. Read 2. Sam. 6. 14, 16. When the ark of the Lord
was to be brought to the city of David, David for exceeding great joy danced
and leaped before the ark with all his might, as if he had not been his own
man, insomuch as his wife despised him, and v. 20. derided him, O how glorious
was the king of Israel this day, which was uncovered to day in the sight of the
maids of his servants as a fool uncovereth himself! If we were men according to
^ods own heart, as David was, we would have the like estimation of the
assemblies of the Saints; both when we could not frequent them, most earnestly
to desire them, and when we have liberty, with wonderful chearfulness^ and
alacrity to frequent the Churches, as for other exercises of religion so for
prayer. In respect whereof it is called the house of prayer, Isai. 56. 7.
Neither must our private prayer exempt us from the public: For although it be
an excellent exercise and in no case to be omitted, yet if it come in
comparison it must give place to the public. But the frequenting of the
public assemblies is especially to be understood on the Sabbath, on which is
mercatura animae, the merchandise of the soul; and the marketplace is the
Church.

Now as we are to frequent the public assemblies, Private preparation required
before public prayer.
so we must be careful before we come thither to prepare our selves, according
to the counsel of the Wise man Eccles 4. 17. to look to our feet, that is, to
our affections, lest we offer the sacrifice of fools; and to lift up holy hands
(...), without wrath or doubting, 1. Tim. 2. 8. And also when we are there, to
behave our selves both in soul and body as I have showed before; laboring also
inwardly for unanimity, that we may call upon God (...), with one mind and
heart, (To unanimity is the promise made, Matthew. 18. 19. If two of you shall
consent, etc.) as the Primitive Church did, Acts 1. 14. and 4. 24. and
outwardly for uniformity so far forth as it is joined with decency and order,
and severed from superstition.

Concerning the voice, which I said was always Of the voice to be used in
public prayer.
to be used in public prayer, we are to know; If it be uttered in one voice,
as in prayer, the mouth of the people ought to be the minister: because it is
part of prophecy; and the Apostles Acts 6. 4. make it part of their function.
If by the voice of many, as in singing (For singing also is warranted in the
word of God both by the example of Christ, Mark 14. 26. and by the commandment
of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. and of James chapter 5. 13.) then such
singing is to be used as we may sing with grace in our hearts and spirits, with
understanding to instruct and edify both our selves and others. But we may not
so sing as that neither we our selves can attend to the matter, nor they which
hear us understand what is said. That both unanimitie and uniformitie may be
used, it is fit that there should be set forms of public prayer: for then may
the people best join their consent and desire of heart when they know
beforehand the very form of the request. Indeed to that which they understand
they may at the end of the prayer say, Amen; but when they know beforehand what
shall be asked, there may be a better concurrence between the prayer of their
heart and the speech of the minister who is the mouth.

Private prayer is either the prayer of a family, Of p^ivate prayer.
or of some one. To the former does the promise of Christ also appertein; When
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them, Matthew. 18. 20. And it is so much to be preferred before the other as it
seems to draw nearer to public prayer: And therefore it is the duty of an
houshoulder to call his family togethe^ and to pray with them.

The prayer of some one man is properly called private: For privi with the
ancient Latinists is the same with singuli. That which properly is required in
this prayer is this, that it be private: as that we be not heard to pray of any
man. This is done either when we are alone and ordinarily, or in the sight of
others upon occasions offered. If when we are alone; we must neither be heard
nor seen of any, but obey the commandment of Christ, Matthew. 6. 6. When thou
prayest enter into thy chamber; and when thou have shut thy door, pray unto
thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which sees in secret shall
reward thee openly. And therefore we are to be careful to contein our voice
within the compass of the private place wherein we pray. For otherwise we
break the commandment of Christ; and it is all one as if we prayed openly. For,
as Tertullian says, petitiones suas quid minus faciunt quam si in publico
orent? What do they less in their petitions then if they prayed in public?

Again, if we so pray privately as that either we be seen or heard of men, our
prayers will not be void of ostentation. But as we are to avoid evil, so we are
to shun all appearance of evil. Now to pray for ostentations sake is a thing
simply evil and forbidden by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 6. 5. And therefore we
are to forbear not only from it but also from the show thereof.

Is privately thou art to pray upon occasions offered in the presence of
others, then thou art to pray in the closet of thy heart without using the
voice, according to the example of Moses, Exodus 14. of Abraham's servant, Genesis
24. and Hannah, 1. Sam. 1. Nehemiah, chap. 2. 4. But this is not to be
understood of him who praying in the company of others is as it were the mouth
of the rest: For we are to conceive of that as of the prayer of the family,
wherein the voice is necessary.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the time of prayer.
NOw we are to enquire of the time of invocation, when we are to call upon God.
The holy Ghost tells 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. that we must pray (...), that is,
continually, and (...), in all things to give thanks: and not in that place
alone, but also in diverse others; as Luke 18. 1. that we must pray (...),
always; and 21. 36. as also Ephesians. 6. 18. (...), in all seasons.

What then, will you say, must we do nothing else Object.
in the whole course of our life but pray?

I say not so. This was the fantastical opinion Answ.
of the fanaticall heretics the Euchetae, which thought they might do nothing
else but pray, and grounded their hersies upon these places of Scripture. But
for the answering of them and informing The Euchetae confuted.
our selves in the truth, first we are to search out the true meaning of those
places of Scripture: First, therefore where it is said 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. that 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. expounded.
we must pray continually, it may be fitly expounded by that in the 18. verse,
(...), in all things; for the sense would be the same if we should say, (...),
in all things pray, and continually give thanks, that is, upon every just
occasion pray and give thanks. Now that these cannot be understood of
perpetual continuance in prayer, excluding all other actions and duties, it is
plain by this; Paul in diverse places of his epistles does profess of himself
that he did pray and give thanks always, continually, without ceasing; Romans 1.
9. Col. 1. 3. 1. Cor. 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 16. Col. 1. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. 2 Thessalonians.
1. 3. and yet notwithstanding he neither denied to obey the necessities of
nature, neither omitted the duties either of his calling or of a godly life:
Nay, he labored in his calling more then all the rest of the Apostles. The
like may be said of Cornelius, of whom the Scripture does testify Acts 10.
that he prayed always, which is all one with in all things; and yet by his
calling a Centurion, and therefore sometimes in fight: and for the duties of a
godly life, it is said that he was a just man, v. 22. and therefore exercised
the duties of the second table, and gave alms.

Secondly, as touching the place in Luke 18. 1. Luke 18. 1. expounded.
where it is said that Christ spoke a parable to this end that we ought always
to pray, the holy Ghost expounds his meaning in the next words by removing
the contrary, that we should pray always and not saint: So that to pray
always in this place, is not to saint in prayer: Which in other places is
(...), to persevere in prayer: as Romans 12. 12. that is, with some pertinacie
(if I may use this word in the good sense) to persevere in prayer. And that
this is the meaning of the words it appears by the scope of the parable it
self, which is nothing else but this, That when we have prayed unto God and he
seems not to hear us, we must not faint and give over, but steadfastly
persevere until we have an answer.

Thirdly, for the other places: Luke 21. 36. and Luke 21. 36. and Eph^s. 6. 18.
(...)
Ephesians. 6. 18. it is not said, (...), in every time, but, (...), in every
s^son; that is, upon every just occasion, whenever opportunity is offered. To
confirm this exposition this reason may be used; The Lord in his word inioyneth
us a great sort of duties besides Invocation; which if we do omit, for the
omission of them, although we should do no hurt, we shall be condemned: Matthew.
25. 42. the sentence of condemnation is pronounced against the wicked for the
omission of certain duties, which necessarily must be omitted if we should do
nothing else but pray. Again, it is a received distinction, That the negative
commandments of God do bind both semper and ad semper to the absteining from
those things which are forbidden; but the affirmative commandments, howsoever
they do bind us semper, yet for the most part they do not bind us ad semper.
And therefore although we be always bound to the performance of this duty, and
never exempted from it, yet we are not bound to do it always. So that these
commandments of continuing in prayer are to be understood of the whole life and
not of every moment of time.

Now that we are always bound to this duty appears That we are always bound
to the duty of prayer.
both by our continual necessity to pray, in regard first of our necessities
and wants both spiritual and temporal; secondly, of the continual rage of
our spiritual enemies, who are never at truce with us except we be at league
with them; thirdly, of innumerable dangers which are always imminent, from
which by Gods continual mercy and goodness toward us we are delivered, for
which we must return thanks unto him. For if there were no other cause of
thanksgiving (as there are many) but only this, that he has spared us, and
not confounded us for our sins, this were matter sufficient: Lam. 3. 22. It
is the mercy of the Lord that we are not confounded.

Now that we may perform these commandments of continuance in prayer, it is
requisite that we call upon God both ordinarily at set times, and
extraordinarily as occasion and opportunity is offered. And therefore in
respect of time prayer is thus Of stinted prayers at set times, and unstinted
upon occasions offered.
distinguished; Preces sunt statae vel vagae: which distinction belongs both
to public and private prayer.

For public prayer; What set hours in the daytime are to be appointed for
Divine service, it is to be left to the discretion of every Church. Only in
the nightime it seems inconvenient in the flourishing and quiet estate of
the Church, that public assemblies should be held: but in time of persecution
it is otherwise. For vagae: They are so often to be used publicly as occasion
is offered either by any public danger and calamity to pray, or by some
public blessing of God to give thanks.

But concerning private prayer, there is no time No time exempted from private
prayer.
of day natural which may not be employed thereunto. It has been the practice
of the godly to call upon God both night and day. So did David, Psalm. 22. 2.
Annah, Luke 2. 37. and not only she, but all right widows, of whom Paul
fpeaketh 1. Tim. 5. 5. So did Paul himself, 2. Tim. 1. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. But
more specially for the day; David says that he would call upon God seven times
a day, that is, many times, Psalm. 119. 164. In another place he says that he
would pray in the morning, in the evening, and at noon. And again, for the
morning; Psalm. 5. 3. and in another place, that he would prevent the morning
watch. For the noon, Acts 10. 9. For the night our Savior gave us a precedent
Luke 6. 12. where it is said that he spent the whole night in prayer unto God.
And to omit other special times; There is none so unseasonable as midnight;
yet often in this time have the godly given themselves unto prayer: Psalm. 119.
62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee. And so did Paul and
Silas, Acts 16. 25. So that we see no time excluded from private prayer.

But to apply the former distinction to private prayer also: and first for
statae: That our infirmity may be helped, and our backwardness in this duty
relieved, we are to appoint to our selves some certain hours in the day which
we will not let pass without invocation on the name of God: but yet so as we
place no religion in one time more then in another, as the Papists do in their
canonical hours, as though God were more ready to hear one time of the day
then another. This practice which I have named the most holy men of God have
used: As David, Psalm. 55. 17. In the morning, at noon, and in the evening will
I pray: And Daniel, chap. 6. 10. used to pray three times in the day. Which
practice of theirs we are thus to imitate: 1. to pray in the morning, before we
go about the works of our calling; 2. in the midday, in the time of
intermission of our works; and thirdly, at evening, before we take our rest:
and besides, whenever we take mea^ we are to use both prayer and
thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4. 4, 5.

2. Concerning vagae: We are to follow the advice of the Apostle Col. 3. 17. In
every thing which we do, in word or deed, both to take it in hand by calling
upon the name of the Lord, and to end it with thanksgiving. Not that we are
always to use the voice and gesture of the body; for sometime it is sufficient
to lift up the soul unto the Lord: Which kind of short prayers among the
ancient Fathers were called ejaculations. And thus if we shall use statae and
vagae orationes, stinted and unstinted prayers, omitting no just occasions, we
shall perform the commandment 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. but otherwise we shall break the
same, and in so doing we shall incur the wrath of God.

CHAP. XXVIII. Concerning the place of prayer.
THirdly, concerning the place: To no one certain place is that promise made
that then was That there is no limitation of place for prayer.
made to the temple of Jerusalem; viz. That whatsoever men in their extremity
should ask of God in it, God would grant it in his holy habitation in the
heavens. Jesus the Messiah then looked for, whose presence was sought in the
mercy-seat and between the Cherubims, is now entered between the veil, that is,
in the heaven, and there abides only Mediator for us: unto whom from all the
coasts of the earth we may lift up pure hands with assurance that we shall be
heard. Howsoever the Israelites under the Law were tied to pray either in the
temple and tabernacle, Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 14. Psalm. 99. 6. or else toward the same,
2 Chronicles. 7. 38. 1. Kings 8. 44, 48. Psalm. 138. 2. Dan. 6. 10. yet now all such
distinction and difference of place, being but ceremonial, is abolished. For
that one place of prayer and sacrifice was a type of Christ Jesus the alone
altar; and the praying in or toward the same did figure out thus much, That
only in the mediation of Jesus Christ, who is the only Mediator both of
redemption and also of intercession, we are to call upon the Lord: Wherefore
seeing these were but shadows and ceremonies of things to come, and seeing the
substance and truth it self, Jesus Christ, is already exhibited, whereunto the
shadows and ceremonies do and ought to give place; we are not now tied to one
place more then another, as one being more typically holy then another. In the
4. of John v. 21, 22, 23, 24. our Savior himself resolves this doubt: for
when the Samaritane had demanded of him, which is that place wherein God is to
be worshipped, the mount Gerizzim where the Samaritanes temple was, or the
mount Moriah whereon the temple of Solomon was built; Christ gives her this
answer, That now the time was come wherein all these differences of places,
being but ceremonial, were taken away; and that now the Lord was no more to be
worshipped by ceremonies but in spirit and truth: and therefore that it was
lawful to worship God not only in Jerusalem o^ in mount Gerizzim but also in
other places.

The Prophet Malachi seems to foretell the same, chap. 1. 11. For so the Lord
speaks by him, From the rising of the sun to the going down of the same my
name is great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered
in my name, etc. But most plain is that 1. Tim. 2. 8. where the Apostle wills
that men should pray (...), in every place, lifting up holy hands without wrath
or doubting. So that there is no such difference of place, but that we may
lawfully call upon God in any place: Which also is confirmed unto us by the
practice of Christ and his Apostles: who did not only pray in the temple, but
without distinction in other places, as in the mountain, in the desert, in the
garden, in private houses, on the housetop, on the seashore; and where not?

Hence appears the vanity of Pilgrimages: Which The vanity of Pilgrimages.
were used either because the places were more holy to which they went then
others, or because the Lord was nearer to them there then elsewhere. The former
reason I have already confuted: and the latter is more absurd. For is the Lord
present at Jerusalem, and is he absent in England? nay, Do not I ^ill heaven
and earth? says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. And does not the Psalmist say, Psalm
138. 8. If I ascend into heaven, thou art there; if I lie down in hell, thou
art there. If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the sea, yea, thither shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me.?
Seeing therefore that the Lord is every where present to hear us, we may call
upon him in any place: and the rather because our bodies are the temples of
God, and we our selves priests, and Christ Jesus dwells in our temples, upon
whom, as being our only altar, we may offer up incense, that is, our prayers,
Revel. 5. 8. Psalm. 141. 2. So that wheresoever we are, we have temples wherein
to call upon the Lord.

Now howsoever this which I have said be in general true of Invocation both
public and private, yet it is to be understood of public with this
distinction: For public prayer is to be considered according to the state of
the Church: If the Church be either in persecution or warfare, wheresoever the
assembly meets to that purpose there may they lawfully pray: As namely in
persecution, in private houses or in secret places: for the assembly and not
the place makes prayer public. But if the Church be in flourishing and quiet
estate, there ought some public places, as Churches, to be appointed for that
purpose, wherein the congregation ordinarily is to be assembled; not for any
greater holiness in the Churches then in other places (for the assembly
sanctifies the place, and not the place the assembly) but only for good
orders sake and polity of the Church.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Prayer or Petition: and what is required unto it.
HItherto of the general doctrine of Invocation 1. A sense of our wants and a
desire to have them supplied.
common to both the sorts. Now follows the special.

Invocation is either praye^ or thanksgiving. In the former we ask good things
at the hand of God: In the latter we return praise and thanksgiving for
benefits received. The former has reference to the time to come; the latter,
to the time past. For in the former we crave either the gift of such things as
we want for the time to come, or the continuance and increase of that which we
have. In the latter we praise Gods goodness for his blessings either bestowed
already, or at the least promised. In the former we beg and pray; in the latter
we give, or rather render and repay, the praise which is due to his name.

But howsoever in nature these two sorts of Invocation Prayer and thanksgiving
must be joined together.
do differ, and so are in doctrine to be severed, yet in use and practice they
must go together. Neither must we be more ready to crave new blessings at the
hands of God then to return thanks for benefits already received. And therefore
the performance of both these duties the holy Ghost in many places has joined
together: as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. Psalm. 50. 14, 15. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Col. 3. 17.
More plainly Col. 4. 2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with
thanksgiving. Phil. 4. 6. Be distrustfully careful for nothing, but in all
things let your requests be manifested unto God in prayer and supplication with
giving of thanks. Examples: of Jacob, Genesis 32. 9, 10, etc. David, 1. Chron. 29.
10, 18. 2. Sam. 7. 18. Paul, Col. 1. 9, 12. Phil. 1. 3, 4. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. Not
that by giving of thanks for benefits received we do merit greater and better,
according to that of the Th. Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 83. 17. c.
Schoolmen, De acceptis beneficiis gratias agentes meremur accipere potiora,
When we render thanks for benefits received, we merit to receive better; but
that the Lord of his mere bounty is ready to reward our thankfulness for
former b^nefits with granting new blessings which we crave at his hands: and
likewise our selves, when we are affected with a thankful remembrance of Gods
goodness toward us for the time past, are the more encouraged with faith and
affiance to crave new blessings for the time to come; Psalm. 4. 1. 1. Kings 3.
6, 7, 8. Psalm. 116. 1, 2.

But first we are to speak of prayer. Prayer is What Prayer or Petition i^.
that invocation whereby we effectually crave any thing which we do well (that
is, lawfully and profitably) desire at the hands of God.

Where I say it is invocation, I mean that it is a religious speech of the
faithful made unto God in the name of Christ, according to the will of God, by
the help of the holy Ghost, concerning good things apperteining to Gods glory
and our good; and consequently, that whatsoever before has been spoken in
general concerning Invocation is particularly to be applied to Prayer. The
proper nature and difference is expressed in the word crave: For prayer is that
invocation whereby we beg and crave of God. But because we speak of that prayer
which is right and acceptable, and is framed according to the will of God, as
was said in the general out of 1. John 5. 14. and it is the will of God that
our prayer should be effectual and our desire good; therefore I added, whereby
we effectually crave any thing which we do well (that is, lawfully and
profitably) desire of God.

That our prayer which shall avail with God must in it self be effectual, S.
James teaches us, chap. 5. 16. The prayer of a righteous man avails much, it
being effectual. The word is (...) of which I have spoken before. As therefore
that is an effectual oration wherein nothing is omitted which the oratory art
requires, whether the hearers be persuaded or not; so that is an effectual
prayer wherein nothing is omitted which in the word of God, that teaches the
art and doctrine of prayer, is required either in general or in particular.
For although the efficacy of prayer does not properly consist in the
observation of the general points, yet they are such as without them it cannot
be effectual: As 1. That The generals of Invocation applied to Petition.
the party which prays be faithful, that is, a penitent and believing
sinner; 2. That the prayer be directed unto God; 3. In the name and mediation
of Christ; 4. By the help of the holy Ghost; 5. That it be a prayer of the
heart, or that the prayer be made in truth; (for to that the promise is
restrained, Psalm. 145. 18. and therein the life of the prayer consists,
without which it is dead and counterfeit) that it be made with knowledge, and
with faith, with humility, with reverence, and with heartinesse; 6. For good
things. All which are essential points required in all invocation.

But the things wherein more properly the efficacy Fervency and faith required
in our petitions.
of prayer consists are Fervency and Faith: and to pr^y effectually, is to
pray fervently and faithfully. For as touching the former; whatsoever we do
effectually ask that we do fervently desire. Quae vero Bein. De orat. and
(...). sermon. 4. sol. 21. R.
^idelis, and humilis, and fervens oration fuerit, coelum sine dubio penetrabit:
unde certum est, quod vacuaredire non poterit: The prayer which is faithful,
humble, and fervent will without doubt pierce the heavens: whence we certainly
gather, that it cannot return vain and empty.

Now fervency presupposes a sense and feeling Sense and feeling of our wants
required in prayer.
or acknowledgement of our want: And both of them in the Scriptures are
signified in the phrases of hungring and thirsting, Isai. 55. 1. Matthew. 5. 6.
John 7. 37. For as in hunger and thirst there concur two things; a sense of
our want, and an appetite to have that want supplied: so in prayer we must
hunger and thirst after those graces and blessings which we do crave, that is,
we must have a true sense and acknowledgement of our want, and an earnest
desire to have it supplied. In which respect David compares his soul to
thirsty lands which gape for the rain, Psalm. 63. 2. and 143. 6. and to the
heart braying for the rivers of waters, Psalm. 42. 1. Both these are necessary to
effectual prayer: For what we ask we desire, and what we desire we want:
Neither can we fervently ask that we do not earnestly desire, and we cannot
earnestly desire that whereof we feel no want. The whole needs not the
Physician, as our Savior says Luke 5. 31. And as the Philosophers teach,
Nihil appetit quod habet, Nothing affects what it has: therefore this I said
is presupposed. If any want wisdom, says S. James, let him Jam. 1. 5.
ask it. For if he find not himself to want it in whole or in part, he is not
to ask it, unless he will mock God, who will not be mocked, Gal. 6. 8.

Here therefore they offend, I. In respect of temporal things, who trusting in
their own means, and relying upon their own store, do not find themselves to
stand in need of Gods help, neither do depend upon the providence or blessing
of God in the use of the means. For such when they pray unto God for these
things, as namely, to give them this day their daily bread, they do not pray in
truth, because they do not unfeignedly desire that whereof they find no want.

II. In respect of spiritual things two sorts of men offend: First, those that
are carnally secure, who although they be wretched and miserable, poor, blind,
and naked, yet being lukewarm with the Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17. and feeling no
want, think they are rich and need nothing. Secondly, those who are righteous
in their own conceit; as Pharisaicall and Popish justitiaries. For both these
and the other feeling no want, either pray not at all, or if they do pray, it
is but for fashions sake: and therefore praying usu magis quam sensu, out of
custom rather then sense, their prayer is not acceptable unto God, and like
lukewarm water to the stomach. Wherefore it behooves us to labor that we may
have a true sense of our wants: Which I speak especially in respect of
spiritual graces: for when we are pinched with bodily wants, we are many times
but too sensible thereof: But of spiritual wants many have no sense; and being
miserable they feel no misery. First, therefore it is good to be persuaded that
this sense of our wants is necessary for us: For without it neither will we
seriously seek unto the Lord, neither will he seem to regard us. We will not
earnestly seek unto him: for what we do not want we do not desire; and what we
do not desire that we do not ask, except it be for fashion: And how can we look
that the Lord will compati, that is, have compassion on us, when we do not
pati, or feel any want? How can we desire him misereri, to have mercy on us,
when we do not esteem our selves miseri, to whom mercy belongs? (for thence
has misericordia the name.) Yea, if we be rich and full in ou^ own conceits,
the Lord will send us away empty, Luke 1. 55. remaining in our sin, Luke 18.
14. exposed to his curse, Luke 6. 24, 25. Whereas on the other side, if we be
humbled with the sense of our want, the Lord will have special regard unto us,
Isai. 66. 2. and 57. 15. and be near unto us in all our desires, Psalm. 34. 18.
Yea, such he calls to him, Matthew. 11. 28. such he promises to hear, Psalm.
10. 17. John 7. 37. such he pronounces blessed, Matthew. 5. 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, that we may attein to this sight and How we may come to a sight and
sense of our wants.
sense of our misery and wants, we are to look into the glass of the law;
which will reveal unto us our misery, both in respect of our sins, and also of
the punishment due for the same, etc.

Thirdly, for as much as the sight and sense of our misery is the gift of God
and work of his spirit, we are to pray unto God that he will anoint the eyes of
our minds with the eye salve of his spirit, Revel. 3. 18. that we may see our
sins; and that he would touch our hearts with the finger of his spirit, as he
struck the rock in the wilderness, that they may melt within us, as the heart of
Josias did at the reading of the law, 2. Kings 22. 19. and be resolved into a
fountain of tears, by which we may bewail our sins whereby we have displeased
and dishonored God.

From this sense of our wants arises the second That we must in prayer have an
earnest desire to have our wants suplyed.
thing, that is, an earnest desire to have our wants supplied. And this is of
such force in prayer, that it seems to be nothing else but the expressing of
our desire, and is therefore called (...) and of such efficacy in prayer, that
some place the efficacy of prayer therein; and so read the words of S. James,
chapter 5. 16. The effectual ^ervent prayer of a righteous man avails much;
others, The prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent. But
though it be not the only cause of efficacy, yet it is one of the principal:
for, as Augustine says, Dignior s^quitur effectus quem Epist. ad Probum, 121.
ferventior affectus praecedit: A more worthy effect follows which a more
fervent affection precedeth

This praying with earnest desire is commended to us in the word of God by
diverse significant phrases: For besides that it is called crying unto the Lord,
and crying mightily, Jon. 3. 8. lifting up of our prayer, Isai. 38. 14. this is
also to pour forth our souls before the Lord like water, Lam. 2. 19. In which
sense the Israelites are said 1. Sam. 7. 6. to have drawn water from the
fountain of their hearts, and poured it out before the Lord. This is to pray
with groans unspeakable, Romans 8. 26. which the holy Ghost stirs up in us;
and is therefore an evident token of the child of God endued with the Spirit of
adoption: which is also the spirit of grace and supplication, making us when we
look upon him whom we have pierced by our sins, to lament and mourn as a man
mourns for his first-begotten, Zech. 12. 10. For, as Augustine Epist. 121.
says, Plerunque hoc negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitu^, fletu
plus quam affatu: For the most part this business is effected better with
groans then words, with weeping rather then speaking. This is to pray with Paul
(...), exceedingly, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. This is with Epaphras, Col. 4. 12. as it
were to wrestle with the Lord: which the Apostle commends to the Romans,
chap. 15. 30. By which kind of wrestling Jacob prevailed with God, as Hosea
teaches chap. 2. 3, 4. and was therefore called Israel, Genesis 32. This is that
prayer of the humble which pierces the clouds, Ecclus 35. 21. This fervent
desire therefore is fervently to be desired of us, and happy are they which
have atteined to it, Matthew. 5. 6.

The means to attein unto it are, First, because it The means to obtein
fervency of desire.
is the work of Gods spirit, to beg it of him by prayer.

Secondly, to labor after a true sense of our wants.

Thirdly, in our preparation to meditate on the excellency, profit and
necessity of those things which we crave, that so our affections may be
inflamed with a desire thereof; as also of the necessity of Gods help, that
except the Lord hear us and help us our case is desperate. So David prays
Psalm. 28. 1. and 143. 6, 7. Hear me, O Lord, and hide not thy face; else I
shall be like to them that go down into the pit.

Fourthly, we are upon extraordinary occasions to join fasting with our
prayers, as we are directed in many places of the Scripture. For fasting as it
causes the hunger of the body, (...) it is an effectual means to stir up
and increase the hunger of the soul. For which cause the Fathers (...) fasting
orationis alas, the wings of prayer.

CHAP. XXX. Of Faith, which is chiefly required in prayer.
BUt the chief thing which makes prayer effectual is Faith: whereof Fervency
it self is a fruit: And therefore our Savior attributes the earnestness and
importunity of the woman of Syrophenicia's prayer to the greatness of her
faith, Matthew. 15. 28. For that prayer which S. James, chap. 5. 16. calls
(...), in the 15. verse he calls (...), the prayer of faith.

Now in prayer there is a double faith required: A double faith required in
prayer
The one more general, apprehending the promises of the Gospel concerning
salvation by Christ, by which we are in some measure persuaded that we and our
prayers are accepted of God in Christ: Of which I have spoken before in the
general doctrine, Romans 10. 14. Heb. 11. 6. Ephesians. 3. 12. The other more
special, giving special assent to the promise made to our prayer, whereby we
are persuaded that our particular requests shall be granted unto us according
to Gods gracious promise in this behalf; Matthew. 7. 7, 8. John 14. 13, 14. and
16. 23, 24.

To pray effectually therefore is to pray faithfully. For what things soever,
says our Savior, ye Mark 11. 24.
desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them, Matthew. 22. 21
and ye shall have them. And it is usual with our Savior Christ to dis^isse
his suitors with this answer, As thou believe (...) be it unto thee. On the
other side he prays not effectually who doubts whether he shall be heard or
not: Wherefore, as S. James says, chap. 1. 5. If any man want wisdom let him
ask it of God, and it shall be given him: But let him ask in faith, nothing
wavering: for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind
and tossed to and fro. Neither let that man think that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord. So S. Paul, 1. Tim. 2. 8. would have men pray without
doubting. Examples; Psalm. 4. 3. and 55. 16, 17. And the Apostle S. John says,
This is our confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will he hears us: and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask
we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him, 1. John 5. 14, 15.
Wherefore seeing in Christ we have boldness and access with confidence by the
faith of him, Ephesians. 3. 12. we ought as we are exhorted Hebr. 4. 16. to come
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtein mercy and find grace to help
in time of need; and draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith,
Heb. 10. 19, 22.

But here a distinction is to be used. In matters That we must pray for
spiritual things absolutely;
spiritual necessary to salvation, as we are to ask them absolutely, as being
persuaded that God has subordinated our salvation to his own glory; so are we
absolutely to believe that the Lord will grant them unto us. Yea, this may be
added for our comfort, that if God has given us grace unfeignedly and
earnestly to desire any saving grace, the same grace is begun in us. In matters
temporal or spiritual for temporal things conditionally.
which are not necessary to salvation, as 2. Cor. 12. as we are to ask them
conditionally, so far forth as they may stand with Gods glory and the good of
our selves and our brethren, so are we to believe that he will so far forth
grant them, and therefore that he will either grant our desire or that which is
better. For which cause in such requests we are most willingly with our Savior
Christ to submit our will and desires to the will and pleasure of God, Matthew.
26. 39, 42. who as he knows what is good for us better then our selves, so he
is most ready to give good things unto us, Matthew. 7. 11. and therefore we are
always to believe that our requests being rightly conceived shall be granted
unto us.

I would believe that I should be heard, were it Object.
not for mine unworthiness and my wants in prayer.

Indeed thou may be such an one, and such Answ.
may be thy prayers, as thou can have no hope to be heard: that is, if thou
be an impenitent and unbelieving sinner God will not hear thee; or if thou
pray in hypocrisy and dissimulation the Lord will not hear thy prayer. But if
thou art a penitent and believing sinner, yea, if thou do unfeignedly desire
to believe and repent, and do pray unto the Lord in truth with unfeigned
lips, thou ought to pray with assurance to be heard: and this thy faith and
assurance must not be grounded on thine own worthiness or dignity of thy
prayer, but on the undoubted promises of God, and on the merits and mediation
of Christ, in whom both we and our prayers are accepted of God. As for the
sense of thine unworthiness, if it be in truth and joined with unfeigned
desire of grace, it ought to make thee the rather to pray in faith: for such,
as I have showed, our Savior calls with promise to hear and help them: And
such he pronounces blessed, Matthew. 11. 28. John 7. 37. Matthew. 5. 4, 5, 6.

Now for the helping of our faith, we are in our Meditations to strengthen our
faith in prayer.
preparation to meditate of these things especially: First, of the power of
God, who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we do ask or think,
Ephesians. 3. 20.

Secondly, of his fatherly good will, who will deny us nothing that is good,
Matthew. 7. 11. The consideration of both which our Savior has prefixed before
the Lords prayer, when he teaches us to call upon God as our Father, therein
noting his love and good will; which is in heaven, therein noting his power,
Psalm. 111. 3. that being persuaded that God is both able and willing to grant
our requests, we might pray in faith and assurance that our prayer shall be
heard.

Thirdly, of his gracious promises made unto prayer: as Matthew. 7. 7, 8. John
16. 23, 24. which if we cannot find in our hearts to believe, we are not to
pray; for in not believing we make God a liar.

Lastly and especially, of the merits and mediation of our Savior Christ who
sits at the right hand Romans ^. 34.
of his Father making intercession for us. Heb. 7. 25.


Though our prayer must be fervent and confident, yet with submission to the
will of God; Quid, Quale, Quantum, Quomodo, Quando, Vbi, what, of what kind,
how much, after what manner, when and where he is pleased to give, knowing that
he is able (...), exceeding abundantly. We are not to limit (...). 3. 20.
God or to circumscribe him by circumstances. It is reckoned, Psalm. 78. 41.
among the faults of the old Israelites, that they circumscribed the holy One of
Israel; and is effectually reproved by Judeth, chap* 8. 11, 16. in the
governors of Bethulia, who appointed to the Lord the term of five days to
deliver them, otherwise they would give up their city. Not that it is simply
unlawful to mention circumstances, so it be done with submission to the will
of God either expressed or understood; Genesis 24. 12, etc. Psalm. 102. 2.

Now, as I said, we do by prayer effectually crave that which we do well, that
is, lawfully and profitably, desire at the hands of God. Lawfully, when we
desire that which is good, and to a good end: For if it be not good which we
desire, then is our desire unlawful, and we sin in going about to make God
the author of sin. God has promised to give good things to them that ask,
Matthew. 7. 11. But if they be not good, they are not within the compass of Gods
promise, nor ought to come within the compass of our desire. If not to a good
end, our desire is not lawful nor our prayer acceptable, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.

But as the thing must be good in it self, so also it must be good unto us,
that is, expedient and profitable: for God as a most wise Father does not
always grant his children their desires; for many times they ask that which
would be hur^full: for we know not what to ask as we ought, Romans 8. 26. But he
hears them always though not ad voluntatem, to their will, yet ad
utilitatem, to their profit. And therefore when he seems not to satisfy our
particular desire, he graciously hears our prayer, if it be rightly
conceived. For we ought all to be of that mind which some of the heathen
expressed in their prayer mentioned in Plato and in the Greek Epigramme,

(...).
Good things, great Jove, pray or pray not, impart
To us; but bad, though craved, from us avert.
CHAP. XXIX. Of duties to be performed after prayer.
ANd these are the duties to be performed in the action of prayer. Out of the
action, before is required preparation: wherein we are to meditate of such
things as may help and further us for the exercise of such duties as are
required in the action, which I have already noted in the particulars.

After our prayer is ended we must quietly rest in 1. We must rest upon Gods
pleasure for the obteining of our suits.
the good will and pleasure of God; not doubting but the Lord as he has heard
our prayers, so in his good time will grant the same as shall be most for his
glory and our good. And this is the meaning of the word Amen, where with our
Savior has taught us (as it were) to seal up our prayers: for thereby as we
signify the consent of our desire, so also the assent of faith. This was
David's disposition, Psalm. 3. 4, 5. I did call unto the Lord with my voice;
there is his prayer: and he heard me out of his mountain; there is his
assurance that he was heard: I laid me down and slept; there is his quiet and
secure resting in the good will and protection of God who did sustein him. So
Psalm. 4. 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 5. 3. In the morning I will direct my prayer unto thee,
and speculabor, and I will look and wait, until thou shall grant my desire.
And such also was the disposition of Hannah after she had prayed, 1. Sam. 1. 18.

Secondly, as we crave good things at the hands 2. We must use the means to
obtein those things for which we have prayed.
of God, so we our selves must endeavor to attein unto them by all good means
possible. For otherwise our prayer is a tempting of God, as if we would have
our desire granted as it were by miracle, and a fruit of no faith or unfeigned
desire of the thing asked. For if we did truly believe and unfeignedly desire
the thing which we ask, we would leave no good means unattempted for the
obteining thereof. As for example, when I pray for faith or any other
spiritual grace, I must besides my prayer use all the good means carefully
which the Lord has ordained for the begetting and increasing of those graces
in us, as the hearing of the word preached, receiving the Sacrament, reading
and meditating in the word, etc. To this purpose there are many worthy sayings
of the heathen: as of Aeschylus, (...), God delights to be present with him
that labors: and, (...), When as any man uses his endeavor God also
puts to his hand: and, (...), Manum admoventi invocanda sunt Numina, Divine
powers are to be invocated by him that puts to his own hand: To which
purpose is that proverb of Varro, Dii facientes adjuvant, God assisteth
laborers: Adag. (...).

Thirdly, if having prayed and used other means 3. We must examine what is the
cause that we are not heard.
we do not obtein our desires, let us before we go any further labor to find
out the cause. If the fault be in our prayer, because we did ask amiss, Jam.
4. 3. as that we did not pray in faith, or in fervency, c. we must endeavor by
the assistance of Gods spirit, which we are to crave, to amend that fault. If
the fault be in our selves, as that we lie in some sin not repented of, we
must by repentance wash our selves, and then renew our prayers unto God, Isai.
1. 16, 18. It may be we neither so greatly desire the thing which we ask while
we want it, neither would so highly esteem it when we have it, as it deserves,
and therefore the Lord deferreth the granting of our suit, that our desire
being deferred might be more fervent, and the thing so hardly obtained might
both the more highly be esteemed and the more carefully kept. So Augustine,
Deus differt nostra postulata, ut discamus grandia grand^ter desider are: God
deferreth to grant our requests, that we may learn to desire greatly great
things.

Fourthly, having used the means and endeavored 4. We must persevere in prayer.
to remove the impediments, we are to persist and persevere in prayer without
fainting. To which purpose our Savior propounded the parable of the widow and
the judge, Luke 18. 1. giving us to understand that those things which we do
not obtein at the first, by reason of our perseverance and importunity shall
be granted. To which purpose also serves the parable of the two friends, Luke
11. 8. To this perseverance we are often stirred up both by precept, Romans 12.
12. and practice; as of Hannah, 1. Sam. 1. 12. of David, Psalm. 109. 4. who gave
himself to prayer; of Daniel, when he was forbidden under pain of death to call
upon God, Dan. 6. of Bartimeus the blind man, who calling upon Christ and being
therefore rebuked of the people did so much the more cry after him, Mark 10.
46, 48. of the woman of Syrophenicia, who having received diverse repulses yet
by her importunity obtained her desire, Matthew. 15. 22. of the Primitive Church,
Acts 2. 42. and 12. 5. of Cornelius, Acts 10. of Paul, who prayed without
ceasing.

Fifthly, as we are to persist with a kind of importunity 5. We must with
patience expect Gods leisure.
in our prayers, so are we with patience to expect the Lords leisure, Psalm. 40.
1. and 130, 5, 7. and not to be hasty, according to that, Isai. 28. 16. Qui
crediderit ne festinet, Let not him that believes make have: but, as it is
Psalm. 123. 2. waiting upon the Lord until he have mercy upon us, knowing, as
Jeremy speaks Lam. 3. 26. that it is good both to trust and to wait for the
salvation of the Lord; being assured that the Lord, who is a present help in
the time of need, will in his good time grant our requests. And therefore we
are exhorted Heb. 4. 16, to come with boldness to the throne of grace, that we
may obtein mercy and find grace (...), that is, for opportune help. And because
we have need of this patience, Heb. 10. 36. we are to stir up and encourage
our 6. We must be cont^ed with Gods good pleasure when he seems to deny us.
selves thereto, Psalm. 27. 13, 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, etc.

Sixthly, if having persisted in prayer and long expected the Lords leisure we
yet have not obtained our suit, insomuch that the Lord may seem rather wholly
to deny it then for a time to delay it, we are to rest in the good will and
pleasure of God, being persuaded that he has heard our prayers in a better
manner then we desired, hearing us though not ad voluntatem yet ad utilitatem,
that is, for our profit t^gh not according to our will; after the manner of
wise and careful parents, who will not give to their children what they ask
but what is profitable; and of good Physicians, who will not grant their
patients what they desire but what is expedient. And therefore we are in this
case to be disposed as Augustine directs us; Si quid contra quod oramus
acciderit, Aug. Epist. 121. ad Pro^am.
patienter ferendo, and in omnibus gratias agendo, hoc potius oportuisse quod
Dei non quod nostra voluntas habuit, minime dubitare debemus, by patient
bearing it, if any thing happens contrary to that which we have prayed for,
and in all things giving thanks; neither ought we to doubt but that it is
better that should come to pass which God wills then what we desired. And
this is true not only in temporal benefits, which it is good sometime to
want, but also in spiritual which are not necessary to salvation. As for
example; A man being troubled with some infirmity, which is as a prick in his
flesh moving him to sin, prays unto God to be delivered from it: but
howsoever his prayer in desiring to be freed from evil is acceptable unto God,
yet it may be he will not grant it, the denial being more for his glory and
our profit: for his glory, because his power is manifested in our weakness; to
make us work out our salvation with fear and trembling, to make us more
circumspect of our ways, knowing that we carry such an enemy about us, as if
we stand not upon our guard will be ready to foil us. Example hereof in Paul,
2. Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. And this ought to be our disposition when our requests do
seem not to be granted.

But if contrariwise the Lord has heard our prayers How we must carry our
selves when our requests are granted.
and granted our requests, then are we, First, to be thankful unto God for his
goodness, Psalm. 28. 6. and 66. 20. and 118. 21. Dan. 2. 23. Genesis 24. 26. John
11. 41. Secondly, our love of God must be increased and our faith confirmed
with greater confidence to make our prayers unto him for the time to come,
Psalm. 116. 1, 2. I love the Lord because he has heard the voice of my
supplications: because he has inclined his care unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live.

CHAP. XXXII. Distinctions of prayer in regard of the object.
NOw this kind of invocation admits some distinctions in regard of the
object: which is either Personal, or Real.

In regard of persons we pray either for our selves 1. Of the persons; For and
against whom we must pray.
or concerning others; howbeit when we pray for our selves we are also
ordinarily to pray for others, as our Savior has taught us.

The prayer which concerns others is properly called (...), intercession, and
it is either for them, 1. Tim. 2. 1. or against them, Romans 11. 2.

The others for whom we are to pray, are either deceased or living. The
deceased are either the elect, which are happy in heaven; or the reprobate,
damned in hell. For the elect in general we do pray in the second petition of
the Lords prayer, that the whole number of the elect being accomplished the
Lord would hasten the second coming of Christ, for our and their full
redemption, that both they and we may both in body and soul enjoy the felicity
of our blessed Savior, and by him the fellowship of the whole Trinity to our
complete and eternal happiness. As touching the reprobate in hell; we are not
to pray for them, but rather against them: which we do in general and by
consequence in the same petition.

In particular we are not to pray for any deceased: That we ought not to pray
for the dead.
For either they be in heaven, and then our prayer is needless; or in hell,
and then it is bootlesse. For as touching the purgatorie-fire, it was but a
smoke, and therefore vanished; or at the most a devised fire, serving for the
Popes kitchen, and the enriching of the Popish clergy. Furthermore, as he that
prays in particular for the saints in heaven wrongeth them, as supposing that
they need his prayer; so he that prays for any of the reprobate in hell
wrongeth himself; for such a prayer being without warrant, and therefore not of
faith, yea expressly against the Scriptures, which teach that out of hell
there is no redemption, is turned into sin. For what warrant have we to love
where we know that God does hate, or to make intercession for them to whom the
intercession of Christ does not belong?

But we know not whether they be in heaven or Object.
in hell.

But this we are to know, Whether they be in Answ.
heaven or hell we are not in particular to pray for them. If we know not their
estate, we are in charity to hope the best of those which die in the church;
for whom being in heaven we can by prayer procure no particular blessing.

Concerning those that are alive; We are commanded That we ought to pray for
those that are alive.
in the word of God to pray one for another, Jam. 5. 16. for all the Saints,
Ephesians. 6. 18. for the whole brotherhood of Christians, as our Savior has
taught us, Our Father, Give us, etc. The which as it does teach us our duty, so
to them that do it it ministers comfort. Frater, si pro te solo or as, solus
or as pro te: si pro omnibus, omnes or ant pro te: Brother, if thou prayest for
thy self alone, then thou alone prayest for thy self: if thou prayest for all,
then all pray for thee. And not only for the faithful are we to pray, but for
all men in general, that is, for men of all sorts and conditions, those only
excepted who have sinned against the holy Ghost: for whom there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and violent
fire which shall consume the professed enemies of God, Hebr. 10. 27. For these
we are not to pray, 1. John 5. 16.

Of the rest there is a distinction to be made in respect both of their outward
and inward estate. In regard of outward estate some are public persons, some
are private. We are to pray for all, but especially for the public, and those
which be in authority, 1. Tim. 2 1, 2. And as private persons are to pray for
the public, so contrariwise the public for the private, 1. Sam. 12. 23.

In regard of the inward estate, some are faithful, some are faithless. We
are to pray for all, but especially for those which be of the household of
faith, Psalm. 122. 6. Ephesians. 6. 18. Gal. 6. 10.

The faithless are the enemies of God, and some Object.
of them the enemies of our Church and country, and some enemies to our
selves; and shall we pray for such?

Although now they be the enemies of God, yet Answ. That we ought to pray for
unbelievers.
hereafter they may become friends and be reconciled unto him: whereof our
prayer may be a means: And therefore howsoever we are to pray against their
wicked practices, we are to pray for their persons, that they of enemies may
become friends; of infidels, faithful; of heretics and schismatics, sound
Christians; of wicked and profane, religious and holy: for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who wills that all men should be
saved and come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1. Timoth. 2. 4.

Examples of them who have prayed for the wicked are very many in the word of
God: As of Abraham, for the Sodomites, Genesis 18. Moses, for the rebellious
Israelites, Exodus 32. yea, for Pharaoh and the Egyptians; Samuel, for Saul; the
man of God, for Jeroboam, 1. Kings 13. But why seek I examples? We have a
commandment to pray for such as have sinned not unto death, and a promise to
procure mercy for them, 1. John 5. 16. and a complaint of God when this is not
performed, Ezekiel. 22. 30.

Prayers made for the wicked are many times Object.
without fruit.

If they be without fruit, though they be to them Answ.
idle, yet not to thee: Thy prayer shall return into thine own bosom, Psalm.
35. 13. according to that Mat. 10. 13. When ye come into an house, salute it,
or wish peace unto it: if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but
if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.

As for those that be our enemies; Though the Schoolmen teach that we are not
or at least need not specially to pray for them, yet our Savior Christ has
commanded us to love our enemies, to bless them that curse us, and to pray for
them who despitefully use us and persecute us. So Jer. 29. 7. Romans 12. 14. And
this was practiced by our Savior, Luke 13. 34. by Stephen, Acts 7. 60.

To this kind of praying for others we are to refer Of Blessing, a special
kind of prayer.
Blessing: which is a special kind of prayer of the superior for the
inferior, Heb. 7. 7. As of the Prince, 1. Kings 8. 55. of the Priest, Number. 6.
23, 24. of the parents, Genesis 9. and 27. and 49. To which the Lord has given
great force, insomuch that the prolonging of the childrens life and days
seems to be attributed to the parents in the fifth commandment, that they may
prolong their days, etc. And therefore not without cause are children taught
to crave the blessing of their parents; the rather because as it is our duty to
pray for others, so also to desire others to pray for us. Which has been done
not only by the inferior and weak in grace, as 1. Sam. 12. Jam. 5. 14. but
also by the chief Saints of God, as by Paul in many places of his epistles, as
Romans 15. 30. Ephesians. 6. 19. But when we desire others to pray for us, we must add
our Chrysoft. hom. 79.
own prayers, and our endeavor, and our repentance, if sin has separated
between God and us; otherwise the prayers of others though never so godly will
not avail us, Jer. 15. 1. Ezekiel. 14. 14.

Prayer against others is Querimonia or, Imprecatio. Of Prayer against others.


Complaint, is intercession against others, laying Complaint^
forth the evil that they do or intend against us, Romans 11. 2, 3. 1. Kings 19.
14. Psalm. 3. 1, 2. and 22. 7, 8, 12. Is^i. 37. 14. Acts 4. 29.

Imprecation is that intercession against others Imprecation
whereby we do not only declare their malum culpae, evil of sin; but desire
their malum poenae, evil of punishment. And hereof are three degrees: The
first, when we pray not against their persons but against their counsels and
practices, that God would confound them and bring them to naught: So David
prayed against Achitophel, 2. Sam. 15. 31. Secondly, when we pray the Lord to
inflict some temporal affliction upon them that they may be humbled and
brought to repentance, Psalm. 83. 16. Fill their faces with shame, O Lord, that
they may seek thy name. Job 34. 36. Optat Elihu ^obum tamdiu afs^igi donec
justitiam Dei agnoscat, and a responsionibus blasphemis qualibus impii utuntur
abstineat* Elihu wishes Job so long to be afflicted till he acknowledged Gods
justice, and absteined from blasphemous answers, such as the wicked do use.
Thirdly, when we pray for their utter destruction, Psalm. 55. 15. But Whether
imprecations be lawful.
here it may be demanded whether these kinds of imprecations be lawful and
agreeable to charity, and whether also they be imitable.

Of the first there is no question, seeing it is made not against their person
but their sin. Now it is profitable not only for him that prays, but for
the other also that is prayed against, that his sin may be restrained, and
his wicked practices prevented. Nor is there any great question to be made of
the second, if it be made in hatred of the sin and love of the person, that
the sin by the affliction may be mortified and the sinner saved. Concerning
the third, we are to distinguish between such imprecations as are generally
conceived against the wicked and obstinate enemies of God, and those which are
particular. For of the first there is no question to be made, that they be
warrantable and lawful, as they are generally propounded without having a
special eye to some particulars whom perhaps we malign; Judge. 5. 31. Psalm.
31. 17. Deuteronomy. 27. 15, etc. to the end of the chapter. 1. Cor. 16. 22. Anathema
Maranatha. Again, those that are directed against particular men, sometimes
they are, as Augustine says, verba praedicentium, the words of Contra (...)
stum.
those who foretell, rather then vota imprecantium, the wishes of them that
imprecate; as Genesis 9. 25. Psalm. 109. 7, 8. with Acts 1. 20. Jos. 6. 26. with 1.
Kings 16. 34. And such are the words denounced by our Savior to Chorazin and
Bethsaida, Matthew. 11. 21. against the Pharisees, Matthew. 23. and Luke 11. 42,
etc. against Judas, Matthew. 26. 24.

As touching the rest of the curses which the holy men of God in the Scriptures
have denounced against the wicked, wishing the ruin and destruction of their
persons, we are to hold that howsoever they were warrantable in them, yet not
imitable of us. They by the spirit of God were enlightened certainly to know
and discern those against whom they make such imprecations to have been the
desperate enemies of God appointed to destruction. Secondly, they were moved
not with private hatred but with a pure zeal of Gods glory, to which the love
of our neighbor must give place, desiring that God might be glorified in the
confusion of his obstinate enemies. Our safest course is to abstein from
imprecations


But as for us who neither have the like certainty of knowledge nor the like
purity of zeal, our safest course is altogether to abstein from imprecations
directed against the persons of men; knowing that when curses do proceed from
private hatred and malice, they are most horrible profanations of the name of
God, whereby malicious men go about to make God the executioner of their
malice: and therefore we are charged not to curse but to bless, 1. Pet. 3. 9.
even those that curse or persecute us, Romans 12. 14. Matthew. 5. 44. Cursed
therefore are they which use cursing, Psalm. 109. 17. especially if they curse
any of the heirs of the promise, to whom God has made this promise, Blessed be
he that blesses thee, and cursed be he that curses thee, Genesis 12. 3. and 27.
29.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the real object of prayer, or the things to be prayed for.
THe object real, or the thing which we do ask, is either undetermined and not
particularly expressed, or else it is determined and expressed in particular.
The former, when in general or in indefinite terms we desire the Lord to hear
us; Psalm. 4. 1. Hear me when I call; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer:
Psalm. 5. 1, 2. and 28. 1, 2. and 54. 2. and 55. 1, 2. and 61. 1. and 86. 1. and
88. 2. and 102. 1, 2. and 130. 1, 2. and 141. 1, 2. and 143. 1.

The object determined is either the glory of God or our own good. The
advancement of Gods glory is to be asked both absolutely and first. Absolutely,
I say, without any condition or respect of our own good, which we must
subordinate to the glory of God, and not the glory of God to it. If therefore
the glory of God and our own good come in comparison or in question whether
should give place, we ought to prefer the glory of God before our own
salvation. Example, Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3. For the glory of God is the chief
end, and our good is no otherwise to be desired then it is referred thereunto.
But as we are to ask it absolutely so also first: First, both in order, as our
Savior has taught us, this being the first petition of the Lords prayer; and
first in degree, that is, chiefly, because the end is always better and more
exc^llent then those things which are referred to the end: (...).

The things which we crave for our selves (under which word I comprehend all
men) is either the bestowing, continuing and increasing of some good, or else
deliverance or preservation from evil. In which regard prayer is either (...),
precatio boni, prayer for good; or (...), deprecatio mali, deprecation of evil.
(...) (...). 147.
(...), Prayer is the desiring of good concerning holy things made unto God,
says Basil. Phil. 4. 6. 1. Tim. 2. 1.

It was said before that the matter or object of Object.
our prayer must be good; how then can prayer admit a distinction in respect of
good and evil.

The avoiding or taking away of evil is good: Amotio Answ.
mali habet rationem boni, Removing of evil has the reason of good: And, as
the Orator says, Bellum est cavere malum, It is a good thing to shun evil.
And hereupon the benefits of God are distinguished into positive, which are
real benefits; and privative, which is deliverance or preservation from evil.
The good things which we crave for our selves belong either to the obteining of
a better life, or for the mainteining of this life: the former are commonly
called spiritual blessings, and the latter temporal.

The spiritual blessings (I mean so many as are necessary to salvation) we are
to ask absolutely; because such spiritual blessings are absolutely
subordinated to Gods glory and man's salvation. And secondly, among those things
which we crave for our selves they are first to be desired and sought, Matthew.
6. 33. And that order our Savior observes in the Lords prayer, teaching us
after the glory of God, in the next place to seek our own chiefest good. For by
the kingdom of God we are to understand both the kingdom of glory and the
kingdom of grace. The kingdom of glory comes to us in our glorification, the
kingdom of grace in our vocation, whereby we are brought out of the kingdom
of Satan into Gods kingdom; and secondly in our justification, whereby we are
both endued with the privileges of his kingdom, which are the righteousness
of God imputed, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and also
entitled unto the kingdom of heaven. And by doing the will of God on earth as
it is done in heaven, is meant the righteousness of God so far as it is by us
to be performed, or the righteousness of sanctification, which is both the
cognizance of all true subjects of the kingdom of grace, and the proper note
of all the heirs of the kingdom of glory, Acts 26. 18. and 20. 32.

As touching temporal benefits; Some have denied that they are to be asked of
God; as the Marcionites and Manichees: others have doubted concerning the same;
as Chrysostom and Basil, as being unworthy either for us to seek and ask of
God, or for him to give unto us. But our Savior, when he bids us first seek
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, implies that temporal things are
to be sought also in a secondary respect: For, as Lyra says, Primum relative
dicitur ad secundum. Cum ergo dicit, Primo quaerendum, significavit quod hoc
posterius quaerendum non tempore sed dignitate (id est, secundaria quadam
ratione) illud tanquam bonum nostrum, hoc tanquam necessarium nostrum;
necessarium autem propter illud bonum: FIRST is relatively spoken August. De
sermon. Dom. in m^te, l. 2.
with reference to a latter: And therefore when he says that we must seek it
first, he implies that this is to be sought afterward, not in respect of time
but dignity (that is, in a secondary respect;) that as our good, this as
necessary. For whereas it may be objected, that temporal benefits are not
quaerenda sed adjicienda quaesitis, not to be sought, but to be added to things
sought; I answer, That God has promised to add these things, but not to those
that tempt God in neglect of prayer and other means, but to such as seek them
in a secondary respect. Whereunto we may add the practice of the godly; Genesis
28. 20. 1. Kings 8. 33, 35, 37. Prove. 30. 8. and the precept of our Savior
Christ, teaching us to say, Give us this day our daily bread. It cannot be
denied but that in asking temporal things many do err, either asking them
chiefly or absolutely; but as we must ask and seek them in a secondary respect,
so also conditionally, so far forth as they stand with the glory of God and
our own spiritual good.

But these outward things are not to be cared for, Object.
and therefore not to be prayed for.

Christ does not forbid curam providentiae, sed Answ.
(...), curam solicitudinis and diffidentiae, the care of providence, but
carking care and diffidence. Phil. 4. 6. Be nothing careful, but in all things
let your requests be manifested. And where they think these things unworthy the
Lords gift, they must understand that his providence submits it self to the
lowest creature; and he gives food to all even the basest creatures*

The mind in and by prayer is to be lifted up to Object.
God, and not to be depressed to things below: But when we pray for temporal
things the mind is not elevated but depressed.

When we so ask temporal things for themselves, Answ.
resting in them as the end, our mind is depressed and our heart is set upon
them, but not so when they are asked as means to further Gods glory and our own
spiritual good.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Deprecation.
NOw follows Deprecation, which is called (...). The evil which we do
deprecari, that is, desire either to be delivered from, whether in whole, ut
avertatur, that it may be averted, or in part, ut mitigetur, that it may be
mitigated if it be upon us; or to be kept and preserved therefrom if we be in
any danger thereof, ut antevertatur, that it may be prevented, is either the
evil of sin or the evil of punishment. In the former we pray that our sins
may be removed and taken away, that is, that we may be delivered either from
the guilt of sin, which is our justification; or from the fault and Of
confession of our sins, and that it is most profitable and necessary. De
confessione peccat. Sermon. 66. De Tempor.
corruption, which is our sanctification.

In prayer for the forgiveness of sin these things specially are required:
First, in the action it self, confession of sins. And of this Augustine
speaks excellently: Hortatur nos saepius Scriptura ad medicamenta fugere
confessionis: Non quod Deus indigeat confessione nostra, etc. The Scripture
does often exhort us to flee to the medicine of confession, not that God
needs our confession, unto whom all things are present which we think, speak
and do; but because we cannot otherwise be saved unless we confess penitently
that which we have done amiss negligently. He that accuses himself in his
sins, the devil has not whereof to accuse him in the day of judgment. If at
least confessing he do by repenting blot out what he has done, and does not
again renew them, etc. Let the sinner whilst he lives confess the sins
which he has committed, because confession is fruitless in hell, neither does
repentance there profit to salvation. Behold, now is the day of salvation, now
is the time acceptable to God; now is the time of pardon to the penitent: but
after death there will be a time of vengeance for those that neglect to
confess their sins. For all wicked men have bitter repentance in torments,
but it does not profit the^ for pardon: but their conscience to^tureth them for
the increase of their pains which they suffer, etc. All hope of pardon
consists in confession. So A^ fratres in Eremo, Sermon. 30. O honto, ne tardes
converti ad Deum, etc. O man, says he, do not delay to turn unto God. Examine
thy mind, search all the secrets of thy heart; consider before thou come to
confession that thy heart has sinned in coveting evil things, thine eye in
beholding vanity, thy mouth in speaking falsehood, thine ear in hearing lies,
thy hand in perpetrating blows and murders, etc. Let therefore thine heart
gri^ve, thine eye weep, thy mouth pray without inter^ssion, thine ear hear
the word of God, thine han^ give alms, etc. thy feet come to Church, thy knees
bow and labor, etc. And do not defer it: For God has prom^sed pardon to the
penitent, but he has not promised life till to morrow to him that delayeth it.
Thus much Augustine.

Now this confession is both prositable and necessary. It has the promise of
forgiveness: So to the hiding of our sins is pardon denied, 1. John 1. 8, 9.
If we deny our s^, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us; but we
bewray our selves to be hypocrites: If we consesse our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper; but he that (...)
and forsakes them shall have mercy. We see this verified in the example of
David: For while he concealed his sin, the hand of the Lord was heavy upon
him to afflict him, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. but when he confessed and acknowledged his
iniquity, the Lord forgave him his sin, verse. 5. As Soon as David reproved by
Nathan confessed his sin, the Propher presently assures him that his sin
was forgiven, 2. Sam. 12.

Now this confession is to be made of unknown How this confession is to be made.
sins generally, Psalm. 19. 13. of known sins particularly, together with
the aggravating circumstances, Psalm. 51. 4, 5. and in both we are freely to
acknowledge what we h^ve deserved ^or the same, Ezra 9. 6, 7. Dan. 9. 4, 5.
that judging our selves we may not be judged of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 31. and
that the Lord when he judges may be justified, Psalm. 51. 4. To which purpose
we are to abhor our selves in dust and ashes, Job 42. 6. and to behave our
selves before the Lord as Benhadad and ^is followers before Ahab the King of
Israel, 1. Kings 20. 31. And that this confession may be made accordingly, That
examination should go before conf^sion.
we are in our preparation both to try and examine ourselves by the law of God,
to find out our sins which we are seriously to confess, Lam. 3. 40, 41. and
also labor that we may see and feel our misery in respect of them, that
laboring and being wearied under the burden of them, we may out of an humble
and contrite soul pour out our supplications unto the Lord. The neglect
whereof is reproved Jer. 8. 6.

And that we may obtein forgiveness we are also Charity and repentance
required before con^ssion, and aft^r.
to come in charity, being as desirous to forgive our brethren that have
offended us as we desire to be forgiven of the Lord, Matthew. 6, 14, 15. See
Ecclus 28. 2, 3. 1. Tim. 2. 8. (...), without wrath. And likewise we are to
repent of those sins the pardon whereof we desire: For that is pretended in
our asking forgiveness, that is, both to be sorry for our sin past, and to
promise and purpose unfeignedly amendment for the time to come.

And both these duties of charity and repentance are likewise to be practiced
in our lives after we have craved forgiveness at the hands of God. For as
touching the duty of charity in forgiving others; If after we have desired
forgiveness, and in our conceit have obtained pardon, if we deal unmercifully
with our brother, whom we will not forgive, it will be an evidence against us
that our sins indeed were not pardoned, Matthew. 18. 23, to 35. And for the
other duty of repentance; A man cannot have assurance of the forgiveness of
his sin which he does continue in: For God does not remit the sins which we
our selves retein; He that confesses and forsakes his sin shall have mercy,
Prove. 28. 13.

And as we are to pray for the forgiveness of sin or taking away of the
guilt, so we must also pray that we may be delivered from the corruptions and
preserved against tentations alluring unto sin for the time to come. And as
we are to pray against corruptions and tentations, so must we in our lives
strive and fight against our corruptions and resist tentations, avoiding also
occasions of evil; otherwise how can we ask that of the Lord which we our
selves will not yield unto in our practice.

So much of prayer against malum culpae, the Of prayer against the evil of
punishment.
evil of sin. There is also prayer against malum poenae, the evil of
punishment, both spiritual and temporal and also eternal. The spiritual is,
when God does punish sin with sin, blinding the eyes of men, and hardening
their hearts, and giving them over to a reprobate sense. The temporal, when
God does either for chastisement, or trial, or punishment, afflict men with
the afflictions and calamities of this life: against which sort this kind of
deprecation is most usual. Psalmus (...), Ne perdas; Psalm. 57, 58, 59, 75.

But in this kind of prayer especially we must wholly submit and resign our
selves unto the good will and pleasure of God, who knows what is good for us
better then our selves; with p^tience and comfort to bear what it shall please
God to lay upon us, after the example of David, 2. Sam. 15. 26. and of our
Savior, Matthew. 26. 39, 42. For herein especially that is verified Romans 8. that
we Vide Aug. ^pist. 121.
know not what to ask. For to be afflicted is not simply evil, but contrariwise
works for the good of them that are afflicted, Romans 8. 28. Insomuch that
David professes that it had been good for him that he had been afflicted,
Psalm. 119. 71. and Jeremy, Lam. 3. 27. yea, David pronounces the man blessed
whom the Lord does chastise and nurture in his law, Psalm. 94. 12.

Deprecation of calamities is often joined with Lamentations particularly
bewayling their state, and Expostulations. Example of the former in the
Lamentations of Jeremie. Expostulations are vehement interrogations of the
afflicted expressed from their grief, whereby they expostulate with God
concerning the greatness or continuance of their afflictions, Psalm. 22. 1.

But here we must take heed that our expostulation be a lively fruit of a
strong faith, lest perhaps it do degenerate into open murmuring and repining
against God: David, Psalm. 22. 1. and our Savior Christ being assured that the
Lord is his God, and therefore calling him, My God, my God, expostulateth with
him why, b^ing h^s God, he had forsaken him. So much of Petition or Prayer.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Thanksgiving.
THanksgiving is that invocation whereby we do render due thanks and praise
unto God for his benefits. As touching the name; This duty is by Of the diverse
names and phrases whereby thanksgiving is expressed in the Scriptures.
diverse names expressed in the Scriptures, Psalm. 100. 4. Isai. 12. Psalm. 145.
2. As, To praise God, Genesis 29. 35. To bless him, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. and 104. 1.
1. Chron. 29. 13. Jam. 3. 9. To confess unto him, Matthew. 11. 25. H^b. 13. 15.
To give him thanks, Psalm. 105. 1. 1. Chron. 16. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Romans 1. 21.
Ephesians. 5. 20. To magnify the Lord, Luke 1. 46. Act. 10. 46. and 19. 17. To
extol him, Psalm. 145. 1. To exalt his name, Psalm. 34. 3. To glorify him,
Matthew. 9. 8. and 15. 31. Luke 2. 20. To make his name glorious, Psalm. 66. 1, 2.
To offer (viz. a voluntary oblation) ^hanksgiving and praise, Psalm. 50. 14, 23.
To offer the sacrifice of praise unto God, that is, the fruit of our lips
confessing to his name, Heb. 13. 15. as Hosea speaks chap. 14. 2. To render
the calves of our lips; To sacrifice unto God with the voice of thanksgiving,
Jon. 2. 9. Psalm. 116. 17. To sacrifice the sacrifice of thanksgiving.

The duties required in thanksgiving are either Of the common duties required
in thanksgiving
common to it with prayer, or proper and peculiar unto it. For when I say that
thanksgiving is a kind of invocation, you are to understand that all those
things which were spoken of in the general treatise are particularly to be
applied to thanksgiving. The which I will the rather do, because commonly those
things are delivered not as general points but as particular to prayer.

Thanksgiving therefore as well as prayer, is a Thanksgiving what it is.
religious speech of the faithful unto God in the name of Christ, made
according to the will of God by the help of the holy Ghost, concerning good
things apperteining to Gods glory and our own good. I call it a religious
speech, because it is a principal part of that religious worship which we ow
unto God: whereby it is also distinguished from the civil thanksgiving to men,
and is therefore religiously to be performed.

In the rest of the definition I noted six things which are essential to all
invocation, and without which it cannot be acceptable unto God: First, That the
party which does invocate must be faithful: for God hears not sinners: And
thanksgiving being a sacrifice, the holy Ghost tells us that the sacrifice of
the wicked is abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. The proper subject of Gods
praise is the Church: The proper subject of Gods praise is the church
Ephesians. 3. 21. To him be praise in the Church. Psalm. 65. 1. Praise waits for
God in Sion. The Lord, Psalm. 50. 14, 15. exhorts his saints and his peculiar
people to offer unto him thanksgiving, and to call upon him in the day of
trouble: But v. 16. unto the wicked says God, What have thou to do to declare
my statutes, and to take my covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and castest my wor^s behind thee? Sacrifices are to be offered by
none but priests; and all the faithful and they only are a royal priest^ood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 2.
5, 9. Revel. 1. 6.

This duty is necessarily required of all, and cannot without sin be omitted
by any; but cannot be Thanksgiving can be rightly performed by the faithful
only.
acceptably performed but by the faithful. And therefore the faithful are in
a special manner exhorted to this duty, Psalm. 30. 4, and 145. 10. and 149. 5,
6. And this shows the necessity of faith in Christ and repentance toward
God. Again, those which give thanks must be joyful and rejoice in the Lord;
but the wicked cannot rejoice in the Lord; neither ought they whilst they
continue in their sins to be joyful: yea, our Savior denounces a woe to
such laughers, Luke 6. The faithful therefore alone are exhorted, as to
rejoice always, so in all things to give thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 18. Psalm.
132. 9, 16. and 149. 2, 3, 5, 6. and 33. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye
righteous; for praise is comely for the upright.

Secondly, as prayer so also thanksgiving is to Thanksgiving is to be offe^ed
unto God alone.
be offered unto God alone as the author and principal giver of all good
things, Jam. 1. 17. Psalm. 50. 14. Col. 3. 17. Ephesians. 5. 20. We may and ought to
be thankful unto men as unto the instruments of God; as Romans 16. 4. And to be
unthankful is a great fault; 2. Tim. 3. 2. But if neglecting God we give
thanks unto men as the authors, we commit sacrilegious idolatry in robbing God
of his honor and giving it unto men. In this sense praise and thanksgiving is
a sacrifice which must be offered to the Lord alone; and in this sense his name
alone is to be exalted, Psalm. 148. 13. and therefore they which so give thanks
to men, or rest in the means, they sacrifice unto them and make them their God;
they sacrifice to their net and burn incense to their drag, Hab. 1. 16. Ephesians. 5.
20. (...), unto God and the Father.

Thirdly, Thanksgiving as well as Prayer is to be Thanksgiving to be offered in
the name of Christ.
offered unto God in the name of Christ, Ephesians. 8. 20. (...), in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 3. 21. (...), through Christ Jesus, Romans 1. 8. and 7. 25. Col. 3. 17.
Heb. 13. 15. For we are an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 8. 3.

Fourthly, for the manner; There is required in Of the manner of thanksgiving
the soul, 1. in general, that our thanksgiving be a speech of the soul and
not of the lips alone. David therefore in some places stirs up his soul to
praise God, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. and 104. 1. And elsewhere he professes that he
would praise God with his whole heart, Psalm. 9. 1. and 86. 12. and 111. 1. that
is, with an upright heart, Psalm. 119. 7. To which purpose Paul also exhorts
us to sing in our hearts unto God, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. To little purpose
serves the outward melody of the voice, unless there be a concent thereof
with the heart: We must therefore be careful to sing David's Psalms with
David's affections; but we may not sing or praise God either with feigned lips
or with wandering thoughts.

2. In the mind there is required, first, Understanding; Psalm. 47. 7. Col. 3.
16. and secondly, Faith, whereby we are to be persuaded that this our service
and sacrifice of praise is acceptable unto God in Christ; without which our
thanksgiving cannot be as it ought, cheerful: unless we be persuaded by faith
of Gods goodness toward us how can we be thankful to him?

3. In our heart it is required that our praise or thanksgiving be humble,
reverent, and hearty: Humble; that we may ascribe the whole praise unto God,
unto whom alone it is due, and assume no part thereof unto our selves; Psalm.
115. 1. Reverent; for without reverence we cannot give unto the Lord the praise
that is due unto his name, Psalm. 29. 2. nor ascribe unto him eternal kingdom,
power and glory. We must in our thanksgiving rejoice in God, but we must
rejoice in reverence, Psalm. 2. 11. and 95. 2, 6. performing therein a religious
service and worship to God. Hearty, with all our heart; and that in particular
with thankfulness and cheerfulness, without which our thanks will be either
cold or counterfeit. See Psalm. 68. 26.

And as for bodily duties: The voice in more special manner is required in
thanksgiving. Therefore our tongue is called our glory, because by it we are to
glorify God. We are not by silence to smother Gods praise; but as we are
inwardly thankful so must we testify our inward thankfulness by our outward
thanksgiving. And in this kind of Invocation especially is singing warranted
and commended unto us in the Scriptures, not only of the Old Testament but
also of the New, Jam. 5. 13. Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. Matthew. 26. 30. Acts 16.
25.

Fifthly, this invocation also is to be performed by the help of the holy
Ghost. For naturally we are tongue-tied in Gods praises: but it is the spirit
of God that does open our lips that our mouth may show forth his praise, Psalm.
51. 15. It is the spirit of grace which makes us to sing with grace in our
hearts.

Sixthly and lastly, our thanksgiving must be for good and lawful things:
otherwise we go about to make God the author of evil.

CHAP. XXXVI. Special duties required in thanksgiving.
THe duties specially required in Thanksgiving do concern either the manner
how, or the time when, or the object for which we are to give thanks. For the
manner, there are duties required both in the action it self and out of it,
that is, before and after.

In the action there are duties required both inward and outward.

The inward are (...), Thankfulness; and (...), Cheerfulness.

The former is required Col. 3. 16. that we should 1. Thankfulness.
sing (...), with grace in our hearts. For (...) and gratia do signify both
the benefit and the thanks; as when we say, (...), Gratia gratiam parit, A good
turn begets thanks: And in this sense the word grace is used for
Thanksgiving at meals. The grace therefore that is required in the soul is
Thankfulness. For outward thanksgiving without inward thankfulness is
counterfeit and hypocritical. There is no doubt but that habendae sunt gratiae
quas agimus, we must have thankfulness when we give thanks. And as prayer is
the expressing of our desire, so thanksgiving is the testifying of our
thankfulness. And therefore as they play the hypocrites which pray for that
which they do not desire, so likewise they which give thanks for that for which
they are not thankful, either because they have it not, or do not think
themselves beholding to God for it, Luke 18. And as in prayer the Lord
especially regards the desire of the heart; so in thanksgiving, the
thankfulness of the soul.

Now unto this thankfulness there is required

grata
recordatio, mindfulnesse, in the soul; agnitio, acknowledgement, in the soul;
affectio, affection, in the heart.
For first, if we be not mindful of Gods benefits, 2. Rememb^ance of Gods
benefits.
non habemus gratias, we bear them not in mind, we are not thankful. And
therefore we are often stirred up to remember Gods benefits, and straightly
charged that we do not forget them: for to forget them is to be unthankful.
See Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11, 12. and 8. 11, 14, 17, 18. and 32. 15, 18. Psalm. 103. 2.
and 116. 21. And this remembrance it must be effectual, moving us to be
thankful both in heart, word, and deed, Psalm. 78. 7. Deuteronomy. 8. 11.

The second is a grateful acknowledgement beneficii 3. A grateful
acknowledgment of Gods benefits.
Divini, of Gods goodness; and officii nostri, of ou beholdingness. To the
grateful acknowledg^ent of Gods benefit is required, first a faithful gnizing
of the author or benefactour, and a rig^ prizing of the benefit. For if we
would be tr^ thankful unto God, we must acknowledge, w^t good thing soever we
have, whether spiri^all or temporal* by what means soever, that God i^ ^he
author and giver thereof, Jam. 1. 17. But in^delity in not acknowledging God
to be the giver, ^ut either resting in the secondary causes, which are but the
instruments of God, or ascribing the good things we have either to our good
fortune or to our own industry or worthiness, makes men unthankful unto God.
For faithless men, as when they desire any good thing which they want do not
seek unto God, so having obtained their desire they do not return praise unto
him, but ascribe the good thing which they have either to blind fortune with
profane Atheists, or to their idols with idolaters and Papists, Hos. 2. 5, 8.
or else rest in secondary causes as the principal, and prefer the tool
before the workman, Isai. 10. 15. or attribute it to their own means and
industry, and so sacrifice to their net, Hab. 1. 16. or lastly to their own
wisdom and worthiness, as if they were gods to themselves, Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18.

The second thing is a grateful estimate and a 4. A grateful estimate of Gods
benefits.
right prizing of Gods benefits, as well when we have them as when we want
them. But ungrateful men lightly esteem the benefits of God when they have
them, which they greatly desire and highly prize when they want them. The which
is most usual in ordinary blessings: The benefits of ^ealth, of peace, of
liberty, the spiritual food of ^ods word, etc. we make no reckoning of them
wh^ we have them; but carendo magis quam fruendo, by ^ting rather then enjoying
them we learn rightl^ to prize them: and God many times bereaveth me^ of these
benefits that by the want they may learn rig^tly to value them, and to be
thankful unto him (...) them. Our duty therefore is, not to extenua^ Gods
blessings, but with thankful acknowledge meant rather to amplify them, in
respect of the greatness of them, the excellency, the profit, the
commodiousnesse, the necessity, the sufficiency; saying with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 16. 6. acknowledging also therein Gods wisdom, power, goodness,
fatherly providence and bounty toward us; being persuaded that he does all
things well, Mark 7. 37. and that by the gracious dispensation of his good
providence he causes all things to work for our good, Romans 8. 28. They
therefore are unthankful who either extenuate or lightly esteem the benefits
of God (which, as I said, is usual in ordinary blessings) Number. 11. 6. or,
which is worse, do take in ill part that which God has done for their good,
Deuteronomy. 1. 27. which is usual in the fatherly chastisements and crosses which
God lays upon us for our profit, Heb. 12. 10. But who is wise and will
observe these things, even he shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord, Psalm. 107. 43.

And as we are thankfully to acknowledge Gods 5. An acknowledgement of our
beholdingness.
goodness toward us, so also we are humbly to acknowledge our own
beholdingness. Which we shall the better do if to the acknowledgement of Gods
goodness we shall add the consideration of our own nullity in our selves and
our own unworthi^esse.

For first, if we consider that we came naked into the world in respect of
temporal blessings, and void of all spiritual goodness, we will acknowledge
that what good thing soever we have we are beholding unto the Lord for it: Job
1. Naked we came into the world, and naked we shall go out of it: for what have
we that we have not received? 1. Cor. 4. 7. and that by the grace of God we are
that we are, 1. Cor. 15. 10.

But secondly, if we add thereto the consideration 6. An acknowledgement of
our unworthines
of our unworthiness by reason of our sins, by which we have deserved the
plagues of God in this life and eternal damnation in the life to come, we
shall be thankful to God in all estates, acknowledging that he has not dealt
with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, Psalm.
103. 10. In time of distress we shall acknowledge his great bounty that we are
not consumed, Lam. 3. 22. and so be thankful for his privative blessings. And
for the positive, if we have any (as we never are without some, more or less)
we will acknowledge with Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. that we are less then the least
of his mercies. But if in stead of heaping his judgments upon us which we have
deserved, he multiply his blessings which we have not deserved in the least
degree, how are we then to acknowledge our own unworthiness with David, 1.
Chron. 17. 16. and 29. 14, 15.?

True humility therefore is the mother of thankfulness: 7. Humility the mother
of thankfulness.
But pride contrariwise makes men unthankful, persuading themselves either
that they have not so much as they are worthy of, and so are discontented that
they have no more; or that whatsoever they have is to be ascribed to their own
worthiness, wisdom or strength, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. Isai. 10. 13. which is to make
themselves Gods; Ezekiel. 28. 4, 5, 6. D^n. 4. 30. 8. Joy and rejoy^ing.


Now this acknowledgement of Gods goodness and our beholdingness, if it be
effectual as it ought to be, will work upon the heart that it shall be
gratefully affected with the sense of Gods goodness and bounty toward us,
causing us to love God and rejoice in him, and to be obsequious toward God in
all duties of thankfulness. For upon this sense and acknowledgement of Gods
goodness toward us wherewith we are affected, follows alacrity and
cheerfulness, which is the second inward duty required in thanksgiving. For as
the Lord loves a cheerful giver, so a cheerful thanksgiver: and as (...),
thanks, comes of (...), which is, to rejoice, so (...) must be (...), with
joy, Phil. 1. 4. Jam. 5. 13. If any man be merry, let him sing Psalms.

The holy Ghost in many places has joined them together; as Psalm. 9. 2. and
33. 1. and 81. 1. and 92. 1, 4. and 100. 1, 2, 4. and therefore they ought not
to be severed by us. It is the duty of the faithful, who have tasted how good
and gracious (...)
the Lord is, to rejoice in the Lord: Psalm. 104. 34. and 149. 5. and 32. 11.
and 33. 1. Phil. 4. 4. especially when we praise him and give him thanks. For
when men are dull, neither affected with any sense of Gods goodness nor with
cheerfulness, their thanks are not hearty but cold and counterfeit. So much of
the inward duties.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the outward expressing inward thankfulness by praising God.
THe outward duty is, to express our inward thankfulness and cheerfulness:
Our thankfulness, by celebrating and praising the name of God, extolling his
goodness, recounting his mercies, and exciting others to praise God: Our
cheerfulness, jubilando, by making a joyful noise, and singing unto God;
Psalm. 100. 1. and 81. 1. Jam. 5. 13.

Now because naturally we are backward in the performance of this duty,
insomuch that scarce one of ten can be found to return praise and thanks unto
God, as appears in the story of the ten lepers, Luke 17. 17. I will therefore
use some arguments Reasons moving us to praise God.
to move us thereunto. And first that threefold argument Psalm. 147. 1. Praise
ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises to our God: for it is pleasant, and
praise is comely. I. It is good: For it is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. It is the commandment of God in many places;
Psalm. 50. 14. And the same is testified Psalm. 92. 1, 2.

II. It is pleasant: Psalm. 135. 3. For it is an exercise wherein not only the
faithful on earth do especially rejoice, but also the Saints and Angels in
heaven, who enjoy perpetual joy and happiness, rejoicing and reposing therein
a part of their happiness.

III. It is decent or com^ly: 1. in respect of God, to whom all glory and
praise is due, and it is therefore just to give unto him the glory and praise
which is due unto his name, Psalm. 92. 2. in respect both of his attributes and
works: Praise the Lord: for he is good; for his mercy endures for ev^r, Psalm.
136. 1, 2, etc.

Secondly, in respect of the faithful; Psalm. 33. 1. For what can more become
those who by Christ's benefit are become priests to offer spiritual sacrifices
unto God, then to sacrifice praise unto him? 1. Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 1. 5. By him
therefore let us offer continually the sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the
fruit of our lips, confessing to his name, Heb. 13. 15.

To these we may add another ternion of arguments, That praise and
thanksgiving is an exercise it self most Excellent, to God most Honorable, to
us most Necessary.

1. The excellency of it may appear by comparing The excellency of this duty.
it, first to the sacrifices of the Law: For the sacrifice of praise, the
calves of our lips, is far preferred before the sacrifices of goats and
bulls, Psalm. 50. 14. secondly, with Prayer: for as it is a more blessed thing
to give then to receive, Acts 20. 35. so a more excellent thing to give thanks
then to beg and crave. Again, what more excellent thing can be done on earth
then that which is the exercise of the Saints and Angels in heaven? and
therefore to praise God is not only an excellent but also a blessed exercise;
wherein the faithful have reposed happiness, Psalm. 84. 4. Blessed are they
that dwell in thine house: they will be still praising thee.

2. Praise is Honorable to God; Psalm. 50. 23. He 2. Praise honorable to God.
that sacrifices praise he honors me. God so highly esteems his praises
proceeding from us, as if thereby something were added to his glory, to which
being infinite nothing can be added. Therefore the praising of God in the
Scriptures is called bl ssing. Psalm. 103. 1. the magnifying of God, Luke 1. 46.
and the glorifying of his name, Matthew. 9. 6. the making of his praise glorious,
Psalm. 66. 2. or, as some read, appone gloriam nomini ejus, appoint glory to
his name, not that our praises indeed do make him great or glorious, or add to
the glory of his name, for his name is exalted above all praise, Nehem. 9. 5.
but that to encourage us to this duty he is pleased so to term the setting
forth of his praise, and the declaring or celebrating of his glory.

3. It is Necessary, 1. Necessit^te praecepti, by necessity 3. Praising of God
necessary.
of precept, Psalm. 50. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. the which imposes necessitatem
officii, the necessity of duty, and the rather because we are priests ordained
to offer spiritual sacrifices, 1. Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 1. 3. Heb. 13. 15. because
in our daily prayers we desire that we may glorify his name, and therefore in
our lives are to endeavor it. We desire also that his will may be done; but
this is the will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. Would we, as we pray, do the will of
God as it is done in heaven? then must we be frequent in sounding forth his
praise: for this is the exercise of the Saints and Angels in heaven.

II. Necessitate medii, by necessity of the means; as a necessary means, in
respect both of our good and Gods glory. 1. Of our good, for new blessings:
because it is the condition upon which the Lord promises to hear and deliver
us, Psalm. 50. 15. And in this respect thanksgiving is also profitable, because
God will honor them that honor him, 1. Sam. 2. 30. The readiest way to obtein
new blessings, is to give As^census gratiarum est descensus gratiae.
thanks for the old: not that by giving thanks we deserve better and greater
blessings, as the Papists reach: for this i before confuted. 2. In respect of
Gods glory, which is the sovereigne end of all. All creatures do set forth Gods
glory, Psalm. 19. 1. and 148. The dumb creatures, as Basil says, are (...),
silent praysers and piercing preachers of Gods hidden works: but much more men,
who set forth Gods praise not only as the matter but as the instruments of his
praise, Psalm. 145. 10. Our speech was given us to glorify God; and therefore
our tongue is our glory: So that they are worse then bruit creatures who are
mute in Gods praises. Yea, such necessity there is of praising and glorifying
of God, that if men should be silent God would make the stones to sound forth
his praise

III. Necessitate signi, by the necessity of the sign. For it is necessary
not only that we should be thankful unto God for his mercies, but also that
we should express our thankfulness. And for as much as we cannot reserre or
recompense Gods bounty, ( for our goodness will not reach to him, Psalm. 16.
3.) It remains therefore that we must agere gratias, that is, give thanks.
For if we should enter into consultation with our selves, and deliberate what
course we should take to testify our thankfulness, our resolution must be the
same with that of David, Psalm. 1 16. 12, 17. Seeing then this is the only
thing besides the glorifying of God by a godly conversation that we can do to
express our thankfulness, we are very unthankful if we be defective herein.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the duties which ought to be performed before and after
thanksgiving: and of the object and time.
DUties to be performed out of the action both before and after.

Before, Preparation: Psalm. 108. 1. and 57. 7. Before, is required preparation.
Wherein, first, we are to stir up our selves to the performance of this
duty, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. and 104. 1. Secondly, we are to meditate of Gods
undeserved bounty toward us, and our own unworthines. Thirdly, because of our
selves we are unable, we are to crave the assistance of Gods Spirit, that he
opening our lips we may show forth his praise, Psalm. 51. 17.

After, we are to testify our thankfulness, First, After, we must testify
our thankfulness.
by referring the benefits and gifts received to the glory of God the giver, in
the good of his Church. Secondly, in seeking to glorify God who has been so
gracious unto us, by bringing forth the fruits of a godly life, John 15. 8. by
shunning sin, John 5. 14. and walking in new obedience. Thirdly, by honoring
the Lord with our substance, Prove. 3. 9. and acknowledging him to be the chief
Lord from whom we do hold all good things; by giving unto him the tithes which
are his, Levit. 27. Debentur Deo, etc. They are due unto God by virtue of his
universal dominion over all, and by him assigned before the Law to the
firstborn which were his Priests, as to Melchisedec; under the Law, to the
Leviticall priests; under the Gospel, to the ministers and preachers thereof,
1. Cor. 9. 13, 14. In which respect he is the portion of Priests. Neither are
they due to the ceremonial law only: For the tribe of Levi, unto which the
ceremonial law does tie them, in Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedec.
Unthankful therefore are they to God, who is the portion of the Priests, who
deny to give to God his part. The Apostle seems to call it a mocking of God,
Gal. 6. the Prophet Malachi, chap. 3. a spoiling of God, that is, sacrilege.

Now it remains that we should speak of the object Of the object of
thanksgiving
and the time. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. (...), In all things give thanks, etc. Ephesians.
5. 20. (...), giving thanks always for all things. The object, (...), for all
things, Ephesians. 5. 20. that is to say, for all good things. For as we are to
pray unto God only for good things, Matthew. 7. 11. so are we to praise him for
good things only: Otherwise we shall by our praying and praising go about to
make God the author of evil. And it is manifest that officium gratias agendi,
the duty of giving thanks does presuppose beneficium, a benefit for which we
are to give thanks.

It is true indeed that all things as they proceed from God are good, and are
by him ordered and directed to his glory and the good of his chosen: and
therefore in all things he is to be praised. God is to be praised for his
attributes and for his works absolutely considered: but we are to give him
thanks because he is good unto us who are his Church, and causes all things to
work for our good. We are therefore upon all occasions to give thanks unto God
for his benefits either bestowed or promised, either common or private, either
old or new, spiritual or temporal, either positive or privative: positive,
when he bestows a real blessing or good thing upon us; privative, when he
preserves or delivers us from any evil or danger whereunto either our own
sinhath made us subject, or the malice of ourenemies whether spiritual or
corporal does expose us.

The time, (...), Ephesians. 5. 20. (...), sc. (...), in We must give thanks
continually. Heb. 13. 15. Object.
every opportune time, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. (...), continually.

But against this diverse things may be objected. 1. If we must give thanks
always then we must do nothing else.

Negative commandments do bind semper and ad Answ.
semper, always and at all times: but the affirmative, though they bind us
always, yet they do not bind us to perform them always. That which is
forbidden is never to be done: that which is commanded is to be done, not
always but when occasion is offered (as every duty has his time) and when
there is a concurrence of circumstances requisite. The perpetuity therefore that
is required in performing duties enjoined in affirmative commandments is to be
understood of the whole course of our lives, and not of every moment of time:
that is, We are always bound whilst we live to perform the duties at all
times when just occasion is offered; which being many and diverse must have
their diverse seasons; neither can they all be done at once. Negative
commandments are to be obeyed all at once, but affirmative in their du^ seasons
as just occasion is offered. In this sense David says Psalm. 46. 2. While I
live I will praise the Lord: I will sing praises to my God while I have any
being. Psalm. 104. 33. and 145. 1, 2. I will extol thee, my God, O King, and I
will bless thy name for ever and ever; that is, for ever whilst I live or
have a being I will be ready upon all occasions both ordinarily and
extraordinarily to praise thee. For the distinction of invocation, that it is
stata, stinted, or vaga, unstinted, is to be applied to this kind: We must both
set our selves certain times wherein to call upon God, praying unto him and
praising him, after the example of Daniel, chap. 6. 10. and also
extraordinarily be ready upon all occasions to return thanks and praise unto
God, acknowledging with David that when God bestows any new blessing upon us,
he has put a new song of thanksgiving into our mouths, and think no time
wherein God does bless unseasonable to give him thanks. And for as much as
Gods mercies are renewed upon us every morning, Lam. 3. 23. and multiplied upon
us every day, Psalm. 68. 19. and every night, therefore we are with David to
praise him every night and every day, Psalm. 92. 2. and 145. 2. yea, seven times
a day, Psalm. 119. 164. Neither must we think midnight it self unseasonable for
this purpose; Psalm. 119. 62. Acts 16. 25. Every morning we are to praise God
for his blessing upon us that night, and every night we are to praise him for
his blessing upon us that day: Every meal is to begin with praises and be
concluded with thanksgiving: every attempt and business of importance is to
begin with prayer and be ended with thanks, Col. 3. 17.

Thanks is to be given with joy; but we are many Object. 2.
times in distress, and consequently in grief.

The Apostle as he exhorts us to give thanks always, Answ. That we must give
thanks always and for all things.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. so also to rejoice always, v. 16. But you must understand
this as spoken to the faithful, who rejoice in God, being persuaded of his
love toward them. For those who have not tasted how good the Lord is, nor are
persuaded of Gods love toward them, they have no peace, and much less joy.
Paulus non omnes ad hoc juge gaudium, Basil.
sed tantum sui similes invitare videtur, Paul does not seem to invite all to
continual joy, but only those who are like himself. But the faithful, who
are at peace with God, have also joy in the holy Ghost: whereby they do rejoice
in God in all estates, not only in time of peace and prosperity, but also in
time of adversity, Romans 5. 3. Yea the greatest afflictions of this life are to
be born of the godly, not only meekly and patiently, but also comfortably and
thankfuly. For 1. as God in all his judgments remembers mercy, so must our
faith apprehend his mercy as well as our sense apprehends his judgments. And
therefore we ought to say with Job, chap. 13. 15. Though he kill me yet will I
trust in him.

2. Because the faithful have this privilege, that as nothing can hurt them,
Isai. 54. 17. so all things, even their afflictions, do work together for their
good, Romans 8. 28.

3. Because God afflicts them for their good, whether by trial or
chastisement.

4. Because with the outward affliction he vouchsafes inward comfort, 2. Cor.
1. 5. 1. Sam. 30. 6. Acts 16. 25. Psalm. 94. 19.

5. Because the afflictions of the faithful, though for sin, are under their
desert; and in them the anger of God is carried not against their persons but
against their sin.

6. Because of those other favors of God which in their afflictions they do
enjoy. Desinentes contristari Basil. 386. f.
propter ea quae non habemus, de rebus praesentibus gratias agere debemus,
Ceasing to grieve for those things we have not, we are to give thanks for
things which we presently have.

7. Because though positive blessings are wanting, yet there are always
innumerable privative blessings for which we are to give thanks. Consider the
evils we have deserved, and the dangers whereunto we are exposed: Consider that
by our sins we have deserved all the plagues denounced in the law, Deuteronomy. 28.
15. not only in this life but also in the world to come. Whilst therefore our
condition is better then those in hell, we have cause to praise God, who has
not dealt with us after our sin^es, nor rewarded us after our iniquities, Psalm.
103. 10. Lam. 3. 22. Now if they are bound to praise God that are not consumed,
how much more have we cause to praise God, whom he has not only not consumed,
but has heaped and multiplied his mercies upon us both privative and positive?
And as at all times we are to praise God, so in solemn festivalls ordained to
that end, such as was that of Purim, Esth. 9. and ours of the Fifth of
November, for our mavelous deliverance from that horrible conspiracy of the
Papists by the gunpouder-treason.

FINIS.
A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER;

Showing the meaning of the words, and the duties required in the several
Petitions, both in respect of prayer it self, and also in respect of our lives.

PHIL. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.

Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. Ann. Dom.
MDCXL.

MATTHEW. 6. 9. (...). LUKE 11. 2. (...)
TO call upon the name of God by hearty and effectual prayer, is a duty in it
self most excellent, to God most glorious, to our selves most profitable and
necessary: But such is the blindness and ignorance of our minds, the dullness
and hardness of our hearts, that we know not either how to pray or what to
ask: Like to Zebedee's children, Matthew. 22. 20. We ask we know not what: and as
Paul speaks, Romans 8. 26. We know not what to pray as we ought. Wherefore our
Savior Christ in abundant mercy toward us, that he might relieve our wants in
this behalf, has set down a prescript form of prayer whereby we are to frame
ours, commanding us when we do pray to pray thus.

In which words as he forbids us not to use (...)
this prayer, so he does not always bind us to use the same words. For here
two extremities are to be avoided: the first of the Brownists, who think it
unlawful to use the prescript form of these words; the second of the Papists,
who superstitiously insist in the very words and syllables themselves.

As touching the first; Our Savior commands 2. The Lords prayer is to be
used as a prayer.
us thus to pray; and more plainly, Luke 11. 2. When ye pray, say, Our Father,
etc. Therefore unless it be unlawful to obey the express commandment of our
Savior Christ, it is lawful to use these words. Secondly, the book of Psalms
does prove that we may have set forms of prayers. Psalm. 86. is a form of prayer
to be used in affliction. The 92 is Psalmus in diem Sabbati, A Psalm for the
Sabbath. The 102 Oration pro paupere, A Psalm for a poor man. The 136 A solemn
form of thanksgiving. 2. Chron. 7. 6. and 20. 21.

For the second, when Christ commands to That we ought not to be tied only
to this form.
pray thus, he does not tie us to the words but to the things. We must pray for
such things as herein summarily are contained, with such affections as are
herein prescribed. For we must understand that our Savior Christ propounds
this prayer as a brief sum of all those things which we are to ask. For as
the Creed is summa credendorum, the sum of things to be believed; the
Decalogue, summa agendorum, the sum of things to be done: so the Lords Prayer
is summa petendorum, the sum of things to be desired. But as all things
particularly to be believed are not particularly expressed in the Creed; nor
all things to be done, in the Decalog^: so neither are all things
particularized in the Lords prayer for which we are to ask: And therefore it is
lawful, nay expedient and necessary, often to descend into the particulars
themselves. For the proving whereof we have so many arguments as there are
prayers of the godly recorded in the word: For though all of them may be
referred to this prayer or some part thereof, yet none of them are conceived in
the same words. And moreover, Matthew and Luke in setting down this prayer are
not curious in observing the same words: And therefore superstitious is the
opinion and practice of the Church of Rome, who think that the bare repetition
of these words in an unknown tongue, without understanding or faith, is ex
opere operato meritorious: as though our Savior Christ had prescribed these
words to be used as a charm, etc.

First, whereas our Savior Christ propounds (...) That this form is a
perfect pattern.
this form, we may be assured that it is a perfect pattern of prayer, that
nothing ought to be asked which is not in it contained. For in him are all the
treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God, Col. 2. 3. He knows what is
acceptable unto God, what is needful for us: therefore in this prayer is
contained whatsoever is either fit for God to grant or for us to ask. By this
then as a pattern we are to form our prayers, and as by a rule we are to
examine them. May the things which we desire be referred to these petitions?
then may we boldly ask them. Can they not be referred? then do we not pray
according to Gods will; and therefore can have no assurance that we shall be
heard.

Secondly, whereas Christ teaches his disciples Ministers must teach their
people to pray.
to pray, herein he gives an example to be imitated of Ministers; sc. that as
they teach other things, so also to pray. John Baptist, Luke 11. 1. taught his
disciples to pray; whereupon Christ's disciples desire him in like manner to
teach them. Wherein also they are to be an example to be imitated of all
learners: As the Father in the family, or the Pastor in the Church, ought to
teach; so the child in the house, the hearer in the Church, ought to be
desirous to learn how to pray.

Thirdly, it sneweth that of our selves we know not how to pray. For if we
should be left to our own affections and desires, we should ask many times
those things which would tend to Gods dishonor and our own hurt: As appears
by Socrates, who wanting this direction of our Savior Christ, knew not what to
ask, but groping in darkness desired in general terms, that those things
which are good he would give them whether they asked them or no, and would
deliver them from evil things although they should ask them: Plato in Alcib. 2.

(...).
O Jupiter King, give unto us good things whether we ask or ask them not; but
put away from us evil things though we pray for them. And therefore our Savior
Christ thought it necessary to teach us how to pray.

Again, hence arises great comfort to Gods children: (...)
For whereas the word of God assures us whatsoever we shall ask according to
his will it shall be given us, 1. John 5. 14. we may assure our selves that we
so pray when we follow Christ's direction. Neither need we doubt but the Lord
acknowledging the voice of his own Son (as Cyprian says) our prayers
Agnoscit Pater filii sui verba cum preces sundimus. (...)
shall be acceptable unto him.

Lastly, seeing our Savior Christ has commanded us to pray and taught us how,
we are unexcusable if we neglect this duty.

One thing further is to be considered in the words as they are set down by
Luke, When ye pray, say: Whether speech in prayer be always necessary. Quest.
Answ.


There is (...), either inward or outward speech: and prayer is either vocal
or mental: And the Lord hears the cry of the heart, and our secret groans
are not hid from him, Psalm. 38. 10. Howbeit the voice is to be used so often as
it may conveniently, both for the attention of the mind and intension of the
affections, etc.

NOw let us come to the Lords Prayer it self. In Of the Lords prayer.
which is lively, though summarily, set down unto us the practice of that
doctrine which heretofore we have learned concerning prayer. For as we have
been taught that Prayer and Thanksgiving are to be joined together: so here
with the Petitions is joined a Thanksgiving, wherein we are taught to ascribe
unto the Lord eternal kingdom, power and glory; which words almost David
uses in his solemn thanksgiving, 1. Chron. 29. 11.

Again, whereas we have been taught that unto prayer are required duties before
we pray and also in prayer it self, both here are prescribed. Before we are to
use preparation, wherein we are to meditate of such things as are fit to stir
up those graces in us which in prayer are to be expressed. In prayer two things
are to be expressed; an hungring and thirsting desire of grace, and the
special assent of faith: For the stirring up of both which it is fit to
meditate upon the fatherly love and almighty power of God, which our Savior
has taught us to prefix before the prayer it self. In prayer two things
especially are to be expressed: 1. An hungring and thirsting desire of the
grace and blessing of God; 2. A special assent of faith that our request shall
be granted. Therefore the prayer it self is divided into Petitions and
Conclusion: the desire being especially expressed in the Petitions; the
Conclusion containing, 1. a confirmation, 2. a testification of our faith, in
the word Amen. Of the Lords prayer The parts.
therefore there be two parts: the Preface; and the Prayer it self, consisting
of Petitions and the Conclusion, containing a Confirmation of our faith joined
with the praising of God, and also a Testification both of our faith and the
truth of our desire, in the word Amen.

In expounding the Lords Prayer we will observe The order.
this order: First, we will expound the words, and show the true meaning of
the^; and then we will infer the uses of Doctrine, Confutation, Instruction
in the duties of prayer and of our lives; and lastly, of Reproof, whereby shall
be detected the hypocrisy of worldly men, who using these words do not pray in
truth.

Whereas our Savior does not abruptly propound the Petitions, but prefixeth a
solemn Preface, we are taught before we call upon God to use some preparation.

The preface contains a description of God to The preface.
who^ we pray, taken 1. from his relation to us, that he is Our Father; 2. from
the place wherein his majesty does especially appear, that he is in heaven: the
former signifying especially his love; the other, his power. Of which two if in
our preparation we do duly meditate, our desire will be kindled and our faith
confirmed, considering that he to whom we pray is both able and willing to
grant our requests.

Our Father.
SOme do expound these words as though they were a rhetorical proeme which we
use to win Gods favor. But we use words in our prayer not that God but that we
may be moved and affected. First we call him Father: whereof we are first to
seek the meaning, and then the use. By the name of Father God alone is
understood: For, as our Savior says Matthew. 23. 9. we must call no man father,
because we have but one Father who is in heaven. Joh. 8. 41. We have one
Father, which is God: A good profession if it had been uttered with a good
conscience.

Now God is said to be a Father two ways: by God a Father two ways.
Creation, and Adoption. By creation, as Isai. 64. 8. So Adam is said to be the
son of God, Luke 3. 38. and the Angels, Job 1. By adoption in Christ, Fphes.
1. 5. So every believer is born of God, 1. John 5. 1. For to so many as believe
in Christ God has given this privilege, to be the sons of God, John 1. 12.
And in this sense is every faithful man to call God Father.

But here it may be demanded, Whether the Quest.
whole Trinity is called upon in the name of Father, or the first Person alone.

The word Father is attributed unto God two Answ.
ways; either essentially or personally. Essentially, when he is so called in
respect of the creatures, 1. Cor. 8. 6. Personally, when it has relation to
the other Persons, the Son and the holy Ghost. In this place it has relation
to the creatures. So Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Isai. 63. 16. But howsoever the whole Trinity
is our Father, and so to be worshipped of us, yet this speech is more
peculiarly directed to the first Person, the fountain of the Godhead, who is
the Father of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 14. and in him our Father, John 20. 17. yet so
as in worshipping him we jointly worship the other two, who as they are all one
in essence, coequall and coeternall, concurring also in all actions toward us,
so they are altogether to be worshipped. O God, thou Father of Christ, and in
him our Father, who give the Spirit of thy Son, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father, to thee we present our prayers in the name of thy Son, craving the help
of the holy Ghost.

The second Person is called our Father, Isai. 9. 6. and so may the holy Ghost,
who does regenerate us, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. and to either of them may our prayers be
directed, Acts 7. 59. So that our prayer may be directed to any or to all the
Persons, 2. Cor. 13. 13. or to two of them, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11.

We are taught to whom to direct our prayers, 1. (...).
namely, to God alone. For seeing our Savior has commanded us, when we pray,
to say, Our Father, it is 1.
evident that we break the commandment if we direct our prayers to any to whom
we may not say, Our Father, etc. Which title without blasphemy we cannot
attribute to any but only to the Lord, who is our heavenly Father: Jer. 31. 9.
Sum Israeli Pater, I am a Father to Israel.

Secondly, whereas by nature we are the children 2.
of wrath, and yet commanded to call upon God as our Father, we are taught in
whose name we are to come unto God: Not in our own names or worthiness, Dan.
9. 18. for then we shall find him a Judge rather then a Father; but only in
the name and mediation of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 12. in whom he is our Father, and in
whose name he has promised to grant whatsoever we ask according to his will.
It is well said of Calvine, Cum Deum Patrem vocamus, Christi nomen
praetendimus, When we call God Father, we pretend the name of Christ.

3. We are taught that the help of the holy Ghost 3.
is necessary in prayer. For how should we which were children of wrath dare to
call God our Father, or be assured that we be his children? By the holy Ghost,
who is the spirit of adoption, and bears witness to our spirits, that we are
the sons of God, we cry in our hearts, Abba, Father, Romans 2. 15, 16. For if
none can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost; 1. Cor. 12. 3.
then much less can a man call upon God as his Father in Christ except he be
endued by the holy Ghost. We must therefore, as the Apostle teaches us, Ephesians.
2. 18. call upon God the Father in the name of the Son by the assistance of
the holy Ghost, so shall we, though unworthy and unable to call upon God, in
Christ be accepted and by the holy Ghost be enabled to pray according to God.

Here therefore first are they refuted who think 11. (...).
they may lawfully direct their prayers either to Angels 1.
or Saints, to whom the name Father is opposed, Isai. 63. 16. or to their
images, saying to a stock or stone, Our father, Jer. 2. 27. If God be our
heavenly Father, who is more willing to give good things then any earthly
parents, and also all-sufficient, why should we seek to any other, unless we
can either accuse him of unkindnesse, or object want of power unto him?

Secondly, if God be our Father in Christ, then 2.
ought we with boldness to come unto the throne of grace through him, Ephesians.
3. 12. Neither do we need any other mediation then of the Son, who is the
only Mediator as of redemption so also of intercession, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
contrary to the doctrine of the Papists, who teach men to use the mediation of
Saints: Whereas our Savior John 16. 26. having commanded us to pray in his
name, adds, I say not that I will entreat the Father for you: for the Father
himself loves you.

Duties in Prayer.
IF God be our Father, we must come 1. In reverence as unto our heavenly
Father. 2. In dutiful, thankful, and sonne-like affection, acknowledging his
mercy of Adoption, who when we were by nature children of wrath adopted us to
be his sons; and if sons, then heirs. Behold, what love the Father Romans 8.
16. 1. (...) 3. 1.
has showed on us, that we should be called the sons of God. 3. In faith and
assurance, not only that we and our prayers are accepted in Christ, but that
our prayers shall be granted unto us of our Father as may be most for his glory
and our good.

And that we may come in faith, let us consider, First, that without faith we
are no sons of his, but children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3, 12. and if we believe
we are the sons of God, John 1. 12. and of the household of faith. Secondly,
that if God be our Father in Christ, he will grant us what good thing soever we
ask. For 1. he is affected as a good Father Psalm. 103. 13.
toward his children: yea, his love toward us is so much greater then the
love of earthly parents as his goodness and mercy is greater, Isai. 63. 16.
Psalm. 27. 10. Isai. 49. 15. Matthew. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13. 2. In that he is our
Father he has given us the greatest gift that can be imagined, and therefore
will not deny the lesfe. Pater quid negabit filiis, qui jam dedit quod pater
est? What will the father deny to his sons, who has vouchsafed already to be
our Father? For if he have so loved us that he gave his Son for us (that in him
we might be adopted his children) how shall he not with him give us all good
things? Romans 8. 32. 3. In that he has vouchsafed us this great love to be our
Father and that we should be his children, he has also made us his heirs, and
provided us an inheritance in heaven. For as he gave his Son in pretium, for
a price, so he reserveth himself in praemium, for a reward. If therefore it be
our Fathers pleasure to give us a kingdom, we need not fear but that he will
grant us matters of less moment, Luke 12. 32. 4. In sonne-like submission we
are to call upon God our Father, etc. Matthew. 26. 39, 42. And in this faith we
are to rest in the will of our Father, submitting our selves thereto, knowing
that he will dispose of us for the best.

Duties in our lives.
IF we call God our Father, we must behave our selves as dutiful and obedient
children, 1. Pet. 1. 14. we must walk worthy our calling, Ephesians. 4. 1. For
seeing we have these promises, namely, that God will be a Father unto us, and
that we shall be his sons and daughters, we ought to cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up into all godliness in the
fear of God, 2. Cor. 6. 18. and 7. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Nonne ipse Pater tuus, etc.
Is not he thy Father M^l. 1. 6.
that has bought thee? We must honor him, we must fear him, 1. Pet. 1. 17.
Neither ought we to fear any thing so much as to displease him. We must love
him, and Christ his Son, John 8. 42. and for his sake our neighbors, as the
sons of God and members of Christ, and consequently as our brethren and
fellow members, 1. John 5. 1. We are to imitate our heavenly Father, Matthew. 5.
45. Luke 6. 36. We must patiently and meekly bear afflictions as fatherly
chastisements, Heb. 12. 6, 7, etc. Otherwise we show our selves to be bastards
rather then sons. We must trust in him, Psalm. 27. 10. Isai. 63. 16.

Here therefore is reproved the hypocrisy of those who using these words do
not call upon God in their prayers with sonne-like reverence, faith, affection,
submission, nor in their lives behave themselves as Gods children. For though
we call upon God as our Father, and yet do not obey him, nor honor him, nor
fear him, nor love him, nor follow him, nor submit our selves to his
chastisements, nor trust in him, we show our selves not to be the children of
God, but rather of the devil. For our Savior says to the Jews affirming that
God was their Father, His sons ye are whose works ye do, John 8. 39, 48. And
John also says, 1. Epist. 3. 8, 9, 10. He that commits sin is of the
devil: Whosoever is born of God sins not; for his seed remains in him,
etc. In this the children of God are known and the children of the devil.
Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God; neither he that loves not his
brother. See Deuteronomy. 32. 5, 6.

Our.
WHen as our Savior teaches us to say, Our Father, Give us, etc. he may seem
to some to have prescribed a form of public prayer only. Otherwise why does
he not teach us to say, My Father, Give me, etc.? But out of verse 6. it
appears that he prescribes this form as well for private as for public
prayer. Now he teaches us to say, Our Father, Give us, etc. that we may learn
it to be our duty to call upon God not only for our selves but also for others.

But for what others? For all men, 1. Tim. 2. 1. (For God is the Father of all
by creation.) but especially for the faithful, to whom G^d is a Father by
grace of adoption, and they also our brethren in Christ. We are therefore to
pray for the whole brotherhood, which is the universal Church, and the whole
company of the faithful, Psalm. 122. 6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem. For
the universal Church, I say, militant upon earth. For unto the present estate
of the Church militant our Savior does accommodate this prayer: as, that we
may do the will of God upon earth as it is in heaven; that he would give us our
daily bread; that he would forgive our sins, and not lead us into temptation.
When as therefore this prayer is used amongst the Papists for the dead, they
show themselves not impious only but also ridiculous.

Uses concerning Prayer.
FIrst, whereas Christ commands us to call God 1.
Father not only of other faithful and elect but Faith required in prayer
also ours, he requires in us when we are to pray a true and justifying faith
whereby we are persuaded that God is our Father in Christ, and the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry in our hearts, Abba, Father. Therefore that special
faith which the Papists call presumption, whereby every Christian man believes
that he is adopted in Christ, reconciled to God, and justified by him, and that
for his sake both himself and his prayer is accepted of God, Christ requires
in this place. For unless I be persuaded that the Lord is not only the Father
of the rest of the faithful and elect, but also my Father, I cannot in truth
call him our Father. Unto prayer therefore we must bring faith, without which
it is impossible to please God.

Secondly, whereas Christ commands us to call 2.
upon God not only for our selves, but also in the We must pray one for
another.
behalf of the whole fraternity, which is the universal Church, Our Father,
Give us, etc. he teaches us to exercise the communion of Saints by mutual
prayers for one another, Ephesians. 6. 18. and not only to have respect to our own
good but also to the good of others, 1. Cor. 13. 5. and withal informs us
how we are to be affected toward our brethren when we come to call upon God;
that we should desire the same good things for them which we ask for our
selves; that we should be touched with a fellow-feeling of their wants, as it
becomes those which are not only the sons of the same Father, but also
members of the same body, Heb. 13. 3. Therefore as we ought to bring faith
toward God, so also charity toward men, that without wrath and dissension we
may lift up pure hands unto God, 1. Tim. 2. 8.

But is it not lawful to say sometimes, My Father, Quest.
My God, and to pray for our selves in particular or for some others?

It is lawful in private prayers to call God thy Answ.
Father, so that thou do not arrogate any thing peculiar to thy self besides
or above other faithful men. For this is the voice of justifying faith
(especially in the time of temptation, when the faithful man may seem forsaken
of God) to apply unto himself in particular that which commonly belongs to
all the faithful, Psalm. 22. 1. Deus meus, My God, my God, etc. John 20. 28.
Romans 1. 8. The Lord instructs his people thus to call him, My Father, Jer. 3.
4, 19. and Christ his disciples, Matthew. 6. 6. Pray to thy Father; and thy
Father which sees in secret, etc.

It is lawful also to pray for thy self and for others in particular, so as
thou forget not to pray for the whole brotherhood of Gods children. For as when
we are commanded to do good to all, but especially to the household of faith,
Gal. 6. 10. we are bound in particular to do good to those whose wants are
known unto us: so when we are commanded to pray for all, we are bound in
particular to pray for those whose wants are known unto us, and especially for
such as do any ways belong unto us or do desire to be commended in our prayers
unto God, Romans 15. 30. Jam. 5. 14. Ephesians. 5. 19. 1. Tim. 2. 1, 2.

Thirdly, whereas we are taught to say, Our Father, 3. An use of comfort,
seeing all the Church prays for us.
Give us, etc. we may gather that this prayer and those that are made to the
like effect are the common voice of the Church and of all the members thereof
praying mutually for one another: Which affords comfort to every one of us;
for although the sense of thy own wants and weakness in calling upon God does
discourage thee, yet this ought to comfort thee, that this prayer and the like
is the common prayer of the Church and of all the faithful lifting up holy
hands in every place, and praying for thee, if thou be a faithful man, as well
as for themselves. Now the prayer of the Church the Lord who is most gracious
unto it is ready to hear, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Isai. 65. 24. and being most faithful
is also willing to perform, Matthew. 18. 20. Therefore this serves, as for
instruction, teaching us our duty in calling upon God for one another, so also
for our comfort, assuring us that others in like sort pray for us, and that we
are partakers of all the prayers of the whole Church and all the members
thereof.

Fourthly, the hypocrisy of those is condemned who say with the Jews, John 8.
41. We have all one Father, God; but neither have faith in God, nor charity
toward men, nor any fellow-feeling of other men's wants, nor any true desire of
their good; who say, Every man for himself, and God for us all.

Uses concerning our lives.
SEeing we have all one and the same Father, Brotherly love required of all
that pray.
Matthew. 23. 9. therefore we ought to embrace one another with brotherly love,
Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 6. For if God be the Father of us all, then are we all
brethren. Which word of love ought to tie us with the bond of love, and break
off all dissension, Genesis 13. 8. Acts 7. 26. Mal. 2. 10. And surely if we love
not our brethren, the love of God is not in us: For he which loves him that
begets, loves also those that are begotten, 1. Joh. 5. 1. And, Whosoever
says that he loves God and hates his brother, he is a liar, 1. John 4. 19,
20. Therefore where is not brotherly love there is not the love of God; where
is not the love of God there is no faith; and who has not faith is not the
son of God. Therefore the Apostle says, 1. John 3. 10. In this the children
of God are known and the children of the devil; Whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, nor he that loves not his brother. For if those
that be the sons of God, as all the faithful are (and we are to hope well of
the most when we speak of particulars) be not our brethren, and so we esteem
them, then are not we the sons of God. For if he be our Father, then his
children are our brethren; If the sons of God be not brethren to us, then are
not we his children. If therefore we shall hate the children of God, how can we
call upon him as our Father?

Secondly, whereas all, as well poor as rich, are 2. To ^each the rich, and
comfort the poor.
commanded to call God Father, this ought to teach the rich, and comfort the
poor. The rich ought from hence to learn humility and not to despise the
poorest Christian, seeing they are our brethren by the law of nature, and of the
same blood, Acts 17. the same flesh, Isai. 58. and also by our redemption by
Christ they are our brethren in him, sons of the same Father, and have as
good part in Christ, if they believe, as the best, for God is a Father that
respects not persons, Acts 10. 34, 35. 1. Pet. 1. 17. And in Christ there is
no difference of rich and poor, bond or free; but we are all one in him, Gal.
3. 28. To which purpose Paul exhorts Philemon to receive his servant
Onesimus, being now converted, as a brother, v. 17. Let therefore the rich
follow the advice, Romans 12. 16. Example, Job 31. 13, 14, 15. that of the wife
1. Pet. 3. 7. which is to be extended to all Christians, viz. that they be
coheirs. Which doctrine does not favor the Anabaptists; for although in
respect of our spiritual estate there ought to be no respect of persons, Jam.
2. 1. neither is there difference of bond and fr^e in Christ, yet in respect of
our outward estate the Lord has ordained superiors and inferiors, etc. and
has established orders and degrees in the outward polity.

The poor also are to comfort themselves with this consideration, that
howsoever they be contemned in the world, yet they are dear in Gods sight. God
is their Father as well, or rather of them then of the rich, Psalm. 68. 6. and
Christ their brother: yea, they are members of Christ, to whom what is done
Christ esteems as done to himself, Matthew. 25. The which is to be understood
of the godly poor; for otherwise, as their estate is miserable now, so a
thousand times more miserable shall it be in the world to come.

Uses of reproof.
THey are condemned that call God their Father, (...)
and yet hate the children of God because they are godly, and deride the name
of brethren.

2. Schismatics, who call God their Father, but deny his children to be their
brethren. For they which will have God for their Father, must have the true
Church to their mother. And these words, Our Father, are the voice of the
Church, and of all that be of the same brotherhood.

3. Again, when we are bid to say, (...), Our Father, etc. we are taught to
direct our prayers unto God immediately, as being present with us. Which
confuteth the Papists, who would not have us go directly to God, but to desire
Mary, or Peter, etc. to pray for us: whereas this privilege have all the
faithful, to come with boldness to the throne of grace by Christ, Ephesians. 3.
12. Secondly, we are to believe that God who is in heaven is also present with
us, hearing our prayers: and therefore so ought we to pour forth our prayers
as into his bosom, yea though we pray in secret, Matthew. 6. 6. Thirdly, we
ought to have the eye of faith to see him that is invisible, Heb. 11. so shall
we set God before our eyes, and behave our selves as it becomes those that
speak to so glorious a Majesty. But most men because they see none present are
touched with less reverence then if they spoke to a mortal superior.

Which art in heaven, (...).
HEaven is all that space which is above the earth: Of which are three parts,
Coelum Aereum, Genesis 1. 8. Aethereum, Empyreum. The first, Air; in which are the
birds, fowls of heaven, and the wicked spirits in heavenly places, Ephesians. 6.
12. and 2. 2. The second is that heaven wherein the stars are, which are
called the host of heaven. The third is the seat of the blessed and throne of
God, called Coelum empy. reum, because of the light, 1. Tim. 6. 16. paradise,
2. Cor. 12. 4. and the third heaven, in respect of the two lower; and in the
same sense, the heaven of heavens, Psalm. 115. 16. 1. Kings 8. 27. God is all in
all. But this place is especially to be understood of the third heaven, which
is the place of the Lords habitation, 1. Kings 8. 30.

How is God said to be in heaven, seeing he is everywhere? Object.


If God be everywhere, then is he also in heaven: Answ.
But God is said to be in heaven, not that he is included therein, 1. Kings 8.
27. and therefore not circumscriptive, by circumscription, as the body of
Christ; nor definitive, definitively, as the finite spirits; but he is there
and everywhere repletive, filling all places, ^er. 23. 23. but yet so as he is
everywhere totus, wholly. But yet after a more special manner he is said to be
in heaven: Because there especially he manifests his glory; there he is seen
face to face; there he communicates himself; thence he sends down his
blessings and judgments, Romans 1. 18. thence he speaks to men; thence Christ
descended; thence the holy Ghost, Matthew. 3. thither Christ ascended; there he
sits; and thence he returns to judgment. And as the soul is said to be
tota in toto and tota in qualibet part, all in the whole, and in every part
all; and yet in respect of the chief operations is said to be seated in the
head (as it were) the heaven of this Microcosme; so God, who is everywhere
wholly both in the world and out of it, is said to be in heaven: Heaven is his
throne, Isai. 66. 1. there he prepared his seat, Psalm. 103. 19. there he
sits, Psalm. 2. 4. that is the habitation of his holiness, etc. Isai. 63.
15. the place of his habitation, 1. Kings 8. 30.

Secondly, when Christ says, (...), in the heavens, he means (...),
heavenly, as Matthew. 6. 26. And he is called heavenly, because the shallowness
of our minds cannot better conceive of the unspeakable glory and excellent
majesty of God then under this name. For nothing more excellent and glorious
is subject to our sense then the heaven. Whereas therefore the Scriptures give
this title to God, they teach us to ascribe unto him majesty glorious, essence
omnipresent, power infinit^, wisdom unspeakable, mercy endless.

The sense therefore of these words is this, Tho^ that sit upon heaven as
thy throne, glorious in majesty, infinite in essence, power, wisdom and mercy.

Uses concerning prayer.
I. THe adoration of images and relics condemned, Adoration of images
condemned.
we are taught to lift up our mind, eyes, hands to God being in heaven. We may
therefore say, as Psalm. 121. 1. Should I lift mine eyes to images? whence then
should I have help? my help is from God. Therefore as Psalm. 123. 1. To thee I
lift up mine eyes, O thou who dwell in the heavens.

II. We are taught, not to direct our prayer toward any certain place, as the
Jews toward the temple; but we may turn any way toward God in heaven. And if
we are not bound to look toward any certain place, much less to go on
pilgrimage to it.

III. Neither must our minds go on pilgrimage whilst we are praying; but above
the earth and all earthly cogitations our minds with our hands are to be lifted
up unto the heavens, Lam. 3. 4. Psalm. 25. 1. and as at all times, so especially
in the time of prayer, our conversation ought to be in heaven.

IV. When we are commanded to call God our heavenly Father, we are taught to
abandon all base conceits concerning God, Psalm. 50. 13. and to ascribe unto him
incomprehensible glory and majesty, infinite power and essence, wisdom
unsearchable, mercy endless. Majesty; as sitting upon the heaven as upon his
throne, the earth being his footstool, Isai. 66. 1. Which must teach us
reverence, and not rashly to utter any thing before God: For God is in heaven,
full of majesty and glory; and thou upon earth, dust and worms meat, Eccles 5.
1.

Power; that is, Might infinite, omnipotency; Right infinite, and authority
universal. Potentia, Power, Psalm. 115. 3. Our God is in heaven: whatsoever he
will he does. Which must teach us to pray with affiance, being assured that
our heavenly Father is able to do for us according to (yea above) our requests,
yea above our thought, Ephesians. 3. 20. Thus Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20. 6. Art not
thou God in heaven, so as power is in thine hand which none can resist?

Potestas, Authority: So says Jehoshaphat, Art not thou God in heaven? and
do not thou rule over all nations? So Psalm. 103. 20. The Lord has
established his seat in heaven, and his kingdom is over all. On him therefore
our trust must be reposed, by whose providence and power all things are
governed in heaven and in earth. For hereby we learn that the Lord is not only
able in respect of his might, but has right also to bestow upon us any good
thing. Audacter Deum roga, nihil illum de alteno rogaturus, S^neca.
Beg boldly of God, seeing thou can ask nothing of him which belongs to
another.

Infinite essence and omnipresence; for so is the heaven said to be his throne,
as that the earth also is his footstool: and so is he in both, as that he is
also everywhere and in every place totus. For we may not think that God is
far from us, Acts 17. 27. because he is said to be in heaven, as the wicked
imagine, Job 22. 13. but we must acknowledge that he is always present with
us, Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9, etc. and, as it is Psalm. 145. 18. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. near unto
us when we call upon him; yea, where two or three are gather^d together in his
name, he is in the midst of them, Matthew. 18. 20. If theresore thou prayest in
secret, the Lord hears thee, Matthew. 6. 6. if in the closet of thine heart
without any speech, he hears the voice and cry of the heart, Exodus 14. 15. 1.
Sam. 1. 13. Assure thy self therefore that thou speak not into the air or
utterest thy words in vain, but that thou pourest forth thy requests into the
bosom of the Lord.

Wisdom unsearchable: For as the heavens are high above the carth, so are the
Lords thoughts above ours, Isai. 55. 9. We must therefore submit our selves to
his will, which is most wise and just: neither let us circumscribe him, but
rather resign our selves unto him, who best knows what is fit for us.

Mercy unspeakable; Whereby all these attributes are effectual to our good.
For if earthly parents do know to give good things to their children, much more
does our heavenly Father, Matthew. 7. 11.

This therefore must not discourage us, that he sits above in heaven in the
high throne of his majesty: for though he dwells above, ^t he mercifully
abaseth himself to behold the things which be in heaven and in earth, Psalm.
113. 5, 6. He looks down from the high place of his holiness, even from
heaven does the Lord look down upon earth* that he might hear the mourning of
the prisoner, and deliver the children of does, Psalm. 102. 19, 20. Neither
ought his power to terrify us: for he uses it to our good, Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
Herideth, or sits, upon the heavens for our help. Him therefore, let us
exalt who rides on the highest heavens, Psalm. 68. 4.

Here therefore is discovered the hypocrisy of those men who calling upon God
as their Father in heaven lift not up their hearts to heaven, but let them lie
grovelling on the earth; who imagine God to be like themselves, who without
reverence speak unto him, or use vain babbling; who trust not in his power, nor
acknowledge his presence with them, unreverently behaving themselves because
they see him not; that submit not themselves to his fatherly wisdom, nor rest
in his mercy and goodness.

Uses in our lives.
First, if our Father be in heaven, who also has begotten us to an heavenly
inheritance, then we who are the children of God are in this world pilgrims
from God and from our country; and therefore ought not to mindearthly things,
but have our conversation in heaven, Phil. 3. 19, 20. Secondly, if God our
Father be full of majesty and power, we ought to fear him and to stand in aw.
Thirdly, if omnipotent, let us rest confidently under his protection, neither
let the fear of any danger draw us unto sin; for God is able to deliver us,
Dan. 17. And on the other side, let us fear to sin; for he is able to destroy
both body and soul in hell, Matthew. 10. 28. If God be omnipresent, let us behave
our selves as in his presence, and walk before him in uprightness of heart. If
our heavenly Father be most wise and merciful, let us cast our care upon him,
in all our necessities depending on him. As for those that are mere worldlings
and terrae filii, who neither stand in aw of his majesty, nor trust in his
power, nor wa^k as in his presence, nor depend upon his fatherly goodness,
they cannot but in hypocrisy call God their heavenly Father.

Now if we join these two together, of which we have spoken severally, That God
is our Father, and therefore willing to hear us; and also in heaven, and
therefore able to grant our desires; there will be no place left to diffidence
and distrust, seeing God is both willing and able to grant our requests.
Therefore we ought not to be distrustfully careful, but with confidence and
assurance that we shall be heard to make our requests known unto God, Phil. 4.
6. seeing, as Fulgentius says, Deus multus est ad ignoscendum; in hoc multo
nihil deest, in quo and omnipotens misericordia and omnipotentia misericors
est: God is much in forgiving; in this much nothing is missing, in whom is
omnipotent mercy, and merciful omnipotence. The consideration of either of
these may stir up a man to pray: but if he doubt of either, I see not how he
can pray in faith. The leper, Mark 1. 40. being persuaded of Christ's power,
desires him to make him clean: the father of him that was possessed, Mark 9.
22. having some good opinion of Christ's willingness, entreated his help for
the dispossessing of the unclean spirit: But because the one was not assured of
his willingness, the other of his power, they make but doubtful prayers, If
thou will thou can make me clean; If thou can do any thing help us. But we
may be assured of both in our heavenly Father: and therefore are to be
encouraged to pray in faith, etc.

The division of the Petitions.
HItherto we have spoken of the preface. Now we are to proceed unto the
petitions: Which are in number six; but yet in respect of the objects they may
be distinguished into two sorts: For either they concern more properly and
immediately the glory of God, without respect of our own profit; or else our
own good, and mediately the glory of God. For in the three former we say, Thy
name, Thy kingdom, Thy will; in the three latter, us and our, etc. Those that
concern Gods glory are indeed most profitable for us; for with his own glory he
joyneth the good and salvation of the elect: For if we glorify the name of
God, he will glorify us: if we be subjects of the kingdom of grace, we shall
be inheriters of the kingdom of glory: if we do the will of God upon earth, we
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. But in propounding these petitions we
are not to respect our own profit but the glory of God. Those which immediately
concern our own good must also mediately respect the glory of God, whereunto if
our good be not referred it is not good.

Those which immediately concern the glory The order.
of God are set down in the first place. By which order our Savior Christ
teaches us to prefer Gods glory before our own good, yea (if they should
come in comparison) before our own salvation, Exodus 32. 32. because Gods glory
is the end, and therefore better then those things which are referred
thereunto. For which cause not only in order of petitions but also in the
measure of our affections the glory of God must be preferred before our own
good: Ideoque in tribus primis petitionibus oration (...) est, cum posteriores
conjunctionibus colligantur, And therefore in the three first petitions there
is no copulative, when as the three latter are tied together with conjunction^

In the three first petitions we desire either the glory of God it self as the
end, or else the means whereby his glory is procured: the end in the first
petition; the means in the other two. For then is God glorified when his
kingdom is advanced and his will fulfilled.

This order teaches us that the main end of all our desires and actions should
be the glory of God.

I. Petition.
FIrst, of the first petition: Wherein we are to learn the meaning of the
words, and then to consider the uses which arise from thence. (...), Hallowed
be thy name. The name of God signifies What is signified by Gods n^vne.
both God himself, and his attributes, which are himself, and also that whereby
he is named. In the former sense the word name is often used to signify the
persons named: as Acts 1. 15. and 4. 12. Revel. 3. 4. and 11. 13. So the name
of God is put for God himself, Joel 2. 23. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Hereupon the Hebrews
use to say, (...), that is, His name is himself, and he is his name. And
hereunto belong those places in which the name of God signifies his
attributes, which are nothing but himself: For the justice of God is the just
God, the wisdom of God is the wise God, the mercy of God is the merciful God,
etc. And these also are the name of God, as appears Exodus 33. 19. and 34. 5,
6, 7. For this is the name which he proclaims, The Lord, the Lord, strong,
merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
etc.

Secondly, the name of God signifies that whereby God is named; whereby he is
either renowned or known. The name of renown is his glory, which is (as it
were) his good name: For so in great persons their good name is their glory and
renown; and therefore they are said in the Scriptures to be men of name, Genesis
6. 4. In this sense the word name is used Genesis 11. 4. That we may get us a
name: Genesis 12. 2. I will make thy name great: Jer. 13. 11. name, praise, and
glory, Deuteronomy. 26. 19. The name of God therefore signifies that whereby he is
renowned and acknowledged to be glorious, that is, his glory: So Exodus 9. 16.
Psalm. 8. 1.

Again, the name of God signifies that whereby he is known; to wit, not only
his Titles, which more properly are called his name, and by which he is known,
but also the Means whereby he is known. The titles are the names of the
Godhead, of the attributes, and of the Persons. Of the Godhead; as Jehovah,
Lord, God, etc. Exodus 3. 15. This is my name: Exodus 6. 3. Psalm. 83. 18.
Attributes, as Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Majesty, etc. Persons, as Father,
Christ, Jesus, Savior, holy Ghost, etc.

The means whereby God is known are either peculiar to the Church, or common
unto all. Of the first sort are his word and religion therein prescribed. The
word of God is called his name, as Acts 9. 15. to carry my name, etc. and 21.
13. 1. Tim. 6. 1. with Tit. 2. 5. Romans 2. 24. Psalm. 22. 22. Heb. 2. 12. So is
the doctrine of religion and worship of God, Mich. 4. 5. We will walk in the
name of our God. 1. Kings 5. 3, 5. to build a house unto the name of God. The
common means are the works of God: The works of Creation, Psalm. 19. 1. Romans 1.
19, 20. In respect where of he is called the Creator of heaven and earth. As
also of Administration, as his blessings and judgments. In respect where of he
is called the Governor and Judge of the world, Exodus 34. 7. All these does the
name of God signify.

To sanctify signifies either to make holy, or to acknowledge What is meant
by sanctified or hallowed.
and declare holy. In the first sense things are said to be sanctified and (in
themselves being not holy) to be made holy, which are set apart to holy uses;
as the Sabbath, the Temple, Priests, Christians consecrated and set apart to
the worship and service of God. In which sense the name of God, which is most
holy, Psalm. 111. 9. cannot be said to be sanctified.

2. To sanctify is to acknowledge and declare holy: as wisdom in the like
phrase of speech is said to be justified, Luke 7. 35. and God to be magnified
and glorified: And thus the name of God is sanctified either by us or by God
himself, Number. 20. 12, 13. By us (I mean our selves and others, for whom also we
pray) when, as the name of God is most holy and reverend, so we in our hearts
acknowledge and that effectually, in our tongues profess, in our deeds use it
as most holy and reverend. By God himself his name is sanctified, when either
he manifests the glory of his mercy and justice, or else freeth it from the
pollutions of men, especially when men neglect it, and removes the
impediments, Number. 20. 12, 13.

First, we pray that Gods name may be sanctified of us; that is, That God would
vouchsafe unto us his grace, that we may give unto the Lord the honor due unto
his name, Psalm. 29. 2. that as his name is most excellent, holy, glorious, and
reverend, so his praise may be unto the ends of the earth, Psalm. 48. 11.

We sanctify the name of God, which is most holy, and reverend, and glorious,
Deuteronomy. 28. 5^. whenas in our hearts, words, and deeds we do use it holily and
reverently.

But to speak more especially, according to the significations of the name of
God: The names of God first signify himself and his attributes, which are
himself, which we desire in this prayer that we may sanctify in our hearts,
tongues, and lives. In our hearts we sanctify God, as Peter exhorts, 1.
Epist. 3. 15. when as 1. we do acknowledge, and that effectually, That there is
a God; That this God is such an one as he has revealed himself in his word,
most wise, most just, most merciful, infinite in power, essence, and
continuance, etc. 2. When in our minds we think and conceive nothing of God but
that which beseems his glorious majesty; that is, when we always think and
conceive of God most holily and reverently.

In our mouths; 1. When we confess and acknowledge and profess God and his
attributes, etc. Romans 10. 10. 2. When we speak of God and his attributes holily
and everently.

In our lives; when the knowledge of God and his attributes is effectual to
bring forth in us a conversation answerable thereunto. Know thou there is a
God? worship him. That he is a Spirit? worship him in spirit and truth. That he
is just? fear him. That he is merciful? love him. That he is omnipresent?
behave thy self as in his presence. That he is omnisufficient? repose thy trust
in him. That he is omniscient and (...), a s^archer of the heart? approve thine
heart to him, etc.

Thus then we desire that the name of God in the first sense may be sanctified
by us.

The uses. 1. Concerning prayer.
THat we may pray fervently, we must have a feeling of our want; as, our
ignorance of God (here we pray for knowledge of God, without which we cannot
acknowledge him) the vanity of our minds, thinking amiss of God, Job 1. 5. our
irreverent speech of God, our not sanctifying of God in our lives (a fault
incident to the best) Number. 20. 12. For who can say that he has loved and
feared God, etc. as he ought, and behaved himself always as in Gods presence?

2. Concerning our lives.
The use concerning our lives: That as in our prayers we desire, so in our
lives we endeavor thus to sanctify God: For if we our selves will not
endeavor thus to do, it shows that we have no true desire hereof, but pray
in hypocrisy with feigned lips. Their hypocrisy therefore here is detected,
who desiring with their mouth that they may sanctify God, will think that
there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. will think basely of him, Psalm. 50. 21. or deny
his providence, mercy, and justice, Psalm. 10. 11. who use to speak unreverently
of God and his attributes, to murmr against his justice, etc. Psalm. 78. 19.
who live as if there were no God, Tit. 1. 16, that say he is a Spirit, but
desire not to worship him in spirit; that he is just, and yet desire not to
fear him, etc.

II. How Gods name signifying his glory is hallowed by us.
SEcondly, the name of God signifies his glory: Which we do sanctify whenas
we glorify God in our hearts, mouths, and lives: And this is the most
principal signification of this petition.

We glorify him in our hearts, 1. When in the affections of our hearts we
desire the procuring and advancement of Gods glory above all things, as being
more dear unto us then our own good. 2. When as in the purpose of our hearts we
intend the glory of God in all things, putting into our hearts to give glory to
his name, Mal. 2. 2.

In our mouths we glorify him, when we make the glory of God the matt^r and
end of our speech. The matter, when in our speech we set forth the praises of
God, whose name is to be exalted above all praise, Neh. 9. 5. For to praise him
is to glorify him, Luke 2. 20. Psalm. 50. 23. and to make his praise glorious,
Psalm. 66. 2. We make it the end of our speech, when therein we intend the glory
of God, either by the profession of a necessary truth, Josh. 7. 19. or by a
speech seasoned with grace, tending to the glory of God, or the good and
edification of our brethren, which is subordinate thereunto, Col. 4. 6.

In our lives we glorify God, 1. When in all our actions whatsoever we aim at
the glory of God, according to that 1. Cor. 10. 31. 2. When by our godly lives
we do not only glorify God our selves, John 15. 8. but give just occasion to
others of glorifying him, Matthew. 5. 12. 1. Pet. 2. 12.

Uses. 1. In prayer.
Wants to be bew^yled.
1. Our pride and vainglory, seeking our selves and our own praise. 2. The
neglect of Gods glory, the main end of all things, which ought to be more dear
to us then our salvation. Such we are that except the Lord endue us with this
grace, we neglect his glory, and so live in vain. 3. Our suppressing of Gods
praise, our unthankfulnes. 4. Our idle and unsavory speeches. 5. Our manifold
slips in our lives whereby God is dishonored. All which are faults incident to
the best of us, and therefore we had need earnestly to pray that God may be
glorified of us, 2. Sam. 12. 14.

Graces which we desire.
1. Zeal of Gods glory; 2. Thankfulness; 3. A desire to glorify God by a
godly life.

2. Uses in our lives.
As we are in prayer earnestly to desire that Psalm. 86. 12.
we may give glory to God, so in our lives we must endeavor both in our
hearts, tongues, and works to glorify him, etc. Otherwise, if in our mouths
we desire that we may glorify him, and in our hearts neither desire it nor
intend it, if we altogether seek our selves and our own praise, if we use to
suppress the praises of God and to smother his truth, if our ordinary speech
be idle and unsavory, our lives dissolute, from whence no honor can arise
unto God, and in truth desire not to be freed from these sins; nay, on the
contrary, if in stead of intending Gods glory we seek his dishonor, in stead
of sounding forth his praise we blaspheme his holy name, in stead of professing
and defending his truth we oppugn the same, in stead of savoury speeches they
be rotten and infective, in stead of causing the name of God to be glorified we
cause it to be blasphemed, our prayer is little better then mockery of God: And
yet such is the prayer of very many, which with their mouths desire that they
may glorify God, and yet desire not his glory in their hearts, nor seek it in
their lives, but rather practice such things whereby the name of God is
dishonored and blasphemed.

The glory of God is most dear unto him, and so must be to us, Acts 12. 22. His
glory he will not lose.

III. The name of God signifying his titles, how it is hallowed.
THirdly, the name of God does signify his titles; the titles, I say, of the
Deity, Attributes, and Persons. This name of God is sanctified, when, as it is
holy and reverend, so it is used of us. It is used of us either by taking it
into our mouths, or by taking it upon us. We sanctify it in our mouths, and
so in our writings, when as we make a^ holy and reverent mention of the titles
of God. Which we do when we mention them in a serious matter, after a reverent
manner, to a holy end. For the most holy and dreadful name of the Lord our God
Deuteronomy. 28. 58. must not be used to trifles and ridiculous matters: neither may
we lightly take up the most reverend name of God, which we are not worthy to
take into our mouths: neither must the glorious name of God be mentioned but
to his glory either mediately or immediately. And hereunto we are to refer
two sorts of usurpation of Gods name and titles, by Blessing and Swearing
aright.

Blessing is either of God or man. The blessing of God is the praising of God;
of which we have spoken: Example Romans 9. 5. and 1. 25. 2. Cor. 11. 31. Blessing
of men in the name of God, which the Scripture calls the putting of Gods name
upon them, Number. 6. 27. is a duty to be performed by all, to all, even unto
enemies, Romans 12. 14. Matthew. 5. 44. (whereunto refer salutation) but
especially to be performed by superiors, Hos. 7. 7. to their inferiors: in
the commonwealth by Princes and Magistrates; David, 2. Sam. 6. 18. Solomon, 1.
Kings 8. 55. In the Church, Number. 6. 23, 24, 25. Melchisedec, Genesis 14. 19. In
the family by parents: unto which the Lord gives great force, etc. By swearing
we make a holy and reverent mention of the name of God, whenas we swear in
truth, judgment, and righteousness, Jer. 4. 2, etc.

We take upon us the name of God when his name is called upon in us, as Genesis
48. 16.. i. when we call our selves by his name, and profess our selves to be
the children of God, Isai. 43. 6, 7. which began to be done in the time of Seth
after the birth of Enosh, Genesis 4. 26. and 6. 2. In these last times those of
the Church of God do invocate the name of Christ, Acts 9. 14, 21. 1. Cor. 1. 2.
and are called by his name, Christians, Acts 11. 26. and are baptized into his
name.

Thus we sanctify the name of Christ when as we walk worthy our calling
whereby we are called, Ephesians. 4. 1. and adorn the doctrine of Christ our
Savior in all things, departing from in^quity, as it is 2. Tim. 2. 19.

Uses in prayer.
1. Graces to be desired.
1. That we may use the titles of God reverently. 2. That we may swear by his
name alone in judgment, truth, and righteousness. 3. That we may walk worthy
our calling.

2. Wants to be bewailed.
1. Irreverence in using the titles of God. 2. Rash swearing. 3. Not walking
worthy our calling.

Uses in our lives.
As we pray that we may sanctify the name of God, so must we be careful in
our lives 1. To be mindful of God, and to mention him in matters serious, to a
good end, after a reverent manner. We mention not our prince without some show
of reverence: how much more ought we to bow the knees of our hearts when we
mention the glorious Psalm. 2. 10.
name of our God* Ex^mple, Romans 9. 5. 2. To use blessing and not cursing, Romans
12. 14. 3. To swear by the Lord alone in truth, judgment, and righteousness.
4. To labor by all means to walk worthy our calling, even as it becomes the
saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. Otherwise if our practice be (and we continue therein)
either not to mention God at all, (which the Scriptures call the forgetting of
Go^, and it is a sign that God is not in their thoughts in whose mouths he is
not, seeing out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: or else by
mentioning his name to pollute it; either in respect of the matter, mentioning
it in jests and ridiculous matters; And in the name of God, O God, O Lord, Good
God, Jesu Lord, Mercy God, etc. or of the manner; either by careless, light,
and unreverent using of Gods name without fear or conscience, sense or regard
of God: or by superstitious using of the titles, doing more reverence to the
words then unto God himself, and sticking not to blaspheme his name by wicked
swearing; like to the soldiers, Matthew 27. 39. Or in respect of the end; when
the name of God is mentioned to wicked, yea to devilish ends, as enchantments,
etc. or by cursing, which is a most horrible profaning of Gods name: or by
wicked swearing: or by living unworthy their calling; for so they take the name
of Christ upon them in vain, and profane it. Considering, Luke 1. 73. Tit. 2.
14. 2. Tim. 2. 19. In vain therefore they profess themselves the sons of God
whilst they behave themselves as the sons of men, Genesis 6. 2. or rather as
the sons of the devil. And besides, they cause the holy name of Christ to be
blasphemed. If this, I say, be our practice, and we continue therein, and yet
pray that we may sanctify the name of God, we play the hypocrites.

IV. How the name of God, as it signifies his Word, is sanctified.
FOurthly, the ^ame of God does signify his word, whereby he is especially
known. Which is sanctified by the Ministers, when it is purely, powerfully, and
profitably taught: by the people, when it is heard with reverence, attention,
good conscience, and purpose to practice it: by all, when in our hearts we do
holily meditate thereon, and are inflamed with a desire of practicing it, Psalm.
119. In our tongues, when we apply it to those uses whereunto it is profitable,
2. Tim. 3. 16. In our lives, when we knowing it do perform it.

Uses in prayer. Wants to be bewailed.
1. The want of preaching, where it is wanting. 2. The neglect and contempt of
the word, a capital sin of these times. 3. The little practicing of it where
it is known, especially in these days, ubi scientiae multum, conscientiae
parum, where there is much science, little conscience.

Uses in our lives.
In our lives we are to endeavor to sanctify the word of God: if Ministers,
by dividing it aright; if people, by saving hearing thereof, by meditating on
it, by desire to do it, by applying it to its right uses, by yielding simple
obedience unto it. Otherwise, if we desire it may be sanctified, and yet we
profane it, and please our selves in so doing, either preaching it
unprofitably, or hearing it without reverence, attention, or purpose to
pr^ctice it: if neither in our hearts we care to know nor have desire to
practice it: if we abuse it to confirm errors, and confute the truth, to
impenitencie, jests, superstition, and charms, etc. if we profane it either by
neglect or contempt, Mal. 1. 12. Amos 2. 7. Prove. 30. 9. Levit. 22, 31, 32. in
word we desire to sanctify it, but in deed profane and pollute it.

V. How the name of God is sanctifi^ as it signifies the Doctrine of religion.
FIfthly, it signifies the doctrine of religion and the worship of God. In
which respect his name is sanctified when as we walk in his name, Mich. 4. 5.
For religion is the way by which we go to heaven, Isai. 30. 21. and therefore
in the Scriptures is often called the w^y. When as therefore we walk in this
life so as that our life does answer to our profession, it is in this sense
said to signify the name of God.

As we profess the Christian religion, so our life is answerable to our
profession if denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world; Looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit.
2. 12, 13. Our religion is the truth in Christ; which if we be truly t^ught, we
must put off the old man, Ephesians. 4. 20, etc. Our religion is the light, and we
profess our selves children of the light, and so must we walk, Ephesians. 5. 8,
10, 11. In this way we must walk in respect of God uprightly, in respect of men
inoffensively.

Duties in prayer. Wants to be b^wailed.
1. Our backwardness in religion; 2. Our hypocrisy; 3. Our scandalous
conversation.

Duties in our lives.
In our lives we are to desire and to endeavor that we may adorn the
profession of religion by renouncing all ungodliness, etc. to set God before
our eyes, that we may walk uprightly as in his sight; to walk inoffensively,
Heb. 12. 13. Otherwise, if we profess religion, and renounce not our sins,
nor put off the old man; if we call our selves the children of the light, and
yet walk in darkness; we profane the name of God and his religion. And this is
done, 1. In respect of God by hypocrisy, 2. Tim. 3. 5. when as the profession
of religion is pretended to worldly or wicked respects. 2. In respect of men by
the profane and dissolute life of common Christians, and by the falls and
scandals of them that would seem the best professors. If we continue in this
course and please our selves therein, we cannot make this prayer in truth, etc.

VI. How the name of God signifying his works is hallowed.
SIxthly, the name of God signifies his Works whereby he is known, and that
both of creation and administration. The creatures are sanctified, Works of
Creation.
First, by an holy and religious meditation and mentioning of them, 1. To the
glory of God, acknowledging in them the wisdom, justice, power, and goodness
of God, glorifying him, being known in his works, as God, Romans 1. 21, 22. 2. To
our good, when we imitate and sly such things in them as the holy Ghost has
appointed. Secondly, by a holy and sanctified use. The creature is sanctified
by the word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Col. 3. 17.

Duties in prayer. Wants to be bewailed.
1. (...), that is, the hardness and senselessness of our hearts, in not
seeing and acknowledging the goodness, wisdom, and power of God in his
creatures, Mark 6. 52. 2. Our jesting at some of his works; as at the form or
countenance of some man, etc. 3. Our suffering of the brute creatur^s to go
beyond us: as the crane and swallow, in knowing their times and seasons; the
ant, in diligence; the trees and plants, in bringing forth fruit. 4. Our
irr^ligious use of the creatures, or abusing them to b^ the instruments of
sin.

Duties in our lives.
1. Holy meditation and mentioning of the works of God to his glory and our
spiritual good. To his glory: for so must we meditate and speak of the
creatures as that the wisdom, goodness, and power of God shining in them be
acknowledged; that we knowing him by his works may glorify him as God. To our
good; by meditating in such things as are to be followed or eschewed in them.
2. The pure and holy use of the creature s^nctified by the word and prayer,
etc. Otherwise, if we knowing God by ^is works, shall not glorify him, Romans 1.
21. if we shall play the Momes in detr^cting from the works of God or mocking
the same; if we shall abuse his creatures to superstitious, wicked, and prof^ne
uses, and please our selves in so doing, we are to take heed lest in making
this prayer we be found mockers of God.

Now follow the works of administration: which W^rks of Administration.
are his blessings or judgments toward our selves or others. His blessings on
our selves are sanctified, 1. in our hearts, when we are truly thankful for
them: 2. in our tongues, when we give thanks, Psalm. 124. 6. and show forth his
benefits, Psalm. 66. 16. and 71. 8, 18. 3. in our deeds, when we refer the
good things received to his glory and the good of others, and when by them we
are brought to repentance, Romans 2. 4.

The blessings of God on others are sanctified, when we rejoice with them, 1.
Cor. 12. 26. and glorify God in them, Psalm. 35. 27. Gal. 1. 24.

The judgments of God on our selves are sanctified, when they have the like
effect in us that they had in Job; that is, First, when we are humbled under
the hand of God, and brought to repentance, Job 1. 20. and 42. 6. Secondly,
when we bear them patiently, Job 1. 21. Thirdly, when we bless God in them and
for them, v. 21.

The judgments of God on others are sanctified, when by consideration thereof
we fear to sin, when we show forth the justice of God in the punishment of
the wicked, Psalm. 58. 11, 12. when we condole with the just.

Wants to be lamented.
First, unthankfulness: in that neither in our hearts we have the cheerful
sense of Gods goodness in his benefits, nor in our tongues return praise to
him, nor in our deeds bring forth the fruits, nor yet by them are brought to
repentance. Secondly, our not acknowledging Gods graces in others, or depraving
or lessening them, or envying their good. Thirdly, our senselessness in
affliction, Jer. 5. 3. Fourthly, impatienc^, Isai. 22. 12, 13. Fifthly,
murmuring. Sixthly, not to be terrified by the example Dan. 5. 22.
of others, but rather pleasing our selves, Luke 13. 1. Seventhly, not
condoling but rather rejoicing in other men's evils; as, laughing at fools.

Duties in our lives.
To be thankful to God for his benefits; To express our thankfulness, by
thanksgiving, by referring them to the glory of God, by repentance; To rejoice
with others; To glorify God in them; To make right use of his chastisements on
our selves and others. Otherwise, if we shall be proud of those good things
which we have, as though we had not received them, not giving God the glory,
nor referring them to his glory and the good of others, but contrariwise
abusing them to the dishonor of God and the hurt of others, as many do their
learning, wit, riches, strength, etc. If we shall deprave Gods mercies in
others, or envy them; If in the judgments of God upon our selves we shall
harden our hearts with Pharaoh; If we shall impatiently bear them, and murmr
against the severity of God; If with Belteshazzar we shall not be moved with
the example of others, D^n. 5. 22. If we shall make a sport of (...) men's
calamities; we are far from that desire of sanctifying Gods name which in
this prayer we pretend.

Secondly, in these words we pray that the Lord would sanctify his name. The
which petition we are the rather to make, because his glory is so little
regarded amongst men. And in this sense our prayer is the same with that of our
Savior, John 12. 28. Father, glorify thy name; or with that of David, Psalm.
57. 6, 11. Be thou exalted, Lord, above the heavens, and thy glory above all
the earth; or that, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, etc.

The Lord does sanctify his name, I. When he How God sanctifies his name.
does show forth and manifest the excellency and glory of his name, that is,
of his attributes and perfections, as wisdom, power, etc. but especially by
making manifest the glory of his mercy and justice. Of mercy; by preserving his
Church, and multiplying his blessings upon the faithful, Ezech. 36. 21. For
the glory of his own name he preserved his Church amongst the heathen, and
promised to reduce them into their own country: not for their sakes, but his
holy names sake, v. 22. and then v. 23. I will sanctify my great name, which
was polluted amongst the heathen (namely, because of the affliction of his
people) v. 20. and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, says the Lord
God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes, etc. So 2 Thessalonians. 1.
12. Of his justice and power; in executing his judgments on transgressors and
on the wicked, and overthrowing the enemies of his Church. When Nadab and Abihu
had offered strange fire contrary to the commandment of God, and were destroyed
by fire from heaven, he said, I will be sanctified in them that come near me;
(that is, By executing judgment even against those that are near to me, I will
make manifest the glory of my justice) and before all the people will I be
glorified, Levit. 10. 3. Isai. 5. 15, 16. By the judgments of God executed
upon the wicked it is said that man shall be humbled and brought low, but the
Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and the holy God shall be
sanctified in justice. Ezech. 28. 22. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I come
against thee, Sidon; and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they
shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed judgments in her,
and shall be sanctified in her: For I will send into her pes^ilence, etc. And
chap. 38. 22, 23. he threatens to rain fire and brimstone upon Gog and Magog,
that is, both the open and secret enemies of the Church, etc. Thus, says he,
will I be magnified and sanctified and known in the eyes of many nations, and
they shall know that I am the Lord.

II. God does sanctify and glorify his name, when he does remov^ the
impediments of his glory, as idolatry and worshipping of false gods,
superstition, 2. (...). 3. 1.
ignorance, and gives a free passage to his Gospel, when he takes away the
wicked, Psalm. 104. 35.

III. By freeing it from the abuses and pollutions of men, and mainteining his
own glory. When Moses and Aaron at the waters of Strife did not sanctify the
Lord by believing and acknowledging his omnipotent power, then the Lord did
sanctify his name himself, Number. 20. 12, 13. Lev. 22. 32. Neither shall ye
pollute my holy name; but I will be hallowed amongst the people of Israel. So
when Herod would not give the glory to God, the Lord glorified himself in his
destruction. In the second place therefore we pray in zeal of Gods glory, That
howsoever men pollute and profane his holy name, yet he would glorify it, and
manifest the praise both of his mercy in blessing and preserving his Church,
and also of his justice in executing his judgments upon the wicked and enemies
of his Church, by removing the impediments, by freeing it from the pollution of
men, and mainteining his glory.

Duties.
1. Zeal of his glory, that he may sanctify it whatsoever become of me. 2.
Fear to profane his name, seeing he will be sanctified, etc.

V. 10. (...), Thy kingdom come. What Gods kingdom is.
THe first petition contained the main scope of all our desires: This and the
next contein the way and means whereby that end is to be achieved: for then is
God glorified when his kingdom is advanced and his will is performed.

The meaning of the words, Thy kingdom come.

We must know that there are two kingdoms Two kingdoms in this world: the
first the kingdom of darkness.
in the world ruling in the minds and hearts of men; the one of darkness, the
other of light; the one of Satan, the other of God, Col. 1. 13. unto the one of
which every man in the world is subject. The kingdom of Satan and darkness
is, whereby the children of disobedience being blindfolded and bewitched of the
devil go on and continue in ignorance and sin to their own perdition. The
prince of this kingdom is Satan, the prince of the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. and God
of this world, 2. Cor. 4. 4. John 12. 31. The subjects are all men by nature,
until they be brought out of this kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of God:
and then is the kingdom of God said to come to them. But in this subjection do
none finally remain but the reprobate, who are the children of disobedience, in
whom Satan works effectually* Ephesians. 2. 2. and blinds their minds, that the
light of the glorious gospel of the kingdom of God shine not unto them, 2.
Cor. 4. 4. and carries them away captive to the obedience of his will, 2. Tim.
2. 26. The law of this kingdom whereby he rules is sin: Hujus regni (...),
The law of this kingdom is to be without law. This sin reigns in the mortal
bodies of men, m^king them give up their members to be instruments of sin
unto iniquity, Romans 6. 12, 13. until it please God to let his kingdom come
upon them, ruling them by his word and spirit. The end of this kingdom is
endless perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. and against this kingdom are we taught to
pray in this place, etc.

The other is the kingdom of God: And this is The second is the kingdom of
God, 1. uni^ll over ^ll.
either universal or special. The universal is that whereby the Lord rules
over all things, even over his enemies; whereunto all things are subject, and
from which subjection nothing can exempt it self. This of Divines is called
regnum potentiae, the kingdom of power: whereof the holy Ghost speaks Psalm.
99. 1, 2. and 145. 13. and in the clause of this prayer; For thine is the
kingdom. But most plainly Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord has established his throne
in heaven, and his kingdom is over all. This kingdom nothing can resist,
nothing can hinder, no not although all creatures should band themselves
together against it.

The special kingdom of God is that whereby 2. Special, over the Church.
he rules not over all men in general, but only over the Church, that is,
the company of the elect. And as there be two parts of the Church, the one
militant upon the earth, the other triumphant in heaven; so are there two parts
of Gods kingdom: the first of grace, the Church militant; the second of glory,
the Church triumphant. The former is the blessed estate of Christians in whom
he reigns in this life: for it does not consist in meat and drink, or in any
temporal or worldly thing, but it is righteousness, that is, assurance o^
justification, and peace of conscience arising from thence, Romans 5. 1. and joy
in the holy Ghost, a consequent of both the other, Romans 14. 17. The latter is
the glorious and blessed estate of the Of the kingdom of glory.
faithful after this life, where they shall have the fruition of God in whose
presence there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11.
etc. Of these two the former is the way to the latter: therefore whosoever
would be an inheritour of the kingdom of glory in heaven, must first be a
subject of God in the kingdom of grace in this life, Luke 22. 30. and
therefore out of the Church there is no salvation. And on the other side,
whosoever is a true subject of God in the kingdom of grace, shall be an heir
of glory in heaven: and therefore to them that be true members of the Church
there is no condemnation. And this David teaches us, Psalm. 15. 1. Who shall
sojourn, etc. both parts of that question concerning one and the same man. Of
the kingdom of grace.


The kingdom of grace is that government whereby the Lord does effectually
rule in our hearts by his word and Spirit, working in us his own good work of
grace, and making us fellow-citizens, and meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. Saints in
light, Col. 1. 12. In this kingdom the Prince is the Lord, who exercises this
kingdom by his Son, Psalm. 96. 10. and 97. 1. and 110. 1. The people are the
Church; which is therefore called the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5. 19. and the
particular subjects are all true Christians. The scepter of this kingdom is
the word of God, Psalm. 110. which is also the law whereby he reigns; and is
therefore called the word of the kingdom, Matthew. 13. 19. the gospel of the
kingdom of God, Mark 1. 14. The preaching of which word and gospel is also
called the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 13. 11. and 22. 2, etc. Where by the way
we may note, that where the word of God and gospel of the kingdom is truly
preached, there is the kingdom and consequently the Church of God: and
therefore that may be also verified of us which our Savior Christ speaks of
the Jews, that the kingdom of God is amongst us, Luke 17. 21. This preaching
of the word is also called the arm of God, Isa. 53. 1. whereby he pulls men
out of darkness into light, and out of the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.
18. But especially the Lord rules in our hearts by his Spirit, drawing us unto
his Son, bending and bowing us to the obedience of his word, inlightening our
minds, and sanctifying our hearts, and leading us into all truth, etc.
mortifying sin and corruption in us, and renewing us unto holiness of life.
The end of this kingdom is the kingdom of glory. And therefore Christ says
to his Church, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, etc. For therefore does he
pull us out of the kingdom of darkness, and bring us into the kingdom of
grace, that by faith we may have remission of sins and inheritance among them
that are sanctified, Acts 26. 18. By reason of the certainty hereof it is said
that those that believe have everlasting life, John 5. 24. and are translated
from death unto life: that those whom God has justified he has also
glorified, Romans 8. 30.

The kingdom of glory in respect of us is the blessed estate of the godly in
heaven, when as God shall be all in all, 1. Cor. 15. 28. where God has
prepared such things for them that love him as neither the eye of man has
seen, nor ear heard, nor etc. 1. Cor. 2. 9.

What this word come signifies.
(...), Adveniat. This word Come, is diversely to be expounded according to the
diverse significations of the kingdom of God. The universal kingdom, or
kingdom of power, is said to come when it is manifested and made apparent that
all things are guided by the power and providence of God.

Here therefore we are taught to pray, That the How Gods universal kingdom is
said to come.
Lord would vouchsafe to advance his kingdom, and bring all things into
subjection under his feet; and also that all men may acknowledge this
universal kingdom of God, ruling all things according to the counsel of his
will, and may willingly submit themselves to the government of this absolute
Lord, who has placed his seat in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all;
That he would subdue his enemie^, Psalm. 110. 2. governing them with an iron
rod, Revel. 12. 5. and 19. 15. and bruising them like a potters vessel, Psalm.
2. 9. That he would execute his holy and eternal decrees, both in the general
government of the world, and also in the saving of the elect, and destroying
the reprobate, to his own glory, working all things according to the counsel of
his will. And albeit this kingdom cannot be resisted or hindered maugre all the
enemies thereof, yet we are to pray that it may come; and that he would exalt
his kingdom, as before glorify his name: not meaning thereby to move God, but
to show the concurrence of our will with Gods will, and our affection toward
the advancement of Gods kingdom, and zeal toward his glory.

Secondly, the kingdom of grace is said to come How the kingdom^ of grace
comes.
unto us, whenas it is either begun and erected in us, or continued and
increased amongst us. And in this behalf we are taught to pray not only for
the coming of this kingdom, but also for the granting of the means whereby it
comes, and also removing the impediments of the coming. I As touching the
coming it self, we are to note out of this word, That we come not to this
kingdom of grace of our selves, but this kingdom comes unto us, and in
coming preventeth us, as our Savior speaks, Luke 11. 20. (...), is come upon
you: for we naturally are the bondslaves of Satan, and subjects of the kingdom
of darkness; out of which bondage we are not able to come except the Lord do
pull us: and as our Savior says, John 6. 44. No man comes to the Son but
whom the Father draws. Wherein appears the undeserved mercy of God in
preventing us, in seeking that which was lost, in being found of them that
sought him not, in coming to them that neither could nor would (through their
own default) come unto him. And secondly, because there must be always a daily
progress in this kingdom, and work of grace in this life, therefore we are
taught to pray daily that this kingdom may come.

Now let us see how this kingdom comes, and Three degrees of the coming of
Christskingdome.
what it is which here we ask. Of the coming of this kingdom there be three
degrees: The first is the pulling and drawing us out of the kingdom of Satan
and power of darkness unto God; which is our effectual calling, whereby we
are brought from the spiritual bondage of sin and Satan into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, and are made fellowcitizens of the Saints, and
domestici Dei, of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. And this calling is
wrought by this means. First, to us sleeping in our sins the word of God is
sent to rouse us, the law showing us our sins and the punishments due for
them, the Gospel promising salvation upon the condition of faith and
repentance. Secondly, the spirit of God concurring with the word inlighteneth
our minds to understand the word of God, inclines our minds to attend
thereunto, mollifieth our hard and stony hearts in the sight and sense of
sins; and then traveling under the burden of them with weariness, he
stirs up in us a hunger and thirst after the righteousness of Christ and
reconciliation with God, and teaches us to pray with sighs which cannot be
expressed.

Secondly, when the Spirit of God applies the merits and efficacy of Christ's
death and r^surrection to the justification of the sinner, and by degrees
works in him faith and assurance of the pa^don of his sins; whereupon
follows peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost: In which three the
Apostle says that the kingdom of God does consist, Romans 14. 17.

Thirdly, when Christ our King rules and reigns in our hearts by his word
and Spirit, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, justly and holily in this pr^sent world, expecting the happy hope and
glorious appearance of the great God our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 12, 13.
that is, when by his Spirit he applies the merits of his death to the
mortifying of sin in us, and of his resurrection to raise us up to newness
of life.

And this we desire not only for our selves, but also for the whole company of
the elect, That the Lord would from all sorts gather his Church, electing them
from the world, engraffing them into his Son, justifying them by faith, and
sanctifying them by his Spirit; That he would confirm them by his grace, that
they may increase more and more, and be enriched with all spiritual blessings
in heavenly things, and finally by the power of God through faith may be
preserved unto everlasting life, 1. Pet. 1. 5.

And because the Church of God is, as we have said, the kingdom of God, we
desire not only that God would gath^r his Church, but also that he would
enlarge it more and more, by the visible adding unto it those that are to be
saved; that h^ would prosper and preserve it, Psalm. 122. 6. protect and defend
it from all enemies both corporal and spiritual; that he would give all
graces needful and expedient unto them. And thus we are to pray that the
kingdom of Gods grace may come uponus and upon all his chosen servants.

The means are to be prayed for of the coming of Christ's kingdom.
II. Now because this kingdom comes by means, we are also to pray for them.
The means are either outward or inward. The outward are 1. Outward means.
the preaching of the word, and Christ's government by his min^ters. The
preaching of the word* which is the Gospel of the kingdom of God, is such a
notable means of the coming of the kingdom that it is called the kingdom of
God. For whereas there be three degrees of this coming, our Vocation,
Justification, and Sanctification; every one of them ordinarily is wrought by
the preaching of the word. We are called outwardly by the Gospel; We are
justified by faith: faith comes by hearing of the word, Romans 10. 17. We are
sanctified by the word of truth; by the preaching of the word we are begotten
unto God. Therefore we are to pray that the word of God may have a free passage
and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. and also that the preaching of the word and
Gospel be not taken from us, or, as Matthew. 21. 43. that the kingdom of God be
not taken from us, but continued to us and our posterity. And because there
cannot be preaching of the word except there be preachers, Romans 10. 14. we are
taught to pray, Matthew. 9. 38. that God would send forth laborers into his
harvest; that he would furnish them with Vrim and Thummim, gifts sufficient,
Ephesians. 6. 19. that he would clothe them with righteousness, Psalm. 132. 9. that
he would open unto the^ a door of the word, that they may speak the mystery
of Christ, Col. 4. 3. And because there cannot be ordinarily learned guides and
scribes taught unto the kingdom of God, except they be first trained up in
good literature, we are to pray also for the Universities and schools of the
prophets, which are the seminaries and seed-plots of the Church.

The second outward means is the government of The second outward means.
Christ by his servants both in the Church and Commonwealth. In the Church, by
the Ministers and governors exercising in the name of Christ admonition,
suspension, excommunication. For whom we are to pray, That they may execute
their offices according to the will of God, as shall most serve for the
advancement of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and defacing of the kingdom
of sin and Satan; That the people submit themselves to the censures of the
Church, and be reclaimed thereby. In the Commonwealth, by Magistrates, who are
Gods ministers also, etc. Romans 13. whom God has advanced that they might be
nursing-fathers and nursing-mothers to the Church, Isai. 49. 13. For whom also
we are to pray, 1. Tim. 2. 2. That after the example of David, Josias,
Ezechias, they may reform religion, defend the truth and profession of it,
suppress idolatry and superstition, punish sin, etc. That the subjects may
live in all obedience unto them as unto the ordinance of the Lord.

The inward means is the operation of Gods Spirit 2. The inward means of the
coming of Gods kingdom.
in the souls of men. For it is the Spirit of God which makes the outward
means effectual, and without which neither the preaching of the word nor the
other means of government will any whit prevail, 1. Cor. 3. 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 4. It
is the Spirit of God who in the ministry of the word knocks at the door of
our hearts, and inlighteneth our minds to understand it: John 16. 13. he
leads us into all truth; 1. John 2. 20, 27. he teaches us; he opens our
hearts to listen unto it, as he did the heart of Lydia, Acts 16. 14. he makes
the word the savor of life unto life. For without the Spirit the word is a
dead letter, the Scripture a seale^ book: without him we cannot say that Jesus
is Christ: without him we cannot pray, etc. He mollifieth our hearts, and
works in us that godly sorrow working repentance never to be repented of:
which stirs up in us earnest desires, and makes us to call upon God with
sighs unspeakable; and is therefore called the Spirit of supplication. He
works in us the assurance of our reconciliation with God, which we call
faith; and is therefore called the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father, etc. He sanctifies us throughout, mortifying sin, and raising us up
into newness of life, Ezech. 36. 26, 27. working in us all sanctifying and
saving graces; and is therefore called the Spirit of grace: and so every grace
is called by the name of the Spirit, because it is a gift of the Spirit; as the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. Isai. 11. 2.

In this petition therefore we desire that the Lord would grant us his Spirit
(which he has promised, Luke 11. 13.) and that by this Spirit he would rule
and reign in us, and quicken us, that being animated thereby we may behave our
selves as members of Christ, etc. ruled and guided by his sanctifying Spirit.

The impediments of Gods kingdom to be prayed against.
III. Lastly, because the word (...), let it come, seems to import and
presuppose some obstacles and impediments whereby this kingdom is hindered we
do also pray that these may be removed.

The impediments are these: First, the three main enemies of our salvation are
also the chief oppugners of the kingdom of grace, the Devil, World, and Flesh.
The devil seeks by all means the ruin 1. The D^vil.
of the Church in general, Revel. 12. and also of the particular members.
Whilst this strong man possesses his hold (that is, every natural man) all
things are at quiet: but when the Lord by his word and Spirit draws any out
of the kingdom and power of darkness, then he bestirreth him, and by all
tentations both by himself and his instruments he seeks to entangle him in
sin. When the seed of the word is sown in the hearts of men, he carries it
away, as the birds do the corn which fall on the ways, Matthew. 13. 19. or he
blindfoldeth them that they shall not see the light of the gospel, Ephesians. 4. 4.
or if they understand it, he carries them away captive to the obedience of his
will. If they be called to repentance, he persuades them to defer it; They
may repent hereafter as well, etc. If to amendment of life; he tells them
that if they be elected, they may live as they list; if rejected, they cannot
be saved: If to humiliation; that it is a doctrine that belongs to notorious
sinners, etc. Moreover, he opposes himself to the Ministers and their
ministry, Zech. 3. 1. he suborneth false teachers, and is a lying spirit in
their mouths. Therefore we pray that the Lord would bind Satan, dissolve his
works, and tread him under our feet, Romans 16. 20.

The second is the world and the lusts thereof, 2. The World.
which choke the seed of Gods word, Matthew. 13. 22. ( the glorious show of this
world, 1. Cor. 7. 31.) By these Satan as by nails naileth men to the earth that
they cannot mind heavenly things: By them as baits he allureth to sin, as
snares entangleth to perdition. Which make men citizens of the earth, and miss
of their freedom in heaven; which cause men place their paradise upon the
earth, and not to care for the kingdom of heaven; (For a man cannot Matthew. 6.
24.
serve God and Mammon, or be a worldling and yet a subject of this kingdom)
which make worldly men sell their birthright with Esau, etc. therefore we pray
that the Lord would deliver us from the evil world, Gal. 1. 4. wain us from it;
that we may renounce all worldly lusts; that we may use the world so as we
abuse it not, 1. Cor. 7. 31. that the world may be crucified unto us and we to
the world, Gal. 6. that by faith we may overcome the world, 1. John 5. 4. and
that we may behave our selves not as worldlings minding earthly things, but as
pilgrims on the earth and ^itizens of heaven, and fellow-citizens of the
saints, Ephesians. 2. 19. whose (...), oonversation, is in heaven, Phil. 3. 19, 20.

The third is our Flesh, that is, our own corrupt 3. The Flesh
nature, the wisdom whereof is e^mity against God; which lusts against the
spirit; which sends out continual lusts, as it were sparkles out of a
furnace, which fight against our souls; which the devil abuses as his bawd to
pollute us and to beget in us all manner of sins, which bring forth death.
Therefore we pray that the Lord would reign in us by his Spirit; that we may
not be carnal but spiritual; that we may not walk after the flesh but after
the spirit; that, as being pilgrims on earth but citizens of heaven, we may
abstein from fleshly lusts, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 11. that we may crucify the flesh
and the lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24. In a word, we desire that the Lord would
confound the kingdom of darkness, whereby the devil rules in the hearts of
men, using for his instruments or soldiers the lusts of the world and of the
flesh.

The outward enemies of Gods kingdom.
But these were spiritual enemies. And we are not only to pray against them,
but also against the outward enemies of the Church, which is the kingdom of
God: And these are either open and professed enemies, as the Turks and Infidels
(the great Turk being that (...), or Abaddon, that makes havoc of the Church,
Revel. 9. 11.) or else close and covert enemies which under the name and
profession of Christ oppugn the kingdom of Christ, as Antichrist and his
Synagogue, that is the Pope and the Church of Rome. For notwithstanding all
their glorious profession, that they and they alone are the Church of God, yet
these are they that say, We will not have this man to reign over us, but
having received the mark of the beast are in subjection to the Pope under
penalty of damnation: And he sits in, or rather sets himself against the
Church, usurping sovereigne authority; and sitting as God in the throne of
Christ, he deteineth the people in ignorance, making them believe that their
implicit faith will save them: and so they lead them blindfolded after them as
it were in a string, to perdition. For whose law reigns amongst them? Gods,
or their own? The breach of whose law more severely punished? To whose
government are they subject? Gods, or their own? What doctrine do they teach?
the word of God, or the inventions of men? The word of God, which is his
scepter; do they not suppress this light of men's souls? do they not hide it
from the people under a strange language, as it were under a bushel? do they
follow the Lamb that have received the mark of the beast, and persecute with
fire and sword all true professors? etc. Well, against these enemies, both
secret and open, covert and discovered, that is, Gog and Magog, Revel. 20. we
are taught to pray, that being subdued, (that is, either converted or
subverted) the Church and kingdom of God may be advanced.

Besides these enemies there are also other impediments of the kingdom of God
opposite to the outward means. As to the preaching of the word, 1. The
insufficiency of Ministers not able to teach; 2. Their negligence and
idleness; 3. Their causeless non-residencie, and covetous multiplying
benefices with cure; 4. The want of maintenance by impropriations and
corruption of Patrones. All these we are to pray that they may be removed, and
a free passage to his word granted.

Impediments opposite to government, are either no government but confusion in
the Church and Commonweal; or else corrupt government, the rulers hindering
rather then promoting the kingdom of Christ.

We see then what we desire when we pray that the kingdom of grace may come:
viz. That where it is not it may be erected, and where it is it may be
continued and enlarged; That he would bless, preserve, and protect his Church:
That the Lord would rule and reign in us by his word and Spirit: That he would
effectually call those which belonging to his election are not called: That he
would justify us by faith, sanctify us by the holy Ghost, and make us and all
his meet to be partakers with the Saints in light: That we may more and more
feel in our selves the fruits of this kingdom, righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost: and to this end, That he would give a free passage to
his word, and send faithful laborers into his harvest, blessing them and
their ministry, and also the seedplots thereof: That he would establish an
holy government in the Church and Commonwealth, and bless the governors, etc.
That he would grant unto it the effectual operation of the holy Spirit, making
the outward means profitable: That he would confound the kingdom of darkness,
sin, Satan and Antichrist: That the devil may be trod under our feet, the
world crucified unto us and we to the world, the flesh with the lusts thereof
mortified: That we may renounce and forsake (according to our vow in baptism)
the flesh, the world, and the devil: That all other impediments of his kingdom
of grace and our salvation being removed, we may be preserved blameless to the
coming of Christ, and may be kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation.

Uses. Wants to be bewailed.
Now let us come to the uses. First, our need which we have to make this
prayer, by reason of our defection from God in our first parents, and our
original sin derived from them. For before man fell from God by sin, he
was wholly subject to the kingdom of God, and conformable to his will in all
righteousness and holiness; his mind enlightened with knowledge, endued with
wisdom, his conscience pure, his will holy and just, his affections orderly,
the inferior powers of his soul subordinate to the superior, and all to God,
the members of the body instruments of holiness unto righteousness. But when
as man fell from God by sin, he became the subject of Satan, his mind
darkened with ignorance and folly in spiritual things, his conscience impure,
his will not only unjust but also unable to will that which is good, his
affections inordinate, the inferior faculties rebelling against the superior,
the members of the body instruments of sin unto iniquity. We therefore that
are bred and born in this state of disobedience, have great need to pray that
the Lord would rule in us, that we may be renewed according to the image of God
in holiness and righteousness.

2. Our spiritual servitude and bondage under sin and Satan: by reason
whereof we are not able to come unto God, but must desire that his kingdom may
come unto us. When we ceased to subject our selves to God, we became the
subjects of Satan; when we left to be the servants of righteousness, we became
the servants of sin; when we left the image of God, we got the image of the
devil. Naturally we are wholly carried away by the devil as captives to the
obedience of his will, doing nothing but sin, and pleasing our selves
therein; thinking our selves free, as John 8. being most bond: and therefore if
we did feel the power of sin and Satan reigning in us, we would with great
fervency and vehemence of affection desire that the Lord would pull us out of
this power of darkness, and translate us into the kingdom of his Son.

3. Our unthankfulness unto God that has brought us out of this bondage into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God; especially considering he gave
himself for us to this end, Luke 1. 74. Tit. 2. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 24. We had need
therefore to pray that he would rule in us by his word and Spirit: For
professing our selves to be redeemed by Christ, we behave our selves (many of
us) as if we still were in the bondage of sin: For, whom we obey, his
servants we are.

4. Our neglect and contempt of the word.

5. Our resisting the good motions of his Spirit, and striving against the
same: our contristation or making heavy the Spirit of God.

6. The remnants of the kingdom of darkness or rather our heaps of sins and
corruptions; our continual lusts and concupiscences.

7. Our yielding to the temptations of Satan; our worldly minds following after
pleasure, profit, or preferment; our not crucifying of the flesh, but rather
walking therein.

And as we are to ask good things for others, so must we also bewail their
wants. As when we see men plunged in sin, and carried away headlong to their
perdition, as the swine were into the sea, we ought to lament their desperate
estate, Psalm. 119. 136, 158. Ezech. 9. 4. We are to bewail all the impediments
of the kingdom of Christ, disorder in the Church, confusion in the Commonweal,
the want of the word, and causes thereof. Our hearts ought to yern within us,
as our Saviors did, Matthew. 9. 36. when we see a people living in ignorance and
sin, without means and without God in this world: and therefore for the
supply of all these wants, we are in sense thereof to pray fervently, Let thy
kingdom come.

Our duties in our lives.
1. In respect of the kingdom of power, That we acknowledge the Lord to be our
absolute King: That we submit our selves to his providence: That we rest
contented and well pleased with whatsoever he does toward us, who does all
things according to the counsel of his will.

2. In respect of the kingdom of grace, we ought to have an earnest desire of
the advancement of Gods kingdom, and zeal of the Churches good; and more
particularly, that the Lord would reign in us by his word and Spirit. And unto
this desire must be joined an holy endeavor, first in order and first in
degree to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, that is, that the
Lord would rule in us by his word and Spirit, and that we may show our
subjection by bringing forth the fruits of righteousness.

3. A careful using of the means which God has appointed to advance his
kingdom, and to work our salvation; to hear the word with submission,
reverence, attention, good conscience, and desire to practiceit; to nourish the
good motions of the Spirit, yielding our selves to be drawn thereby.

4. Thankfulness to God that he has made us subjects of his kingdom, Col. 1.
12. Mark 11. 10. and care to behave our selves as subjects of this kingdom.

5. Diligent endeavor in our several places and callings to advance and
further the kingdom of Christ. Princes and Magistrates must be nursing-fathers
and nursing-mothers of the Church, zealous by all good means to advance the
kingdom of Christ, and to remove the impediments thereof, and to set
themselves against the kingdom of darkness, of sin, Satan, and Antichrist;
to root out all superstition and idolatry, and the relics thereof; to reform
religion where it is corrupt; to be defenders of the faith; to take order that
there may be preachers in all places provided for, and see them discharge their
duties; to punish sinners, and reward the virtuous. If we be Ministers, we are
by preaching of the word in season and out of season, to do our endeavor to
win men unto the Lord, etc. If private men, we must live in obedience to
superiors in Church and Commonwealth, as to the ordinance of the Lord, our
King ruling us by them. Whatsoever we are, our duty is to labor by all means,
1. that we our selves may become subjects of the kingdom of grace, and 2. that
by all good means we may win others unto the Lord.

6. To oppose our selves against the enemies of the Church both spiritual and
temporal; to resist Satan and his temptations; to be wained from the world,
and to mind heavenly things; to walk not after the flesh but after the spirit;
to come out of Babylon into the Church of God, to keep us therein; to oppose
our selves against Antichrist and his adherents, as being enemies of the
kingdom of Christ.

But here the hypocrisy of very many is detected, The hypocrisy of many
detected.
who ask this petition with their mouths but desire it not with their hearts:
As first in respect of the universal kingdom, those that will not submit
themselves to the providence of God, but desire rather that they were freed
from all subjection unto God, they abuse God in making their prayer and pray
against themselves, that God would advance his kingdom, and make his enemies
his footstool, or break them with his iron scepter like a potters vessel.

Secondly, in regard of the kingdom of grace; first, those that will not have
Christ to reign over them by his word and spirit, but cast off his yoke of
subjection, Luke 19. 14. Psalm. 2. 3. sons of Belial: such mock God when they
say this prayer.

2. Those who living in ignorance and sin, and consequently in spiritual
bondage, please themselves as if they were free, John 8. 33. and therefore do
not truly desire that Gods kingdom may come, because they have no sense of
their own misery, etc.

3. Those that seek not the kingdom of God and his righteousness, but set
themselves to seek their own carnal and worldly desires.

4. Those magistrates, ministers, people, that seek not the advancement of
Christ's kingdom in themselves, contemning the word, quenching the spirit, nor
yet in others. As for those Magistrates who in stead of cherishing the Church
do persecute it, in stead of advancing Gods kingdom do deface it, erecting
superstition and idolatry, suppressing virtue, advancing vice; or those
Ministers that deprive the people of the food of their souls, and like dry
nurses hunger-starve them; or those men whosoever that labor to withdraw men
from allegiance unto God: all those oppose themselves to the kingdom of grace;
and therefore being enemies, in making this prayer do ask their own confusion.
For our Savior Christ shows himself to be a King as well in subduing his
enemies as in preserving his subjects, Psalm. 110. 1. Psalm. 2. 6.

5. Those that follow the temptations of the devil, the desires of the world,
and lusts of the flesh, and please themselves in so doing, they are not guided
by the Spirit of Christ, but are enemies to his cross, Phil. 3. 19. and
soldiers in Satan's camp.

As therefore we desire the kingdom of grace so let us seek it, etc.

Of the coming of the kingdom of glory which we here desire.
Thirdly, we desire that the kingdom of glory may come, that is, that the
number of the elect being accomplished, and all Gods enemies subdued, Christ
would hasten his coming to judgment to our full redemption and glorification,
that God may be all in all. Here therefore we pray, 1. That God would hasten
the coming of Christ unto judgment; and to that end would accomplish the
number of the elect, and subdue all his enemies under his feet: 2. That this
kingdom may come unto us, and that it may be possessed of us; and to that end
would make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
and would free and keep us from all evil unto his own everlasting kingdom, 2.
Tim. 4. 18. and would by his power through faith preserve us unto everlasting
life, 1. Pet. 1. 5.

Uses.
1. Duty in our lives.
We must earnestly desire the coming of Christ, and believe that it shall come,
and that to our salvation.

2. Wants to be bewailed.
First, the want of faith, by reason of the conscience of our manifold sins
which make a separation between God and us, and make the remembrance of the
judgment terrible unto us: so that we cannot desire the coming of Christ to
judgment as we ought.

Secondly, the worldliness of our minds, in that we are all more or less
overtaken of the desires thereof, and not so wained from the world as becomes
pilgrims on earth; so that many of us are so far from desiring another life
that they could be content to live here for ever.

Thirdly, our sins must be as an heavy burden unto us; that being weary we
may earnestly desire to be dissolved, and so disburdened of them, Romans 7. 23,
24. Phil. 1. 23.

Fourthly, we must bewail and be weary of the sins of the world, whereby Gods
name is dishonored, his kingdom hindered, his will neglected, that so we may
truly desire that an end may be put to these evil days, and may say, How long,
Lord, holy and true? Revel. 6. 10.

We must believe 1. That Christ will come to Things ^o be believed.
judgment, and that there will be a kingdom of glory after this life: for
these two articles of our faith are here presupposed: For if we be in the
number of those mockers of whom Peter foretold, 2. Epistle 3. 4. that believe
not this second coming of Christ, etc. we shall but mock God if we make this
petition. 2. That Christ will come to our salvation, and that we shall be
inheritours of that kingdom: for we cannot else truly desire his coming, etc.

Duties in our lives.
I. We must give all diligence to make our calling and election sure: For by
this means an entering shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of the Lord, etc. 2. Pet. 1. 10, 11.

II. If we pray in faith that our request may be We must expect I. with faith:
granted, we must expect Christ's second coming. And we must expect it with
faith, fervency, patience, and vigilancie. With faith, that is, with persuasion
and assurance that Christ will come to our full redemption. For when a man can
truly say by faith, that our (...), conversation, is in heaven, he will also
add with the Apostle, from whence we look for a S^viour, Phil. 3. 20. and
consequently expect it with cheerfulness, and not with unhappy Felix tremble
at the mention of judgment. For howsoever it shall be a day of unspeakable
terror to the wicked, yet to the godly it shall be a day of singular comfort:
For then the Lord shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Revel. 7. 17. For
which cause it is called the time of refreshing, Acts 3. 19. And therefore our
Savior Christ, Luke 21. 28. bids the faithful to lift up their heads, etc.
because the day of their full redemption both body and soul draws near. II.
with earnest desire 1. of eternal life;


Secondly, we must expect with earnest desire, 1. eternal life, 2. the coming
of Christ, Tit. 2. 13. For how can a man faithfully expect and certainly look
for happiness who does not also earnestly desire it? therefore the Apostle
says, that we who have the first fruits of the Spirit, do sigh within our
selves, expecting the adoption (that is, the heavenly inheritance whereunto we
are adopted) and the redemption of our body at the second coming of Christ,
Romans 8. 23.

Secondly, we are with desire to expect the second 2. of Christ's coming.
coming of Christ, looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of God,
2. Pet. 3. 12. But there are many who with Balaam desire salvation, but how few
that desire the second coming of Christ? Yet this is made a note of a true
Christian, to love and desire it, 2. Tim. 4. 8. For, as Th. Aquinas says, Qui
diligit amicum cum desiderio exspectat eum, He that loves his friend expects
him with longing desire. And also they who believe that Christ is their
Savior, they will also desire his coming. And as the creature earnestly
waits for that time which Acts 3. 21. is called the time of the restitution
of all things, which now are subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20. for then the heaven
and earth shall be renewed, 2. Pet. 3. 13. so we also, who have the
first fruits of the Spirit, sigh within our selves, waiting for the adoption,
even the redemption of our bodies, Romans 8. 23. Then is the time of Christ's
marriage with his Church, and of our conformation with him in glory, 1. John 3.
2. For when he shall appear, we shall be like unto him. If then the second
coming of Christ shall be a day of refreshing, of full redemption, of Christ's
marriage with his Church; then those who hope to be partakers of these
benefits, and are espoused unto Christ by faith, will with as earnest desire
expect his second coming as the loving bride does the marriage-day. Wherefore,
as it is Revel. 22. 17. the Spirit and the bride say, Come: and let him that
hears say, Come. and v. 20. Come, Lord Jesu, come quickly. And so the Lord
has taught us here to pray. And therefore if we will pray unto the Lord in
truth, we must labor to attein unto this assurance of faith; that being
assured of Gods everlasting love toward us in Christ, we may earnestly desire
the Lord, that an end being put to these evil days, he would hasten the coming
of Christ. Neither let us think that we have well profited in the school of
Christ until we do with desire expect his coming.

Thirdly, we must expect with patience. For he III. With patience.
that is saved in hope (as all the faithful are in this life) expects with
patience that which he hops for: For hope is not of that which is seen. If
therefore, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 25. we hope for that which we see not, we
do by patience expect it. And surely in respect of this coming of Christ to our
salvation, we had need of patience, Heb. 10. 36. For, as Peter has prophesied
of these last days, there are come mockers, walking after their lusts, who
say, Where is the promise of his coming? 2. Pet. 3. 4. but the holy Ghost
answers, Heb. 10. 37. Yet a very little while, and he that shall come will
come, and will not tarry. Dearly beloved, says the Apostle Peter, 2. Epist. 3.
8, 9. be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day with the Lord is as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack as
concerning his promise, as some men account slacknesse, but is patient toward
us, and would have none to perish, but would have all men come to repentance,
viz. that the whole company of the elect may be fulfilled. Therefore, as Isaiah
says, Qui crediderit ne festinet, Let not him that believes make haste. For
seeing the Lord in patience toward us deferreth his coming and the fulfilling
of his promise, we ought with patience to expect it. Sustine ipsum, says
Augustine, qui In (...).
sustinuit te; If he waited patiently until thou should amend thy bad life,
then do thou also patiently wait until he crowns thy good life. IV. With
vig^lancy.


Fourthly, we must expect the coming of Christ with vigilancie, having our
loins girt and our lights burning, like the vigilant servants, Luke 12. 35, 36,
37, 40. and the wise virgins, Matthew. 25: not like the ungodly servant, who
says in his heart, My master deferreth his coming, etc. Luke 12. 45. nor the
foolish virgins, who sleeping in security, and contenting themselves with the
shining lamp of an outward profession, at the coming of the bridegroom were
shut out.

III. The third duty. So to live in this expectation 3. We must remain constant
in Gods love.
as that neither prosperity nor adversity shall be able to remove us from the
love of God, being stayed with the anchor of hope, Heb. 6. 19. apprehending and
expecting the heavenly joys set before us, in respect whereof all the
prosperity and pleasures of this life are to be contemned, and all adversities
patiently to be endured. For those that have this assured expectation, contemn
all the prosperity of the world as mere vanity in respect of the glory that
shall be revealed, and therefore are crucified to the world, and mind heavenly
things, etc. Again, this expectation swalloweth up the sense of all temporal
afflictions, as experience has taught us in the martyrs: For the afflictions
of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.
18. Therefore, as the Apostle exhorts Heb. 12. 1, 2. let us, having such a
cloud of martyrs, with patience run the race that is set before us, looking
to Jesus, etc. Jacob for the promised reward, viz. the marriage of Rachel,
thought his seven years troublesome service to be but easy and short: how
much more ought we cheerfully to bear all the afflictions of this life as light
and momentany, in respect of that super excellent weight of glory? And for this
cause also we are to comfort our selves in all distresses in the expectation of
a better life.

IV. We must walk worthy of God who has called 4. We must walk worthy of God.
us to his kingdom and glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. and live as it becomes those
that have this hope, 1. John 3. 3. For every one that indeed has this hope,
(namely, that he shall be like the Son of God) purifieth himself as he is
pure, that he may be in some measure like to him in grace in this present
world, as he hops to be like him in glory in the life to come. And let us
remember that if we have hope for the end, we must be careful of the means, as
being the necessary forerunners of glorification, faith, repentance,
sanctification. And in this expectation must the duties of piety, justice and
sobriety be performed, Tit. 2. 13.

V. We must so live as if we were always ready 5. We must so live as ready to
meet Christ.
to meet Christ Jesus in the clouds; and to this end set before us continually
Christ sitting in judgment, that we may always labor to be such as then we
desire to appear, that we depart not from Christ ashamed, 1. John 2. 28. And
surely what can be more forcible to draw men to repentance and to stir them
up to vigilancie then the meditation of the judgment to come, and a continual
expectation of Christ coming in the clouds? Recordare novissima, Remember thy
end, says he, Ecclus 7. 36. and thou shall not sin. For where this
cogitation is once settled, that we shall appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, it will not suffer a man to be in quiet until he be settled in such a
state as that he may with boldness appear before the Judge. Therefore the
coming of Christ to judgment is used as a forcible argument to draw us to
repentance, Acts 17. 30. 2. Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12, etc. These things if we do, we
shall with cheerfulness expect the coming of Christ, and when he comes we
shall appear with boldness, 1. John 2. 28. but otherwise with unhappy Felix we
shall tremble at the very mentioning of judgment, so far shall we be from
truly desiring; and at the sight thereof we shall depart from Christ ashamed,
desiring the mountains to fall upon us, Revel. 6. 16. Wherefore to conclude; If
we will truly make this petition in our daily prayers, we must every day so
behave our selves as if Christ were presently to come to judgment. And in this
behalf let us imitate S. Hierome. So often, In Matthew.
says he, as I consider that day, my whole body trembles: for whether I eat,
or drink, or do any thing else, that terrible trumpet sounds in mine ears,
Surgite mortui and venite ad judicium, Arise ye dead and come unto judgment.

VI. We must live as having our (...), conversation, in heaven, from whence we
look for a Savior, minding heavenly things, and not being addicted to the
world or the desires thereof, but living as pilgrims on the earth, etc.

The hypocrisy of men is here detected, who either Hypocrisy detected.
1. make this prayer having not this desire; or 2. live as if they were out of
hope; as all those do that go on in their sins without remorse: for how can
he truly hope for the end, that ^areth not for the means? Does not the holy
Ghost say, That without holiness we shall never see God, Heb. 12. 14. That
without regeneration we shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven, John 3.
3, 5.? Therefore we cannot hope that Christ his coming will be to our
everlasting salvation, if we continue in our sins; neither can we truly and
earnestly desire his coming, except we have that hope; neither can we truly
make this prayer, except we have this unfeigned desire. 3. Those that are
wedded to the world, and are so far from desiring the hastening of Christ's
coming that they do not only desire to live here always but also so behave
themselves as if they meant always to abide here, placing their paradise upon
the earth, and not caring for the kingdom of heaven.

The third Petition. (...).
The order.
THis petition is a consequent of the former: For then does God reign in the
hearts of men when they subject and submit themselves to his will. Therefore as
in the former petition we desired that the Lord would reign in us, so here we
pray that we may show our selves to be his subjects by perform^g his will. For
these two are relatives; if he our (...), then we his subjects. And therefore
hereby we (...) discern whether the Lord does reign in us, if we have a true
desire and endeavor to do his will. And the^fore our Savior Christ, Matthew. 6.
33. as he does ^id us to seek first and principally the kingdom of God, so
also his righteousness^*

(...), will, signifies three things: either 1. (...), that which wills; or
2. (...), the willing; or 3. (...), the thing willed.

1. (...), that which wills, in the creatures is the faculty of the mind
whereby it wills: But in God, whose nature is most simple, and in whom there
is nothing which is not himself, it is his essence. In this sense, Voluntas Dei
est essentia Dei volens, the will of God is the essence of God willing.

2. (...), or (...), the willing, in the creatures is the act or function of
willing proceeding from the fa^ulty: But in the Lord both the act of willing
and the faculty whereby he wills is his essence. Therefore as his essence is
one and eternal, so his (...), his willing, is one and eternal, and without
succession. And therefore whatsoever God has willed, does, or shall will, that
he wills with one and the same everlasting act of willing. For as uno actu
intelligendi unoque intuitu omnia intelligit; so also uno actu volendi omnia
vult quae vult: for as with one act of understanding and one view he
understands all things, so with one act of willing, he wills all that he
wills. Out of which appears the unchangeablenesse of his (...), his
willing. For whereas in ours there is a change, when either we will that which
before we did not, or leave to will that which before we desired; God by one
eternal act of willing wills all things, and therefore neither begins to
will that which before he did not, nor leaves to will that which once he
willed. The consideration whereof ought to be 1. A stay and comfort to Gods
children in any distress, seeing there does nothing happen unto them which the
Lord has not willed from everlasting, and that for his glory and their good;
2. An argument of thanksgiving unto the Lord, who before we were willed so well
unto us; 3. A confirmation of faith in his promises, because whom he loves he
loves to the end; neither is he as man that he should repent. For howsoever
repentance be sometime ascribed unto him, yet this and the like passions (...),
are spoken after the manner of men, but must be understood according to the
majesty of God. And as sometimes repentance is affirmed of God, so also many
times it is denied. Where it is denied, it is to be ascribed to the
immutability of his will; where it is affirmed, efficaciae actionis, to the
efficacy of his action.

3. (...), the thing willed; which oftentimes in the Scripture is called his
will, John 6. 39, 40. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. And in this sense the testament is called
the will of the testatour.

The thing that God wills properly and per se is All that God wills is
properly good.
good, howsoever unproperly and by accident he wills that which is evil ( non
quidem facere sed fieri) not to do it but to permit it to be done, as it is
referred to good ends, viz. his glory and our good. Bonum est esse malum, It is
good there should be evil, that both the glory of Gods mercy in saving us and
of his justice in punishing our sins in Christ might appear: But properly the
Lord wills not it, but the end: as when a man is content that some part of
his body should be seared, he does not properly desire the searing of the part
but the health of his body.

The things willed are either God himself Of the things which God wills.
and those things which pertein to himself, as his glory, etc. or the
creatures, and such things as belong unto them. Himself he wills most
properly: for if bonum cognitum, known good, be the proper object of will, then
primum and supremum bonum, the first and supreme good, which is himself, is
most properly the object thereof. His creatures he wills and such things as
concern them as means referred to this end, Romans 11. 36. Prove. 16. 4. Himself
he wills by absolute necessity, not indeed of constraint but of nature: for
most willingly he wills. His creatures he wills most freely, having liberty
either to will them or to nill them. Howbeit things willed come to pass by
necessity, not absolute but ex hypothesi voluntatis Divinae, on the condition
of Gods will. Now God wills the means, not thereby to perfect the end, which
is himself, or to purchase any good to himself: for he is (...), most perfect,
and does not stand in need of any of his creatures, Psalm. 16. 2. but he wills
them propter se communicandum, that they by the communication of himself unto
them may be perfected. Omnia ordinantur in finem ut a sine perficiant^r, All
things are ordained unto an end that from the end they may be perfected. So
that he wills and wills well to his creatures for their good and not for
his own: which commends the riches of his love toward us.

But to proceed; Those things that God wills concerning his creatures are
either quae fieri vult de creaturis, aut quae fieri vult a creaturis, the
things that he will have done concerning the creatures, or the things which he
will have done of the creatures: the knowledge of both which must be sought
after so far forth as it has pleased him to reveal the same or promised to
reveal it, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Romans 12. 2. That which is voluntas beneplaciti
concerning the creatures is the will of his good pleasure; which is called
(...), Matthew. 11. 25, 26. and decretum Dei, the decree of God. The which is
partly secret, which the Lord will not have foreknown; and therefore we must
religiously adore it, not curiously search it, Romans 11. 33, 34. Acts 1. 7. John
21. 23. partly revealed. And this decretum Dei, decree of God, is either
universal, concerning the government of the world; or more special,
concerning the salvation of the elect or damnation of the reprobate. The former
revealed in part, both beforehand to the Prophets, and also by the events: the
latter revealed by his Son in the Gospel, John 6. 40. Ephesians. 1. 5. What this
(...), good pleasure, of God is, not only toward the elect in general but
also toward himself, every Christian ought to know. For besides that it is
declared in the Scriptures, sealed by the Sacraments, confirmed by his daily
benefits, the holy Ghost also reveals this knowledge unto us, 1. Cor. 2. 10,
12. Romans 8. 39. Gal. 20. 20. 2. Tim. 1. 12. Romans 5. 5.

The will which God wills to be performed of us, is voluntas signi, (...),
that which is well-pleasing, Col. 1. 10. (...), that which is acceptable,
Ephesians. 5. 10. (...), That will of God which is good, acceptable, and perfect,
Romans 12. 2. (...). This will we are bound to know, E^h. 5. 17. because he has
revealed it in his word, because we are to practice it, and according to it as
the rule of justice are to frame and fashion our wills; not only to will the
same things, but also after the same manner, with love unfeigned; to the same
ends, seeking the glory of God, and the good of our brethren. And of this will
does our Savior speak.

This in general is whatsoever the Lord requires of us either in the Law or
Gospel: But more specially there are some branches thereof recorded in the word
of God. As, it is the will of God that so many as shall be saved, being adulti,
come to age, shall come unto knowledge of his truth, 1. Tim. 2. 4. that a
sinner should convert unto him, Ezech. 33. 11. that we should believe in
Christ, 1. John 3. 23. that we should be thankful unto him for his mercies, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. that we should be sanctified, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. and by weldoing
stop the mouths of the ignorant, 1. Pet. 2. 15. that we should patiently and
cheerfully suffer affliction, Matthew. 16. 24, 25.

Unto this will of God are opposed the slesh, which is enmity against God, the
desires of the world, the will of Satan, which is sin, and whatsoever is an
enemy to the performance of this will. And therefore as we are taught to pray
that Gods will may be done, so also that these things which be contrary and are
impediments may be removed.

Thy will: which is not only just, but also the rule of all justice: Not our
will, nor the will of Satan, or of the world. For here we are taught to pray,
that our words and our lives may be framed according to the will of God, which
is the rule of justice; and that we may have grace to deny our selves and our
own will, renounce the desires of the world, and resist the will of the devil;
that he would create new hearts in us, and establish us by his free Spirit;
that we may will and desire such things as are acceptable unto him. And surely
if our Savior Christ, whose will was pure, said, Not my will but thine be
done, how much more ought we so to desire?

Fiat, be done.] But here it may be demanded, Quest. Whether Gods will be
always done.
Whether the will of the Lord be always performed or not: and if it be, to
what end serves this prayer? and if not, how can that be verified, Isai. 46.
10. Consilium meum stabit, and omnem voluntatem meam faciam, My counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my will?

The will of God is diversely taken in the scriptures: Answ.
For sometime it signifies the decree of God, whereby he wills simply and
absolutely: Which is called voluntas Absoluta, Beneplaciti, Consequens, Efficax
and Invicta, the Absolute will, of his Good pleasure, Consequent, Effectual,
and Unresistable. This will of God is always performed, Psalm. 115. 3.
Quaecunque vult facit, he does whatsoever he will: and 135. 6. Isai. 46. 10.
Omnis mea voluntas fiet, All my will shall be done. Neither is any thing able
to resist this will, Isai. 14. 26, 27. Romans 9. 19. Which also is proved by his
omnipotency. And therefore we may truly say that voluntas Dei est omnium rerum
necessitas, the will of God is the necessity of all things; and that in respect
hereof all things come to pass necessarily, howsoever in respect of secondary
causes some things are necessary and some contingent. And this will is so
effectual and invincible that whatsoever happens comes to pass according
to the will of God, who works all things according to the counsel of his
will, Ephesians. 1. 11. yea, the very enemies of God when they do most oppose
themselves against the will of God, do unwittingly perform it, Acts 4. 28. But
hence arise two objections;

1. If that which the wicked do happen according How can the wicked sin, seeing
they do Gods will?
to the will of God, how can they be said to sin?

Sin is not the transgression of the secret and Answ.
hidden will of God, which cannot be hindered, but of the revealed will of God,
which he has propounded as a rule to square our actions by: and therefore
sin is called (...), the transgression of the law: Ad legem and testimonium,
To the law and testimony.

2. If all things come to pass as God has willed How sin is by Gods decree.
and decreed, then sin also: and how then is not God the author of sin?

Some things God has decreed to do; some Answ.
things he has decreed to suffer to be done: Of those things which he has
decreed to do, his will is the efficient cause; as of his creatures, and all
good things: Of those things which he has only decreed should be effected by
such and such causes, his will is not the cause, as namely sin. And howsoever
sin is evil, yet it is good that sin should be, for the manifestation of the
glory both of the mercy of God and also of his justice: and therefore though
the Lord does not velle peccatum per se, will sin properly by it self, yet he
does will it per accidens, by accident, as it is referred to good ends. Again,
sin may be considered as it is malum culpae or malum poenae, an evil of fault
or evil of punishment. Sin as it is a punishment is a work of justice in him
that punishes: for it is just that he that does commit malum culpae, the evil
of fault, should suffer malum poenae, the evil of punishment: as it is
therefore a punishment, i. a work of justice and not sin, it is willed of God
the author of all good. In sin as it is malum culpae, the evil of fault, three
things do concur: actus, macula, and reatus, the act, stain, and guilt. The
action is materiale peccati, the matter of sin: the corruption is formale
peccati, the form of sin: reatus est obligatio ad poenam, the guilt is the
obligation to punishment; the which is just as the punishment it self. The
action as it is an action severed from the corruption is good: Omne ens
quatenus ens est bonum, Every being as it is a being is good: and God is the
author of it; for in him we live and move and have our being, Acts 17. 28. But
of the corruption wherewith the action is stained God is not the cause. For
unto every action concurreth the first cause and some secondary cause depending
from him, as being the instrument of the first: The which instrument being bad
(as many times it is) there is a double work in the action: one of the first
cause, good; the other of the instrument, evil. God then is the cause of the
action, but not of the corruption; but yet uses, orders, disposes the
corruption of the instrument for the execution of his own good work. When the
Lord gave his Son to death, he used Judas as his instrument. The action is
the delivering of Christ: which as it came from God, was a most glorious work,
John 3. 16. Romans 8. 32. But quem Deus tradidit Judas prodidit, whom God
delivered Judas betrayed. When God will chastise his servant, he uses some
wicked man as his instrument to afflict him: This affliction, as it comes from
God, is castigatio, a chastisement: but, as from the instrument, persecutio,
rapina, etc. persecution, rapine, etc. A man that rides on a lame horse is the
cause why he goes, but not why he halteth. Again, Deus non est author ejus
^ujus est ultor, God is not the author of that of which he is the punisher and
revenger.

Thus we see that howsoever God does voluntarily permit sin, and also uses,
orders, and disposes the same to good ends (for such is his wisdom that he
knows how to use that well which is evil) yet he cannot be said properly to
will sin, which he hates; or to be the author of it, which he revengeth.
For this privilege Gods will has, Whatsoever it wills it is therefore good:
but sin as it is sin cannot be good.

But to return to my purpose: That this absolute Gods secret and absolute will
is not here meant.
will of God be performed we need not to pray, ^nlesse it be to show our
affection to Gods glory, and conformity and submission to his will: As in the
time of affliction, The will of the Lord be done. Neither indeed does our
Savior speak of it; as appears by the clause following, in earth as it is in
heaven.

Secondly therefore, the will of God which he requires to be done of his
creatures, quatenus praecipit vel prohibet, so far forth as he commands or
forbids, which is therefore called voluntas Revelata, Conditionalis, Signi,
Antecedens, Inefficax, non quatenus promittit vel minatur absque condition,
est decreti revelatio, the Revealed will, Conditional, of the Sign,
Antecedent, Inefficacious, not as he promises or threatens, and without
condition, is the revelation of the decree.

Now the word of God is called voluntas signi, the will of the sign, because
it signifies what our duty is, and what is acceptable unto God: (...), and
conditional, because it does not show simply what God will have done, but upon
condition: Si John 6. 4^*
vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata; Si vis servari, creed, If thou will enter
into life, keep the commandments; If thou will be saved, believe: and
inefficax, uneffectuall, because it is not always performed: Fit voluntas Dei
de omnibus, non ab omnibus, The will of God is done concerning all, though not
of all.

To do the will of God, is in respect of the matter, to perform that which he
commands, after the same manner, to the same end that he appoints: but if
you look into our weakness, this doing of Gods will by us is especially to be
understood of the will and endeavor, which the Lord in his children accepts
as the deed. Pr^camur and optamus, ut non tantum faciat Deus quod vult, sed nos
facere possimus Cyprian.
quod vult: We pray and wish not only that God do what he will, but that we
may be able to do what he will.

Whereas therefore this will of God is contemned of men, oppugned by the flesh,
the world and the devil, and yet must of necessity be obeyed of us, if either
we would be subjects of the kingdom of grace or inheritours of the kingdom of
glory, great cause there is why we should instantly make this prayer, etc.

In earth] that is, by us men on earth, and consequently, as Paul speaks Tit.
2. 12. (...), in this present world. So as Oecumenius says on that place,
(...), For this life susteineth the sight; but the life to come shall receive
the reward. In this life eternal life is either won or lost: In this life we
must do the will of God, or else we shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven, Matthew. 7. 22. According to that which every man does in the flesh shall
he be judged, 2. Cor. 5. 10. And therefore whilst we have time let us do good,
remembering Gal. 6. 10.
that the Lord has placed us here on the earth for a short time to do his
will: which time if we let pass without repentance, and turning to God, and
doing his will, afterward it will be too late.

As it is in heaven] that is, as the Angels in heaven do perform it. And they
perform Gods will, Psalm. 103. 20, 21. 1. Scienter, knowingly. 2. Sincerely and
uprightly. 3. Willingly and cheerfully. 4. Readily, expecting the beck of the
Lord, Matthew. 18. For which cause they are said to stand before the Lord, Dan.
7. 10. Revel. 5. 11. 5. Speedily, without delay: For which cause wings are
attributed unto them. 6. Fully, and not by halves. 7. Constantly, till the Lord
bid them cease. 8. Faithfully, doing all to Gods glory, assuming no glory to
themselves, Revel. 19. 10.

(...)] As, here signifies not equality but similitude; as 1. John 3. 3. For
if we should understand it of equality, we should pray for an impossibility,
Eccles 7. 20. No man on the earth does good, and sins not. True it is
indeed, that we should contend and aspire toward angelical perfection;
although whilst we are on the earth we cannot attein thereunto.

In this petition therefore we pray that we may perform the will of God on
earth after an heavenly and angelical manner.

Of this obedience there are two degrees: the matter and manner. First we will
speak of the obedience it self; and then of the manner.

Of the matter of obedience.
As touching the former; Whereas our Savior teaches us thus to pray, it is
evident that of our selves we are not able to do his will: and therefore the
doctrine of Freewill is here refuted. Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works
((...)) in us (...), both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Vt voluntatem
Dei faciamus facit hoc ipse Deus in nobis, God himself does this in us that we
do the will of God.

Wants to be bewailed.
The defects therefore which we are to bewail are these: 1. Our inability
through our own default to perform obedience to the will of God. 2. Our
pronenesse to sin and to transgress the will of God, being stirred thereunto
by every occasion. By our corrupt nature we are as apt to sin as a bird to
fly. 3. The frowardness of our wills, rebelling against the will of God, Romans
7. 23. and our preposterous affections, the law in the members. (...), The
carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. 4. The disobedience also of
others must wring tears from us, Psalm. 119. 136. 5. Our impatience in troubles.

2. In respect of the matter wants to be bewailed.
In respect of the matter we are to bewail our imperfect obedience; our
righteousness being like a polluted cloth. Velle praesto est, sed perficere
bonum non invenio, To will is present, but I find not how to perform that which
is good, Romans 7. 18. Our best actions, if God should enter into judgment with
us, are not justifiable.

The Graces which we ask.
We ask 1. in respect of obedience it self, That the Lord would vouchsafe us
this grace to deny our selves, our own wills and affections, which are opposite
to his will, Matthew. 16. 24. 2. That we may labor in all things to perform
simple obedience to the Lord, Heb. 13. 21. more especially, That he would
convert us, and we shall be converted, Ezekiel. 33. 11. 3. That he would bring us
to the knowledge of his truth, 1. Tim. 2. 4. 4. That he would give us faith,
which is the gift of God, 1. John 3. 23. 5. That he would make us thankful, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. 6. That he would sanctify us, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. 7. That he would
arm us with patience, that in all a^lictions we may say with Christ, Not my
will, O Father, but thine be done, Matthew. 26. 39, 42. 8. That we may not be in
subjection to sin and Satan, and carried away captive to the obedience of his
will, 2. Tim. 2 26. but that he would renew, stablish, and g^ide us by his free
spirit, that we may will and do those things which are acceptable in his sight.
9. That we may not be carried away with the world, or conformed thereunto, but
transformed by the renewing of our minds; and that we may prove what is the
good will of God, acceptable, and perfect. And ^o. That we may give up our
selves a lively, holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God, that is our
reasonable service of him, Romans 12. 1, 2.

2. Of the manner of our obedience.
As touching the manner, We are here taught that we are not to rest in opere
operato, in the deed done; but that we are to be careful as of the matter so
also of the manner. It is not sufficient that we do the will of God, unless we
do it after a spiritual manner, 2. Chron. 25. 2. Many think if they hear, it
is sufficient; and care not how: but Christ says, Luke 8. 18. Take heed how ye
hear. Therefore we must pray, That we may do the will of God as the angels do
it in heaven, with knowledge, faithfulness, sincerity, uprightness, with
willingness, alacrity, cheerfulness, readily, speedily, fully, constantly,
doing all to the glory of God: And, whereas he has appointed us to salvation
that we may be (...), like the angels, Matthew. 22. 30. that it may please him to
begin our conformity with the angels in this life. These wants then we are to
bewail, and these graces we are to crave in this petition.

Duties in prayer.
Further, we are in these words taught to perform these duties in prayer: 1.
That we pray according We must pray according to Gods ^ll.
to Gods will, 1. John 5. 14. asking such things only as he has promised to
grant. Otherwise in this petition we pray against our own desires, namely, that
not our will but the will of God may be performed. 2. That in our prayers,
especially for temporal matters, we do humbly and willingly submit our selves
to his will, and wholly resign over our selves to his good pleasure, saying
with our Savior Christ, Not my will, etc. because we ought to be assured, that
as for his wisdom he knows what is best for us, so also for his fatherly
love he is most ready to grant good things unto us, Matthew. 7. 11. Romans 8. 32.
and therefore if he deny our requests, that the denial is better then the
grant. And we are to remember that here we pray not that God would alter his
will according to ours; but contrariwise, that our will may be conformable unto
his.

Duties in our lives.
As we pray that we may do Gods will on earth as the angels do it in heaven, so
must we have a true desire, an unfeigned care, and an upright endeavor in our
selves to perform holy obedience to Gods will. Otherwise how can we persuade
our selves that we pray in truth, being not willing to obtein that which we our
selves do ask.

Duties respecting the matter.
And therefore, as it is the duty of every one to make this prayer, so none of
us ought to think our selves exempted from doing the will of God: Neither may
we think it sufficient in words to profess God, and in prayer to crave good
things of him, unless we be careful in our lives to do his will. Not every
one that says, Lord, Lord, etc. Matthew. 7. 21. yea those that make a profession
of religion and obedience, as though they would perform obedience to Gods will,
and yet do it not, are many times further from salvation then open sinners: as
appears by the parable of the two sons, and the application thereof, Matthew.
21. 28, 29, 30. Neither may we think that we shall obtein our prayers, unless
we be desirous to perform Gods will. For if we will not do his will, why should
we think that he will do ours? Prove. 28. 9. John 9. 31. We know that God
hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God and does his will,
him he hears. If we ask any thing, says S. John, 1. Epist. 3. 22. we receive
it from him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things which are
acceptable in his sight. If therefore we be desirous and careful to obey Gods
will, we need not doubt, having these testimonies of a true faith, but that
both we and our prayers are acceptable unto God. For our selves, our Savior
affirms, that those be his brothers and sisters that do the will of his
Father that is in heaven, Matthew. 12. 50. And the holy Ghost gives this
testimony unto David, that he was a man according to Gods own heart, who would
do all his will, Acts 13. 22. And elsewhere the Scriptures ascribe blessedness
to those that do the will of God, Luke 11. 28. For our prayers; John 15. 7.
Psalm. 34. 15, 17. And as we are to do the will of God in general, so more
especially those branches of his will which after a more special manner are
called his will. His will is, if we would be saved, we should come to the
knowledge of his truth, and not live in ignorance, 1. Tim. 2. 4. that we should
turn unto him, and not go on in our sins, Ezekiel. 33. 11. that we should
believe in Christ, 1. John 3. 23. that we should be sanctified, dying unto
sin, and living unto righteousness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. Mich* 6. 8. 1. Pet. 2.
15. that we should be patient in troubles, and thankful unto him in all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. And as we are to do the will of God, so must we deny
our own wills and renounce the desires of the world.

Duties respecting the manner.
And as touching the manner; We are not to rest in opere operato, in the deed
done: but as we pray that we may do the will of God on earth as the angels do
it in heaven, so must we endeavor to imitate their manner of obedience. And
albeit we cannot attein to that full perfection which is in them, yet we are to
strive toward it: and therefore we are not to content our selves with that
small measure whereunto we have atteined, but still we are to labor that we may
grow up in grace, seeing whilst we live here we are in our (...) and growing
age. We must do Gods will as the Angels, 1. In knowledge.


But let us come unto particulars. 1. The Angels do the will of God in
knowledge; and so must we, or else all our worship of God is but will worship,
and all our religion but superstition. Knowledge is the stern, without which we
rove and wander like a ship wanting a stern: it is the light, without which we
walk in darkness not knowing whither we go. Without knowledge we have no
faith; and without Heb. 11. 6.
faith it is impossible to please God. And therefore miserable is our estate if
we please our selves in ignorance.

2. The Angels do the will of God sincerely, uprightly, 2. In sincerity.
laboring always to approve their obedience to the Lord: so must we obey the
Lord (...), but (...), not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but from our soul
and heart, Ephesians. 6. 6. Romans 6. 17. in singleness and uprightness of heart
laboring to approve not only our outward actions but also our inward
affections and cogitations to the Lord, knowing that he looks not as man
looks, but he especially respects the heart, and according to the
disposition of the heart esteems of men. Without this uprightness all our
obedience is but hypocrisy; and all the graces which we seem to have, but
glorious sins, etc.

3. The Angels do the will of God willingly and 3. Willingly
cheerfully; their whole delight being to do Gods will: so must we worship the
Lord with upright hearts and willing minds, 1. Chron. 28. 9. knowing that
forced obedience proceeding only from servile fear, as it is violent, so it is
but momentany, and therefore but counterfeit. But we must worship the Lord in
faith, love, and hope, and consequently with cheerfulness, willingness, and
delight: for when the love of God is shed abroad in men's hearts by the holy
Ghost, men have assurance that their obedience and service is acceptable unto
God, and so they are encouraged in all cheerfulness to offer their obedience
as a free-will-offering to the Lord. First, To whom much is forgiven they love
much, Luke 7. 47. and secondly, those that have true love, to them the
commandments of God are not grievous, 1. John 5. 3. the yoke of Christ is
light. Nihil difficile amanti, Nothing is hard to a lover. To Jacob his seven
years troublesome service seemed to be short and pleasant, Genesis 29. 20. If
therefore we truly love God, we will take delight to do his will. And thirdly,
if we have assured hope of salvation by Christ, and live in expectation of
happiness, we shall contemn all the difficulties of this life as not worthy
the glory that shall be revealed, and joyfully proceed Romans 8. 18.
in our way to life, because of the joy that is s^t before us. Let us therefore
hold fast by this anchor* for if we leave this hold, we shall eftsoon fall away
into worldliness, whither the surges of worldly desires carry us. And in this
behalf as we are to imitate the example of the Angels, so also of Jesus Christ,
whose meat it was to do his Fathers will, John 4. 34. and therein also was his
delight, Psalm. 40. 8. Facere voluntatem tuam, Deus mi, delector, O my God, I
delight to do thy will: Psalm. 122. 1. Isai. 54. 13.

4. The holy Angels do the will of God readily 4. Readily and speedily
and speedily: so ought we without delay put in execution the co^mandments of
God, behaving our selves toward our heavenly Master as the Centurions servants
to their master, Matthew. 8. 9. Does the Lord call thee? thou must answer with
David the type of Christ, Ecce venio, Behold I come, Psalm. 40. 7. Does the Lord
bid thee seek his face? answer with that heavenly echo of the Psalmist, Psalm.
27. 8. Thy face, Lord, will I seek. It is the will of God that thou should
turn unto him: break off without delay the course of thy sin, and turn unto
the Lord. Knock at the door of thy heart; Open thine immortal gate, that the
King of glory may come in. Does he call thee to repentance to day, If ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts? Defer not repentance; but to day,
before to morrow, repent. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, and call upon
him whilst he is near, Isai. 55. 6. Does he call us to trial and affliction?
let us take up our cross and follow him, submitting our selves willingly to
his will, 1. Sam. 3. 18. Acts 21* 14. 2. Sam. 15. 26.

5. The Angels do the will of God fully, accomplishing 5. Fully and totally.
whatsoever the Lord commands; so ought we to do it fully and not by halves:
otherwise he will say to us as to them of Sardis, Revel. 3. 2. I have not found
thy works (...), complete, before God. Remember the example of Herod, Mark 6.
20. who albeit hearing John Baptist he did many things, and heard him gladly,
(...), yet because he continued in that sin of incest, his partial obedience
did nothing avail him. He that keeps all the law, and fails in some one
commandment, is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. And he that truly repents of any
one sin, repents of all. Where there is upright obedience, there is entire
obedience: but where there is halving, there is halting between God and Mammon,
between Christ and Antichrist. The covetous man thinks well of himself,
because he is not a whoremaster or a drunkard: the riotous person thinks well
of himself, that he is not covetous, no extortioner, etc. the Pharisee because
he is no Publicane, Luke 18, etc. Many separate justice and holiness, etc. But
herein we are as much as we are able to follow the example of Christ, who did
(...), fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. For if we will be men
according to Gods own heart, we must desire and endeavor to do all his will,
Acts 13. 22.

6. The Angels of the Lord do his will constantly, 6. Constantly.
never giving over until they have accomplished the will of the Lord: so must
we be constant, persevering in obedience, being not weary of weldoing, knowing
that we are redeemed of the Lord to worship him etc. all the days of our
lives, L^ke 1. 74. Our obedience must not be like the morning mist. Remember
that religion is a way to the end, whereto we cannot come until the end of our
lives; and therefore if we set down our staff before we come to the end, and
will go no further, what will all our former pains avail us? If we run in this
race, and faint before we come to the goal, how shall we hop^ to obtein the
garland? Be faithful unto death (says our Savior) and I will give thee the
crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. and Matthew. 24. 13. He that continues to the and
he shall be saved.

7. Lastly, the holy Angels do the will of God 7. Faithfully
faithfully, and in all their doings seek the glory of God that sends them,
not assuming unto themselves any part of the praise: So must we, 1. Cor. 10.
31. For if therein we shall seek our own praise or other sinister respects, we
have our reward.

Thus must we truly in our lives desire and endeavor to do the will of God on
earth as the Angels do it in heaven; otherwise when we make this prayer we do
ask with our mouths that which we desire not with our hearts. Here therefore
is discovered The hypocrisy of many discovered.
the hypocrisy of many men, who pray that they may do the will of God, which
they will not do. God would have thee to turn unto him; thou prayest that thou
may do the will of God: and yet wilt not turn to him, etc. What is this
then, but to mock God, when thou ask that of him which thou have neither
desire nor purpose to do? But here especially appears the hypocrisy of
obstinate and stiff-necked sinners, who will seem so forward as to desire that
they may do the will of God even as the Angels do it in heaven, and yet in very
truth obey the will of God no otherwise on earth, then the devils in hell: who
although they oppose themselves against the revealed will of God, yet
willingly, though unwittingly, perform his secret will, which no creature is
able to disanull. If therefore we would be thought to pray in truth, let us
desire and endeavor to do that in our lives which in prayer we ask and desire.
So having imitated the obedience of the Angels on earth, we shall be made
(...), like the Angels, and fellow-citizens with the Saints and Angels in
heaven etc.

The fourth Petition.
HItherto we have spoken of those petitions which immediately concern the glory
of God. Now we are to come unto those which more How things apperteining to our
own good are to be asked.
nearly appertein unto our good: Howbeit mediately also they are referred to
Gods glory, which must be the main end of all our desires: for whatsoever we
are to ask for our selves we are to desire no otherwise but as it is
subordinate to Gods glory. Spiritual graces and salvation we are to desire for
the manifestation of the glory of his mercy in our salvation. And because a
Christian man is bound to believe that the Lord harh ordained him to salvation,
therefore salvation and those spiritual graces which are necessary thereunto,
may be asked absolutely, as being subordinate to Gods glory, with which he
joyneth the salvation of the chosen. Temporal benefits are to be asked
conditionally, so far forth as they serve for Gods glory and our spiritual
good. Gods glory is to be sought for even in our eating and drinking, and
whatsoever we do, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Nay, our life it self is no otherwise to be
desired then it is referred to Gods glory, Psalm. 80. 19. Preserve, O Lord, our
life, and we will call upon thy name. Psalm. 119. 175. Let my soul live, and it
shall praise thee. Isai. 38. 18, 19. Psalm. 6. 5. and 30. 9. and 50. 15.
Sufficientia vitae, says Augustine, recte appetitur, non propter seipsam
quidem, sed ut eam habentes commodius Deo serviamus: Sufficiency for life is
rightly desired, not for it self, but that we may more commodiously serve God.

Now these petitions are of two sorts: For in them we ask either temporal
benefits concerning the body for the maintenance of this life present, or
spiritual blessings in heavenly things concerning the soul for the obteining
of a better life: Of both which we have a promise 1. Tim. 4. 8. and therefore
are to pray for both.

The prayer for temporal blessings is contained in these words, (...), Give us
this day our daily bread. The order.


But first let us consider the order of the petition in respect both of those
which go before and also which follow. In respect of the antecedents our
Savior speaks, Matthew. 6. 33. First seek the kingdom of God (which is that
which we desire in the second petition) and his righteousness (which we desire
in the third) and then all these things which we beg in the fourth shall be
cast unto us. Therefore preposterous is their care and study who first labor
for temporal benefits, and post off the seeking of Gods kingdom and his
righteousness until the end of their days, etc. And whereas this petition is
set after the third, we are taught before we ask temporal benefits, to submit
our will to the will of the Lord, saying with our Savior, Not my will, O
Father, but thine be done. Why we ask temporal bl^ssings before spiritual.


As touching those that follow, it may be demanded why we are taught to ask for
temporal benefits before spiritual blessings: Is it because we are more
earnestly to desire them? Nothing less. In the spiritual blessings which
afterward we ask, namely, justification and sanctification, the happiness of a
Christian man in this life does consist: and therefore they are in judgment to
be esteemed and in affection desired above all worldly things, which without
the spiritual graces are not^ing worth; For what will it profit a man to gain
the world, and lose his soul? Mark 8. 36. Therefore the Psalmist Psalm. 4. 6.
says, Many say, Who will show us any good? (that is, worldly profit?) But,
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance: for so shall thou give me more
joy and gladn^sse then when their wheat and wine did abound. So John 6. 27. But
the reason why we are first taught to ask temporal things is this; 1. Because
it is an easier matter to depend upon the providence of God for the maintenance
of this life then to rely on his mercy for the salvation of ou^ souls: and
therefore the Lord would have faith trained up by the easier, that we may learn
to r^pose our trust in him for the greater. Therefore those which make
profession of their faith in God c^ncerning their salvation, and have not
learn^d to rely upon his providence for temporal matters, but seek the same by
unlawful means, are greatly to fear lest they deceive themselves with an
opinion of faith: for if they trust him not for the less how will they believe
him for the great^r? 2. Because the things of this life are amongst those
things which we ask of the least value; therefore in m^dium quasi agmen
conjiciuntur, Homerica scilicet d^spositione, In medio infirma, they are cast
(as it were) into the middle rank, according to Homers method placing infirm
things in the middle. And the rather because in all speeches the heat of
affection shows it self most in the beginning and in the end: And therefore
elsewhere this order is inverted, Prove. 30. 7, 8.

The meaning of the words.
Bread, by a Synecdoche, signifies not only food (in which sense it is often
used in the Scripture, Genesis 31. 54. Exodus 18. 12.) but also all other
commodities of this life, serving either for necessity or Christian delight;
which the Grecians call (...), or, as John speaks 1. Epist. 3. 17. (...),
Luke 15. 12. the Latins victum. So Genesis 3. 19. Prove. 30. 8. Ale me pane
demensi mei, Vlpian.
(...), Feed me with bread of my allowance or portion.

The reason why the holy Ghost comprehends Why all commodities are
comprehended under the name of bread.
all the commodities of this life under the name of bread, is 1. Because of all
commodities food is most necessary; and among food, bread. 2. Because he would
teach us to moderate our desires, Romans 13. 14. and not to covet after
superfluities, as the Israelites did after quails, and were buried in the
graves of lust, Number. 11. Sit oration quae pro temporalibus est Bernard.
circa solas necessitates restricta, Let prayer which is for temporal
bl^ssings be restrained to our necessities alone. And so the Syriack reads,
Da nobis panem necessitatis nostrae, Give us the bread of our nec^ssity. 3. To
teach us contentation, that if we have but necessaries, as food and raiment,
yea but bread, we should be therewith content, 1. Tim. 6. 8. Heb. 13. 5. Phil.
4. 11. If God give more, we are to be thankful; if but bread, we are to be
content. John 6. 11. for the five barley-loaves and two little fishes Christ
gave thanks.

(...), Our.
Our bread, is that portion of temporal blessings What on^ bread signifies.
which God has assigned to every of us to be atteined by good and lawful
means, Prove. 30. 8.

Whereas our Savior directs us to ask for our bread, he teaches us, 1. To
be content with that lot and portion which God assigns unto us, and not to
covet other men's goods. 2. That we get our goods by lawful means, Ephesians. 4.
28. For that only is ours which we have got by lawful means, as by
inheritance, or by the works of our calling, etc. that we may eat the labors
of our own hands, Psalm. 128. 2. And if we must eat our own bread, we must walk
diligently in our callings: for he that will no^ labor let him not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. And verse 12. he exhorts them that lived idly, and therefore
inordinately, that they would work with quietness, and eat their own bread. 3.
That God would give unto us a profitable use of those things which we have.
Many men want even that which they have; and therefore had need to pray that
God would give them even that which is theirs already, Eccles 6. 2. A man is
not said to have that which he does not use: Matthew. 25. But we are to pray not
only that we may use and enjoy his gifts, but also that he would bless the
use and fruition of them unto us. For when a man does with comfort enjoy that
which he has, it is the gift of God, Eccles 3. 12. and 5. 17, 18. and
therefore to be begged of him.

(...), Our daily bread.
This word is diversely expounded. Some expound What is m^ant by daily bread.
it super substantial or above substance: that is, that bread which is above
all substance and better then all wealth and riches; meaning thereby our
Savior Christ, which is that bread of God which came down from heaven, John 6.
33. But this exposition seems to be far fetched, agreeing neither with the
words of the Petition, nor yet with the whole body of the prayer. For first the
word it self, if you derive it from (...), signifies rather agreeing to our
substance, or added to our substance, as (...), (for that sense has (...),
insum, or adsum, not supersum) then exceeding above substance, as the Greek
authors teach. Neither do I see how we may aptly desire Christ to be given
unto us, whom the Father has already given unto us. In the second petition we
desire that we may be drawn out of the power of darkness, and given unto
Christ, that he may rule in us by his word and Spirit. Neither, as I think,
would Christ have taught us to say, Give us that bread of ours, but rather,
that bread of thine: For we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1. Cor, 3. 22. and
he is that bread of God which came down from heaven. Neither would he teach us
to ask this bread for a day, but rather for ever. And as touching the body of
the prayer, which is a sum, not of all Divinity, as they imagine, but only
of those things which we are to ask (as the Decalogue is the sum agendorum,
of things to be done; and the Creed, credendorum, of things to be believed) it
may not be thought that in this perfect sum our Savior Christ has omitted
any thing which we are to ask. But if you shall not expound this petition of
temporal blessings, you cannot comprehend them in any other petition: for to
say that they be comprehended in the first, it is too violent an exposition.

As for the Papists, that expound this petition of the Sacrament of the Altar;
they are more absurd: For besides the reasons alleged, they contradict
themselves, both by a diverse exposition, translating the same word, Luke 11. 3.
daily; and by their practice: For if the people are to ask that bread every
day, then are they bound in conscience to give it them every day, whereas
indeed they give it unto them but once a year.

Others derive the word of (...), which word is used five times in the Acts,
(...), scilicet, (...), that is, the day following. For of (...), adventare, to
come, the participle is (...). Now if you expound the word, crastinus, the
sense will not agree, that we should ask to morrows bread to day; especially
seeing our Savior bids us not to care for the morrow.

But if you expound it, as some do, succedaneus, that succeeds, which is all
one in sense with quotidianus, (...), daily, the sense will well agree* viz.
That we ask that bread which daily we stand in need of; cujus successione atque
accessione quotidie egemus, Piscat.
whose succession and accession we daily need.

Others expound (...), ut (...), quasi (...), scilicet (...), convenient for
substance and being, as Suidas. Basil in his short 252 questions expounds
(...) to be (...), that bread which fitteth our substance for the maintenance
of this temporary life. So Theophylact, and Euthymius. Gr. Schol. (...) (...),
convenient for our substance and being. So that (...), our daily bread,
signifies that portion of temporal things which thou have assigned as most
fit and convenient for us. Sic. Beza (...) interpretatur panem cibarium, vel
panem nobis sustentandis idoneum. So Beza interprets (...), bread fit for
meals, or convenient to sustein us. This exposition I take to be the safest,
not only because it is made by the Greek writers, whose judgment in this case
we are rather to follow then the Latins; but also because it agrees with the
Syriack interpretation. Da nobis panem necessitatis nostrae: But especially
because it fully agrees with that prayer of Agur, Pro. 30. 8. Give me not
poverty nor riches, but nourish me (...), cibo dimensi mei, vel pane
praescripti, vel portione quam assignasti mihi: With the bread which thou have
allowed me; or with meat appointed for my portion; or give me the portion which
thou have assigned me: as Genesis 47. 22. or as the LXXII interpret, Give me
(...). August. Constitue mihi quae necessaria sunt sufficienter, Give me those
things which are n^cessary in a sufficient measure.

Now whereas the Lord Jesus does direct us thus to pray, he teaches us to
avoid two extremities; that we neither covet abundance, nor affect poverty:
according to Agurs prayer, Prove. 30. 8. Give me not poverty nor riches, but
feed me with food convenient for me. For those that desire either of these know
not their own infirmity. Wealth many times is accompanied The ^vils that
accompany rich^s.
with these vices: 1. Pride, oblivion, and contempt of God, Deuteronomy. 8. 11, 14,
17. and 22. 15. 2. Chron. 32. 25. August. Divitiarum morbus superbia, Pride is
the disease of riches. 2. Disdain and contempt of our brethren, Luke 16. Dives.
3. Security, Psalm. 30. 6. Luke 12. 19. 4. Confidence in riches, Psalm. 49. 6.
Job 31. 24. 1. Tim. 6. 17. 5. The choking of Gods word in them, Matthew. 13. 6.
The nailing of men unto the earth, setting their heart and affections upon
their pelf, Psalm. 62. 10. whereby it comes to pass that they serve Mammon.
And these corruptions are not only incident to the wicked, but sometimes also
to the children of God. And therefore the Lord many times denies prosperity to
his children for their good, and grants it to the wicked, who have their
portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 17. Luke 16. 25.

On the other side, poverty is accompanied many The evils that accompany
poverty.
times with 1. murmuring against God; 2. repining at the better estate of
others; 3. distrust in Gods providence; 4. using of unlawful means; 5.
abandoning of all religion, taking a desperate course of life, as though they
were persuaded that they have served God for naught.

Agur therefore finding these infirmities in himself (which indeed naturally
are in us all) desires the Lord that he would give unto him neither poverty
nor riches: lest, says he, I be full and deny thee; and say, Who is the Lord?
or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain, Prove. 30.
8, 9.

Here therefore two sorts of men are condemned: 1. Those worldlings who covet
after abundance of wealth, not knowing that they further and increase their
condemnation. 2. Those superstitious Papists that vow voluntary poverty,
whereby they become unthankful to God and unprofitable to men.

But our Savior teaches us to follow the middle course, and commends to us
a moderate desire of that which is necessary and convenient for us, both for
our own sustenance and also relief of others.

Now the same measure is not necessary and convenient The same measure is not
convenient for all men.
for all men in respect of themselves. For there is a necessity 1. of Nature,
quatenus homo, as we are men; 2. of Person, quatenus solus est, vel familiam
habet, as a man is alone, or has a family; 3. of State, quatenus est persona
publica vel privata, as he is a public or private person. The necessity of
nature, which is content with a little, is satisfied with food and raiment, 1.
Tim. 6. 8. But the necessity of an householder or one that has a charge,
requires not only that which is necessary and convenient for himself but also
for those that belong unto him: every one being bound to provide for them, 1.
Tim. 5. 8. The necessity of state requires that which is convenient for that
condition and calling wherein God has placed him. Every one therefore is
taught to desire and by prayer to ask that portion of temporal blessings which
is necessary and convenient in respect of the necessity not only of nature but
also of a man's person and place. And these things we are to desire, not only
for the supplying of our own need, but also that we may have to communicate to
the necessity of others: Ephesians. 4. 28. Prove. 5. 15, 16. Acts 20. 33. The
necessities of others are either private or public; and those either of the
Church or commonwealth: To whose necessities we are to desire that we may not
be wanting.

Give.
God is said to be the giver of these things 1. because In what respect God is
said to give.
either he gives them without our means, or else blesses our means unto us
for the obteining of them. 2. because he grants us the use and fruition of
them. 3. because he blesses the use of them unto us, giving them virtue and
strength to nourish and cherish us. 4. And a gain, that is said to be given
which is freely and graciously bestowed.

Here therefore we are taught I. to ascribe those temporal blessings and good
things which we have neither to fortune nor chance, nor to our own labor and
industry, nor to our own merit and desert; but to the goodness of God freely
bestowing them upon us. Now if we cannot deserve a piece of bread of God, but
must acknowledge the goodness of God therein and our own unworthiness, Genesis
32. 10. much less can we challenge eternal life as our own desert, but must
with the Apostle Romans 6. 23. acknowledge it to be the free gift of God. And as
we are to acknowledge God the giver of these things, so II. we are when we want
them to beg them of him, and when we have them to return thanks unto him for
them: For which cause we are taught to receive the good creatures of God with
prayer and thanksgiving. III. If we are to desire temporal blessings as the
gifts of God, we are to be careful to get them by good means. For then we are
to esteem them as the gifts of God and pledges of his love and favor toward
us when we obtein them by good means and have care to employ them to Gods
glory. But contrariwise, when we get them by wicked means, by deceit,
oppression, usury, etc. they are to be esteemed rather the gifts of the devil
and earnest-penies of destruction. 4. We are not to trust in the means be they
never so good, but in the use of the means we are to crave the blessing of God,
and to depend thereon, whithout which they are nothing worth. Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
Except the Lord build the house etc. True it is indeed, that we must use good
means, (for otherwise we tempt God;) but we must not trust in the means, but
depend upon the blessing of God, which, as Solomon says, makes rich, Prove.
10. 22. Let us therefore remember that exhortation of Moses, as belonging to
us, Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18. Beware lest thou say in thine heart, My power has gotten
me this abundance, etc. Hab. 1. 16. 5. We are here taught, not only to ask
these temporal things which we want but also that he would give unto us thos^
things which we have: And that in two resp^cts: 1. That he would give us the
use and fruition God gives onelv the use of all.
of them: which we have need to pray for, not only because men oftentimes are
deprived of those things which they have before they have use thereof, as the
Lord threatens Mich. 6. 15. Thou shall sow, but not reap; thou shall tread the
olives, but shall not anoint thee with the oil; and make sweet wine, but not
drink it: So Hagg. 1. 6. ye have sown much and bring in little: But also
because many men deprive themselves of that which they have, as the Preacher
says Eccles 6. 1, 2. There is an evil which I have seen, etc. And elsewhere he
affirms, that when men with comfort enjoy their goods, it is the gift of God,
Eccles 5. 18.

Secondly, that God would bless the use of his God only blesses us in the
use.
gifts unto us, giving them virtue and strength to nourish and cherish us. For
without the blessing of God neither will food nourish, nor apparel cherish, nor
medicines cure, nor any thing else be effectual for our good. Hagg. 1. 6. Ye
eat, but ye are not satisfied; ye drink, but ye are not filled; ye clothe you,
but ye be not warm: and he that earneth wages, puts it into a broken bag.
Mich. 6. 14. The virtue of food in nourishing, as some think, is called the
staff of bread; which staff if God shall break, as he often threatens in the
Scriptures, we shall eat bread and not be nourished therewith, Ezekiel. 5. 16.
Wherefore as those which are in want are to use this prayer, that God would
grant unto them such temporal blessings as are convenient for them, and would
bless those good means which they use to that end; so they that have
abundance, be it never so great, had need to use this prayer, that God would
grant unto them the use of those things which they have, and bless the use
thereof unto them: For without his blessing the greatest provision of all
things will not help us, and with his blessing the meanest means are
sufficient: for man lives not by bread alone, but etc. Deuteronomy. 8. 3. as
appears by Daniel and his fellows, Dan. 1. 12. And experience tells us that
the children of the poor, which seldom have a good meals meat, many times are
in better plight then the children of the rich, which are both daintily and
plentifully fed.

What is meant by Give us.
Vs] that is, not only me that pray, but also the rest of my brethren. Where
1. we are taught this duty of love (which seeks not her own) not 1. Cor. 13.
only to seek our own good, but also the common good of our brethren.
Covetousness and selflove say, Give me this day my daily bread, without care
of others: but brotherly love and charity says, That good which I ask for my
self, I also beg for others: Give us, etc.

2. We are to pray not only for private benefits, as food, apparel, health,
peace, good name, etc. but also for public blessings, as plenty, prosperity
and peace, Psalm. 144. 13, 14. and 122. 6, 7. Jer. 29. 7.

3. We are to esteem that what good thing soever God has given to any one of
us, that he has given it unto us, that is, the body, whereof all be members:
and therefore that we should not envy the prosperity of others, nor yet envy to
communicate those good things which we have unto others, considering that what
I have received I am to esteem it as given not to me alone but to us. Neither
may thou think that thy prayer is upright, if having obtained that which
thou had asked for us, thou shall keep it to thy self. Thou beggest not only
in thine own name, but also in the behalf of others. Therefore when God hears
thy prayer, he gives not only to thee, but by thee he gives to others;
making thee not lord of that which he gives, but his steward and almoner: and
therefore howsoever thy goods be thine (...), in possession, yet art thou to
make them common (...), in use, by doing good to all, but especially to those
of the household of faith. And as we are to pray that we may be able to help
others, fo being able we must remember to distribute and to do good: for with
such sacrifices God is pleased.

What is meant by this day.
This day, (...), as Matthew, or as Luke speaks, (...), that is, in diem, for
a day: h. e. quantum huic di^i sufficit, so much as suffices for this day; or,
as others expound, according to the day: that is, Give unto us that which is
fit and convenient for us in this our present estate. For we need not the same
things at all times; the time of adversity requiring other blessings then the
times of prosperity. But the sense in Matthew and Luke is the same, Give us
that bread which is convenient for us this day; or, Give us that which is
convenient and necessary for this day.

Now whereas our Savior does teach us thus to pray; First, he puts us in
mind of our frailty and mortality, who have need day by day to be fed and
sustained of the Lord. And secondly, he puts us in mind of our duty, that as
children we should come every day to our heavenly Father to crave those things
that be needful for us. And thirdly, he teaches us not to be distrustfully
careful for the time to come, but every day to depend upon Gods fatherly
providence, being assured that when he has nourished us to day he will not be
wanting to us to morrow. And herein, as in many things else, the Israelites
were a type unto us, whom the Lord would have every day to gather manna for the
day, Exodus 16. 16. And fourthly, he teaches us to moderate our unsatiable
appetite, that we may learn to be content if we have provision for the day.
(Whereas we pray for others to whom God gives by us, we are bound even to day
without delay to supply their want, and not bid them come to morrow or another
time, Prove. 3. 28.)

But here it may be demanded, if it be not lawful Quest.
to provide for the time to come.

As we are to be content if we have provision for Answ. That it is lawful to
provide for the time to come.
the day, so if it please God to give more we are not to cast away his good
gifts, but reserve them, nor suffer them to be lost, John 6. 12. but to
preserve them, or else employ them to good uses. Yea, if it please God to give
means, men are bound to provide for the time to come, rather then by neglecting
the means to tempt God, 1. Tim. 5. 8. 2. Cor. 12. 14. the fathers are to lay up
for their children. And it is evident, that in summer we are to provide against
winter (to which purpose the sluggard is put to school to the ant, Prove. 6. 6.)
and in the time of plenty against the time of dearth: Example, Acts 11. 29.
Genesis 41. 48. Lawful therefore it is to provide for the time to come, so that
these conditions Cautions.
may be observed. 1. That our desire and care in providing be not inordinate,
in laboring for the meat which perishes more, or as much as for that which
endures to everlasting life. After which sort they offend who to gain the
world do loose their soul, as those do that stick not to sin to obtein their
worldly desire. 2. That it be not immoderate or joined with covetousness,
which is an insatiable desire of having more, (...). 3. That it be not joined
either with distrust in Gods providence, or trust in our store, Luke 12. 20. 4.
That we set not our hearts thereupon, Psalm. 62. 10. 5. That it be done neither
with injury to our neighbor nor neglect of our poor brethren. 6. That we lay
up our goods to good ends, that we may have not only to supply our own wants
and to provide for our family, but also to relieve the necessities of others.

But Christ forbids to care for to morrow, Object. 1.
Matthew. 6. 34.

He forbids (...), which is carking and distrustful Answ.
care.

Christ bids us not to lay up treasures on the Object. 2.
earth, Matthew. 6. 19. and forbids us to labor for the meat which perishes,
John 6. 27.

I answer, Those speeches are to be understood Answ.
(...), in comparison of spiritual food and heavenly treasures, etc. And
secondly, that we should not affect or esteem any worldly thing as our
treasure, but rather the righteousness and merits of Christ in heaven, and
those spiritual and heavenly graces whereby everlasting life is obtained: For
where the treasure is there the heart will be also. And thus have we the
meaning of the words.

The duties to be performed in prayer.
1. To ask temporal blessings of God. 2. To ask We ought to ask temporal
blessings of God.
them aright.

For the first; Men are not to have this conceit, that temporal blessings are
not to be asked of God, as being unworthy for him to grant or unnecessary for
us to receive. For the Lords providence stoopeth to the smallest things; to the
lighting of a sparrow upon the ground, to the feeding of all brute beasts,
Matthew. 6. 26. Psalm. 104. 27. and 145. 15. and 147. 9. Luke 12. 24. And he
affirms that all both prosperity and adversity proceed from him, Hos. 2. 8.
that in adversity we should pray unto him, and in prosperity praise him, and in
both acknowledge his merciful providence. And as for us, certain it is that
neither any of us in particular, nor the whole Church in general can continue
our life in this world to the praise of God unless it please him to grant unto
us a continual supply of temporal blessings. Therefore seeing God is the
giver of them, and we stand in need of them, it behooves us by prayer to
acknowledge him the giver of them, and to exercise our faith in asking them at
his hands. And that we are so to do it further appears by these reasons: 1.
Because Christ in this place commands us to ask them. 2. Because we have a
promise that we shall receive them, 1. Tim. 4. 8. 3. The examples of the godly;
Jacob, Genesis 28. 20. Solomon, 1. Kings 8. 33, 35, 37. Agur, Prove. 30. 8, etc.
who have prayed for them.

Secondly, it is not sufficient to ask these things of 2. We mus^ ask them
aright.
God, but we must also be careful to ask them aright, and according to the
will of God: which that we may do, there are duties to be performed both
peculiar to prayer for tempo^all things, and general and common to all prayer.

The peculiar duties are these: 1. That in asking (...) duti^s.
temporal blessings we submit our selves to the will and good pleasure of God,
saying with our Savior, Not my will, etc. And therefore when we ask temporal
things, our Savior teaches us to deny our own wills, and to desire that not
our will but his will may be fulfilled. 2. That we ask them not absolutely, but
so far forth as they are blessings and good things, with this condition, that
if they may stand with Gods glory and our own good: For God has promised to
give good things to them that ask them: But these are not simply good, but as
they have reference to Gods glory and our spiritual and everlasting good. We
must remember, that in temporal matters God hears men either in mercy as a
father, or in wrath as a judge: but we come unto him as a father, and desire
him as a father to hear us, etc. 3. That we ask them to good ends; not to
spend them on our lusts, but to employ them to Gods glory in the supply of our
own wants and theirs that belong unto us, and also in the relief of other men's
^ecessities, either private or public, Ephesians. 4. 28. Therefore we are to ask,
and to ask aright* and this is that which James ^aith, chap. 4. 2, 3. Ye get
nothing, because ye ask not: ye ask and receive ^ot, because ye ask amiss,
that ye may consume it on your lusts.

The general d^ties to be performed in prayer G^nerall (...).
for temporal blessings are, that we ask them in fervency and in faith. That
we may ask them in fervency, we must h^ 1. a true sense of our wants, and 2. a
true desire that o^ wants may be supplied by the contrary gifts and graces. We
will for brevities sake join them together. Every request presupposes want,
Jam. 1. 5. Whereas therefore Christ bids us ask, it proves 1. our nullity,
(...), and Jo^ 1. 21.
poverty in our selves, who neither have any thing but what it pleases God to
give us; neither can we by our means procure any thing that is good, except it
please God to bless our means; neither can we use and enjoy that which we
have, unless it please God to grant us the use thereof; neither will the use
thereof avail us, except it please God to bless the use of them, giving them
virtue to nourish and to cherish us, and make them effectual to our good.

Wants to be bewailed.
In true sense therefore of this our want we are to pray that it may be
supplied by the contrary gifts; namely, that God would be pleased to give unto
us that portion of temporal benefits which he knows to be most fit and
convenient for us; and to that end that he would bless our means for the
obteining of that which we have not, and also grant unto us the use of that
which we have, and lastly, that he would bless the use thereof unto us, making
them effectual to our good.

2. Whereas Christ teaches us every day to say, Give us this day, etc. it
argues our mortality and frailty, who cannot continue our lives, except it
please God to make a daily supply of his temporal benefits whereby we may be
sustained. In sense of which our frailty we are day by day to pour forth our
souls before the Lord, saying, Give us this day our daily bread, that is, that
bread which we have need of every day, as the Syriack reads, Luke 11.

3. As we are to acknowledge 1. our own nullity, who have nothing of our
selves, and 2. our frailty and mortality, who cannot continue except we have a
daily supply; so in the third place, whereas our Savior does teach us to ask
these things not as our own desert but as the free gift of God, we must
confess our own unworthiness, who cannot truly challenge unto our selves the
least temporal benefit that may be as our own desert, but must, as our Savior
has taught us, beg it of God as his undeserved gift: Therefore we are to come
unto God not in our own worthiness but in his manifold mercies, acknowledging
with Jacob that we are less then the least of his mercies, that we are not
worthy to breathe in the air, not to dwell upon the earth, or to enjoy any of
his blessings; which therefore we humbly beg of him that he would give them
unto us for his mercies sake in Christ Jesus.

4. Whereas our Savior teaches us to ask our bread, which we have gotten by
good means, to be given us of God, this argues 1. our coveting of other men's
goods, and 2. our diffidence and distrust in Gods providence, which makes us
ready in time of our need to use unlawful and indirect means: In sense of
which want we are to pray, that we may depend upon his providence, and cast our
care upon him, expecting with all the creatures our daily food from him; and in
all our need may be careful to use good means, and with quietness to work
that is good, that we may eat our bread given us of God: For that is only ours
which we have by good means; and that only is given of God which is well
gotten.

5. Whereas we are taught to desire God to give us these things notwithstanding
our means and the abundance of goods which we possess, this argues our
confidence in the means for obteining our desire, and our trusting in the goods
once gotten: In respect whereof we are to pray, that both in the means and in
the use of the things we may learn to depend upon Gods blessings, without which
all means are uneffectuall and unprofitable; and therefore we must desire,
notwithstanding all our means and abundance of goods, that God would give us
our daily bread.

6. Whereas he bids us ask bread, teaching us to bridle our desires and to
be content with a little, this shows our covetousness and discontentednesse
many times with our present estate: In sense whereof we are to desire, that as
we do ask our daily bread of God, so having that which we have asked we may not
only rest contented but give thanks to God that heard the voice of our prayer.

7. When he directs us to ask (...), daily bread, it be wrayeth our either
superstitious and fantastical contempt of Gods gifts, with them that affect
voluntary poverty, or else our worldly and immoderate desire of more then is
sufficient; that in sense thereof we may with Agur pray, Give me not poverty
nor riches, but feed me with food convenient for me.

8. Where he bids us say, Give us, this points at our self-love, whereby
every man desires good things for himself although many times it be with the
loss of others: And in acknowledgement of this our evil inclination, we are to
pray unto God, that he would give unto us, etc. that is, not only to me that
pray, but also to others; and not only private blessings to private men, but
also public to the commonwealth, as peace, plenty, prosperity.

9. When we are taught to ask bread to be given to us, and others by us, today,
this shows 1. our immoderate desire in providing for the time to come, and 2.
our delay in helping and relieving the necessities of our brethren: In respect
whereof we are to pray, that the Lord would this day give unto us, and by us
unto others as occasion shall be offered.

These wants we are taught to bewail, and in the sense of them we are taught
fervently to ask in this petition those gifts and graces.

The second common duty is, That we ask these The second common duty ^s Faith:
1. ^enerall.
blessings in faith. And this faith is twofold: 1. general, whereby we are to
be persuaded that these blessings do not happen by chance, nor are purchased by
men's industry and means, but that they are the gifts of God, and that he both
can and will bestow these blessings upon his children as is most expedient for
them, Heb. 11. 6.

2. But especially there is a special faith required, 2. special.
whereby we are in particular to be persuaded and assured, that the Lord will
grant unto us our particular request, yea and in that form which we make it, if
we make it as we ought; viz. That God would grant outward and temporal
blessings so far forth as they stand with Gods glory and our good. And this
condition, If it may stand with thy glory, O Lord, and our eternal good, is in
all petitions for temporal blessings either to be expressed or to be
understood: and according to it does the Lord hear our prayers, granting
either that which we do desire or that which is better, etc.

Duties to be performed in our lives.
Duties to be performed in our lives if we would make this prayer uprightly and
in truth, are

I. To have a true desire and care to get our goods by good and lawful means;
because we ask our bread, and that to be given us of God: and therefore that
every man walk d^ligently in a lawful calling, that he may eat the labor of
his own hands, and working with quietness that which is good may ^t his own
bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10, 12. Ephesians. 4. 28.

II. And to this end every one of us must endeavor to be endued with these
virtues, which are the inward duties of the eighth commandment. The 1. is
(...), the not setting our hearts and affections upon the things of this life,
so that neither inordinately nor immoderately we desire or seek more then is
exp^dient and necessary for us. This our Savior teaches us when he directs
us to ask for bread, and that bread which is necessary for us: Whereas
contrariwise if once we set our hearts upon riches, etc. thereupon wi^ follow
an immoderate desire of having more, that will not be satisfied with abundance;
which if we be once attainted withal we cannot make this prayer in truth. 2.
(...), contentation, which is a consequent of the former, Heb. 13. 5. (...),
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be contented with your
present estate. For we ask but that bread which is necessary and convenient for
us. Therefore if we make this prayer in truth, we will be well contented if the
Lord hear our prayer, and grant unto us no more but that which is necessary.
And therefore we ought not to covet other men's goods or that which is
unnecessary, knowing that our lot is befallen us by the most just and wise
providence of God: who if he saw it expedient for thee, would grant unto thee
greater abundance; but if not, thou must say with David, Here I am; let him do
with me as ^eemeth good in his eyes, 2. Sam. 15. 25, 26. And withal consider,
that if thou art such an one as fear the Lord, thou would not change thine
estate with some of them that have the world at will. For, as Solomon says,
Prove. 15. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure
and trouble therewith: and, as his father before him, Psalm. 37. 16. A small
thing which the righteous has is better then the great riches of the ungodly.
1. Tim. 6. 6. (...), Godliness with content is great gain. 3. A moderate
desire of that which is fit and convenient for us; and therefore not to affect
voluntary poverty, which the Spirit of God, Prove. 30. 8. and in this place,
does teach us to pray against. 4. A moderate care to provide that which is
convenient, that we may not be burdensome but rather helpful unto others: And
therefore we are to avoid two extremities: first, to have no care of that which
we here desire, 1. Tim. 5. 8. secondly, with carking care to hoard up that for
many years which we ask but for a day.

III. In the use either of those means which we use for the obteining of our
desire, or of the thing obtained, we are to crave the blessing of God, and
thereupon to depend. Therefore the temporal blessings of God must be received
with prayer and thanksgiving. And in this behalf not only the poor and needy
but also the rich and wealthy are to make this prayer, who cannot in truth make
this prayer to God, if either they rely upon their own means or trust in their
own store.

IV. We must cast our care upon the Lord, Psalm. 37. 3, 5. and 55. 22. and in
all our need fly unto him for supply.

V. As we are taught to pray not only for our selves but also for others, so
must we be desirous and careful of other men's good, and be ready to
communicate those good things which we have to the supply of others need, and
that without delay.

Here therefore the hypocrisy of worldly and Hypocrisy of worldlings
discovered.
carnal men is discovered; 1. Who ask bread, as though a little would content
them, and yet are not satisfied with abundance. 2. They ask their bread, and
yet cover yea take and retein other men's goods; yea some, the goods of the
Church, which they cannot call theirs. 3. They ask (...), daily bread, that is,
as Agur speaks, neither poverty nor riches, but that which is convenient and
necessary; and yet some (as fantastical Papists) do affect poverty, and
others (as all worldlings) desire abundance. 4. They desire that it may be
given them of God; and yet either get it by unlawful means, or relying upon
the means, or trusting in their abundance, find no need of the blessing of God.
5. They ask for us, which they desire for themselves alone, which when they
have got they keep to themselves. 6. They ask but for a day, and with distrust
they hoard up for many years.

The fifth petition. (...). And forgive us our trespasses, even as we forgive
them that trespass against us.
IN the former petition we were taught to ask temporal Two main benefits
required in the two last petitions; Justification and Sanctification.
blessings for the maintenance of this present life. Now in this petition and
in the last our Savior teaches us to ask spiritual blessings for the
obteining of a better life. Of spiritual blessings in this life there be two
chief heads whereunto all the rest may be referred: viz. our j^stification, and
sanctification. For in these two the covenant of grace and the benefits which
in this life we receive by Christ do consist. Heb. 10. 16, 17. This is the
covenant that I will make with them after those days, says the Lord: I will
put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds I will write them: and their
sins and iniquities I will remember no more. And the covenant that the Lord
made with Abraham concerning the promised seed was this, That he would give us,
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that is, Ephesians. 1. 7.
Col. 1. 14. having by Christ remission of our sins and justification, we
should worship him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life, Luke 1. 73, 74, 75. And these are the benefits which
should be preached in Christ's name, repentance and forgiveness of sins, Luke
24. 47. Seeing therefore the sum of all the benefits which in this life we
receive by our blessed Savior consists in these two, we may be resolved that
in these two the happiness of a Christian in this life does consist. For
whereas the Lord swear to Abraham that in his seed all the nations of the earth
should be blessed, Genesis 22. 18. Zachary being filled with the holy Ghost,
expounds that blessedness to consist in these two, Luke 1. 73. And indeed
whereas there are two degrees of our happiness, the one begun in this life,
the other complete in the life to come, that is to be esteemed our happiness
in this life whereby the perfect happiness of the life to come is obtained.
Now whom God has chosen and called to salvation them he justifies, and whom
he justifies, etc. Romans 8. 30. And this appears to be true also in the
particulars, Psalm, 32. 1. Revel. 20. 6. Seeing therefore the benefits which we
have by Christ in this life, and consequently our happiness, consists in
those spiritual graces which our Savior here teaches us to crave of God; it
follows necessarily, that both in our affections we should desire and in our
judgments esteem these spiritual graces far above all earthly and temporal
things, esteeming all other things as dross and dung, yea as loss in
comparison thereof, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. For what will all temporal benefits
avail us, if God do not forgive our sins, and stablish us by his free Spirit?
Surely no more then the good pasture profits the beast that is fatted for the
slaughter. And therefore as these blessings are absolutely necessary to our
salvation, and of far greater value then all temporal benefits, so are they
absolutely to be craved of God, and with greater fervencie and affection.

But let us consider the order and the coupling of The order.
this petition with that which went before and also that which follows. Our
Savior teaches us in the former place to crave temporal benefits as the
less, that our faith having been exercised in the less might be confirmed in
the greater; that is, that we having learned to depend upon Gods providence for
our maintenance in this life, might the more firmly rely upon him for our
justification and salvation; for if we have not learned to trust in him for the
less, it is not likely that we should believe in him for the greater. The
order in respect of that which follows stands thus; We are taught to desire
freedom from the guilt of our sins before deliverance from the corruption,
because our reconciliation with God in Christ and justification by faith in
order of nature goes before our sanctification; howsoever in time the
beginning of our sanctification concurreth with justification.

From whence arises both an instruction for carnal We must be justified
before we can be sanctified.
men, and a consolation for the godly. For if justification goes before
sanctification, then it is certain that we cannot be sanctified unless first
we be justified and reconciled unto God in Christ. And this order the holy
Ghost teaches us Luke 1. 74. That being redeemed etc. For until our
reconciliation, as we our selves are enemies, so all our actions are hateful
unto God. And therefore men had not need to please themselves in their natural
estate, and by their security suffer as much as in them lies the blood of
Christ to fall upon the ground, but rather to be most forward, careful, and
desirous to be reconciled unto God in Christ, and that his merits and
righteousness may be imputed unto them, considering that whatsoever they do
before they be reconciled unto God and justified is no better but sin, whereby
they hoard up wrath against the day of wrath, etc. The consolation which
arises from hence is most singular: For if men cannot die unto sin unless
first they be justified, then those that labor to forsake their sins, and
truly purpose amendment of life, and endeavor to please God in dying to sin
and living to righteousness, may be assured that they are justified by faith
and reconciled to God in Jesus Christ, etc.

And so much of the order. Let us now consider The connection with the former
petition.
of the coupling of this petition both with that which went before and also
that which follows: with the former; Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive etc. Which teaches us that we should not so wholly be addicted to the
commodities of this life, but that we should withal and most principally
labor for spiritual graces perteining to a better life. There be many, says
the P^almist, which say, Psalm. 4. 6.
Who will show us any good? that is, any worldly profit, etc. but as touching
the forgiveness of their sins, and their reconciliation with God in Christ,
as touching the application of Christ's death and resurrection, not only to
their justification but also their sanctification; of these things they have no
care nor desire, etc. But howsoever the world says, Who will show us any good?
yet we must say, But, Lord, lift thou ^p the light of thy countenance upon us:
Show thou thy self favorable and merciful in forgiving our sins; for that
will bring peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, far exceeding all
worldly comforts. We must therefore not only labor for the meat which
perishes, but much more for the meat which endures to everlasting life, John
6. 27. For what would it profit us if we could gain the whole world, if our
sins being not forgiven us, we should be amerced with the loss of our souls?
Mark 8. 36. The connection with the latter petition.


With the latter; Forgive us our sins, etc. And lead us not into temptation,
etc. Which teaches us that we are to desire as to be freed from the guilt of
our sins so also from the corruptions, because they are things that are
inseparably coupled together; forgiving of sins in God, and forsaking of
sins in us. Therefore those which sever these things (as most do) deceive
themselves, Luke 1. 73, 74. 2. Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 5. 24. Our Savior as he is our
redemption and justification, so also he is our sanctification: and therefore
that which he did for us in his flesh, he works in us by his spirit, viz. a
dying unto sin and a rising again unto newness of life. In those for whose
sins he died and rose again for their justification, the spirit of Christ is
effectual to apply the merits of his death to the mortifying of their sins,
and the virtue of his resurrection to their vivification, which is called the
first resurrection. And therefore unless thou die to thy sins and risest
again unto newness of life, thou can have no sound assurance that Christ
died for thy sins, and rose again for thy justification. And therefore as we
desire the pardon of our sins, so must we labor to renounce them, that we
may not only be freed from the guilt but also delivered from the corruptions
themselves. True repentance as it mourns for sins committed, and craveth
the pardon of them, so is it careful for the time to come not to commit that
which ought to be mourned for.

Having thus spoken of the order and coherence Parts.
of this petition, we are now to speak of the words themselves. In which two
things are contained: first, a deprecation or request for the pardoning of our
sins; and secondly, a reason for the confirmation of our faith in obteining
the same. In the request it self we are first to speak of the meaning of the
words, and then to gather from thence such uses as they afford.

(...) debts, according to the property of the That our sins are debts.
Syrian language, in which our Savior spoke, signifies sins. For the
Syrians call him that sins, (...), that is, debtour; and sin, (...), debt,
as appears by the Chaldean paraphrase on Gen 50. 17. Psalm. 1. 1. Bezain
Matthew. 23. 16. But this may be also evidently proved by conference of other
places in the new Testament, as Matthew. 23. 16, 18. The Pharisees conceit was,
that if a man did swear by the temple or the altar, that it was nothing; but if
he did swear by the gold of the temple, or the gift upon the altar, that then
he was a debtour, (...). So in Luke 13. those whom Christ in the second verse
calls sinners (...), in the fourth verse he calls (...), debtours. So in
this chapter our Savior setting down a proof of the reason of this petition,
for (...) says (...), v. 14, 15. But most plainly in Luke 11. 4. where the
words of this petition are thus set down, (...), And forgive us our sins, for
we also forgive (...), every one that is in debt to us, that is, which has
offended us.

Now the reason why sins are called debts is, because The reason why sins
are called d^ts.
for our sins we ow punishment: For as a man having entered into bonds to
perform such and such covenants, or else to incur the forfaiture and penalty
contained in the obligation, is subject to the forfaiture if he perform not the
covenant; so we being bound by most strait obligations to perform obedience to
all the commandments of God, or else to incur the penalty comprised in the
law, which is the obligation or handwriting that is against us, Col. 2. 14. are
subject to the penalty, that is, the fearful curse of God both in this life
and in the world to come if we perform not the covenants. For as in the law
there are two things; 1. praeceptum, commanding or forbidding, and 2. sanctio,
threatening punishment against the ^nsgression of the precept: so in every sin
ther^ are two things answer^ble; (...), the fault transgressing the law, and
the reatus binding over the transgressour to the punishment. In respect of
which punishment every offendour of the law is a debtour, until either the
debt be remitted him, or else he has born the punishment, which is without
end. Whereas therefore we pray that the Lord would forgive us our debts, we do
not only desire that the Lord would forget the fault, but also that he would
remit the punishment unto which the guilt of our fault does bind us over. And
therefore foolish is the opinion of the Papists, who hold that the Lord The
Papi^s confuted, who hold that God forgiving the fault reteineth the punishment.
many times forgiveth the fault and reteineth the punishment. For sin is
called a debt in respect of the punishment which we ow for it: and therefore
this debt is not remitted if the punishment be retained. Again, the mercy of
the Lord pardons no sin for which his justice is not satisfied. Neither
must we so desire the Lord to be merciful as that we would have him forget his
justice. Every sin therefore as it deserves death, so is it punished with
death, or else the justice of God is not satisfied. It is punished, I say, by
death either in the party himself to whom it is not forgiven, or in Christ in
the behalf of the party to whom it is forgiven. For every sin therefore that
is forgiven Christ has satisfied the justice of God in bearing the punishment:
therefore God does not punish them whose sins he forgiveth in Christ: neither
can it stand with his justice to punish the same sin twice, on^ in Christ,
and again in the faithful for whom Christ has suffered. So that we cannot say
that the Lord punishes them whose sins he forgiveth, except we will affirm
either that the Lord is unjust, or that the merits of Christ were unsufficient
and unperfect: both which are blasphemous. Therefore as there is no
condemnation, so there is no punishment, to those that are in Christ Jesus.
Chastised they may be after their sins are forgiven for the example of
others, and their own amendment, as David was 2. Sam. 12. but punished they
never are. The affliction which the children of God do bear is not a punishment
to satisfy for their sin, but either a trial or a chastisement, either to
cure or prevent sin in them. When we are judged we are chastised, etc. 1.
Cor. 11. 32.

And as the opinion of the Papists is foolish, so Their pract^ce foolish who
d^ferre their r^pentance.
the practice of those men is sottish who when they are indebted unto their
neighbor, or have incurred a forfeiture, are never in quiet until they have
got that debt discharged or remitted, and yet the same men being in infinite
debt to the Lord, which although they had the whole world they are not able to
discharge, notwithstanding take no thought for this debt, no^ earnestly sue for
pardon, but securely go on in their sins, as though by continual increasing
of their debt they should the more easily discharge it: much like to him that
having got a burden of wood, and finding it too heavy, should cut down more to
add unto the weight; or as it is in the ridiculous proverb of the Grecians,
(...), I cannot carry a goat; lay upon me an ox.

Now these debts are of sundry sorts. Some are original sins, some actual;
some inward, others outward; some of omission, others of commission; some of
ignorance, others of knowledge; some of infirmity, others of presumption; some
against God, some against our neighbors, and some against our selves. In
respect of all and every whereof we are every of us debtours unto God, and
therefore had need to pray that he would forgive us all and every of our debts,
Psalm. 51. 9. which how many and great they are, we may easily know, if we will
diligently look into our obligation, and examine our lives by the law of God,
etc.

(...), Our.
In this word confession of sin is included. For What is meant by ou^
trespasses
it is in effect thus much; O Lord, we have sinned against thee: have mercy
therefore on us, O Lord, according to thy goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away our offenses: Wash us from our iniquities, and
cleanse us from our sins. For we acknowledge our transgressions, and our
sins are always before us, Psalm. 51. 2, 3. Therefore with asking of pardon
confession of sin is conjoined. And this form of prayer is prescribed to be
used of the perfectest men in this world, as of the Apostles; because there is
no man that does good upon the earth, and sins not, Eccles 7. 20. If we say,
says the holy Apostle John, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to (...) us from all iniquity. If we say that we
have not (...), we make him a l^ar, and his truth is not in us, 1. John 1. 8,
9, 10. Here therefore both the Catharists, which dream of perfection in this
life, and also the Pelagians and Papists, which hold that a man may fully and
perfectly keep the law of God in this life, are confuted: For such cannot make
this petition except they will mock God, as all those do that have a conceit of
their own perfection. (Which conceit is in not only the Catharists and
Papists, but also in the greatest part of ignorant and secur^ men, who affirm
that they love God with all their heart, and their neighbor as themselves,
they never did any man hurt, they never doubted of their salvation.) For
howsoever the Scripture speaks of perfect men, and such as walked in all the
commandments of God, yet certain ^t is that thereby is meant the uprightness
of their will and endeavor, not the perfection of their obedience; which
uprightness notwithstanding the Scripture calls perfection, the Lord
accepting the will for the deed: so that upright men may indeed be said to be
perfect, but in affectu potius quam effectu, in their affections rather then
their actions.

Forgive.
The Lord in forgiving sins, as he is merciful What is meant by this word
fo^give.
so is he just, 1. John 1. 9. Neither does he forgive any sin for which his
justice is not satisfied by the obedience and sufferings of Christ, Romans 3. 26.
He is therefore said to forgive our sins when as he inputeth them not unto
us, but accepting of the obedience and sufferings of Christ as a full ransom
and satisfaction for them, washing away our sins in his blood, covering them
with his righteousness, imputing our sins to Christ and his obedience to us,
so that we, howsoever sinful in our selves, appear righteous before him in
Christ. When as therefore we do pray for the forgiveness of our sins, we do
not so desire him to be merciful as that we would have him forget his justice;
but we come unto him in the name and mediation of Christ, in whom he is well
pleased, beseeching him to accept of his obedience and sufferings as a full
satisfaction for our sins: For remission of sins, as it is a free work of
mercy in respect of us, who neither can deserve pardon nor satisfy his
justice; so in respect of Christ, who has satisfied for us, it is a work of
justice.

Now whereas our Savior Christ does teach By this petition we are put in mind
of our misery and God^ mercy.
every one of us every day to ask forgiveness with assurance to be heard, we
are put in mind both of our misery and Gods mercy. Our misery, who day by day
commit sin, and therefore have need every day to crave remission of our
sins. Gods mercy and long suffering, who though he be offended every day, yet
he is ready to forgive their sins who come unto him by hearty and earnest
prayer, confessing their sins and craving pardon of them. But this mercy and
long-suffering of God must not encourage us to presume, but invite us unto
repentance, Romans 2. 4. and 6. 1. Ecclus 5. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 130. 4. There is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. Joel. 2. 13. and encourage us to
call upon him. This long-suffering of God is to be imitated of us: For if he be
content to forgive us that sin against him every day, then ought we freely to
forgive them that offend us, etc. though it be to seventy times seven times.

Again, if every one of us, be he never so righteous, is bound to make this
prayer that God would freely remit our sins, then it follows that none of
us can discharge the debt, or by any thing which we are able to perform
satisfy for our sins, but either they must be freely remitted for Christ's
sake, or else we must suffer the punishment due for them. Divine remission and
humane satisfaction cannot stand together. We must crave remission therefore:
we cannot satisfy. Remission of sins and justification are free, Romans 3. 24.
Ephesians. 1. 7. Isai. 43. 25. but in satisfaction there is recompense. Therefore
those that trust to their own merits and use this prayer, they mock God and
condemn themselves: They mock God; because they desire him to forgive their
sins, which they do not desire should be forgiven them, but trust to satisfy
for them. They condemn themselves; because they confess themselves to be
debtours unto God unless he remit their debt, and yet stand not to his
remission, but to their own satisfaction, by which they appeal to his justice
rather then implore his mercy.

And that no man can satisfy by any works of obedience No man can sat^sfie
Gods justice for his sins; proved. Reason 1.
the justice of God for his sins, it may further appear by these reasons. 1.
Because our best obedience is unperfect, and our righteousness like unto a
polluted ^lout: and therefore if God should enter into judgment with us, he
might justly condemn us for our best actions, as being not performed in that
manner and measure which his law requires, and therefore every one had need to
pray as Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment, etc. Secondly, 2.
because whatsoever obedience we can perform it is a debt and duty, Luke 17.
10. When we have done all that is commanded, we must say that we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do, (...). Romans
8. 12. and 13. 8. Gal. 5. 3. Now certain it is that we cannot satisfy debt
with debt: but notwithstanding our latter obedience, we shall be debtours in
respect of the former debt unsatisfied. Seeing therefore we are not able to
satisfy for the least of our sins, our Savior has taught us to say, not
with that servant, Matthew. 18. 26. Have patience, Master, I will satisfy; but,
Lord, remit, tak^ away, and blot out our offenses. Furthermore, we are 3.
taught to pray that the Lord would remit our debts, that is, not only forgive
the fault but also remit the punishment, in respect whereof sins are called
debts: And therefore it cannot be truly said that God forgiveth the fault and
reteineth the punishment for which we our selves must satisfy either in this
life or in purgatory. For if God should requi^e of us satisfaction for those
sins which he pardons in Christ, it would follow necessarily that either
the sufferings of Christ were unsufficient, or else that the Lord is unjust.
Moreover, it is absurd that sin being remitted the punishment should be
retained: For sin is the cause of punishment: and the cause being taken away,
the effect also is removed. And again, whereas sin is infinitely increased in
4.
respect of that infinite Majesty and justice of God which is violated, sure
it is that we cannot satisfy for it before we have endured endless
punishment; which will never be. Whereas therefore our Savior Christ teaches
us thus to pray, he shows that we cannot be discharged from these our debts
by our own satisfaction or merits, or any other means, but only by the free
remission of them and imputation of Christ's righteousness. And this is to be
understood not only of our great and grievous sins, but also of our less
offenses, which the Papists call venial, and erroneously hold not to be
mortal, neither need the death and merits of Christ for their expiation, but
may by the holy-watersprinkle, or by episcopal benediction, or by knocking of
the breast be taken away. As therefore every sin, great or small, deserves
death, and is also punished with death, either in Christ or in the sinner
himself; and as the blood of Christ does purge us from all iniquity, 1. John
1. 7. so that by him we have remission of all our sins: so are we to pray
that the Lord would for the precious merits and righteousness of our Savior
Christ remit all our sins both more and less, from which we could by no
other means be delivered but by the merits of Christ.

But here it may be objected; Our sins were Object.
forgiven in baptism, Acts 2. 38. therefore we need not now the forgiveness
of them.

Some answer, That because we sin after baptism, Answ. 1.
therefore we ought after bapti^me to pray that the Lord would forgive our
sins. But this answer is not sufficient, considering that in baptism is
sealed the remission of sins, not only past, but also for the time to come
during the whole course of our life: For otherwise baptism had need to be
reiterated. I answer therefore, That we feeling the burden of our sins, pray
that the forgiveness of sins, which was represented and sealed unto us in
baptism, may indeed be granted unto us, and that we may feel in our selves the
fruit and effect of our baptism. For we must not think that the Sacraments
absolutely confer grace to every receiver, but only upon those conditions
which are contained in the promises of the Gospel, whereof baptism is a seal.
Now the Gospel promises remission of sins and salvation only to them that
believe; and therefore the Sacrament seals and assures remission only to
them that believe. For we ask forgiveness only for the righteousness of
Christ: but the righteousness of Christ is there imputed to righteousness
where it is apprehended by faith: In which sense we are said to be justified by
faith alone, and by faith to have remission of sins. And therefore in this
petition we desire that the Lord would work in us true faith, that being united
unto Christ and made partakers of his merits, we may have not only
forgiveness of sins, but also assurance thereof by the anointment of the
holy Ghost, the Spirit of adoption crying in our hearts, Abba, Father, etc. And
because none attein to that measure of assurance but that it is mingled with
some doubting, therefore all had need to pray that the Lord would increase
their faith, and more and more assure them of the pardon of their sins.

Us.
This teaches us to pray not only for the remission of our own sins, but also
of our brethren; it being a duty of charity to desire and to further the
salvation of our brethren. And this duty as it belongs to all so especially
to those that are governors of others, either in the Church or Commonwealth.
Examples: of Moses, who often stood in the gap, Psalm. 106. 23. Exodus 32. 21, 32.
Number. 14. 19. Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. 23. Neither are we to pray for our friends and
well-willers alone, but also for them that hate and persecute us, according to
the precept and practice of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 44. Luke 23. 34. and the
holy martyr Stephen, Acts 7. 60. And as we are to pray the Lord to forgive
them, so must we as willingly forgive them as we desire to be forgiven of the
Lord: neither can we in truth of heart desire God to forgive them, if we do not.

Duties in prayer.
The duties which here we are taught to perform Duties are 1. more peculiar.
in prayer are either more peculiar to this kind of deprecation, or common. The
former is Confession, which must concur with Deprecation of pardon, and goes
before pardon; as appears Psalm. 32. 3, 5. Prove. 28. 13. 1. John 1. 9. Number. 5.
7. Examples; 2. Sam. 12. 13. Luke 15. 21.

Now this confession is to be made of unknown sins generally; as Psalm. 19.
12. of known sins particularly; Isai. 59. 12, 13. And to this end it will be
profitable to examine our hearts and our lives by the law of God, taking a view
of the duties therein commanded and vices forbidden, that we may particularly
see and acknowledge what duties we have omitted and what vices we have
committed. 2. more common.


The common duties; That we pray in fervency, faith, and perseverance. That we
may pray in fervency, we must have both a true sense of our wants, and earnest
desire to have the same supplied.

The wants which we are to bewail are, 1. our manifold sins and
transgressions, for which we are to be grieved that we have by them displeased
and dishonored God. And to increase this godly sorrow Meditations to increase
our sorrow for sin.
in us, we are First, to consider and meditate of Gods manifold benefits
undeservedly bestowed upon us, and our unthankful behavior toward him, etc.
Secondly, we are to desire the Lord that he would pour upon us the spirit of
deprecation, that we may with bitterness bewail our sins, whereby we have so
violated the justice of God that nothing could be found sufficient to appease
or to satisfy the same but the death of Christ, whom we by our sins have
pierced, Zech. 12. 10. Thirdly, we are to consider the misery whereunto our
sins make us subject both in this life and in the world to come. In all which
respects we must esteem our sins as a most heavy burden, and being weary
thereof we are by prayer to come unto the Lord that we may be eased thereof,
Matthew. 11. 28. Neither are we to bewail our sins alone; but as we are to pray
for the pardon of other men's sins, so are we also to mourn for the iniquities
of the place and time wherein we live, Ezekiel. 9. 8. Psalm. 119. 136, 158. 2. We
are to bewail the hardness of our hearts, that we cannot so bewail our sins
as we ought. 3. Our want of faith and assurance of the remission of our sins.

The graces which we desire, are 1. Remission of The graces* which we desire.
sins and justification, viz. that God would cancel the bill of debt, Col.
2. 14. that he would take away our sins and cast them into the bottom of the
sea, Mich. 7. 18, 19. that he would impute the merits and obedience of Christ
unto us. And secondly, because we receive remission of sins and are justified
by faith, by which we apprehend the righteousness of Christ to our
justification, and without which the merits of Christ are not communicated unto
us, therefore we desire not only that he would forgive us our sins, but also
that he would work in us a true faith, whereby we may have assurance of the
pardon of our sins and peace of conscience. 3. Because our faith is weak
therefore we are to pray for the increase thereof, Luke 17. 5. and also that
God would bless unto us the means of the begetting and increasing of our
faith. 4. Because reconciliation and adoption are unseparable companions of
justification, we therefore must also pray that he would receive us unto his
love and favor, and give us his spirit of adoption; that howsoever we be by
nature the children of wrath, yet being reconciled unto him in Christ, we may
have the testimony of his Spirit testifying to our spirits that we are the
children of God. 5. We pray not only for righteousness and assurance of
justification, and peace of conscience arising from thence, Romans 5. 1. but also
for the joy of the holy Ghost proceeding from them both, Romans 14. 17. Now that
we may with fervencie beg these graces of God, we must besides the sight and
sense of our sins, and the misery The necessity 1. of the remission of ^ur
sins.
which they bring upon us, consider the necessity of these graces; First, of
remission of sins; because sin makes a separation between God and us,
Isai. 59. 1. and makes us subject both to the curse of God in this life and
after; and therefore above all things in the world we are to desire freedom
from our sins, without which our estate is most miserable, etc. and without
which we cannot be saved. Contrariwi^e, in remission of sin consists
happiness, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Secondly, of faith, without which the 2. of faith.
benefits of Christ are not effectual to our justification, sanctification, or
salvation. By it we are made partakers of all the benefits of Christ to our
justification and salvation. In which respect the same benefits in the
Scriptures which proceed from Christ are also ascribed unto faith. Upon which
follow reconciliation, peace with God, and joy in the holy Ghost, and the
beginning of eternal life it self in this life.

As we must pray for the forgiveness of our sins in fervencie, so also in
faith: that as we unfeignedly desire pardon of sins and reconciliation with
God, so we are truly to believe that the Lord will hear our prayer, that he
will receive us unto mercy, and at the length grant unto us the certificate of
his Spirit the Spirit of adoption. For that which he has commanded us to ask
he has promised to give. He commands us to ask remission of sins,
justification, the Spirit of adoption, etc. therefore consequently we are
steadfastly to believe that we shall obtein them. The forgiveness of sins is
a chief part of the covenant of grace, Heb. 10. 17. The Spirit of adoption is
expressly promised to those that ask him, Luke 11. 13.

There remains, that we pray with perseverance, never ceasing day by day to
call upon God for the forgiveness of our sins, and certificate of the holy
Spirit assuring us thereof, until the Lord say unto our souls, I am your
salvation, and shed abroad his love in our hearts. Neither are we then to cease
from this prayer: but as we sin daily, so are we daily to crave forgiveness;
and as our faith is weak and mixed with doubting, so daily to desire the
increase thereof, etc.

Duties to be performed in our lives.
If we would make this prayer with upright hearts, or would either hope to
obtein this request or assurance that our prayer is heard, I. We must 1. We
must be ad^rned with humility.
be adorned with humility, 1. Pet. 5. 5. whereby we must acknowledge our selves
so deeply indebted unto the Lord by reason of our manifold sins, that he may
most justly glorify his name in our endless confusion, and that in respect
thereof we are not worthy to look up unto heaven, or to breathe in the air, or
to live upon the earth: and that therefore it is the great mercy of the Lord
that we are not consumed. For if we have humble and contrite hearts, the Lord
will be ready to hear our prayer and to pardon our sins. The Lord resists
the proud, but he gives grace to the humble, Jam. 4. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 5. The
sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and etc. Psalm. 51. 17.
Psalm. 34. 18. Example, in the humbled Publicane, Luke 18. 14. For Christ came
not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9. 13. Luke 4. 18.
Matthew. 11. 28. Whom does he call with promise to ease them of the burden of
sin, but those that tr^vail under the burden of sin, and are weary thereof?
If therefore God has given thee an humble heart, thou may be encouraged to
come unto him for grace and pardon of sins. For as it was said of the blind
man, so it may be said of every one that is poor in spirit, Be of good
comfort; he calls thee. But as humility makes us fit to receive Gods grace
in the pardoning of our sins, so is it also a good sign that our sins are
pardoned. For they only are happy whose sins are forgiven: but those that are
poor in spirit are happy, Matthew. 5. 3. therefore their sins are forgiven.
Whereas contrariwise, if we be proud and have a Pharisaicall c^ceit of our
selves, it is a fearful sign that we remain in our sins, John 9. 41. Luke
18. 14.

II. If we would have forgiveness of our sins 2. We must believe in Christ.
we must believe in Christ. For by faith alone we have justification and
remission of sins, Acts 26. 18. because faith alone apprehends the merits
and righteousness of Christ whereby we are justified. Now this and the former
must go together: We must be cast down in our selves, acknowledging our selves
that we are no better in our selves then the firebrands of hell: and yet
withal we must rely upon Christ and his merits, being persuaded that
notwithstanding our manifold sins, yet the Lord will receive us into his love
and favor, imputing unto us the righteousness of his Son, and covering us
therewith as with a garment. If thus we believe in Christ we need not doubt of
the pardon of our sins; because Christ having satisfied the justice of his
Father for all the sins of them which believe in him, the remission therefore
of sins to them that believe is a work not only of mercy but also of justice.

3. If we would truly make this prayer ( viz. 3. We must repent of our sins.
in hatred of sin) and have any assurance to our own souls that our sins
are forgiven, we must repent of those sins which we desire to be remitted,
and forsake those sins which we would have the Lord forgive, Ezekiel. 18. 21,
22. At what time soever, etc. Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses his sins, and
forsakes them, etc. And therefore, as Isaiah exhorts chap. 55. 7. let the
wicked forsake his way, etc. If therefore we would effectually crave the pardon
of our sins, we must have a true purpose of heart and resolution to forsake
them: And if we would have assurance that according to our prayer our sins be
forgiven, we must have a true endeavor to leave them, and to perform the
contrary duties. If therefore we have neither purpose in our hearts nor
endeavor in our lives to forsake our sins, we may not look that the Lord
will pardon them. If in my heart I regard wickedness, etc. Psalm. 66. 18. For
the Lord hears not sinners, that is, who do not repent of their sins nor
have a true purpose to leave them, John 9. 31. Prove. 28. 13.

4. If we make this prayer in faith, and truly believe 4. We must fear by sin
to offend God.
in God for the forgiveness of our sins, this persuasion will have this
effect in us, to make us fear to sin and by sin to displease and dishonor
God. There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130. 4. The
bounty of the Lord must draw us to repentance, Romans 2. 4. Nay further, those
that believe their sins are forgiven them, and are persuaded of Gods love and
favor shed abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost, they cannot choose but
love him much who has forgiven them much, Luke 7. 47. and show forth their
love in keeping his commandments.

5. If in prayer we unfeignedly desire faith and 5. We must use means to
increase (...) faith.
assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, then we will be most careful in
our lives to use and to use aright the means of begetting and increasing this
faith; as the hearing of the word, receiving of the Sacraments, etc.

6. If we truly desire reconciliation with God in 6. We must labor to please
God.
Christ, then will we seek in all things to please him. For if we please our
selves in displeasing him (as the very nature of sin is to displease God) how
can we persuade our selves that we are reconciled unto God or desire so to be?

7. If we would have any assurance that our sins 7. We must forgive our
neighbors.
are forgiven, we must be ready to forgive our neighbors the offenses which
they commit against us. For if ye, says Christ Matthew. 6. 14. forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye do not, etc.
But of this more in the reason.

Here therefore is discovered the hypocrisy of Hypocrisy discovered.
those men, 1. who crave pardon of sin in a Pharisaicall conceit of their own
perfection and freedom from sin; 2. who have no true hatred of sin nor
purpose to leave it; 3. who please themselves in displeasing God, and yet would
seem to desire reconciliation with God; 4. who desire faith, and yet neglect
and contemn the means; 5. who with the ungracious servant looking to have
pardon of ten thousand talents of his master would not remit a small debt to
his fellow servants, Matthew. 18. 28. whom he ought to have loved for his Masters
sake, etc.

(...).
These words are a solemn profession unto God The reason con^rming our faith in
the assurance of remission.
of our brotherly love, serving both to confirm our faith in obteining pardon,
and also to testify our love to God (who has forgiven us much) in the love of
our brethren for his sake. For whereas diverse men making this prayer for pardon
of sin either do not believe at all the pardon of their sin, or else
deceive themselves with an opinion of faith, not loving him of whom they look
for pardon, nor their brethren for his sake, but with the ungracious servant
Matthew. 18. 28. exact small debts of their brethren, and revenge offenses
committed against them, as though they could love God and yet hate their
brother: therefore our Savior teaches us to add to the petition this
protestation, that if we be able to make it in truth, we may be assured of the
forgiveness of our sins, and not be deceived (as many are) in our assurance.
First therefore because we are so full of infidelity and diffidence that we are
hardly brought to believe in particular the forgiveness of our own sins, and
consequently to make this prayer in faith, our Savior teaches us to use this
notable argument (not so much to move God as to confirm our selves) drawn from
the less to the greater, As we also forgive, etc. or, as it is more plainly
set down in Luke, For even we also forgive etc. And the reason stands thus,
If we (who have not so much pity, in regard of thine abundant mercy, as is a
drop of water in comparison of the Ocean sea; if we, I say) be ready to
forgive the offenses and injuries done against us, then no doubt thou will
forgive our offenses, which we from the bottom of our hearts confess unto thee
with deprecation of pardon: But even we, Lord, whose mercy is as nothing in
comparison of thine, are ready to remit offenses committed against us: and
therefore as we earnestly crave pardon, so we do unfeignedly believe that thou will forgive us our sins.

The connection of the proposition is necessary. For, as we say, Quod in minori
valet valet etiam in majori, That which is of force in the lesser is of force
also in the greater: If a drop of pity in us does wash away the offense of our
brother, how much more shall the multitude of his mercies wash away our
offenses? And our Savior reasons elsewhere Matthew. 7. 11. If ye which are
evil can give good things to your children, how much more etc. If therefore our
consciences do testify unto us the truth of the assumption, That we are ready
to forgive them that offend us; we may also be assured of the truth of the
conclusion, That God also forgiveth our sins.

2. Whereas many abuse the mercy of God, 2. Reason why these words are added.
whereof they presume for the pardoning of their sins, dealing unthankfully
with God in cruelty and revenge exercised upon their brethren, and so deceive
themselves with a conceit of faith and assurance of the pardon of their sins,
when indeed their sin is not pardoned: therefore our Savior Christ would
have this protestation added, that it may be a touchstone to try whether we
have remission of sin and assurance thereof. For, as our Savior says that
he to whom much is forgiven loves much, Luke 7. 47. and he that loves God
truly cannot but love his brother for Gods cause: For as John says, 1. Epist.
4. 20. If any say that he loves God and hates his brother he is a liar, etc.
and chap 5. 1. Every one that loves him that has begotten does also love him
that is begotten of him. And, Love covers the multitude of offenses, Prove.
10. 12. Therefore if we will not forgive our brethren that offend against us,
it is an evident argument that we do not love them: If we love not our
neighbor, certain it is that we love not God: If we love not God, it is a
certain sign that we do not believe in him nor are persuaded of his love
toward us in the forgiving of our sins: If we believe not this, Christ's
righteousness and merits are not imputed unto us to our justification and
remission of our sins: And therefore if we be not willing and ready to remit
offenses committed against us, it is a certain sign that our sins are not
forgiven of God. As contrariwise, our brotherly love in remitting offenses is a
sure token of the forgiveness of our sins. For as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.
14, 15. If ye forgive men their offenses, then will your heavenly Father also
forgive you.

Some expound these words as if in them we did Our forgiving no cause of Gods
forgiving us.
allege a cause why God should forgive us, or as though our forgiving of our
brethren did merit forgiveness of sins at the hands of God: As the Papists
also expound that speech of our Savior Luke 7. 47. Many sins are forgiven
her; for she loved much. Whereas in truth the love either of God or of our
neighbor for Gods cause is an effect, and so a sign, of Gods love toward us
in forgiving our sins. We love God because he loved us first, 1. John 4. 19.
And so does our Savior in that place argue, not from the cause to the effect,
but from the effect to the cause: as also appears by the opposition in the
latter part of that verse, but to whom less is forgiven, he loves less; and
by the parable of the two debtours, ver. 41. whereof he loved more to which
more was forgiven. So that our love is not the cause of forgiveness, but the
forgiveness of our sins is the cause of our love; and therefore our love an
effect, fruit and sign of the forgiveness of our sins. Again, our
justification and remission of sins is free, proceeding from the mere love of
God without any desert of ours, Romans 3. 24. howbeit it is deserved through the
merits of Christ. And surely if our forgiving of offenses were the cause why
our sins be forgiven, then may we thank our selves for our justification:
neither should we need to pray that God would forgive us for Christ's merits,
but for our own deserts. And lastly, the Apostle Paul exhorts us to forgive
our brethren, as to a fruit and effect of Christ's forgiving us, Ephesians. 4. 32.
Col. 3. 13. Forgiving one another, even as Christ has freely forgiven you. In
these words therefore is not set down the cause of the forgiveness of our
sins, but an argument from the less to the greater to confirm our faith in
the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins; that less being also an
undoubted fruit and sure sign of the remission of our sins.

But now let us consider the words particularly, and so come to the uses.

By our debtors is meant such as have offended or What is meant by (...).
wronged us, or, as the Apostle speaks Col. 3. 13. against whom we have any
quarrel.

But what debtors am I to forgive? may some body Object.
say. I can be content sometimes to put up an injury at the hands of my better;
but I cannot brook that my equal should crow over me, or that mine inferior
should be too saucy with me. I can be content to remit some offenses; but
great indignities I cannot put up.

Answ. Our Savior speaks indefinitely and generally Answ.
without difference of debtors: so that whosoever is our debtor, we must
forgive him if we would have assurance that God has forgiven our sins. But
this is more plainly expressed Luke 11. For even we also forgive (...), every
one that is indebted to us. So that our love must not be partial: neither is
it if it be indeed for Gods cause, in whom we are to love our friends, and for
whom we are to love our enemies.

May not a man therefore require and exact his Quest.
debts of his debtor if he would have God forgive his debts?

Our Savior does not speak of the debts of money Answ.
or goods, but of trespasses, offenses and wrongs, which in the Chaldee and
Syriack tongue are called debts, etc. As for due debts of money and goods, them
thou may exact of those which are able to pay; so that it be done without
using rigor or seeking extremities.

What is meant by, we forgive.
We forgive] God alone forgiveth sins, how Object.
then can we be said to forgive our debtors? How we ca^ be said to forgive.


We must distinguish both of the debt which is forgiven, and also of forgiving.
In every offense Answ. 1.
committed against the neighbor two parties are offended; God mediately, and
the neighbor immediately. And so it may be considered either as a
transgression of the law of God, and so it is properly called sin, (...): or
as it hurts or hinders the neighbor, and is called an injury or wrong. As
therefore it is a transgression of the law of God, no man can remit it: but as
it is an injury or wrong done to a man, he may remit it. Again, God is Answ. 2.
said to forgive a sin, when he is content not only to forget the fault but
also to forgive the punishment for the righteousness of Christ imputed to the
sinner. Man is said to forgive an offense, not when he remitteth the punishment
due unto it by the law of God (for that is not in his power to do) but when he
does abandon all purpose and desire of revenge, all hatred and ill will toward
his brother in respect of the offense.

If this be true, then belike no man may complain Object. 2.
plain to the Magistrate, or seek his remedy by law when he has sustein^d
injury or wrong.

Although we are to forgive from our heart every Answ.
one that offends us, yet we may in some cases That it is lawful to to seek
help from the Magistrate; with these cautions observed.
complain unto the Magistrate and seek remedy by law; if these cautions be
observed: 1. That it be not done in anger, or malice, or desire of revenge;
which commonly are the grounds of men's going to law: but that it be done with a
charitable mind toward the society where we live, toward our brother who has
offended us, and toward our selves. First, toward the society; 1. If the 1.
offense be such as according to the laws of the society is to be punished by
order of justice: for that punishment it is not in our power to remit. 2. If
the offense be dangerous to the society, either in respect of Gods judgment,
or in respect of contagion, then is it good the fault should be pu^ished, that
evil may be taken from among us, and the judgment of God prevented, and others
may see and fear, and fearing their punishment may not follow their example: in
which respects most meet and necessary it is that the insolency and outrage of
wicked men should be restrained.

Secondly, as touching the party: If he cannot be 2.
reclaimed by private means, we are to seek that by public authority he may be
reclaimed and brought to repentance* and we are to take heed left by our
patience our neighbor become worse.

Thirdly, concerning our selves: We may provide 3.
for our safety for the time to come, rather then by too much bearing to
expose our selves to the wrongs and injuries of the wicked. For if it were not
lawful for godly men to complain to the Magistrate, etc. there would be no
measure nor no end of indignities offered unto them. And albeit we are to
esteem every wrong offered unto us as an affliction laid upon us by the Lord,
and are therefore to bear it patiently, and not seek to wreak our selves upon
our brother, who is but the instrument or rod by whom the Lord does correct us;
yet we are in this as in all other afflictions to use such means as the Lord
does offer unto us of deliverance out of the same, and not be like wayward
children, which having taken a fall will not rise. The means which God has
appointed in this behalf is the public authority of the magistrate, who is
the minister of God for the good of them that do well: as for the rest, he
bears not the sword for naught, but is the minister of God (...), an avenger
unto wrath unto those that do evil, Romans 13. 4.

(...).
As, signifies not equality. For as the heavens What is meant by, As we.
are higher then the earth, so does his mercy excel the greatest love amongst
men: as the love of the father, Matthew. 7. 11. and of the mother, Isai. 49. 15.
And by how much his love is greater, by so much he is the slower to wrath or
revenge, Hos. 11. 9. I will not exercise my fierce wrath in destroying Ephraim:
for I am God and not man. Had our Savior been but a man, as his Apostles were
but men, although good men, he would perhaps have been as ready to call down
fire from heaven upon the Samaritanes as they, Luke 9. 54. Had the Lord, who
was offended, been no more merciful toward Niniveh then the Prophet Jonah,
whom they had not offended, Niniveh had been destroyed, Jonah 4. 1. Therefore
Not equality but likeness here to be understood.
equality is not here to be understood, but likeness. For although we cannot
be equal with the Lord, yet we must be like him. And as it is Matthew. 5. 48. Be
ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. But our perfection consists in
uprightness: And therefore although we cannot forgive and love in the like
measure, yet we must in like quality, that is, in truth. So that the meaning
is, We desire the Lord to forgive ^s; for even we also unfeignedly forgive our
brethren. That our forgiving should be sincere and not feigned.


Whenas therefore we do profess that we do so forgive as we desire to be
forgiven, and that we desire so to be forgiven as we forgive, this teaches us
that our forgiveness and reconciliation with our brethren should not be from
the teeth outward, and by halves, but sincere and entire. Many men will speak
friendly to their neighbor, when malice is in their hearts, Psalm. 28. 3. and
are contented that a skin should be drawn over their festred malice, making
outwardly a show of reconciliation and forgiveness whenas inwardly they retein
a secret grudge in their hearts. And again, others will say, Well, I may
forgive him, but I shall never forget him, etc. But these men rather call for
vengeance then mercy at Gods hands, desiring so to be forgiven as they
forgive. And therefore as we desire the Lord not only in word but also in deed
and in truth to forgive us, so must we forgive our brethren that have offended
us even from our hearts, Matthew. 18. 35. And as we desire that the Lord would
not only forgive the punishment but also forget the fault it self and cast it
into the bottom of the sea, Mich. 7. 19. so must we also forgive and forget the
wrongs done unto us. So much of the words.

Uses.
The use which from hence arises is threefold, A threefold use of these words.
viz. of Instruction, Consolation, and Reproof.

For I. those who either desire to make this prayer Uses for instruction.
aright, or hope to have their prayer heard, are here taught how to behave
themselves toward their brethren, namely, that they be in charity with all
men, and if it be possible and as much as in them lies to be at peace ((...))
with all men, Romans 12. 18. For whereas it cannot be avoided but that in this
life we shall both sin against God and offend one another, therefore our
Savior has taught us to join these two together, the desiring of peace of
conscience and reconciliation with God, and the seeking of outward peace and
reconciliation with men.

And first, he that has offended his brother, his 1. He that has offended
must seek for reconciliation.
duty is to seek reconciliation with him before he can look for reconciliation
with God: as our Savior teaches, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to
the altar (seeking reconciliation with God) and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee, (that is, that thou have offended thy brother,
for which thou have made him no satisfaction) leave there thine offering, etc.
So in the Law the Lord ordained that whosoever had offended his neighbor, and
came to seek reconciliation with God by offering sacrifice, he should first
make his brother amends whom he had offended, the same day that he offered for
his trespass, Lev. 6. 5. and then forgiveness is promised of the Lord, v. 7.
Out of our Saviors words, Luke 17. 3, 4. it may be gathered, that it is the
duty of him that has offended to acknowledge his fault with promise of
amendment to him that is offended. And this duty (though very late) was
performed by Joseph's brethren, Genesis 50. 17. But many when they have offended a
man, they do hate him so much the more (as Amnon did Thamar, 2. Sam. 13. 15.)
and are further from reconciliation then the party offended: Because they
having deserved ill of him, as their conscience tells them, therefore they
expect ill from him, and consequently hate him. And of such the Italian proverb
is true, He that offends will never forgive. But these men that will not
forgive them whom they have offended, of all others are farthest from pardon,
because they be farthest from repentance.

Now let us consider how we are to behave our 2. How we are to behave our
selves toward those who have offended us.
selves toward them that offend us. Our duty stands on four degrees: First,
if the offense be not notorious, to take no notice of it, but to dissemble it
and to pass by it. For as Solomon says, Prove. 10. 12. Hatred stirs up
contention: but love covers the multitude of offenses: and Prove. 19. 11. The
discretion of a man makes him slow to anger, and it is his glory to pass by
an offense. Examples, in Saul, 1. Sam. 10. 27. and David, Psalm. 38. 13, 14.

Our first duty therefore when we are wronged Duty 1.
is, not to fret and fume, storm and chafe, and much less to proceed to
brawling or blows: For, as Solomon says, Indignation rests in the bosom of
fools, Eccles 7. 10. but he that is slow to anger is wise, Prove. 14. 29. Means
^o moderate our anger.


And to moderate our anger and desire of revenge, let us consider these two
things: 1. That thy brother which offends thee is the rod of God, etc. 2.
That as thou forgivest so thou must look to be forgiven. If when thou art
wronged, thou chafest, and stormest, and presently revengest thy self, when
thou make this prayer thou do desire the Lord so to deal with thee, that
is, when thou offendest presently to be revenged of thee.

The second duty is, when we have been offended Duty 2.
not to retein anger, purpose or desire of revenge, but freely and from our
hearts to forgive one another, Lev. 19. 18. Romans 12. 19. Ephesians. 4. 32. Col. 3.
13. And thus we are to forgive our brother openly, if he acknowledge his fault
and repent; and that so often as he seeks reconciliation, though it be seven
times a day, Luke 17. 3, 4. If he do not ask forgiveness, but rather persist
in hating and wronging us, yet are we in our hearts to forgive him, and to
desire his good, and to pray for his amendment, Matthew. 5. 44.

Unto the performance of this duty we are to be Reasons moving us to forgive.
moved by these arguments: First, if we will not forgive our neighbor, the
Lord will not forgive us, 1. Reason.
Matthew. 6. 15. Mark 11. 25, 26. 2. If we retein anger 2. Reason.
and desire of revenge, with what face can we pray unto the Lord to forgive us
our great debts, that will not for his sake remit those petty debts of our
brother? And to this purpose notable is that saying of the son of Sirach,
Ecclus 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. He that revengeth shall find vengeance from the Lord,
and he will surely keep his sins in remembrance. For give thy neighbor the
hurt that he has done unto thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven when
thou prayest. One man bears hatred against another, and does he seek pardon
from the Lord? He shows no mercy to a man which is like himself, and does he
ask forgiveness of his own sins? If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, who
will entreat for pardon of his sins? Therefore Paul exhorts us to pray,
lifting up pure hands without anger, 1. Tim. 2. 8. and Peter signifies that
anger interrupteth this exercise of prayer, 1. Pet. 3. 7. 3. If we 3. Reason.
do not forgive our brother, in making this prayer we desire that the Lord
would execute his vengeance upon us rather then crave forgiveness, etc. For
this cause, as Augustine exhorts, we are above all other sins to lay aside
anger and hatred when we come to pray. For this prayer obteineth pardon for
other sins; but for this sin it does not, but rather pulls down vengeance
upon him that desires revenge.

As for those reasons which we pretend for our Pretenses of those who will not
forgive taken away.
anger, hatred, and desire of revenge, they are most vain, especially if we
compare the debts of our brethren to us with those which we desire to be
forgiven of the Lord. For some will allege, The offenses which he has
committed against me are great, and I cannot put them up. But they are nothing
to those sins which thou have committed against God. 2. Yea, but he has
touched my good name. And thou by thy sins have dishonored God, and have
caused his holy name to be blasphemed. 3. Yea, but he is mine inferior, etc.
And what art thou to God? 4. Yea, but the offenses which he has committed
against me are many, and he never makes an end of doing me wrong. But nothing
so many as thy sins are against God: neither do thou put an end to thy
sinning. 5. Yea, but I have deserved well of him. But not so well as God has
deserved of thee. 6. Yea, but I have sought to win him with kindness. And has
not the Lord by his mercies invited thee to repentance? 7. Yea, but he has
been often admonished of his fault. Not so often as thou.

Furthermore, as thy brother offends against 4. Reason.
thee, so for the most part thou offendest against him, either by giving him
occasion of evil, or by anger and impatience conceived against him: therefore
the debt being mutual, thou should be ready to strike off thine own debt by
pardoning of him. And although perhaps thou have not deserved so ill of him,
yet thou have deserved worse of the Lord, who by him as his instrument
corrects thee: and therefore must say, as Mich. 7. 9. I have sinned, and
therefore I will bear the anger of the Lord. Duty 3.


The third degree is (...), forgetfulness; That we should not only forgive
but also forget the offenses done against us, as we desire that the Lord would
forget the sins which we have committed against him. And therefore this art
of oblivion, which Themistocles wished, we are to beg of the Lord.

The fourth is, by Christian charity to labor to 4. We must labor to win him.
win him, and to overcome evil with goodness, Romans 12. 21. And this love must
be exercised 1. by doing good to him that has deserved ill, Psalm. 25. 21, 22.
for thereby also we shall resemble the goodness of the Lord, who although he
has been diversely offended, yet first seeks reconciliation with us. 2. in
commending them to God in our prayers, Matthew. 5. 44.

II. The second use is consolation to them who An use of consolation.
are ready to forgive the offenses of their brethren: For if we do forgive, we
may be assured that we are forgiven, Matthew. 6. 14. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you. For which cause our Savior
Christ pronounces the merciful to be blessed, because they shall obtein
mercy, Matthew. 5. 7. And undoubtedly the true love of our brother for Gods
cause, which is especially to be seen in forgiving offenses, is an evident
argument of the love of God. The love of God is a fruit of faith; for we love
him because we are persuaded that he loved us first: and where faith is there
is justification and remission of sins by imputation of Christ's
righteousness apprehended by faith.

III. The last use is a reproof of those which An use of reproof.
using this prayer notwithstanding retein hatred against their brother or
purpose of revenge. And they are to be reproved both for their hypocrisy and
folly: their hypocrisy; because they not forgiving their neighbors but
reteining malice against them, are not ashamed to lie unto the Lord, saying,
For even we also forgive, etc. Their folly; because using this prayer, Forgive
us as we forgive, not forgiving but purposing and desiring revenge, in stead of
craving pardon they desire God to be revenged on them for their sins, as they
desire to be revenged on their neighbor. Of both which hypocrisy and folly
our lusty gallants, especially our chevaliers and hacksters, are guilty: who
think it the greatest disparagement that may be (which the holy Ghost esteems
to be the glory of a man) to put up an injury; and therefore will die upon a
man rather then suffer the least offense unrevenged. But these men must know,
that not only they are carnal men and remain in their sins, but also that
in seeking private revenge they are satanicall and devilish. And therefore when
Abishai stirred up David to revenge himself upon Shimei, David answered, What
have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye are this day to me (...),
instead of Satan, 2. Sam. 19. 22. to teach us that they are inspired of Satan
that breathe after revenge. Yea, but, says one, I know how to avoid both this
hypocrisy and folly, and yet I will be even with mine enemy too. For either I
will leave out this petition, or use some other form of prayer where this
clause is not, or else I will not pray at all. Yea, but the sentence of our
Savior, whether we use these words or no, stands sure; If ye forgive not men
their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your
trespasses, Matthew. 6. 5. and 18. 33. and therefore those that use such shifts
do but mock God and deceive themselves. Remember the parable, Matthew. 18. and
the saying of Tertullian, Quid est ad pacem Dei accedcre sine pace? ad
remissionem debitorum cumretentione injuriarum? Quomodo placabit patrem iratus
infratrem? etc. What is it to come unto God to seek peace without peace? for
remission of our debts with retention of wrongs? How shall he please the Father
that is angry with his brother?

Verse. 13. (...). And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.
OF the order of this petition and the coupling it The coherence and order.
with the former I have spoken before. For whereas in the former we begged the
grace of justification and remission of sins, in this we crave the grace of
sanctification and the spirit of fortitude whereby we may prevent sin, and be
enabled to resist the tentations of the devil, flesh and the world provoking us
unto sin. In the former we asked freedom from the guilt of sin: In this we
crave deliverance from the evil and corruption of sin, and strength against
tentations alluring us thereunto. But as touching the order we are taught to
ask first justification and freedom from the guilt of sin, and then
sanctification and freedom from committing sin; because justification in
order of nature goes before sanctification. And as touching the coupling of
this with the former, signified in the first word (...), And, we are taught
this duty, ^eing freed from sin, we must become the servants of righteousness
That as we are to desire freedom from the guilt of sin, so we should be
desirous and careful to forsake and prevent sin, and to avoid the occasions
thereof. Forsaking of sin is a companion of the forgiveness of sin: And
whosoever has faith and believes the forgiveness of sin, has also a care
to prevent sin, and an endeavor to resist it and the provocations thereof.
Art thou washed from sin? take heed thou be not again defiled therewith: As
the Spouse says in the C^nticles, chap 5. 3. I have washed my feet; how should
I again defile them? Has Christ justified and freed thee from the curse of thy
sin? stand fast in this liberty which Christ has purchased for thee, and be
not again entangled in this yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1. For he that commits
sin is a servant of sin. Far be it from us to abuse this liberty as an
occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. as though being freed from sin we might
sin more freely. No, we are taught the contrary 1. Pet. 2. 24. Luke 1. 74.

Neither may we think, as secure men do, that Those whom God pardons the
devil temp^eth.
because we are persuaded that our sins are forgiven by Christ we are safe
from sin and need not fear the allurements thereof, and therefore not stand
upon our watch and ward, but live in security. For tentation unto sin is a
consequent of remission of sin: Whom the Lord loves the devil hates: whom
the Lord draws unto himself and pulls into the kingdom of grace, him the
devil labors to pluck back again by all means. Therefore if a man be not
tempted at all, it is a fearful sign that the strong man possesses still his
hold, because all is in quiet: Whereas contrariwise, to be troubled with
tentations, is an argument of Gods favor, if also we have grace to resist
them. Satan fights not with those that be under his bondage and fight as it
were in his camp; but those that are soldiers under the banner of Christ, they
must look to be assaulted. They that be true members of the militant Church
must acknowledge their whole life to be a spiritual warfare, wherein they are
daily to fight against the assaults of Satan, the corruption of their own
flesh, and allurements of the world. Such as are Christ's, Satan desires to
winnow and to sift them as wheat, Luke 2. 31. to such he sends his messenger
to buffet them, 2. Cor. 12. 7. Our Savior therefore knowing his faithful
servants whom he loves to be most subject to tentation, in this place teaches
them to use this prayer; and elsewhere commands them to watch and pray that
they enter not into tentation, Mark 14. 38.

The necessity of which prayer is further to be The necessity of this prayer,
Not to be lead into temptati^n.
enforced by consideration of our enemies likeness to overcome, and our own
weakness to withstand. Sin is deceitful, Heb. 3. 13. The flesh continually
sends forth concupiscences which fight against souls, 1. Pet. 2. The law of
the members carries captive to sin, Romans 7. The things which we desire in
the world are so many baits of the devil to allure us unto sin. The bad
examples of other men are so many stumbling blocks whereat we stumble and fall.
The devil, very cunning, powerful, malicious, diligent. For his craft he is
called the old serpent, cunningly using our own corruptions and inclinations,
the baits of the world, and examples to entangle us. For his power he is called
the prince and the God of this world, John 12. 31. 2. Cor. 4. For his malice he
is called Satan. For his diligence he is said to traverse the earth, Job. 1. 7.
and as Peter says, to go about as a roaring lion, etc. 1. Epist. 5. 8. As for
us, we are prone to sin, naturally drinking in sin like water, Job. 15. 16.
and weak to resist. And therefore seeing our fight is not with flesh and blood,
but with principalities and powers, with worldly governors of the darkness of
this world, with spiritual wickedness in high places, therefore we are to
stand upon our guard, to take unto us the armor of God, and especially by
prayer to flee unto the Lord, that he would establish us by his free Spirit,
that we may be able to stand (...), against the artificial and cunning
assaults of the devil, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, etc.

But let us come unto the words: Wherein the The latter part of the petition
expounds the former.
petition is first propounded, and afterward expounded. For when we desire
that the Lord would not lead us into tentation, we do not desire not to be
tempted, but when we are tempted to be delivered from evil, that we quail not
in the tentation. And so our Savior prays John 17. 15. I do not pray that
thou should take them out of the world, but that thou would keep them from
evil. Therefore these two branches are not to be distinguished into two
petitions, as the adversative particle But shows. For he does not say, Lead
us not into tentation; and deliver us from evil; but thus, Lead us not into
tentation; but deliver us from evil; in the former part setting down our
request negatively, in the latter affirmatively: as if we should say, O Lord,
do not thou give us over to the tempter, nor leave us to our selves; but
withtentation give an issue, that we be not overcome in the tentation, but
preserved and delivered from evil. But we are first to expound the words
severally, and then from thence to infer the uses.

Two sorts of temptations.
Temptations are of two sorts; 1. Probations; 2. Provocations to evil.

1. Probations and trialls: And so men sometimes Of probations and trials.
do tempt, and sometimes God. Men; as when one friend, to try the good will of
another, asks some benefit which he means not to take: or when a man, to
try the fidelity of his servant, either droppeth some money in his way, or
bids him do some difficult things which he would not have him to do, etc.
God tries men, either that his graces may appear to his glory and their good;
or their infirmities may appear, that they may be humbled and more seriously
turn unto him, Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 16. And Of Gods trialls, 1. by prosperity;
these trialls of God are either of the right hand or of the left. The former
are his temporal blessings, which he bestows upon men many times to try
their thankfulness, humility, obedience, charity, affiance in God; or the
contrary. Exodus 16. 4. when the people wanted food, the Lord sent them food
from heaven to tempt or to prove them whether they would walk in his law or no.
If men which are in prosperity would consider that the Lord bestows his
blessings upon them thereby to try them, that they should show what manner of
men they are, doubtless this meditation would be profitable, partly to bewray
their wants unto them, partly to incite them to labor to approve themselves to
the Lord, that proves them. Prove therefore and examine thy self: God has
bestowed these blessings upon thee, so many, so great: Have thou been thankful
to God the giver? has not thine heart been lift up with pride? have thou been
careful to please him that has been so gracious unto thee? or have thou been
displeased with thy self when thou have offended so good a God? have thou been
ready to expose those gifts which thou have to the glory of God and relief of
thy brethren? have thou not trusted in thy riches and thine own means more then
in the providence and blessing of God? If in these respects thou have been
wanting, then by these trialls God would let thee see what thou art, that thou
may be humbled before him, and may truly labor to approve thy self unto
him by thy thankfulness, humility, obedience, charity, affiance reposed in
him, etc.

The trialls of the left hand are such as cross our 2. by afflictions.
desires: as first, when the Lord commands such things as we are loath to do.
So he tempted Abraham, Genesis 22. 1. Secondly, when he exercises us with
afflictions which are hard for flesh and blood to bear. So Job was tempted; and
so the godly in all ages. And therefore afflictions are called tentations, Jam.
1. 2. 1. Pet. 1. 7. laid upon them of God to try their faith, and their
patience, their obedience, and their love, etc. and are therefore called
trialls of faith, Jam. 1. 3. Revel. 2. 10. The devil shall cast some of you
into prison, that ye may be tried. Ecclus 27. 5. The furnace proves the
potters vessel: so do tentations try men's thoughts, Pro. 17. 3. And as by
winnowing the wheat is tried and severed from the chaff, so is the sound
Christian from the hypocrite by affliction. Has the Lord therefore laid any
cross upon thee? consider that he has done it to try thee. Examine therefore
thy self if the Lord has let thee see thine own weakness: let the sight
thereof humble thee, and make thee more careful for the time to come, and
labor to approve thy self unto the Lord by thy humble, patient, thankful and
cheerful bearing of the cross. For as James says, chap. 1. 12. Blessed is
the man that indureth temptation: For when he shall be found approved, he shall
receive the crown of life which God has promised to them that love him.
Thirdly, thus God also tries his servants by suffering heresies, and
permitting the wicked to live among them: 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be
heresies, that they which are approved may be known, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Jud. 2. 22.
Seeing therefore all these trialls of God are for our good, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. we are
not to pray that we may not be tried, but rather contrariwise, that we may be
tried, and being tried may be found approved, Psalm. 26. 2. and 139. 23.

Temptations which be for evil are either provocations Of tentations for and
unto evil.
unto evil, and therefore evil; or punishments of evil, and therefore just. In
the former sense tentation is the provocation of a man unto evil: And that
proceeds from one of these three fountains, the Flesh, the World, the Devil.

1. As touching the flesh, James says chap. 1. 13, 1. Of the (...).
14. Let no man say that is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil; neither tempts he any man (namely, to evil.) But every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence and is enticed,
Matthew. 15. 19. Out of the heart proceed (...), evil reasonings, or thoughts.

2. The world is said to tempt, either in respect II. of the world.
of men in the world, or worldly things. Men tempt to evil, either of
punishment; as when by captious questions they seek to bring a man into danger:
which Christ calls tempting, Matthew. 22. 18. Or else to evil of sin: and
that either they do by counsel and allurement, as Jonadab did Amnon, 2. Sam.
13. 5. Achitophel, Absalom, 2. Sam. 16. 21. Or example, by words, or deeds. By
words alluring: so did 1. By words.
Joseph's mistress, Genesis 39. 7, 12. the harlot, Prove. 7. 13, etc. and 1. 10,
14. So by entising words Jezebel tempted Ahab, ^. Kings 21. 7. 25. By example.
A 2. By example.
sin committed in the notice of another is committed against him, and
destroys him as much as in the offender lies. For as Augustine says, As he
that lusts after a woman has committed adultery with her though she remain
undefiled, so etc. For every sin committed in the notice of our brother is a
scandal provoking him to the like; yea and, as the Apostle says, destroying of
our brother for whom Christ died, Romans 14. 15. 1. Cor. 8. 11. Where by the way
men must note, that those who provoke others to sin are in that action the
very instruments of Satan: and therefore are worthy to be enterteined as Christ
did Peter, Matthew. 16. 22, 23. Avaunt, Satan; for thou art a scandal unto me: or
as David did Abishai tempting him to revenge, What have I to do with you, ye
sons of Zeruiah, that ye are in stead of Satan unto me this day? 2. Sam. 19.
22.

The things in the world whereby men are tempted 3. By the desires thereof.
are either the desires or the terrors of the world: For sometime the world
allureth unto evil by promising good things, sometimes terrifieth from good by
threatening evil things. The desires of the world, that is, the things desired
in the world, (as in general, peace and prosperity; in particular, pleasure,
profit, preferment, and glory in the world) are many times so many baits of
sin, and snares of Satan: baits, in respect of the getting; and snares, in
respect of the using of them. For sin, being in it self ugly and fearful if
it should come in its own likeness, being the hook of the devil, therefore it
is covered with the show sometimes of pleasure, sometimes of profit, sometimes
of preferment, sometimes of glory, as with a bait, that the voluptuous man with
desire of pleasure, the covetous man by coveting after profit, the ambitious
man by gaping after preferment might swallow the hook of the devil to their
perdition. Men had therefore need to look unto the means of getting their
desires: for when they cannot be got but by sin, they are the baits of the
devil. In respect of using, they are snares of the devil, whenas men's minds and
hearts are entangled with them so as they cannot mind or affect heavenly
things. If they be called to the worship of God and means of their salvation,
they have their worldly excuses, as those in the Gospel, Luke 14. 18. If they
come to the worship of God, if they hear the word, if they call upon God by
prayer, their heart notwithstanding goes a whoring after their worldly
desires, whereby they are so fettered as that they cannot freely set their
hearts and minds on better things. Men had therefore need to take heed unto
themselves, that they use the world as though they used it not; that they
possess the things of the world, and be not possessed of them: For if once
they set their hearts upon them, and be wholly addicted unto them, they fall
into tentation and snares of the devil, and into many foolish and noisome
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, 1. Tim. 6. 9. As the good
things in the world are many By evils and crosses.
times baits and snares to allure men to evil, and to entangle them therewith;
so the evils and crosses which be in the world are many times terrors to scare
and terrify men from God. If thou embrace godliness and sincerely profess
the truth, then, says the world, thou shall not only bereave thy self of that
pleasure, profit and preferment which thou might have enjoyed, but thou
shall live in misery, in want, disgrace and contempt; ^ay, it may so be that
thou shall lose thy goods and hazard thy life. Thus by allurements on the one
side and terrors on the other side many men are tempted with Demas to forsake
God, and to embrace this present world. But we must be careful to make Moses
his choice, Heb. 11. 14, 15, 16. remembering that this life is but a moment in
respect of immortality, and therefore that it is not only mere folly but
extreme madness to hazard, nay indeed to lose, the eternal fruition of God
and all happiness in heaven for the momentany fruition of sin in this world.
The desires of the world are but vanities in comparison of heavenly blessings.
The crosses and terrors of the world are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed. And so much of the tentations of the world: Which in respect of the
men, who are the instruments of the devil, tempts instrumentally; in respect
of the things, which either are the baits and snares of the devil to allure to
evil, or the bugbears of the devil to terrify from good, it tempts (if I may
so speak) objectively or occasional^y, ministering the objects to the flesh or
the devil: which two tempt to evil efficienter, as the efficients.

3. But now we are to speak of the tentations of III. of the devil.
the devil, who is the principal tempter unto evil* and is therefore called
the tempter, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Matthew. 4. 3. Now his tentations may diversely be
distinguished. I. That they are either immediate or mediate: Immediate, when he
casts a wicked thought or concupi^cence, as it were a fiery dart, into the
mind or heart of man: And such are called the suggestions of the devil: Which
if they be not admitted, but resisted and presently nipped in the head and
extinguished as a spark cast into water, they hurt us not; but if once they
being enterteined do take hold on us, they will both infect and inflame us,
John 13. 2. But for the most part he deals by means, using either as his
instruments sometimes the flesh, that is, man's own corruption; and sometimes
also the mediation of other men, as once he did the serpent; or else, as
occasions and objects, the desires and terrors of the world.

The chief help and instrument of the devil is the 1.
flesh, that is, a man's own corruption; by which he has all the advantage he
has against us. The flesh is as it were the devils bawd, prostituting the soul
to his tentations, and betraying us into the hands of the devil. And as he
knows in general our pronenesse to sin, by which he takes advantage
against us, so he observes and by observation acquainteth himself with the
particular inclinations, humors and dispositions of men, following and fitting
them in their humors, and by all means egging them on to the extremities of
those things whereunto they are themselves inclined: And thus he works
effectually in the hearts of men, carrying them captive to the obedience of his
will.

2. He uses other men as his instruments; sometimes friends, sometimes foes.
Friends; So he used Jobs wife and friends to ^empt him to despair; Peter, to
dissuade Christ from the work of our redemption; Abishai, to tempt David unto
revenge; Jezebel, to egg on Ahab to all wickedness. Sometimes he uses foes:
As when they are incensed by them unto anger, malice, and desire of revenge.
For these are the works of the devil; and he that yields to these things,
gives place to the devil, Ephesians. 4. 27. So Shimei was the instrument of the
devil, and his ^ongue set on fire from hell, Jam. 3. 6. set on work by Satan,
to provoke David to impatience and sin.

3. Sometimes he uses (as has been said) the desires of the world as his
baits and snares; therein cunningly fitting the several humors of men, by
offering the bait of pleasure to the voluptuous, of profit to the covetous, of
preferment to the ambitious, of honor and renown to the vainglorious. Thus
(although in vain) he assaulted Christ, Matthew. 4. Sometimes by threatening
future dangers and crosses, he sets upon the weak and inconstant. Sometimes
by aggravating the present troubles, either in respect of the greatness, or
the length, or something extraordinary in them, or by comparisons with others,
to move them to impatience, or to bring them to despair.

II. The tentations of the devil serve either to overthrow men's faith or
obedience: Their faith; partly by infecting their judgments with errors,
partly by casting doubts into their mind; or contrariwise Tentations of errors
and heresies;
causing them to presume. First, That he may infect men with errors, he is
many times a lying spirit in the mouths of those that take upon them to be
teachers of others. Secondly, he uses to cast doubts Of doubti^g;
into men's minds concerning Gods love toward them, concerning their election,
justification, and salvation. And his especial motives hereunto are 1. the
calamities of this life; 2. the conscience of sin.

As touching the former, It is the usual practice of the devil to persuade men
being in affliction that they are not in Gods favor, either in respect of
their continuance, or greatness, or by comparison of their distressed estate
with the prosperity of others. This was the main argument that the devil used
to assail the faith of Job with by his wife and friends, That because he was so
greivously afflicted he was not the friend of God but an hypocrite: and this
assault made him sometimes to stagger, 13. 24. Why hidest thou thy face from
me, and esteemest me as thine enemy? So David, Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? But this tentation is the most effectual when
comparison is made with others, Psalm. 73. 12, 13. Jer 12. 1. And although reply
be made, that the Lord many times does greivously afflict his own children, he
will allege that never any was so afflicted either for the length or for the
greatness, etc. The second motive is conscience of sin committed. For the
devil, that extenuateth a sin when it is to be committed, making of a
mountain a molehill; when it is committed, he will aggravate the same, and of
a molehill make a mountain, persuading a man that his sin is greater then may
be forgiven, as we see in Cain and Judas.

On the other side, he tempts men to vain presumption, Of presumption.
that it may occupy the room of faith: As when he brings mere natural men
into a conceit of themselves that they have a good faith to God, that they love
him with all their hearts, that they are highly in Gods favor; First, by
flattering them in their ignorance and blindness. For the more ignorant and
sottish a man is in Christianity, the greater conceit commonly he has of
himself. Secondly, by making them please themselves in the performance of some
outward works; wherein Popish devotion consists, Mich. 6. 6. Luke 18. 12.
Thirdly, by comparing themselves with others that be notorious sinners, Luke
18. 11. Fourthly, by letting them see the falls of others that seem forward
professors, he makes them please themselves in their ignorance and security;
as if all profession of religion were but hypocrisy, and they in the only
way. Fifthly, by consideration of their great prosperity which, as Solomon
says, slays fools, Prove. 1. 32.

The tentations of Satan touching obedience Tentations touching obedience:
serve either to withdraw men from good or to draw them to evil. Of the former
there be so many examples as there are duties to be performed: As namely, in
the duties of piety and of Gods worship; as 1. Hearing of the word: Either he
keeps 1. in hearing the word,
men from coming to hear; or when they are come, he withdraws away their
minds by putting other matters into their heads; or when they have heard, he
steals away the seed of Gods word out of their hearts, or by the allurements
of the world choketh it. 2. Prayer: Either he keeps men 2. in p^ayer,
from prayer, saying as Job 12. 15. What will it profit us to call upon him? or
if they do, he labors by all means to withdraw their minds from that
heavenly exercise, by suggesting other (and for the most part worldly)
cogitations. 3. As touching 3. in the sacrament.
the sacrament; Either he nourishes men in hatred, etc. that they are unfit to
come; or when they do come, instead of examining and looking into themselves,
they busy themselves in looking into the sufficiency of the minister,
examining the worthynesse of other receivers, or prying into their behaviors,
whether they sit or kneel, or how they behave themselves.

Of the latter sort there be so many examples as Tentations drawing men unto
evil.
there are sins forbidden: Whereunto he sometimes provokes men by
suggestion; as he did David, 1. Chron. 21. 7. to number the people; and Judas,
to betray his Master, John 13. 2. Sometimes allureth by desires of the world,
which are his baits; Sometimes inticeth by the counsel or example of others,
which are his instruments; Sometimes and most ordinarily abuses a man's own
corruption, which is his bawd; Sometimes he draws thereunto as a means to
escape danger, as an evasion out of trouble, etc. So foolish are men that they
can be persuaded by the devil to seek an issue out of some bodily trouble or
danger with the hazard of their souls. Sometimes he clotheth sin with the
cloak of virtue.

So much briefly shall serve to have spoken of tentations as they are
provocations to evil. Against which we pray not that we be not tempted; but,
that the Lord would not in his fierce wrath for a punishment of our sin lead
us into tentation, nor give us over to our own concupiscences to be hardened in
sin, or to the world to be carried away with the desires thereof, or to the
devil to be overcome in tentation and to be carried away captive to the
performance of his will. For howsoever men willingly run into these tentations,
as the beast goes cheerfully to the slaughter; yet there can be no greater
judgment inflicted upon a man in this life then to be given over to his own
lusts or to the allurements of the world or tentations of the devil. Now this
giving over men in tentation is that which our Savior calls leading into
tentation: Of which we are now to speak.

Lead us not into, or rather, bring or carry us not into, (...). Where first
we must note the person to whom we speak; and secondly the thing against which
we pray. The person; Do not thou lead us. Which when some have considered they
have chosen rather to read thus, And do not thou permit or suffer us to be led
into tentation. But we must not teach our Savior to speak; but rather with
humility learn the true meaning of his speech.

Yea but, say they, this prayer is superfluous: For Object.
God tempt^th no man, as James says, chap. 1. 13.

It is one thing to tempt, and another thing to Answ.
lead into tentation: as it is one thing to execute punishment on an evil-doer;
and another, to deliver him over to an executioner: the one is the act of the
judge; the other of the hangman.

Yea, but we must understand this of permission Object.
only, or else we shall make God the author of sin.

God does not only permit men to be temp^ed Answ.
How God may be s^id to tempt.
but also leads into tentation. The like phrases are usual in the
Scriptures: Exodus 7. 3. Induravit cor Pharaonis, he hardened Pharaohs heart.
Isai. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear? Romans 1. 24, 26, 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. God shall send
them strong delusion. All which words do signify not only a permission but
also a work of God, (...) and yet notwithstanding he is not the author of
sin. In every tentation, even unto evil, God has an hand: And the same
tentation which proceeds from Satan or our own corruption may also be said to
come from God. But in the same tentation we are to distinguish the work of God,
which is good; from the work of the flesh or of the devil, which is evil. As it
comes from God, it is either a triali or a chastisement, which are works of
mercy; or a punishment, which is a work of justice: But as it comes from Satan
or the flesh, it is a provocation unto evil, and therefore a sin. Such is the
wisdom and goodness of the Lord, that he knows by evil instruments to
effect his own good work. The tentation of Job proceeded from God and from
Satan. God by that means tried his patience; the devil provoked him to
impatience and despair. When David numbered the people, it is said that God
moved him so to do, 2. Sam. 24. 1. and Satan provoked him to number the people,
1. Chron. 21. 1. Gods work was a chastisement of David, and punishment of the
people; Satan's work, an incitation to sin. When Pharaoh detained the people
of Israel, it is said that God hardened his heart, and that Pharaoh hardened his
heart, Exodus 8. 15, 32. and 9. 34. As it came from God, it was a punishment; as
from himself, a fruit of his own flesh, and so a sin. Again, we must further
distinguish betwixt the tentation of God, and of the flesh and the devil. The
flesh, when it tempts, sends forth evil concupiscences, which allure men to
evil and withdraw from God, Jam. 1. 14. The devil, when he tempts, casts
into men's minds, either by himself or by means, ill motions and suggestions.
God does not instill into men's minds ill motions; as the devil and the flesh
do: But he is said to tempt in these respects: 1. By offering the occasion or
the object of sin for our trial; howsoever we through our own corruption or
instigation of Satan take occasion by the trial of sinning: 2. By withholding
and withdrawing his grace, which he is not bound to vouchsafe unto any, but in
justice might deny to all: 3. By giving them over either to their own lusts or
to the tentations of the devil, who is his executioner, as a just punishment of
their former sins. And in this sense God is said to harden men's hearts: not
that he makes them of soft hard, but, being hard already, gives them over to
their own corruptions and the tentations of Satan further to be hardened; which
hardness they further gather to themselves, willingly committing sin with
greediness. Now this the Lord may do most justly: For when men have hardened
themselves, what should bind God to soften them? He has mercy on whom he will,
by softning them: and whom he will not have mercy on, them in justice he
hardneth. And who shall constrain him to show mercy in softning where in
justice he may harden?

This must teach us, 1. not to dispute with God, but to justify him in all his
judgments, which in justice he might exercise upon all, howsoever in mercy he
spares some: and 2. to be thankful unto him for vouchsafing us to be in the
number of those whom in mercy he so softeneth, when in justice he might have
hardened us.

Thus we see in what sense the Lord is said to lead men into tentation: not
that he suffers them only to be led; but also that he gives them over to be
tempted, and in the tentation to take the foil. 2. Whereas our Savior teaches
us thus to pray, That the Lord would not lead us into tentation, we gather this
consolation, That howsoever we are assaulted A consolation: Satan can neither
tempt nor overcome without Gods permission.
continually by the flesh, the world, and the devil, yet we shall not be
overcome except the Lord himself lead us into tentation. Satan goes about
continually like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour: but he cannot
tempt, except it please God to bring us upon the stage, as he did Job: nor in
tempting overcome us, unless the Lord give us over into his hands. For he that
is in us is greater then he that is in the world, 1. John 4. 4. And if we be
born of God, the evil one shall not touch us to hurt us, 1. John 5. 18. The
devil desires to sift and to winnow us as wheat: but our Savior has prayed
for those that believe in him, that our faith may not fail, Luke 22. 32. The
devils could not enter into the herd of swine without special leave. Neither
could Satan touch the cattle of Job until he had commission from God: and
further then his tedder he cannot go.

Seeing therefore in all tentations the Lord rules the action and overruleth
the tempter, our duty is, in all tentations to flee unto him, praying that he
will not lead us into tentation.

So much of the person to whom we make this request. Let us now consider the
thing against which we pray: That we be not led into tentation. Our Savior
does not teach us to pray that we be not tempted at all: For it is not an evil
thing, to be That it is not evil to be tempted, but good to God^ children.
tempted, simply; but rather to the children of God a good and a necessary
thing. James bids the faithful rejoice when they fall into tentations, Jam.
1. 2. He that is not tempted, says the son of Sirach, he knows but a
little, 34. 10. and as Augustine, No man knows In Psalm. 60.
himself unless he be tempted. Besides, we are not soldiers under the banner
of Christ, unless we fight with the flesh, the world, and the devil: and we
sight not with them, unless we be tempted of them: neither must we look to be
crowned, unless first we strive. Nay, if we be not tempted, it is a sign that
he needs not assault us. Lastly, all tentations turn to the good of those
that love the Lord, Romans 8. serving either to humble them by the sight of their
weakness, 2. Cor. 12. 9. or to prevent sin in them, making them more wary
and circumspect for the time to come; or to manifest Gods graces in them, that
they may be found approved, and so become happy: For as James says, chap. 1.
12. Blessed is the man that endures tentation: for when he shall be found
approved he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
those that love him. We do not therefore pray that we be not tempted, but, that
we be not led into tentation; that is, That when we are tempted the Lord would
not leave us unto our selves, nor give us over to the tempter, nor suffer us to
be overcome in the tentation, nor to be tempted above our power: but that it
would please him to stablish us by his free spirit, and minister strength unto
us, giving with the tentations an issue, that we may bear them. What is meant
by, Deliver us from evil.
And so our Savior expounds himself in the words following, But deliver us
from evil: Which, as has been said, are the exposition of the former.
Tertullian, Clausula haec interpretatur quid sit, Ne nos inducas in
tentationem, hoc est, sed erue nos a malo, This clause interprets what this
is, Lead us not into tentation, that is, but deliver us from evil.

By evil we are to understand all the enemies of our salvation; the flesh,
world, and devil, sin and hell, and all punishments of sin; but especially
the devil, who in the Scriptures is called (...), the evil one.

(...), deliver, signifies two things: 1. To keep and preserve, to protect and
defend from evil, that we fall not into it. In which sense Christ is said to
deliver us from the wrath which is to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. And our Savior
making the same prayer, uses in stead of this word, (...), keep or preserve,
John 17. 13. 2. Cor. 1. 10. Which argues, that of our selves we lie open and
naked to our spiritual enemies, unless it please the Lord to keep and to
protect us from them. 2. It signifies to deliver, and as it were to pull us
out of the hands, that is, power, of our spiritual enemies: as the word is
used, Luke 1. 74. Matthew. 27. 43. (...), let him deliver him. Romans 7. 24. (...);
who will deliver me? 2. Tim. 4. 17, 18. Which teaches us, 1. that naturally we
are in subjection to our spiritual enemies; 2. that it is not in our power to
free our selves out of this bondage; but it is the merciful work of the Lord,
of whom we are therefore taught to crave deliverance.

This deliverance which we crave is either inchoate in this life or perfect in
the life to come: both by Christ; Luke 1. 74.

Duties in prayer.
I. To pray against tentation, Luke 22. 40. 2. Cor. 12. 8. to escape it. II. To
pray in fervencie and faith.

Wants to be bewailed.
I. The malice and power of our spiritual enemies that fight against us,
Ephesians. 6. 12. The flesh sending forth concupiscences which fight against the
soul; the law of our members carrying us captive unto sin: The world by her
enticements alluring unto evil, and carrying us out of the way, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
by her terrors terrifying from good, by bad example seducing us: The devil our
mortal enemy, going about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1.
Pet. 5. 8. II. Our weakness to resist; our negligence in not preparing and
arming our selves against tentations, but rather by idleness and security
sweeping and preparing a room for the tempter, Luke 11. 25. III. Our pronenesse
to sin, our quailing in tentations, our running into tentations, and seeking
baits of sin. IV. Our subjection to sin and Satan, Romans 7. 14. and
exhibition of our members as instruments to the tempter. V. The evil of sin
with which we are corrupted, and the evil of punishment which we have deserved.
VI. Our inability in our selves to free us from these evils.

Contrary graces to be desired.
In sense of which wants we are with fervencie to crave the contrary graces:
Which we are to distinguish according to the former distinctions of tentations
and evils from which we desire to be preserved and delivered. And first for the
tentations of God or trials; we do not pray against them, but rather for them,
I. That the Lord would try us, Psalm. 26. 2. and 139. 23. and II. That when he
does prove us, we may be approved; or if it please him by the tentation to
discover unto us our weakness, he would turn it to our good, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. that
both in respect of our former weakness we may be humbled, and for the time to
come be made more circumspect.

But as touching those ^entations which are provocations How we are to pray
against taentations.
unto evil; we pray against them, I. in general, That our hearts may not be
inclined to any evil, Psalm. 141. 4. and therefore that the Lord would neither
give us over to the tempter to be overcome, nor suffer us to be tempted above
our power, neither leave us to our selves and forsake us in the tentation, but
that it would please him to stablish us by his free spirit, Psalm. 51. 14. and
assist us with his grace (which will be sufficient for us, 2. Cor. 12. 9. that
being confirmed and strengthened by him, 1. Pet. 5. 10. we may not fall away in
the time of tentation, Luke 8. 13. but may be able to withstand our enemies in
the evil day, and having finished all things may stand fast, Ephesians. 6. 13.
being kept by his power through faith unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. And II.
more specially, 1. against the tentations of How we^ must pray against
tentations of the flesh*
the flesh we are to pray, That howsoever sin dwell in us, yet it may not
reign in our mortal body, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof, or
give o^r members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 6. 12, 13. And
especially, That he would not punish our sin with sin, giving us over to
our own lusts, Psalm. 81. 13. Romans 1. 24. or to the hardness of our own hearts,
Ephesians. 4. 18. or to ^ reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. to commit sin with
greediness. But contrariwise, That he will give unto us his sanctifying
spirit, not only to fight against the flesh, but also to mortify our earthly
members, Col. 3. 5. as our inordinate affections and evil concupiscence; and to
crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24. and that being renewed
by his spirit, we may no longer be carnal men but spiritual, walking not
after the flesh but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1.

2. As touching the world; We also pray, That How we must pray against the
tentations of the world.
we may not be carried away with the world or overcome thereby, but that by
faith we may overcome the world, 1. John 5. 4. And whereas the world is said to
tempt in respect either of the men or the things in the world: and whereas the
men tempt either to evil of punishment and danger by captious questions, or to
evil of sin; either by bad speeches, enticing, incensing, counselling; or
lewd examples: We therefore against their captions desire the spirit of
wisdom, that we be not ensnared; and against their offenses and scandals
either in word or deed, constancy and perseverance, that we do not stumble or
fall, nor be conformed to the world, Romans 12. 2. As for the things of the
world, they are either the desires thereof, or the terrors and crosses. In
respect of the desires of the world, which are the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1. John 2. 16. the world is said especially
to tempt; they being the baits of sin and snares of the devil. Against these
we pray, That we may have grace from above to renounce all worldly lusts, Tit.
2. 12. to be wained from the world, to use it as though we used it not, 1. Cor.
7. 31. to be crucified to the world and the world to us, Gal. 6. 14. to live as
pilgrims and strangers upon earth and citizens of heaven, minding heavenly
things, and contemning all the desires of the world as mere vanities in
comparison of heavenly joys. As touching the crosses and afflictions of this
life, which are worthily called tentations; We are to pray, That God will not
suffer us to be tempted above our power, etc. 1. Cor. 10. 13. but that the Lord
in his good time would either release us from them in whole or in part, or else
arm us with patience to bear whatsoever he shall lay upon us, that we may
endure tentation, and, being found approved, we may receive the crown of life,
Jam. 1. 12. whereof the afflictions of this life are not worthy, Romans 8. 18.

3. As concerning the tentations of the devil; We How we must pray against the
tentations of the devil.
desire that the Lord would tread Satan under our feet, Romans 16. 20. or at the
least that it would please him to arm us with the complete armor of God, that
we may be able to stand against the cunning sleights, (...), of the devil,
Ephesians. 6. 11. and especially with faith, whereby we may quench all the fiery
darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6. 16.

Now in all these we are to pray, as our Savior teaches us both by his
example, John 17. 15. and by his precept in this place, O Lord, we do not
desire not at all to be tempted, but that we may be delivered from evil: that
is, from the tyranny of the flesh, that it hold not us captive unto sin; from
the allurements of the world, that they do not draw us unto sin; from the
assaults of the devil, that he prevail not against us; from the punishments of
sin, and judgments which by sin we deserve, so far as our deliverance
therefrom may stand with Gods glory and our good; and lastly, from the
corruption of sin it self; in regard whereof we desire the Lord would endue
us more and more with the Spirit of sanctification, applying unto us the merits
and efficacy of Christ's death to mortify our sin, and of his resurrection to
restore us to newness of life; wherein we are to proceed from faith to faith,
and from one measure of grace to a greater, until we come to a perfect man in
Christ.

And as there are two degrees of our deliverance from these our spiritual
enemies: the one begun and imperfect, by sanctification in this life; the other
full and perfect in the life to come, which is our full redemption and
glorification: So we pray, not only that we may be freed from our corruptions
in part, but also may be fully conformed to the glorious image of the Son of
God; and therefore pray that we may be delivered from every evil thing, and be
preserved to his heavenly kingdom, 2. Tim. 4. 18. whereby it appears, that
as in the fifth petition we desired pardon of sin and justification by faith;
so here we cra^ strength against sin, and freedom from the corruption, and
sanctification by Gods Spirit, and finally the end of our faith, which is the
salvation of our souls: For when we pray to be delivered from evil, we desire
deliverance also from hell, and consequently salvation in heaven.

Now as these graces are to be asked in fervencie That we must pray for these
graces in assurance of faith.
and affection, so also in assurance of faith that we shall be heard. For as
the Apostle James chap. 1. 5, 6. teaches, If any man desire wisdom of God,
wisely to endure tentation, he must ask it in faith. And to this faith the holy
Ghost does most notably encourage us in the Scriptures: Prove. 18. 10. The name
of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs unto it, and in edito
collocatur, and is placed on high. The Lord, says Peter, 2. Epist. 2. 9.
knows to deliver the godly out of ^entation. And of our Savior the Apostle
says, Heb. 2. 18. In that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. Christ has overcome our enemies: the devil, Col. 2. 15.
the world, John 16. 33. and to this end gave himself for us that he might
deliver us from the hands of our spiritual enemies. He that is in us is
stronger then he that is in the world, 1. John 4. 4. Neither shall any be able
to pull us out of his hands, John 10. 28. Christ, whose prayer is always
heard, John 11. 42. has prayed for us that our faith shall not fail, Luke 22.
32. and that we may be kept from evil, John 17. 15. The Lord has promised, and
is faithful to perform, that he will not suffer us to be tempted above our
power, but with the tentation will give an issue that we may bear it, 1. Cor.
10. 13. And finally, Joel 2. 32. he has promised, that whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Our faith therefore concerning
assistance against tentation and deliverance from evil must be grounded not
upon any conceit of our own strength or worthiness, but on the power, mercy,
faithfulness and truth of God in his promises, and on the mediation and
intercession of Jesus Christ.

Duties to be performed in our lives.
I. General: 1. To avoid tentations and occasions of evil; To shake off
slothfulness, and diligently to employ our selves either in good exercises or
in the works of our callings: 2. To resist tentations, and to withstand them:
3. To be vigilant and watchful, Mark 13. 33. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Ephesians. 5. 15.
(...), to walk circumspectly, to shake off security; to keep a watch over our
senses; To make a covenant with our eyes, Job 31. 1. To desire the Lord to turn
away our eyes from beholding vanities, Psalm. 119. 37. 4. To get unto us the
whole armor of God; as, the shield of faith, etc. Ephesians. 6. 12, 13, 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.

II. More particular: 1. To deny our selves; to crucify the flesh, and not to
satisfy the lusts thereof; to abstein from fleshly lusts, 1. Pet. 2. 11. 2. To
renounce the world and the desires thereof, 1. John 2. 15, 16. 3. To resist the
devil; not to yield to his motions, but rather practice the contrary; not to
believe his persuasions, 1. Pet. 5. 9. Jam. 4. 7. 4. To hate all sin, as we
desire to be delivered from all; To retein no one sin, with Herod; To think
no sin small; To abstein also from all show of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. To
desire full deliverance, Phil. 1. 23. Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved.
Romans 7. 24. Quis me liberabit? Who shall deliver me?

Hypocrisy discovered.
Here then is discovered the hypocrisy of those, 1. Who pray that God would
not lead them into tentation, and themselves run into tentation; as those
that go to plays and give themselves to idleness; 2. Who by security and
idleness make preparation for the unclean spirit, Matt. 12. 44. 3. Who take
thought for the flesh to satisfy the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. 4. Who are
addicted to the world and the desires thereof, as pleasures, profits (1. Tim.
6. 9. Those that will be rich fall into tentation, etc.) and preferments; 5.
Who have made a covenant with hell, Isai. 28. 15. who pray to be delivered from
sin, and yet will not forsake their sin, as their drunkenness, whoredom,
usury, etc. but harden their hearts, and therefore shall fall into evil, Prove.
28. 14. who are so far from desiring full deliverance from evil by their
dissolution and translation out of this life, that rather they have placed
their paradise here upon earth.

The Conclusion.
HItherto we have spoken of the petitions: Now follows the Conclusion of the
Lords prayer, in these words, For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the
glory, for ever and ever, Amen. For howsoever This conclusion authentical and
necessary.
this clause is omitted of the Latin interpreters, and is rejected by Erasmus,
yet was it added by our Savior, and registered by Matthew. For first, the Greek
copies have it: secondly, the Syriack Paraphrast translateth it: thirdly, the
Greek writers expound it; as Chrysostom and Theophylact: and fourthly it is
not only consonant with the rest of the Scriptures, but also in this prayer
has a necessary use. For we have heard that praise is to be joined with
prayer: and in prayer two things required; fervencie, and faith: Now as the
petitions especially contained a specification of our desires, so this
conclusion contains partly a confirmation of our faith joined with praising
God, in these words, For thine is the kingdom, and the power and the glory,
for ever and ever: and partly a testification both of our faith and of the
truth of our desires in all the former petitions, in the word Amen.

Our Savior teaches us to confirm our faith by Our faith confirmed by this
conclusion by three reasons drawn from three of Gods attributes.
three reasons. For that they be reasons the word For signifies. And reasons
they are not so much to persuade God that he would grant our requests as to
persuade and assure our selves that we shall obtein. The reasons are taken
neither from our own worthiness nor from the dignity of our prayers, (for if
our faith were to be grounded thereon, we should neither dare to pray nor hope
to be heard) but from the nature and attributes of God; that we might know that
the obteining our requests depends not upon our own worth but on the power
and goodness of God. The reasons, I say, are drawn from three attributes of
God: viz. his eternal Kingdom, eternal Power, eternal Glory. His is the
kingdom: therefore he has right to give us whatsoever we desire: His is the
power and might: therefore he is able to grant our requests: His is the glory,
both of giving all good things, and also of all good things given; and
thereunto our requests do tend: and therefore he is ready and willing to grant
our requests for the manifestation of his own glory. And this we shall the
easier believe if we consider to whom we ascribe these things; namely, to our
heavenly Father, whose s^at is in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all,
Psalm. 103. 19. who is in heaven, and does what he will, Psalm. 115. 3. who
sits on the heavens as his throne, full of majesty and glory, and rides on
the heavens for our help. Neither does the right, power and glory of giving
benefits temporal and concerning this life alone belong unto God, but also of
everlasting blessings in heavenly things after this life is ended. For his is
the eternal kingdom, eternal power, and eternal glory, signified in those
words, for ever and ever; which are to be referred to all the three attributes.

What kingdom here signifies.
But first of his kingdom: Which here signifies 1. generally the universal
kingdom of God, which some call the kingdom of his power, whereby he rules
and governs all things, Psalm. 103. 19. 2. Chron. 20. 6. and in regard whereof
the right of all things belongs to him, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Psalm. 24. 1.

This then teaches us two things: 1. That our heavenly Father is the absolute
Lord and owner of all his creatures; who as he is the Creator so is he also
the possessour of heaven and earth: in whose hand all good things are to bestow
as it pleases him. This therefore must encourage us with assurance of faith to
make our requests to ou^ heavenly Father, of whom we cannot ask any good thing,
whether spiritual or temporal, which is not his to bestow. And therefore it
is well said of Seneca, Audacter Deum roga, nihil eum de alieno rogaturus, Ask
boldly of God, seeing thou can ask nothing of him which belongs to another.
2. That our heavenly Father is the sovereigne King and absolute Lord and
Governor over all his creatures, ruling the good, and overruling the evil; to
whose commandment all the good creatures obey, and at whose beck they are ready
to do us good: And as for the wicked either men or angels; they are so
overruled by the almighty providence of God, that when they seek to annoy us,
they are against their purpose made the instruments of God to do us good.

And whereas our Savior teaches us to say, What is meant by, ^hine is the
kingdom.
Thine is the kingdom, we are to observe that the kingdom of government which
Kings and Princes have, it is the kingdom of God; whose ministers and
leiutenants they are, Romans 13. 4. by whom they reign, Prove. 8. 15. and from
whom all authority is, Romans 13. 4. Which as it must teach them to subordinate
their government unto the Lord, and in him to rule their subjects, because the
kingdom which they exercise is not theirs but Gods, their judgment is not
theirs but the Lords, 2. Chron. 19. 6. so does it teach all subjects to be
subject to their governors so far forth as they are subordinate to the Lord;
because in obeying them they obey the Lord, and in resisting them they resist
God, Romans 13. 2. But if Magistrates and Kings shall leave their order, in
commanding that which God forbids, we are bound to be subordinate to our
supreme King, whose the kingdom is, in whom only we are to obey the inferior
governors, Ephesians. 5. 21. that so far forth as in obeying them we obey also the
Lord, for better it is to obey God then men, Acts 4. 19. and 5. 29. And as to
obey an inferior Magistrate which rebelleth against his Prince, is to rebel
with him; so to obey a Prince or Magistrate rebelling against God, in that
wherein he rebelleth, that is, in unlawful things which he commands, it is
also to rebel against God. So that not only good but also evil Princes and
Magistrates are to be obeyed; but neither good nor bad, unto evil.

More especially the kingdom of God is the The kingdom of grace and glory.
kingdom of grace in this life, and the kingdom of glory in the life to
come. In the former the Lord communicates grace to his servants, ruling in
them by his word and Spirit: In the latter he communicates glory to his
Saints, vouchsafing unto them the fruition of himself, who shall be to them all
in all. Do we therefore desire grace in this life or glory in the life to come?
God is the King of grace and of glory: let us sue to his throne of grace; for
he will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11.

Uses.
1. If God be our King, we are to be encouraged in all our necessities to call
upon him: For it is the property of good kings to hear the suits of their
subjects, and to relieve and defend them.

2. If he be the absolute Lord of all his creatures, and all things whatsoever
be in his power and possession, then ought we not to be distrustfully careful,
but to cast our care upon God and to depend upon him. The earth is the Lords,
and all that Psalm. 24. 1.
therein is. He is a Father that is rich toward all those which put their
trust in him.

3. If God be our King, our duty is to obey him, and to behave our selves
toward him as dutiful subjects. Why call ye me Lord, says our Savior, and
do not the things which I command you?

What is meant by, thine is the power.
And the power, (...). Power belongs in some The (...) between the power of
God and the creatures.
degree to all creatures: but to God it is ascribed after a peculiar manner: In
them it is a faculty proceeding from their nature: in God it is his essence:
Theirs is a power created and received from God, Acts 17. 28. his is uncreated,
eternal, and from himself: Theirs is mixed with impotencie and passive power,
which makes them subject to change: but Gods power is most perfect and pure
without such mixture: Theirs is finite, as themselves are: but his is infinite,
as himself is. And it is infinite 1. in it self: 2. in respect of the multitude
of effects which he is able to work and unto which his power is extended; in
which sense it is said to be infinite extensively: 3. in respect of the
efficacy of working; in which regard it is infinite intensively. It is infinite
extensively: because it is extended to all things, Matthew. 19. 26. Luke 1. 37.
and for that cause is called omnipotency. For the Lord never does so many or
so great things, but he is able to do infinitely more and greater. His power is
extended to all things which either can be done, and that is called his
absolute power: or which he will do, and that is called his active or ordinary
power: For whatsoever God will do that he can do; yea, by his actual power
does it, Psalm. 115. 3. but he can do many things by his absolute power which he
will never do, Matthew. 3. 9. and 26. 33. It is also infinite intensively, in
respect of the efficacy of the action: For the Lord does not work any thing so
effectually or intensively, but he is able to effect it infinitely more
effectually or intensively, Ephesians. 3. 20.

Uses.
Uses, respecting means; I. To humble our selves under the mighty hand of God,
1. Pet. 5. 6. not to be lifted up against him with pride, nor opposed through
obstinacy, 1. Pet. 5. 5. Job 9* 4. Romans 9. 17. Dan. 4. 37. II. To fear God
above all things, and to be afraid to offend him, Matthew. 10. 28. 1. Cor. 10.
22. Are we stronger then the Lord? III. To repose trust in him, Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
For if God be on our side, who can be against us? Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3. Number. 14.
9. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. Jer. 42. 11. There is no good thing but he is able to effect
it; no evil, but he is able to deliver us from it. No creature can help us
unless God use it as his instrument for our good: no creature can hurt us
unless God use it as the rod of his anger. The devil is strong; but he is not
able to pull us out of Gods hands, nor yet to hinder or stop the course of Gods
blessings toward us.

Uses respecting faith; I. To confirm it in believing any article of our faith;
as, of the resurrection, Matthew. ^2. 29. II. To confirm our faith in the
promises of God, Luke 1. 37. Romans 4. 19, 20, 21. III. In prayer. For which
purpose it is here alleged, Matt. 8. 2. 2. Chron. 20. 6. and 14. 11, 12.
Ephesians. 3. 20. IV. In the assurance of perseverance unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1.
5. Romans 14. 4. John 10. 29. 2. Tim. 1. 12.

What is meant by, thine is the glory.
And the glory] Whereby is meant honor and praise, 1. Tim. 1. 17. For to him
belongs the glory, honor and praise of bestowing all good things: He is the
fountain and author of every good gift, Jam. 1. 17. His is the glory of
hearing and granting our prayers, Psalm. 65. 2. And to his glory whatsoever we
ask according to his will does especially tend. Therefore as by his kingdom
and power he is able, so for his glory he is ready and willing to grant our
requests which we make according to this direction of our Savior. For what
Christ has taught us to ask in his name, that the Lord has promised to give
for his sake, in whom all the promises of God are Yea and Amen, to his glory,
2. Cor. 1. 20.

This therefore serves to confirm our faith. For doubtless such things as
tend to his glory he will grant: especially considering it is his glory to
hear the prayers of his servants, and seeing to him belongs the glory of
giving every good gift: but these things which we ask according to our Saviors
direction do tend to the glory of God, and to that end we ask them: therefore
we may be assured that he will grant our requests so far forth as they stand
with his glory.

Now whereas our Savior directed us to make this our first suit, That Gods
name may be glorified, and now teaches us to make his glory the reason of our
prayers; this shows, That the glory of God should be the main end of all our
desires, for which we should affect them, and unto which when we have obtained
them we should refer them, 1. Chron. 16. 35. Psalm. 50. 15. And forasmuch as
the glory is the Lords, which he will not have communicated to any other, Isai.
42. 8. therefore we are to call upon him alone, as being the only fountain of
every good gift, the only hearer of our prayers. Of which glory we rob the
Lord, if we direct our prayers to any other. And as we are not to give his
glory to any other, so we are not to take it to our selves: For seeing the
glory is the Lords, therefore vainglorious persons seek to rob God of that
glory which is proper to him, and to assume it to themselves. But we must say
with David, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, O Lord, etc. and with Daniel, chap. 9.
7. Righteousness, O Lord, belongs unto thee, and to us shame, etc.

But we ascribe unto the Lord not only kingdom, Everlasting kingdom power
and glory belongs to God.
power and glory, but also an everlasting kingdom, an eternal power, and
immortal glory. For as Moses says, Psalm. 90. 2. He is God from everlasting to
everlasting; he is King for ever. Therefore he has right not only in this
life to crown us with his blessings, but after this life he has an everlasting
kingdom to bestow upon us, Luke 12. 32. unto which he is able and willing to
bring us by his power everlasting, to the immortal glory of his mercy.

Now these reasons as they must be propounded These word^ are a form of
praising God.
in faith, so also with cheerfulness, as a consequent thereof. And when they
are cheerfully uttered, they are not only reasons of our requests, but also a
notable form of praising God: which our Savior has taught us to join with our
prayer. And so the holy Ghost has directed us elsewhere; as Col. 4. 2. Phil.
4. 6.

And that this is a form of praise and thanksgiving, appears by other places
of Scripture, where the men of God setting themselves of purpose to praise God
have used the very like form: As David, 1. Chron. 29. 10, 11, 12. and Psalm.
145. 10. and 11. 12, 13. Revel. 7. 12. Jude v. 25. Revel. 4. 11.

Uses.
Duties concerning prayer. 1. That we pray to God, and him alone. Whereof a
reason is contained in these words, For his is the kingdom, etc. 2. That we
pray in faith; seeing our heavenly Father, whose is the kingdom, power, and
glory, is both able and willing to grant our requests. 3. That with our prayer
we join praise and thanksgiving; which in this short form is not omitted.

Duties in our lives.
1. To arrogate nothing to our selves, but to ascribe all kingdom, power and
glory to the Lord, Psalm. 29. 1, 2. and 115. 1. and of all good things received
to ascribe the praise to God. 2. If God be our King, then must we behave our
selves as dutiful and obedient subjects: If his be the power, then are we both
to fear him and to trust in him: If his be the glory, then of him must we beg
all good things, and to his glory must all be referred: If his power, kingdom
and glory be everlasting, then are we taught whom to fear, whom to serve, whom
to trust in; namely, him that is able not only in this life to bless us, but
also after to crown us with immortal glory in his eternal kingdom. If we
serve the flesh, the devil, the world, we shall have the momentanie fruition of
sin, and after this life is ended eternal torments. God lives for ever, as to
crown eternally the godly, so to punish the wicked eternally. He then will
exclude them out of his kingdom, and will be of power to destroy both body and
soul in hell; and he will glorify his justice in their endless confusion.

Hypocrifie discovered.
But here the hypocrisy of men is to be discovered, who ascribe kingdom to
God, and yet obey him not; power, and fear him not; glory, and glorify him
not: and they add all these reasons to their petitions, as if they should say,
Thou, Lord, wilt grant our requests; for thine is the kingdom, power and glory
for ever, and yet do not believe that the Lord will grant their requests.

Amen.
And so much of the confirmation of our faith. What Amen imports and
signifies.
Now follows the testification both of our faith and of the truth of our
defire in the word Amen. For it imports the assent of the heart to the words
of our mouth: and it signifies truly; or, even so; or, as the Grecians
sometimes translate it, (...), So be it.

The meaning of it is thus much, as if we should say, As I have made th^se
requests unto thee, O Lord, so do I both unfeignedly desire the performance of
them (Let them, O Lord, be granted, 1. Kings 1. 36.) and also truly believe
that thou in thy good time wilt grant my desires so far forth as they stand
with thy glory and my good: and in this persuasion I rest, attending thy good
pleasure. And as I have ascribed unto thee kingdom, power and glory, so I do
both unfeignedly acknowlcdge that thine alone is the kingdom, etc. and also
heartily desire that I and all others may truly and effectually ascribe unto
thee everlasting kingdom, power and glory. For being annexed unto prayer, it
signifies both the truth and earnestness of our desire, and also the assent
of faith laying hold on the promises of God made in Christ to our prayers. And
being added to thanksgiving, it signifies both the truth of our assertion in
ascribing praise to God, and also a true desire and zeal of Gods glory.

Hence therefore we may learn again those duties Duties to be p^rformed.
which heretofore have been taught: 1. That we call upon the Lord with
unfeigned lips and upright hearts, truly desiring those things with our hearts
which we ask with our mouths, and being truly thankful for those things for
which we give thanks. 2. We must strive against our infidelity and doubting,
Psalm. 42. 12. and must truly believe that the Lord will grant our requests so
far forth as they stand with his glory and our good; otherwise we cannot
say, Amen. 3. We are to rest in the good pleasure of God with assurance
expecting his grace and help, Psalm. 123. 2. and 3. 4, 5. and 4. 9. And thus our
Savior has taught us with this word to seal up our prayer: Which therefore is
not unworthily of some called Signaculum orationis Hie^on.
Dominicae, the seal of the Lords prayer. For he that truly believes that the
Lord does hear him, and goes away resting in his goodness, putting his Amen
to Christ's Amen, John 16. 23. he has set to his seal that God is true in his
promises, and that to the Lord belongs kingdom, power, and glory for ever.

But here see the hypocrisy of men, who say Hypocrisy discovered.
Amen, but pray not from their hearts, nor truly desire that which with words
they ask, nor are thankful for that for which they would seem to give thanks;
neither do they believe that God will grant their requests: and therefore
though they say, Amen, yet therein they lie unto God.

(...).

FINIS.

