A PRAYER, OR Petition for PEACE.

November 22. 1645.

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. And Verily ye shall not see me
tell ye say blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Printed in the Year 1645*

A PRAYER AND PETITION for Peace.
By the Lady Eleanor.
O Lord, the great and dreadful God: As we having sinned deeply and offended
guilty of no less then open Rebellion: by our excluding thee, fleeing from thy
presence, with one voice (as it were) We will not have this man to reign over
us (or) He defers his coming, as others: Even departed from Thy precepts and
Judgments set before us, so here prostrate before the footstool of thy
Throne, implore neverthe^sse pardon and forgiveness.

For this no stolen or secret transgression committed, But with a high hand,
and so much the rather presuming on such access, because the vulgar, (the
burden and heat of the day though theirs,) those sheep not guilty or
accessory to this trespass or Capital crime: of deposing thee, or opposing
the LORDS Return as in not harkning to the loud voices of the Prophets
accomplished, His Messengers. But to our Kings, Princes, Heads and Rulers,
which appertains, so straightly commanded and charged in readynesse to be and
watch, and signs of the time, they discerning them not, such celestial signs
and tokens, wherefore have watched over them, as since this a Nation, or under
the whole Heaven the like unknown of those Vials (...) violently powerd out
(without doubt) Not since the Flood as in this present Century.

Neither taking warning by our neighbors houses set on fire first, like his
seting in the front the handmaids and their children, or like that great Massy
Jmage, first smitten in the feet, by that stone without hands cut out, before
broken in pieces, And thus before hand thought others as lighted Becons for our
use yet like the rest lightly weighed.

Till suddenly like Sampsons sevenfold new cords and green Wyths all plucked
assunder; when linked so fast and knit, France with great Britain, Spain with
France, Germany with Spain, Together with these married Isles or united
Kingdoms, now in widows woeful estate, or as the divorced: sometime th^^ as
it been a new world, with such creations flourishing, and new names, and so
walking like days of old,, when he voted out was to the open fields, No less
then is not this great Babylon, and become as those, when God repented he made
man, brought to a like Ebb or fall, as those insaciable Giants.

Now behold O Lord through a high and heavy hand abased and so low brought
humbled to ashes and Sackcloth from the highest to the lowest, then tread not
one a Worm, break not the bruised reed, the wounded smite them not, but hear
us O thou our Anchor, hope and present help, ready to be consumed utterly and
swallowed up, if thou calm not and aswage these tempestious working Seas
through unruly raging winds let loose, wrought and contrived, and so praying in
His posture when as without rain so long 42. months, even bowing himself
double or kneeling on his head, also behold our estate since the year 1642.
these miserable Isles and Kingdoms of ours whose storehouses exhausted like
those rivers dried up and like the dead trees burnt up our nation and
habitation.

To conclude; Blessed as those two and forty unhappy INFANTS torn by two
she-Beares, and as Gods curse upon them, so Lord let thy face shine upon us,
cause thy voice to be heard, that some time speak to the Fish, the fig tree,
the deaf, the dead, and very Devils subject, and turnest the hard Rock into
standing waters, etc. also the waters of this CJTJE hear them, for the Lords
sake our only Savior, say the word and it is done, that from hence forth, let
there be no more Death, etc. no more Killing and Slaying, J beseech thee.

FJNIS.

