THE Gatehouse Salutation From the Lady ELEANOR.

Revelat. cap. 4.

Serving for Westminsters Cathedral, their old Service.

And Courts of Westminster, those Elders sitting, etc.

February, 1646.

Printed in the Year 1646.

Revel. cap. 4. Post haec vidi, and ecce ostium apertum in Coelo, etc.
New PSALM or SONG; The CONTENTS.
Holy Ghost first knocks, so high extold,
shows the end come, by New writ witnessed and Old;
in whose Calendar the time set out,
a week expired of Centuries thereabout:
When as Twenty four from Normand Race sprung,
cast their Crowns down,
Times hourglasse (as 'twere) run.
So opend the aforesaid gate or door,
what winged Beasts be those four,
what restless eyes those day and night;
The first ruff a Lion like:
The other smooth as a Calves skin soft:
The fourth an Eagle flying aloft:
Midst them one visag'd as a MAN,
which knot unloose he who can:
what eyes these before and behind,
Holy, Holy, etc. all of one mind;
Which was, which is, which is to come,
say, Glory to Father, Spirit, Son.
Inthroned, powther'd within whose Robe,
in right hand whose the Starry Globe,
the likeness of the Judgment Day,
as Resurrection robes display.
Benedicite omnia opera.
The four Beasts, etc.
Bethlems Manger sometime the Throne,
as its described, where she did groan;
a Feather-bed called otherwise,
some Dormix curtains wrought with eyes;
their work both sides alike does show,
full of holes, besides all eaten so;
A Rug and Blankets thereon laid,
a woeful prisoner, the aforesaid,
whose companions tedious hours,
no better Church then prisoners towers:
As Elders white arrayed so shine,
Four and twenty first crowned of time:
Seasons four, also with Feast days,
crowns resign; aloud him praise,
all proclaiming Eternity,
away with tyrant Time they cry.
All Blessing, Power, Honor, say,
him dedicate a third day;
worship no Throne but his alone,
besides whom King nor Priests is none:
Like as with twain that covered their face,
other twain with flying apace,
their feet covered also with twain,
Time past, present, and futures reign.
So Tabernacles three let us make,
one for Moses, Christ's, and Elias sake;
as for those that adore the Beast,
no Sabbath have, day nor nights rest.
Lo Moonday she celestial virgin Bride,
as Behold, J make all things new, Gates wide,
new Earth, etc. Jerusalems peaceable rest,
Spouse of the Sun, our splendant new Moons feast,
Monthly, as the golden Tree of life
like renders its fruit, no more pain, prison, strife:
As spared a million of Belial Sons,
better then touch one of those sacred ones:
O kiss this precious Altar Coal,
purges division, makes ye whole.
Away with former fashions old and past:
New Lights appear, new Song record at last;
he that is otherwise at his peril,
as he that righteous is, be he so still.
So Gates and Prison Doors be no more shut,
The King of Glory comes, your souls lift up.
Farewell. Magnificat.
FINIS.

