Imprimatur, July 28. 1643.

This is licensed, and entered into the Register of the Company of Stationers,
according to Order.

Rex meus est Deus. OR, A SERMON Preached at the Common Place in CHRISTS-CHURCH
in the City of Norwich. By G. D. Scatter thou the People that delight in war.
Psalm. 68. 30.

EX IGNE RESVRGIT VIRTUES



LONDON. Printed in the Year. 1643.

CIVITATI LONDINENSI Salutem et quietem a IESV CHRISTO humiliter precatur

G. D.

Rex meus est Deus OR A SERMON Preached at the Common Place in CHRIST-CHURCH,
in the City of Norwich.
Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not
well, sin lies at the door, and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou
shall rule over him.
AS there was never any history in the world, comparable to the books of Moses,
either for antiquity of time, or for latitude of extent, or for variety of
matters most memorable, and none of Moses his works for all respects like this
of Gen^sis: so neither is there any particular passage of this book more
memorable then the relation of Cains patricide: wherein we have a man killing a
man, Gen 4. 8.
a bad man a good man, a brother slaying a brother, an elder brother a younger
brother, hatred and envy moving action in the one, v^rtue and goodness
occasioning passion in the other One of the first riddles that ever was made;
the first man that ever was born, (...). 17. 10
killed the first man that ever died.

Which God foreseeing, who is (...), the only searcher and knower of men's
hearts, Leo.
Cui pervium omne solidum, apertum omne secretum cui obscura ^larant, muta
r^spondent, as Leo wittily. To whom every solid thing is pervious and
transparent, every secret thing open and manifest, to whom dark things shine
bright, dumb^ things speak loud, from whom nothing c^n b^ hidden or concealed.
I say t^is omniscient power perceiving the malicious intentions of this
malevolous wretch against his innocent brother, does in the words of my text
labor to prevent it by dissuading him from committing so horrible a sin by
these three arguments,

The first is argumentum ab utili, The text divided.
a reason drawn from profit and comfort in well doing: nonne si bone egeris
remissi? If thou ^o well, shall thou not ^e acc^pted? The second is Argumen^um
ab iuutili, an argument taken from the unprofitablenesse of the contrary, doing
not well, sicero non ben eg^r^s, prae foribus est peccatum exe^bans, and if
thou do not well sin lies at the door. Lastly, here is Argumentum ab^aequo
et bono, a reason drawn from right and equity, at ^rga te est appetitus illius,
and tu^raees illi And unto these shall be, etc. And these are the measures of
your patience and of this time, of them in order, and first of the first
argument, ^ Argument.
which is taken from the comfort and profit that arises from well d^ing, si be
^egeris if thou do well, shall not thou be accepted?

In i^ there are two things co^siderabl^: The first argument subdivided.
a work and a reward. The if thou do well; the reward promised, shall thou not
be accepted? the question putting ^t out of question: of these first jointly
Do. 2* the manner of performing it well. 3 the person admonished to parforme
it, Cain, shadowed under the pronoune primitive Thou: Do.
Do.

By which is understood the conformity of our whole carriage unto ^ods will
revealed in his law: not that we can perform obedience to the Law legally,
that is, in that perfection which the law requires, for in many things we
off^nd all, James 3. ^.
says the Apostle: but when I speak of doing the will of God, I mean, that we
should conform our sel^es and all our actions according to the rule of the Law,
after ^n evangellical manner, that is, we must desire, resolv, and endeavor to
perform unto it as perfect obedience as we can: and this doing of the word and
fulfilling of the law, almighty God accepts for his sons sake, who has in
all points and parts perfectly fulfilled the law for all those that believe.
Without doing, no salvation.
But without this doing of the will of God, there can be no salvation, for as
the law says, Luke 11. 28.
Do this and live; so Christ in the Gospel pronou^ceth them only blessed that
so do: Acts 9. 6.
therefore this was Saint Paul's first Quaerie, Acts 16 30.
Lord what will thou have me to do? and likewise the poor Jailer, Sirs, what
shall I do to be saved?

Which condemns the carnal gospellers of these times, Solifidians condemned.
that are all for faith, and nothing for works, that believe they shall be
saved as soon as the best, Iam, 2. 18.
but they have nothing to show for it; but this showing the Apostle will have,
Matthew. 1^. 3^.
Iam. 2. 18. show me thy faith by thy works, for the tree is known by it is
fruit. Know ye therefore, O ye careless ^^^^ration, you scandalizers of
religi^n, you enemies of grace, that faith is operative, working by love; it is
not if thou believe well, but if thou do well, that shall rend^r thee
acce^ted before God: for what is the ^ody without the soul, but a dead
carcass? such is thy faith without works, according to Saint ^ames; James 2. 26.
as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also,
Revel. 3. 1.
therefore for all your boastings, I may say of you, as he Angel said of the
Church i^ Sard^s, that you have a name that you live, but indeed you are dead.

Again, Idle talkers of religion branded.
if thou do well. This pusheth sore at all ou^ idle talkers ^f religion,
whither they be those of the clergy, that preach the will of God, but do it
not, (like Noah's carpenters building houses for other men, and per^shing
themselves,) or whither they be the common-tatlers of the times, 2 Timothy 3 6.
that go from house to house, prating of religion a great deal more then
their sha^e, whose works if you look in^o, you will take them for Atheists,
rather then for Christians: these in stead of making godliness a great gain,
according to the Apostle, make a great gain of godliness: 1 Timothy 6. 6.
1 Timothy 4. 8.
the first of these (if they be Christ's true disciples) are taught by their
masters example, Acts 1. 1.
first to do, and then to tea^h Act. 1. 1 and the latter may be admonished by
his sharp rebuke.

Matthew. Matthew. 12. 34.
12. 34. O generation of vipers, how can ye being evil, speak good things?
Genesis 27. 12.
how is it that I hear Jacobs voice, but feel Esaus hands?

Once more, Vain hear is conv^nced,
if thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? what have most of our forward
hearers to do with this? who of men and women are become monsters, having all
ears but no hands, as if relgion were to go no further with them, then aurium
tenus, up to the ears: But what says Saint James (if Apostles may be credited
in these days) Be ye doers of the word, James 1. 22.
and not hearers only deceiving your own souls: where he does not condemn
hearing, no more do I: but I would have doing besides, ^. well. James 4 3.
and so would he.

But as we may ask, and go without, because we ask amiss, so we may do,
and not be accepted, because we do amiss therefore my next suit to you is,
that you do so, that you may be accepted, that is well; if thou do well,
says God: for he that does well is of God, says Saint John in his epistle to
his beloved Gaius, John 11.
verse 11.

The Lord here intimates unto Cain, that his own evil doing, and not Gods
evil judging, is the cause of his rejection: for howsoever he seemed to walk
in eq^ipage with his brother, and to offer as devout a sacrifice as he, yet
was there something amiss in it, which God (the searcher of the hearts) did
see, and therefore did reject him. It was bonis specie, but malum inte^tione,
good in apparition, but bad in intention; and God is wont to love adverbs
^etter then adjectives; non refert quam bonum s^d quam been; he regards not how
good the work be, when it is done; Three things required to the doing of a
work well.
but how well it is performed while it is a doing. Therefore that a work may
be done well, there are three things required, first, (...) conformity to the
law of God, which is the rule of Bucan. com. loc. de bonis oper^bus. page 331.
(...) and (...) sin and deflection from Gods law, 1 John 31 4.
are terms convertible, so that whatsover is sin, erreth from the law, and
whatsoever strayeth from the law is sin, therefore that a work may be well done,
it is required that it do accord with the Law.

fides, faith in the doer, by which his per on may please God in Christ, and
the word be accepted for the persons sake: for it is otherwise between God and
m^n, then it is between man and man; with us the person is accepted for his
gifts, be he black as Vulcan, or deformed as Thersites.

Ditia si attuleris mun ra gratus cris. Bring a good present in thy hand, and
welcome; but it is not so with God, but clean contrary; for he accepts of the
gift for the giver, and reckons the work good, because a good man does it:
he first makes the tree good, Gregor
and then its fruit; as St. Gregory very clearly, Genesis 4. 5.
Deus gratum non hab^t offerent^m propter munus, sed munus propter offerentem*
thus verse 4. it is said unto Ab^l, and to his ^ffering God gave respect: first
unto Abel, then unto his offering, first loving the man in Christ, and then
regarding the work for the man. This excellent comfort faith brings with it,
that when it has joined us to Christ, all our deeds are well thought off, Rom
14. 23.
but where faith is not, there can nothing be accepted, St. Aug. in Psalm. 31.
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Laudo fructum bo^i operis, sed in
fide agnosco radicem, says St. Augustine, I commend the fruit of a good work,
but I account faith to be the root from whence that goodness springs. St.
Bernard super Cant. ser. (...).


Faith, says Saint Bernard, is the vine, virtues the branches, good works the
cluster of grapes, devotion the wine; to conclude, nec palms fine vite, nec
virtus sine fide; the branch cannot subsist without the vine to bear it, nor a
virtuous action without faith to breed it.

Finally there is r^quired, Respectus ad Deum; a good intention and Cain may
offer sacrifice to the Lord, and yet both justly rejected, if they propound
wrong ends unto their actions, St. Aug. cont. Iul. Pelag. lib. 4,
seeking rather to magnify themselves, then to glorify God: This is that,
that Saint Augustine tells the Pelagians, non artibus, sed finibus pensantur
officia: good works are not to be poysed by the art in the well contriving of
them, Bucanus de bo^is operibus. page 332.
but by the ends for which they were contrived: so Bucanus, non tam artibus
quam finibus virtut savi^^is sunt d^sc^rnendae.

It is not the action, but the end of the action that must distinguish vice
from virtue So then whilst Cain facrificed to the true God an offering for
substance and matter allowable, yet wanting faith in Christ to give the action
a good beginning, and respect to God to direct it to a right end, he did not
well and consequently he and his offering justly were rejected.

Away then with heretical Pelagi^n ^sme, Heathen works condemned.
that calls heathen virtues, good works, that thinks Aristides shall be saved
for his justice, Xenocrates for his temperance, Fabricius for his abstinence,
Socrates for his patience, and so Cain for his sacrifice. And hark how in
exclamation they cry out against us. Julian. Pelag: a^pud A^g contra Iul. lib.
4.
How is it possible, ut erunt in damnatione sempiterna, in quibus erat vera
justitia? that they should be in eternal condemnation, whose works did seem to
merit eternal commendation? But we reply with Saint Augustine, quis hac sapiat,
nisi desipiat, who will think that such works be good, but he that has not
the wit to think as he should, or he that with Epicurus accounts virtues, but
voluptatis a^cillas, servants to attend upon vain pleasure.

Hear Saint Bernard to Cain, Bernard super Cap, ser. 24 (...)
Been hon^ras deum munere fatido? been placas fidei interfector? do thou
think to honor God well with a stinking oblation, that wants the salt of true
faith to season it? And such and no better are all heathen works.

Yet will not my charity suffer me to give all heathens for damned: All heathens
not damned.
for I know that God is righteous in all his ways, Psalm 145. 17.
and that he loves righteousness; I have heard it also said, Psalm (...).
that he reapeth not where he has not sown and gathers not, Matthew 25. 26,
where he has not strawed; but requires of very man according to the talent
which he has given him, Genesis 18. 25
more where he has given more, less where he has given less, therefore if
any of them shall make the best use of their talent, and improve it (according
to their power) to the best advantage, Isaiah 42. 3.
why may not I think that God (who has promised that he will not break a
brui^ed reed nor quench a smoking flax) will multiply and increase their
gifts, according to his promise, Matthew 25. 29.
Habenti dabitur, to him that has; it shall be given and he shall have
abundance: and may infuse into them so much knowledge of the Deity in general,
and of Christ the second person in particular as may save their souls?

Away also with Semipelagian Papism, Meritorious works condemned.
that c^lls unr^generate actions meritorious deeds; that imagines goodness is
showed, and grace purchased Ex op^^e operato; Rhemist. annot. in Acts 22. 16,
A term more monstrous in the sense, then bar^arous in the words for what
Papist of them all can for outward respects do a better work then Cains? who
yet neither showed virtue to God nor merited reward unto himself.

^ittifull to think how many famous and worthy works they have spoiled in their
People by their false doctrine; either erecting them upon false grounds, or
directing them unto false ends.

For when I read (in Bid and others) of so many Churches built, Bed. Histor,
Gent Aug.
hospitalls edified, monasteries erected schools founded, Colleges endowed,
etc. I cannot sufficiently admire our ancestors devotion: but when I go
further and find that these works were done, in remea^um any ae^^n remissione^
peccatorum, i^ honorem divae virginis ad promerend^m De^m, etc. for their
souls health, for remission of their sins in honor of our Lady, and to merit
heaven, I cannot but lament their teachers ignorance, Hypocrites and profane
persons condemned.
and do often wish that they had some of our science, we more of their
conscience, they our knowledge, we their devotion.

Finally, Bonavent.
away with each hypocrite and profane person: The hypocrite vult bonus esse
inordi^ate, he desires to be good without the order, outwardly acting some
laudable deed, inwardly respecting some detestable end: and the profane person
would have feign have well at death, but he is not willing to do well in life,
he is angry at his punishment, but delights in his sin. Let both these
learn of John the Baptist, John 5. 35.
of whom our Savior says, that he was Lucerna ardens ot lucens, a burning and
a shining light. Wicked men do but one of these. The hypocrite will not care
much to gliste (like a glow-worme) with the false fire of holiness, he is
content to shine, but he will not burn with the true zeal of piety and the
profane person will not grudge to burn with Balaam, Numbers 2^. 10
with the love of heaven, o that he may dye the death of the righteous! Yes by
all means, but he will not shine with the light of virtue in his life, that
men seeing his good works may glorify God: Bern. de ser, de Ioh. Baptist.
at lucere parum, ardere vanum, lucere et and re perfectum; to shine only is
in vain without profit, to burn only is in vain, to no purpose, but to shine
and to burn too is perfect.

Would we then be perfect? let us burn with the true love of God, sacrificing
to him what Cain kept to himself, Psalm. 36. 8.
that is, our hearts, he will cool us, cum potabit e torrente voluptatis: when
he shall drench us in the river of his pleasure, let us also shine with the
light of grace, so will God add more luster to us, by making us shine in the
light of glory.

And (...) much shall suffice to have spoken of the work, Do, with the manner
of performing it, 3.
well: we come now to the person, upon whom it was urged, Thou.
Cain, shadowed under the pronoune, thou: If thou dowel. Grace offered unto all
men.
Thou that have offered me sacrifice with an hypocritical and deceitful heart;
thou that have conceived against me unjust anger in thy breast, thou that
repinest at thy brothers integrity, thou that harbourest in thy heart a bloody
resolution to slay the innocent without a cause, and he thy brother, there
being but one man more in the world; and he thy father, Luke 19. 42.
thou that art guilty of all this wickedness, yet, if thou do well, shall thou not
be accepted? A like place to this we have in the 19th of Saint Lukes Gospel;
where our Savior Christ coming near he City of Jerusalem, weeping over it,
said, If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day the things which
belong unto thy p^ace: Acts 7. 51*
thou that have always been a stiffenecked and rebellious people; thou that
killest my Prophets, Matthew 23. 37.
and stonest them that are sent unto thee; thou that have drawn iniquity with
cords of vanity, Isai. 5. 18.
and sin as it were with a cartrope, yet, if thou had known, even thou.

How free is the Lord in the dispensation of his grace (...) there is no man so
abominably wicked, to whom he does not proffer it: if hypocritical, envious,
bloodthirsty Cain will at last do well, he shall be accepted: herein God
shows himself to be a God of mercy and compassion, not desiring the death of
a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness and live. Ezekiel, 18. 23.
32,
Witness those passionate wishes that we hear in scripture coming from him,
oh that there were such a heart in them to fear me, Deuteronomy, 5, 29,
Isaiah 5. 3,
that it might go well with them! Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Witness his mournful
exp^stulations, as Esaiah 5. 3. judge I pray you between me and my vineyard,
what could I have done more for my vineyard? and turn ye, Ezekiel. 33, 11.
turn ye, why will you dye, oh house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. witness his
melting commiserations of the lamentable condition of foolish men that will not
be reclaimed. Oh Jerusal^m, Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings,
Matthew 23. 37,
and you would not? Matthew 23. 37. But now that men will not apprehend the
doctrine of salvation, nor accept of grace thus freely offered them, but will
go to hell after all this, debemus nos i^orum vitio, non Christi gratia
adscribere, we ought to lay the blame upon them, and not upon the grace of
Christ. The rain falls upon the stony rocks, as well as upon the fruitful
soil, but does i^ pr^duce the same effect from both? No: for the soil is made
fruitful, Isaiah 55, 10.
but the rocks remain hard and barren as before, is the fault then in the
rain? no: but in the rocks, which because of their flintie hardness will not
be mollified and made fruitful, God in like manner raineth down the showers
of his ordinances upon the wicked as well as upon the righteous, Isaiah 27. 3.
the means of salvation are held out to all, if thou, or thou, or any thou in
the world, wilt do will, thou shall be accepted. But the same effect is not
produced from all, for some do lay hold upon grace thus freely offered, others
again stand out, rebel and will not yield. The believer and unbelieve are
like wax and clay before the fire, Ier. 5. 2.
the same heat which mollifies the one, hardens the other.

Let not men therefore cavil at Christ's intention and Go^s election, Ezekiel, 18.
25.
but let them look into their own hearts, and they will tell them, that they
are rebels, and live in profane and wicked courses, in neglect of all holy
duties, they carry their own sentence, and cause of their damnation in their
own breasts. As for Gods secret purpose in electing some and rejecting others,
it is hid from the world, and therefore that cannot be the rule of our
obedience; but look to Gods revealed will, look to what is commanded thee in
his word, and if thy conscience tell thee that thou have not accepted of grace
being offered thee, nor yielded that obedience unto God that thou ought and
might,

And so I pass from the work supposed, Th^^ ward pro^^
If thou do w^l; to the reward promised, Pareus is loc.
shall thou not be accepted? the interrogative put for the affirmative. It is
well observed by Pareus upon the place, that the word here translated,
acc^pted, which is (...) a verbo (...) among other things, signifies to lift
up; and so is also turned by some actively, erit tibi elevare, if thou do
well, thou need'st not go hanging down thy head like a condemned man, but
thou may be able to lift up thy countenance in sincerity of conscience as
well as thy brother. Of some again passively, erit tibi ^l. vari, if thou do
well, thou shall be promoted and advanced with the blessings of earth i^ this
life, and with the crown of blessedness when this life is ended. If you join
them both together, Well-doing has a double acceptance.
you shall find that well-doing has a double acceptance: the gratulation of
conscience within our selves, and the gratuity of blessedness from almighty
God.

Concerning the first; comfort of conscience is no small reward unto a
righteous man, 1. The comfort of a good conscience.
many men reckon it enough, and solely rest therein. Virtus in seipsa mercedem
habet; a good work carries her reward with her, even the testimony and
congratulation of a good conscience: which is a precious jewel, a hidden
treasure, our heaven upon earth, our chiefest glory until we come to the
Kingdom of glory, according to Saint Paul: 2 Cor. 1. 12,
this is our glory even the testimony of our conscience. Inaestimabile bonum
est testimonium bonae and insontis conscienti^, Muscul.
the testimony of a good conscience is an inestimable good thing, Est titulus
religionis, templum Solomonis, agee benedictionis, hortus delicia^^^ aureum
reclinatorum, gaudium Angelorum, arca faederis, thesaurus Regis, aula Del,
habitaculum Spitus Sancti.
without which no man can be truly merry, and with which no man certainly
sad: for what can cast a man down, if conscience be upright? or what can raise
a man up, if conscience once deject him? what made Belshazar fall into his
melancholy dumps in the midst of his cups and boon companions? why, nothing
but an evil conscience is a continual fiend to haunt him? and what made Saint
Paul sing Psalms at midnight in prison, but a good conscience, a continual
feast to cheer him? Finally, Hug. lib. 3. de ant. cap. 11. Dan. 5. 6. Act. 16.
25. Prove. 15. 15. Luke 16. 23. 1 Samuel 17, 50. Acts 12. 23.
I demand with a Father, what thou accountest in this life pleasant and
comfortable? Mensane deliciosa? a table furnished with continual delicates?
Dives had this, and yet was turned into hell. Bona valetudo corporis? Is it
strength and soundness of body? Goliath had this, and yet knocked down with a
pebble stone. Ingens gloria? Great magnificence and glory? Herod had this, and
yet was eaten up of lice. Divitiarum ^^pia? abundance of wealth and riches?
The glutton had this, and foolishly lost his soul. Luke 12. 20.
What then? he concludes, nihil aliud jucundum est, quam conscientia proba, et
res futurorum certa: nothing, nothing truly comfortable in this world, but a
good conscience within our selves, and a strong confidence in the God of
heaven. Had (...) at the time of his oblation, but known the benefit of a good
conscience, which was in Abel before he suffered his martyrdom, and the wound^
of an evil conscience, which were fallen upon himself after he had committed
his murder, he would have labored more earnestly to do well in action, that
he might more joyfully have sped well in acceptance.

And such would be the desire of all men, Ber^^an lib. de co^scient.
were conscience valued at his true dignity and worth, excellently Saint
Bernard, unicuique est liber propria c^nscientia, and ad hunc librum
discutiendum and em* ^dandum omnes alij inventi sunt; every man's conscience is
a book, and to clear and refine this book, all other books are invented and
found out. All our reading to our selves, Id.
all our preaching to you, all your and our hearing is jointly for one end, ne
dissideat unu quisque a seipso: that no man should be at odds with his own
soul. The benefit and comfort whereof were it sufficiently known to many men,
and earnestly loved of all men, the shopkeeper would not by making short
measure unto others, Micah 6. 10, 11.
make himself fall short of heaven; the lawyer would not plead so long against
the truth, Luke (...). Isaiah 3. 15. Lev.
till his own conscience pleaded against himself: the extortioner would not
grind the face of the poor, til faenus pecu^iae, proves funus animae, his
moneys birth, his soul^s death. The Bankrupt would not so often compound with
his creditors, till the devil without compounding carries away his soul:
finally the whoring drunkard, the roaring swaggerer, and the raving blasphemer,
would not dance themselves in jollity into hell as they do, if they were but
persuaded that a good conscience were but worth half so much as it is.

Good works rewarded.
and so it purchases reward without, as well as partaketh of comfort within*
Indeed it has ever been the devils policy to make men believe it is in vain
to serve God: Job. 21. 15,
in I^b. 21. 15. the wicked will needs make it a question, what profit they
should have, if they should serve God?

A base demand, seeing as one observes, every good man knows, etiam submota
mercedem, virtute^ ips^ corona^, ac ornamentum esse; that virtue carries her
reward in her bosom, and cannot want the comfort that is due unto her: she is
both the work and the reward herself: yea, and that in this present life. Gods
children want not comforta^le blessings, which are (as it were) the first
fruits of their full inheritance: Psalm 37. 25.
God being gracious unto them, dum per res parvas, et in aspectum cadentes
majoribus invisibilibusque fidem astruit: whilst by outward things he
strengthens their faith for greater and more glorious matters. And they content
themselves with his good pleasure, Romans 8. 32.
and depend upon him without distrust saying one to another with Saint Paul
Romans 8. 32 He that loved not his own: Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? and to their own souls
with Origin, quid de op^bus dubitas, qui herum habes? what do thou doubt of
the inheritance, Origin, in Pom. 8,
when thou have the heir himself bestowed upon thee?

Yet herein they are discreet too, Isidor. Pelus. lib. 1. epist. 4.
for they have learned with Pelusiota, that combatings appertain to this
world, comfortings to the other world, here crosses, there crowns. Such is
Gods wisdom that generally he has proportioned the work for earth, the
wages for heaven: and yet such is his goodness too, Sr. Aug. de civit. Dei lib
2, cap. 8.
that here also many go not unrewarded. For says Augustine, if God should
reward no good man in this life it would be thought, these temporal lessings
did either belong to God for to give, or to good men to receive: and again, if
he should reward every good servant with these outward things, they would be
thought the only good, and men would serve him for earthly commodities: and
so, non pios nos f^e rei talis servitus, S. Aug. ut (...)
sed cupia^s et avaros, the practice of religion would not make us truly
pious, but wickedly covetous, and every man in the world would turn servant
unto God, that God might make the wo^ld serve every man's turn.

Wherefore he takes an excellent course, rewarding some only in Heaven, some
both in heaven and in earth, but every man suffic^e^tly, and ultra condignum,
beyond all dese^t. His blessings are infinite, some of his children have all of
them, but all of his children have some of them, as makes most for the glory
of his name, and the glorification of their souls.

Why then do we lose by idleness, Job 22, 21.
what we might gain by godliness? mark what counsel Eliphaz gives to Job
chapter p. 22. ^1. acquaint thy self with God, verse 26.
and be a peace, thereby good shall come unto thee* Good to thy soul, verse 26.
Thou shall have thy delight in the Almighty, verse 29.
and shall lift up thy face to God. Good to thy body, verse 29 When other men
are cast down, thou shall say, verse 24.
I am lift up. Good to thy estate, verse 24: Thou shall lay up gold as the
dust, and the gold of Ophyr, as the stones. Let no man be discouraged, Psalm
58. (...).
for verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges the earth.

O then let us all be doing out of hand: art thou a rich man? then be doing,
St August.
erogae pecuniam et accipccalum: give thy money to the poor, and thou shall
find treasure in heaven. Art thou a magistrate? then be doing, Luke 18, 22.
exerce justitiam, ut obtineas misericordiam, do justice to all men, that thou
may find mercy to thy self. Art thou a minister? then be doing: sparge
sermonem, ut metas vitam. S^w the seed of the word, that thou may reap the
harvest of life. And to conclude, who ever we be, let us imitate Abraham, who
willingly forsook his earthly country for a City, Heb. 11. 10.
whose builder and maker is God. Heb. 11. 10:

Let us imitate Moses, who left the Court of Egypt, for the Court of Heaven:
Hebrews 11. 26.
Heb. 11. 26. Let us imitate Christ, who for the glory that was set before him,
Hebrewe. 12. ^.
endured the cross, and despise the shame. Heb. 12. 2. And so I end this point
with Saint Paul: 1 Cor, 15. 58.
1. Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my dear brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. If thou do well, shlat not thou be
accepted?

How good works make us to become accepted.
and see how our doing well makes us to become accepted, which I will unfold in
a word: good works do wonderfully please almighty God, and are rewarded by him
with the choicest blessings of this life, and with the crown of blessedness
when this life is ended; Call. Just. lib. 3. cap. 15. sect. 3.
non quia ita merentur, sed quia divina benignitas hoc illis ex seipsa pratium
statuit: as Calvin, not because they deserve these rewards, but because the
goodness of God has of it self appointed these rewards unto them. Merit
condemned.
As for the word merit, it is irksome in the ears of every humble minded man.

For if we be not able to think a good thought as of our selves (as the Apostle
avoucheth) then how can we do good deeds, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
and merit by them? Genesis 6. 5.
And for the works that we do perform (alas) they cannot merit, because,
though they be good in their own nature, yet they sail in some necessary
circumstance that is required, as when we do them not after that manner, or
with that mind, or to that end, that the law requires.

But say we could do, bonum been, good works well, yet how few are they in
number in respect of our evil works? and can we hope that some few good
works can make satisfaction for so many evil works that we have done, and
compensation for so many good works that we have left undone?

Besides what congruity is there between grace and merit, that works should
merit through grace? gratia non est ulla mod^, si (...) ^it gratuita omni mode,
St. Aug. ep. 106. ad Bon.
says Saint Augustine, it is not grace any way, if it be not gratis every way:
Romans 11. 16. Cum deus coronat merita nostra nihil aliud coronat qua^ dona
sua. St Aug. epist-105. ad Sextum praesb Luke 17. 10.
so the Apostle reasons, Romans 11. 6. if it be by grace, then it is no more
of works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works, then it is
no more of grace, otherwise work is no more work. But why should we not as
well dread the punishments we have deserved by our evil deeds, as well as
look for a reward for our good deeds? especially considering that our
perfection is but imperfection, and that when we have done all that we can,
we are but unprofitable servants; 1 Cor. 2. 9.
and the reward which God out of his free grace is willing to bestow upon us,
is so great, as the eye has not seen, nor the care heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive; Romans 8, 18.
2 Cor. 4. 17.
and who knows not the analogy of merit and reward, that the one must not
exceed the other?

But yet as I would not have you Nullifidians, boasting of your wor^s without
true faith, so neither would I have you Solifidians or carnal gospellers,
making brags of your faith, having no works to show fort: for though we cannot
be saved by them, Phil. 2. 5.
as the meritorious cause, yet can we not be saved without them, Whereby we
are justified, and shall be saved.
they being the necessary effects of our faith. Would we then all be saved? let
us all to work, and that betimes too, for, paenitentia sera raro vera: late
repentance will be repented often: and having once well begun, let us with
Abraham continue our sacrifice of well doing to the evening of our days, that
so having been faith to the death, Reve. 2. ^
we may receive the crown of life: for it is not if thou will do well
hereafter, nor if thou have done well heretofore, but if thou do well, if thou
have begun to do well already, and if thou resolvest to do well to the end.

If thou do well, 2 Argument,
shall thou not be accepted? That Is the first argument. The second follows,
which is argumentum ab inutili, a r^ason drawn from the unprofitablenesse of
the contrary doing not well. And if thou do not well, sin lies at the
door. That is, thy not doing well attaints thee with sin, and thy guilt of
sin attaches thee with punishment.

Herein two things likewise are considerable, Two things considerable.
a supposition and a position: the supposition, if thou do not well: the
position, sin lies at the door.

Concerning the first, God intimates unto Cain, (as Parcus notes upon inter
justitiam and peccatum non datur medium, Parcus ad. lo^*
between righteousness and sin there is no middle thing, but whatsoever is
well done, is righteous, and whatsoever is not well done, is unrighteous. there
is no indifferency at all between them. He that is (...) with me, Matthew. 12.
30.
is against me, (says Christ) and he that gathers not together, scatters
abroad: There be two maine opposites, God and the devil: two contrary places
of reward, heaven and h^ll: two ways to come thither, the broad way and the
narrow way; two distinctions of men's actions, St, Hierom.
good and bad: and as Saint J^rome said of the broad any narrow way: Omne quod
loquimur, omne quod agimus, aut de lata, as^ de angusta vta est: all that we
say, and all that we do, looks upon one or the other; so it is true of the
quality of men's actions, they all favor of God or of the devil, they all tend
^ither to heaven or hell, and are all for meant and worth to be repu^ed well
done, or ill done.

Bellarmines mincing of sins, to be Non contra legem, but Pr^ter legem,
cannot prove either that that which is not well done, should be accounted a
good action, or that that which is an evil action, should deserve no
punishment. Take we heed then by all means of linsey-wolsey actions, of
works part good part bad, of obedience by halfes; for God is a jealous God, he
will have all the action for himse^fe and all the affection to himself: he
reckons every thing bad, that errs in su^stance, and he accounts nothing good,
tha^ fails in circumstance; only his goodness will pardon the infirmity of
our flesh, if our wills endeavor conformity to his spirit. Again^, by this
saying* If thou do well; God gives us some insight into sin, and the nature
of it: It is not a thing positive, but privative, not the substance of any
thing present, St. August. de B^at. To. 1.
but the privation of a duty absent: Cain did ill because he did not well.
Nequitia is ne quicquam, says Saint Augustine, and naught and naught are both
one. Adultery the privation of chastity, drunkenness the absence of sobriety,
covetousness the nothing of liberality; all evil the want of good. Had Cain
come with an honest heart, and an upright hand, he had done well; these were
absent, he did ill, so his sacrifice was naught, his obedience naught.

Beware therefore my beloved, of all things beware of sin: there is no
undoing of our selves, to the not doing of our duties: if we do well, we are
sure to be somewhat, but sin brings us from all things to nothing, and undoes
us in punishment, Et vincit essentia nihillum.
who left virtue undone in practice: Manifestum est, quia peccatum nihil est,
et nihil fiunt homines cum peccant It is clear (says he again) sin is a
nothing, St^^ (...) de vera relig, cap. 12.
and such as commit sin, Id. in Ioh. Tract. 1
bring themselves to nothing, they that make nothing of sin, sin shall make
nothing of them. Wherefore I beseech you, as we desire a being, let us ache heed
of being sinners, there is no well being, but with God; nor no well-doing but
in the will of God: God is Eu^ entium, the best being himself, and to be like
God, is the best being for man: do well then, and be all this, but do not
well, and thou art undone for ever. For, if thou do not well; sin lies at
the door: that is the Position, following the Supposition, Peccatum prae
foribus, sin lies at the door.

I find it three ways expounded, 1 Lyra ad loc.
first, says Lyra, no^ erit occultum, sed mox patebit scelus tuum; if thou do
not well, thy wickedness is presently found out by God, it can no more be hid
from his eyes, then that which is thrown out of doors, can be concealed from
the eyes of men. And herein is Cain stung to the heart, for he might suppose,
that all his livour and ill meaning to his brother; all his choler and ill
mind toward God, might be palliated with some other outward work of
religion, with another opus operatum, a second sacrifice or so: but God detects
him in his lewd thoughts, and tells him there is no starting from him. Ezekiel. 8.
9.
He that found out the idolatry of a stone wall, Ezekiel. 8. 9. can find out also
the conspiracy of a stony heart, whatsoever has bin spoken in darkness shall
be heard in the light, and whatsoever has been whispered in the ear in
secret, shall be preached upon the house top openly; not a deed, not a word,
not a thought that shall escape the allseeing eye of God. Psalm 147. 4.
For he that calls the stars by their names, he that tells all our steps;
Job 14. 16.
he that counts the sparrowes, and reckons the hairs upon our heads, Matthew.
10. 29, 30.
he that pntteth all our tears into his bottle, he that knows the cattle
upon 1000. Psalm 56. 8.
hills, he that writes all our members in a book, Psalm 50. 16.
long before we were borne, nothing can be done so secretly, but he will bring
it to light, Psalm 230, 16.
for he is like the Sun, whose going forth is from the end of the heaven,
Psalm 19. 6.
and his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof.

How true this is, Saint Bernard.
Nonnullos d^^uere non verba, sed verbera, it is Saint Bernards phrase in
another case, some men have learned, not from the ministers word, but from the
magistrates sword: what strange conspiracies have been hatched against our
State and Kingdom? even subter viscera terra, as low as hell it self, and yet
have flowne out of doors, and lie like the Levites wife, Iud. 19. 27.
dead upon the threshold, brought to their end, before their end; and seen of
all men before they were felt of any. Thus the sinner meets with Jeremiahs
sawes, Ier. 2. 19.
Ier^m. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, Numbers 32, 33.
and his conscience for ever after checks him as Moses does the Rubenites,
Numbers 32. be sure that your sin will find you out. For if thou poest not
well, Peccatum pra foribus, Sin (...), etc.

Secondly, Pe^catum pra foribus, Si^^^ lies at the door, that is, (...) fitts
in the Conscience, and there judges and condemns the m^^^factour: for this
is the property of sin, Con^utere illum apud quem fuerit, to beat upon the
heart of him that hatcheth it; as it did to David, whose heart smotehim, after
he had numbered the people. When the sin hears iniquity reproved, his
Conscience is read^^ to tell him, 2 Samuel 24, 10
Tu es h^mo^ when he hears judgment denounced, his Conscience makes him with
F. lix to tremble. 2 Samuel 12. 7.
Obst^p^it (...) amisso nomine, Acts 24, 25. Arator,
says Arator: Felix lost his felicity when he lo^t his innocence, he grew
contrary to his name, when his Conscience was different in it self. Sin has
many vengeances, but -- Prima est hac uli^o quod so
Iudice, Iuven. Sat.
nemo nocens absolvitur.
This is the first, that no man escapes the darts of an angry Conscience: Yea,
Menander.
(...), says Menander. Conscience is a God, and keeps his Domesticum Tribuna;
within us, and impossible it is to escape his censure, Gerard. Med.
since the Plaintiff, the Judge, the witness, the prison, the punishment, the
Executioner is all one.

This is that (...), S. Chrysostom Gerard. Med.
as Saint Chrysostom^, calls it, that incorrupted Judge, qui nec flecti potest
precibus nec corrumpi (...); as Gerhard; who will neither be won by
entreaties, nor corrupted with gifts: This is that Insepulta, sepu^tura, a
Grave ever open, he that stumbleth at it, L^ctanti us Insti. 6, 24,
does irrecoverably fall into it; Quid prodest non habere Conscium l^ab^^nti
Conscientiam? No book to be secret from the view of men, so long as
conscience is privy to it less; like a Sergeant, or Catchpole, it sits at our
doors, and never parts with the sinner; till he parts with his sin.

But most of all, Pecc tum prae foribus, we shall find sin at the door,
when we are going out at the door, at the time of death, or going out of the
world: For God herein alludes to the nature of some Mastiffe or wild beast;
lying at the door of a man's house, who as soon as ever a man's foot is over
the threshold to go forth, it fires in his face to pluck out his throat. So
Conscience in wicked men like a bandogge, barks at them all the while they are
in the house of this life, but when at death they go out of the Clay houses of
their bodies, then it furiously sets upon them, tears out the throat of their
souls, and makes a full end of them.

Thirdly, and lastly, Peccatum prae foribus, Sin lies at the (...), that is,
li^nes punishment is at the door, hard at hand; ready to overtake him that
sins: Sin and his punishment (except they be severed by found Repentance)
go still together* Gognatum (...) inuatum est omni sceleri sceleris
supplicium; Sins punishment is homebred nay imbred with it: As in the clear
Sunshine, the dark shadow follows the body, so in the sweet pleasure of
evil lad punishment accompanies sin; if thou commit the one, God will not
omit the other; If thou do the one, thou shall suffer the other. Therefore the
Chaldee paraphrast turns it thus, Chal. Bat.
Si non been egeris, peccat (...) tuum in diew judicij servatum erit: If thou
do not well, thy sin is reserved till the day of judgment; thou may
shut it out at the door of thy mind, but it will fit at the door of Gods
memory, to procure just vengeance on thee. As the Poet said of perjury, I may
say of all other sins, Pers.
It may tarry long.

Sera tamen tacitis paena venit pedibus. Val. Max.
Slow footing it makes, but sure footing it takes; and then as Val: Maximus
says, Tardetatem supplicij gravitate compensat, it will make amends for the
long time of delay, with the heaviness of the punishment when it comes: for
though God has leaden feet, he has Iron hands, though he comes very
slowly, yet he pays surely.

And thus it was with Cain, He lived long after this, he built Cities, married
Wives, begat Children, invented Arts, as if nothing did trouble him, but all
this while, he had with in him a feared Conscience, a trembling heart, a guilty
look, sin lay at the door, and at last threw him out of house and home,
Psalm 50, 22.
and so the end of sins pleasure, was the beginning of hell torments: Consider
this all ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, while there be none
to help. Sin is a bad Tenant, it casts out the Landlord: If you please your
selves in sin, God will displease you in punishment, His judgments are ever
just, and vengeance will come, when it is due.

Serious consideration herein may do much good; whilst we consider that
divine punishment argues humane transgression: We may safely conclude from a
punishment to an offense, Posito uno, po^itur et alterum: Who can enumerate
your gross enormities and crimes now reigning among us? How does rebellion
(which is as the sin of witchcraft) get a head, 1 Samuel 15, 23.
whilst Authority and Dominion is trodden under-foot* How does Schism and
Faction prevail and increase, whilst order and decency is set at naught ^ How
is Religion made with many, the Mask of Villainy! How is the Ministry
contemned, and our Message disgracefully accepted! How have the Holy Scriptures
lost their due Authority; and cannot be believed by many of Us! But above all,
How by our unhallowed lives, do we tread under feet the precious blood of
JESUS CHRIST!. When the City of Oth^ was burned, one yields this as a
presaging cause of it, that a little before a Priest at Mass, spilt a Chalice
of Consecrated Wine, which that credulous age thought to have been the very
blood of Christ: Our Kingdom has not been burned, nor (I trust) ever shall
till that great day of fire, when the earth, and the Elements and the Heavens,
and all shall burn; and yet how is the Blood of Christ spilt upon the ground,
and trodden under foot by our profane courses! But what though our Houses
escape the fire, if our bodies do not? No marvel if some have Ignem in
ossibus, the fire of loathsomeness in their bones, when they have kindled I
gnem in Carne, the fire of Lust in their flesh: No wonder that our blood boyles
with the heat of fevers and burning Agues, when the fervor of drunkenness
and distemperature has blown the Coals. No mervaile if all the plagues
concomitating a civil War do fall upon us, when out filthy lusts within
us, 1 Peter 2, 12.
which war against the Soul are so predominant. S. Cypt. ad D^^tr.
Quid mirum in generis humani crescere jamiram Deicum creseat quotidi^, quod
puniatur? What marvel (says Saint Cyprian) to see the judgments of God
every day increase, when our sins which call for them do increase more than
they? Our pride increases, our hypocrisy increases, our prophannes
increases, our rebellion increases, our Atheism increases. Is it a wonder
then that the Pox should increase, that the Plague should increase, that our
divisions should increase, that wars and rumors of wars should increase also!
Be wise therefore (my Beloved) and sin no more lost worse things befall Us take
away the cause, John. 5. 14.
if you would have the effect to cease, and remove sin from your doors, if you
would have God withold punishment from your souls.

And so much for the second point.

The third remains, which is Argumentum, ab aquo and bono, a reason taken from
right and equity, unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.
And here it did become me to crave your patience a little longer, (the time
being already past) did I not know the subject I have in hand commanded it, For
behold, my heart has i^dighted a good matter, Psalm 45. 1.
and I will speak of the things that I have made touching the KING: Psalm
105, 15.
And I would to God that none would touch him worse.

Unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him:
WHich words are meant of Abels subjection to Cain, and of Cains supremacy
over Abel. God that he might restrain Cain from a further evil, does comfort
him with this present good, that neither his own wickedness could deprive him
of his dominion, nor his brothers righteousness free him from subjection; but
Ab^ls desire must be subject unto Cain as the Elder, and Cain by Authority rule
over Abel as the younger. So that here two things are delivered.

One, 2 Things delivered.
That the Firstborn has the condition of a superior: The other, That the
younger has the state of an Inferior, and both must keep their own.

Concerning the first, 1 Primo geniture.
Primo geniture, even by the Law of Nature, and by the Law of God, has a
twofold privilege, Regni and Sacerdotij; of outward rule and command as a
King, of inward direction and guidance as a Priest. Genesis 49, 3.
Thus Jacob intimates in Reuben, Genesis 49. Reuben my first borne, etc. Thou
had the excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power: The excellency
of Dignity, that is the order of Priesthood in the Church; The excellency of
Power, that is the state of Sovereignty in the Commonwealth.

Now because every house is a little City, as every City is a great house,
therefore the first borne was a petty King over his brethren, and as a Bishop
or Priest to the whole family.

And for this cause God appointed the firstborn, Deuteronomy. 21, 17.
Duplicem haereditatem, a double portion of inheritance, answerable (as it
were) to his double dignity and preferment. Cain then being Elder then Abel,
was his Superior by birth, and in this superiority was promised to continue,
albeit by sin he might seem to have lost it.

From this point much might be observed, and I could be large in it, but I
neither desire to offend you, nor do I delight to weary my self: May it
please you briefly to observe with me these three points.

First that Superiority of on man over another is the very ordinance and
appointment of Almighty God; Three points.
so that by him the greatest is set man; so neither the Sovereign alone nor
the subjects alone can make a Commonwealth; whereall will rule there is no
rule, and where none does rule, there is all misrule. Therefore has God
ordained an order and chiefly in all things: The blessed Angels know their
thrones and the Saints their seats. The Heavens have their Orbs, and on st^r
differs from another star in glory. 1 Cor. 15, 41.
The Planets have their plac^s, and the Elements theirs: Prove. 19, 12.
look among the creaturs, and you shall find the Lion to have the preeminence
among the beasts, Proverbs 20, 2.
the Eagle among the Fowls, Job 39, 27.
the Whale among the Fishes, among the Serpents, the Basyliske; There Is a
Bell-weather in the flock, there is a Captain among the Cranes, a Governor
among the Pismires, a master Be in the Hive, and the Grasse-hoppers go out in
bands, and shall we admit of no Order among reasonable men? Irenaeus.
Cujus jussu ^^mines nascuntur, hujus jussu Reges constituuntur, It was
Divinity in Irenaeus his time. He that made men, made Kings, and to them he
gave a superiotity over o^ her men: Romans 13. 1.
The powers that are, says Saint Paul, are ordained of God.

Again, observe from hence that sometimes a wicked man is appointed Cain the
King is wicked, in Abel, the Subject good. So it was in the Primitive Church,
the Christians were good subjects, but Nero, Domi^ian Julia^ bad Princes.

Cain and Abel, to whom is promised continuance of their states, each his own
place, after most unlike merits and deserts.

This David knew of Saul, a bloody, Bu^cherly barbarous Prince that so eagerly
hunted after his life to take it, ^ Samuel 24, 1^
yet he (not a private man, but one appointed and anointed by God to reign in
his stead) was so far from hurting him, when God had delivered him into his
hands in the Cave, that his heart smote him when he had but cut off the skirt
of his garment; 1 Samuel 24, 5. Verse 10.
and the reason he gives for it is because he was the Lords Anointed.

What should I speak of Nebuc^ aduezzar King of Assyria, who wasted all
Palestina plundered Jerusalem, Isaiah 12, 29.
put out the eyes of the King, slew his Sons, Jeremiah ^9, 6, 7 ^ Kings 24.
burnt the Temple; took away the holy vessels, and defiled all places with
rape ^uine and blood, and yet for all this his unmatched cruelty and impiety,
Jeremiah* 29, 7.
the Prophets, Jeremy and (...), wrote to those Captive Jews, Bar. 1. 12.
whom he after his glut of butchery had led into Chald^a, to pray for the
prosperity life of him, and his son Belsta^r, that their days might be upon
the Earth as the days of Heaven: and the Prophet (...), Eze^iel 17, 15, 16, 18.
does both blame and threaten Zede^iah, for his disloyalty in revolting from
him (though a heathenish tyrant) whose homager and tributary he was.

What of Saint Paul, and Saint P^^er, who lived, wrote their Epistles, and died
Martyrs under the Reign of bloody, Heathenish, and Athiesticall persecutors?
Yet says one of them, Let every soul be subject to the Higher p^^ers (not
every body, Romans 13, 1, 2
but every Soul, our subjection must not be forced, 1 Peter 2. 17.
but be free and voluntary, coming from the soul) And the other Submity (...)
selv^s to every Ordinance of man for the Lords s^ke; to the King as supreme.

I could abound both with examples and testimonies taken out of the Word of
God, if those holy writings were of any credit in these ^^yes. I am sure the
Christians in the Primitive Church learned from them, that the Tyra^^ie,
Atheism, and prophannesse of their Princes, was not a sufficient cause for them
to thrust them out of their Empire, yea (remembering Saint Paul's precept) even
to resist, Tertul. Apollo,
being offended; and therefore they spent their time (according to Tertullian)
in praying for them, that God would give them, Imperium (...) prolixam donium
securam exercitus fortes; A safe Empire, a long life, Bellarm. de pot.
a quiet house, a valiant army: and this they did not out of fe^re, because
they wanted strength, Pap. lib. 5. c. 7.
(away with that devilish gloss) but merely out of Conscience because they
knew their subjection to be Gods Ordinance: Romans 13, 1.
For the government is not man's but Gods, it is not Earthly, but Heavenly, and
Kings are in a manner deified while they are upon the earth: and that by Gods
own Vote too, Dixi Diiestis, Psalm 82. 6.
I have said ye are God* (says he) and a^ of you are children of the m^st
High* Gods, in ^itle, though not equal in power, God has given them His Name,
though not His Nature, and upon the Earth they serve in Gods stead; as may
appear by that of the Queen of Sheba, 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
to King Solomon: Blessed be the Lord thy God* which delighted in there, to set
thee upon His Throne, that thou may be King, for the Lord thy God. Their
kingdoms are given them by God, the most High rules in the kingdom of men,
Daniel 4, 32.
and gives it to whomsoever he will, Job 36, 7^
Dan. 4. Their Thrones are appointed them by God, Reges co^^ocat in soli^; he
places Kings upon the Throne, he does establish them for ever, and they are
exalted. Job 36. By God they sway their (...), and do instice, Prove. 8. 15.
by me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. Pro. 8. Their crowns are set
upon their heads by God, Psalm 21, 3.
Thou set a grown of pure Gold upon his head. 2 Samuel 12. 7.
Psalm. 21. They are anointed by God; I anointed thee King over Israel. 2.
Sam. 12. Their Kingdom is Gods, their throne is Gods, their scepter is Gods,
their crown is Gods, their anointing Gods, and their royal persons adorned
with all these are so divine and sacred, 2 Samuel 14. 17.
that they themselves are the angels of God, and (...) of the most high. Psalm
105. 15.
And therefore has God given a special charge concerning them, Nolite tangere
Christos meos, touch not mine anointed; It is not, ne tangite, but nolite
tangere: we must be so far from doing it that we must not have so much as
the least will or inclination to go about it. N^lite ta^gere. Yea, say he be a
tyrant for manners, and a heathen for religion, all is one, he is Christus
domini, the Lords Christ then whom none is greater then Christus dominus, the
Lord Christ himself, he must not be touched. And as from God he receives his
power, so for the good or bad administration thereof he is to be acco^^table
only unto God, and not unto any mortal creature.

And for this cause were Kings anointed with oil to signify their supremacy,
The Kings supremacy.
for the oil will still be uppermost: and for this end (it may be) God would
have the first king he set over Israel, to be higher by the head and
shoulders then all the people, 2 Samuel 10. 23.
for the head being the place of policy, the shoulders of strength and power,
do show that no policy nor power should be above him. He may justly claim the
commendation of John Baptist, for surely among them that are borne of women
there has not risen a greater. Matthew 11. 11.
And therefore Kings are called higher powers, Romans 13. 1.
the Heads of the tribes, the children of the most high: a Deo pri^^us, post
Deum secundus, reckon not God and the King is the first, but count God and He
is the second. Psalm 8^. 6
Nothing in all created nature is more great, more excellent; not the
high priest, for he is his servant, as Abimelech confessed nnto Saul, 1 Samuel
^2, 15
1. Sam. 22. not Saint Paul that great and glorious Doctor of the Gentiles,
forstanding at Caesar's judgment seat, he confessed that there he ought to be
judged, and to submit himself to his censure, Acts 25. 10.
Act. 25, Nay, not Christ himself, as he was man, for he gave tribute unto
Caesar, Matthew 22. 10.
and denied not but that the power of Pilate was given him from above. John 19.
11.
In a word, who knows not that this is one of his royal titles, supreme
judge over all persons, and in all causes, over all persons, be they who they
will be, be they who they can be, Ecclesiast. 8. 4.
who may say unto him, what do thou Ecclesiastes 8. 4 who of the Priests?
who of the Peerees? who of the People? who but He that put him in authority
Almighty God?

And as he is supreme Judge over all persons so in all causes whatsoever;
defend the preservation of your liberties, of your estates, of your lives, nay,
of religion it self: He is supreme in all causes; the cause cannot be so just
as to deprive him of his supreme power.

I could multiply proofs out of Scripture to confirm this truth, take one for all, Mat. 26. 5^.
which may stand as one in a third place of Arithmatick for a 100 they are the
words of our Savior Christ, Mat. 26. when he was betrayed into the hands of
the Jews; behold one of the^ that were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and
drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest, and smote off his
ear: (what cause could be more just then to defend the person of our most
blessed Savior? yet see how he was rebuked for his pains:) Then said Jesus
unto him, put up again thy sword into it is place, for all they that take the
sword, shall perish with the sword: how so? why, Mat. 22. 20.
because it was drawn without the consent of the Magistrate, to whom Christ
himself did acknowledge subjection: so then this was the doctrine of the
Prophets, Ioh, 19. 11.
of the Apostles, of the Primitive Christians, yea, of Christ himself,
therefore for my own part, till there be a new bible made, or all these
places raced out of the old one, I am resolved (by the help of God) to live and
dye in this opinion.

But what say the Jesuits to all this? their divinity is, that it is not
lawful for Christians Tolerare Regem infidelem aut haereticum: Bell de Rom
Potif. lib, cap 7.
to suffer a King that is an infidel or heretic to live, Jesuits Traitors
but to take him away with all speed, and heresy (we all do know) has a
large extent with them, if he do but cross the Pope, any thing will serve to
make him an heretic, and then he must down. Smalmeron in Rom, 13, disp, 4.
And if you tell them of Saint Paul and Saint Peter, that these were of another
mind, Salmeran very mannerly tells you again, Blanditur Paulus imperatoribus,
sic^t and Petrus in priore sua epistola, and Peter and Paul be both a couple of
claw-backs, they do nothing else in those their sayings then flatter and cogge
with the Emperors that then reigned; but St. Peter nor St. Paul need not care
what such men say, it is well known their tongue is no slander, for they would
be as ready to say as much of Christ himself if he stand in their way.

And would you think it? Schismatics Traitors.
There are such another sect in the world, who though they look diverse ways,
yet like Sampsons foxes they hold together by the tail, and carry fire betwixt
them to burn up Church and State. Read but over the profane writings of Knox
and Bucanan, and you shall find how mightily the devil has prevailed in the
hearts of them who would have bin accounted great professors of religion,
the^r language is such as wou^d ^care a very atheist, ^ue. de ju. reg. apud
Scot. pa. 70
and (...) him swear to abandon all religion: namely, that minister, may
excommunicate Princes, and they being by excommunication cast into Hell, are
not worthy to enjoy life upon the earth That if Princes (...) against God and
his truth, Knox in lib, ad Aug eb Scol. pa. 78. In Hist. ^col. page 343. 15 his
appeal. page 33.
their subjects are free from their oath of allegiance: that God has appointed
the nobility to bridle the inordinate appetite of Princes, and in so doing,
they cannot be accounted as ^esisters of authority. That it is the duty of the
nobility to suppress the rage and insolency of Princes; and that the people
have power to bestow or take away the crown at their pleasure, having no
respect to birthright, to succession, to propinquity of blood at all. You
firebrarnds of strife, you trumpets of sedition, you red horses, whose sitters
have taken peace from the earth, you furies of hell, whose voices are lightnings
and thundrings, whose breathing is nothing but sword, fire, rages, rebellions,
(pardon me if I shake off all respect of civility, Apoc, 6, 4,
toward such miscreants) is this orthodox divinity? is this according to
Christ and his Apostles? surely the devil dropped poison into their pens to
infect all Christian countries with disobedience and disorder, for let them but
show me but one place of holy Scripture; (and on^ is but a small number, yet let
them show me but one) either in the old or new testament, or any one of the
ancient fathers, who have let fall so loose a speech, as may be strayned to
make good their tenets, and ^ will be their bondsman for ever, therefore were
not the spirit of division, (I mean the devil^) bin seated in their souls,
hey would not so openly opposed the settlings of their cotton brain against
the express command of holy Scripture, which forbid leth so much as resistance
under any Prince, though never so heathenish or tyrannical: but as for the
word rebellion, the very thought of it was so odious to Christ and his
Apostles, that (as Sol^n made no law against paricide, because he thought no
man would prove so wicked as to commit such a horrid fact) I do not find it so
much as once mentioned throughout the new testament, yet they have got a trick
to produce some examples out of the old testament of rebellion, Rom, 13, 2, ^.
(which though were ever attended upon with heavy judgments from God) but I
would feign know what they can force from thence: will they ^ake over all
histories for examples of rebellion? and then argue a facto adjus, and say
every thing is lawful that they find has bin done? we must judge facts by
law, and not laws by facts: for there has bin no fact so impious, which may
not be parraleld by examples, will they justify their gross sacrilege, their
^^^aturall ince^^^, with their frequent adulteries, their notorious lying,
their uncharitable judging, Ioshu, 7, 19. 2. Sam. 23. 2 Samuel 11. 4. Act. 5, 4.
Mat. 7. ^.
because they have for these examples of Achan, Ammon, David, Ananias and
Saphyra, the Scribes and Pharisees? who then has but half an eye and cannot
see how these men's pens have ranged, and their judgments raged beyond all
compass, and course of reason or religion?

But to let go these (as they and the devil would have it) what policy can
there be in it for the Subject to oppose or resist the King upon any terms?
for what can we expect from thence but murders, outrages, ripes, No policy in
resisting.
ruin and desolation? for what if the Prince aggrieved be able to make and
maintain his party as King John and Henry the third did against their Peers?
what if some foreign Prince whom it may well concern as well in honor to
see the Law of nat^ons observed, as also in policy to break the neck of those
proceedings which may form preced^n^s against himself, do come in and side
with his brother king, and in the end play the kite with them both? will not
this prove a pretty piece of policy? were it not far more safe to take Saint
Paul's counsel and be obedient unto Princes, not only for conscience sake,
because they are the ministers of God, Romans 13. 5. ver 3 1 Timothy 2. ^.
but for our own sake, because he is so to us for good: it is for our safety
and tranquillity that we may lead under them a quiet and peaceable life; The
Prince is the soul of the body politic.
for the Prince is the very soul of the body poli^ick, and what is the body
without it but a confused lump, unformed, senseless, witless, and destitute
of all means to maintain or uphold it self, but it is quickened, and moved,
and provided for and kept from dissolution only by the soul. Now of the soul
there are two principal receptacl^s, The King is the head,
although she be totain tot^, et tota in qualibet part. The head and the
heart, such is the king in respect of the body politic, he ^s the head, in
which regard we should have him in so high esteeem, as we should not only seek
his ease and welfare, but even expos^ our selves to any perils for his sake
and safety, we should be so far from offering violence unto him, that we
should readily receive the strokes and wounds in^ented against him; yea there
is no part of us but would willingly endure pain by incision, scarrifying,
ligature, or issue to remedy his grievances, especi^illy considering how dear
and tender all the members are to him: for such is the sympathy and
fellowseeling that he has of ^he griefs of the whole body, that when the most
inferior member suffers, he suffers together with it, even as a little wet
or cold taken in the remotest part of the body has forthwith a ready passage
to the head. The King is the Heart.
Again, the king is the heart of the body, which is the well of life, Aristot.
^he furnace of heat, the centry of blood, the first thing in man that lives,
and the last that dies, and look as the heart sends forth sometimes the blood
and spirits with a full flush plenteously replenishing all the parts of the body.
And otherwhile again, being possessed with a fe^^^ of imminent danger, retireth
them home with all speed to his little sconce, to comfort and fortify it
self: and judge if this be not sometimes the case of Kings. And whilst you
are judging of that, I will pass fairly on to the second point; 2 Point.
which is, that Abels innocence did not free him from subjection to his
brother. If the superior have his power from God, the inferior ought to obey
him for God, no man's virtue that he has in himself, A threefold duty from
every subject to his Sovereign.
can be a warrant for him to be vicious to another, but who ever is holy and
righteous must express it in duties to God and men. Therefore be the subject
never so much in the right, and the sovereign in the wrong, yet
notwithstanding there is due from every one of them to him a threefold duty: 1
Honor,
honor to his person; subjection to his calling* obedience to his law. First
we must honor his person, and that in word and deed; the first consists in
speaking honorably and reverently of him, he being no other then the
derivative, or rather diminutive of Almighty God. Exodus 22. 28.
This Moses enjoyneth Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse
the rulers of thy people, no, not so much as in our thoughts, says Solomon,
Eccles 10. 20. Numbers 12. 8.
Ecclesiastes 10 And this God takes notice off. Nu. 12. 8. as a special
indignity done unto him, wherefore are ye not afraid (says he to Aaron and
Miriam) to speak against my servant, against Moses, not against my servant
Moses, but more emphattically, against my servant, against Moses: against my
servant, although he were not Moses: against Moses my great serv^nt, seeing he
is both my servant, and my servant Moses, wherefore are ye not afraid to
speak against him? When this searching and piercing presumption shall get up
to this highest step and dare to pry into the kings dispositions, intentions,
affections, actions, then is it come to the height of the he^t of Ch^^n, the
stubbornnes of Esau the peevishnes of Shemei, the conspiracy of A^solom, the
treachery of Judas, and deserves with them condign punishment. For the heart of
a King is unsearcheable as the height of heaven, and the depth of the earth
says Solamon it is as well presumptuous, as unpossible to discover it, Prove,
^^. 3, Eccles. 8. 4
therefore says he again, Eccles. 8. who shall say unto him, what do thou?
But what is words without deeds? another sort then of homage i^ is that we owe
unto our Sovereign, is to honor him with our goods, with our estates, yea,
(if occasion serves) with our very lives. The children of Belial said, how
shall this man save us? and they despised him in their hearts, and brought no
gifts to him, 1 Samuel 10. 27.
1 Samuel 10. 27. if they were the children of Belial that brought the King no
gifts, then whose children are they that debar him of that which is his own?
Judges 5.
I have read over the 5th. of Judge and have pretty well observed the several
passages therein, how God has in that renowned song of Deborah, provided an
honorable commemoration of them who did assist His cause: First the Princes
have their place: The Princes of Isachar were with her, Verse 3. 15.
verse. 15. And then the Governors the great Persons, and officers of State,
they have their place, because they ^^^^red themselves willingly in that
service, Verse 9.
verse 9. And after them the merchants that rode upon white asses; and the
Judges that sat in judgment, verse 10. Verse 10.
Yea an unlikelier sort of people then any of these, even they that walked by
the way in the same verse. And lastly the whole body of the people, they have
their place in this honor, because they offered themselves (and what will he
deny, that offers himself?) and willingly in this service: This was the
honorable mention that God afforded them, who did assist Him, but what says
he of those, who for collateral respects preuaricated or withdrew themselves
from this employment; he gives them a brand that should stick by them ever
after: Reubens heart was to big to come in The divisions of Reuben were great
thoughts of heart verse. Verse 16.
16. Ambition of the Hi^hest ^lace, desire of presedency in offices of
employment, greatness of heart, and an unwillingnes to be under the command of
any other do offentimes retard ^^en the cause of God: so is there a reproach
and increpation laid upon Dan^uer. Verse 17.
17. why did Dan remayn in the ships? for this they were condemned though the
ships were their own; and upon Gilead, that abode beyond Jordan and As^er that
continue on the seashore when the cause o^ God was in hand; and for this was
Meroz cursed, yea cursed bitterly by the Angel of the Lord because they came
not to the help of the Lord, Verse 23.
to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Verse 20.
And therefore for the encouragement of those that did assist him in any
proportion, though their assistance was no way competent against so poten^ an
enemy, God fought himself to, they fought from heaven, the stars in their
order fought against Sisera, verse 20. The Stars in their order fought, let
no man pretend that he fights for God, when he fights out of order, for God
will not fight, nor be fought for disorderly.

The duty that every Subject owes to his Sovereign, is submission to his high
place and calling, 2 Submission.
He being no other then Gods Lieutenant and Vicegerent upon the Earth: And that
not so long as he does w^ll, and no longer, as some simple people imagine, for
what rebellion, what (...) has ever been made, but under some of these
pretenses? what can a Prince do or leave undone that may not thy malicious or
ignorant interpretation forfeit His Crown? No, no. God has better provided
for them then so; They do not hold their Crowns ad placitum populi, at the
peoples pleasure, but it was God that set them in their Thrones, and it is God
only that can remove them: Le^ them so behave themselves as they will answer
it before God at the last day, (...) our parts there is no shift for us, but
we must be subject. And why should we not in this, as well as in other
things? we can endure (...) patience unseasonable weather, unfruitful years,
unwholesome seas^^^, and such other judgments of God, because we know they
come from God (for shall there be evil in a Citis, Amos. 3. 6.
and the Lord has (...)) and why should we not as well tolerate the
imperfections of Princes? Since they are Ministers sent from God to do his
will? If the Lord be (...) pleased with us, Romans 13. 5. 2 C^^o. 1.
He will set a wise King over us, whom he loves, 2 (...) 1. If he b^e
offended at us, He will remove Him, and set up a worse in his room: For, for
the fin^es of the Land, the Kings are changed, Pro. 28. 2. whither they be good
or bad, Prove. 28. 2.
there is Digitus Dei, the finger of God in it, and therefore not to be resisted
nor repined at, but to be endured with patience.

And yet we want one duty still that we owe unto Our Sovereign, and that is
Obedience to his Laws. 3. Obedience.
Which though they do not bind the Conscience primario per se, principally and
by themselves, bec^^^^ he only who can punish the Soul; can bind the soul
yet they do it per concomitantiam, Matthew. 10. 28.
by way of concomitancie, because they depend upon the Law of God, and are
agreeable unto it, which primario and per se, does bind the Conscience.

It is true indeed a man's Conscience binds him more than the commandment of
the Magistrate, because the Conscience has none directly above it, but God
only: yet herein we must distinguish, by putting a diff^^ence between those
things that are indifferent in themselves, and those things which are simply
forbidden or commanded. In things indifferent we are more bound to follow the
command of the Magistrate then our own consciences, but in those things that
are good and evil in themselves, we are bound to follow our conscience then
the command of the magistrate again there 's a general mistake among us whilst
we do not distingu^sh between subjection and Obedience; for there may be
subjection where there is no obedience: the on is always due; though not the
other* or if it be it is by distinguishing between active and pas^^e obedience:
If the King commands me a thing not Lawful, I will not obey Him Faciendo by
doing it; but Patiendo^ I hope I shall by submitting my self to suffer his
pleasure for not doing it:

This was the very case of the three children Dan. Dan. 3. 18.
3. be it known unto thee O King that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship
the golden image which thou have set up; They refused to yield obedience to his
unjust comands faciendo, yet did they acknowledge him to be their King and did
willingly submit to suffer any torment that he should be pleased to inflict
upon them. 1 Samuel 8.
This was that which God by the mouth of Samuel told the Israelites before
hand: 1. Sam. 8 After he had admonished them what heavy, what open injustice
they should endure under some of their kings, he concludes, and ye shall cry
out in that day, because of your King, and the Lord will not hear you; as if he
had sa^d, ye shall gr^^an under your burden, but you shall have no power either
to shrink from it or shake it off. I but the people of England, are not like
the children of Isra^l, they for their disobedience were made slaves unto their
Governors, Object, 1.
but we are a free nation, I have Laws to be ruled by, let the King say what
he will; God be thanked that we can tell now what is lawful, and what not.
Resp.
It was not so from the beginning, for in the first Heroical ages, it is
evident the people were not governed by any positive Law, but their Kings did
both judge and command by their word, by their will, by their absolute power,
Sir John Hayward.
without either restraint or direction, but only of the law of nature, but
because it grew both trublesome and tedious for all the people to receave their
right from one man (as Iethro advised Moses) therefore were laws invented and
officers appointed to execute the same under the supreme Magistrate. Genesis
18. 18.


I but our Kings are bound to observe the Laws as well as we, Object. 2.
They take an Oath at their Coronation to do nothing thereunto repugnant, and
if they do, They shall find that there is law for Them as well as for others:
which is as if in direct terms they should say thus much: Sir Kings, whilst
our heads were under your girdles, we were content to be obedient to your
commands, because we had no way to help it, but now we have gotten the wind
of you, and made you swear that you will not transgress ^he laws
established, we tell you plainly the case is altered, you hold your crowns
merely at our courtesy, and are indeed no other then Lievtenants General, we
have the power upon your m^sdemeanour to keep you up, or to put you down.

Profane men! Resp*
Is Christian Religion become a mere polecy! does the word of God change and
vary with the times? are Gods ordinances alterable according to the wilfulness
of the Giddy multitude; was it death in former times to disobey the ruler of
the people, and may he now with Acteon be chased, nay worried by his own
hounds? May the Lords Lieutenant, John 1. 18.
the Lords Anointed be kept in, or east out of state at the pleasure of his
subjects? Is he become of worse condition then the Lord of a Manor, then a
parish Priest, then a poor Schoolmaster, who cannot be thrust out by any
under their charge?

O my soul come not thou into such secrets. Genesis ^9. 6.
But what if the king do at his coronation take an oath that he will be are
himself regardfull of the accomplishment of the laws established? does he in
so doing condit^^^ restrain himself or his authority? should he not be King
if he did not take that oath? Surely yes, only it is his gracious pleasure to
make an honorable promise that he will endeavor to discharge his duty, which
promise he it bound to perform by the laws of conscience and state, yet if
he do not, his person only is hereby affected, not his authority, the one is
tied and bound in honor, the other is in force, though performances fail. The
promise of the Prince is free and voluntary, he need not have made it except
he had would, yet being made, his duty in performing it is necessary; duty I
call it only in respect of God before whom he swear, but to us it was a
princely exce^^ency and an act of grace.

But is not the King then subject to the law as well as others? Object. 3. Resp.
^rifler, to the directive part of the law he is, but not to the coactive part
of it, as thou would have it: as the law is the rule of justice, and the line
by which both Prince and people must be guided, so is the Prince subject
thereunto: but as it is an instrument which the Prince uses in ruling of the
people, so is the King free and not subject to it.

I come now to unburden your overwearied patience with a brief conclusion,
Conclusion.
by way of application to these present times. If a bad Prince must be
honored, submitted to, and obeyed out of conscience, then how much note a good
one with all readiness? If it be wicked and bloody tyrants due, how much more is
it required from all men to godly and pious Princes? under whose peaceable and
religious Government, the gospel of Christ is cherished, learning advanced,
factious spirits supprested, wholesome laws enacted, the bond of unity
maintained, and our very goods and lives preserved*

It was a passionate and pathetical speech that Saint Ambrose h^d upon the
death of Gratian and Val^^tin^an two famous Emperors; Percussa eras, o
ecclesia in una maxi^^ ^um amitteres Gratianum p^aebuisti alteram maxillam cum
Va^entini^^^ creptus est, (...) ^taque non in una sed in utraque maxi^^^
lacrimae tibi sunt: Thou were smitten, o poor Church on the one cheek when
thou lostest Gratian; thou turnedst the other cheek when Valentini^^ died,
justly therefore have thou tears not on one but on both thy cheeks: I may say
^t truly of this Church of England she had a blow on the one cheek when famous
Elizabeth died, the suffered on the other check when good king James was taken
from us, and just cause had we to have wept with both eyes, had not these
wounds bin healed by the coming of our most gracious Sovereign King Charles,
for whom let us give God thanks, and think our selves as happy in him, as any
nation in the world is in their Prince, indeed he is set as a sparkling gemme
in the ring of this round world not to be paraleld by any or all the princes of
the earth for his piety and uprightness toward God, for his temperance and
sobriety in himself, for his mercy and clemency to his people.

Prolong o God the Kings life and his years as many generations, Psalm 61. 6.
give him o Lord the desire of his heart, Psalm 21. 2.
and deny him not the requests of his lips: prevent him with the blessings of
goodness, Psame 59. 10.
and set a crown of pure gold upon his head, ^ebuke the company of speare-men,
Psalm 21. 3.
the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the People, till every one
Submit himself with PIECES of SILVER, Psalm 68. 30.
Scatter thou the people that delight in war. 1 Samuel 25. 29.
But let the soul of our Lord be bound up in the bundle of life, let his glory
be great in thy salvation, Prove. 21. 5. 6.
honor and majesty do (...) lay upon him, give him everlasting felicity and
make him glad with the joy of thy countenance, Psalm 132. ^18.
as for his enemi^^ cloth them with shame, Psalm 70. 13.
but upon himself let his crown flourish: So we thy people and sheep of thy
pasture, Revel. 1. 7.
will give thee thanks for ever, we will show forth thy praises to al
Generations, even so, Amen.

FINIS.

