CONSIDERATIONS TOWARD A Peaceable Reformation in Matters Ecclesiastical.

Submitted to the judicious Reader, By CALYBUTE DOWNING.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Hearn. Anno Dom. 1641.

CONSIDERATIONS toward a peaceable Reformation in Matters Ecclesiastical.
1. THat the straightest, and so the shortest Rule, to compose differences in
ways, is to agree of ends; for deliberations are not duly drawn up, when the
design is uncertain. He that has no certain port, has no certain wind:
Therefore it were to be wished, before we go too far in Collateral heats,
and divertive retardings in diversity of Projects, that we well understood what
Reformation of our Church does import in a sober sense: For until that be
fore-laid, and allowed by an Universal Vote, it will be very easy for the
averse party to blast all blessed beginnings, and to raise rubbish to become a
Rock, or at least a Remora of our Reformation.

2. That the work in hand is not planting of a Church, laying fundamentals,
nor only the reducing of practices to fore-laid principles, but the perfecting
and improving, cum effictis, those Orders and Ordinances that have been either
omitted or corrupted; and in the removin^ what does pregnantly produce such
distempers: That so we may secure future Relapses by real Clauses
conservative.

3. That though the rule of Supernaturals is not defective, nor difficult in
the necessaries to the being or well being of the Catholic Church; yet in
relation to the better being of particular Churches, there must be beating out
of advantages by serious consideration of consequences; not as to single
salvation, but in respect of common edification, as we are collectively
considered in a visible society: Now the fewer deductions that we admit, the
safer it is, both in relation to humane reason, and Antichristian Tyranny,
which runs up all into Authority; which is brought in not only as
auxiliarie, but as authentic also in a concurrent way.

4. That it is very safe, and savours of a prudent and peaceable spirit, not
easily to conclude many things in Government, Iure Divino; For as fundamentals
in point of belief are few, and fully revealed, and soberly to be held without
any supplementive additionals; and the admitting of more is the cause of all
the mischievous miseries in the Church in point of Doctrine: so it sets us at a
distance from peace, at defiance amongst our selves, and disableth all
accommodation, to pitch down a Government Iure Divino; yea, produces many
hard charges, prejudicating the truth of God; and gives ground plausibly to
arrest and attaint Religion, for suspicion of disturbance or incroachment, by
such fore-stalling the Civil State, and rendering the business of Reformation
for the future impossible.

5. That though in a degenerate time, and Church, it be well and wisely done to
discover as much as may be for Information, as necessary to Reformation; yet
we may do as well to be wary, that we discard not all we dislike with the
same degree of detestation: So that as we have cause not to bless all that we
would have, with a Iure Divine, so we may find reason not to blast all that we
desire should be removed, with an Antichristian brand: For we are fur from
peace, while we put ill-sounding consequences upon other men's opinions and
practices, or by provoking parallels, or envious aggravations, represent them
odious. This is very hardly to be avoided, where affairs are carried with few
heads and many hands; and when they take destructive work to be their way, and
that to have most of Justice which has most of Primitive proceedings in it.
This course has cost Christendom dear, for seldom any Councels but fell
foul upon opinions by extreme sentences: Now though middle Councels are
seldom safe in affairs of State, yet seldom hurtful in business of the
Church.

6. That though it be unpleasing, and may prove pernicious, peremptorily to lay
down a way of government, Iure Divino, to the decrying of all others in an
exclusive way; yet it is very reasonable and conformable to the principles of a
Christian Church, to propose the designs Iuris Divini, coasting in all
consultations closest, to that which is by divine permission of approbation; as
what is most for Christian peace, freest from scandal, fullest for
edification, most for the glory of God: which Rules bind not only because
they are written, but also because they are reason. And in thus doing we shall
be true to the end and reason of the State, which is to be a most Christian
national Church.

7. That as change is no wise man's choice, but h^^d chance often puts him to
yield to it, who would never positively have pitched upon it for a remedy; so
it is reason in alterations to take care that some things which are mutable, as
to their original, be not too easily changed upon color of Inconvenience,
without such a necessity as is as easily discovered: For as it is dangerous ^^
venture upon the inconveniences of any great alteration, so it will be difficult
to avoid the like grievances upon the same grounds, because if we change now
evil for good, upon men's advice, why may we not change again for the better;
and so we shall always be meddling under the consideration of mending: and
while we complain of Innovations, we shall do nothing but innovate.

8. That we shall do well to distinguish upon what is to be reformed, whether
the corruptions be incorporated by Custom, have color of Law, or are mere
matter of Fact, which do rise and fall with a faction: Dis-usage to carry men
off insensibly, may be safe in the first; overruling by interpretation in the
second; and exemplary discountenance in the third; for where such men get no
heat, they will take no cold. And so we shall appear, such as seek more to
remove what we fear then what we hate.

9. That as it is a slip in Judgment to confound Persons and things, Fact and
Law, in a destructive way, so it may be an error in good desires; and
something dash our design to go direct and downright ways, though to
upright ends in point of Edification, without allowance of due time for men to
see reason in what is laid down as a Rule: For all sudden departures are
dangerous and offensive, as prodigious; therefore it may be a consideration
worthy the weighing, and will prove a great assurance of peace, to lay
foundations of Government at a good latitude, that the Reformation may be of
a growing constitution; and so may bear up against corruption; as well
underlaid by its own good temper, and not only stand or fall by the temper or
distempers of men.

10. That if it be not well to go on in provoking ways, when it is possible to
pacify and sweeten, then it is not wise to stir many matters at once,
because many matters engage many men; yea, many times move more than is fit to
be removed, or to be discovered moveable: Therefore in punishing persons,
Reformers shall do well to be tender of the honor of Offices; and in
discarding Superstition in point of places, times, and performances, take heed
of fostering profaneness in any of those respects, I confess it is hardly to
be avoided, but that party which is to suffer Reformation, must needs for the
time be near to ruin: for many that hate the Clergies Canons and Orders, love
not Gods Commandments nor Ordinances.

11. That though Civil States may be free from temporal turns and interests
in the Reformation they design on the Church, yet they shall hardly avoid the
suspicion of it, if the Clergy be not respectively called to Consultation:
Therefore it may be well, and is expected that there be communicating not
only in a private way with men, whose minds they know aforehand, and it may
be, have already suggested their sense; but with such also as are dis-ingaged
and resolved to be reserved until such a time, as a public agitation may
give ground to declare their judgments; this will be of no ill influence upon
the whole work in relation to the Christian world.

12. That seeing Politic Laws should be laid in with Moral possibility, and
multiplicity of commands makes them impossible, as well as the difficulty of
the duties; therefore it is believed a good course not to over-lay any State
with positive penal Laws, promissarie Oaths, discovering Subscriptions, or
multitude of Ceremonies; especially a Church that has the Law of God as a
perfect rule of Doctrine, Manners, and necessary Discipline: But let the
things be few that are required, and then let them be strongly commanded. For
many indifferent things have cost too dear, having been put on too hard upon
pious and peaceable men, without any accommodation or tolleration: Thus without
cases reserved to an arbirrarie power, conscientious men may be moderately
dealt with, that they complain not of a rigorous remedy as a grievance and
persecution of mankind.

FINIS.

