THE DOVVNFALL OF GREATNESS. For the loss of GOODNESS.

A POEM: OR, A short Survay of Thomas Lord Wentworth, Late Earl of Strafford,
Lord Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Army, General Governor, and Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord President of the Council established in the North
parts of England, and of the County and City of York, one of His Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter.

His History, and Tragedy: Who was accused, and impeached of high Treason,
arraigned, found guilty, condemned, and beheaded on Tower Hill, May 12. 1641.

portrait of Thomas Wentworth 1593-1641) first Earl of Strafford and Lord
Deputy of Ireland

Printed in the Year, 1641.

THE DOVVNFALL OF GREATNESS FOR THE LOSS OF GOODNESS.
IN this (as in a mirror) you may see
Wentworth, want worth, his life and tragedy,
He was a Peer, once Pillar of this Land,
Who a whole Kingdom had at his command;
Indeed, What had he not? The confluence
Of all things make men happy, Emminence
Bove others, Learning, Knowledge, Eloquence,
The favor of his Prince, familiarity
With his Pe^res; he had volubility
Of his tongue, with the strength of memory,
Honors, offices, wealth, and potency.
He wa^ a man of admirable parts,
Expert and skillful both in arms and arts;
Soldier, and Scholar, able to compare
With Ajax, or Ulysses, for his rare
Perfections; a grand Counceller of State;
Counsel might make him see, not shun his Fate.
This great man's execution long expected,
Did come at last, and quickly was effected;
So mortal was his life, that daring death
Deprived him at one stroke of vital breath.
Why then, hail death! Lord of the land of clay!
Emperor of Churchyards, King of Golgotha!
Seeing neither Arms, nor Arts, nor Caesar's smile
(Whose glorious beams do bless this British I Will)
Could guard him from deaths fatal blow; fix this
Oh Truth, in every Statists soul, All bliss
Borrowed from breath is transient: even as boys
With Cards build Castles, so titles are but toys,
Erected, and strait ruined with a breath;
But virtue survives Marble, Time, and Death.
Honors are bubbles, Phantasmes that delude
Dull souls: by them stout Strafford was subdude.
His haughty mind aspiring got a fall
So ponderous, that it caused his funeral.
Unfortunate he was from's Mothers womb,
And so continued has unto his Tomb.
Some are slain by ambition, some by lust;
He like a stone was cut in his own dust.
His Rule in Ireland' its well known to all,
Was potent, tyrannous, and tragical.
His life was a sad play, his Mothers Womb
From which he ent'rd, was the Tyring-Roome;
Wherein with Natures gifts he was so dressed,
That he had acted well, he had been blessed
To all Eternity; happy had he bin,
Had he considered but the stipend of sin,
And called himself t'account his unto Master.
He Had not then met with any such disaster.
But wretched man himself of's self bereaves,
And like a silk-worme his own sorrow weaves.
So inconsiderate and stupid, that he
Seldom prevents his future misery,
Careless and dreadlesse, 't was his malignant Fate
Instead of love, t'incurre the peoples hate,
That hastened his death. May his example prove,
There is no happiness on earth like love.
May it warn great men, who are high in blood,
To be as'ith' State great, so in mind good;
And may it be a caveat unto all
That stand, to take heed lest like him they fall.
Oh, what is glory? or the life of man?
Much like a vapor, far less than a span.
What Is the Earths pomp? a ship of vanity,
In which man sails through a Sea of misery;
And never is in happiness, or rest,
Till he land at Heavens haven, that Port blessed.
He that does well, and's constant, he shall find
Peace in his conscience, comfort in his mind.
He that does ill, Let him remember this,
There is a thing called direful Nemesis.
Judgment (though slow) is sure; And honors flood
Ebbes into air, when man is great, not good.
View it in him, whose splendour was we see
A well writ Prologue to his Tragedy.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE PRECEDENT POEM.
THe fairest Prospect unto honor lies from the hill of virtue, and the best
way to happiness, is in the high rode of holiness. He that lives well,
cannot dye ill; And it is not what a man has, but what he is, that makes him
shine an eminent star in the Sphere of the State.

Stemmata nil faciunt, as the Poet accutely; and nobilitas sola est atque unica
virtus, It Is only virtue which is the truest Nobility, and that which makes man
r^ally noble. Hence it is, that Nobilitas parta is far better than Nobilitas
parta, to be borne great, and to live sordid, is ignominious and wretched; but
merit, and the nob^e actions of the mind far transcend the generositie of
high-borne progenitors. Hinc illae Lachrimae that from a pure fountain should
spring a foul stream; from a good root a bad branch, it is much ^o be
deplored. So true it is that the princely Prophet, Man being in honor, has no
understanding, but is like the Beasts that perish. It Is verified in the subject
of this discourse. Honos to him was Onus, his preferment his perdi^ion, his
pomp was his pain, and his rising his ruin, The higher he was, the heavier
was his fall: with Phaeton he soared too high, and with him aiming at the Suns
Sphere, to be mounted in Charles wain; from the altitude and utmost pitch of
Majesty, he fell to the profundity, extremity, and abisse of misery. Had h^
been holy as he was honorable, righteous as rich, pious as politic and as
prudent for the Sta^e, as he was pestilent to the State, he had been the grace
of his Country, the glory of his age, and a mirror of succeeding generations,
to his eternal fame; had he been what he was not, he had never arrived to such
a sad disaster as he did.

He was a man of admirable abilities; Eloquence, Learning, Courage and valor
were his servants to command; all which he might have employed to the glory of
God, the honor of his Majesty, the good and benefit of the Church and
Commonwealth; but he perverted those good indowments, which nature and the
God of nature was pleased liberally to confer upon him, and employed them to
his own ends, for the effecting and accomplishing of his heinous doings, and
facinorous designs.

His capital crimes were Ambition, Pride, Injustice, Cruelty, and Treachery,
Cum multis aliis, which for brevity sake I omit. He endeavored to subvert the
Laws, the ancient and fundamental Laws and Government of the Kings Realms of
England and Ireland. And whereas he alleged at his trial in Westminster Hall,
that he never introduced an arbitrary and tyrannical Government, although he
has not effected it, (God be thanked, being prevented) yet he intended it. He
exercised tyrannous and exorbitant power above and against the Laws, over the
liberty, states and lives of his Majesty's subjects. He was the firebrand and
incendiary of the wars between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

The better to preserve him and his confederates, he labored (as much as in him
lay) to dissolve Parliaments, and to subvert the rights, liberties, and
privileges of Parliaments, and the ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings.
He who was under the Law did assume to himself a power above Law, yea without
and against Law. He was a terror to the City, and an eyesore to the Country;
his look was grimme, his anger intolerable, his rage implacable. He was tyranny
in the Abstract; without any bowels of compassion. How many honest men did he
cause to be committed? compelling the great Council of the Kingdom of Ireland
to condescend to his commands; trampling on the Peers, oppressing his
Mejesties subjects, and insulting over people of all ranks, quality, and
condition whatsoever. When he was first sent into Ireland with commission and
authority, it was not long after, but he pursued his intents, and produced them
into acts. Such horrid offenses and nefarious crimes did he perpetrate and
commit, of so exorbitant and transcendent a nature, that they indang'rd a
general insurrection against Majesty it self. To contract what I might
protract, He attempted at one blow the ruin of the three Kingdoms, and their
posterity, to bring them into perpetual captivity, which is treason, and in
the highest degree. These were his plots and projects, these were his crimes
and offenses. For which by the high and honorable Court of Parliament, he was
convicted, and condemned to suffer death, in the place and on the day before
mentioned.

Iam illum premit nox, The Sun of his Summers day is now set, and the sad night
of dreadful death is come upon him. Let not the headless multitude (or rather
that many headed monster, bellua multorum capitum) censure and condemn this
great man, as one utterly lost. We ought to judge charitably of him, who died
in the fear of his Maker, and faith of his Redeemer. He had sweet Christian
expressions of his Repentance, of faith, his obedience and humble subjection to
the will of God. Without doubt, God did open his eyes, both before, and at the
hour of his death; And though his latter days were his bad days, (yet in the
judgment of charity) his last day* way his best das.

FINIS.

