ARCHIEPISCOPAL PRIORITY INSTITUTED BY CHRIST, PROVED By plain Testimonies of
Scripture.

Asserted By the Ancient Fathers.

And whereunto all the modern Divines of the Protestant side do fully assent,
without contradiction of any one man.

By SAMUEL DANIEL Master of Arts.

I KING. 7. 21. And he set up the Pillars in the Porch of the Temple: And he
set up the right Pillar, and called the name thereof Jachim: And he set up the
left Pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz,

GAL. 2. 7, 8. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the
Uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was
unto Peter: for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision: the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.

Printed Anno 1642.

To the godly and indifferent Reader.
COurteous Reader, I foresee that at the first view of the title of this Book,
you will think strange to hear such an assertion affirmed, never being
purposely maintained in a particular theme and position by any Divine until
this time. But I pray you first read, and then judge: I hope you shall find
that it is no new broached doctrine, but asserted by many learned Divines of
our own religion, and contradicted by none; I know no Divine, that denies that
Peter had a prioritie of order in the Church of the Jews; I will say no more,
I only desire you to read the discourse, and I hope you shall find it a
doctrine, not only assented to by all our best Divines, but maintained by all
the ancient Fathers, who have written on that Subject; yea, which is most of
all, delivered both to them and us, by Christ and his Apostles so plainly in
the Scriptures; that in my judgment, there can be nothing more plain. I grant
all the Arguments, that are brought by me from the Scriptures, to prove Saint
Peter's prioritie in the Church of the Jews, and Saint Paul's in the Church of
the Gentiles, are not demonstrative, and their conclusions necessary: the most
part are, and the Arguments so strong, that I, in my most serious meditations
cannot imagine, how they can be answered; and those Inferences that are but
probable, being joined together are strong enough.

Nam, quae non prosunt, singula, multa juvant.
As for the places of Scripture set down in my first parallel, I grant they
do not all bear witness for three degress of Church Governors, the most
part do, and all the rest are plain enough for two, even for the first two
Bishops and Presbiters, which is sufficient to show the Imparitie of
Churchmen, and the divine right of Episcopal Government; If ye ask me why I
have not set down the parallel places for the contrary opinion of my
opponents? I answer, because I find not one place-in all the New Testament to
prove a paritie of Church Governors, nor yet denying an Imparitie; If any
Divine will produce one place, from which, so much as a probable conclusion may
be inferred, for the Paritie of Churchmen, I will say (as the Proverb speaks)
Erit mihi magnus Apollo. Well Reader, I beg not thy favor, I hope the truth
shall procure thy affection, if thou will be pleased but to read diligently,
and consider seriously the doctrine delivered in this discourse, and with
indifferency of judgment ponder the reasons on both sides, and the
perspicuitie of Scripture, from the which these reasons are drawn; and I hope
in the mercy of God, he will make the truth manifest to thy understanding,
which the Lord grant for Christ's sake:

Farewell.
Archiepiscopall prioritie Instituted by CHRIST.
Josephus (de bello Iudaico) affirms, that in the days of Ptolomeus,
Philopater, Gabbaeus and Theodosius, two Samaritans, kept a disputation at
Alexandria, against Adronicus and other Jews, for defense of their Temple
which stood upon Mount Gerizim, and undertook to bring proofs of their
assertion out of the Law: But they could not do it, and therefore the King
adjudged them to die; Now I profess before all the world, if I do not prove
from the Scriptures of the New Testament, the Order established by Christ, for
the Government of his Church under the Gospel to be Hierarchicall, I shall be
content to suffer for my presumption: only, let me have one thing granted,
that if my Opponents do not prove their Paritie of the Ministers of the Word,
and mixed Government, by clear evidence of Scripture, and convincing Arguments,
that they be subject to the same punishment.

But oh! if that Law of the Locrians were in force in this Kingdom, that they
who petition for the change and abolishing of old Laws, and establishing of
new, should come with ropes about their necks, willingly offering themselves to
suffer for their attempt, if they did not prove the New better then the Old;
Alas! I say, what would become of many of my Opponents, who are not once able
to produce one clear and plain testimony of Scripture for their Paritie, no
not any of the three Armies of my opponents, neither those who are for the
Presbiterial Government, nor these who stand for Parochial, nor that third
sort, who defends the necessity of Family exercises, and separate
Congregations; Nay, which is more, they are not able to prove their Assertions,
by any necessary and immediate consequence drawn from any place in Scripture.
Now, this must be held for a ground: That whatsoever is not set down in
Scripture, in plain and evident terms, nor yet can be drawn from thence by a
just and immediate consequence, is only to be counted an humane ordination.

But to come to the point, I will undertake by the assistance of Gods Spirit,
to prove in the following discourse, that our wise and provident Master, and
Savior Jesus Christ, as he appointed degrees of Church officers under the
Gospel, so has he also established an order and a prioritie among the chief
Governors themselves. For he who is wisdom it self, appointing a certain
number of chief Governors, of equal power and authority, and knowing that
equality breeds confusion, most wisely did appoint, who should be their
speaker and prolocutor, and order all things in their meetings and assemblies;
and so in this also left us a pattern to follow, in after ages, as his Father
gave unto Moses a pattern, both of his worship, and the government of his
Church under the Law.

Now, because this doctrine may be subject to mistaking, and the malevolous may
calumniate, I will follow the example of the Apostle Paul, whose wisdom it
was, at all times to prevent calumnies and cavils, as in the Epistle to the
Phil. 4.10. to the conclusion of the Epistle, being to commend them for their
beneficence and liberality exercised toward him, lest some malcontents
should have suspected his sincerity and thought, that he had been a man that
had respected more the fleece, then the flock, and had set before his eyes in
the course of his ministry, his own ends and advantage, he prevents this
mistake before he insists in amplifying of their love and kindness toward
him: I speak not this, says he, in respect of want, for I have learned in
whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content, etc. Even so before I enter
upon this discourse, I will premise the testimoni^s of some Protestant Divines,
and some of the precisest strain too, who affirm all that in substance, which
I maintain in this discourse, and these testimonies I do the rather set down
in the beginning, because I have resolved, not to confirm any thing that I am
to deliver in all this Treatise by the testimony of any Divine, ancient or
modern, but only by the Scriptures of the New Testament, wherewith I am able
to prove, that the testimonies of all the ancients do also accord: and this
course chiefly I follow, because my opponents use to brag of the Scriptures, as
if all that they say were Scripture it self, whereas it is nothing else but a
mere abusing of the word of God, and throwing of it like a nose of wax, which
way they will; and as Tertullian says, a very murdering of the Scriptures for
their own purpose. I know it to be true, they make the Scripture speak many
times, that which neither the Penner nor the Dictator ever minded.

My chief purpose in this Discourse is to prove, that as Christ did ordain
certain men, to be chief Governors of his Church: so has he o^dained among
these Governors a Prioritie of order, and a primacie of moderation: but let no
man mistake, and think that this Assertion does favor in any ways, the Popes
pretended supremacy but let him consider, that there is a great difference
between a Primacie and a Supremacy; a dignity and a degree; a prioritie and
a superiority; a primacie of moderation, and a supremacy of Jurisdiction; a
dignity of estimation, and a degree of exaltation; a prioritie of order, and a
superiority of power. Primacie of moderation and prioritie of Order, (which
cannot be without some dignity and estimation) may be, yea must be in all
companies and incorporations, in all meetings and assemblies whatsoever. And
Christ with his own mouth did appoint this prioritie of order, among these
chief Governors, whom he authorized himself with equal power and
authority. Yea, I know no Divine that denies that Peter had a Prioritie of
order amongst the rest of the Apostles, and how can they? for it is evident in
the Scriptures, that he had it both de jure and de facto, but before I bring
Scripture for it, I will produce the testimonies of some Protestant Divines, to
prevent cavils, and I will begin with Calvin.

Calvin in the fourth book of his Institutions, cap. 6. Sect. 8. says, that
the twelve Apostles had one among them to Govern the rest, and it was no
marvel, says he, for nature requires it, and the disposition of men will so
have it, that in every company, although they be all equal in power, there be
one as Governor, by whom the rest shall be directed. There is no Court
without a Counsel, no Senate without a Praetor, no College without a
President, no Society without a Master. Yea, he says farther, speaking of the
Government of the ancient Church, that every Province had a Archbishop among
their Bishops, and that the Council of Nice did appoint Patriarchs, which
should be in order and dignity above Archbishops. It was done, says he, for
the preservation of Discipline, although in this discourse we may not forget,
that it was a thing very rare; For this cause therefore were these degrees
especially appointed, that if any thing shall happen in any particular Church,
which could not there be decided, the same might be referred to a general
Synod, and if the greatness or difficulty of the cause required yet greater
consultation, there were added Patriarchs together with the Synods, from whom
there could be no appeal, but only to a general Counsel. This kind of
Government, says he, some call an Hierarchy a name unproper, and not used in
the Scriptures, as I think: for the holy Ghost would not have us to dream of
any dominion or rule; when question is made of Church Government; but omitting
the name, if we consider the thing it self, we shall find, that those old
Bishops would not frame any other kind of Government of the Church, then that
which God prescribed in his Word, so that Calvin was of opinion, that not only
Archbishops are of Gods Institution, but also Patriarchs.

Piscator in his Appendix Ad Analysin Matthaei, page 22. grants that Peter was
speaker and prolocutor for the rest of the Apostles: we grant, says he, that
Peter answered in name of the rest of the Apostles as their mouth, but not as
their Prince and Head, this we deny.

Bucerus de vi and usu ministerij page 565. speaking of Bishops and
Metropolitans, and of their authority over the Churches and Ministers within
their Diocesses, and Provinces, he says, it was agreeable to the law of Christ.

Hemingius in Enchir, page 367. says, that Paul by order and dignity was
superior to Tim. and Tit. and Tim. in degree and order excelled all the other
Presbiters of Ephesus, and that Titus was chief Governor of the Cretians.
Here this learned Divine acknowledges that Paul was an Archbishop, because in
order and dignity above Timothy and Titus, and that Tim. and Titus were
Bishops, because both in order and degree above their inferior Presbiters,
which I think no man will say was done, but by the special ordinance of God.

Jewel in his defense against Harding, 4. Art, page 195. says, that the rest
of the Apostles honored Saint Peter, as the special member of Christ's body,
with all reverence, and so by this speech acknowledges his primacie of
moderation, and priority of order.

Willet Synop. pagina 274. says, that there was a priority of order amongst
the Apostles themselves, although in respect of their Apostleship, they were
all of one authority: much more, says he, should there be order and degrees
among the Ministers of the Church, who are inferior to the Apostles. And
again he says, that Paul was ordained the chief Apostle of the
uncircumcision, and Peter of the Circumcision, Gal. 2.2. and further he says,
we also grant, that Peter when he confessed Christ for and in the name of the
rest, had a Primacie of order and a priority at that time, who also for, and in
the name of the rest, received the Keys of the Church; and thus much says he,
Cyprian acknowledges, Hoc erant caeteri Apost. quod fuit Petrus, the rest of
the Apostles were the same that Peter was, having the fellowship of power and
honor, but the beginning is from one, that the Church may appear to be one,
De simplicitati praelat. In these words of Cyprians quoted by Willet, to
confirm his preceding doctrine, acknowledges first a prioritie of order
amongst the Apostles, next that Peter had this prioritie; thirdly, that Peter
was chief Apostle of the Circumcision, and Paul of the uncircumcision.
Fourthly, he acknowledges that when Peter confessed Christ in name of the
rest, and received the keys in name of the rest, that then he received this
Prioritie of order. And lastly, confirms all this by the Testimony of Cyprian.

Willet in plain terms speaks for Peter's prioritie, page 155. We deny not,
says he, a primacie of order to have been in Peter, but that he was the head
and commander of the rest, that we deny.

Chemnitius in his Harmony, cap. 50. page 517. grants to Peter a primacie
amongst the Apostles, but denies that he has any supremacy above the rest: as
it is, says he, most apparent, that Peter was chief among the Apostles,
notwithstanding his dominion over the Clergy, can no ways be proved.

Lysetus page 1231. Harmon says, It is one thing to be first for orders sake
among those, who are of equal authority, and another thing to have power and
Authority over their brethren, the first we grant Peter received of his Master,
but not the second.

Marlorat upon the 1 Cor. 9.5. says, We acknowledge Peter to have bin the
first of the Apostles, as it is ever necessary in all meetings, that there be
one to preside, but this primacie of Peter's was not a domination, nor a
commanding power; yea, he says further, that he had it with the consent of all
the Apostles, so that by this it appears, that Marlorat is of this mind, that
although the rest of the Apostles grudgedat James and John's aspiring to this
dignity, yet they were all content that Peter should have it. Dodelius on the
Epistle to the Ephesians, written by Ignatius, fol. 240. confesses that Peter
was called the mouth of the Apostles, because he was Ordine princeps, that is
first and chief in order and precedencie.

Fulk Rh. Test. Gal. 2. Anotat. Therefore it was not lawful to Peter, to whom
by God was committed the chief Apostleship of the Circumcision, to forsake
this charge and take upon him, the chief Apostleship of the Gentiles; and
again he says, though he came to Rome, and preached at Rome, and died at
Rome, yet he was the chief Apostle of the Circumcision still, and Paul the
chief Apostle of the uncircumcision and Gentiles; therefore the Pope might
more probably have conveyed his title of Supremacy from Saint Paul then from
Saint Peter.

Perkins on the Galat. cap. 2. The Apostle S. Paul was ordained by God to be
the chief Apostle of the Gentiles, as St. Peter was of the Jews; and James
and Cephas, and John, that were the chief Apostles, did acknowledge him for
their Colleague and gave him the right hand of fellowship. Perkins upon the 2.
Galat. ver. 9. which Text makes (says he) against the Primacie of Peter, and
so by consequence against the Supremacy of the Pope, in regard Saint Paul was
chief Apostle of the Gentiles, who were far more in number then the Jews.

Cartwright on the Rhem. Test. (as I remember) on the same place of Scripture
has a very good note to the same purpose.

I could bring the testimonies of many other Divines to prove my assertion if
it were needful, and that both ancient and modern, only I will use one of
Saint Augustines; He writing upon John says, Petrus Apostolus Propter
Apostolatus primatum, etc. Peter the Apostle, because of his Apostolical
prioritie, by the generality of a figure, he sustained the person of the
Church, as concerning Peter himself by nature he was but one man, by grace
one and the first Apostle, but when it was said to him, Tibi dabo claves,
universam significabat ecclesians, etc. Augustine here gives unto Peter a
primacie and a prioritie, and this, he says, he had by grace, that is by the
favor and benevolence of his Master, and yet when he recived the keys he
received them in the name of the whole Church, says he, that is for the
benefit of the whole Church. Now, I hope the testimony of these godly and
learned Divines, will defend me, from the aspersion of Popery: I know all are
called Papists by my opponents, that in any ways opposes their tenets
concerning the Government of the Church: but the truth is, the Papists and my
opponents are both in extremities, and none of them can endure Moderation and a
middle course, wherein I am sure the virtue consists. Even as the liberal and
charitable man, by the covetous niggard, who is the extreme in defectu, is
called prodigal; And again by the prodigal waster, who is the extreme in
excessu is called a niggard; So the meek, charitable, and moderate Divine by
the Papist who is the extreme in excessu, is called a Puritan, and by the
Puritan who is the extreme in defectu, is called a Papist.

But for any thing that I shall deliver here, by the grace of God, I shall be
as free of popery as any of the foresaid Divines, for they do all maintain
all, that I shall say, which in any kind may be thought to smell of popery,
and not they only, but all the Commentators that I have read upon those places,
out of which I bring my arguments: Yea, I know no Divine that denies Peter a
primacie of moderation, and a prioritie of order, and yet as I said before, I
bring not in their testimonies of purpose to prove what I am to say, but to
prevent the cavils and calumnies of the malevolous.

Well, if my opponents mouths be not stopped by this means, I hope the clear
evidence of Scripture shall do it, for great is truth and it prevails. I may
here truly affirm, that the doctrine which I maintain, is the most powerful
means to throw down the Tower of Babel; yea, and to allay the pride of all
those who will not be content with that dignity which Christ gave unto Peter,
nor those degrees of Church Governors, which Christ with his own mouth
appointed for the government of his Church until his second coming to
Judgment, but exalt themselves above all that is called God, and curse with
bell and candle all those that in the sincerity of their hearts, and meekness
of spirit refuses to swear and subscribe to their tenets.

I find in the doctrine of the Evangelists, that there was a strife and
contestation among the twelve Apostles who should be chief among them, and
that which gave occasion of this strife, was Christ's familiarity with Peter,
James and John, he preferred them much in his respects to all the rest, he
took them to an high mountain, and suffered them to see him in his glory, at
the transfiguration, and in the Garden of Gethsemanie in his greatest agony,
he suffered also those three to be with him when he raised Iairus daughter to
life, but none of the rest This respecting of them thus made the rest to
murmr and grudge a little at it, but I am of opinion, that the greatest
contestation was among the three Disciples, whom Christ respected most: for we
see that James and John, and their Mother, being jealous of Peter's preferment,
hearing Christ, bid Peter pay toll for himself and for him, and hearing him
promise to him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and to none of the rest,
they took occasion and their Mother to go to Christ, and to desire of him,
that one of them might sit upon his right hand, and the other upon his left
hand in his kingdom (for they dreamed even as all the rest did, of a temporal
kingdom) Math. 20.20. and Mark 10.35. which suit of theirs, Christ did not
altogether refuse at first, but told them that they knew not what they asksd,
and also asked them, if they were able to drink of the Cup, whereof he was to
drink, and be baptized with the Baptism, wherewith he was to be baptized, and
when it was answered yes; Then he tells them that it was his Fathers right to
give that which they desired, and that it was prepared for others, and was to
begin in them of his Father in his own time; so that by Christ his Answer to
James and John, and their Mother, we may easily collect by the way, that Christ
did not condemn the dignity as unlawful in it self, but a proud affectation
of the dignity: this he condemns in his speech to the rest that took offense
at James and John their presumption: Christ had promised before, that they
should sit upon 12. thrones, and judge the 12. Tribes of Israel, which very
well might have sufficed them, but they would needs contest, who should be
chief among themselves, they would not commit it to their Masters arbitrament,
and therefore Christ tells them who must be this chief; not he that affected
it most, not he that aspired to it out of a conceit of his own worth, but he
that was humble and meek and lowly, and therefore Christ said to them, that he
that was lest among them all (to wit in conceit) he should be greatest; yea,
further says our Savior, he must be like a little child in his own eyes; A
child, although he be the son of a Prince, he will make himself companion to
the son of a peasant: even so they that have chief place among Gods
Ministers, must account all the rest as brethren, yea as Christ says they must
be servants to the rest, even as Christ was. As he that serves, so must they
that have chief place under Christ in his Church be, as servants to the rest
of their inferior Ministers: and this made Origin to say, That he that was
called to a Bishopric, was called unto the service of the Church, Homil. 6. in
Esaiam, and the Counsel of Carthage decreed, 4. Can. 34. wheresoever a Bishop
sits, he must not suffer a simple Priest to stand before him, and that the
Bishop in the Assembly of Priests ought to sit in the highest place, but within
the house let him know, that he is their fellow.

Now I will beg leave of the learned, to vent a certain conjecture of my own,
which I hope shall give offense to none which conjecture, James and John, and
their Mothers petition to Christ, and Christ's answer to them again, has given
me occasion to apprehend. The affectionate Mother being desirous of her sons
preferment, she comes in all humility, and falls down before him, and
earnestly intreates him on the behalf of her sons, that one of them might
sit on his right hand, and another on his left hand in his kingdom, she
expected that at this time Christ was to restore the kingdom to Israel, and
she would feign have had her two sons, in the most honorable rooms of
Christ's Court, little knew they that Christ's kingdom was not of this world,
and therefore he tells her and her sons both, that they knew not what they
asked, and yet he answered her according to her own mind, as he did the
Disciples after his Resurrection, when they asked him, if he was to restore the
kingdom to Israel at that time; he answered, that it was not for them to know
the times and seasons, which the Lord had in his own hand: Even so our Savior
Christ answered the sons of Zebedee and their Mother. These dignities, says
he, the bestowing of them is not in my hand, but in my Fathers, and they shall
be given of my Father to them, for whom they are prepared.

I am confident that Christ by this answer of his, does not mean of any two,
that were to be advanced to the highest degrees of glory in heaven, for first,
because this were not to answer ad rem, for her meaning was of some dignities
here upon earth, and therefore we must not think but Christ would answer her
according to her own meaning; next we do not read of any right hand or left
hand that Christ shall have in heaven, or of any that shall sit upon either of
his hands there, we read of his Fathers right hand, where Christ sits for the
present, and shall sit until his second coming to Judgment, we read also
of degrees of glory in heaven, but not in these terms; but the good woman had
no such meaning, her meaning was of the greatest dignities upon earth as Christ
had to bestow, and therefore I think that our Savior means of two, to whom
his Father was to give, the two greatest dignities in his Church, the event
shows more that Christ does mean of these.

For he had advanced the 12. Apostles to 12. Thrones, and had given them power
to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, he had promised to give them the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, that they might shut it upon the impenitent, and open
it to the penitent, greater power they could not get, greater dignity they
might: it was but honor and dignity that the sons of Zebedee craved, and
that upon earth too, they desired not power and authority over their brethren.
And this dignity was no more but a primacie of moderation, and a prioritie of
order amongst the Governors of the Church, that Christ had to bestow upon
those, for whom his Father had prepared it; Christ was not to distribute to any
of his Apostles state employment, and places of honor and dignities in the
Commonwealth, he left that to be done by worldly Monarchs.

Now I find in the Scriptures that our Savior Christ gave this prioritie of
order, and primacie of moderation, to two of his Apostles, and honored them,
as it were, the one upon his right hand, and the other upon his left hand;
these two Apostles were Peter and Paul, the one to have prioritie of order in
the Church of the Jews, the other in the Churches of the Gentiles, that Christ
gave the chief precedencie amongst the 12. Apostles to the Apostle Peter, it
is more then evident in the Scriptures, for is it also for Paul's moderation in
the Churches of the Gentiles.

The 12. Apostles were first appointed by their Master to be chief Governors
of the Church of the Jews, and therefore when Christ sent them out two and two
to preach the Gospel, he directed them only to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, and therefore Peter having precedencie amongst them, it behoved to
be in the Church of the Jews only. But the Apostle Paul makes this manifest,
Gal. 2. where he tells us in plain terms, that the Gospel of the Circumcision
was committed to Peter; and the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed
unto him.

The Apostle Paul could not say this if there had not bin some difference
between their ministry, and the ministry of the rest of the Apostles; for
both the Gospel of the Circumcision, and the Gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed to the rest of the Apostles, and to all others that were to be
ordained by them, and advanced to the Apostolical and Epis^opall charge, by
virtue of that commandment, Go teach all Nations, etc. but this is said
because of that distinction that Christ made for order sake, that the chief
care of the one should be in the Church of the Jews, and the chief care of
the other in the Churches of the Gentiles, so that it was lawful still for the
rest of the Apostles to preach to either Jews or Gentiles, and also for Peter
and Paul to preach to either, and so we see they did when occasion served. Now
who was it that made this distinction? Without all question it was Christ
himself as the Apostle Paul makes manifest, Gal. 2. 7. But when they saw
(says the Apostle) that the Gospel over the uncircumcision was committed to
me, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was committed to Peter: These words can
have no sense, unless there be some difference between the charge of the
rest of the Apostles, and the emploiment of Peter and Paul, made by Christ
himself: for he says, when the Apostles saw, to wit, the Apostles there
mentioned, Peter, James and John saw that the Gospel of the Uncircumcision,
etc. the Apostle Paul takes it for granted, that the Gospel of the
circumcision was committed unto Peter, as the relative word ( as) does
demonstrate: for these Apostles saw as the one was committed to Peter, so the
other was committed to Paul. These Apostles made not this difference then, they
saw that it was made, they did not commit this charge to Paul, they saw that it
was committed by another, even by him, by whom the Gospel of circumcision was
committed to Peter, their Master and Savior Christ, which the Apostle Paul
makes plain for himself, Gal. 1.15. But when it pleased God, says he, that
separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his
Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen; So that the Apostle
acknowledges, that both he received the degree of Apostleship from Christ, and
the dignity in the degree to be the chief Apostle of the Gentiles: This may be
also collected out of the words, for in that he says, that the Gospel of
uncircumcision was committed unto him, as the Gospel of Circumcision was
committed to Peter, he shows clearly that he has a prioritie of order in
the Churches of the Gentiles, as Peter had in the Church of the Jews.

That Peter had this prioritie, beside the evident testimonies of Scripture
proving it, as we shall see by and by, by Gods grace, his priority is
insinuated in the same words, for if there were not some singularity in the
Apostleship of Peter, Paul would not have said, when the Apostles saw, that the
Gospel of uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospel of circumcision
was committed unto Peter, but he would have said, when the Apostle saw that the
Gospel of uncircircumcision was committed unto him and Barnabas, as the
Gospel of Circumcision was committed unto them: if he had spoken so then, we
might have truly said, that as there was no difference in degree among them
all, so there was no distinction in dignity. But I will prove first that Peter
had this prioritie granted him by Christ in the Church of the Jews, and next
that he gave it also to Paul, in the Churches of the Gentiles, and first I
will lay down my grounds out of Scripture, and then form my Arguments out of
these grounds. There is one ground for both their precedencies, and it is this,
that both their names were changed, we see clearly that Christ gave Simon a
new name, and called him Peter, but who changed the others name it is not
revealed. I am verily of that mind, that Christ did it too, for in the 13. of
the Acts, where it is recorded, that Paul and Barnabas by Gods direction, were
separate for the Apostolical charge, it is said there by the Holy Ghost, to
the Prophets and Teachers at Antioch, Separate (...) Barnabas and Saul, for the
work whereunto I have called them. After this time he is never any more called
Saul, but once, and then his new name is related, then Saul, otherwise called
Paul (says Luke) filled with the Holy Ghost, and so as soon as he is said to
be filled with the Holy Ghost, as soon is he called Paul, and never any more
Saul.

Now, this changing of the two Apostles names was a special sign of honor
and preferment, as the changing of the name of Abram to Abraham, was not only a
signification of the multitude of his posterity, but also a sign of his
preferment, and the Lords respects to him. So the changing of Jacobs name, into
the name of Israel, did not only testify that he had prevailed with God, but
it was a sign of Gods great love to him, and of his prevailing with men. Even
so the changing of these two Apostles names, was an argument of Gods great
respects to them, and of their preferment and advancement in the Church of
Christ: and also it was a sign of the great work, that the Lord was to
accomplish by their Ministry, both among Jews and Gentiles.

For Peter's precedencie among the Apostles, we have many evidences for it in
Scripture, for first he was one of the three, who was most respected by Christ,
and also had place of the other two, for he is always first named by all the
four Evangelists, he gets a new name by himself, and the other two gets both
of them but one name, Boanarges, Sons of Thunder. Peter again is more employed
in Christ's affairs, and Christ is more familiar with him, then any of the
rest: when there was toll required of Christ, he directed Peter to cast an
angle in the Sea, and he should get in the mouth of the first fish that came
to his hand, a piece of money, Take it (says Christ) and give it for me and
thee, Math. 17.27. but no word of the rest, this notes some pre-eminence.

It was Peter that answered Christ, when he asked his Disciples, Whom say ye
that I am? Thou art Christ, says Peter, the Son of the living God, Math.
16.16. It was Peter that drew Christ aside, and would have advised him not to
go up to Jerusalem, Math. 16.22. It was Peter that said to Christ, when he saw
his glory in the Mount; It is good Master being here, let us make three
Tabernacles, etc. Math. 17.4. It was Peter that answered Christ in the name of
the rest, O Lord, we have forsaken all and followed thee, Math. 19.27.

But these differences are nothing in respect of those that were made by Christ
himself, and first as I said before his name was changed by Christ; yea, when
Christ called him first from taking of fish, to be a fisher of men, he
promised that he should be called Peter, Ioh. 1. but as yet his name was not
changed, this was a great argument of his preferment; Again, Christ calls him
Peter, in allusion to the rock of Faith, whereupon he was to build his Church,
for he is called Petrus a petra, he was called a Rock, because his confession,
( Thou art Christ the Son of the living God) was to be so solid and firm a
Rock, that whosoever was built upon it, the gates of Hell was not able to
prevail against him. Further Christ promised to give Peter the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, which promise he made not to the rest: he prayed for him
in particular that his faith should not fail, but for none of the rest, and
commanded Peter when he was converted to strengthen his brethren, he gave not
this direction to the rest, Math. 22.32. After his Resurrection he appeared
first to Peter alone, with whom no doubt he had privy conference, and
committed to him somethings which he did not to the rest; or otherwise to what
end should he have appeared unto him before any of the rest? and after he had
dellvered a general commission to all, he gave him a particular Commission to
feed his sheep, to feed his Lambs; he required a greater measure of love of
Peter then he did of the rest, John 21.15. which was an argument, not only
that Christ had forgiven him much, but also that he had given unto him more
then the rest of the Apostles: Christ forewarned Peter of his manner of death,
and encouraged him to suffer to the end, Follow thou me, says he, John 21.
this he, did not to any of the rest. By all these particulars we see our
Savior Christ differenced Peter from the rest of the Apostles, which evidently
shows that Christ gave him some dignity and pre-eminence, that he gave not
unto the rest.

The Angel also that appeared to Mary Magdalene put a difference between
Peter and the rest, when he directed her to go tell Peter by name, that Christ
was risen, but none of the rest.

The Evangelists also differences Peter from the rest of the Apostles in
setting down his name always in the first place; Yea, Saint Math. who was
also an Apostle, does not only mention him first, but also calls him Primus,
the first Apostle Matthew 10. he says not Primum adverbialiter, but Primus
nominaliter, the first, and this is an evident argument of his prioritie)

The Apostle Paul also bears witness to this truth in that by way of
Emphasis he calls him the Apostle of the Circumcision, and that Christ
wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, this was
not because he was the only Apostle of the Circumcision, for in that same
chapter, to wit Galat. 2. where he calls the Apostle Peter, the Apostle of
the Circumcision; he says also, that James and John were also Apostles of the
Circumcision, for thus he speaks: Peter, James, and John gave me and
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that they should go unto the Jews,
and we unto the Gentiles; Peter then is called the Apostle of the Circumcision
by way of Emphasis, because he had a precedencie of the rest of the Apostles
of the Circumcision. Yea, we see that the Apostle Paul preferres Peter in his
account, to the rest of the Apostles, for Gal. 1. he says, that after three
years he went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, he mentions none of the rest, not
James who was Bishop of Jerusalem; and 1 Cor. 9.5. he gives some pre-eminence
to Peter, Have not we (says he) power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well
as the other Apostles and the brethren of the Lord and of Cephas; In this
comparison, the Apostle ascends by way of Gradation, as if he had said, may not
I have a wife to accompany me in my travells, as well as the rest of the
Apostles? yea, as well as the brethren of the Lord, yea even as Cephas, who is
in dignity before all the rest; yea, would he say, we have power as well as
any of them, even as well as Peter himself.

All these Evidences were nothing, if he did not make proof of his prioritie
de facto, if he had not exercised it, and confirmed it by his practice, but
this he did, both in his Masters own time, as I showed you before; and also
much more after his ascension: This, a very novice may perceive, that will but
read the Acts of the Apostles; For immediately after Christ's ascension he
takes the place upon him, without any election, or the voices of the rest.

Me thinks if Christ had not given him this pre-eminence, and moderatorship,
the first thing that they would have done, they would have chosen a speaker,
and a precedent for order sake, but this they did not, because they knew Christ
their Master had done it before: Christ was more careful of the government of
his Church then so: he saw them before his death contesting for precedencie,
and the first place, and foresaw also, that after his departure there would be
emulation and strife amongst them, who should be chief, and therefore most
wisely he thought good to prevent this schism and division: For he knew if
they had fallen out amongst themselves for this prioritie of order, who were to
be the first and chief publishers of the Gospel, and Witnesses of all that
Christ did, and said, It might have been imputed to him by those, who
hereafter took occasion to stop the course of the Gospel. They might have
said even as the these upon the Cross, and the other railers that passed by
said to him, ( and thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross) So I
say, they might have said, and this man had been such a man as they call him,
he would have prevented this misorder and contention, he would have appointed
one of the number, to be first in order among them, to moderate their
assemblies, for avoiding of confusion and dissension, but blessed be the God of
order, that would not leave his Church without order.

The Apostle Saint Peter then without any more Ceremony obeys his Masters
Commandments, he commanded him when he was converted to strengthen his
brethren, he gave him direction both to feed his sheep and his lambs, and he
like an obedient servant will not fail to do, what he commanded with all
expedition.

And first he begins with a Sermon ( ad clerum) to the rest of the Apostles,
and the other Disciples, and tells them, that it was necessary, that Judas
should play the Apostate, that the Scripture might be fulfilled; and that it
was also necessary to fill his room, that the number of those might be made
up again, whom Christ had appointed to be witnesses, of all that he did and
said.

His next Sermon was ( ad populum) after that the Holy Ghost was descended, the
people that heard the Apostles speak with diverse tongues, wondered and marvelled
at the matter; some said that they were drunken, but the Apostle Peter in his
Sermon made it known to them all how the matter was, Act. 2.14. and at the
hearing of this Sermon, there was three thousand converted to the Christian
faith. Another Sermon also he made to the people upon the occasion of healing
of a lame Man, at the hearing of which there were five thousand converted to
the faith of Jesus Christ, and in effect the most part of the history of the
Acts to the 13. chapter concerns the Apostle Peter, and his service in the
Ministry: and so by all these evidences it appears, that Saint Peter was
precedent of the Apostles.

It appears also in this, that Peter was chief Apostle of the Circumcision,
because his chief stay for many years was at Jerusalem. Although the Apostle
James was the peculiar Bishop of that City yet in regard of the general
charge that he had over the whole Nation, his most frequent abode was there:
for both the times that Paul went to Jerusalem, both the third year after his
conversion, and fourteen years there after he found Peter there; yea, that
his chief residence was there at that time; it is manifest by the Apostle Paul
his resolution, for he says Galat. 1.18. that three years after his
Conversion he went to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.

The Apostle Peter also makes manifest, that the Gospel over the
Circumcision, was chiefly committed to him, by directing his Epistles only to
the Jews: for his first Epistle is only written to the Jews, whom he calls
strangers scattered throughout Asia, Gala^ia, Pontus, Cappadocia: Now it is
most certain, that in all these Nations at that time, when he writ his
Epistle, there were many Gentiles converted to the Christian faith, and yet he
writes to none of them, but to the Jewish Nation only, so that we may very
easily perceive, that his chief care was o^ the Jewish Church: and that the
second Epistle was written t^ them only, it is manifest to any, that will read
but the third chapter of the said Epistle.

Now the question may be asked, who gave Peter this precedencie, and Prioritie
of order among the Apostles? I answer, This question is without all question,
for no doubt Christ his Master gave it him; Again, it will be asked when it
was, that Christ gave it him? Answer, some thinks that he gave him this
dignity, when he changed his name, and called him Peter; some again that he
was thus advanced, when he promised to give him the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven. And indeed, both these are certain signs of preferment: The deliverie
of the Keys to any, was ever a sign of preferment; yea, also of Power and
Authority, for he that has the keys he goes through all: as when the Husband
gives the keys to his new-married wife, he declares that he gives her power
over all; even so when the Master of the family gives the keys to his steward,
he gives him power over all his affairs: for this same cause it is that the
keys are delivered to a Prince, when he first enters in any City of his
dominions, it is a special sign of his power and authority within that City:
even so when our Savior gave the keys of the kingdom of heaven to his
Apostles he gave them power to rule and govern his house, according to his will
revealed in his Word, he gave them power to open the gates of heaven to the
penitent, and to shut them upon the impenitent, so the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4.
1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
the Mysteries of God: The proof of this we have Esaias 22.20,21,22. where the
Prophet Esaias at the command of God, threatens Shebna, Chamberlain to King
Ezekiah, and tells him that he shall be driven from his Station, and Civil
place, Eliakim in his room, and in sign of his preferment and authority, he
says, and the Key of the House of David, will I lay upon his shoulders, so he
shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open, that
is, he will give unto Eliakim chief power in Ezekias house, and in the City
of Jerusalem: whose advancement was a figure of the Kingdom of Christ. And by
the spirit of God applied to Christ, Revelat. 3.7. Which power he conferred
upon his Apostles, when he said, All power is given unto me both in heaven
and in earth: Whose sins ye remit shall be remitted, and whose sins you retain
shall be retained, whose sins ye bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven,
whose sins ye loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven: and this the Spirit
of God confirms. Revel. 2.26. where he promises to that Minister of the
Church of Thyatira, that overcommeth and keeps his works unto the end, power
over the Nations, which is not to be understood of civil power and authority
(Christ meddles not with that) but of spiritual power and jurisdiction, even
as I received of my Father (says he V.27.) so then when Christ promised to
Peter, that he would give him the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, out of all
question, it was a sign of his preferment to some dignity, but not of his
power and authority above his brethren; for that which he promised to give to
him, he made a covenant to give it to all the rest as well as him: indeed had
he not breathed upon all the rest, as well as Peter, and said to all, receive
the holy Ghost, Whose sins ye remit, etc. I would have persuaded my self,
that Christ had given Peter power and authority over the rest, and not only a
priority of order, and a precedencie of Moderation.

Some thinks that our Savior Christ, give not Peter this precedence till after
the resurrection, yea, after he had given the general commission to all the
Apostles in common, when he said to him, Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs: but for
my part, I will not dispute, when he gave in him, sure all these are evidences
that Christ, and none other did advance him in that kind, and many more then
these, as may be collected by the former doctrine, and which I shall make more
plain hereafter.

Again it will be asked, how long this precedencie of Peter's was to continue,
for a year or half a year, or how long? truly for any thing can be said in
the contrary, he had it for his life time; What Christ has joined together,
what man dare put asunder? Christ gave him precedencie, who could then defraud
him of it? none of the rest might, yea, not all the rest had power to displace
him: certainly as long as the Christian Jews were divided from the Gentiles
that were Christians, by the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses, which they would
needs keep. The Apostle Peter took a special care of the Jewish Nation, so
he took a special care of Jews in Antiochia, who were Christians, but zealous
of the Law, Gal. 1. yea, it was condiscended between him and the Apostle Paul,
that it should be so: but I believe that the mayn work which was enjoined him
by his Master, in common with the rest of the Apostles, to teach all Nations,
did in the end draw him of that particular charge of the Jewish Nation; yet I
think he ever kept that priority of order amongst the Apostles, which his
Master conferred upon him, upon all occasions.

A third question will be asked, was Peter to have successors in this
precedence? I answer, although perhaps he could have no Successors, in respect
of his precedence over the eleven, whose calling was universal, and not
confined to any particular Place, Congregation, Province, or Kingdom; Yet his
precedence in general among the chief Governors of the Church in all several
Kingdoms and Nations was to have a succession, order was requisite among the
successors of the Apostles, as well as among them, and this order was to be
defined according to the division of Kingdoms and Provinces: Saint Peter was
chief precedent in the Churches of Jews, in which respect he might have
Successors, yea, and had them too, and so a chief precedent was requisite
among the Governors of the Churches of other Kingdoms.

Again this question will be asked, since a priority of order, is necessary in
all Churches, must it remain constantly in one person, or may it be changed
from one to another, that every one may bear his part, and all bear equal
burden? Answer. I see no reason why it should be changed, except this
vicissitude can be proved by Scripture, Christ has left us a pattern, and this
pattern we ought to follow.

Further, it may be asked how this precedent should be elected? I answer by him
who is Gods Vicegerent here upon earth, for God has appointed Kings to be
pursing Fathers in his Church, and they ought to have a care, that all things
be done decently and orderly, and that Gods will be done in earth as it is in
heaven. If the King present the man, the Church ought to receive him, except
they can give a reason in the contrary; but it may be replied, that we have no
pattern for this in the Scripture. I answer none, except that we find the
election of Matthias referred to God: and the King is in Gods place, and a God
upon earth, I have said ye are gods, Psalm. 82. and John 10. Reply: but this
choice was referred immediately to God, the lots is cast into the lap.

I answer, in the election of Matthias, I find that the Apostles had a hand in
it, the seventy Disciples and other inferior Ministers, for they made choice
of Matthias and Barsabas, and prayed unto the Lord to give forth his
determination by lot, but in the election of the seven Deacons, the people
also, the Apostles, and all other Churchmen, all three joined together. Upon
other occasions the Apostle only made choice of inferior Ministers, Timothy by
prophecy, and so there is no certain pattern left us in the Scriptures for the
right of nomination. But if it were so agreed upon, it were easy to devise a
way how both the people, inferior Ministers, the Governors of the Church, and
the supreme Magistrate might have their several voices in the nomination of
Churchmen of the first rank and order, and yet in end the Lord to make the
choice, but it were boldness in me to prescribe. The Lord of his mercy, so
direct those a right, who have power and authority in their hand, that they may
do all things according to his will, plainly revealed in his Word.

Now I will prove from the former grounds, first, that Saint Peter had a
precedencie of the rest of the Apostles, in the Church of the Jews; next that
this precedence was given him by Christ his Master; Thirdly, that this
precedencie is not only profitable and expedient, but necessary for the
Government of all Churches; and this I will do by formal arguments, whereunto
I desire my opponents to answer, Categorice, without subterfugies,
prevarications, or circumlocutions, for by so doing, the truth shall be the
more easily found out,

The first Argument.
He whose name is always recorded in the first place, had place of all the
rest of the Apostles.

But Peter his name is always recorded in the first place.

And therefore Peter had place of all the rest of the Apostles.

There can be no reason given why Saint Peter his name should be always first
set down, but only, because he was first not only in gifts and graces, but also
in dignity, place, and estimation. That his name is recorded at all times,
sirst, is evident except only once by the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2. who without
all doubt, did it by the motion of Gods Spirit, that he might insinuate,
although the Apostle Peter, was the chiefest Apostle of the Circumcision, as he
had declared before, Verse 7. yet it was in order and estimation, and not in
degree and exaltation: it was a primacie but not a supremacy, a prioritie, but
not a superiority that he had of the rest of the Apostles.

But I will prove, that the Apostle Peter was not only named first, but that he
was called the first, and so was first indeed.

The second Argument
He who is called by the Apostle Saint Matthew, the first of the Apostles, he
was in deed, and in truth the first;

But the Apostle Peter is called by the Apostle Saint Matthew, the first of the
Apostles, Chap. 10.2.

And therefore the Apostle Peter was indeed, and in truth, the first of the
Apostles.

The strength of the proposition stands in this, that he who was an Apostle
himself, would never have called Peter the first of the Apostles, and he had
not been first indeed.

The third Argument.
He that was prolocutor and speaker for all the rest of the Apostles had a
priority and precedence of the rest of the Apostles.

But Peter was speaker and prolocutor, for all the rest of the Apostles.

And therefore Peter had a priority and precedencie of the rest of the Apostles.

The proposition I think will not be denied, for the Consul in the Senate; the
Speaker in Parliament, the Moderator in the Assembly, has a priority and
precedence of all the rest of the Senate, Parliament, and Assembly. That Peter
was speaker and prolocutor for all the rest, I prove thus He that answered
Christ in name of the rest, and received the promise in name of the rest, was
speaker and prolocutor for all the rest:

But Peter answered Christ in name of the rest, and received the promise in
name of the rest:

And therefore Saint Peter was speaker and prolocutor for all the rest.



I hope my Opponents will deny nothing that is here affirmed, and therefore by
their own confession, I conclude, that Peter had a priority of order and a
precedencie of Moderation amongst the Apostles.

The fourth Argument.
He whom the Angel in particular commanded Mary to tell the Christ was risen
from the dead, and none of the rest, had some sort of pre-eminence before the
rest.

But the Angel commanded Mary to tell Peter by name, and none of the rest, that
Christ was risen again from the dead, Mark 16.7.

And therefore Peter had some pre-eminence before the rest.

Truly, in my judgment, this is a strong argument to prove that Peter was in
place and dignity before the rest of the Apostles or otherways, I think the
Angel of God would never have mentioned Peter by himself, and all the rest of
the Disciples in gross.

The fifth Argument.
He whom Paul preferred in his respects to all the rest of the Apostles, had
some precedence of the rest of the Apostles.

But the Apostle Paul preferred Peter in his respects, to all the rest of the
Apostles.

And therefore Peter had some precedencie, of the rest of the Apost.

Now why the Apostle Paul should respect and honor Saint Peter, more then the
rest of the Apostles, I know no reason, except he had had some place and
pre-eminence of the rest. That he respected him more then the rest, we find,
Gal. 1.18. for he says there, that he went up to Jerusalem, three years after
his conversion, of purpose to see Peter, and remained with him 15 days: I will
only ask my opponents, for what cause he went up to see Peter, more then
James, who was Bishop of Jerusalem.

The sixth Argument.
He who took precedence upon him de facto, be had it de jure.

But Saint Peter took precedence upon him, de facto.

And therefore he had it de jure.

Either the proposition must be true, or else we must say, that Saint Peter
took more upon him, then he had good right to challenge, and so in this
particular erred de facto, which no Divine ever said or dare say, and if any
man durst be bold to say it, I durst take the boldness upon me to say that it
were little less then blasphemy.

But some may say that the Apostle Peter had this right of moderation, de jure
Apostolico: I answer, if it were so, all were one thing in effect, for that
which the apostles did, they did it by the motion of the spirit, and if the
apostles did choose Saint Peter to be their speaker, being a man of most
singular parts, why may we not, yea, why should we not follow their example
in giving to the most worthy for gifts, and graces, the precedence of
Government? I think the practice of the apostles should be a law to us: But the
truth is, there is not so much as any show or appearance in the Scriptures,
that the rest of the apostles conferred this moderation upon the apostle Peter,
but what probability there is, yea, what convincing arguments for his Master
Christ's donation of it, I refer to the judicious Reader.

The seventh Argument.
He that took a special care not only of Jewish Churches throughout the land
of Judea, but of those Jews also that sojourned in other Nations, had the chief
care of the circumcision, and consequently both of pastors and people.

But the Apostle Peter took a special care not only of the Christian Jews that
lived in the land of Judea, but also of those who dwells in other nations.

And therefore Peter had the chief charge of the Circumcision, and consequently
both of the pastors and the people.

The truth of the proposition, appears by his writing to the one, and
remaining with the other. Both his Epistles are written to the dispersed
Tribes, and that he remained in Judea, for many years after the ascension of
Christ is evident, Gal. 1. for Paul not only, three years after his conversion
went up of purpose to Jerusalem, to see Peter, but 14 years thereafter, when he
went up he found Peter there: and that Peter had an oversight both of pastors
and people, we find in his first Epistle where he writes to both, and exhorts
the Elders (that is) their Ministers both of the first and second order, but in
special their chief Governors, and forbids them to exercise their power
tyrannically over their inferiors, 1 Pet. 5.1,2,3. and in his second Epistle
1.12. he says, that he will not be negligent to put them always in
remembrance of these things, though they know them, and be established in the
truth, yea, I think it meet (says he) Verse 15, as long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance, and Verse 15. he
says, I will endeavor, that you may be able, after my decease, to have these
things always in remembrance, so that hereby it appears infallibly, that Peter
had the chief oversight of the Church of the Jews, both at home and abroad,
and consequently both of pastors and people.

By these arguments, it is manifest that the apostle Peter had a priority, and
a precedence in the Church of the Jews: follows to prove that his Master and
Savior Christ gave it him.

The first Argument.
He to whom Christ communicated himself most, with whom he was most familiar,
and to whom he did commit his special affairs most, yea, whom he purposed to
make one of the chief instruments of the advancement of his Kingdom, to him he
gave some preferment and advancement, more then he did to the rest of the
Apostles.

But to Peter Christ communicated himself most, with Peter he was most
familiar, and to him he did commit his special affairs most, yea, and him he
purposed to make the chief instrument of the advancement of his Kingdom.

And therefore he gave Peter some preferment and advancement, that he gave not
to the rest of the Apostles.

The truth of the proposition appears by this similitude of Kings and princes,
if they set their affection upon on man more then another, and choose him to be
their nearest minion, at lest they will give him some title of honor, above the
rest of their Court, that all others may honor him the more, and will advance
him to some places of dignity and pre-eminence, which indeed will make all
others to respect him, and reverence him, because they see the Kings affection
set upon him: when King Assuerus, resolved to honor Mordecai, he commanded
Haman to put his Robe Royal upon him, and to set him on his best horse, and to
lead him through the City of Susan, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be
done to him whom the King will honor: how much more, whomsoever the King of
Kings desires to honor moethen others, in this life will he advance to some
dignity at least, in the face of the whole world, and proclaim as it were
before them, thus shall it be done to him whom the King of Kings desires to
honor, and therefore since Christ had a respect to Peter more then the rest of
the Apostles; it cannot be questioned but he made him president of the rest,
for since a president was necessary for avoiding of strife and contention, it
is very likely, that Christ would give it to Peter, rather then any other. The
truth of the assumption we may see in the grounds before laid down.

The second Argument.
If the changing of names be a sign of honor and preferment, then Peter was
honored and preferred by Christ before the rest of the Apostles.

But the changing of names, is a sign of honor and preferment:

And therefore Peter was honored and preferred by Christ before the rest of
the Apostles.

The truth of the proposition is manifest, because our Savior himself changed
Peter's name, from Simon to Peter, and so if the changing of names be a sign of
honor and preferment, then Peter was without doubt honored and preferred by
Christ.

As to the assumption, that the changing of names is a sign of honor and
preferment, I prove it by the changing of Abrams name, in Abraham, and Iaacobs
name in Israel, when it pleased God to advance them, Genesis 32.28. and 41, 45.
even so when Pharaoh preferred Joseph, he changed his name, and called him,
Zaphna Paanea. So when Daniel was advanced by Nabuchadnezzar, he was called
Beltashazer, and upon the same occasion, the three children, Hanama, Misael,
and Azaria, were called, Zadrach, Mesech, and Abednego, Daniel 1.7. and
Assuerus changed Hesters name, when he took her to be his Queen, and called
her Hadasha, Ester 2.

But some may reply that Christ gave James and John a new name, and called them
Bonarges, that is, Sons of thunder; I answer, that is rather a title then a
name, and if it were a name, it is but an appellative name, and not a proper
name; But Peter got a name by himself, and a name signifying his prioritie and
precedencie, and was for the most part called by that name, at all occasions.
And further some are of opinion, that James and John received also, some
prerogative from Christ their Master above the rest of the Apostles, for the
which also there are some probabilities in Scripture, all which and such like,
are special evidences, that Christ did not establish a paritie among Church
officers.

The third Argument.
He that took this precedencie upon him, after his name was changed, he
received this precedencie when his name was changed;

But Peter took this precedencie upon him, after his name was changed.

And therefore Peter received this precedencie, when his name was changed.

The proposition cannot be but true for if Peter took this precedencie upon
him, after the changing of his name, who can say otherwise, but he got it when
his name was changed, since (as I said before) the changing of names is a sign
of honor and preferment. As to the assumption, that Peter took this
precedencie upon him, after he received his new name; read the Gospel of
Saint Matthew, and ye will find, that the Apostle Peter is the man, that for the
most part at least, takes upon him to speak for all the rest, after this time.

The fourth argument.
If it was about the time that Christ changed Peter's name, that the Disciples
strove who should be first, then by all appearance Christ at this time, gave
unto Peter this precedencie.

But the first is true, and therefore the second.

The strength of the Proposition stands in this, that Christ being most wise,
would needs take away all occasion of falling out, and knowing that a precedent
was necessary, for avoiding of Schism and confusion, he would sure prevent
this danger.

As to the assumption that it was about this time, that the Disciples strove
who should be chief. Compare Mat. 16.17. and 18. and Mark 9. and Luke 9. read
these chapters, and consider the doctrine contained in them, and ye will find,
that it was about the time that Christ changed Peter's name, that the Apostles
strove who should be chief.

The fifth Argument.
He for whom Christ paid toll, and for none of the rest, he gave him a
prioritie and precedencie of the rest.

But Christ paid toll for Peter, but for none of the rest.

And therefore Christ gave to Peter, a prioritie and precedencie before the
rest.

The Proposition is very probable, for why should Christ have bidden Peter pay
toll for him and himself only, and he had not had some pre-eminence and
precedencie of the rest, surely I cannot imagine what other cause there can be
alleged.

As to the assumtion it is evident, Math. 17.27. Take it, said Christ, and pay
it for me, and for thee.

The sixth Argument.
To whom Christ promised only to give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, he
gave him a prioritie and precedencie of the rest of the Apostles.

But Christ promised only to Peter, to give him the keys of the kingdom of
heaven.

And therefore Christ gave Peter a prioritie and precedencie of the rest of the
Apostles.

The reason of the Proposition is this; That Christ should promise only to
Peter, to give him that, which he made acount to give to all the rest of the
Apostles, as well as to him an evident argument in my mind, of his Prioritie,
for it was a special encouragement to Peter, and he was much comforted, with
hope and assured confidence, and expectation of great matters; which the rest
of the Apostles had not.

But I know it will be said; that the promise was made to Peter in name of the
rest. I answer, it is granted; But I believe the rest of the Apostles knew not
so much themselves, neither I think could they challenge Christ of any thing
was promised to them; yea, the Apostle thought verily, that the promise was
only made to him, for the promise of Keys, the changing of his Name, the paying
of toll for him, the singling out of Peter, James, and John, to be witnesses of
his transfiguration and raising of Iairus Daughter, all these respects Christ
showed to Peter about the same time, as may easily be perceived in the Harmony
of the Evangelists, which occasioned the murmuring of the rest, for the which
Christ reproved them, Math. 18. and Mark 9. and Luke 9.

But I see neither danger nor absurdity to say, that the promise was only made
to Peter, Christ did not give him the Keys, before he gave them to the rest,
for after his Resurrection only, he gave the Keys to them all: with one breath
(as it were) he breathed upon them all at once, and said to them, Receive the
holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit, shall be remitted; The only difference is
this, Christ gave Peter some hope and assurance which he gave not the rest.

The seventh Argument.
For whom Christ prayed in particular that his faith should not fail, and did
not so for any of the rest, he gave him a pre-eminence, and a precedencie
before the rest.

But Christ prayed for Peter in particular, that his faith should not fail,
and did not so for any of the rest.

And therefore Christ gave Peter some pre-eminence, and precedencie before the
rest.

As to the Proposition, truly I see no reason why our Savior should have
prayed so earnestly for Peter his perseverance, and he had not laid a greater
charge upon him, then upon any of the rest of the Apostles, he gave unto all
Apostolical power and authority, and as ample a charge to teach all Nations,
as he gave unto Peter, but forasmuch as he gave unto him a certain oversight
of the Apostles, as well as the inferior Ministers and People; therefore did
his Master pray so earnestly for him, that God would strengthen him by his
Spirit to resist the great tentations, wherewith he was to be besieged, and to
enable him with such a measure of grace, as the greatness of his charge
required.

The assumption is manifest that Christ offered up a particular prayer for
Peter, which he did not for the rest of the Apostles, Luke 22.32. Christ says
to him, that he had prayed for him that his faith should not fail, and he
tells the reason too, because he foresaw that he should be highly tempted by
Satan; at this same time he offered up unto his Father most sweet, pithie and
powerful prayers, as ye may read, John 17. the reading of which prayers will
move any Christian heart, that has the least measure of grace in it; O then!
how powerful were these to pierce the stoniest heart that ever was, when they
distilled from the sacred lips of our blessed Jesu: well, he prayed for all in
general then, but in that he offered up a particular prayer in behalf of
Peter, it is an Argument that his Master made a particular difference between
him in the rest.

The eighth Argument.
He whom Christ commanded to strengthen his brethren when he was converted,
he gave him some pre-eminence, and charge over the rest of his brethren.

But Christ commanded Peter to strengthen his brethren, when he was converted:

And therefore Christ gave Peter some pre-eminence, and charge over the rest of
his brethren.

The strength of the Proposition stands in this, that he, that is commanded to
strengthen another, is commanded either to teach him, and instruct him, or to
direct him, and admonish him, or to comfort him, and encourage him: which
soever of these duties he was commanded to perform on behalf of his brethren,
it argues at the least this prioritie and precedencie, less pre-eminence it
cannot portend, I am fully persuaded, that Christ would never have commanded
Peter to discharge any of those duties toward his brethren, more then he would
have directed them to do the like duties to him, and he had not had some
charge and oversight of them that none of them had of him.

As to the assumption that Christ commanded Peter to strengthen his brethren,
when he was converted is evident, Luke 22.32. But I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith fail not, says Christ, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren.

The ninth Argument.
He to whom Christ appeared in particular, before he appeared to any other of
the Apostles, he gave him some charge, that he gave not to the rest of the
Apostles.

But Christ appeared in particular to Saint Peter, before he appeared to any
other of the Apostles.

And therefore Christ gave to Peter some charge and employment, that he gave
not to the rest of the Apostles.

The Proposition cannot be but true, for his appearing to him first, before he
appeared to any other, is an evident argument in my mind of his prioritie and
precedencie, yea, of some particular charge that he received from his Master,
that was not laid upon any of the rest, join the consideration of Christ his
appearance here to Peter, and the Angel his direction to Mary, to tell Peter
in particular of Christ's Resurrection, and other evidences already specified,
this argument will be strong enough to confirm all that I have said.

As to the assumption, that Christ appeared first to Peter, the Apostle Paul
shows us, 1 Cor. 15.5. for he says that he was seen of Cephas, then of the
12. that is, first of Peter, then of the rest. And Luke 24.34. it is said that
he appeared to Simon alone.

The tenth Argument.
He to whom our Savior Christ gave a particular commission, after he had
delivered a general commission to all the rest of the Apostles in common, to
him he gave some privilege before the rest of the Apostles.

But Christ gave a particular Commission to Peter, after he had delivered a
general commission to all the rest of the Apostles in common.

And therefore Christ gave Peter some privilege above the rest of the Apostles.

The Proposition I hold it most strong, for when, after a general commission
is delivered to an whole collective body, how they shall carry themselves in
the duties of their calling, a particular charge again is given to some one of
the number, it argues a certain kind of singularity, as for example, when the
Kings Majesty being General of his Army himself, gives directions to the
under officers of the Army, and then in particular, tells his own Lieutenant
what should be his care and solicitude, he plainly declares his eminence above
the rest: or when the Bishop comes to visit any particular parish of his
Diocese, and gives Injunctions in general to all the whole Parish, and then
in particular tells the Minister his duty, does not the Bishop hereby declare
his Eminency above the rest? when our Savior Christ called Peter and Andrew,
Philip and Nathaniel, John and James, he called them all at the same time to be
Preachers of the Gospel, and yet he said to Peter only, Henceforth thou shall
catch men. So to bring a particular after a general, it still argues a
singularity, and so this commission which he gives to Peter by himself is a
mighty argument that Peter had some special oversight in the Church of God,
which none of the rest had, and this was no other thing but a prioritie of
order, and precedencie of moderation, in the meetings of the Apostles; it is
not an argument that he had any power over the rest, but only a precedencie, to
moderate all things discreetly, to gather the voices faithfully, and to take a
special care that all things be done orderly, and all Schism and confusion
shunned.

As to the assumption, that Christ gave particular commission to Peter, after
he had given a general commission to all in common; We read John 21. where
Christ commands Peter to feed his sheep, to feed his Lambs: this commission is
not only a several commission, from that which Christ gave to all the Apostles
in common, neither is it a particular commission in respect of Peter, to whom
it is only given, but also particular in respect of the persons whom it
concerns, it concerns not all Nations, all people and languages, but certain
particular persons whom Christ calls his sheep here and his lambs; now all
those whom the Apostles in general are commanded to teach, cannot be called
Christ's sheep or his lambs, for they were commanded to teach all in general
without exception, Go preach the Gospel to every creature, says Christ, Mark
16. by every creature here is meant all men, as I think all men will confess:
but all men are not Christ's sheep, nor Christ's lambs, and therefore some
particular persons must be understood here: now who are these?

I answer, Some think that by sheep here is understood strong Christians, and
by lambs weak Christians, but this cannot be: because at this time I think
there was not many strong Christians, it was hard then to discern between the
strong and the weak, even the Apostles themselves were but weak at this time,
as we may perceive by that question which they proponed to Christ, to wit, if
he was to restore the Kingdom to Israel at that time. They minded still a
temporal kingdom, and as long as they expected such a kingdom, no man will
say that they were strong Christians, they were but all weak until the
Pentecost, at which time the holy Ghost strengthened them abundantly. Neither
can be understood by sheep, ancient Christians, and by lambs new converts, for
all that did stick to Christ at this time, they were no doubt Christ's
antientest Disciples, that had been for a long time in his company, that had
long heard his doctrine, and seen his miracles: neither can be understood Gods
elect who are called his sheep in the Scriptures, and also his lambs, for then
there should be no difference between the two words Lambs and Sheep, but they
do signify diverse things as all Interpreters accords, and certainly the elect
cannot be understood here, because it will follow that Peter did know who was
elect, and who not, and so this commission given to Peter had been contrary to
the general commission given before to all; neither is understood inferior
Ministers and the people, for all the rest of the Apostles had this oversight
as well as Peter, and laid upon them all by Christ in the general commission:
but by all probability, is understood here by sheep, the rest of the
Apostles, and by Lambs the 70. Disciples, and all those that were to be joined
to them in either of the functions, and this commandment is equivalent to that
which he gave him before his death, saying, When thou art converted strengthen
thy brethren, Luke 22.32. but howsoever, understand whom ye will of all these
forementioned divisions, it is a particular commission given to the Apostle
Peter, after the General was given to all, which is an argument of his
particular oversight over all, both Pastors and people, for I hope we will
not except any sorts of Pastors out of the number of Gods sheep.

I gant that threefold confession which Christ expostulates of Peter, had a
reference to Peter's threefold denial, for as Peter denied his Master thrice,
so his Master to testify his earnest repentance would have him to make a
threefold confession, for every time that he denied him, he would have him to
make as many confessions, and professions of his love to him, but there is a
great difference between Peter's confession and his Masters commission, the
confession came from Peter, and rested as it were in Christ, the commission
contrary ways proceeded from Christ, and was terminate in Peter, that Christ
then gave Peter, this commission, was because of the general charge he had
over all.

The eleventh Argument.
Whom Christ forewarned of the manner of his death, and encouraged him
patiently to endure unto the end, and did not so to any of the rest, was in
dignity and estimation above the rest by Christ his own ordinance.

But Christ forewarned Peter of the manner of his death, and encouraged him to
endure patiently to the end, and did not so to any of the rest:

And therefore Peter was in dignity and estimation above the rest, by Christ's
own ordinance.

The truth of the Proposition stands in this, that if Christ had not preferred
Peter to some dignity above the rest, he would not have used him so
respectively, and encouraged him so many and diverse ways, and not the rest of
the Apostles.

The assumption is manifest, Job. 21.18.19. Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
When thou wast young, etc.

The twelfth Argument.
He that was appointed by Christ, to be the chief Apostle of the
Circumcision, received from Christ a prioritie and precedencie of the rest of
the Apostles.

But the Apostle Peter was appointed by Christ, to be the chief Apostle of the
Circumcision:

And therefore the Apostle Peter received from Christ, a prioritie, and a
precedencie of the rest of the Apostles.

Either this primacie which our Savior Christ gave unto Peter, did consist in
a prioritie and precedencie, or in a superiority of power and Authority, but
this cannot be granted, because we see no warrant for it in Scripture at all,
and therefore of necessity this prioritie and precedencie for orders fake must
be granted him.

As to the assumption, that Christ appointed S. Peter to be the chief Apostle
of the Circumcision, is manifest, Gal. 2.7. where the Apostle Paul says, that
the Gospel of the Circumcision was committed to Peter, and that the rest of
the Apostles saw that it was committed unto him; Now I ask, by whom saw they
that it was committed unto him? by Christ only sure; for none other could
commit it unto him, but either Christ or his Apostles the Apostle: did not
commit it, for they saw it was committed by another, and consequently by
Christ; and this Willet in his Synop. page 156. affirms, that Christ himself
made this distinction; But here it will be objected, that the Gospel of the
Circumcision, was committed to all the rest as well as Peter. I answer, it was
committed to all the Apostles alike, to preach the Gospel to all Nations, but
the Church of the Jews was chiefly recommended to Peter, for even by that
particular commission which Christ gave to Peter, to feed his sheep, to feed
his lambs; Some understand this particular charge of Peter's, over the Jewish
nation, for our Savior Christ before called them his sheep, when he first
gave them all a commission to go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel;
and indeed this charge before Christ's death was laid upon all alike, but after
his Resurrection he enlarged their charge, and commanded them to teach all
Nations, and withal gave the special oversight of the Jews to S. Peter, as is
most clear and evident by the testimony of the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.7.

The necessity of this precedencie comes to be spoken of in the third place, of
the which I will speak but a little: that a speaker and a precedent is
necessary, nature, reason, and experience teaches us; yea, that it is
necessary, both necessitate medij, and necessitate praecepti (as we speak) it
is most certain. Necessitate medij, because otherwise there could neither be
government nor order in Gods house, but mere confusion and misorder, such as
is not to be found among many sorts of brutish creatures: necessitate
praecepti, for the Apostle Paul commands that all things be done decently and
in order; which order I think was necessary in the days of Christ and his
Apostles though not so necessary as now; yea, Christ himself has tacitly
enjoined it, Mar. 9.35,36. and Luke 9.47,48. where he commands, that he that
desired the first place among them to be servant to all, and most meek and
humble in his own conceit, he will have him both last of all, and least of all,
and then says our Savior, the same shall be great, as if he would say, only
they are worthy of preferment, that are humble and meek, and lowly, and of
small account in their own conceit.

I will make this doctrine manifest by a formal argument.

If Christ has declared how those should be qualified, that have chief place
among the Governors of the Church, then it is Christ's will and pleasure, that
there be one to moderate in their meetings and assemblies.

But Christ has declared how those should be qualified, that have chief place
among the Governors of the Church.

And therefore it is Christ's will and pleasure, that there be one to moderate
in their meetings and assemblies.

The Proposition will be granted; I prove the assumption.

If Christ has commanded that those, that have any prioritie in dignity or
degree in the Government of the Church to be simple as Doves, and meek and
humble as children, yea, account themselves as servants to the rest, then
Christ has declared how those should be qualified that have chief place among
the Governors of the Church.

But the first is true, and therefore the second.

The proposition cannot be denied, the assumption is manifest, Mat. 9. 35,36.
and Luke 9.47,48. Yea our Savior sets his own example before them to follow,
behold, would our Savior say, although I be chief among you, yet am I as he
that serves, the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
Matthew. 20.28. yea, which is worth our consideration after that he has
declared, that he that desires to be chief among them, must humble himself
like a little child, he infers, Whosoever receives one of such little
children, receives me, and whosoever receives me, receives him that sent me,
and whosoever shall offend one of those little ones that believes in me, it is
better that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the
Sea: Augustine says, by little ones we must understand humble ones, such as
he would have his Disciples to be, and to receive such little ones, is to obey
the Governors, of the Church, that humble themselves to attend upon us, as the
Mother to attend her children, and to have a care of them, and they that
receive such with all submission and obedience, Christ says, they receive him,
and not him only, but also him that sent him, and to offend those humble ones,
(says Augustine) is to disobey them or contradict them: that this is the true
meaning of our Savior; it is evident by the like speech of our Savior to his
Disciples, Matthew. 10.40. He that receives you, receives me, and he that
receives me, receives him that sent me. And Luke the 10.16. he expounds
himself these words as I have done. He that hears you, hears me (says our
Savior) and he that despises you despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, to hear in this place is to obey, and to despise
is to desobey.

So then we see that Christ has evidently declared, that all those that have
the chief government of the Church, must be humble, meek, and lowly, and
consequently that chief Governors there must be, and a chief precedent among
these Governors.

But it will be replied, that this necessity is not absolute but conditional,
when the Governors of the Church, has occasion to meet and assemble together.
I answer, if it be of absolute necessity that there be chief Governors in the
Church, according to Christ's appointment, then is it absolutely necessary, that
there be a constant president to moderate their meetings and assemblies. There
is no Incorporation without a chief: a Major, an Alderman, a Baily, no Company
without their Master, to moderate all their meetings: even so the Governors of
the Church, must have a constant Moderator to sit amongst them, upon all
occasions to convene them together when need is, propone matters to be handled
in their assemblies, stay contentions and misorder, impose silence to the
mutinous, and many other things.

Here again my opponents will reply, that the forementioned Governors are
elected every year: I answer, then he that has the first place among them may
be elected after that same manner; but in a Society, where the Governors has
place for their life time, or ad culpam, then the chief president must be
continued for his life, or ad culpam. I grant, to choose a Speaker at every
assembly is conform to the platform of presbyteriall Government, for this
precedent is no longer needful in a Church so governed, because the Church
during the not sitting of the assembly, is governed by Presbyteries in such a
bound, and by Sessions consisting of the Ministers and lay Elders in every
Parish, and so they need not a constant Moderator; but in a Church that is
governed according to the pattern that Christ has left behind him, that is, if
the government be established in the persons of certain chief Governors, with
the concurrence of those whom they shall choose to assist them, of necessity
this precedent must be constant and perpetual, either ad vitam, or ad culpam.

But what do I dispute a point, so clearly revealed in the Scriptures? did not
Christ appoint the 12 Apostles, and their successors to be chief Governors of
the Church? who can, yea, who dare deny it? and is it not as manifest that
Christ appointed a president to moderate all their meetings? and was he not
appointed to moderate for his life? if he was not, show me how long he was to
continue in his office? when he was to lay it down? Well I am sure, Christ was
as wise as all the thousands of my opponents, and he knew the necessity of
order and government in his Church, and therefore laid down a platform of
Government to teach us what form of Government to follow, and what form he
thought most necessary and expedient himself, and if he have laid down any
other platform then I have declared, I shall be very willing to know, and as
willing to learn. O bessed Jesu, thou that art the way, the truth and the life,
Direct me in thy truth, lead me one in that way, that I may be partaker of
that life, which shall never have an end. Amen.

I know some of the weakest of my opponents will say, that by this doctrine, I
give too much advantage to Papists, in affirming Peter to have been primus
Apostolus, and chief Over-seer of the rest. Truly these brethren, exposes
their weaknnesse to the World, for they neither know what popery is, nor what
it is to oppose Popery: to mayntain Bishops to have been instituted by Christ,
and that Christ did choose one to be their chief President and Moderator, is so
far from being Popery, that it is directly against it: for papists will have
Bishops to be the Popes creatures, and not Christ's, they will have the calling
of Bishops only to be de jure humano, and not divino, and that Bishops are no
more but Priests, and that Bishops and Presbyters are but one order, and that
all are equal secundam consecrationem Eucharistiae, in regard of their equal
power to consecrate the Eucharist, and all this they say to maintain the Popes
pretended supremacy for Bellarmine, that great champion of Rome, affirms that
the calling of the 11 Apostles was extraordinary, and that they were Christ's
extraordinary Ambassadors, and that Peter was only appointed by Christ to be
the ordinary and chief pastor of the Church, and that he and his successors
the Popes should govern the universal Church in all ages to come: now I refer
it to the judgment of all Christians, to judge between me and my opponents,
whether I accord with the papists in most things, or they: this shall be the
parallel, the papists say that the calling of the Apostle was but temporary and
not perpetual, so does my opponents; the papists say that the 11 Apostles was
but Christ's extraordinary Ambassadors, so does my opponents; the papists say
that the Episcopal function is not de jure divino, but humano so does my
opponents; the papists say that Bishops and presbyters are all one order, so
does my opponents; in all these I am opposite to the papists, for I mayntaine
that the calling of the Apostles was an ordinary calling, and that the Apostles
was ordained by Christ to be the chief Governors of the Church, and to have
successors in all ages and generations to come, superior both in dignity and
degree, to inferior presbyters.

But my opponents will say, although I do not agree with the papists in the
forementioned heads, concerning the Episcopal Function, yet I jump with them
in making Peter to be the chief of the Apostles: and here also I desire all
good Christians to be judge in this case: this is the parallel. The papists say
that Peter was in degree before the rest of the Apostles, I only that he was
before them in dignity: The papists say that Peter had a supremacy of
jurisdiction above the rest of the Apostles, I, that he had only a primacy of
moderation: the papists say that Peter had granted him by his Master a
superiority of power and authority in his Church, I say that his Master gave
him only a priority of order in it; The papists say that Christ made Peter
Universal Bishop over his whole Church throughout the World; I say that Christ
committed only to him the chief Apostleship of the Circumcision; the papists
say that Peter was both in dignity and degree above Paul, Peter was chief they
say, and Paul only Legatus a latere: I say that Paul was equal to Peter both
in dignity and degree, and had the larger Commission, for he was the chief
Apostle of the uncircumcision, Peter only of the circumcision. The papists say
that Peter received both the swords from Christ, civil and spiritual: that is
both civil and spiritual power, I say he only received spiritual power, and
that equally with the rest of the Apostles. The papists say that the pope of
Rome is Peter's successor in the Universality of jurisdiction: I say that an
Archbishop is his successor, in his priority of order and primacie of
moderation within his own province.

Consider now good Christian which of us two, I or my opponent, be most popish,
he is half I am sure, I in no case, he in the point of Episcopal government,
says wholly as they say, I am against them in all the foresaid controversies,
I give no more to Peter, then the chief adversaries of popery gives him,
Calvin, Piscator Jewel, Willet, Marlorat, as I made manifest before by their
particular testimonies, to whom accords Davenant in his determinations, for he
says, that both out of Scriptures and Fathers, many things may be brought,
which ascribes to Peter some prerogatives of honor, but of such titles and
prerogatives as are attribute to him, we affirm, that no other thing can be
collected, but that he obtained a certain primacy and presidency, for orders
sake among the Apostles. Maier also in his Treasury upon Matthew. 16. says, That
Christ gave Peter some prerogative above the rest of the Disciples, and yet
making another viz. Paul equal to him in every respect. And truly I remember
no Protestant Divine that denies that Peter had the first place amongst the
rest of the Apostles, and how can they? since it is so plain and manifest in
Scriptures, and which is in effect the very bane and overthrow of the mayn
grounds of popery.

For although the Papists abuse the foresaid places of Scripture, to maintain
Peter his supremacy and his successors the Pope, yet we must not refuse to give
Peter that which his master bestowed upon him, and so wrest the Scriptures as
far upon the other hand: although the Papists abuse the words of our Savior
Christ ( hoc est corpus meum) to maintain their transubstantiation, yet we
must not deny a real and spiritual presence of Christ's body in the souls of
the faithful: even so although the papists abuse the foresaid places of
Scripture to maintain Peter's supremacy, and the universality of the Popes
power and authority, yet we must not deny that Christ gave Peter a priority of
order, and a precedence of moderation, among the Apostles, for there is a great
difference between supreme power and authority, which the papists ascribe to
Peter and his successor the Pope, and a priority of order for avoiding of
confusion; this Christ gave Peter without doubt, but not the former.

It is true indeed Protestant Divines have been very sparing in amplifying the
prerogative, and pre-eminence, that Peter had amongst the rest of the Apostles,
only because the Papists advance him too much, far beyond measure and
moderation: But although the Papists decline too much to one extremity, God
forbid, that we decline as far to the other, God forbid, because papists
defend a bodily presence of Christ in the sacrament, that we turn
Sacramentaries, because the papists extol good works and make them
meritorious, that we turn Libertines, because papists will needs worship God
supra statutum, they will do more then God has commanded, that we refuse to
do that which he has appointed: even so God forbid, because Papists make
Peter universal monarch of the whole world, that we deny, that he was chief
Apostle of the circumcision, and had a priority of order among the governors of
the Church of the Jews, which the Scripture gives him in plain language, let
us remember, that they that add to, and they that take from the word of God,
are both subject to the same curse, and that they that call evil good, and
good evil, are in the same case.

For my own part, I dare not but speak the truth as I find it delivered in
the Scriptures, it is the duty of all Gods messengers, to reveal the whole
counsel of God, and to keep back nothing, the knowledge whereof is necessary
for the promoving of Gods glory, and the advancement of the Kingdom of his
dear son: and this point which I maintain, concerning the superiority of
Church Governors, concerns the external government of his kingdom, I am sure,
and it is so clear and evident in Scripture, that none that has understanding
and can read the Scriptures, but may conceive it, and my opponents some of them
make a Church government a mark of the Church, and a part of the Gospel; it
stands us then greatly in hand, to make trial, which is that government, that
Christ has established in his Church, and truly the government which I defend
is the only government which we find established by Christ and his Apostles,
and which has been in use in the Christian Church, in all ages and
generations since: And that which some of my opponents defend, we neither read
of it in Scripture, not so much as a syllable, nor that as it was the
government established of any particular Church, in the whole Christian world,
till within these few years, and truly it makes my hair to stand upon my
head to hear so glorious Epithiets given to the Inventions of men, as to call
their discipline, the temple of God, Mount Sion, the Tabernacle of the Lord,
the eternal council of God, the Scepter of Judah, a mark of the Church, a
part of the Gospel: these Epithiets, and styles are proper to the Apostolical
government, to the purity whereof, as it is recorded in Scriptures, if the
government of the Church of England were conformed, it might be justly called
the holy discipline, and enjoy all these forementioned Epithiets. O blessed
Jesus! happy should I think my self, if I should see thy Church in all
Christian Kingdoms governed, as thou have prescribed in thy word; and thus
much I have said for Peter's Archiepiscopall priority, now I will say somewhat
for Paul's, in the Churches of the Gentiles.

Saint Augustine says that Peter was not the head of the Church but an eye in
the head: and truly if Peter was the one eye, I may say that Paul was the
other, for although that Peter was called among the first of the Apostles by
Christ his master, and Paul after all; yet the Apostle Paul mentions his
dignity and degree to be as high as Peter's, he was not inferior he says to
the chief Apostle; and if we look to the manner of their calling, Paul's
calling was much more glorious then Peter's, even when he was first called to
be a preacher of the Gospel. Peter was called when he was going about the
works of his calling, Paul when he was raging with all cruelty against the
Saints of God, Christ arrests him and makes him stand and yield, Saul, Saul,
why persecutes thou me, it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks: it was
at this time that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
which is not lawful for man to utter, 2. Cor. 12. It is no wonder that the
Apostle Paul glories in the manner of his calling, for none of them were called
after so excellent a manner, which was a presage of the greatness of the
work, whereunto he was called, which our Savior makes known to Ananias Act.
9. for he says to him, he is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my name before
the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel, for I will show him says
the Lord, what great things he shall suffer for my names sake, this was the
first time that he was called, and that only to be a preacher of the Gospel,
he was not as yet called to be an Apostle; nor he was not advanced some years
after this to the Apostolical function, not before the Lord appeared to the
Prophets and teachers at Antioch, and required them to separate to him Barnabas
and Saul, to the work whereunto he had called them Act. 13. it was at this
time that he was made an Apostle; before this time, he was no more but one of
the Prophets of the Church of Antioch, and so called Act. 13.1. after this time
he is said to be filled with the Holy Ghost, and to be mighty by wonders and
miracles, after this he is called by a new name Paul.

That Paul was the chief Apostle of the Churches of the Gentiles, he shows in
diverse places of his Epistles, Ephesians. 3. he says, for this cause I Paul the
prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, and verse 2. if ye have heard of the
dispensation of the mystery of God, which was given to you-ward, and verse 8.
unto me, who am less then the least of all Saints is this grace given, that I
should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ: The
Apostle says this grace was given him, not because it was only given him, but
because it was chiefly given him. But he most plainly declares his priority
in the Churches of the Gentiles, Gal. 2. for there he equals himself with
Peter, who as I have made manifest, had a priority of order among the 12.
Apostles, and in the whole Jewish Church, and does not in any case acknowledge
himself inferior to him, neither in order nor degree, yea he tells us plainly
that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to him, as the Gospel of
circumcision was committed to Peter, which testimony of the Apostle Paul's,
evidently declares, that there was a special oversight committed unto Peter,
in the Church of the Jews, and unto Paul, in the Church of the Gentiles, for
if it had not been so, why would he compare with Peter, and not with the rest?
not, he would have said without all doubt as the Church of the Jews was
committed to Peter, James, and John, so the Church of the Gentiles was
committed to him and Barnabas.

Moreover it is evident that Paul his charge had some excellency in it, above
the ministry of the other Governors of the Church of the Gentiles, for
although there were others that were Apostles of the Gentiles, and namely
Barnabas for one, yet he appropriates a special oversight of the
uncircumcision to himself in these words, He that was effectual in Peter to
the Apostleship of the circumcision the same was mighty in me toward the
gentiles.

Further Paul tells us, 2. Cor. 11.26. that he had the care of all the
Churches, viz. of many Churches of the Gentiles, this evidently shows not the
greatness only but the speciality of his charge, for sure there was some other
Apostle that had the care of some Churches of the Gentiles, as Tim. of Ephesians. Tit
of Cret. Epaphroditus of Phil. Archippus of Laodicea, Epaphras of Col. and
Hierapolis, Apollos of Cor. and others; And although these men's Apostleship may
be questioned, there can no be question of Barnabas Apostleship, and tha^ over
the uncircumcision too, and yet the Apostle Paul says that he had a special
care of all.

His care is also manifest in his diligent writing to the Churches of the
Gentiles, Cor. Gal. Ephesians. in the which he makes known the great care that he
had of their salvation, as may be instanced in his expostulations,
protestations and earnest exhortations, yea he had a special care of those
Churches that were not planted by himself, but by others, as of the Church of
Col. Laodicea, Rome: and where he planted the Gospel himself, what a special
care had he to visit them again, and keep them safe as far as as he could,
from the entering in of wolves to devour the sheep committed to his charge? yea
this is the greatest argument that he has against the false Apostles that they
intruded them upon his charge, the Gentiles being chiefly committed to him,
which he proves by the testimony of Peter, James and John, who gave him and
Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that they should go unto the Jews, and
they unto the heathen; now from these grounds, I will form some arguments for
Paul his priority of order among the Churches of the Gentiles.

The first Argument.
IF Paul was not inferior to Peter, neither in dignity not degree, then if
Peter had a priority and precedencie among the Apostles of the circumcision,
Paul had the same priority among the ministers of the uncircumcision.

But Paul was not inferior to Peter, neither in dignity nor degree.

And therefore if Peter had a priority, and a precedence, among the ministers
of the circumcision, Paul had the same priority, among the ministers of the
uncircumcision.

That Paul was not inferior, neither in dignity nor degree, to the Apostle
Peter, I hope will not be denied, for he defends it in many passages of his
Epistles; and that Peter had a priority, and a precedencie among the Apostles
of the circumcision, I have made manifest by clear evidence of Scripture, and
therefore the conclusion will stand good, that Saint Paul had a priority, and a
precedencie, among the Ministry of the uncircumcision.

The second Argument.
He to whom the Gospel of the uncircumcision was chiefly committed, had a
priority, and a precedencie of all the Ministers of the uncircumcision, of
whatsoever order or degree.

But the Gospel of the uncircumcision, was chiefly committed to the Apostle
Paul.

And therefore Saint Paul had a priority, and a precedence, in the Ministry of
the uncircumcision, of all degrees.

The proposition will be granted; I prove the assumption by the Apostle Paul
his own testimony, Gal. 2. where he says, As the Gospel of the circumcision,
was committed to Peter, so the Gospel of the uncircumcision, was committed to
him; thus the Apostle Paul speaks, not because the Gospel of uncircumcision,
was not committed to any other, for in that same Chapter, he says that it was
also committed to Barnabas, and in the general Commission given by Christ to
all the Apostles, it was included; for they were commanded to teach all nations
( omni creaturae) both Jews and Gentiles, but only because, it was principally
committed to him; and this exposition Doctor Willet confirms in his Synopsis,
Where he plainly testisieth that Paul had the chief Apostleship over the
Gentiles, yea he says, that Peter was chief of the circumcision, and Paul of
the uncicumcision, that although Peter had the first Lot in order, yet Paul had
the more large and glorious Lot, and further he says that it cannot be denied,
but that Paul was chief toward the Gentiles, and therefore the Church of Rome
might with better right, derive their authority from the Apostle Paul, then the
Apostle Peter: now if Paul had an oversight of the whole Churches of the
Gentiles, then it will follow that he had an oversight both of the Pastors and
the people, if the pastors and Ministers of the Gentiles be of the Church of
the Gentiles, which I think no man will deny.

The third argument.
He that had the care of all the Churches of the Gentiles, had a precedencie
of all the Apostles, and inferior Ministers, of these Churches.

But the Apostle Paul had the chief care of all the Churches of the Gentiles,
2. Cor. 11. 26.

And therefore the Apostle Paul, had the oversight of all the Apostles, and
inferior ministers, of these Churches.

The proposition must be true, for to have a care of a Church wherein there are
other inferior Ministers, either in dignity or degree, it will follow
necessarily, that his care extends both to pastors and people.

The fourth Argument.
He that had the care not only of those Churches which he planted by his own
ministry, but of those Churches also that were planted by the ministry of
other men, he had an oversight of all the Pastors of those Churches.

But the Apostle Paul had not only the care of those Churches, which he planted
by his own ministry, but also of those Churches, which were planted by the
ministry of other men.

And therefore the Apostle Paul had an oversight of all the pastors of those
Churches.

The proposition must be granted, or else Paul might have been challenged for
putting his sicle in another man's field, and intruding himself upon the
labors of other men, and so to have stretched himself beyond his measure,
which he labors by all means to avoid 2. Cor. 10. 13. 14. 15.

I prove the assumption that the Apostle Paul had the care of those Churches
which were planted by the ministry of others, he had a care of Rome, Col.
Laodicea, which were planted by the ministry of others, as is evident Romans 10.
11. for I long to see you, that I may Impart some spiritual gift unto you, to
the end you may be established, and so forth to the 14. verse, and Col. 2.1.
for I would ye knew, says Paul, what great conflict I have for you, and for
them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh, and
verse 5. for although I be absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in spirit,
Ioying and beholding your order, and the steadfastnesse of your faith in
Christ, even as he says Romans 18. I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you
all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the world: so it is more then
manifest that the Apostle Paul had a special care of those Churches, which
were planted by others, and therefore it will follow necessarily that he had
some oversight of the pastors as well as the people.

The fifth argument.
He that did Admonish, direct and command, as well the pastors as the people,
he had some oversight both of the pastors and people.

But the Apostle Paul did admonish, direct and command as well the pastors, as
the people.

And therefore the Apostle Paul had some oversight, both of the pastors and
the people.

The proposition will be granted: I prove the assumption, by his Admonition he
sent to Archippus, Col. 4. 17. and yet Archippus was planted in my Judgment by
Epaphras in Laodicea, and perhaps in Col. also and not by the Apostle Paul. We
see the truth of this by his directions to Tim. and Tit. registreat in his
Epistle written to them, yea Phil. 2. 25. and 26. he says that he had sent
Epaphroditus back again to them, which words argue some kind of oversight at
least for he that sends is greater then he that is sent.

The sixth Argument.
I If the changing of Peter's name was a token of his preferment and
advancement, then the changing of Paul's name was a token of his preferment and
advancement.

But the first is true, and therefore the second.

I know it will be replied, that Christ changed Peter his name, but not Paul's.
Answer. I am confident he also changed Paul's, for the reasons before alleged,
although it be not in plain terms revealed in Scripture; all things that
Christ did and said are not revealed in the Word, as we may read in the last
chapter of the Gospel according to S. John. I am of opinion that when Paul was
ravished to the third Heaven, and heard words which might not be spoken, that
he changed his name then, and that he did conceal the changing of his name, as
he did the rest of the words that he heard, because it was his own name,
therefore he makes no relation of it: even as Peter out of modesty does not
report the many favors and respects which his Master did show to him, no not
the changing of his name; so the Apostle Paul conceales the changing of his
name, left his telling of it had been thought arrogance in him; and the rather
because the name that he had before had an evil signification, and he had
small credit to have had Saul for his Godfather, although he was King of
Israel; and indeed their names were very agreeable to their manners, for Saul
in Greek signifies turbulency, and truly both Saul the King, and Saul the
Pharisee, were rightly so called, for both were proud, both were turbulent,
Saul the King persecuted Christ in David, who was a type and figure of Christ,
he did what he could to frustrate Gods purpose, that Christ should not come of
the seed of David, and also to deprive him of his Kingdom. Saul the Pharisee
persecuted Christ in his children, and did what he could to hinder the
propagation of Christ's Kingdom, and so to frustrate the salvation of the
Elect. Paul was therefore loath to make mention of his name; and the rather
because the changing of one letter of his first name S. into P. made it have a
good signification, for Paul in Greek signifies Quiet and peaceable, so that
the changing of the name Saul into the name Paul did signify his conversion
and change, who of a turbulent persecutor of Christians, became a quiet and
peaceable Christian himself; and so S. Ambrose says, before that this Apostle
was washed with spiritual precepts, he was a blasphemer, a persecuter and a
Saul: but when as the rain of the heavenly washing had flowed down upon him,
the blasphemer, the persecuter, and the Saul is killed, and the Apostle, the
righteous, and the Paul is vivified: The word Saul as interpreters relates is
(...), a name taken from turbulency, and Paulus comes of (...), rest and
quiet: some will have it deriven from the Hebrew word (...) to segregate,
because he was chosen and segregated as a mavelous man, according to Jerome
in Epist. ad Philem. But I am rather of Augustine his opinion, who follows
rather the Latin Etimology saying, after that he was brought unto the Master,
that said, Learn of me, for I am meek and gentle, he was named Paul. And
again he says, Saul laying aside the old coat of sin, being bloody with
slaughter, took the coat of humility, that he might be made of Saul a Paul.
There are many opinions concerning the changing of the Apostles name from Saul
to Paul, but I am confident that his Master Christ did it, although the Apostle
told it not, and he might have told it too, although it be not recorded in
Scripture, sure he told that he was so called, although he was not immediately
called Paul after his conversion, he said to Paul (it may be) as he said to
Peter, thou shall be called Paul, viz. when he was advanced to the Apostolical
charge, and so we read Act. 13. soon after he was separate, for that work, the
Evangelist Luke calls him Paul, and no more Saul. And therefore I may very
justly conclude, that since Christ changed the Apostles name, that it was a
sign of his preferment and advancement by Christ.

The seventh Argument.
He who took precedence upon him de facto, he had it de jure. But Paul took
precedence upon him de facto: and therefore he had it de jure.

The proposition must be true, or else we must say that Paul presumed and took
more upon him, then did of right belong unto him, which I hope no Divine will
say, and therefore my conclusion must be good.

As to the assumption that Paul took precedence upon him, we see it in the
Acts of the Apostles, for although Barnabas was an Apostle as well as Paul, yet
he gave place unto Paul, and suffered him to speak, and therefore at Lystra
Paul is called Mercurius because he spoke all, and Barnabas is called Jupiter.

Now I hope I have plainly proved, that these two Apostles, S. Peter and S.
Paul, had a priority and a precedence of all the Church Officers both of Jews
and Gentiles, Peter of the Jews, and Paul of the Gentiles.

There is one argument yet for the dignity and preheminency of both, viz. that
the History of the Acts concerns them only, except very little in the
beginning of the History, which in my judgment is an evident argument not only
of their diligence in the ministry, but of their honor and preferment by
Christ; that these two Apostles pains in the ministry should be in some part
registrate, and the acts of none of the rest, no not of John who was a most
painful preacher of the Gospel even until the day of his death, yea some of
them are not once named except in the general, under the name of Apostles; who
will be pleased to read over that part of Scripture will find it so.

Now to end this discourse: as I brought in the beginning the testimonies of
some modern Writers to testify for me, that what I was to say, had been said
of them before my time, hereby to free my self from scandalous imputations
wherewith I might have been wrongfully charged; so here in the end I will
produce the testimonies of the most ancient Fathers and godly martyrs that
lived in the first centuries of Christianity, to make good what we both have
said, but truly not to prove any thing that I have delivered in my former
Discourse, for to what use shall a man light a thousand Candles and set them up
in his house, when the Sun shines bright in at the windows? and so there is
no need of either the testimonies of ancient or modern Writers, when the
matter is delivered in the Scripture in plain and evident terms. I will
produce them then not to prove any thing that I have said, but to be as it were
Proctors for me, and to defend me from the calumnies and the aspersions of the
malevolous, and to testify that I have said nothing, but that which is
according to the clear evidence Scripture, and whereunto some of them did
bear witness before, and sealed the truth thereof with their blood. I will
begin with Cyprian.

S. Cyprian de simpli prolat. speaks thus. The rest of the Apostles was the
same that Peter was, ordained with that same honor and authority, but the
beginning was from one to demonstrate the Church to be one.

S. Ambrose writing upon Galat. 2. he says that Paul names only Peter, and
compares him with himself, because he had received the Primacy to found the
Church (of the Jews) and himself was also elected to have the Primacy, in
founding the Churches of the Gentiles, yet so that both Peter might preach to
the Gentiles, and Paul to the Jews, if there were cause, for both of them are
found to have done both, and yet it is known that full authority was given to
Peter, in preaching to the Jews, and full authority to Paul in preaching to
the Gentiles. And in the gloss S. Ambrose is thus alleged, Which of them does
resist Peter, to whom the Lord gave the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, nisi
alius talis, but such another that knew himself, by the confidence of his
election, not to be unequal. So says Jerome, Paul does reprehend Peter
because he knew himself not to be unequal etc.

So Jerome on Math. 16. says, that all received the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, yet one is chosen among the twelve, that an head being appointed all
occasions of schism might be taken away.

Chrysostom Hom. 87. says, what means Christ to single out Peter alone, and
to say thus unto him, ( Peter love thou me? love thou me? love thou me?
thrice. Feed my sheep, feed my Lambs?) He was the mouth of the rest says he,
and Prince of the Apostles, wherefore Paul went up to see him above others; for
as though he, viz. Christ his master had forgotten his denials, he commits
unto him the care of his brethren; as if he had said, as thou love me, so
take a care of thy brethren, and the love which thou have always showed to me,
show now, and the life which thou saidest, thou would lay down for me, lay
down now for them.

S. Augustine says that Peter and Paul were chosen for the salvation of two
peoples, Peter of the Jews, Paul of the Gentiles; Peter to repair the old and
desert fields of Judea and to make them fruitful through the wholsomnesse of
faith and grace, being kept unfruitful by the shadow of the Law, and hidden
from the heat of the Sun; but Paul is sent to the Gentiles a new ground, that
yielded no fruit before, that he might cut it with the plough of the Lords
Cross, etc Therefore these two are more eminent then the rest of the Apostles,
and by a certain peculiar prerogative did excel them all. August. in fest.
Petri and Pauli.

An ancient Writer compares Peter and Paul to the two great Pillars, which
Solomon set up in the porch of the Temple, one upon the right side, and an
other upon the left side in the entrance into the Temple, and that upon the
right side he called Iachim, which signifies established; and the other upon
the left side he called Boos, which signifies strong or strength; which two
Pillars he compares to Peter and Paul, Peter signifiing a rock most firmly
established; and the word Paul signifying rest or quietness, which is opposite
to motion, and so of such strength as cannot be moved or turned back. So that
as Solomon who was a type and figure of Christ, being about to build a house
unto the Lord, did set up two Pillars in the Porch of the Temple, one upon the
right side, and another upon the left. Even so Christ the true Solomon, being
to erect a Church to God here upon earth, he set up two Pillars as it were in
the entry of this Church, so that whosoever desires to enter in the Church of
Christ, they must enter by the door which these two Apostles by their doctrine
and ministry has opened both to Jews and Gentiles; and therefore this
ancient Author compares the Jews to the right side called Iachim to whom
Peter was chiefly sent; and the Gentiles to the left side called Boos, over
whom Paul had the chief oversight.

Surely it is mentioned by all the ancient Fathers, and modern Writers,
without contradiction of any one, that these two Apostles had a propriety of
order before all the rest of the Apostles, and Presbyters, the one in the
Church of the Jews, the other in the Church of the Gentiles. What can be said
against the perpetuity and continuance of this priority in the Church of Christ
in all ages following, I cannot imagine: that it was a personal prerogative
that these two Apostles had granted them by Christ their Master, in the
beginning of the Gospel, can no ways be said, and that for these reasons
following.

First, because it is a thing that is morally necessary without the which a
Church cannot be governed at all, as Calvin says in plain terms, Inst it 4.
cap. 6. sect. 8. That the 12 Apostles had one among them to govern the rest,
it was no marvel says he, for nature requires it, and the disposition of men
will so have it, that in every company, although they be all equal in power,
there be one as Governor, by whom the rest shall be directed; There is no
Court, says he, without a Consul, no Senate without a Praetor, no College
without a President, no Society without a Master; so that whatsoever is morally
necessary in all ages, Nations, Kingdoms, Provinces, Incorporations,
Societies, can no ways be thought to be a peculiar Prerogative to one or two
particular men, living in one age, or in one Nation and Kingdom.

Secondly, this priority is much more necessary now in a settled Church, then it
was in a Church while the foundation was but in laying, the Apostles calling
was universal, and they were ordained to preach the Gospel to all Nations,
and had equal power conferred upon them to preach the Gospel, and to gather a
Church unto Christ, and thereafter to erect a ministry and plant overseers
among them, there was not great need of a Precedent, and in special in the
Churches of the Gentiles, until there was a company to go before; but now in
a settled Church, governed according to the pattern that Christ has left behind
him, this precedent is so necessary that he is most necessary.

Thirdly, I conceive this Precedent to be so necessary that Christ settled it in
the persons of Peter and Paul to be a pattern to afterages, showing them that
it is his will, that his Church be so governed in all ages and generations to
come, for since it is more necessary now then it was then, the Church not being
settled, and the Apostles and Presbyters charge being ambulatory, and their
ministry spread over all, and the rather since the Apostle James was settled in
Jerusalem as Bishop there, who was sufficient to govern the whole Church of the
Jews, with the assistance of his Presbyters, so that Peter's Precedence in the
Church of the Jews seemed not to be so necessary, except only that Christ
thought good to do so, for an example to afterages, yea that superiority and
inferiority, which he established in the persons of the several ranks of
Church Governors was not so needful then as now, considering that then Apost.
and the 70. Disciples, and their successors in both degrees, had the gift of
miracles, and other extraordinary gifts, by which powerful means, they were
able to keep all their inferiors in order and awe: for if by such means they
were able to work faith and repentance in their souls, they were as
sufficient to work amendment of life in their conversation; and therefore at
this time all Churchmen might have been of equal authority, both for dignity
and degree, and yet Christ himself, with his own mouth did constante both
diverse dignities and diverse degrees, and that chiefly to teach us how he would
have his Church governed in all ages and generations to come.

Fourthly, there are some things that Christ did in the which we are not able
to follow his example, as his fasting forty days without meat, his walking
upon the sea, and such other miraculous, and extraordinary works: next, Christ
did some things, wherein we must not follow him, as in being circumcised,
celebrating the Passoever, and in a precise keeping of the Mosaicall
Ordinances, Christ kept them all, he came to fulfill all righteousness, he
says he came not to break the Law but fulfill it, yea that one jot or title
of the Word of God should not pass away he says, until all things were
fulfilled, the whole ceremonies of Moses Law were referred to Christ and had
their end in him, and therefore we might not follow Christ in obeying them:
Thirdly, Christ did some things wherein we need not follow him, Christ went
barefooted, he traveled on foot, we never read that he did ride on
horseback, but once that he did ride upon an Ass to Jerusalem; well, we may
choose whether we will follow him in these things or not. Lastly, in some
things we are bound to follow Christ's example, that is, in all things that he
did morally, we are bound to follow the example of his life and conversation,
to be patient as he was patient, temperate as he was temperate, modest as he
was modest, merciful as he was merciful, loving as he was loving, meek as he
was meek, etc. In all these and such like moral virtues, we are bound to
follow his example. And lastly, what Christ did in the settling of the manner of
his worship, we are bound to follow him in these things, we are bound to preach
in season, and out of season, as he did, we are bound to celebrate the
Sacrament of the Supper, according to his example, except in in the
circumstances of time, place, person, site, which are neither morally good, nor
morally evil, but good or evil, according as they are used or abused, and
thirdly we are bound to follow him, in what he did concerning the government of
his own Church, he did found his own Church in an imparity of
Church Governors, he distinguished them in degrees and dignities, in doing
whereof the Church in all ages is bound to follow his example, we hold the
practice of the Apost. to have the force of a precept, much more should we hold
the practice of Christ to be mandative and obligatory. And so I hope I have
proved by good and forcible reason, that ^dency of these two Apostles Peter and
Paul was not a per^^^^^^ogative but a moral example, instituted by Christ.

FINIS.

