The Star to the Wise.

1643.

To the high Court of Parliament, THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS: THE Lady
ELEANOR her Petition; Showing cause to have her Book Licensed, BEING The
Revelations Jnterpretation.

MALACHY 4. 2. For unto you who fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with healing in his wings.

LONDON: Printed in the year, 1643.

The Star to the wise.
To the High Court of Parliament, The Honorable House of Commons;
The Lady Eleanor her Petition, etc.
HAppy Reader and Hearer; for so he who reads, and keeps the words of this last
Prophecy, revealed to be at last: The Revelations showing Things which shall
shortly come to pass: And as the golden leaves of that fruitful Tree, showed
to be for the healing of the Nations, Their Blessed Peacemaker, saying, And
there shall be no more curse: So the whole Prophecy directed unto our Nation,
provided for these days of ours; That Sovereign Plaster, when such
unnatural Division, sowed by the old Serpent; The very foul Disease of the
King's Evil, etc. saying therefore, I Jesus have sent my Angel. And so, touching
Malignant humors, for the most part resorting about the Ears, in which parts,
not a little dangerous; wherefore, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear;
being the burden of every charge, to the Churches, concluded there with;
proclaiming his coming to be showed aforehand to his servants, saying, I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; The Lord of Sabbath; as evident, by
holding the seven stars in his right hand; and That Book sealed with seven
Seals, like Pharaohs Dream doubled, even the established time; and so many
days as from the first Adam to the flood of waters; so from the second Ad^m ^o
the fiery Lake, That flood of Fire and Brinstone; And therefore the second
Death so called.

And as that Token set in the clouds: The straightened Bow that bound himself
thereby, so here crowned with the Bow, binds it with an Oath, By him that
lives for ever, That Time shall be no longer. But as the seventeenth hundred
year revealed to Noah, shows Times my stery contained in that little open Book;
(The shortness of Time) also revealed to be before the end: Eyes the days of
Baptism, likewise how long preached, to such disobedient spirits; as farther
by his right foot on the waters, and his left on the earth: The times measured,
the first Noah's days, by the second Noah's days: to wit, in the seventeenth
Century, his coming in the clouds, who rewards every one according to his
service; For the name of a Christian serves not; But his end worse then his
beginning. That after the House swept and garnished, with seven foul spirits
that goes and berayeth it. And afar off, as in the one bewrayed, how long the
preaching to last of Baptism, as here in alluding to those days; By sevens
when every clean, etc. entered into the Ark, By the unclean seven spirits entered
into him, whose end worse then his beginning. So he expressly speaks in another
place of the worlds beginning and end, to know one by another: As the days of
Noah were, so shall the son of man's days be also; As the days before the
Flood, One thousand seven hundred years; as much to say, To both allotted alike.
And so in Luke the Eleventh, a touch given going before, for better discerning
the time; when they said, He by the Devil cast out Devils. Much like now, as to
believe that an army of another Religion should come to defend the true
Religion. Where the end of Antichrists Kingdom, showed also further, By such a
King, as it were against himself divided; or a man possessed, that goes about to
make away himself.

And had the old world warning; and are the last days cast out of remembrance;
and is his Promise come utterly to an end? Though saying, Ye shall not see me,
till ye say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. And behold, I
will send you Elias before the great and dreadful day; as Eli signifying the
Name of God, etc.

And so much for those days, when the sons of God took them wives of the
Daughters of men, taken with their Sorceries.

And this yet held a senseless thing, or a fancy to expect it: Though showed,
even thus it shall be when the son of man shall be revealed, (Luke 17) like
giving in marriage, and revelling: And with such Buildings and Plantations etc.
a fair warning to prepare for it.

And cursed Jericho that burnt with fire seven days, or a weeks warning that
had, where Rahab saved her Fathers house there, by a Line for token, etc. And
was the handwriting at that Feast, sent to him, He of that first Monarchy, the
last of them, who was weighed in the Balance, etc. and found a lost Body, etc.
And by reading the Prophet Ieremiahs Books: He that understood then the number
of those years, that seventy years should be accomplished in Ierusalems
desolation: Wherefore not by reading now of that Book, where bidden, Let him
that has understanding, count the number of the Beast, 666. etc. To understand
also, how long the Churches captivity under spiritual Babylon: The
Antichristian Monarchy, and aged now 43. and 1600. Even as signified in his
seven heads, and Ten horns, those crowned: his age, So in her whores forehead,
written too that Name of hers: Not of the blessed Virgins giving, of a certain;
and so much for that. He ridden, and ruled so long by her, no longer to be
endured: and which great Harlots City, not unknown. Beginning here, with the
everlasting Gospel, showing, as coming to pass in Augustus his Taxin days,
there sending forth his Decrees to have all the world Taxt. That second Caesar,
when he the second personin Trinity, came to pay the Ransom of all; Also in
his Reign, those Taxing days of his, Not over the world unknown: These
Burdens never so imposed, before He the second of Great Britains Monarchy:
Likewise revealed the se^ond coming of our Lord, when that time comes to pass:
And good will toward Men, Peace on Earth.

So farther with That past, comparing This troublesome time: When all the city
so troubled, and He who mockd with God, faining He would worship him, was
himself mockd; after they made of his Counsel, having sent them to Bethlehem,
etc. in revenge fell upon poor Innocents, under such an age spared none; who to
that Fox returned not any more, but went another way, supposing before their God
they should have obeyed him: Whose Treasure then they laid it at his feet;
given as it were to the Churches use; made their Omage there.

And in city and country, early and late, such keeping watch by day and night
both, to keep out wolves inwardly, those late Bishops; as when the watchful
Shepherds visited, and were told where they should find The Lamb of God: And
the Churches watchmen likewise assembled. Wherefore as Thou Bethlehem, not the
least, so inferior to none of Great Britains Villages, Thou KNIGHTS-BRIDGE by
Name; for such service of thine, found worthy to afford such a Plaster, To the
Honorable KNIGHTS and BURGESSES in the Commons House, which was delivered by
their worthy Speaker; Being made of the root of Iesse and pure Oyl-olive, and
from the Hospital of the diseased and dismembered, not distant far, doubtless
remembered all those maimed in Gods service and slain, in preferring This place,
made the receptacle of His Sacred Oracle, that ointment.

Where the Spittle and the Bridge, in those Letters signified, the Spirit and
the Bride; and as Bethlehem, The House of Bread, signifying, etc. so, Let him
that is athirst, come: for here, The wedding of the Lamb, The offspring of
David; Even as the inseparable Witnesses in the Sacrament: Those places where
the Word of God resides, like the Bread and Cup.

And thou Hide-Park, none of the greatest, yet makes up the Harmony, before the
wedding all rejoicing; The trees of the Wood also utter their ayrie voice,
where the Court of Guards service weil worth the marking and observation; those
Bulwarks there so watched round about; and here to proceed with the everlasting
Word of God; there the flaming sword also; the Tree of Life guarded thereby,
which turns every way on the East of it; and as it were the Cherubims returned,
displaying in the air their golden wings, those Colors of theirs; like as the
Man, when droven out to till the ground from whence he was taken; and so the
Thorn, and the Thistle, and Herb of the Field, his portion with his Wife, sent
away in their Buff-coats and skins, to take their progress.

In vain neither those Pales plucked up, laid open that Enclosure; for every one
to make their Fuel of it: But the forerunner of the little Books disclosing,
the day of Judgments time discovered, Times race or finishd, etc. and so of
those enlarged Horns of the seven-headed Beast, ranging without mean or
measure, crowned with so many Crowns, The mystery of Time there but sets forth.

And Britain derived from Brute, having the Beasts Name as it were, and left
the good angels, nothing ever since Prospering or Thriving; showing also how He
to Oxford now droven to go, a Prototype or figure of Time, sealed in his very
brows or forehead, being aged 43. And thus as he participates of Times age like
it. So tyrant Time to be no longer; but in the seventeenth hundred year cut
off; a copartner with him, of his Estate also and Condition, which in the
seventeenth year was expelled of his Reign forborne so long.

And thus, as the way showed where kept now the Tree of Life; so farthermore of
what nature it is; a Tree hard and stony, the Fruit not to be meddled with, or
touched at first; though none more mellow and soft then it afterward; and
because of a restraining virtue, its good Name taken away, like the Medlars
crowned fruit miscalled.

And so another place belonging to the city, in these days of such
distraction, worthy to be thought upon, Bethlehems Hospital, Their House of
Bread; for the witless sent to This, as the Wisemen to the other, those Sages,
etc. in some respects to That not inferior, where some Barn or the like, made
the Bedchamber of the blessed Lady; and He there born, our Bread from heaven,
and for a sign given the Shepherds, of his racking on the cross, that was put
into the Rack or Manger; and by a Woman aforehand anointed; and other like
signs and tokens.

Whether these betoken nothing too, appeal to the wisdom of our age; or to be
such an unlikely thing; that he who wrote that brotherly Epistle (going before
the Apocalypse) to a Lady, saying, He had many things to write unto her.
Whatsoever it was which appears not there, but referred to another time or
meeting; That from another Lady, The Revelations Interpretation of her writing,
should be sent to Divines for their assent to the same, written by that Divine,
etc. where such a meeting of theirs, in a time of so much distraction of the
Church.

Where touching or importing an inspiration; what phrase of speech more meet
and proper, then that of, Mouth to Mouth; That our joy may be full? for a full
expression of our Lords coming to be revealed to a woman; That secret disclosed.

And the wind blowing where it lists; wherefore not serving to bring these
about from the Isle of Patmos, to Great Britains Islands, when testified he
comes, he comes. The Islands may be glad thereof, etc. Psalm. especially at
such a time of perplexity and woe; and for the redemption of wounded prisoners
too, so miserably relieved, and others for their hurts and maims, disabled ever
to help themselves.

Wherefore then not to be revealed to us, before others in such case: and
as soon to his handmaids as his menservants; the spirit of God to be poured on
them* and so now, as well as then, when she had the first happy sight of him,
after his rising, which was sent to tell and inform them where they should meet
him first: and what odds between seven Churches visited, or sent unto: and
Henry the sevenths Chapel, in such a Church: and in the seventeenth hundred
year of Grace; where the Assembly of Ministers, etc. sitting in that place,
dedicated or consecrated to his memory; whose sons Royal Issue so soon
reedified or reformed the Church so much gone to decay; renewed in such a short
space of Time, The Scriptures buried in another Language, Life not only infused
into them; but sent forth as far West, as even East in former days.

And now in the West, to us since this thing to be revealled, (the Mystery of
the Lord of Sabbaths Coming) wherefore to Westminster, Not directed too: where
the Kingdoms Great Counsel meeting showed there where they shall meet Him
coming in the Clouds.

And of late the Red Rose and the White also, By the scriptures that were
delivered out of thraldom, how soon reconciled, being disunited before: The
Bread and Cup in the Lords Supper reunited, having been judgled away By the old
Serpents policy, because bidden to divide it, The Cup amongst them, as other
allowance have none for it. So begins with the one first, intending not to
forbear the other long: Eves Daughters moved for their sake, lays hold of the
fruitful Uine, whose Emblem, those Branches to keep within their own walls:
or because the Spirit first moved upon the waters, And he in hold now himself
the very Antichristian* Serpent, by whose crooked unluckey, hands kindled this
Kingdoms cruel Combustion again: showed how Gods word first, even that burnt
by him, together with the revealed last coming: the Handwriting applied to this
Nation, being Sealed therewith, that Seal Manual. To Belshazzar that was sent
heretofore. And now whether his Kingdoms: He which was so much incensed hereat,
be Divided and Numbered, or he absent and found wanting, or this be proved a
false alarm sent to him, who tatken With Belshazers looseness, the occasion
of this befalne him: as for more proof of it, Moreover, etc.

Moreover of the Holy Oracle, that Handwrighting reinterpreted by her for an
express sign, Which in the year 1633 was to the Elector Palsegrave Dedicated
upon the letters of his naue The palm of the Hand, etc. Charles Be: for
Belshazer: bidden beware the Hands of the Medesis: and he being after so
imprisoned in France. With the premises referred to the worlds judgment: What
mould Pharaohs heart made of, whether the Handwriting has not been fullfilled
and double, Britains Blow.

And as of late came to pass these: So let his repentance come to late, when
praying it were to do again, give him for his doings, of that Sop his belly
full, till his Bowels gush out with that arch Traitor, his fellow Judas, l et
the Executioner be without his fees no longer: his Gown and Girdle, Win it and
wear it, who has drawn this Curse upon us: and for whose cause (with those
companions of his) these fleeing the very place where they sat: here repair to
the Second House for this License for the Lamb and the Bride, She having made
her self ready, like Joseph and Mary, but betroathed as yet, this pair: So the
other House of Parliament: Our Saviors second Coming assigned to them, to give
Order for this his License, In due consideration of a Sihne, or the twelve
Signs given rather for a token, as not unknown to both houses, etc. Which was
delivered to their Speaker (taken out of the Revelation, Chap. 12.) And there
appeared a great sign in Heaven: a woman Clothed with the Sun and the Moon
under her feet: And upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars. Interpreted this
way: The Celestial Woman clothed with the Sun, to wit, the Suns entering in
Virgo, the bowels and belly: Showing the time of the Churches great
deliverance, about Michaelmas to give her enemies for ever the overthrowe: as
signified by Michaels victory and the Dragons fall, and which piece of
Scripture thus expounded, be presented to them in the month of August. Not
unlike that of Jonas in the Whales belly, that sign of the Resurrection then
as this now of the general time at hand.

And thus his Eexcellencie here, the General for the House of Parliamets
defense, as that Archangel signifying Ezcellent to omong the Angels, and by War
in heaven. The Division of tha high Cout set forth where Saint John ascends a
degree higher then the Prophet Daniel speaking likewise of the troubled time of
the end: Thus, And they that turn many to Righteousness shall shine as the
Stars in the Firmament, the Parliaments signification, The Firmament firm for
ever: as much to say, To sit there fixed, etc. as they, Daniel and John, joined
in Commission for these days.

And so the day of Judgments Epitomy, This Battle here in heaven amongst us
here before his coming, that testifies he rewards every one according to his
work; as they have done by others, even served with the same themselves; Their
toes pared too, taken lower.

And shall our loins be girt, and lights burning to prevent bodily danger, so
much preparation: And shall all be in such security, when that dreadful time,
and no sign at all then on the posts of our doors: But the destroyer coming
into houses of his servants also: When as the Devils storming, because he knows
he has but a short time, shows expressly the time is to be foreknown.

And the Nations angry for that time of wrath come; The time of the dead to be
judged, (Rev. 11) shows the Churches Intelligence aforehand of that time; far
be it from us to be like the deaf Adder; That because once accursed for
harkning when forbidden. Therefore to forbear, charm the Word of God never so
strongly and sweet; like the blind Jews under color of shunning Idolatry, and
the like, that fell to be such Blasphemers of God.

Preaching ye have always, and may hear them when ye please, and their large
Dedicatories and Volumns may License them daily: But the little Book, The
Spirit of Prophecy, Not always that.

And lastly, here for testifying the burden of the Word of the Lord revealed
to her, by so many voices with one consent, showed as follows, touching this
Firstling the Word of God, where and when the same came to her: In the first
year of his Reign, when His first Parliament called at Oxford. Whether he now
returned; a great voice from Heaven then, speaking to her, revealing in what
year the day of Judgment; and so at what time of the year, or how long that
time; she the Daughter of the first Peer or Baron, her first Husband the Kings
first Sergeant, etc.

And in Berkshire, the first of Shires at her house at Englefield, about the
end of July; which month, nam^d after the first Emperor, heard the voice of
God there.

And for publishing the same, from thence went immediately to Oxford, that first
University; To the Parliament then delivering the tidings of the end revealed,
etc. in a Writing given to the prime Bishop Abots; which being printed, was
afterward burnt by his Successor in his first year, 1633. whose Pass given
him before, etc. and with this Sign annexed to it, That the great Plague
presently should cease, which came but to its height the next Week after.

And so came to pass, after that Weeks great Bill, which amounted to Five
thousand six hundred or near, being the first Week of August, 1625. as it were
the Worlds age, The mystical Weeks reckoning.

And then so suddenly vanished, that before a Months end, or thereabout,
scarce any token or appearance thereof, the City so long shut up, open again in
a manner clear.

Thus from that presaging place or Name of Englands bloody Field: Englefield
near Reading-Town, where the Term kept, that remarkable year, for so many
Examples of Extraordinaries produced.

ANd now where the day of Judgment, the great Day of Battles approach (as has
hin declared) was proclaimed, etc. There in those two very Shires, of Berkshire
or Birchshire) and in Oxfordshire. What we have not so much as heard the half
of, others have by woeful experience felt the weight of it. Where two such
Bodies of Armies so large, Whose last Blow, after that cruel Fight, was within
a bowe-shot of the aforesaid House of Englefield: at Theill village: and these
belonging to this place of Scripture, wherefore worthy or notice, Luke the 17.
Where Lord shall thy Coming be revealed:) when replied, Where the body is the
Eagles will resort. As Gods Word without a high and heavy hand never digested,
or obtaining passage, but like the Passover, ever eaten with bitter Herbs,
That Fast of the Lamb.

The Raven is sent forth before the Dove, likewise before him: That same that
had his raiment of Camels hair, girt with a Letherne girdle coming before him,
in whose Coat, not so much as a seam. And Here the still, or sost voice sent
with everlasting peace, the last, before the good time bring the trve Olive
Leaf.

POSTSCRIPT. Revela.
And here The Cup none debard of it: He that is athirst Let him Come, etc.

Knights-Bridge, November, 1643.

