THE STABLE TRVETHS OF THE KIRK REQVIRE A SVTABLE BEHAVIOR.

Holden forth by way of SERMON upon I. Tim. 3. Verse. 14. 15. delivered by Mr.
William Douglas PROFESSOR of Divinity in Kings College, in the University of
Aberden, before the provincial Synod of Aberdene, APRIL 18. 1659.

Psalm. 25. 5. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: Psalm. 50. 23. -- and to
him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.
John 17. 17, Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. Act. 26. 25.
But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of
truth and soberness. ABERDENE, PRINTED by J. B. in March, Ann. 1660.

Some Escapes to be thus amended.
Page, 18. lin. ^. read enervats. and l. 35. r. then it is a. page 19. l. 39
r. propose. page 23. l. 30. r. declarations. page 26. l. 5. 8. infalliblie. page
28. l 27. add the word by. page 29. l. 18. r. concluding. page 34. l. 4. r.
concernment. ibid. l. 37. r. vnue^e^aries. page 38. l. 19. r. inveigh. page 43.
l. 28. r. feed.

To the Right Honorable and his singular good Lord, My Lord Duffus, the Author
wishes such sufficiency of Grace, as may bring to fullness of Glory.
IF true Piety, if high esteem of Learning and true Religion, if love to the
form of sound words holding ou^ saving trueths, if due respect to the
faithful Ministers of CHRIST, if well purchased Honor, if close walking with
GOD, if ingenuous and honest actings for the good OLD CAUSE, may be strong
inducements to make use of such a Patron then for all these jointly, let me be
bold humbly to desire, to present the following thoughts to public view, under
the Patrocinie of your L. honorable Name. When these graces in your L. have
indeared you, to all the Lovers of precious trueths in these parts, then why
not me also? IT was the earnest desire of some Reverend and godly Ministers
both by word and writ, that my thoughts upon these verses 14 15 of I. Tim.
Chap. 3. should be published; wherein, though through much weakness I confess.
I have endeavored to vindicat and clear diverse precious saving trueths,
which to make out, it behoved me to enlarge some points more fully, then were
in Sermon delivered, wherein my chief aim has been, the just opposing of
Popery and other Novations, the Assertors and Fomenters whereof with a mouth
full and foul, have poured out all manner of Obloquie and Contempt upon
Gospel-trueths, and the holy Ministry, so to render both odious, vselesse and
ineffectuall: which with our own present Coldness and Indifferency in the
things of GOD, and the not sisting of needless debates, together with our
barrenness, and walking unsuitable, and behavior unanswerable to the GOSPEL of
CHRIST, speak no less then the removing of the Candlestick, or some great
eclipse of Religion among us. I have shunned all just offense in owning these
trueths; if any charge asperitie, let these know, that were it not, That love
covers many blemishes, much more might have been spoken. If any profess
unsatisfaction in some things here, let me tell them, That I speak the truth in
CHRIST, that I am for peace, but does not seek to please men. I shall spare to
add more, only this, That recommending this Treatise both to your L.
favorable acceptance, and judicious Censure: and hoping that your L. will
regard the substance of matter, and accept the mind of the Offerer. I
reco^mend your L. to the rich Grace of GOD. who has called you to the unfeigned
love of the truth, and is able to preserve you unblameable therein to the end;
I do subscribe my self

Your L. most humble servant in the Lord, Mr. William Douglas.
At old Aberdene March 30. 1660.
A SERMON Delivered by Mr. William Douglas PROFESSOR of Divinity in Kings
College, before the Provincial Synod of ABERDENE, Aprile 18. 1659.
Upon I. TIM. Verse. 14. 15. These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto
thee shortly.

But if I tarry long, that thou may know, how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of GOD, Which is the Church of the living GOD, the pillar and
ground of the truth.


IN this first Epistle, The Apostle worthily acquireth himself three ways.
First, as a Pastor instructing Timothy, both anent the right end of the LAW: as
also what Gospel-Trueths are to be taught, professed, and practiced, and
withal urging his proficiencie in them, as in Chap. 1. and 2. Secondly, as a
Prophet, fortelling dangerous approaching times, sad Apostasy, total or
partial, as Chap. 4. etc. Thirdly, as an Apostle, prescribing Rules anent the
oeconomie of the true Visible Church, and emitting Canons anent Office-bearers,
Bishops and Deacons in that Church, as in chap. 3. of which the TEXT is.

In it are two points considerable, I. a Reason why he issues out this
Directory, which is, That he might know how etc. II. Upon Division of the Text.
the mentioning of his suitable behavior, we have an elegant description of
the Church, by way of Commendation, in that it is, The house of GOD etc. the
ground of truth; a Summarie of which Trueths we have verse. 16.

As for the first set down in verse. 14. and beginning of verse. 15. in it two
remarkable points are expressed. 1. The course he Verse. 14. divided into 2.
takes being absent. These things write I unto thee. 2. The way he purposes
to supply that, hoping to come unto the shortly. But if I etc.

In the First again, I shall shortly take notice but of these In first, are
three.
three. I. The Course, is writing. II. Who does write? III. Who it is he
writes unto.

As to the first; Scripturall Writtings are for three. 1. For I. writting for
what.
Memorial duration, see Isai. 30. 8. Exodus 17. 14. 2. For Admonition,
excitation and Christian edification, see I. Cor. 10. 11. II. Pet. 3. 1. and I.
John 2. 14. 20. 3. For the due regulating Namely for three.
of Faith and manners, as Joh. 5. 39. Joh. 20. 31. II. Tim. 3. 15. 16. (Whence
we may collect, of what singular use for Unity and Concord were the
Encyclickes of the Ancient Kirk.) called by AUGUST. Co^municaetoriae literae.
But passing this, I the rather note the Ends of the Divine writes to stop
Stappletons foul mouth, (Who Contr. 4. q. 5.) prefers the Word-unwritten,
to the Written, for three Respects. 1. For Authority, in that the Unwritten
Word, may define against the Written. 2. That the Unwritten Word is of greater
certanty for determinations of Faith.

3. That the Materials proposed in the Unwritten Word are more excellent, then
these in the Written Word. The very repetition of which blasphemies may be a
just refutation of them.

As to the Second. This is undeniable, that it belonged to the Apostolic II.
Who writes
function, to emitt Rules for the Church, both in general, as also in
particular. Here briefly take notice of three. 1. It belonged to Apostolic
jurisdiction, to regulate Evangelists and Note three. 1.
Pastors, both in their fixed residences, so we have it Tit. 15. as also in
their necessary excursions and delegations: for although (as Gillesp. q. 4.
Miscell. well notes) for latitude the office of the Evangelist was
commensurable with that of an Apostle, yet so they were not for power of
Commission or jurisdiction. 2. is, That accordingly Paul endeavors to be
useful now, that is, 2.
by Epistolick Commission to supply the want of his Personal presence,
comforts and conference. Thus the Fathers of the ancient kirk did, as said is:
and this is to lesson us now, that as occasion is offered from Providence, we
imitate him in this. 3. is, That 3.
hence I find no warrant for Roman-Rescripts or papal Decretalls now; for it
were in consequent to argue from the power of Apostolic Delegations to that of
the present Roman tyrannical. Days were, that Roman delegations to sister
Churches, as to Carthage, Antioch, Millan, Alexandria were wholesome, but the
case is altered, as is well noted by Spalato, lib. 4. cap. 12. Rep. eccl.
Q^eolim fuit legatio sana, postea valetudinaria, tandem mortua facta. First, it
was sound, then languid, lastly dead and null.

As for the Third, unto thee, whether to him as an Evangelist, III. To whom?
or as an ordinary Pastor at EPHESUS, it matters not much. Only this, he as
an inferior, was to receive Orders from a potestative Superior, as the same
Spal. writes l. 4. cap. 1. Justin Martyr, and Beza hold him out as the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, or that he was Moderator, Bishope and President amongst
the Elders there. I shall now only mark what good account Paul gives of him
in Scripture: And first see his Lineage, birth and breeding, 1. Who he was
II. Tim. 1. 5. secondly, his Calling, II. Tim. 4. 5. thirdly, his gifts and
abilities, II. Tim. 1. 6. II. Tim. 3. 15. I. Tim. 3. 14. Fourthly, his
diligence and fidelity in employments, see Phil. 2. 20. Fifthly, his strict
walking insinuated, I. Tim. 5. 25. Whence I note this, Where all these
concur, it is an evident sign of an inward CALL. The Madeburg. Centur. lib.
2. C^nt. 1. cap. 3. hold, as others also, That He, with Onesimus, and Dion.
Areopag. were executed at ROME by Domitians command.

Use to be made hereof, is this; Since Paul writes to him, then Timothy must
read this script. both to make him wise to salvation, as also to behave
himself as becomes in Gods house. Are not all scriptures Gods epistles to men?
so August. on psalm. 90. The scripture is Gods letter dated from that City, to
which as pilgrames we travel. The first Nicen Council decreed, That no
Christian want a Bible. CHRYSOSTOM. 3 Hom. on Lazar. bids the people take the
Babble and read it. HIERON in the epitaph of Paul, and in his epistle. to
Laeta, Theodora etc. affirms it to be unlawful for women to be ignorant of
the scriptures, or that one day should pass without learning something out of
them daily. Whose testimonies I the rather cite against these two most
erroneous bold assertions of the Jesuit Stapleton, Relect. Cont. 5. q. 3. a.
4. First, That the Translation of Scriptures is the seminary of heresy. 2.
That the reading of scriptures by the Laics is impious and pernicious. O
heavens be astonished at this!

The INTENT is, to come shortly to them. Anent this comparative 2. his purpose.
(...), I note that some as Aretius refer it unto his writting, but others to
the nearest, his coming. But the maine Observe of Critiques here, is, That
this Comparative adds much to the simple signification of the absolute; so it
is, Joh. 13. 27. so Act. 25. 10. (...). so II. Tim. 1. 17. (...). Since then
we find his Resolve is for Ephesus, the question is, Did he indeed by a
local motion return to it? Although some for the affirmative ground on the
words Act. 18. 23. yet the most are for the negative* and if so, yet his Intent
is rational, and for why to come
good use, as is well observed by judicious Calvin, and learned Danaus. as 1.
to repress insolent and contumacious Spirits, and to sober their minds, upon
the supposall of his speedy return. 2. To refresh the present incumbent, with
a comfortable hope, of enjoying his personal presence to ease and relieve him.
3. To excite Timothy and stir him up to further diligence to, and attendance
on his Calling, see the like I. Tim. 4. 13. 4. To demo^strat Paul's continued
care of the welfare of all the Churches of Christ. Now to this verse. 15. be
subjoines a PROVISO, If his occasional affairs should retard him: yet in the
interim, make use of this written Directory.

Now these words, But if I tarry long. are very well rendered Verse 15.
by Chrysostom. on the place thus, Whether I come sooner or later, or in
Providence not at all, yet by these I mind thee of this, HOW TO BEHAVE THY
SELF etc. do thou duty, follow these precepts thus set down, or further to be
set down, applicable to all Pastors and Churches, as to Timothy and Ephesus.
Here we may take notice of those I. Obser.
two. 1. by this (...), we see his promised return to be conditional, but
not absolute, as is well noted by Estius. (...) says Chrysostom. on the place.
For though all prima(...) were sufficiently revealed to the Apostles, yet all
future and emergent Circumstances were not clearly revealed. Then wait on
duty, submit to providence, refer events to God. Distinguish between Gods
disposals and 2. Obj. is an use.
man's proposals. The spirits impulse admitts of no repulse, see a clear
instance of this, Act. 16. 7. there the Holy Ghost did forbid them to preach
the word in Asia, and the spirit did not suffer them to go to Bithynia.

But to pass this as less Material, Let us consider what the 1. The end of
writting.
Church is, in which a behavior suitable is required. In which observe these
two. 1. The end of his writting, that thou may know how etc. 2. The Churches
dignity (which is the object of this comely behavior) by way of Panegyric
beyond all that can be given to all Arts or sciences. In the which are those
two. 1. Who is the Proprietary of this House, and of the Church. 2. What is the
property or rather office of this house and Church, that is, to be the ground
and pillar of the truth.

Now because the Object well known moves and excits to the 2. A description of
the Object.
duty, we shall insist on these two first. Namely, why the Church is called the
house of God, the Church of the living God. with some uses of either: then in
what sense the Church is indeed and justly so called, the pillar and ground of
truth.

As for the first of these two titles; The house of God, the 1. The house of
God.
Church in scripture, is compared to a garden enclosed, to an Army, to a City,
and here to an House: but to that, of God, CHRYSOSTOM. affirming the Apostle here
to allude to Bethel, and to the Temple of the Lord. Here first consider. Why
the Church has this denomination, then give some uses of it.

As to the first, The very origination or signification of the I. Why the
Church is so called.
word in the Hebrew, Greek and English, relates to it, as of God. In the
first, it is building. in the second, it is dwelling. in the third, it is
defending. IT is well remarked by D. Ha^mond, this is a phrase, taken from that
special place of Gods presentiating himself. For as Ambrose says, Thoughall
the world be his Dominion, yet the Church is only his House. For, here He
dwells, here he delights to meet with the pious and devout soul, here he
receives their addresses, here he answers their petitions, here he is
worshipped; Threefold house of God 1. Material.
and without this house, is no such communications, no such intertainment. But
further to clear this, the word, House of God, relates either 1. to the
Material house, whereof read I. King. 8. ordained as an adminicle to advance
Prayer, praise and sacrifices in it. Or: Sedgwick on psalm. 23. mantaines this
to Of this house ar these places meaned, luke 19. 46 Eccl. 4. last
be Gods house, both for operation and for separation, in that divine duties
and services are performed in it, and so to be set a part, as not to be a
Stable or an Aile-house. The primitive Christians, after the public peace of
Christendom, sutably had their Auditories and Oratories. which the Grecians
and Latins called Basilicae, and Dominicae. 2. Is the Celestial, whereof we
we read 2. Cor. 5. 1. 2. and Joh. 14. 2. 3. Is the Spiritual, yet 2.
Celestial.
Militant, the true Church on earth, both visible and invisible; this is here.
and of this house, are also these places, Heb. 3. 2. 6. 3. Spiritual.
I. Pet. 4. 17. Psalm. 69. 9. Luke 1. 27. Ephesians. 2. 19. Gal. 6. 10. This is that
house where fatness is. psalm. 36. 8. this is that house where satisfying
goodness is, psalm. 65. 4. this is that house of David, luke 1. 33. this is
that house built on the Rock, Matthew. 7. 24. this is that house where holiness
is seemly psalm. 93. 5. here we inquire, psalm. 27. 4. here he remains by
ordinances and his spirit, see I. cor. 3. 16. I. Cor. 6. 19. II. Cor. 6. 16.
Augustine yet further holds out the resemblance thus, 1. A house has the
ground, the walls. the roof, so the Church has says to be grounded upon,
hope to be erected by, and love that covers, etc. 2. A great house has
several Office-bearers, so that the Church, I. Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
3. A great man's house, has vessels and vt^nfiles of all, and for all sorts.
Now as God is a great Honsholder, Matthew. 20. 1. so has he in the Catholic
Visible Church, vessels of diverse frames, II. Tim. 2. 20. 4. In a great house
is provision for young and old, poor and rich, weak and strong: so it is in
this house, see Heb. 5. 12. 13. 14. I. Pet. 2. 2. Matthew. 15. 26. Mark the
Differences between God his house and ours. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
27. 5. In a great house, there is but one Head and Lord: so here it is, Ephesians.
33. 22. Ephesians. 5. 24. Col. 1. 18.

But yet further to enlarge the point, mark the great differences between Gods
House and our houses in these. 1. Our houses keep and defend us: but God keeps
and defends His House, psalm. 121. 3. 5. 6. psalm. 125. 2. Isai. 40. 2. Isai. 27.
2. 3. it is not with Gods house as with that of dagon, I. Sam. 5. 4. 2. Our
houses locally comprehend us, but no house co^prehends God, as I. Kings 8. 27.
4. We may be absent from our houses elsewhere: but it is not so here, see psalm.
24. 1. Matthew. 28. 20. Isai. 43. 2. Heb. 13. 5. 5. The strongest of our houses,
they decay, wear away, and are perishing, as Amos, 6. 11. Psalm. 49. 11. 12:
but not so here. All true Members of this lower house, or Militant Church,
though now they be Viatores, shall be of the upper house, or of the Triumphant
Church, and Comprehensores, see psalm. 84. 11. The Lord will give grace and
glory. 6. O how far is this House surpassing all the magnifick Structures,
all the sumptuous fabrics of the most curious and exquisite Architects of this
world? if we either regard the eminent Structure, the situation, the
accommodation, the contrivement, the duration, the perfection of its beauty, see
psalm. 87. Isai. 26. 1. 2. Heb. 11. 10. Rev. 21, etc. Never talk of the Persian
Hispaan, the Ethiopian Amara, the Egyptian Pyramids, the Adrian Mole, or the
Lorenzo in Spayn, for in comparison with this, They are but as the drope of the
bucket compared to the sea, or as the dust of the balance compared to the
whole earth.

Now in so much, That suitable to this House of God, behavior is required; my
first use is this.

Labor to be within this house. Do as David, psalm. 23. 5. I will dwell in it
for ever. This is the Mother of us all. This must be to us as the Ark of Noah;
not only to be in it, but abide in it, see Joh. 15. 6. 7. I. Joh. 2. 19. Away
with separation needless and unjust; IT is a good word of CYPRIAN, He that
has not the Church for his Mother, he has not God for his Father.

If we be Members of this House, it shall be our best behavior to 2. Use.
carry so as becomes the house we are come off. Let us look out like vessels
of honor, fitted for the Masters use. a peevish or a ranting behavior argues
a vessel of dishonor. Remember that of ps. 93. 5. Holiness becomes thy house
O Lord! it is good word of Nehemiah, chap. 6. verse. 11. Should such a man as I
flee? Should one enrolled in the King of heavens Family carry basesly, idly,
divisively? Remember who are without, Revel. 22. 15. etc. If civil carriage
be much required and looked after in a great man's house; how much more is
christian and spiritual behavior required in this great Lords House?

Then in particular, Let each Member mind the welfare and 3. Use.
standing of Gods house. Augustine being interrogated how this should be,
Answered, Orando, juvando, condolendo, congaudendo; for which acts, see these
scriptures psalm. 122. 9. 7. 8. 9. Amos, 6. 6. Romans 12. 15. I. Cor. 12. 26.
psalm. 42. 4. psalm. 27. 4. etc. Our greatest joy and glory shall be to
contribute our talents hither, to repair breaches, to restore paths to dwell
in.

Then in special, Let Ministers look to their behavior in this house. No
house requires so wise and faithful servants as this 4. Use
does. Remember these passages, Matthew. 25. 21. 23. Luke 12. 42. I. Car. 4. 2.
Were thou but a doore-keeper in Gods house, improve thy talent to His praise
and the Churches good. Mark Moses, his commendation; That he was faithful in
all the house of God as a servant, Heb 3. 2. Why was Jehojada so honorably
buried? was it not because, he had done good in the house of the Lord, II.
Chron. 24. 16. The greatest Elegium and Commendation that Theodosius could get
of Ambrose in his Funeral was that, dying he was more careful of the
Churches good, then of his Crown, Family or Posterity O Remember both the parts
of that promise and threatening set down, Matthew. 24. 45. 46. etc.

If Ministers would give notice of good behavior in Gods 5. Use.
house, then let them learn to behave themselves wisely in their own houses;
as Paul insinuates I. Tim. 3. 4. O that we could learn to be as David, who
psalm. 101. 2. says, I will walk in my house, with a perfect heart: but not to
follow Eli his example, I. Sam. 4. 13. His sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not. This might be laid to many of our doors, a good father and
a good pastor are very comely.

If we are to behave our selves suitable to this house, then avoid 6. Use.
divisive motions, or schismatic behavior, so Romans 16. 17. If a Republicke,
or Army, or a City, or the rulers of a Ship be divided, the sequel is ruin.
Matchiavels rule was, divide et impera. Our Lord insinuatetd this, Mark 3. 25.
O sad is that word of Micah, chap. 7. 7! Good was that saying of Gregor,
Nazanz. (...), that is, That we think, speak, and do the same. (...). one in
judgment, and in affection also.

Since our behavior is so looked upon, as it corresponds and 7. Use.
keeps due proportion with this Metaphorical house, the true visible Church,
then our behavior must not be to glory in the outward show and pomp of a
glorious Temple. I deny not, but of old, Altars were piously erected, the
Tabernacle reared up, the Temple finished, Synagogues built, Kirks and Cells
continued as adminicles of divine worship in the public meetings of the
saints: yet when these meeting places become dens of thieves, and cadges of
uncleanness, it is just with God, to affront them, as he did Shilo, and the
Temple, see Ier. 7. 4. 14. 8. Use.


Here I cannot but meet with that sophisme of BELLARM. The Kirk is a house,
says he, and one house has but one Rector, who can be this but Peter and his
successors? ANSW. 1. grant all this, what is it for the present Roman Bishope?
this is but beggerie. 2. Make Peter that one Rector (which is denied by us) yet
I deny that he is head or spouse of the Church. 3. Cyprian makes a better use
of that Rectorshipe, who epist. 67. says, We are many Pastors, yet we feed but
one flock, which is the Lords. Episcopatus Vnus est, cujus a singulis in
solidum part tenetur; but of this more II. Title, Church of the Living GOD.
hereafter.

Next follows the second branch of his Commendatory, The Church of etc. Where
we are first to explicate this other Predication or denomination, then gives
some uses of our behavior to the things so denominated.

If any inquire here, what Church is meaned? I answer both What Church is here
meaned?
the Catholic and each particular, the true Visible and the Invisible, the
Kirk Essential, and Organick, the Kirk National, and Domestic, the Ancient
and Modern, the Oriental and the Occidentall, the Kirk more or less pure.
For each of these so long as they adhere to revealed trueths, and remain
joined to the Of the living God.
base, so far they are The Churches of the living God, his body, his spouse.
Now what is added? This title is added, both for distinction, and for
demonstration; As to the first, This is to difference the Owner of the Kirk, 1.
from that which never lived. I. For distinction.
2. from that also, which though it was, or is living, yet it is but mortal.
3. yea from that also, which so lives, as not subject to mortality, as the
Devil: or as some learned Divines more clearly hold out thus. 1. There be dij
deputati and reputati, as psalm. 82. 6. I have said, ye are gods. 2. there be
dij fictitij or manufacti, dead gods or Idols, psalm. 138. 15. etc. 3. there be
dij sensuales, as of these, whose god is their belly, phil. 3. 19. 4. there be
dij usurpantes, as the devils, II. Cor. 4. 4. the god of this World: but none
of these is the living GOD. It had been good for these, if they had never
lived. This limitation is mainely in opposition to these false gods, whose
pictures invented and framed by humane brain, were adored and sacrificed unto,
in the heat hen Temples; as if Paul upon this very account should urge a
reverend and holy behavior in Timothy, because he was an Office-bearer II. For
demonstration.
not in Diana's Temple, or in Jupiters Capitol, nor in the house of Dagon or
Bell, nor in the Synagogue of Satan, but in the Church of the Living GOD. Then,
secondly, for demonstration, that is, what a living God this Owner is both
formally and effectually, which Schoolmen well explain, when they say, That God
is life quidditative, intellectual, interminable, eternal, simple, immutable,
incommunicable, infinite and perfect; grounding upon these words, I. Tim. 6.
16. As also who gives life, 1. The Universal, as Act. 17. 28. then the
rational, as Genesis 1. 26. Jer. 38. 16. Psalm. 32. 8. Isai. 28. 26. Psalm. 36. 9.
then the supernatural life, as when he is called our life, see Col. 3. 3. 4.
Galat. 2. 20. I. Pet. 1. 23. both these are no less well explained by Marianus
Victorinus, lib. 4. against the Arians; upon these words of Joh. chap. 1. 4. In
him was life, and his life was the light of men. Vivere Dei non est quale
nostrum, sed est vivere summum, primum, fontaneum, a semetipso, est vivere ante
omne vivere, sui sibi principium, omnium effectivum, viventium origo.

The Title thus explained. The 1. Observe may be this; Since 2. Uses of this 1
Use.
the Church is the Church of the living God, then it is indefectible, hence it
is called, the City of the living God, Heb. 12. 22. this is from his gracious
assisting presence, and if it were otherwise, then there might have been a time
supposed, wherein no saving trueths should be revealed on earth, but there was
never such a time, nor shall be. This our Mother never dies.

This Title is a great comfort to Believers, to living Members, 2 Use.
even in the midst of the greatest and saddest Revolutions, in the time of
their greatest pressures and sufferings; Mark to this, that of Job, chap. 19.
25. and of Psalm. 18. 46. The Lord lives. And so much the more, if we suffer,
because we trust in the living GOD, I. Tim. 4. 10.

Then beware to reproach the Living God. Let all Rabshake's 3 Use.
and Golia's look to themselves, see I. Sam. 17. 36. and II. King. 19. 4. O
that scoffers and deriders of the sacred Trinity, would take this to heart!

Then whosoever professes Membership of the Church of 4 Use.
the Living God, Let them learn to live to him, Romans 14. 7. 8. to this end,
enter into this Kirk by a new and living way, Heb. 10. 20. Behave your selves
as Children of the Living God, Romans 9. 26. Carry as servants of the Living God,
Dan. 6. 20. Thirst for the Living God, psalm. 42. 2. Offer your bodies a living
sacrifice, Romans 12. 1. Trust in the living God, I. Tim. 6. 17. Swear by him
that lives, Ier. 4. 2. Fear the living God. Dan. 6. 26. then worship him that
lives for ever, Revel. 4. 9. Rev. 5. 14. Then take heed of Apostatising from
him, see Heb. 10, 31. If there be in us a Vital principal that is indeed
spiritual, then assuredly these foresaid Vital operations are apparent; else
it may be said of us, as of the Angel of Sardis, Revel. 3. 1. Thou have a name
that thou live, but thou art dead. They that are sealed with the seal of the
Living God, will 5 Use.
yield fruits of holiness and happiness, Revel. 7. 2. II. Cor. 3. 3.

Let this be in a special way applied to Ministers, who are not Baals Priests;
That all their actings be in a lively way, in the Lord, and for the Lord. A
lifelesse Ministry, cold and careless, is a soul-Murthering office. Far be
it from us in our Ministerial acquittalls, that popish tenet, Missa non
mordet. It is marked of Christ, Matthew. 7. 29. That he taught with Authority,
and the happy issue of this is set down, Matthew. 11. 5. which is well rendered,
The poorear evangelized, that is, drenched in it. Thus Paul preached to the
Thessalonians. I. These. 2. 3. We were bold in our God, to speak unto them
the Gospel of God in much contention. and to the Coloss. chap. 1. 28. We
teach every man in all wisdom, that we may present etc. And yet to clear
this, mark these two notable passages of Paul in his powerful preaching, to
draw men from vanities and idols to the Living God, see I. These. 1. 9. For
they themselves show what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye
returned to God from your idols, to serve the true and living God. and that
other, to this purpose; Act. 14. 15. Sirs, we preach unto you, that ye should
turn from these vanities, unto the living God. So should we now be most
sedulous to root out in special, the imbred seeds of Popery, in each of us by
nature. And yet further, that our behavior may be suitable to the church of the
living God, Mark that worthy Apeale of PAUL, as to this, I. These. 2. 10. Ye
are witnesses and God also, how holily, and justly and unblameably we behaved
our selves among you that believe, etc. Here are three good Adverbs. 1. How
holily, a Minister should be Holiness to the Lord, endued with
personal-holines, profession-holines, holiness in his Family, and holiness
Vocationall, this is most requisite. Sad was that speech of a worthy hearer
upon a graceless PREACHER. When he is out of the Pulpit, I wish he never came
again into it, he is so profane: but when he is in the pulpit, I wish that he
never came out of it, he preaches so to the life to others. Then, how justly,
that is, wronging no man's interest, giving to each in Gods family his portion
in due season, revealing to the^ the whole Counsel of God, applying in a wise
way, Law-threats and Gospel-promises, giving both aloes and cordials, bitter
and sweet as PATIENTS stand in need of it. Thirdly, how unblameably, PETER very
well urges upon all, an holy and honest conversation, I. Pet. 1. 15. I. Pet. 2.
12. O how much more is this required in a Minister; which moves Paul, I. Tim.
4. 12. to desire TIMOTHY to be a pattern to believers, in word, in purity, in
faith, in spirit, in charity, in conversation. our example being more viewed
then our precepts; which puts me in mind, of a sad speech of Martianus Bishope
of Constantinople, recorded by Socrates, lib. 5. chap. 20. Have. eccl. and it
is this, After that he had ordained one Sabatius to be a Presbyter in PONTUS,
and finding him afterward to judaize, to turn factious and turbulent, and
fostring the schism of the quartadecimani, he did burst forth in these sad
expressions: Would to the Lord, that I had laid my hands on briars and thorns,
that day, I gave thee imposition of hands, thy carriage is so full of blame. I
end with this humble Request. Let us all endeavor for such behavior as is
suitable to revealed trueths, as is suitable to the power of godliness, as is
suitable to these Ordinances we hold out to others, and as is suitable to our
holy profession. III Title. The Pillar of truth.


Now follows the last two titles of that place, where Timothy his behavior
must be The pillar and ground of the truth. Now of this are three different
references. 1. Some refer them to Timothy, as if he were the ground and
pillar of the truth. thus Leigh. and Chillingsworth. apply these titles, for
so say they, was Attains called by Eusebius. lib. chap. 1. for his constant
Martyrdom, but this is not right. For this is the predicate of the Church here,
and one is not a Church. 2. Some refer and join these words to the
subsequent, verse. 16. these material trueths being a Pillar, so Camero, so
Heinsius, so also Mares. t. 1. Contr. 5. contra Tirin^ p. 163. 3. Most of the
soundest Interpreters refer this to the Antecedent, for which cause, the
original Greek has it, (...), (...), even referring to (...), so is the like
Gal. 3. 16. It is the Church to which these two denominations belong.

I shall first speak of this Pillar of truth attributed to the Church. II. of
this ground of truth, why, and how it is thus called. As for the first, I
propose these. 1. What Church it is, that is this Pillar. 2. Why the Church is
so called. 3. I shall vindicate the place from foul aspersions, and false
glosses put upon it. Then 4. I shall raise some observes, and give some uses of
it.

As to the first, to make the point more clear, mark shortly I. The use of
Pillars. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
and in general, for what uses Pillars are reared up. We read in scripture,
That they have been erected for witnessing, so Genesis 31. 13. 52. 2. For a
Memorial, so was Absoloms pillar for preserving his memory alive, II. Sam.
18. 18. 3. Pillars are erected as an Emblem of a judgment, so Genesis 19. 26. 4.
For Strengthening and supporting great buildings, so Judge. 16. 29. 5. We read
I. king. 7. 21. that Solomon erected two pillars in the Temple porch, called
Jachin and Boaz, interpreted by the seventy Interp. (...) and (...), that is,
Direction and Protection: or as others, Light and Integrity; They were as the
Vrim and the Thummim. purity of Doctrine, and sanctity of life, a sound faith
and pure living, a sound head, and charitable hands, sound precepts and good 6.
practice, by the which God directs and establishes his Church. 6. Amongst
the Romans were Pillars erected to Conquerours, after wars for Triumph, so in
Foro there were new Obelisks, and in Campo Martio, such pillars and high
statues. But the pillar 7.
here mentioned, is not a Material but a Metaphorical, not a real, but a
figurative, not an Architectonicall, but Political, not simply but
comparatively so, that is, in respect of men locking and leaning to it.

As to the question first to be answered, to wit, What is the 2ly, What Church
is this pillar?
Church that is this Pillar? I Ans. first in general. 1. Each true Church is
this Pillar, yea each individual Believer is a pillar in a sound sense, as
Revel. 3. 12. But, secondly, If the Quaere be, to which this attribution
chiefly and primarly belongs, that is, whether firstly to the Catholic, or to
the particular Churches? Then I answer thus. That since the Catholic Church
is first in Divine Intention, and in Institution, and in Privileges, and in
Authority, and so in Dignity and Perfection: yea and since the Federall
Promises are first made to the Church Catholic, as is well proven by J.
Hudson; Hence it is, that I affirm, that the Notion, the denomination, the
qualifications of a pillar, do all belong primarly to the Church Catholic. It
is well said of Jerome, even to this very point, Orbis major est urbe. This is
a clear truth, every affection applicable, or rightly applied to the
Catholic, is not straight and still to be applied to each particular as to be
infallible, or to be The Mother of us all; it were incompetent to apply this to
each particular, though both these, in act not erring, are this Pillar, yet
with more and less, yet with subordination, yet as of the higher and of the
lower degree: Which I the rather insist upon, to refute that new conceit of
Independents, who hold no kirk to be a Pillar of truth, but their particular
Congregations; This is just as the Papists say, No true kirk but that of Rome:
and as the Donatists before them said, No true kirk but in Africa. but both are
mistaken, not knowing the true affections of II. Why, to be a pillar, is
attributed to the church.
the true Catholic Visible Church.

Now to clear the second, That is, Why this Title is given to the Church. I
shall first negative show in what sense, the Church is not a Pillar, then
positive show in what sense, it is a Pillar. As to the first, that is well
cleared by D. Feeld, lib. 4. cap. 4, of the Church. 1. IT is not the Pillar of
truth, as if divine trueths for their entitie and being, did depend on the
Church: nay says 1. In what sense, it is not the pillar of truth.
CHRYSOSTOM. well. The Church depends on these trueths. 2. Nor is it a Pillar, as
if our faith depended on Church Authority. To which purpose, Irenaeus says
well, lib. 3. cap. 1. Inst. The Apostolic writes are the Pillars of our faith,
and cap. 2. the Gospel is the Pillar of truth, and not men's Authority. The
Church is not the author or procreant cause of our faith. 3. Nor is the Church
a Pillar, as if God could no other ways reveal supernatural trueths, but by
its Ministry, as by necessity invincible; No, These have been revealed both by
Himself immediately to this or that private man, and by Angels. 4. Nor is it,
as if the Kirk were in no sense subject to ignorance or the least error, in
its decisions, and so to appeal to it, as the supreme infallible Judge, to
whose discretion appertains the differencing between 2. In what sense, it is
the pillar of truth.
truth and falsehood.

Yet I affirm the Church to be a Pillar of truth, with Calvin, Beza,
Davenant. Chamier, etc. 1. As Custos, it is a keeper, to which divine saving,
needful revealed trueths are concredited. To which purpose hear, what these
three Fathers say to this point. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 4. The Apostles laid up
in the Church, as in a rich treasure all truth, and she keeps the Apostles
faith and preaching. Tertullian. The Kirk keeps the scriptures, which are
Christ's heirship. Lactant. lib. 6 Insti^. The Catholic Church only keeps the
true worship of God, it only is the fountain of truth, if any enter not into
it, or go out of it, he is a stranger to salvation; without are errors,
fancies and lies. 2. As Tutana, as a defendresse, that is, supporting and
maintaining it, as CHRYSOSTOM. Hom. 11. on Tim. explicats this well, when he
says, The Kirk by its Ministry and preaching, supports and upholds the truth
as it were, on its shoulders. 3. As PR^CO, as an Herald, proclaiming,
promulgating, professing it, and bearing witness to it, which no society on
earth does or can do, but the Church. 4. As REGISTRATRIX, a Recorder,
transmitting it to posterity successively, so it is a Thesaurer, a Tutrix, an
Herald, a Notar, keeping, defending, proclaiming, recording divine trueths,
which moved Ravanella rightly to say, That In Ecclesia prostant Veritates
Catholicae. And as Aug. said before him, lib 3. cap. 6. contra DONAT. Every
Kirk should lead men to the faith. But yet to make the justness of this
predication more clear. I say, That as of old, the Egyptians and the Romans,
and in ordinary, Magistrates now, erect Pillars and posts, to the which they
affixe their Edicts, Laws and Wills: or to which of old, were joined their
Tabulae pensiles, in the which, Proclaimations carrying their minds, are
expressed, notified and insinuated, so the Kirk to Written Trueths, it is not
they, but it demonstrats them: even as the Pillars or broads affixed to them,
are not the LAW'S in recto, so it is with the Kirk, according to that saying of
the same CHRYSOSTOM. Truth establishes the Kirk, and not the Kirk the Truth.
HAMMOND in his Notes to this, well explains this. The usefulness of a pillar
is from the basis, on which it stands, else it will down. If the basis be so
set that it sink not, the pillar being firmly fastened on it, and standing
upright, it is able to bear a vast weight of building upon it, and so these
two, though several in themselves, (as contiguous not continuat) yet joining
together, and so, as it were consolidated together in one, they do as one not
severally support what is laid on it; so that as said is, (...), one here is
described by two, that is, the pillar upon the base firmly sustaining that,
which is built and erected upon it, so the Church firmly built upon the basis
of trueths (to the which the body of divine trueths are delivered) holds them
out to her Children.

Since the Trent Papists, the Rhemists and other Jesuits pervere 3 The due
vindication of this place from the Jesuits cavills
this place, I wipe off their Objections.

1. Say they. If the Church be the pillar of truth, but in the sense now
delivered, then it is rather a Chist unto Truth, and not the Pillar of it,
thus it is but as a Booksellers Shope, containing many Trueths in it. Answ. 1.
The Church is both, that is, both an Ark, wherein are the Tables of the
Covenant, as also a Pillar 1 Ob.
in the sense given; these are well consisting. 2. The Church acts that which
no Chist or Booksellers Shope can do, it not only keeps, but it promulgats
and transmitts the truth to ages. 3. The Church is not only Index, but also a
Vindex of the truth, yea in a sound sense, it is also a Judex of it, to wit,
secundarie, ministerial, and accountable. Well does Altingius L. C. p. 2. page
588. distinguish. The Church is a pillar not in regard of inherent
infallibility in every thing; but in respect of its office adhering to it.
that is, keeping, discerning, interpreting, preaching the truth. Here the
Jesuit Becan. lib. 1. cap. 3. of his Man, assumes, then even according to our
sense, The Roman Kirk is a true kirk, because it acts all the ways we allow
to a pillar. Here I deny the Antecedent, it smothers and opposes revealed
trueths, as shall be proven. Then when he arguments thus, whatsoever Church
acts these four ways now set down, that is a true Visible Church, but the
Roman kirk acts thus. Here again I grant the proposition, and deny the
assumption.

Bellar. lib. de eccl. Milit. cap. 12. 13. reasons thus, The Pillar 2 Ob.
of truth is infallible, but the Visible Kirk is the Pillar of truth, ergo it
is infallible. Answ. I may grant both the Propositions, and with no
disadvantage to our Cause. 2. In the Jesuits sense, I deny them both. 3.
Whether I grant or deny both, yet the Elench is not inferred. What is this to
the Roman kirk, where at they aim in this dispute? But Bellarm, endeavors to
strengthen his inference thus. 1. Upon this ground only, and no other, was the
Roman kirk called the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, that it is and was
the Pillar of truth. Whence also it was that Ambrose writting of this place,
has these words, Though all the World be Gods, yet the Church only is his
House and pillar, whereof Damasus Bishope of Rome is Rector this day. Hence it
is, says he, that the Roman kirk, was so esteemed, for the emitting and
transmitting infallible trueths to all Christian Churches. Now to all this I
might answer, as Isaias. chap. 33. 23. said of the Assyrian forces. Thy
tacklings are loosed, they could not well strengthen their mast. Yet in
particular I answer 1. to argue from Rome now Apostaticall, to what it was,
when Apostolical, is very inconsequent. 2. It was not so styled by any ancient
Writter of the first 600 years: for then was no supremacy over other Churches,
the^ it and other Churches were sisterly associated and collateral, then it
was commended, as Solidata super Petram, which Rock according to Cyprian,
Hieron, August. and others is Christ. 3. It is, flately denied, That the kirk
of Rome emitts all saving trueths though it retain some trueths, if he except,
then it is a true Church in so far as it retains some trueths, even we being
Judges, and in so far, is a Pillar. I Ans. 1. Be it so: but as we say of a
man, he may be a man essentially, as consisting of two essential parts, soul
and body; who yet is not so, for the truth of integrity, if there be either
excess or defect, maimed or monstrous: and for the truth of Perfection, he
may yet be far less a man, as if a Fool, if witless, if mad; so I say of
the present Roman Church, or as our Divines distinguish. A Man may be a true
man Metaphysically, as for entitie, who is not so morally, that is, for
honesty. As we say of a Thief, he is truly a man for essence, though he be no^
a true man, for fidelity. so the Roman kirk is a true kirk equivocally, being
for parts integrall, and for perfection, a most false Kirk. 4. As to that
passage of Ambrose, the very flattering Canonists, with their Dominus deus
noster Papa, Christus noster, servator nostor Papa, do confess these
Commentaries to be spurious, and not to be Ambroses at all: but granting them
to be his, yet, as is well marked both by Feeld and Cartwright, they are thus
to be read, whereof Damasus is a Ruler, but not the Ruler; for so are all
Bishops and Pastors as Cyprian well says, there is one Bishoperick whereof each
has a part. But what a Rector even this Damasus was, the bloody Contests
between him and Vrsacius, about that Idol of Rome, the Chair and the
Supremacy historians do testify. 4. Some observations and uses. 1.


Now ere I come to the last title. Anent this, That the Church of the Living
God, is the Pillar of the truth; I observe 1. Whatever Society it is, that
either expressly or by just consequence, opposes revealed trueths, that is not
the Pillar of truth: whence I infer, That the Roman kirk cannot be this
Pillar of truth, since it enerrats divine trueths, what by addition, what by
detraction. Hieron. has a trim speech, when he says, Sanctorum Congregatio
est dicta columna, etc. that is, The company of saints is called a pillar both
for soliditie and for stabilitie. and Theodoret. The company of Believers is
called the pillar of truth, because being grounded on the Rock, they remain
stable and unmovable, and so preach dogmatick trueths. But so it is, the
Representative of the Roman Kirk does not hold out infallibly, divine revealed
trueths, as Tirinus would have it. Our learned Divines have much holden out the
truth of this negative, by the induction of the chief particulars; as anent
the Mediation of Christ, Justification, Free Will, number and efficacy of
Sacraments, Traditions, equalled if not preferred to Scripture, the Nature and
Notes of the Scriptures. All which Doctrinalls of faith are by them fearfully
depraved. Wherefore passing these; I offer to hold the point out meerlie in
these two heads at this time. 1. Let any consider the XII Articles of the new
Tridentine Faith, approven by Pius IV. P. called the new Symbol, and now daily
urged by the Spaynish Inquisition, wherein are so gross additions supperadded
to that we find in Scripture, or which we call the Apostles Creed, that any
Reader that compares, shall easily find them, as is well both observed by
Crakenthorp, H. Lynd, and L. Sharpus. 2. Let any impartial Reader consider the
five Propositiones, called the determination of Innoc. X. anno 1653. for the
Molinists against the Jansenists, and he shall find in them a new faith,
unknown to the better and purertimes of the Church. Certain it is, a heterodox
Representative can no more lay challenge to a Pillar, then a Where to chastity,
or as a Thief to honesty. Whence it is acutly said by one, of One thrasonickly
boasting, but misapplying the words of Psalm. 75. 3. I bear up the Pillars of
it. nay rather, as it is. II. King. 25. 13. They have broken the Pillars of
brass, and carried the brass to Babylon.

If the Church of the Living God be a Pillar of truth, holding 2 Obs.
them out, then men may read, and hear, and see these trueths; then it a
Visible Church and Pillar. Here I do lay aside and justly condemn both
extremes. 1. Is of these that mantain no Kirk to be a true PILLAR, but that of
the predestinate which is Invisible. 2. Is of these, who hold no Kirk to be the
Pillar of truth on earth, but a glorious, conspicuous, visible, pompatick, a
Kirk dressed to the eye: full of worldly splendour, and outward magnificence, as
Bellarm. defines it.

If the Kirk of God be the Pillar of truth, then that is a false assertion of
the Socinian or Racovian Catechism; That from the 3 Obs.
Apostles days, for the space of 1400 years, the Kirk of Christ has perished,
and that, in that whole long intervall, there was nothing amongst men called
Christians, but the Antichristian Whore, no saints then, no Pillars of truth
then. O this is most false and comfortless, opposing the Promises made to the
Church, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. Against which no
weapon formed shall prosper, Isai. 54. 17. see Isai. 59. 21. Matthew. 28. 20. A
Pillar by strong opposition may be made to shake and tremble, yea to be at a
loss in its former strength and standing: and yet it is not either cut off or
removed from its base. Concuti potest, at non perire, the firmness of it
continues, when the outward splendour is not so apparent, but obscured.

Then it becomes all honest Ministers to be as Pillars and posts in Gods house,
to hold out all revealed trueths in Gods house 4 Obs. an use.
plainly, pertinently, powerfully. Malach. 2. 7. The Priests lips should keep
knowledge, that is, as one notes, Even as his heart and brain is for himself,
so should his lips and tongue be for the good of the Kirk. Mark to that end,
these two words of PAUL, Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the form of sound words.
Phil. 2. 16. holding forth the word of life. The Lord says to Jerem. chap. 1.
18. I have made thee this day an iron pillar. that is, firm, strong, and
straight, so should Ministers be, and not broken Reeds, like Egypt Isai. 36. 6.
on which if a man lean, it will pierce his hand. It is a good remarke of
Ravanella, This speech of PAUL to Timothy is set down, not so much assertive as
preceptive, what ought to be, quomodo oporteat, (...). These that seem to be
pillars, ought so to carry, as that they may be real pillars. Let us do our
duty in doing, in suffering, within the compass of our Callings, remembering
that sweet word of Christ, Revel. 3. 12. Him that overcomes, will I make a
pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall no more go out.

Here we may see the great dignity of the Ministry; We are 5 Obs.
entrusted with this depositum, this pearl of price, we are the pillars to
which are affixed the Oracles of God. See II. Cor. 4. 7. We have this treasure
etc. and this to purpose, to propagate, and preach to the World. It is well
answered by Mares. to Tirin. Our asservation of divine trueths, is not as that
of a Chist, local and material, but as said is, it is moral and formal; for
to act as said is, is not thecae sed columnae. Let us then constantly attend at
the posts of Wisdom which thus honors us, as to be pillars.

Since PAUL urges his good Behavior in his particular Charge 6 Obs.
at Ephesus, hence I collect that a particular Church joined to and
consolidated, as it were, with the base, may well be called the Pillar of
truth; but if any such particular adhere not to the base, it is no longer a
Pillar. What are the seven Churches of the lesser Asia now? even turned to
rubbish; What ar the famous Churchs of Africa now? Stables to impure
Mahumetisme. What is become of the renowned Churches of Asia the greater?
Dens of Infidelity. What is become of many the celebrious Churches of Greece?
Infected with pernicious heresies. God is not tied to particular times and
places. As there was a famous orthodox Nicen Council, so was there as infamous
and unsound a Nicen. As there was an orthodox Ephesine Council, so after,
there was a wicked and a praedatorie Ephesin. O then it were good for all and
every particular Church to remember to practice what the Spirit speaks to the
Churches of Asia. As to that of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 25. But that which ye have
already hold fast, till I come. As to that of Sardis, Revel. 3. 3. Remember
therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast. As to that of
Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do thy first works. As to that of Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 11. Hold that
fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. As that of Laodicea, Revel.
3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the sire, that thou may be
rich, etc.

If this Pillar hold out this Light, and Law, and Rule, Then all that are
within the verge and reach of it, should look to it, 7 Obs,
walk by it, as it is said of the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 9. Ioh. 3. 14. so
of this Pillar, look to it, believe it, obey it, so far as it follows
Christ, I. cor. 11. 1. IT is marked of that Pillar that lead the Israelits,
that it was one and the same pillar that was light to Israel, but darkness to
Egypt, Exodus 14. 19. so the same Word preached by faithful Pastors, becomes to
some The savor of life to life, to others of death unto death. II. Cor. 2. 16.
as an Edict on the post, to some is matter of comfort, to others not so.

Here we see clearly, That one and the same thing may be both supporting and
supported, both active and passive as to its being and use, and as to trueths.
the Church supports the truth, in the ways before specified, quoad declarari,
ac manifestari. Truth again supports the Kirk, in genere entis et moris, that
it has the being of the Church of the Living GOD, and that it, in its
Latitude and Complexe, should be invincible and infallible. IT is not
misapplyed that of Prove. 9. 1. Wisdom has built her house, she has hewn out
her seven pillars, etc. But of this enough. Now I come to the greatest and last
title of the Church.

The ground of the Truth. Now I am to treat of the Church, IV Title. The
ground of the truth.
under this notion; and because this is most material, I must insist a little
on it. And the rather, in that the Modern Jesuits affirm that we Protestants
abhor to read this, and that this TEXT is so pungent, that we flee from the
literal sense of it. Therefore this shall be my Method. First, I am to clear
the words of this Title. II. To propose that grand question, that falls
pertinently 1. The Title is explained.
here to be discussed, which is; Whether this ground can make a ground or
grounds? III. I must clear some other doubts proposed here, and that by way of
vindication. Then IV. Some uses to be made of this assertion; That Gods Kirk is
the ground of the truth.

As to the first. The greek word (...), by some is rendered Fundamentum, by
others better Firmamentum in latin. As Whitak. Contr. 4. q. 5. Critics
distinguish between (...), and (...) thus, That the first is properly rendered,
a ground, the second, properly a seat, applying the word, ground, to the
trueths existing and revealed; and applying the word seat, to the Church;
according to what we read Matthew. 22. 2. of Moses Chair or seat. Of the which
Criticisme, P. Bayne gives this reason, in Comment, on Ephesians. 2. 19. 20. That
which so supports all; as that it is not supported, in a right and strict
notion is a ground, so Maimonides call his book (...) but that which so The
ground of grounds.
supports, as that it is supported, is properly a seat and receptacle or (...),
but improperly (...) or a ground. Yet we shall use it, as it is here in the
English rendered. Theophylact. Beda, P. de Aliaco, Chaloner, explicate this
TITLE thus; The Church is the ground of truth, because supernatural divine
trueths are in it, we lean to the Church, as to the seat of truth, but not to
it; as to the lowest and chiefest ground, why these trueths are trueths. D. F.
White 3. Conf. p. 4. clears this well thus. The pure Apostolic Church was the
pillar and ground of truth simply, intierly and fully in all things, but the
subsequent and the Modern Churches, is only so with limitation, that is,
conditionally, that is, in so far as they deliver Apostolic doctrines, the
Apostles were exempted in all their decisions from all errors: but the Fathers
and Councels are only so, in so far, as they adhere to the trueths written
by Prophets and Apostles. And indeed what he says, is all granted by the more
moderate PAPISTS, as by Occam, Cusanus Picus, Gerson. IT was the old doctrine
Ground 1. Personal. 2. Doctrinall 3. Ministerial.
of CHRYSOSTOM. Homil. 49. on Matthew. Let no man believe Churches, but in so far
as they lean to the Scriptures, if thou would know where is the true Church,
then flee and run to the Scriptures. But yet further to clear this, NOTE, as
Davenant well observes, That there is a threefold ground of truth. 1. Is
Personal, and that is Christ, I. Cor. 3. 11. Isai. 28. 16. 2. Is doctrinall,
and that is the Scriptures, see Ephesians. 2. 20. 3. Is Ministerial, and that is,
Pastors, Fathers, Councel-determinations, and all their right Superstructures,
that is, so far as they are conform to the scriptures, I. Cor. 3. 10. Let
every man take heed, how he builds thereupon.

As for the second; I answer this question negatively, Whether II. Can the
church make or creat grounds. 1 Reason.
the Church can make Fundamentals? that is, if it can produce and procreat that
to be a fundamental now, which before was never received as such. Now the
Reasons of my denial are these. 1. I ground on the judgment of these
WRITTERS, whereof the first is, Vincentius Lyrin. who in his book anent profane
Novelties, chap. 3. has these words, The Church adds nothing, diminishes
nothing, changes nothing, cuts not off necessars, proposes not superfluous
things, losses not her own, usurpes not that which belongs to others, but every
way cares to polish what was informed of old, and to confirm what is expressed
and revealed, and to keep what is defined and confirmed: yea this the Church
still intends, that whatever was simply believed before, should afterward be
more carefully believed. And after him, G. Occam, in his Dialogues, Neither,
says he, the whole Church, nor a General Council, nor the Pope can make an
Article of faith. Bellar. also, lib. 2. de Council. cap. 12. The Counsels when
they define, do not make any point defined, to be of infallible truth, but
they only declare it to be so. To all which three worthy sentences we
subscribe.

If the Church could make fundamentalls, then it could unmak 2 Reason.
them* but the more moderate of the Papists deny this, upon this ground, that
it belongs to the same power, both to creat and annihilate. And so they reject
that non obstante of the Council of Constance, grounding on that of Scotus, 1.
did. 11. q. 1. Truth was of faith before heresy had a being, so that the
determination of the 3 Reason.
Kirk, does not make a truth, though it define against an heresy. 3. That
which the Kirk declares is either extra or intus. If it be without the nature
of the thing declared, then its declaration of the thing is false, and so it
cannot be fundamental: if it be within the compass and nature of the thing
declared, then it is yet only in that kind fundamental, seeing the
declaration whatever it be, is posterior to the nature of the thing. That is
but a silly Evasion of some, to wit, that the declaration of the Church makes
a point fundamental quoad nos, nay it does not that, as the same F. White well
proves, ibid. p. 9. For no respect to us can vary the foundation. if the thing
be not fundamental in the nature of it, the Kirks declaration does not make it
so to us. Since then the Kirk has no real detracting power, no more, as said
is, can it have any real 4 Reason.
adding power, since both are alike forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. 4. All credible
points are at last resolved into Scripture, therefore, it is it that makes
fundamentalls. CYPRIAN speaks appositly to this purpose, lib. de Bapt. All
Ecclesiastical discipline, has its rule from the Scripture, here it is bred
and borne, and hither it must return. Camerarius lib. 1. Sent. d. 11. q. 1.
Theological principles are the very trueths of the sacred Canons, because the
last resolution of Theological discourse is made unto them, and out of these
trueths firstly, each Theological Proposition is deduced. QUEST. What to judge
of Creeds and Confessions.


Here a needful question comes to be solved. as, What are we to judge of the
Creeds, confessions, declaratios, forms of faith, synodal-conclusions, both of
the Ancient and Modern Kirk? for since they contain the sum of credenda,
agenda, petenda, speranda, that is, of what we are to believe, to do, to ask,
and to hope for, which are the Synopsis of all Christian duties, the Question
is, If these are to be looked upon, as fundamentalls, or grounds of Faith and
truth? To answer this aright, let us avoid these two extremes. 1. None of
these are so to be looked upon as Scripture, or of equal authority to it. It
was an idol and idle word, that of GREGORY, to exequat the first four general
Counsels to the four Evangelists. 2. Avoid that other 1. of the vile
Swenkfeldian, who in disputing, as they reject the Scriptures, so also all
Church determinations, pretending (though falsely) that they are opposite to
Christian liberty. 3. That of the ARMINIAN, Who though they admit the reading
of such Confessions and declarations, yet they will not ascribe the least
authority to them. The pure Ancient Kirk, and our Orthodox present kirks oppose
both these, and have published very needful and worthy uses of these forms.
as, 1. They are looked upon as the Expositions of the true Catholic Faith. 2.
As strong bars both to hold out, and to remove heresies. 3. As a ready
Catechism containing the grounds of both what we are to believe, and what to
do. 4. They are a singular Mean, to beget and preserve a good understanding
between kirks, and to foment Peace, unity and concord amongst them, as by the
harmonious Confessions of the Reformed Churches is now seen; as when that,
which indeed is an Orthodox ground is received, and the Heterodox tenet is
rejected. That axiom of Lyrin. was much esteemed, Quod semper, quod ubique,
quod ab omnibus creditum est. which ever, and everie-where, and by all is
believed. In Ignaetius his Epistles it is often remarked and inculcated, That
whosoever will not join to the abridged doctrines of the Church, (...), he is
corrupted. III. Vindication


But passing this, I next offer to vindicate this place from the false
inferences of the Rhemists, Bellarmine, Becan, Tirinus, Valent. Gretzer. If the
Church be the ground of truth, then all Christians may and should at last
acquiesce to its determinations, 1 Ob. answered.
and so safely resolve their faith into it at last. To which I answer first,
by denying the Consequent, because the Churches Authority is not the formal
cause of our assent to divine trueths, as shall be shown in the Answer to the
third Objection. 2. Giving but not granting what is in the illation, yet I deny
that to appertain to the present Roman Church; which is the maine aim of these
Sophisters. 3. I propose to them this question, (which they force us to
startle) which is, What is that Christian Society into which all credible
Objects are vltimately resolved into? Is it the Ancient Catholic Kirk? or is
it the lawful oecumenick Counsels? or is it the concurrent judgment of the
Ancient Fathers? or is it the present Roman Kirk? To these the late Jesuits
answer far otherwise, the^ the Moderate Schoolmen did. I shall succinctly
repeat some of their most absurd answers to this, I mean of the Jesuits.
Bellarm. lib. 4. de P. R. chap. 1. affirms every successor of Peter to be the
rock and foundation of truth. Gretzer lib. 3. cap. 10. defens. by the Church
we interpret the Pope. D. Bann. 2. secundae. The authority of the universal
Kirk, and that of the Pope, are the same. The Cannon Law, lib. 6. Extravag.
tit. 14. The Rescripts of the Pope, are Canonical scripture. D. John White, in
his way etc. Digress. 16. p. 36. collects out of their Writers, this to be
their judgment. 1. say they, The Catholic Church is the Rule to be followed in
all points, as the rule infallible. 2. The Roman and the Catholic Faith are
all one. 3. By the Kirk we mean her Head, says Valentia, tom. 3. d. 1. p. 24.
so that this Catholic Church, whereof they so much brag, is no other but the
Pope. Now this Valentia, finding the bed to be shorter then that he can stretch
himself upon it, as we have Isai. 28. 20. down right maintains that neither
Ancient Counsels, nor the ancient Kirk, nor old Decretalls, nor the present
Roman Kirk, but the Pope, is that, whereunto at last we must resolve our faith.
of which rule to resolve unto, he says, Analys. fidei lib. 8. cap. 7. Stante
hac regula rationali, animata, infallibili, omnes fidei articuli, ultimate
resolvuntur in ipsam, tanqua^ in rationem formalem. So that according to this
new doctrine of the Roman Kirk, Alexander VII. now Pope, is that ground of
truth, whereon all are to lean; so that the Pope now, as D. Clerk wittily
observes, is grown so bigg, that he is both Head and whole Body, yea the
whole Church, both holy Father and holy Mother, both Husband and Wife: nay the
Pope is God, as one Felinus Sandeus blasphemes. This compendious way, that they
are fallen upon, puts me in mind of a like foolish conceit, one S. Cornaeus a
late Jesuit has fallen on, who to reject Bellarmins 15 notes of the kirk,
falls only upon one as sufficient to confirm truths, and confute errors,
which is the Miracles of the Roman Church. Now to show the folly of Valentia
and such flatterers, hear what to the contrar says J. Picus in concl. It may
happen that the Pope the vicaria^ head be sick, and as the natural head sends
down noxious humors into the body, so also this Vicarian, corrupt doctrines
into its body. But Puteanus a late Jesuit is now more plain and bold in his
Co^m. on 2. 2. q. 1. a. 6. That the present Pope (to wit Paul V.) is Christ his
true vicar and successor, is not not absolutely belonging to faith: for this
Proposition presupposes two other Propositions. 1. That Paul the V. is
baptized 2. That Paul V. was Canonically elected to be pope, but so it it, that
none of these two Propositions belongs to the Catholic faith. thus he, out of
which I form this syllogism. Whatsoever Alexand. 7. has defined, that is
infallible the ground of truth, but he has defined this or that. Here grant
that the Proposition were true, which yet is most false; yet its Assumptio^ can
be no more then probable. For how can he be certain that this Pope was lawfully
ordained, or at all baptized? Of these there is no more then humane assent,
grounded upon probable conjectures. or what certainty is there to all and every
one subject to him, that he has published this or that definition? Of these
and the like is no divine certantie. It is excellently well proven by S. V.
LYND, That in the Roman Church, which they so far extol above Scripture,
there is neither safety nor certanty, whether we understand the Essential, or
the Representative, or the Virtuall, or the Consistoriall Church, nor that
Individual Church, barbarously so called, which wants both personal and true
doctrinall succession. see his Via devia. p. 513. and 452. And whereas Fisher
and some others account it more safe to resolve into the Council of Trent now.
I say, this can be of no credit at all, because this Council was neither
lawfully called, nor was it free, nor was it generally received by the
Romanists themselves, see Innoc. Gentill. on it, and Sess. 12. see Chemnitii
examen, see Calvini Antidotum, see the History of the Council of Trent. lib.
4. p. 319. see Whyts 3 Conf, with Fisher.

Since the Nicen Creed has, I believe in the Church; Therefore Ob. 2.
primarly and properly, it is the pillar and ground of truth. whereupon
Stapleton has this assertion against WHITAKER, I believe, whatsoever the
Church believes lib. 1. cap. 9. and this indeed is the true ground of their
circular argueing, or the COLLIARRS faith, and of that brutish assertion of
Cajetan, That the obedience of a Brute is the most perfect obedience of any.
But to speak to what is alleged of the Nicen symbol. I answer 1. That
preposition (...) is not at all in that Creed, it is a false quotation of the
Rhemists, like many more. 2. In the Symbol of Constantinople, we read it
indeed, and our Divines clearly show, that it was spuriously foysted in there.
3. Make it to be the real composure of that second general Council, yet
Drusius, that great Critic makes it to maintain no more, then I believe the
Church. But 4. August. Tom. 10. p. 311. de expos. Symboli, is of a far better
and sounder judgment, when he said there, because the Church is not God,
therefore we believe not into it, or in it. Faith its credere as to the
Trinity, says he, is considere, but Faiths credere as to the rest or
secundarie objects of faith, it is but agnoscere. August. knew nothing of that
late Iesuit-opinion, I may believe in the Kirk, as I believe in the Virgin
Mary, neither of these is true. Though all the superstructures of this Church
were most true, yet all its decisions are to be tried and examined.

That even in Augustins judgment, (to whom Protestants appeal Ob. 3.
so often,) The Church is the ground of truth, when contra epistolam
fundamenti, he says, I would not have believed the Gospel, unless the
authority of the Church had moved me. Now to clear August. and to satisfy,
as far as may be, the Papist, I answer 1. If it be well considered against
whom, and for what August. disputes there, which both our Divines have shown,
and Papists knew well enough, this testimony can make nothing either against
us, or for them. 2. Some schoolmen, as Scotus, Gabriel, Canus, judge that
Augustine is to be understood of acquisite and historical faith, and not of
infused. 3. Others of them think, that Augustine there is speaking of the
Authority of that Church, which the Apostles governed, and not of the
succeeding Church. But passing them, I answer by this distinction, of the
mean, and of Distinguish between by which, and for which.
the principal cause. It is well marked by Baron. Apod. Cathol. p. 628. h. 9.
q. 4. That we ought to use these two Prepositions warily, Per and Propter,
that is, by which, and for which I believe. The first imports the use of means,
without which faith is not ordinarily produced, but this other relats to the
principal ground and formal cause of our assent. And so I apply the Churches
testification is a mean to believe the Gospel, but the principal ground of
my assent to its trueths, is because God has revealed Distinguish between the
Moral proof, and the Divine proof.
it. I make it yet more clear by distinguishing between a Moral proof, and a
Divine proof, the Testimony of the Church is a moral proof, motive or
inductive of Faith: but the Authority of the Holy Ghost speaking in the
scriptures is that Divine proof causing assent, whereunto at last I resolve.
Altisiedorensis, thus explains it. It is with the believer ordinarily, as it was
with the Samaritans, Ioh. 4. 42. that is, after her discovery to them, by the
light of grace, they perceive the Divine Majesty, Wisdom, efficacy, and
truth of Christ's doctrine, and resolve into them. and as when a faithful
Preacher delivers Apostolic doctrine, though by his preaching we receive
these trueths, yet we resolve not our faith principally and finally into his
Authority who preaches to us, but into that divine truth that is preached by
him. Hear the same learned Baron. yet clearing this, As the principal
effective cause of our assent, is the Holy Ghost by inward illumination of the
mind, and effectual moving of the will: so the word of God it self revealed,
by its innate light, virtue and Majesty manifesting its Divinity, is the
principal objective cause or ground of our assent, to the trueths of the
Gospel. And after him, D. Owen, anent the divine Original of Script. p. 33.
The sole bottom and foundation, or formal reason of our assent to the
Scriptures as Gods Word, and submitting our hearts and consciences to these
Scriptures, is the Authority of God, the supreme Lord of all, the first and
only absolute truth, speaking in and by the the penmen of the Scriptures
evidenced singly in, and by the Scriptures etc. As for the innate Arguments in
the scriptures, that is, The Power and Majesty of the Word, the simplicity of
the style, the ingyring light, the consonancie in it, and in the Writters of
it, the divine trueths contained in it, etc. These and many the like show what
a ground it is to faith, in so much that the Ancient Kirk, Traditor libri, was
judged Abnegator fidei. But the Papists by attributing so much to
Church Authority, and detracting so much from the Divine-Authority of the
Scriptures, and not resting in them, have fallen into a miserable and an
unextricable Circle. STAPLETON maintaining in his Triplicatio, fol. 188. That
the last ground of Faith, is the Authority of the Kirk. Then the question is,
By what authority believe ye that the Kirk has Divine-Authority? His answer
is, The Scriptures say so. Question again. By what believe ye this? Answers
he, The Church says so. Mark the words of one H. Holden, an Englishman and
Parisian Doctor, lib. 1. cap. 9. Div. anel. fidei. (as they are cited by R.
Baxter, in his safe Religion. p. 284.) confessing the truth of the common
labyrinth and circular shift, in which Divines commonly wont to be involved;
For when they asked, how they know then Scripture to be the revealed Word of
God? They answer, by the assertion of the Vnversall censenting Church? And if
they be again asked, how they know that this unanimous assertion of the
Catholic Kirk is free from error: or infallible? They answer, by the Word of
GOD; thus they unavoydably slide into the Circle, most filthily dancing in a
ring. The faith, etc. But as for our belief, (to close this point) it is thus
resolved. We believe the Christian doctrine to be true, because the true God
is the Author of it. We discern that God is the Author of it both by his
intrinsicke, and extrinsicke seals or attestations of it: in that it bearech
his Image and Superscription, and and is confirmed by his undoubted uncontroled
Miracles, and other effects which lead us to the Cause.

O but say the Rhemists and Bellarm. and others; The Presence, Ob. 4.
the Promise, the Prayers of Christ to and for the Church, the assistance of
the Holy Spirit to and with the Spouse and Body of Christ, and former
experiences toward his inheritance, may make us conclude, that in a proper and
strict sense, the Church is the ground of truth, so infallible, that it cannot
err in the decisions of truth, else to what end are all these its
Privileges? Ans. privileges to and of the Church, but what is that to the
present Roman Church, which is their aim? what a slight including argument
were this? O Timothy, know how thou ought to behave thy self in Gods house,
the kirk of Ephesus, because the Kirk of ROME, is the ground of truth, because
to it ar the promises, because to it is given infallibility? Is not this a
mere begging of the question? The point here is never proven. One particular
Church, has no more particular privileges then another. Ephesus is now an
Apostate, so has Rome also apostatised. To clear my Answer yet further, I
propose these two queries. 1. How can the present Roman Kirk be a ground of
truth, since fundamentalls? neither dare its Doctors define either of these.
My second querie is, Where is the seat of infallibility? Judge? The papists of
France hold that a General Council is above the Pope, that it is it, that is
infallible, so do these WRITERS, Cusanus, Cameracensis, Garson, Almain,
Florent. Panormitan, etc. The Italians maintain the flate contrare, and most
of the Jesuits. O but says BELLARM: Christ's prayer for Peter was for faiths
infallibility both to him and all his successors in that Chair. but that is
flately denied, no more is in Luke 19. but a prayer and promise to Peter
against heart-unbeleefe, but not a word anent the words of his mouth, nothing
anent his pretended successors. But here yet they object this against us, Can
that be a true Church, or a safe Religion, or way to walk in, which is
fallible, but the Protestant Church is such, according to our confessed tenet?
I Ans. 1. by these distinctions. 1. I distinguish between a man that may be
deceived, and a man that is deceived. 2. between infallibility in the Object,
and in the Subject. 3. between infallibility in the absolutely necessar
points, and in some inferior smaller matters, as is well marked by Baxter, p.
43. 44. Therefore we say 1. Suppose we should deviat, yet we have an
infallible Rule, the Word, though there be much weakness in the Recipient, yet
there is still infallibility in the Object, the Scriptures. 2. I affirm, all
Churches to be infallible, and that they cannot err in fundamentalls, in
sensis composito, that is, while they remain true Churches, and deny no
essential of Faith: but the same in sensis diviso, are fallible, that is, when
they leave the Objects infallibility, that is, the holy Scriptures, as the
Rule of truth. 3. We make a difference between that, Cui subesse potest
falsum, and that, Cui actu subest falsum. A man may be deceived, who yet is not
deceived. None is falsus, or actually deceived, when he believes the doctrine
of the Protestant Religion, that is, the holy Scriptures. A man may be actually
not mistaken, when he is not absolutely infallible. But lastly here, they
object a passage of August. who in his Epist. 162. says, that in Romana
Ecclesia semper viguit Apostolicae Cathedrae principatus. To which I answer,
1. Distinguish between what Rome now is, and when it was sound. Then was no
Supremacy, then no visible Monarchy, then no power of both the swords, then
the Principality was in the profession of a sound faith, in the practice of
piety, in in prayers, in charity, in tears etc. So that this makes nothing for
the establishment of the tyranny of the present Roman Church.

Now of what I have said, I give these general Observes and 1 Observe.
uses. And the first shall be this. 1. Wherever this divine truth really is,
and is sincerly professed, there is a true Kirk. Boyd in his Comment. on Ephesians.
page 335. has a note apposite to this. Truth is the form informing of the
Church, and the Church is the matter informed: even as the Candlestick holds
out the Candle, and so its light, so does the true Church hold out the light of
truth. And no less has Hensius a pertinent note, on the place to this, Where
God is, there is truth, and where truth is, there is the ground of truth.
Our God is a God of truth, psalm. 31. 5. and Christ is truth, Ioh. 17. 14. 6.
and truth comes by him, Ioh. 1. 17. and the gospel is the gospel of truth,
Gal. 3. 1. and all Worshippers should worship Him in spirit, and in truth,
Ioh. 4. 23. and where men are begotten by the Word of truth, I am. 1. 18.
there I say, we may warrantably conclude, is a true Kirk.

Then let this be the first use we make of this point; IT is incumbent to all
the true Members of this true Kirk, to be for 2 Use.
the Trueths holden out and professed in it, II. Cor. 13. 8. For this end,
follow these precepts and practices of holy men here mentioned. As 1. Choose
the truth, with DAVID, psalm. 119. 30. 2. Love the truth with ZECHARY, chap.
8. 19. 3. Buy the truth with SOLOMON, prove. 23. 23. 4. Pray for its
propagation with CHRIST himself, Ioh. 17. and 17. psalm. 43. 3. 5. Speak the
truth with PAUL, Ephesians. 4. 25. 6. Walk in the truth as GAIUS, Ioh. 3. 3. and
psalm. 86. 11. 7. Pray with David to be lead in the truth, psalm. 25. 5. 8.
Execute the judgment of truth, ZECHAR. 8. 16. 9. Bear witness unto the
truth as John Baptist did, Ioh. 5. 33. 10. Have your loins girt about with
the girdle of truth, Ephesians. 6. 14. 11. And be ye established in the present
truth, II. Pet. 1. 12. 12. Teach the way of God in truth, Matthew. 22. 16. II.
Cor. 4. 2. Therefore my third use is,

Let Ministers learn, to divide the word of truth aright; in this do as Paul
bids, II. Tim. 2. 15. and in this do as Paul did, see 3 Use.
II. Cor. 4. 2. and II. Cor. 6. 4. 7. see also psalm. 40. 11. I have not hid thy
truth from the great Congregation. As there are two sorts of Builders, which
made Paul to say, Let each take heed how he builds, I. Cor. 3. 10. so there
are of Dividers of the word of truth. Which made our Lord to say, what we read
Luke 12. 42. 43. as for Builders, some, their building is the superstructure of
sound trueths, consisting well with, and decoring the foundation: others are of
errors, deforming, defacing, and destroying the foundation, as straw upon
marble, whose work shall be burnt. As for Dividers, some overslipping,
mangling, and renting, and by wresting of it, do it to their own perdition. So
others again, they purely, plainly, powerfully, impartially apply the word to
the Conscience of every man in the sight of Jesus. Well is it amplified and
enlarged by Gregory of Rome, how diverse ways a faithful Pastor is bound to
divide the word of truth, and that to persons diversely affected. I shall but
touch only some few of his directions, 1. Look how a Pastor is to carry
toward a Believer, and how toward an Unbeliever. 2. How toward the Young,
and how toward the old, within the Kirk. 3. How toward, Superiors, how
toward equal and inferiors. 4. How toward Humble spirits, and how toward
the Proud. 5. How toward Weak, and how toward Malicious sinners. 6. How
toward the Penitents, and how toward impenitents. 7. How toward. Turbulent
spirits, and how toward peaceable. 8. How toward Proficients in Christ's
school, and how toward deficients 9. How toward orderly Walkers, and how
toward the scandalous. 10. How toward Faithful Pastors, and how toward idle
Belly-gods. See these and many more in that Treatise of his de cura pastorali.
O if this should move and work us up, into a Fabian-like cunctation and long
pausing! O that we could view seriously, and consider carefully, the length,
the breadth, the hight, and depth of that mystery of godliness, which is the
right dividing of the word of truth! O how loath should we be without an
inward Call to undertake this charge of laying foundations, such a burden,
says Chrysostom, that the very Angels themselves would tremble to undergo it.
This made Moses, Exodus 3. Thrice refuse it, and so Ezekiel. chap. 14. and so
Jonas, chap. 1. This made AMBROSE, hide himself, and three times flee from
Millan. This made Gregory Nazianz. to flee twice to the study of Philosophy.
This made Augustine to weep, and to deprecat the Episcopal function, (put
upon him by Valerian in these terms; quidvis? ut peream? as if it stood him
as much upon, as his life, and souls salvation came unto: Epist. 1. ^^ to
Valerian. Which made Chrysostom. again to say, Hom. 3. in act. Apost. I believe
not, that many Ministers of the Church are saved, when I consider the
greatness of their Charge, and their negligence therein. This made Paul I. Tim.
3. 6. to say, Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
comdemnation of the devil. Let us then look well to this, how we have entered
into it? Bernard says, this will be one of the Lords queries at the last day,
quomodo intrasti? Sad and strict will be, one day, the account that young
Novices must give, for rushing upon the burden of the pastoral Charge. GREGORY
in that same book, p. 3. cap. 26. affirms, That it is as dangerous for such
Novices to undergo the burden of a pastoral Charge, as to lay the roof of the
house upon the walls when they are green. this were to ruin and not to build.
And for any burden, that such or the most part sustain in the Church, such
Novices are well compared, (by the Author of the Apology, p. 12. to these
little statues or Angelets, that we often see affixed to the pillars of our
Churches stooping the head and bending the back, as if they did support the
whole fabric, and yet they sustain nothing at all, but are rather themselves
supported. Have we not seen the trees of the Forest, offer to rest themselves
under the shadow of this brier, and what was the issue a fire came out of the
brier, and devoured the Cedars of Lebanon? What a preposterous Course is it, to
rush on upon the publishing of divine trueths, who were never acquainted much
with either natural or moral trueths? O that Youngman aiming at this would
but stay, till they should find themselves endued with power from above, and
furnished with gifts meet for so high a Calling! He that is the teacher of
Angels, (says the same GREGORY there) would not be the teacher of men, before
30 years of age. O how many things at necessary to the well manageing of right
superstructures, such as lively preaching these trueths, right administration
of Sacraments confirming these trueths, frequent Catechizing to bear in these
trueths upon people, visitation of the sick, to refresh them with the
Memorialls of divine trueths. Spiritual conference upon all occasions in all
meetings, that we may mutually be edified in our holy faith. The power and use
of the keys, whereby strong holds are subdued, which oppose the truth and
power of godliness! Then what a man of experience should such an one be, that
undertaks by these means, the superstructures of a holy life upon this ground?
Since we are 4 Use.
to be built on this ground, it is needful, (both by the necessity of the
mean, and of the precept) that we by all laudable endeavors study to know
them, that we may the more readily believe the^, and practice what is
practicable of them, and this both for our Union with Christ and our more
strict Communion with his body. IT could not be but a great error of these
Bishops, who did ordain Synesius to be the Bishop of Ptolemais, when as he did
not believe that maine foundation, of the Resurrection, as is reported by
Photius and by Evagrius. For though I willingly yield and grant, that alike
explicit and distinct knowledge of all revealed trueths is not of the same
degree of necessity required, (for as we distinguish between Fundamentalls,
and suprafundamentalls, and Circumfundamentalls, all which three are revealed
trueths, so also between these assents given to these, as for example, though a
man cannot be saved without an express assent to prime fundamentalls when they
are clearly proposed and sufficiently revealed to him. Yet as for others, not
of so needful concerment, that are not so clearly holden out, a man without
the express and distinct knowledge of these may be saved) Yet this is not
affirmed to maintain or to justify, but rather to condemn that affected,
that gross, and vincible ignorance of the most needful and essential grounds
of the Christian faith, yea of very necessary superstructures O how many are
ignorant of the first foundations of Christianity? May not the Lord charge
Pastors with this, my People perish for lack of knowledge? How can one say, he
is built on the Rock, that knows it not? How can any resolve a Case of
conscience dexterously, when he knows not the grounds on which it depends, and
must be resolved by? I shall only reflect now upon the sad and gross
ignorance of the four maine necessary points. As 1. O what ignorance is of
Christ a Savior, what worth is in him, what necessity of it, and therefore how
little is he employed in his Natures and Offices? what comfort and benefit by
it? 2. O what defect is now among common Professors, anent the knowledge of
fin, the nature of it, the woeful consequents of it? how few do charge
themselves with it? and that makes men make a mock of it, and are fearlesse of
any danger by it. 3. O what ignorance is now of true repentance from dead
works? Who mourns now for the sins of the Times, or of the Places he lives
in, or of his Calling, or of his Relations? Where is the Pastor that says,
quid feci? Where is there a real Amendment, a through Reformation, or where
are sincere Converts. 4. O what ignorance is there of the nature of faith
toward God? of faith in a slain Savior, of faith unfeigned and working by
love? If there were no more defects of needful Credibles amongst us, these ar
sufficient to draw down great, yea all wrath on us. But on these I insist no
more now; Only one word, and that is, I wish Ministers and all Christians to
be more careful about fundamentalls, then about extra-fundamentalls,
substances then circumstances, bodies then shadows, essentialls then ritualls
and ceremonies, to be more for Certanties, then for uncertancies, more for
necessaries, then unnessaries, more for the weyghtie things of the Law, then
for the tything of avice, mint, and Cumin, more for Catholic verities, then
for private opinions, and to lay the stresse of the peace of the Church upon
the former and not upon the latter. That Rabies quorundam Theologorum, (so it
is well called) contesting about trifles, and quarreiling about a needless
Rite, under the pretense of obviating errors, and maintaining trueths has
ruined us. The like of this did bring in the ARIAN heresy, as Hilare reports,
and this day to our great grief we may see, how much our needless Contests
do strengthen our common Enemy, I mean the Papist. Ministers that are more of
Catholic then factious spirits will think on this, and mourn for it, and help
to amend it.

Now I address my self to speak a word of that last thing that I proposed,
and that is, anent our Relation to that Pillar and ground of truth. That is,
How to behave our selves as to it. The word (...) argues a Behavior or
Conversation suitable and proportioned to the Charge and Call: without which no
House, no Republique, no Army, no Church can subsist. When men know and follow
what their place and their station requires, then their behavior is, as it
ought. I shall first show the meaning of the Word, and the nature of the
Conversation here required, and then make some applications.

As for the first. There is a twofold Conversation or Behavior Twofold
Conversatio^. 1 Evil.
spoken of. The first is, from our Birth, to our Effectual Calling. This is
called by PETER, vain, I. Pet. 1. 18. and filthy, II. Pet. 2. 7. and by PAUL,
the former, Ephesians. 4. 22. and by ISAIAH, base, cap. 3. 5. 2. Is from the first
period of our Effectual Calling, to the end of our christian Race. This (...),
Conversation or Behavior, 2 Good,
has in Scripture many Names. IT is called a Good Conversation, Iam. 3. 13. I.
Pet. 3. 16. and I. Tim. 3. 2. a Good Behavior, and if this had been in some
Ministers, then there had not been so unseemly, so ranting, so schismatic
Miscarriage amongst us. IT is called Holy.
also an Holy Conversation, I. Pet. 3. 15. IT is called an Honest Honest.
Conversation, I. Pet. 2. 12. If this were well looked unto, then such vanity
in Apparel, in gestures, etc. would not be amongst us, we that are Ministers
had need now, to be under that tie of Chaste Upright Orderly Heavenly Examplar
Gospel Conversation.
the 16 Canon. of the vij Genesis Council at CONSTANT, de habitu Clericorum. IT
is called a Chaste Conversation, so I. Pet. 3. 2. IT is called an Upright
Conversation, psalm. 37. 14. IT is called Orderly, psalm. 50. 23. IT is called
an Heavenly Conversation, Phil. 3. 20. IT is called Examplar, I. Tim. 4. 12. IT
is called a Gospel-Conversation, Phil. 1. 27. IT is called a Conversation in
simplicity, and in Godly.
godly sincerity, II. Cor. 1. 12. And as the Behavior thus qualified, and
invested with these Properties, is requisite to saintship of all professors,
so is it much more in Ministers, both as to their personal, as also to their
vocationall Conversation. This moved PAUL, Heb. 13. 7. to exhort thus, Remember
them that have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you, the word of God,
whose faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation. And as to that
end, mark his own practice worthily and largely set down, I. These. 2. verse. 3.
4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.

But to return to the words as spoken to Timothy. I propose this DOCTRINE; A
Ministers behavior or conversation, (which is his constant course of walking)
should not only be raised above the light of nature, but it should be suitable
and answerable to these glorious trueths revealed in the Scriptures, as also to
all the Ordinances of the Gospel, which he administers and holds out. Manner
of of our behavior. I. Prudently.


To illustrate this, I shall now hold out something as to the way and manner of
a Ministers behavior, that as a Minister, he may adorn the doctrine of God
our Savior, in all things.

1. Let the Minister learn to carry prudently in dispensing Gods Mysteries, he
must go on with them by degrees. Milk must go before strong meat. Give as wise
stewarts, to each their portion in due season, Luke 12. 42. first teach the
simple Principles, before we fall upon Perfections. Go not beyond the hearers
capacities. Greg. Nyssen. says well, As we teach not Infants the deep
precepts of science, but first letters, and then syllabs, etc. so the Guides of
the Church, do first propound to their hearers certain documents, which are as
the Elements, and so by degrees do open to them, the more perfect and
mysterious matters. Excess beyond Capacities makes deficients and not
Proficients, says August. lib, 12. de Civit. Dei.

Be instant in season, out of season, preach the word, II. Tim. 4. 2. II
Diligently.
Exhort with all long-suffering, says PAUL, instructing Timothyes behavior. A
sad woe shall be upon the careless mind, and the lazy hand, and upon the dumb
mouth. O let us with all our might endeavor to set up the throne of Jesus
Christ, in hearts, and in Congregations. A necessity is laid upon me, and woe
unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. Great is the task we have in hand,
heavy is that burden laid on our shoulders, daily sow, harrow, break up,
water and plant, and wait for the Lords increase. IT was a good word of GREG.
in his Morals. If I do not bestirre me, Satan may prevail, the people
everlastingly perish, and their blood be required at my hand. O labor then,
yea though it should be in vain Isai. 49. 4. 5. Yet the Lord sent his servants
the Prophets rising early, etc. and in nothing shall our labor be approven
more, then in instructing the ignorant by Catechizing. This was the first
mean, whereby we gained ground on POPERY, and the blessed event of it made
Luther to say, Ego profecto profitear me esse discipulum Catechismi.

That is laying aside all self, all by-ends, all private interests, III.
Sincerlie.
for a wrong end will mar the work. It is not a pure behavior to undergo
this Charge, merely for worldly Lucre or Livelihood, 1. Pet. 5. 2. Gods glory
and man's salvation aimed at, is a manageing of our Ministry as becomes. IT is
well said of Baxter, p. 117. of his Reform. Pastor. Self denial is of a double
necessity required in a Pastor, as he has a double Sanctification or
Dedication to GOD. All our studies and knowledge and excellent preaching will
not avail, if the ends be not right. Mark Paul's vindications as to this, I
cor. 2. 1. He came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, or with
intysing words of man's wisdom, v. 6. and II. Cor. 2. 17. For we are not as
many which corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the
sight of God, speak we in CHRIST. And chap. 4. 2. but have renounced the
hidden things of dishonestie, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word
of GOD deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves
to every man's Conscience in the sight of GOD. verse. 5. For we preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. O that some, whose preaching is all for
crying up themselves, and for crying down others, would follow this Pattern! And
chap. 5. verse. 12. For we commend not our selves again to you. Chap. 6. 4.
But in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, etc. II. Cor.
7. 12. I wrote unto you, that our care for you in the sight of God might
appear unto you. II. Cor. 8. 21. Providing honest things not only in the sight
of the Lord, but in the sight of men. Chap. 10. 3. Though we walk in the flesh,
yet we do not war after the flesh. 14. For we stretch not our selves beyond
our measure. 18 For not he that commends himself is approven, but whom the
Lord commends. And chap. 1^. 14. For I seek not yours but you. 17. Did I make
a gain of you? 19. But we do all things dearly beloved, for your edifying.
See also what he says of these, that preach not Christ sincerly, phil. 1. 15,
16, see I. Tim. 6. 5. Who suppose that gain is godliness.

Let a Pastor that minds good Behavior in Gods House, insist IV. Discretlie
and fitly.
upon what is needful and fitting his people, in the whole course of his
Ministry, both for matter and manner, and for what is fittest for the times be
lives in, Necessity should teach him behavior in all these. Let discretion
teach them to be observant of the case of their flocks. Above all, labor to
teach Christ crucified to our people, and if this be well taught, we teach them
all; that being the one thing necessary. Discretion will teach a Pastor to
avoid needless Ornaments, which argue little inward worth, and unprofitable
Controversies, and trifling debates. See II. Tim. 2. 16. But shun profan and
vain bablings, etc. I. Tim. 6. 5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds. II. Tim. 2. 23. but foolish and unlearned questions avoid I. Tim. 6.
20. Avoid oppositions of science, falsely so called Discretion will teach him
not to trouble his Auditory with old heresies which time has confuted, nor
with to curious Cases of Consciences of that nature, that it is harder to find
the Case, then the Resolution. Discret behavior will teach a Pastor to envy
most against the sins of the present times. IT is well marked of our Lord,
that he never envyed so much against Idolatry, Usury and Sabbath-breaking,
because these were not the sins of the Time and places he preached in, as
against spiritual Pride, hypocrisy, and traditions, which were then most
predominant amongst these people, then it shall also be looked upon as a
discret behavior to whipe vices, but to spare Persons, for by reeling and
personal Reflections, and by base railing aspersions, this is the result, that
thereby the hearts of the Righteous are sadded, and the hands of the wicked are
strengthened, as is to much palpable here-away. A discret behavior will
distinguish between blind Fury and cold Luke-warmnesse. A discret behavior
will regulate the Preacher so, that he will endeavor more for choice matter,
then for Ornaments made up of words. Usually the plainest dress is most
substantial. Follow August. Counsel lib. de Catechis. rud. Prefer the
sentence to words, as the soul is preferred to the body. Mallem, says he,
veriores quam disertiores invenire sermones, sicut mallem prudentiores qua^
formosiores habere amices. keep between base scurrilitie, and affected frothie
gaudie speech. O that we would learn to speak the pure language of Canaan! O
that every Pastor might say with ISAIAH, chap. 5. 4. The Lord has given me the
tongue of the learned, that I would know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary!

There is no better Pulpit-behaviour then that which is managed V. Humbly.
by humility, meekness and Condescension, A Teacher, as is well said of
AUGUST should be ready both to teach and learn at once. We should not be as
some proudly venting our own Conceits and singularities, and disdaining all,
and flinging at all, that any way contradict us. As if the Chair were only
ours, we the Gamaliels, and all others the Paul's at our feet. Can pride lead
men to heaven? if pride did thurst out of heaven proud Angels, will heaven let
in proud Preachers? Remember That being a Minister, thou art the servant of all
for Christ's sake. Learn of me matthew. 11. 28. see phil. 2. He humbled himself
etc. Our unfitness, the sublimitie of the Charge, the weight of the matter,
and the greatness of Him whose Message we carry, may teach us to be humble.
The pride of Paulus Samosatenus, of Arius, Pelagius, Aerius, was their ruin,
being for it deserted of God, and abhorred of all good men. Avoid then both
Arrogancy and silliness. If men believed the presence of God there, and what
he promises there, and how sadly he will rebuke all affronts done to him
there: O how humble, O how reverent would we be in our approachs thither!
Reverence, fervencie and humility, how much are these requisite in all our
divine administrations? Hear the same Baxter, ibid. p. 128. I hate that
preaching which tends to make the hearers laugh, or to move their minds with
tackling levity, and affect them as Stage Plays use to do, in stead of
affecting them with a holy reverence of the Name of God.

That Behavior in Gods house, is only best of these who are VI. Spirituallie
indeed possessed by the Holy Ghost, happy are these that are acted by him, and
that in all their ways savor of the things of the Spirit. A spiritual
strain in preaching, and in all other acts of spiritualitie, is such that
spiritual hearers can discern and relish. There be some that even when they
speak of spiritual matters, talk even of them not in a spiritual, but meet
carnal way, as if they were but common and trivial. Alace for this observe,
That commonly these that are learned men, are not the most spiritual men, I.
Cor. 1. 26. 27. Gregor. in his Moralls, lib. 33. Deus primo colligit indoctos:
postmodum Philosophos; et non per Oratores docuit Piscatores, sed per
Piscatores subegit Oratores. Remember these worthy speeches of PAUL. Romans 1.
11. I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift. I. Cor.
2. 14. Spiritual things are spiritually discerned. verse. 15. The spiritual
man judges all things. Gal. 6. 5. Ye which are spiritual, restore such a
man, with the spirit of meeknes I. Cor. 9. 11. (there it is supposed) that we
should sow spiritual things. I Cor. 10. 3. Upon that, it is affirmed, That all
did eat the same spiritual meat. and that all did drink the same spiritual
drink. I. Cor. 14. 12. Believers are there, Zealous of spiritual gifts. And
why are Pastors or Prophets thought to be spiritual, (as I. Cor. 14. 37?) is
it not that men should be spiritually minded? Romans 8. 6 is it not, That men
may be built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifice as I. Pet. 2. 5.?

He has a good Pulpit behavior, that speaks so to the capacity VII. Plainly
and familiarly.
of hearers, that it is well understood by them. IT is often found the greatest
bussinesse of an honest Minister, to make a needful high point of Divinity
plain and evident to Alphabetarians. Painted obscure Sermons are like the
painted glass in the windows that keep out the Light, and they are to often the
marks of painted Hypocrites. Of old the Valentiniani and Bafilidiani, and of
late the Swenkfeldians, Weigelians, Enthusiasts and the Paracelsians, purposly
obscured their fantastical and fanaticall Opinions, in obscure and obsolet
words. Thus they masked their Errors; but Truth ever loves the light of
Evidence. And indeed there is no better way to make a good Cause prevail, then
to make it as plain and thoroughly known, as we can. We should not be
Barbarians one to another. Mark that of Isaiah, chap. 28. 11. cited by Paul,
I. Cor. 14. 21. With men of other tongues will I speak to them, etc. Affected
obscurity in revealing divine Trueths, looks both sin^lyke, as also
Judgement-like.

Ministers should remember what Paul has, I. Cor. 4. 20. The VIII. Powerfully.
Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. And II. Cor. 10. 4. 5. The
weapons of our warefare, etc. Our words should be sharpened to pierce stony
hearts as nails. Coldness in preaching and sleepie dullness is not for
gaining of unmortified spirits. Yet I wish a prudent mixture of severitie and
mildness both in our preaching and in our discipline, for if there be no
powerful severity, then there will be a contempt of our Reproofs: but again
if all were powerful severitie, we should then be counted rather Usurpers of
Dominion, then Perswaders of the minds of men to the truth. That is a golden
Rule that Gregor ibid. has. Miscenda est lenitas cum severitate, et faciendum
ex vtraque quoddam temperamentum, vt nec multa asperitate exulcerentur subdits
nec ni^nia benignitate solvantur. Away then on the one hand, with base
Cowardlinesse, and on the other, with dogged severitie.

All our Behavior relating to the Flock, should be carried on IX. Lovinglie.
in tender love to them. It was a good word of Paul, I. Cor. 16. 24. My love be
with you all. Mark another, II. Cor. 11. 11. Why? because I love you not? God
knows. And a third, II. Cor. 12. 15. Though the more I love you, the less I
be loved of you. We should make them see, that our love is to their souls, to
their spiritual good: that nothing pleases us more, then what profits them,
and that nothing troubles us more, then their hurt. We must be as Fathers to
them, till Christ be formed in them. We may be sure of this, that when the
people shall see us unfainedly love them, they will hear us, and bear with
us, and follow us the more willingly and speedily. How can it be otherwise
when they see, That we spend and are spent for their sakes? yet this is not
said, to remove all sharpness to them, as inconsistant with love. O no!
Parents will correct their Children, so does GOD, so should the Minister. O but
let there be mutual love!

I add but one word yet as to this Love; let there be Love also, Concord and
Communion amongst brethren, amongst the Guids of Flocks. O that we were
studious or sensible of the benefits of Union and Peace, and would not only
hearken unto, but close and prosecute all motions of Peace, to repair our
breaches! O what a sad Behavior is it, to be the Leaders of Divisions, to
foment them? If some men had endeavored either to prevent or to heal Rents and
Divisions, yea if they had not been too isntrumental both for their rise and
increase, then no such Animosities, rentings, heart-burnings, revilings, and
selfe-seekings had been amongst us, no such misrepresentations of us, or of our
way, who are still for the Liberties of this poor rent Kirk. But since so
needleslie and unjustlie these men in this kirk have and do kythe both by word
and write against us, to the great offense of the Reformed Churches abroad, to
the further weakening of unstable souls amongst us, and to the great
strengthening of the common Enemy; I must needs now hold out some passages of
their behavior, or rather misbehaviour carrying a great Antithesis or
Repugnancy to that good behavior that PAUL desires in a Bishop, I. Tim. 3. 2.
nay parallel their way toward us, with most of all the Directions and Canons
he prescribs in these three Epistles, and then let any impartial man judge,
how far they have started aside. I shall but instance in some few particulars.

Tit. 3. 2. it is said, Speak evil of no man, I ask, is this obeyed. when in
public and in private they call us Malignants, Resolutioners, disowners of
former Principles, Overturners of the worship, government, and discipline of
this Kirk, as the little scurrill cankerd Pamphlet speaks? To rail in the
pulpit against honest peaceable Ministers, and then to deny it, when they are
challenged? as to say of some of us, there is nothing of God in us, we were
never for a good turn, etc. Is this a healing behavior? O no, These and the
like maks the wound the more incurable; as for example, That vile Lybell sent
up to London, ann. 1656 against this Synod, wherein I may truly say, there
were as many Lies as Lines; how can it savor of love or peace, since it was so
full of untrueths? If any would own it, he ought to undergo a most sharp
Censure. Love does not behave it self unseemlie, it thinks no evil, I. Cor.
13. 15: but they dare not own it; The Lord rebuke that lieing spirit.

I. Tim. 4. 15. it is said, Give thy self wholly to them, that is to Calling. I
ask, is their gaddings abroad from their Callings, (I shall not speak much of
some of them involving themselves into other men's secular affairs, though
forbidden by the Apostle, II. Tim. 2. 4. condemned by ancient Counsels, and by
the Acts of our Kirk) Their making uncharitable and illegal Excursions into
the parishes of honest brethren, to draw in silly Proselyts, and in their
trotting up and down, here and there, to brag, That if Paul were not of their
judgment, they would not believe him, a pious Behavior?

I. Tim. 5. 21. Paul says, I Charge thee, that thou observe these things
without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality. I ask, if it be a good
behavior, to kythe prejudice so far against a lawful Call, of an honest able
Minister to a desolat Place, and yet neither can or will give any reason, why
they oppose it? Is not this Partiality? yea let souls starve to death, ere
they quite their prejudice. Is this a Behavior unbyassed, selfe-denied,
unprejudiced, and impartial?

I Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. I ask, if it be a behavior
precept, to intrude a man upon a Christian Congregation and Session, wholly
against their Call and desire, and then runaway to the Powers to own their
disorderly behavior, through their misinformations and mistating the
question? Did not the Arians in Egypt, and Alexandria so? and so the Donatist?

Paul I. Tim. 5. 19. says, Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but
before two or three witnesses. Yet the behavior of the Authors of the little
angry Pamphlet is, to urge an inquisition upon a Minister, without Libell or
Accuser, or if an Accuser be, he is smoothed with the Name of an Informer, and
if he succumbe in probation, their Zeal admits no retaliation. Now our
disowning of this dangerous principle and practice is one Cause, as they say,
that we have fallen from former sound Professions and Engagements.

Heb. 10. 25. it is said, Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together,
as the manner of some is. Notwithstanding of this Dehortation, the Behavior of
some of our Dissenters, is to absent themselves from our Synods* 1. Because
they cannot now sit at the Helm, and command all, as they please. 2. Some of
them have been to bussie to procure Warrants that we meet not in Synod, or if
we meet, and take to our consideration the grievances given in against their
Novations, then they can, yea have procured a warrant from these in Power to
raise us. 3. The Diotrepheses amongst them will not assemble, because, as one
of late compared our Synod to Baals 400 false Prophets, and himself to Micajah,
(when he had little to food his Hearers with, but windy lies,) and called us
Coetus malignantium. 4. Some of them absent themselves, because they are
Neutrals, Claudicants, wily, resolved to offend none. (these who are neither
hot or cold, God will spew them out of his mouth,) Rev. 3. 16. 5. Some of them
are so churlish, niggard and illiberall, that they will absent, lest they ware
a penny on public affairs, sure none of these is that good behavior that
PAUL wills to be in a Bishop, I. Tim. 3. 2.

I will give them a touch of David's behavior, and let any judge and compare
that of David, with theirs.

Psalm. 131. Verse. 2. it is said, Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a
Child that is weaned etc. I ask, if it be a Humble behavior to cry up
themselves to be the sober party, the Godly party, the generality of the Godly
in the Land, etc. Was not this the ordinary word of the Denatist, the
Novatian, the Catharist. Quod volumus sanctum est. what we will is holy. Use
they not the same arguments against us, in their bitter Pamphlets, which the
old Separatists used against Cyprian, August. and Optatus? which God-willing
ere long I purpose to make out at length.

Psalm. 35. 14. it is said, I behaved my self as though he had been my brother
or friend Is it a brotherly Behavior, to count the plurality of Constituents
in a Synod unsound; because a plurality, as the bitter Pamphlet has, and they
are not to be entrusted with the affairs of Christ, and all because they are a
plurality? Was it a brotherly behavior of a Non-nemo, to call our Synod a
wicked Combination?

David in psalm. 101. 2. professes, That he will behave himself wisely, in a
perfect way; I ask, is it a Wise Course or behavior, to urge Extrajudiciall
Meetings as the only mean to heal, sist, and compole our Differences, and to
purge out scandelous Ministers and Elders? and these Meetings to be of equal
number of dissenting in judgment, as to the question anent public
Resolutions? and these Delegats from Synods, to have a Negative voice over
Synods so long at least, till composing and purging be closed? Is this a Court
of Christ's institution? or is it not rather more then the Prelatick Power over
Synods? How excentrick is this to our established Government both by acts of
this Kirk, and Laws of this Land, let any judge?

IT is said Isai. 52. 13. Behold my servant shall deal prudently. I Behavior
of some of these men, still to cry out for purging, when as their own
Principles and actings, closlie obstruct that working? That is, (according to
them,) Though a Judicatorie proceed never so conscientiously and justly, yet
the Party Censured is still the Supreme Judge on earth, of all their
proceedings, and of his own actings also, in relation to their sentence, and
till he be convinced, he must suffer nothing, but counteract at his pleasure.
so acted the Arian after the 1. of Nice, so the Arminian after that of Dort, so
the old Donatist after the third Council of Carthage, so do the Socinians now.
And after the example of these Remonstrators so may any now, to be purged out,
and so might all these do who were lawfully deposed by our Judicatories;
whereas it is the constant judgment of sound Divines, that even an unjust
Sentence (though in foro interno it do not obliege the Conscience) yet in foro
externo, it being the act of a lawful Judicatory, it is so far valid, that a
man cannot in reason deny submission to it, at least passive; for in this case,
we hold the Party grieved ought to submit to the sentence, not only till the
Appeal be discussed, but also after, if the Appeal be discussed against him.
And as the late Review of Protesters not etc. has, which if he submit not
unto, he sins against God, that is, in contemning the lawful standing
Authority of the Kirk, by making a schism, by declyning that whereto God calls
him. Now what a Scandalous behavior (to keep the term of my TEXT,) is their
answer to this? to wit, That our Kirk of Scotland is now unsound, see p. 116.
of that bitter BITT. Let any judge, if this exposes not their Mother-kirk to
the ludibrie of all Adversaries? The Authors cited by the Review, p. 117. and
elsewhere say, That in case of difference of judgment between the Judge and the
Party concerning the nature of a sentence pronounced, and when neither of them
is able to convince the other, the judgment of the Judge ought to carry it, as
to the Parties passive Obedience, and that he is not to counteract until
another Judicatorie repeal that sentence. For this Passive submission, as is
well marked by them, is a notable mean between sinful Obedience, and
schismatic Counteracting.

I. Cor. 13. 7. Paul says there, That Charity believes all things, hops
all things, indureth all things. I ask, is it a Charitable Expression, to call
all the means we have used for healing and union, in our papers, declarations,
meetings and conferences, mere Mock-remedies, if so be that we will not disown
these two lawful General Assemblies, ann. 1651. 1652? although our
Professions who own them still, are not to impose on their judgments, so that
in practicables they join with us. And that we are content these Censures be
taken off (which still we think were just) providing there be no counteracting.

Page 67. Is it a suitable or Gospel-like Behavior, so far to Mothers face, as
to urge a defection from the Trueths professed in this Church, by petitioning
for a vast and illegal Toleration? and to call it a Gospel privilege, and the
Subscribers of it, the Well-affected, although they join with the quakers,
petitionating the same? yea to own the quakers as to that. as is in the 7 page
of their scurrilous Animadversions upon the worthy Testimony of Edinburgh
Presbytery.

Page 67. Is it a peaceable and Gospel-behaviour, to call the Eminent Pillars
of this Kirk Apostates, for giving that just answer to the Parliaments Querie,
which all sound Divines beyond seas have owned as orthodox and just? and of
late in July last, learned D. Voetius in formal words had this expression of
these Dissenters, written in a Letter to a friend of mine, These peevish men
seem to be possessed with judicial blindness, since worse men the^ any in
Scotland, were bound to defend their Country and what is dear to them,
against all Foreign unjust invasion, all having alike interest, as to that.

Let us then duly conceive, That such Unsuitable behaviors, may be a mean both
strong and sad, to unchurch this NATION, to make our Sun go down even at
noonday, to put a bill of divorce into our hands, that for these, the Lord
may in justice lay us aside, and tell us, that he has no more work to be done
by or amongst us. But if the Lord be at this time, in answer to the prayers of
his servants, as would seem, to open a door of hope, let us relinquish and cast
off what ever it be, that may oppose or hinder so seasonable a mercy. And to
that end, let us endeavor, to serve one another in love, to bear the
infirmities of the weak, to build up each other in our most holy faith, that
we may be diligent in the conscientious performance of the several duties of
our Callings; that we may keep our selves unspoted, or tainted with the
Corraptions of these backsliding times, such as are Popish delusions, doting
on errors, sinful separations, endless divisions, Profainnesse, Prelatike
imparitie too palpable in some Ministers, even in a professed paritie, and the
too bussie advancement of self, or private interests. Now for the speedy and
right avoiding of these and such spiritual Rocks, let us seriously lay to
heart these following powerful Instructions, so much conducing to the
furtherance of a Godly and learned Ministry. Which were in the Ancient kirk
required to be had by heart, and answered unto, at the ORDINATION of Intrants,
as an Amuler or preservative for Good behavior.

-- I. Tim. 4. 7. Exercise thy self unto godliness, etc. I. Tim. 4. 12. be
thou an example to believers, in word, in conversation, in faith, etc. I. Tim.
4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the doctrine: I. Tim. 6. 12. Fight the
good fight of faith. etc. I. Tim. 6. 13. 14. I charge thee in the sight of God,
that thou keep this Commandment without spot. etc. I. Tim. 6. 20. O Timothy,
keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain bablings,
and oppositions of sciences, falsely so called. II. Tim. 1. 6. Stir up the
gift of God that is in thee. II. Tim. 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound
words, etc. II. Tim. 1. 11. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep
by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. II. Tim. 2. 22. Flee also youthful
lusts: but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, peace, with them that call on
the Name of the Lord out of a pure heart. II. Tim. 4. 2. Preach the Word, be
instant in season, out of season. II. Tim. 4. 5. But watch thou in all things,
endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy
Ministry. I Tim. 4. 13. 14 15. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee. 15. Meditae upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them. II. Tim. 2. 14. Charging them before the
Lord, that they strive not about words, to no profit, but to the subverting of
the hearers. II. Tim. 3. 14. But continue thou in the things, which thou have
learned, and have been assured of. Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word,
as he has been taught, that he may able etc. Tit. 2. 1. But speak thou the
things which become sound doctrine. Tit. 3. 8. These things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works. Tit. 3. 10. How that is an Heretic, after the first and
second admonition, reject.
Glory be to thee O God! FINIS.

