THE Writ of Restitution: By the Lady ELEANOR.

PSALM. etc. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; Be learned ye that are ludges of
the earth.

ACTS 3. 21. Whom the Heaven must receive, till the times of Restitution of all
things which God has spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world
began.

Printed in the Year 1648.

THE Writ of Restitution: BY The Lady ELEANOR.
ANd now in this his cause, the Judge of all the earth, Prince of the Kings of
the earth, a case wherein all concerned; these are to pray three, who here sit
in his place Judges: Give me leave to speak, and show you a mystery, from this
writ Amoveas manus, defended by the happy Mr. Maynard, notwithstanding opposed
by Mr. Solicitor, with S. John, not knowing what Spirit he is of.

Before whow this day, the day of Judgments figure, showing by reason of a
writ of Error, not executable, three stand charged with contempt of the Court,
pleading Ignorance, notwithstanding the aforesaid Amoveas manus writ being
executed (as it were) the forbidden fruit tasted untimely; these men yet each
discharged and acquitted: as let it neither be reputed impossible, how much
opposed soever by others, for All to be saved at last, when the utmost mite or
minute satisfied or expired, the worst of reprobates not excepted, in his time
whose immense mercy inscrutable: this is the argument, Against whom no writ of
Error feisible either or possible.

Who saw every thing very good at first made by him, reduced to be no doubt to
the same estate, as holds good from that of dust return to dust, every thing to
the place from whence it came; fallen Angels and men restored every one, not left
a hoof, etc. or lost of that kind bearing his Image.

Of which general deliverance well understood to be an Article of the Christian
Faith, famous Origin, from whose judgment other fathers erring, forced were to
erect a Purgatory for Saints, that Babel edifice of theirs; of whom the
aforesaid ancient father, the worst they could say of him was, As he did worst
of any when he wrote ill, so exceeded all men when he did well.

And so proceeding with this reported Case of this days Hearing, where the
fiery adversary upon their surmisings, pressing for a present sentence, before
the accused heard or answering, charged, that although moved in open Court such
a writ, the Amoveas manus to be respited: and accordingly a Supersedis issued
out, delivered to the Sheriff then in being; the Tenants nevertheless outed of
possession by the now Undersheriff of that county about three months ago:
whereupon he called and appearing, demanded of whom, how those doors came to be
opened, denied not what he had done by virtue of such a sealed writ, by such a
Solicitor brought to him; as for other writs concerning them, pleads Ignorance:
One Pomfred by name, (alias Pomum) surprised in state of inocency, like her
first in the transgression; (for pursuing which Allegory thus) showing one
Massingal called, pleading ignorance too as the man laying the fault on Eve; he
(some three years since in that Office) only had a Supersedis, of what
validity now he knows not; for other writ, none came to his hand.

Also Jo: Rand Solicitor called, he appears, no young Fox, not to be foold with
pocket Errors, refers to the Judges, whether year after year that writ like to
be of much force, brought beforce such and such Officers; namely the Treasurer,
etc. when as in being none such, or like to be: And so this the Epilogue or end
of it, their stale Errors being quasht; the writ stands good for taking off or
removing his Majesty's unhealing hands, his Tenants cashiered, moreover for
strengthening which, another writ, a Writ of Restitution produced, brought in
COURT, stops the Lions mouths, forced to put up their pipes, as let it happen
to the enemy of General Restitution, sent to that parable of the unnatural
elder Brother toward his own flesh and blood, Luke; and murmuring laborers,
because their fellows mads partakers with them; endless unmercifulnes thereof
to bid others beware.

And here to make an end with what penance imposed on those three for a
presumption of that nature; these a touch of it: The under Sheriff Pomfred,
somewhat of a low pitch, he never to aspire or take upon him the state or style
of a high Sheriff; the other sometime in the same employment or Office,
Massingal to return to his domestic function or calling deserting former
dainties. The honest poor Solicit' J: Rand as for him unto other Solicitors an
example his lot, besides to pinch himself with hard and thin fare, never to
attempt the Kings Solicitors place, or St. John to be called like the wandering
lew.

And so farther, no jesting matter neither of mean consequence, where like
Twins, this finished tedious Law Suit in Trinity term; and Gods word both
sympathizing or joined wedlock like the blessed Virgin and just Joseph Cousins,
though abruptly in brevities behalf handled or penned, presaging without doubt,
maugre the old Serpents plotting with his smooth outside, through the holy
Ghosts power, thethird person in Trinity, long silent though, or vaild under a
cloud as it were, will immediately decide our Church-Differences, of such
troublesome Times the cause, which Lord hasten, and teach them to discern the
time better.

And so hastening on, showing from hence how all shut up under ignorance, know
not what they do; the man undone by the woman, aleaging for himself, suspected
not, she unto him given, the Author to be of his ruin, having warning of it
given him never; The woman on the other side again, The Serpents intents had
she known, she had not been over reached by such his falseness and flattery, to
the overthrow of her and hers, so many: The Serpent his excuse, he came but to
try her for his part, what would befall was above his reach, foresawit not; no
more then the old Prophet, that by means of him a Lion by the way should tear
his fellow Prophet: Or that such a mass of corrupted mankind should succeed to
perish, since the words to them twain being, Touch it not lest ye dye,
importing but in danger of death.

And thus since all Original sin the root pardoned in that last prayer, Father,
forgive them, etc. sealed with his own Blood on the Tree, Restitution of course
follows, who can forbid it, or show why the taking off, or removing of his
heavy hand should not be an Article of our Belief, seeing this Son of Adam his
administrator discharges all Debts from the beginning of the world to the end,
which by that erroneous Opinion, Mother of Errors, they go about to annihilate
that affirm, Out of Hell is no Redemption; who is able, having Ages of Ages
(Rev. 1.) even from the worlds beginning, the keys of Hell and Death, to turn
this water into wine; and where he has given a being, to cause such judgments
to be for the best, the only Clay to regain the eyesight, howsoever
Excommunicated this Truth by envious times; of Esau's race, endeavoring to
disinherit and strip the Son of God, who gave himself a Ransom, not for some,
but for All; All made alive in him: Forgive them, Father, etc. as showed before,
under ignorance concluded.

FINIS.
ANd without proving what we say, but as saying and doing, which are two, like
to a cipher alone: and of more concernment these three witnesses in earth, then
supposed, what power endued with, whereof as insues in relation to the three in
the high Court of Heaven (Joh. etc.) they styled Judges of the Earth (to wit)
the grave and prudent Barons of Exchequer; Et hi tres unum, etc. Mr. Baron
Trevare, the Ancient of days in his likeness, His voice gone out into all
Lands, etc. Psalm. 19. The second like the Son of man, the azure clouds mixed his
Foot-Carpet; The third answerable to the holy Ghosts slow operation, Miracles
and Prophecy for a time ceased, or like that saying of theirs, Have not so
much as heard whether any holy Ghost, etc. committed to whose Ministry the
Mystery of Times and Seasons, by all the world slighted or derided, etc.
several days before whom this troublesome Trial appearing, of no mean
consequence, the Manor and Rectory of Pyreton, by what means and indirect
courses taken, thereto the King entitled, by juggling Projectors plots, an old
Outlawry revived, caused hereby to stretch it self out by their breathing into
it, etc. to overthrow a lawful Purchase and Ioynture, after enjoyed so many
years, waiting their opportunity, the widows Estate to cut it off, by such
trivial encumbrances sifted forth: the very Image of the Beast, Revel. 13.
xswith the Great-Seal faced forth, only paying His Majesty about a Mark yearly
such a costly purchase therein by his own officer born out, his Solicitor
General.

Not unlike that dispute about Moses body, between the Archangel and the other
(the Tempter) reported by Jude, this Law point debated so often in open Court,
by the advantage taken of her imprisonment, that got into possession: So
passing from this to the Judges their charge for repairing this no slender
breach, appointed to stand in the gap, to take off the Lords heavy hand from
him, namely the King, by conjuring this Spirit down, raised up in his Name, a
lie in Samuels likeness: And how came to pass, for the sin against the holy
Ghost committed, showing also forgiven neither in this world nor the other;
witness the Archbishop, taking prophecy for no other then madness, gone to his
proper place from Towerhil: and yet deliverd not groaning so long in travel the
Kingdoms three, such distraction under witness in Ecclesiastical and Civil
affairs both. As not unknown to himself these, of her coming unto him without
manifestation not of a Commission in that case armor of proof, to give him a
taste or warning of his judgment at hand, the hand writing (Dan. 5.) served on
him in his gallery, was immediately by a reference answered under his hand
bearing date, 1633. October. etc. Whitehal, committed for that cause the space of
two years a close prisoner in the Gate* house, even October. 23. when brought
first thither, honored with the same very day of Irelands Massacre, October. 23.
and of Keynton-fight, etc. stripped of all ever since, a cup where of himself
since has drunk the dregs. This is the business that sleeps not.

Howsoever he fallen asleep, like them bidden to sleep on, etc. she though then,
and since armd with no few sad tokens of that kind come to pass on others no
obscure ones; witness the Dukes fatal month of August foretold.

With this for another observation, her Ioynture the Manor of Englefield
whilst she in the Gatehouse, bought by the Marquis of Winchester, how his of
Basing, such an Example not the like, unlucky Babel Towers, toward the increase
of widows and fatherless, made to kiss the ground.

And impeaced of treason in this kind; no light thing; about their neck a
meeter ornament what weight not unknown; then S. George a horseback. Yet for
making atonement in that case for such his Majesty's folly, like as when Jobs
captivity said to return, was appointed to pray for his three friends: So on
the other side, the aforesaid Judges three to make his peace, to turn his
captivisy away, fallen so low as hard to judge, whether exposed to the dunghill,
or the dungeons Slavery the greater or better Estate, unhapily by his own
seeking happened.

Nor his Name wiped out of this Record, once a good Confession made, afterward
makes as bad an end, opening the very YATES of Hell, like Balaam, loving the
wages of unrighteousness; his own Solicitor General, M. St. Joans holiness such
an adversary, wherein the general good also a copartner with this of the widows
cause, which the Lord defends and stands up for it.

In which, if any misprision has been since their judgment irreversable, may
if they please, appoint the Amoveas Manus to be renewed, etc. And with this
belief concluding, Behold, I make all things new, as including Lucifers
Restoration, first and last of that Name, when the times of refreshing comes,
morning and evening star both; also from his Badge the star born, both under
one Planet infers, How art thou fallen too, etc. first of that Name, and last of
great Britains Kings, counseld by her his Eve, or CHAVAH, also Adams figure,
from whose hands the Lord vouchsafes to accept satisfaction none, declared as
before, as in like case, eaten by a Lion, he sent to cry O Altar, etc. charged
neither to eat bread, nor water to drink there, that Kings arm which restored
(Kin. 13.) so learned Judges, his, savory as Saul's sacrifice too, whom the Lord
repented had made King; for your charge as the substance or sum of it, when
Zions widow restored, settled in her possession, by your mediation, orders a
mitigation for his discharge, set as it were fast in the Sea, about whose neck
a millstone to ease him, so this inference, every one in his order, even for
Sodom easier, etc. its enlargement, before etc. return of Caernaums Captivity.

Endless praise be to whom ascribed. Anno 1648.
FINIS.

