AN Hymen^^an Essay, OR An EPITHALAMY, UPON THE ROYAL MATCH OF HIS most
Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second, with the most Illustrious KATHARINE,
Infanta of PORTVGALL. 1662.

By J. D.

Printed in the Year, M.DC.LXII.

UPON THE ROYAL MATCH, OF HIS most Excell^nt Majesty, CHARLES the Second, with
the most illustrious CATHARINE, Infanta of Portugal.
THe Bride-God lately met the Powe'rs of Love,
Venus and Cupid, as they loosly rove
About Iberian Provinces: his breast
With indignation justly was possessed;
When thus the soft ones did he sternly greet:
Now must I vent; since we so seldom meet.
Shall you still act without me here in Spain;
And to no purpose longer me detain,
Where I am nothing; no more honor have
Then Africa Negro, or poor Indian Slave?
True you reign like your selves; and have so common
Not only worship both of Man and Woman;
But they themselves your Sarifices come,
Willing, nay wilful, in an hecatombe.
Upon your downy Altars most expire,
Where first they kindled, in their own base fire.
In Taurica Diana was content
With a few Strangers by hard Fortune sent:
But you have willing victims, not from far;
They are your friends, and most familiar.
So let it be, and (if it might be) more;
Since they can you, without my self, adore:
Whom they so slight, that, if they chance to use me,
Within a week or two they soon abuse me.
When married. Spaniards, who no aequall brook,
Their chiefest servants, not their consorts, took.
So leaving you (for you leave me) awhile;
I Will post for Englands brave Vxorious I Will.
Which if your Uncle did not so embrace,
I would; 'twere min^ as every Woman's place.
However that famous Isle I shall prefer,
(^f you love distance) in diameter
To your notorious Cyprus; where North-West,
And you South-east, I shall contented rest.
The Bravest Prince there shall I first attend:
And shall not lose mine honor nor mine end.
When all his manly virtues shall combine
With his Queens Graces sweetly Feminine.
They Virtues in the abstract, there will be,
To my renoun, in two Polygamy.
Besides I know, that each inferior state
Will zealously their Princes imitate.
As Kings get Kings, their Loyalty does bind,
That they contemporary Subjects find.
They seize the quarters of the World; they plant,
And cheequer Africa with Inhabitant.
They send Nobility and Gentry first,
And valiant Veteranes there to be nursed:
Whereas your mounted City did compile
It self with Rogues for shelter of Asyle.
These must surmount them then: if generous seed
Will a more Noble fruit and of spring breed.
And from the English pedigree may come
Another Punick to affright your Rome.
So in America my honor's seen,
Where I can scarce remember to have been,
By benefit of them no manhood want,
But double have, who conquer and who plant.
And can I choose but honor then that Nation,
That honors me thus in their propagation?
When Cytherea mildely answered thus:
The Peoples crime why do object to us,
Against our wills so impiously devout?
'Twere best for all that thou were not left out.
Mine and my Sons design and occupation
Is not the Death of men, but Procreation.
Nor do I hinder, or thy words refell;
But will promote the motion liked so well.
Yet pray excuse my presence: 't is uncouth
For me to Travail from the warmer South.
Nor can I in those Britains much delight
In any sense, content with little night.
My Son shall bear thee Company: for me
Take my advice. Consider their degree,
And use them not as vulgars: leave then here,
My Lads, your Torches nor your badges bear:
They need no flames; their presence is so bright;
Your paler fires may burn, but show no light.
Their Court's perpetual Day: and it is all one
To make a Candle aemulate the Sun.
Since arms are odious now; pray Cupid use
No Archey: thy naked self infuse:
Be thou thy Arrow thus most expedite,
And shoot thee through their eyes, yet out of sight.
When they salute, and seal the agreement, then
Exchange their Souls; where fly to and ag'en;
Search every closet of them; every gate
Or door of sense be sure thou penetrate.
Then live in her so long, till incarnation
Shall thee invest, complete the generation
Of such a body, which shall only move
By such a soul, as is all purely Love,
That as thy self this universal Minion
May have as universally dominion.
And Hymen leave thy mantle; for the Zealous,
Without thy Saffron, are already jealous.
Though for the King thou go, it may do harm;
And give misprising Presbyters alarm,
Who, apt to take occasion, will spread
From pulpit, Essex risen from the dead.
So they to make the Essex will endeavor;
Though thou to Essex were unlucky ever;
And most unlike, thou tender, and he brawny;
Yet they will make thy Mantle orange-tawny.
No war no threats, but mine, shall break the peace;
My wars are peaceful, and my labors ease.
Tell him from me; that blushing Roses scratch:
And femal Monarchs do their honeys watch.
Love's bitter-sweet, the sweeter so: and lo!
A mole in my fair face, and fairer so.
Observe my Laws, which never were defense
Unto my sex, but gentle violence.
Nor do thy Laws, brave Charles, forbid: be bold;
Without a witness Laws can take no hold
See how thy house does as thy houses ly;
It Is instauration why so late to try*
O quickly heal thy much impaired Line:
Make them Immortal too that are Divine.
The Gods intend it so, then Hymen said,
Whom they from dangers desperate conveyed
With Queens and Kingdoms and a Royal race
(Themselves to heaven returned) to rule in place;
With such as brave achievements bravely write,
Those Heroes for their Labors they requite.
So thy AEneas did through perils come
TO enjoy Lavinia with her Latium.
The' adventures were alike; the diffe'rence is
The Poet wrote thy sons, the Historian his.
Aeneas one mixed colony constrained;
By Charles the Universe is best maintained
By his own men: Africa, America
Shall make him write, like Spain; etc.
Which twisted Dragons tail shall hurl the Nations,
As Stars the Dragons did in the Revelations.
But tell, said Venus, how they could dispatch
Through various obstacles this happy Match.
The ayry messenger, he answered, Fame
Blason'd with sound of Trumpet first her Name
Through neighbo'uring Kingdoms; then did nearer come,
And in his ear next beat the Royal Drum
With Brasil Stick; then took the Rapper there,
And knocked so loud, Charles opened wide his ear:
Fame entered then; her Starry Servant Fame
Possessed his Sense and Soul, in Cupids name.
As Men love Angels which they yet not see;
So Royal Love's Celestial Sympathy.
Still stubbornly, allthough collapsed, they
Obstruct Church-paths; and cross the Kings high way.
Nor will these Stumbling Blocks ever better prove them;
Till Overseers do lift and quite remove them:
As these themselves, both Root and Branch, o'rturn'd;
Let them likewise, both Root and Branch, be spurned.
Such, as are somewhat sound, and may be squared,
To edify beyond Sea be prepared
But dry and rotten Blocks, which were such cruel
And Kindling Touch-wood to themselves be fuel:
While them their choler, burnt to black, consumes;
And smothered zeal, like stifled charcoal, fumes.
Then, not till then, when hushed is all their Noise,
Shall Charles ly quiet with his happy Choice.
Adieu; said Hymen, then: we must remove;
We can no longer talk. So I and Love
Will take our Voyage; leaving dle you;
And bear another Fairest hence in lieu:
Which, in her Empire when she shall be seen,
Far rather will be deemed the Cyprian Queen.
She with her thousand Graces, will instill
In every honest breast immense good will.
(In all good hearts I say; but there are such
Whose black malignance Candor cannot touch.)
You, and your Three, need not for her to act:
She! numerous she will all that is good attract.
She in Conjunction (for they both are Stars)
Will be much more Benign, then You with Mars;
And cause that they no Peace, nor Plenty want;
When new D^lichium joins with Troy-novant:
When Golden Tagus Sylver Thamesis
Meet in their watery rendez-vous, and kiss;
So eagerly incorporate, as both
Would mean some other Venus by their froth.
Tagus shall dote on Tamesis; and burn
Enough to try his ore; enough to turn
His sandy atoms to a mass, and send
His native present to his noble friend:
Who shall return by Thousands then his thanks;
And help Protect his amicable Banks;
So long as he shall from Iberus run;
Which seeks the Rising, he the Setting Sun;
Those Banks, which now our Authors do not feign,
Swift Mares, conceiving Zephyrus, sustain;
And whose swift vital course is but three years:
For these to be his Eastern fleet appears;
Which in her poop conceives the Western gales;
And rides triennial liquid hills and dales;
Well burdened with all raritys, to greet
His Thames; and lay them at his silver feet.
Scorning with mere domestic gifts to woo,
He ventures far, to fetch exotic too.
True amity, where best things common stand:
Free as his Waters he dispenses Land:
And says, his Nymph shall, to their glorious King,
Both glorious Kings and glorious Kingdoms bring.
These Youths informed me thus; and gave this Theme
(As they come often to me) in a dream.
Waked, with the solemn noise, I fell to pray
All might be real that these Angels say:
That (if not peerless) she may be no other
Then was, for Wife and Queen, his pious Mother.
May she have what is the Queens; he what is the Kings;
Enjoy all Honors, but of Sufferings.
VVhilest We are blessed by both: And every Summer
Enlarge our Wellcomes to a Royal Comer.
When first we had him single, how amazed
Were ardent hearts, which as their bonfires, blazed.
Yet with him joys are doubled; and do thrive
Into a jubily superlative.
But when he is trebled with a Royal Boy,
O! then exceeding joy, exceeding joy,
Will grow ecstatick: When thrice happy, We
Rapt to our third terrestrial Heaven shall be.
FINIS.

