The Christians Zodiake or TWELVE Signs of Predestination unto Life
everlasting.

Written in Lattin by Jeremy Drexelius

LONDON Printed for William Willson Anno Dom: 1647

engraved title page within a triangle within a sun column with banners Inward
Light

Freque^ti^ Sacram

Patience tribulation

^^mes deeds

Love of enemies

propensed over will to

column with banners Apreporatio to Death

Renouncei^ Worldly things

Frequenting Sermons

Self Contempt

Detestation of Sins past

Moderation of our passion^



The Author to the READER.
J Present thee here (pious Reader) with 12 signs of Divine Predestination,
collected at spare hours out of the sacred Scrip^ures and holy Fathers; which
for the help of memory bear each one their Device or Impres in the ^ront of
them. This Glass, ^f thou shall take daily into ^hy hands, to dress thy self
^herein, and diligently ^ark how many of these ^ignes thou discoverest in thy
self; whether all, or none, one, or but a few, thou will be able (if thou
alterest not thy course) to give a near conjecture in whether book thy name
be written, either of Life, or Death: which books are for the present shut
up, not to be opened, till the last General day; when those, who shall not be
found recorded in the book of Life, shall be cast into the dreadful lake of
Fire: whereas those, whose names are registered in Heaven, shall participate of
a joy, which neither knows a Measure nor an End.

Series Signorum.
I. 1. THE first sign of Pred stination, is An internal light; which bears
for it is Device, a burning Taper. The Motto is: Thy Word is a Lantern to my
feet, and a light unto my paths, Psalm. 119.

II. 2. A re^dinesse to dye. The Device, A dead man's Scull. The Motto: I desire
to be disso^ved, and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.

III. 3. Frequentation of Sacraments. Device, The sacred Eucha^ist: The Motto:
He that eats of this bread shall not dye. Joh. 6.

IV. 4. Contempt of world^y things. The Device, A bare Altar dispoy^ed of all
its ornamen^s. The Motto is: But what things were gain ^o me, those I counted
loss for Christ. Ph l 3.7.

V. 5. Patience in the midst of long affliction. The Device, A Rose tree. The
Motto: You are blessed who weep now, for you shall laugh Luke 6.

VI. 6. Frequenting of Sermons. Device, A Fig tree. The Word is: The wise man
shall increase his wisdom by hearing. Pro. 1.

VII. 7. Alms deeds, bestowed with a tender affection. The Device, A Balsome
tree. The Motto: God has committed the care of his neighbor to every one.
Eccl. 17.

VIII. 8. Self contempt. The Impres, The Cypress tree. The Motto: Unless you
become as little infants, you shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Mat.
18.

IX. 9. Love of our enemies. The Device, Two thwarted Lances, combined with an
Olive wreath, The Motto: be not vanquished by evil; but by good conquer
evil. Romans 12.

X. 10. Detestation of our passed sins. The Device, A rod and Scourge. The
Motto: I will come presently to thee, and remove thy candlestick out of its
place, unless thou do rep^nt. Apoc. 2.

XI. 11. Propension of ou^ w ll o Good. The Device An Anchor. The Motto: I have
inclined my heart to fulfill thy statutes for ever. Psalm. 119.

XII. 12. Moderation of our passions, or the victory of temptations. The
Device, A strung Lute. The Motto: Thy desire shall be subject unto thee, and
thou shall master it. Genesis 3.


The Coronides of the Zodiake, Is a short discourse of the scarcity of the
Predestinate.

intaglio etching of burning candle Emblem j

Inward Light

Thy Word is a Candle unto my feet and a Light unto my paths. Psalm 119 V.
105



The Christian Zodiake.
The first Sign, of Predestination, Is a Burning Taper.
The Motto: Thy word is a Lant^orne to my feet, and a light unto my paths.
Psalm. 119,
BY the burning Taper is set forth that internal Light, Psalm. 119.
which so far forth shows us Gods benefits, the worlds vanity, life's
shortness, sins filthiness, the fading shadows of all pleasures; that,
whosoever begins to see them, breaths after heaven, and cries with the Kingly
Prophet, Psalm. 41.
My soul thirsts for the strong God, for the living God: When shall I come
and appear before the presence of God? Psalm. 4, and 88.
There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us: and in this light of thy countenance will we walk.

1. A Master to teach us, there is within us, the light of Reason; which God of
his bounty, deriving from his own countenance, has placed in the better part
of man: and this light does not only distinguish us from beasts, but makes us
like unto God. This light imprinted in man's understanding, is an indelible
Sermon, which teaches us, not to do that to another, which we would not have
done to our selves; inasmuch as we can hope for from anoth^r, none otherwise
tha our selves have done to others W th what measure ye mete, it shall be
meted to you again. Luke. 6.
Hence it is, that we must neither violently nor deceitfully impair either
the goods of others, or their chastity. This light shows us all the creatures,
and (though darkly) G^d himself the ^reator, having all things perfect, most
blessed, eternal, sufficient for himself and all others, the beginning,
middle and end, which dwells in the light that none can approach unto; in his
works and gi^ts, no less amiable than powerful, whose Will and Work are the
same: he which is al mercy and goodness; yet an holy, severe, incorrupt Judge,
and not to be flattered: He which is all Justice, whose shape and greatness is
beyond expression; whose like n ither may we see, nor conceive that at any
ti^e we shall see. All pleasant and beautiful things compared with him, be no
better than mere darkness, and a poor shadow; which lovely transcendant beauty
delights in nothing more than to be beloved. This light manifests unto us the
wor^s of our Creator, the interchangeable rule of day and night, the
star-bright eye of the Heavens Majesty, the long iournies of Sun and Moon,
earths fruitful womb, the spacious compassings of Rivers, the dreadful
Lordship of the Sea, the several kinds of living creatures, and the increase
of fruits. All which, God made without hands, or any labor: only he willed
that they should be made, and they were made.

Also this light of Reason and Faith shows man's chiefest happiness to consist
in this, if as much as is possible he become like his Maker: for like unto
like is ever acceptable: and surely no livelier image is there than that which
is most like him whose image it is. But this shall be not here, but in another
place, in another world, in the land of ^he living. Nondum apparuit quid
erimus, etc. It is not as yet apparent (s ith St. John what we shall be, John
2.
only this we know, that when he appears, we shall become l^ke unto him, in
that we shall behold him truly as he is. From the thought of this, seconded by
refulgent light, the will conceives an incredible content, hope raises up its
self to a most eminent height, and the affection mounts up, all inflamed unto
Almighty God; for what can be more ravishing sweet unto a soul, than to
consider its self, the lively Image of so infinite a beauty, and have the
assurance that it is most dear to its resemblance. But this light is not so
bountiful of its rays to every one, for which reason, the royal Prophet, who
well knew by experience, that all were not participant of this consolation,
does congratulate with himself, Psalm. 88.
for so high a prerogative, Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine. O
Lord (says he) the light of thy countenance is impressed on us, thou have
given me joy in my heart, not in the hearts of others, but in mine own, and of
such only (O thou sovereign goodness) whom thou have predestina^ed to
eternal life. For this we will gladly walk in this light of thy countenance,
and rejoice in thy Name all the day long, for being delivered out of darkness,
and rendered capable of understanding every day more and more of thy holy will,
and by a dearer and straighter bond of alliance united unto thee. Baruch. 4.
Beati sumus o Israel, etc. O Israel how blessed are we (says the Prophet) to
have those things manifested unto us, which are pleasing to Almighty God? And
Job when all both in heaven and earth did seem to conspire against him, yet
remembering of this light, was not a little comforted. Splendebat lucerna eius
super caput meum, Job. 29.
etc His lamp (says he) did shine over my head, and I did walk in darkness
by the light thereof: Wherefore you (says the Son of Syrac) who fear the
Lord, Eccl. 4.
love him, and your hearts shall be enlightened. Lux vestra in tenebris orietur,
Isay. 5.
etc. Tour light shall shine forth in darkness, and our Lord shall bestow upon
you a perpetual rest, and r plenish your Souls with splendours. Whereas if
you once separate your selves from God, you will be involved in Egyptian
darkness on every side: Nam error et tenebrae peccatoribus concreatae sunt:
for error and darkness are jointly created with wicked men.

The 2. Paragraph.
TAlia dixerunt in inferno hi, qui peccaverunt. Wis. 5.
This was the Discourse of sinners in hell, and tell me what was their
discourse, O holy Spirit? for it will appear no vain nor idle curiosity to
be inquisitive what the damned say in hell, and for us who are so covetous of
news, what is done in this Kings Palace, in this Princes Court, to hear what
is done in hell, if it be not ungrateful, will much less be unprofitable,
especially since these are no uncertain humors, such as commonly pass
current in reporting news; What therefore are the discourses of the damned?
Wis. 5.
Ergo er avimus, a^v^ a veritatis, and Iustitiae lumen non luxit nobis.
Therefore we have erred (say they) from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness has not shined upon us. Therefore we have erred: This is the
consequence, but where is the antecedent to it? Venite and fruamur bonis, quae
sunt; vino precioso, and anguento nos impleamus, and ne praetereat nos flos
temporis, coronemus nos Rosis, antequam marcescant; nullum pratum sit, quod non
pertranseat luxuria nostra. Come (say they) and let us enjoy those commodities
which are; let us take our fill of precious wine and sweet perfumes, and let us
not lose the flower of our time, let us crown our selves with Roses before they
fade away, let no meddow he untravers'd by our riotousnesse. What could Kine or
Oxen do more, than invite one another in this manner unto the flowery Meddowes?
And this is the antecedence they put in the world, unto the consequence, which
they make in hell. What miserable Logic is this? Where they made their
antecedence, there they should have added the consequence, and when they said,
come let us enjoy those commodities which are, they ought instantly to have
concluded: Therefore we have erred, since either we must repent in this life,
or burn for it in the next; this is a place to repent our selves of our sins,
and not to make no end of sinning, we are rather now to think of Crosses than
delights, here we are put to fight, we must expect to triumph in another
place. Therefore you have erred, it is a good, and true consequence; but all
t^o late, and the light of righteousness has not shined upon you, and what is
this light of righteousness? if it be righteousness, as Lawyers affirm, to
afford every one his right, then is it likewise a part of righteousness. to set
a right value and esteem on things, whence that light of our Soul, whereby we
d scerne what account we are to make of them, is deservedly styled the light of
righteousness; our unde^standing, and this is that which the damned so lament
they were deprived of. To judge of pleasant wines, to crown their heads with
choice garlands, to please their palats with exquisite fare, and pursue their
pleasure through every pleasant gro^^, none were more exactly skilled than they;
but that all these pleasures were no ways to be preferred unto eternal ones,
they wilfully choose for to be ignorant of. They were so addicted to their
vain, and ignominious pastimes, as all the joys of the blessed seemed of
small moment, b^t compared to them, they affected so passionat^y their
delicious Wines, their Banquets, Roses, and Voluptuousness, that they ever
dared to contemn the felicity of heaven, and made no account of all eternity
in comprison of that liberty of sinning which they had; but this was a most
unjust esteem of things, as the light of understanding evidently declares,
which teaches us to prize e ernity at so high a rate as for its sake alone to
despise all other things. Therefore you have erred, the event does plainly show
it, and the light of Righteousness has not shone upon you, now it is too
apparent. Many there are, who whilst they obstinately follow their depraved
ways, refuse utterly to learn what it is to go aright, but are content to be
so missed by their wilful and ungrateful ignorance: and such as these were
you, O ye miserable wretches, wherefore now cry, and howl, for you are like
everlastingly to sing no other note, but ergo erravimus, therefore we have
erred, therefore the ligh^ of righteousness has not shined upon us. This is
the ditty of the damned souls, this is the mournful song they shall sigh
for^h for all eternity.

The 3. Paragraph.
O Christians, therefore take heed that you deprive not your selves of this
same heavenly light, Baruc. 1.
May our Lord bestow upon us his virtue, and inlighten our eyes, for by the
least glimpse of this light of understanding, it will be no hard matter to
apprehend, that we are not to make more account of men than God; of riches
then of conscience, nor to set more by humane favor, than divine; that no
pleasure whatsoever is to be preferred to heaven, nor these instable things
unto eternal ones. And truly says St. Chrysostom. He can find nothing on
earth to bestow his affection on, who has but once savoured of celestial
things.

This light of understanding our good God was pleased should shine most
plentifully on St Austins soul, when being advised says he) to make
reflection on my self, I entered into the inmost of all my self, and there saw
with such an eye as my soul afforded me, the invariable light of God, which
whosoever knows, does know eternity, and I perceived my self to be so far
estranged from thee, in an uncouth land; and not much unlike to this light of
understanding, was that light of devotion, of which St Bernard speaks.
Beseech for thy self, (says he) the light of devotion, a bright Sunny-day,
together with a Sabbath and repose of mind, where like on old soldier
priviledg'd with rest, for his long service, thou may pass over all the
labors of thy life, without any labor at all, in running with a dilated heart
the way of the Commandments of God, whence it will arrive, that what at first
thou underwentest with force and bitterness of mind, thou shall afterward
perform with much sweetness and consol^t on; to which likewise the royal
Psalmist invites us, where he says, Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini. Taste
and behold the sweetness of our Lord. And this is he delightful light of
heart, that flame burning with the very spirit of pleasure, which God makes us
every day more and more partakers of, and with proportion to this light
inkindled in our bosoms: God, who is incapable of all augmentation, and and
every way immense, does yet after a wondrous manner receive increase himself.

intaglio etching of skull Emblem II.

A preparation to death

I am in a Straight betwixt two having a Desire to depart and to be with
Christ. Phil 1. v. 23.



The second Sign Of Predestination,
IS a readiness to die, which is signified by a dead man's Sc^ll, with these
words,; Co^retor e ducbus desiderioum habens dissolvi, and esse cum Christo;
Phil. 1.
I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. Et vos similes estote hominibus expectantibus Dominum suum, etc.
and be you (says our Savior) like to men awayting their Lord at his return
from some Nuptial feast, that when he comes and knocks, they may straight
ways open unto him. Then says St G^egorie, it is that our Lord does knock,
when by visiting us with any grievous sickness, he de^ounceth unto us that death
is near at hand, and then we readily open unto him, when we entertain his
summons with a friendly welcome: That guilty person makes small haste to o^en
the Judge the door, who dares not issue out of his bodies prison to meet with
him, neither can be with any security behold his countenance whom he knows he
has affronted in such unworthy manner, whereas he, whom his hopes and actions
have rendered secure, will presently open unto him when he knocks, he will be
glad, and take it for an honor that he calls him, and be cheerful in the
midst of tears, in consideration of his future recompense. Phil. 1.
Why then do we not desire (with the Apostl) to be dissolved and be with
Christ, seeing it is every ways b^tter, than to ^ive here prolonging of our
woeful banishment. It is impossible that he should dye ill, who has lived
well, Psalm. 119.
neither on the contrary that he should dye well, who has lived ill, and what
is our li^e, which we are so fearful to be deprived of, but a scene of
mockeries, a sea of miseries, where, in what ship soever we embarke our selves,
whether decked with gold, silver, and pretiou^ stones, or but simple wood, alls
one, there is no avoiding of the swelling wa^es, of being often dashed against
the opposite rocks, and of^ner grounded on perilous flats and sholes. Happy ^s
he who has passed this dangerous sea, happy he who is safely landed in the
haven, and hat^ no more reason to complain, who chances ^o dye before he is
well struck in ye^rs, than one for coming too soon to his journie^ end. ^hy
then should we fear death which is but the end of our labors, the beg^nning of
our recompense? It is the judgment of God upon all flesh, which none in former
ages could ever avoid, nor ever will in any ensuing times, all must follow as
many as went before, and we are all borne on this condition, for to tend
thither where every thing must go ^eath is the end of all, to many a remedy,
and every good man's wish, as being to godly men, no other than a deliverance
from all pain and grief, and the utmost bound beyond which no harm of theirs
can advance a pace. What madness then were it in us, to oppose our selves to
such an universal decre of Almighty Gods, to refuse to pay a tribute, that is
duly exacted of every one, and pretend to an exemption that is granted to
none? How much more sublime is the Christian Theology, which teaches us to
make life the subject of our patience, and death of our desires. Solin de
mirab. mundi.
The Swan if we will believe Solinus, lives ever groaning and sorrowful, and
only sings, and rejoices upon the point of death, and so it becomes the godly
to do, who are to depart to the fruition of an endless joy. So did that white
aged swan holy Simeon, welcome his approaching death with this melodious song,
Nunc dimittis etc. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace: and why
then should we lament when this poor cottage of ours does fall to ruin, as if
we were ignorant that when this house of earth, our habitation here, decays,
God will prepare us a better one in heaven, a house not made by hands, but an
everlasting one.

The first Paragraph.
Whosoever lies in a hard, and painful bed, makes little difficulty to rise
at any time, only they seek excuses and delays, who lie lazing in their
softest down, and are unwilling to forgo their warmer nests. Is thy life
irk^ome to thee? I trust then thou will not be sorry to pass to a better one;
have thou thy hearts content? in my opinion then it is high time for thee to
close up thy days, before thy prosperity overwhelme thee (as it has many
more) with some disasterous ruin at the last: Wherefore (says Tertullian) we
are no ways to fear that which secureth us from all other fears. God delivers
that man from a long torment, to whom he allows but a short term of life.
Which con^^deration made the holy Martyr Saint Cyprian, when the Emperor
Valerian pronounced this sentence against him: We command that Thracius Cyprian
be executed by the sword; to lift up his hands and eyes to heaven, and
cheerfully answer, God be ever praised, Lib. de bono mortis.
who vouchsafes to deliver me from the fetters of this body of mine. St.
Amb^ose could not but wonder at some, who when they were to die, would rather
expect till they were thrust out by force, than leave their bodies prison
willingly; and what is there in this world and life, says he, but strife, with
anger, lust, and gluttony, and the like? Of the same opinion was St.
Chrysostom, when he demands: In c. 1. ad Colos.
O man, what can thou say? Thou art invited to a Kingdom, to the Kingdom of
the son of God, and art thou so stupid to stand shrugging at it like a lazy
sluggard, and doubt whether thou should accept of it or no? If thou were
daily to expose thy self for such a fortune to a thousand deaths, ought
thou not to encounter with them all? And whilst there is nothi g, thou would
not attempt to gain some petty Princedome on the earth, will thou not outdare
a thousand swords, will thou not leap into the fi^e, to become a
joynt-inheritor with the only Son of God? nay out of a too inordina^e love
unto this body of thine, thou do even lament and weep ^or to be taken
hence, and clingst un^o the poor commodities of this present life; can it be
that death should appear unto thee such a ^orrid thing? Without doubt th
negligence, and pleasure thou live in is the cause thereof, for those who
live in misery, desire nothing more than to be freed from the thrall of living,
and fly away to rest. Me thinks we can be compared o nothing more fitly than
to birds, sluggish young ones, who by their good wills would never leave their
nests, and yet the longer they abide in them, the more faint and unweldy they
become, and with good reason I compare this present life to such a nest, whose
best materia^ls are straw, and dust, for show ^re your most magnificent
Palaces, and even those Courts of Princes which shine the brightest with
burnisht gold, and precious stones, and I will account them nothing superior
to the swallows nest, since at the first approach of winter you shall behold
them all come dropping down.

Even so (S. C^rysome thou golden Orator) even so it is, at last they must all
fall indeed, and we for company, and for the most part they are the safest who
get the soonest down. In which regard the wise man congratulates with the
Just, that he was ravished away before malice had infected his understanding,
and the Angels so sharply reprehended him who showed such unwillingnesse to
dye: You are afeard to suffer (said he) and will not depart, what shall I do
with you? He has no faith of the future resurrection, who makes no speed to a
better life. If our house threatened us with ruin, should we not all avoid it
presently? if our Ship in the midst of a stormy Sea, should be in danger of
making wrack, would not our longing wishes be all set on land? In this world we
hear the fearful cracks of ruins every where, the dreadful roaring of
Storms and tempests on every side, and why then do we not seek to make for
land? Why do we not retire our selves unto our heavenly Father for securi^y,
where all our dear friends expect our coming, secure of their own safety,
solicitous of ours? O happy dead who die in our Lord, in that they rest in his
bosom as if they dyed, and in that delightful sl^mber do dye no otherwise,
than if they went to rest. So St. Steven in the midst of such a violent shower
of Stones, Acts 7.
of such a noise and murmur of those that stoned him, did notwithstanding fall
asleep in our Lord, as the Scripture testifies. John 11.
The like our Savior himself affirming of Lazarus, whom he loved so well,
Lazarus amicus noster dormit; Deuteronomy. 34,
So Moses the holy servant of Almighty God at his appointment dyed, and even as
a tend^r mother kisses her child that's sleeping in her arms, and with dear
embraces lays him down to rest, so there wants not some who affirm that
passage of Scripture to bear such a sense as if God should have taken Lazarus,
like a sleeping infant in his arm^s and in midst of his tender kisses, and
imbracements, laid him down in Abraham's bosom, Psalm. 126.
as in a bed to rest: for so, cum d^derit dilectis suis somnum, ecce haereditas
Domini; when he has laid his beloved to sleep, beh^ld (he bestows on him)
his inheritance; thrice happy are such dead as these, Apoc. 4.
of whom the Spirit can say, from henceforth now they rest from their labors,
for their works follow them, no otherwise than servants do their Lords,
children their Parents, Noble men their Princes, and attend upon them even to
the very throne of God. They usher and conduct them to Gods supremest Court,
where never any attendants under their rank and dignity are admitted in;
whosoever then is predestined to everlasting life, will praise death as the
most excellent invention, which nature has, as knowing that they can arive
unto it by no other way. And such a one who is always prepared to dye, will
keep himself in appetite by such like Discourses as these.

The 2. Paragraph.
WHy should I fear to dye; it is but to go the way which my Fathers went
before, nay more, the common beaten road of every thing: What privilege is th
s, which I alone of all others do pretend unto, when I do shun to dye? Had
I not better do that willingly, which I must do whether I will or no? since
the performance is light of that which is willingly undertaken, and necessity
gives place, where our will becomes a party. Rather why should I not embrace
that willingly, by benefit of which I shall cease to be mortal, which I have
unwillingly been so long, I received my body upon no other condition, than to
restore it back again, and am to restore it for no other end than to resume
it again to my more commodity. I have been detained hitherto from beholding of
my God, only by the tardinesse of my death, which is but the forerunner of
that better life, and that day which so many stand in fear of, as the last of
all their life, is but the birthday of an eternal one; and I take it no ways
heavily, that the Sun sets upon me here, since I expect the dawning of a
light again, which never shall be obscured by any gloomy night. O how gladly
shall I embrace that d^y, which shall assign me my habitation, and replant me
in Paradise, delivered from hence, and loosned from those bonds which detained
me here so long? I am not ignorant that I stand guilty, and convicted of many
crimes, but thy mercy, O my God, is an Ocean, and a boundless sea: into which
death shall be no readier to precipitate me off of this turfe of earth,
whereon I stand, than I to commit my self unto the vast bosom of so dear a
sea, as shall set a period to all the miseries of my mortal life. O God, that
death would mend its pace; it can never come so suddenly, so at unawares, as
not to find me ready, and desirous to go to rest; I am not such an enemy of
repose to be sor^y when a holy day comes, which may bring with it a cessation
from ^roubles and afflictions, but will rather rejoice for so good an
opportunity, of shutting up this wretched shop of life, fraught with so many
and innumerable miseries, to shake off the heavy yoke of death, and fortune,
and begin with a day which shall never end in night. O what happy tidings will
it be to hear, that my King calls for me out of this prison where I am, and
ranks me in a state of higher dignity. Open but the cage unto a bird, and there
will be no need to chase it out, but it will fly out of its own accord: Even
so I will willingly issue forth into those azure plains, as one who long since
have been over cloyed with life. Touching the place, or hour of my death, I am
nothing solicitous, let him who made me dispose of me as he ple^se, his will
shall be both the rule of life and death to me, neither can I expect any thing
of him, who is all goodness, but the best. And is it not in the potters hands,
as well to frame the vessel on his act ye wheel, as to new mould it, if it
seem good unto him? I am a vessel of that great potters making, and what
reason have I to complain, if he who made me please to unmake me? or to speak
more properly, to make me new again, and render me happy, who was miserable
before? Is he pleased to have me live? then I will live as long as it pleases
him: Is he ple^sed that I should dye? I I will not desire to have my death
respited a moments sp^ce; both my beginning and ending are wholly depending on
his holy will. Wherefore I will not only embrace willingly, but also gladly
whatsoever he shall ordain. Mihi vivere Christus est. Phil. 1.
and mori lucrum; for unto me to live is Christ; to dye is gain. I love thee,
O my most amiable God, and desire yet to love thee more ardently: O that my
heart might wholly melt away in the flame of such a love, since nothing can
make me happy beside thy self. And when and where, O my God, shall I take my
flight hence unto thee? I will follow thee, O most loving father, and at nearer
distance thou shall call me, the more readily I will obey thy call.

The third Paragraph.
THis feeling he has of death, who desires to be transpor^ed unto heaven, and
live with Christ, neither is this such an uncouth thing, for as a Physician
(says Theoph^lact) when he pe^^eives his patient to have an aversion from the
food and physic which he does prescribe, does first take an assay of them
himself, to encourage his patient to an appetite; so Christ vouchsafed to
taste first of death himself, that Christians might have no horror of dying
after him. And why then dear Christian, tho thou be of nature never so timorous
at the apprehension of death, will thou not put on such a resolution, as that
which I have set before thine eyes, and with an assured and undaunted mind,
burst forth into these ex^lamations; Psalm. 116.
Caelicem salutarem accipiam, and nomen Domini invocabo. J will receive the cup
of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I cannot deny but it is a
bitter one, yet it is no other than that which my Savior drunk of unto my
health, upon his bloody Cross, and le^^ to me to pledge. It is no other than
that fatal cup of death, which Christ drank out of his own free election, and
all others must drink of inevitable necessity, and why then should I alone
refuse it? All whose lives have a beginning must likewise have an end, but to
begin a fresh a life again which never shall have end. What a vain fear then
is this that startles me? what a silly pensiveness that tempts my constancy?
Calicem, quem dedit mihi Pater, etc. and shall I not drink of the Chalice which
my father has presented me withal, which Christ himself has drunk of to
me, and filled me out again; am I a mortal man, and shall I not learn to die?
Alexander lying once dangerously sick, some of his friends more solicitous than
needed for his health, advised him to beware of Philip his Physician, as one
who had a design to poison him. The King, the next time the Physician visited
him, with a potion he had prepared to administer unto him, did no more but
receive the potion in one hand, and reach him out in the other the letter to
read, containing the advice which his friend had given him, and whilst he
prepared himself, to drink it off, he steadfastly regarded the Physicians
face, to note whether in the reading thereof he might discover any signs of
guiltiness, but perceiving the innocence of the man, from the constancy of
his countenance, without any more delay he drunk it up. In this manner
receiving that cup which Christ my only Physician and Savior has ordained,
and presented me withal, to cast me into a profound, and quiet sleep, I will
fasten my eyes upon my Physician whilst I drink it off; I will steadfastly
regard the countenance of my crucified Lord, wherein I shall read written in
lively Characters the countenance of that infin^te love he bears me, and with
a constant and unappaled mind will I drink it up: which will confer so much
the more of health, the more affectionately I shall welcome it. And thus (dear
Christian) death when it arrives, will easily be overcome, if before it
arrives, we arm our selves against the fear of it, by often revolving it in
our memories.

intaglio etching of an altar set for eucharist Emblem. 3.

Frequenting of ye Sacrament.



The third Sign, Of Predestination,
IS the frequent use of the holy Sacrament, which is expressed by the sacred
Eucharist. The words, Hic est Panis de coelo descendens, and si quisex ipso
manducaverit non moriatur. This is the Bread that came down from heaven; he
that eats thereof shall not dye. It is said of the ancient Christians, that
they persevered in the doctrine of the Apostles, and communion of breaking
bread, as it has been piously observed, that with proportion, as this custom
grew cold in the primitive Church, so their fervor of Spirit, the fire of
Charity, and consequently all sanctity decayed. It is wonderful how the
devil bestirs him here, and what plots the crafty enemy has on foot, to
divert as many as is possible from the frequent use of the holy Eucharist. What
bars does he not set in our way, what pretentions, what impediments does he
not devise to hinder us? Now he suggests unto us doubts in point of faith,
which when he sees us with a kind of horror to reject, he then persuades us to
abstain for reverence sake, or would make us believe, that we should find the
more gust in it the more seld^me we frequent it. If this does not take, he
proposes to our imitation the example of some (otherwise good Christians) who
in this are nothing so assiduall as they ought, then he objects what men will
say, and what offense they may conceive thereat; now he will pester you with a
world of business, now store you with plenty of strange cogitations, and
scruples of conscience, and now again set you at mutual jarres with others,
whilst he blows the coals of have and dissension. He renders ones mind dry
and aride, and soaks out of it all gusts of spiritual things, and others
troubled and disquieted: so that nothing is more irksome unto it than to put
himself in way of preparation to the holy Sacrament: In a third, if he can
prevail no other way, he musters up whole troops of extravagant thoughts, that
so at east he may exclude him from this sacred banquet. Some other there are
again whom he deceives under I know not what religious pretext, and persuades
them at least to defer it, though not to omit it quite: and thus the wicked
impostour coyn^s a thousand false pretenses, and shift, to eferre from day to
day the frequentation of the holy Sacram^nt, and heaps delay upon delay, adds
^urpose to purpose: appoynts this day, then the next, whilst in the mean time
both weeks, months, and year^s are passed over by us without repairing unto
our Maker, unless it be very rarely, and then too only of force and necessity.

The first Paragraph.
Luke 14.
ET ceperunt omnes simul excusare: and they began all to excuse themselves,
says the Gospel. This had bought a farm, this a yoke of Oxen, that other was
newly married, so that none is at leisure to repair to Christ: but examine
these excuses, and for all their fair gloss, you will find them mere
senseless ones, for what were it for one of us, for a short hours space to
leave his c^res at his farm, his oxen in the stable, and his wife at home, and
apply our selves to that which so nearly concerns our salvation; If we were
requested to prune a vineyard, or to till the ground, we might with good reason
choose rather to sleep at home, than work abroad: But when we are invited to a
banquet, to be guests of our Savior Christ, where our food is to be no other
than himself, to excuse our selves, and refuse to go, shows a most rusticall
behavior, and speaks us either extremely mad or impudent. We should appear
right Adams offspring, if we shund God Almighties sight, when he were angry,
but to avoid him thus, when out of his great mercy he beholds us with so
gracious an eye, when he calls, and lovingly invites us to his Table, so richly
furnished with all celestial rarities, is the part of brute beasts, and not of
men. But to set off our excuse with a fairer color, we pretend nothing
dishonest, or less becoming us, as theft, adultery, or the like, but excuse
our offense and negligence with as fair pretenses as can be imagined. For what
^arm ^s there say you, in matrimony, and the solicitude of our domestical
affairs, in buying cattle, purchasing of land: and what good can there be in
these, when once they avert us from the ^overaignst good of all, from our
souls salvations? We are so to cherish our bodies as our souls receive no
detriment the while, so to purchase land, as not to deprive our selves of
Heaven; when we are invited to this great supper, we ought presently to go,
laying aside the care of all other things, no thought of our farms, our oxen,
our wives, no solicitude of any business ought to interrupt us then, when we
entertain discourse, at this royal banquet with the King of Angels, but also
many many times we become so impudent as not to be ashamed to answer flatly,
non possum venire, I cannot come, and what is that but to say, I will not come;
Oh dear Christians, is this the way think you, to obtain his favor?
miserable as we are, and to none more injurious than to our selves, what is
this but to fly fron the fire when we freeze for cold, to abuse our Physician
when we lie desperately sick, the more needing his help, the less sensible we
are of our own infirmity, and to have the sweet and delicious Manna in
loathing, whilst we passionately long after Garlic and Onions. God formerly
signified unto the people of Israel by Moses, that they should gather Manna
every day, except the Sabbath, on which they were appointed to take their rest.
This holy Sacrament is our Manna by infinite degrees more excellent then theirs
which we may take our fill of during our term of life, till the Sabbath of
death invite us to our rest. But what do we the while but imitate our first
parent, for as he (says Gerson) not eating of the tree of life whilst he
might, was afterward justly punished in being debarred to eat of it, when he
desired it; So we behave our selves so fastidiously, as we will not approach
unto this holy refection, whilst we may, but whilst we gladly accept of the
least invitation to another bo^rd, we never come to this of our Savior, but
very rarely and much against our wills. We are negligent in nothing so much as
in the point of our salvation, in this we are only careless, in other things
we are vigilant enough. For this respect God in these words sends us to school
unto the Ant, Vade ad formicam o piger, Prove. 6.
and disce supientiam. Go O thou sluggard unto the Ant, and learn wisdom of
her. This little creature can tell only by instinct of nature, that winter is
no fit season to make provision in, and therefore it provides its self of food
in the summer, which it hoords up till then, how far more diligent ought we to
be than they, since our Savior commending unto us this food of immortality,
does affirm that, Si quis man ducaverit ex hoc pane, vivet in aeternum. If any
shall eat of this bread, he shall live eternally. Wherefore those who are
predestined to this eternal life, never cease to make provision of this
vital food, against the winter of ensuing death, and this was his intent who
bequeathed this Sacrament unto us, not to be adored, but to nourish us, and as
we maintain our bodies health, by duly receiving of our corporal food, who
otherwise by that natural heat which is predominant in us should be consumed
away, so likewise the soul by repairing often to this f od is conserved in
life, which otherwise would be destroyed by the impu^e fire of his
concupiscence* Hence it is that Saint In^ocentius so carefully admonishes us,
to take heed least by deferring too long the receaving of this holy Sacrament,
we might incur t e danger of a spiritual death And S. Hilarion to the same
effect, it is to be feared (says he) least those who far absent themselves
from the body of Christ, be likewise far estranged from their salvation; For
whosoever abstaines from sinning, cease not to communicate, but this is that
which we desire, this is but our common impediment, we rather choose to abstain
from holy communion, then from sin, and will sooner leave of to frequent this
table, then our lewd behavior. Even this way which of all others our Savior
invented as the most sweet and efficacious, we cannot be brought to correct our
manners, and amend our lives. We believed the lying Serpent affirming to us, we
should become like to God, and yet hardly credit our Sav our the truth it
self, who assures us that by eating of this food, we shall be changed into
him, Qui manducat meam carnem and bibit meum sanguinem, John. 6.
in me manet, and ego in eo, Our Savior Christ appoynts us to receive this
Sacrament in memory of his death, and who can doubt but he commends withal the
often frequenting it, yet we who on the one side cannot but approve his
ordination as most just, on the other transgress it by our tardy receiving it.
All the holy fathers commend most earnestly unto us the frequent use of this
holy mystery, and we attribute much unto their counsel and authority, but
more unto our own vicious inclinations; we have many Saint-like and holy men
for guides, we see the lights of their good examples, but will not follow them.

The second Paragraph.
IF as often as one received the blessed Sacrament he should improve by some
great sum of money his temporal estate, there were no need to persuade any
to frequent it often, none but would be sensible enough of such golden reasons,
nay it would be rather requisite to take some order to repress the multitude
of communicants, than to invent motives to incite them for to come. Miserable
blindness! we see gold, and are taken with it, and we despise the hidden
treasures of the Euchari^^ only because we do not consider them. And what is
all the gold in the world, but a little dust compared to this peerless
Jewel, which no living crea ure can value to its worth? This sacred Eucharist
protecteth us from committing deadly sins, it enervates the vicious
propensions of the mind, enlightens our understanding, excitates our will,
sereneth our conscience, arms us against the assaults of the enemy, enables us
to withstand adversity, defends us from falling in prosperity, and carefully
directs not to fail in going right. This holy Sacrament gives us a pledge of
future glory, and withal begets in us a contempt of death, and a desire of
Heaven, the moderation of our passions, a horror of sin, a love of virtue, an
entire victory over our selves, and perseverance in good. But you will say,
perhaps my mind is so aride, vain, 'tepid, and defiled, as I even tremble to
repair unto it. This excusation is either evil, or none at all, the more of
these imperfections thou discoverest in thy self, the more nec^ssary ^t is
thou should frequent this holy Sacrament. Is thy mind polluted? make haste
then unto this Sacrament, which is the very fountain of purity. Art thou ill
disposed? it is a sovereign remedy, an approved antidote against all the
diseases of the mind. Art thou hungry? behold the bread of Angels. Art thou
benumbed with cold? make speed unto it, it is an ardent fire. Do thine enemies
molest thee? take courage, this Arsenall will furnish thee with all sorts of
weapons to defend thy self. Art thou sorrowful and afflicted? this is that
wine which cheeres the hearts of men. Do thou seek often dainties? they are
no where to be found but here in this banquet, the repast of Kings. Do thou
long to be in heaven? here thy charges are defraid, here thou will be
furni^hed with far better provision for thy journey than Elias wa^,
traveling toward Mount Horeb: If the very touch of our Saviors garment could
stop a bloody flux, what disease is there which the touch of his sacred body
cannot cure? But I am unworthy you will reply again, who approach too often to
this sacred Communion, which I can never receive with reverence enough. D^are
Christians for his blessed sake, let us not entitle our want of reverence to
our slothfulness: believe St. Thomas that Angelical Doct^r, melias est ex
amore accedere quam ex timore abstinere. It is better to repair to it out of
love, than to abstain for fear: And Saint Ambrose interpreting th^se words of
our Savior, panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie, of the blessed
Sacrament; If it be our daily bread (says he) why is it a year before you
recei^e it? rather why do you not rec^ive that daily, which daily will prof^t
you? live so as you may worthily receive it every day, for he who is unworthy
to receive it every day, will not be worthy to receive it once a yea^e. And in
another place, if our Saviors blood (says he) as often as it is shed, is shed
for the remission of sins, I ought alwa^^s to be receiving, that always my
sins may be remitted me, and it behooves me who^ver sin, to be ever
providing ^e^ of a remedy. Gennadius Marsiliensis says, Lib. de dogm. Eccl.
cap. 13.
I neither praise nor dispraise the custom of communicating every d^y; but
this I would advise and counsel all to communicate every Sunday, always
provided that we come with no determinate will of sinning any more, which
kind of pr^paration is more easily prescribed, than the riddance of our mind
of all affection to any vitiousnesse, that is, never thereafter to offend God
more; for certainly he should show himself very ungrateful toward his Maker,
who would not at least have a will for his sake never to stain his conscience
with any sin, for touching such as these, the Master of the feast with good
reason professed, dico vobis quod nemo virorum illorum gustabit coenam meam. I
say unto you, that none of those men shall taste of my Supper. But alas, O
Lord, are they not the self same men who refused to taste of thy Supper, and
do thou now decree it in punishment of their offense? Even so it is, that
which they desire is their own torment, and what wickedness they voluntarily
embrace, is nothing else but their own pun^shme^t Samaria being oppressed with
the misery of a grievous famine, the Prophet Elizius foretold that shortly they
should see the price of corn incredibly abated: whereupon one of the Nobles in
deriding his Prophecy Si nubes pregnantissimae frumenti pluant, nunquid ideo
sa^ina tam vilis erit p etii: If the clouds, (said he) should be great with
come and rain it down upon us, yet it would never be sold at so vile a price;
to whom Elize^s answered: Thou shall see it with thy own eyes, but shall not
eat of it, and so it came to pass. This is right the punishment of many in
these days, they see plenty of this heavenly bread but never taste of it. They
see men communicating in every Church they look into, but Communicate not
themselves: They are bid Depart; because they will go whether the P^iest will
or no. They are excluded from this holy Table, for no other reason, but because
they exclude themselves.

The third Paragraph.
AS for the Holy men to be deprived long of this bread of Life, they like true
Sons of GOD interpret it as a sign of their Fathers high displeasure, and
indignation: far they are from neglecting any occasion of receiving it, for
they are not ignorant with how great and Fatherly a providence Almighty GOD
has provided for every several Creature their proper food; Eagles prey on
lesser Foul, the Whale devoures the lesser Fish, the Lions other savage
Beasts, Horses and more Domestic Cattle feed upon Oats and Hay. And for Man,
bread growing on the Earth is ordained for Food of such as have no higher
ambition but to be sons of men; but for those who aspire to become sons of
God, this bread descending from heaven is their chiefest sustenance; this
celestial bread, this bread of the Sons of God, this bread of Angels with an
ardent desire, with a humble affection, with a tender reverence they receive
most frequently, and rather choose out of piety to incur the note of
presumption by declaring themselves Children, than of enemi^s, out of a too
faulty bashfulnesse. During which banquet, if our blessed Savior should
address his speech in this manner to any of the number of predestinate:
Consider seriously what I have suffered for the love of thee, thou may well
count the thorns my head pierced, but can never number those torments I have
sustained for t^ee in every part of me besides; ^y body was all goard with
boudy whips and nails; but how much my heart has suffered is beyond
expression. It was little less than a death, I suffered for thee even in the
garden, when the anguish of my mind drew as much blood from me, as the
Soldiers afterward in my flagellation: And now consider with t^y self, what
mine enemies inflicted on me, when even my best friends spared me not; thou
know upon how hard a bed I was content for thy sake to render up my Ghost,
and my love (that thou may know what an ardent one it was) would resolve on
no death to dye for thee, but the most bitter and ignominious of all, when it
finding none more bitter and ignominious than the Cross made choice of it. And
thus behold how I have dyed for thee, and have been still ready to dye for thee
a thousand times; Wherefore tell me, what will thou suffer for me again? if
thou desire that my love to thee should be perpetu^ll, thou must love me
again, who have so loved thee. For my part, I have loved thee unto death, even
unto the death of the Cross, it rests that thou will declare, how far thou will extend thy love for me again. Who now all of that happy company will not
presently answer him, all bathed in affectionate tears, even unto the death, O
my most loving Lo^d, even unto the Cross it self, so it be thy divine
pleasure my love shall extend it self: And who shall grant unto me that
happiness to dye for thee, O Jesus, my sweetest Jesus! or who am I, that I
should be thought worthy for to dye for thee! O what a love was this of thine
my dearest life, that thou would suffer thus, that thou would dye thus
for me, without any the least merit or desert of mine; such sighs as these,
such most chaste aspirations use commonly to be the table talk at this sacred
banquet, and thus a soul becomes intimately united unto Almighty God.

For which reason we place this frequency of Communion (provided that our
affections be sincere at least, though otherwise not so inflamed as we could
wish) among the principal signs of Predestination. But alas, there are but
too too many Christians yet, who whatsoever is delivered to them by way of
Sermon, or of written books are so dead asleep in the Lethargy of their
deboysht lives, as neither the examples of the more pious sort, nor admonitions
of holy Saints, can stir them up to a more frequent use of this holy
Sacrament.

O Christians, what Rocks of Ice, what deadly cold is that which freezes up
your hearts, that thus you avoid the comfortable beams of this all-chee^ing
Sun? Do you not perceive that this is nothing else than the mere stratagems of
your enemy, who endeavors all he can to extinguish wholly in us the fire of
this divinest love, to the end that being all stiffly frozen with this
pernicious cold of mind, we may live no otherwise then if we were wholly dead,
perish in the filth and sordidnesse of sin, and never arrive to the kingdom
of the l^ving? but those who love our Savior Christ with constant affections,
are delighted with nothing more than in often repairing to him: for as
Cassiodorus says admirably well, Inaudita est ditectio quae amicum amat, and
praesentiam ejus non amat. It is such an affection as was never heard of, that
one should love his friend, and not be delighted in his company.

intaglio etching of an empty altar Emblem. IV.

Renouncing All Worldly things.

What things were gain some those I counted loss for Christ Philip: 3. V.



The fourth Sign, Of Predestination,
IS an entire renunciation of all we have, which has for its Device, a bare
Altar dispoyled of its ornaments with this Motto, Quae mihi fuerunt Lucra,
Phil. 3.
haec arbitratus sum propter Christum detrimenta: But what things were gain to
me, those I counted loss for Christ. Our Savior proclaims aloud; Qui non
renuntiat, etc. whosoever renounceth not a^l he stands possessed of, cannot be my
Disciple, He commands to relinquish all, he counsels us to dispossess our
selves of every thing, and who then that has any Christ an blood in him, but
will put on this reso^ution. I had rather become poor than Gods enemy; I had
rather be deprived of all my substance then of his holy grace.

Poverty has made many merchants, not of spices, Draperies, or such
commodities, but of heaven, Simile est regnum coelorum homini negotiatori, etc.
The Kingdom of heaven, (says our Savior) is like a Merchant travailing in
quest of richest pearls, who having found one more precious than all the rest,
goes and sells all that he has to purchase it. And such a Merchant as this is
so far from thinking he has received any detriment by departing with all he
had, as he accounts his stock exceedingly improved, by the purchase of a Jewel
of such inestimable price. He but receives a bill of exchange of our Savior
Christ upon the delivery of those slight comm^^ities, the payment of which will
^ender him happy above measure, he has the whole Kingdom of heaven morgaged
unto him upon the venture of a small sum of Gold, and purchases himself a
mi^hty Kingdom, not only with leaving a few acres of land, but also by his
preparation of mind of leaving it. The owner (says St. Chrysostom) of such a
pearl, though it lie concealed in some small cabinet, and all be ignorant of
his treasure, is not ignor^nt himself how rich a man he is. We come into the
world to traffic, and not to spend our time in idleness, neither is there
any one so poor and needy who has not sufficient to advance his fortune by
this merchandise, (since as Saint Austen says, God only requires our selves,
an^ cares not but in regard of our selves, for any thing we have) nor any one
so rich and wealthy, who in prudence can think much to depart with all he has
to purchase such an inestimable gemme. Yet this is a kind of traffic, which
exacts not so much of us, to depart from our goods, as to be ready when
occasion shall be offered to depart from them, it consist, not so much in
depriving us of our substance, as in bringing us to this resolution: rather to
^pare our souls than money, when need requires, to become a beggar, rather
than an enemy of God. It far more becomes us to be prodigal of our moneys to
save our sou es, (either in freely bestowing it, or bearing patiently the loss
thereof) than to be prodigal of our souls, and save our money. And this we
avouch to be a sign of Predestination, which not only by the light of
Christian faith, but even of reason it self does manifestly ap^eare.

The first Paragraph.
STi^pon having lost together with his Count ey, his wife and children, and
^scaping himself, the only, but happy remainder of the public ru^ne, was
demanded of Demetrius whether he had l st all he had or no? To whom he
answered, he ^ad lost nothing at all; for Omnia mea mecum sunt, I carry with
me, says he, all the goods I have: The like Bias (in the like mischance,)
affirmed of himself, that he carried his substance not on his shoulders, but
in his breast, not where men's eyes might see it, but where their minds may
judge of it. This contempt of earthly things, which in Heathens was accounted
the sign of a great spirit, in Christians is an assured sign of
Predestination to eternal life; and he is a valiant soldier indeed of Jesus
Christ, who after some mighty loss can say, Omnia mea mecum porto, I bear all
my riches along with me; my God is all.

It is reported of St Francis of Ass^sum that with incredible delight he passed
over whole nights together, in the only consideration, and with often
repeating of these four short words, Deus meus and omnia, My God and all. The
example of which admirable Saint we ought all to imitate, and to glory with
him in all our necessities, in saying, Deus meus and omnia. Let others seek
after what other things they please, let them be taken and delighted with what
else they will, I seek for God alone: God is only my desire, all my delight, O
Deus meus and omnia. I freely resign to others all share in honors and all my
part in whatsoever pleasures and delights; give me my God, and I shall have
every thing. I surrender whole worlds to others, and envy them not their
mountains of gold, and precious stones; I care not for their exquisite
delights; my God is unto me in place of all. There is nothing so good, nothing
so delicious or so fair which the chiefest and supremest good does not surpass
both for good, fair, and delicious by infinite degrees; O Deus meus and omnia!
Alas how many desires do often inflame my breast? with what several fires, for
the most part do I burn, what a tide of various fancies do carry my ^eart
away, insomuch as like the frantique youth in the Gospel, M^^^. 17.
sometimes I am dragged into the water, sometimes into the fire, and what are
all these things which I pursue with so much eagernes, but vain, fading, and
for the most part infamous, such we never have any long assurance of, but
either they soon dye unto their own, or he must dye to them. O my God, my
love, and my all, what is it that I can possibly desire, whose want thou can
not abundantly supply? O God art thou not all unto m? my drink, my food, my
rest, my joy, my pleasure, the height of all my honor? O God, thou art all and
more than all to me. For though I feed on those viands which most take my
appetite; refresh me with that drink which best relishes my taste; enjoy that
pleasure which most affects my mind; yet what is all this feeding, this
refreshing, this joy to me? Deus meus and omnia. Ah one refreshing of thine,
one enjoying of thee, is to be refreshed indeed, is to enjoy the quintessence
of every good. But in the mean while, labor oppresses, grief afflicts,
ca^es distract us, our riches diminish, our friends forsake us, our lives
consume away, and we become the subject of others inju^ies and scorn: Nothing
of all this touches my fear (says the holy Apostle) neither do I mak^ my
life more precious than my self, Acts 20.
so that I may consummate my course, neither can all these, though they
altogether rush upon me, any ways indammage me, if God that sovereign good
undertake but the defense of me, Deus meus and omnia. Thou art unto me, O my
good God, O goodness^ it self, rest in my labors, pleasure in my grief,
security in my cares, and the only true riches in my poverty. Thou art my
strong Bulwark against all the furious assaults of men, thou art my refuge
whatsoever evil oppresses me, and finally thou art all unto me whatsoever I
can wish for, or desire. All abundance which is not God, I will account but as
mere beggary. Wherefore then do we seek to ^uench our thirst with these ^uddy
streams, when we have so Crystal a fountain head as this, where we may drink
our fills? In having God we have all whatsoev^r we can desire. If poverty
afflict any one, if fortune frown upon him, as his joy may be less, so
certainly wi l be his grief; when fortune can challenge nothing of him as its
own, nor death bereave him of any thing that is another man's.

The second Paragraph.
NEither does this poor man yield to him in felicity, who being rich in his
possessions, is yet contented with nothing, that he has, since he keeps his
riches in his Coffers not in his heart, and would never pine away for sorrow
should he lose it all, for, Sine dolor amittitur quicquid sine amore
possidetur, quae vero ardenter diligimus babita, graviter suspiramus ablata, we
lose that without grief (says St. Gregory) which without affection we enjoyed,
and ^nely s^gh grievously to depart with that which we loved tenderly whilst
we were poss^ssed of. But that good which can only render others so, none c^n
be possessed or bereaved of against his will: Neither is any thing to be
acc^unted good of which we may ever be deprived of. Go then Satan and
counterfeit thy self a messenger, the family of most patient Job is not so
wholly exting^ished yet, as there remain none of that lineage who can renounce
all they have. Run therefore and cry as loud as rhou wilt, tell such an one,
you have lost all you had, you are wholly impoverished; hear what an answer he
will give, Nisi ego illam, fortassis illa me perdidisset. If I had not lost it,
perhaps it would have proved the loss of me; I am but so much the lighter to
go on my way toward heaven. God in freeing me from a dear, but perilous
burden, has best provided for my security, wherefore I will not account that
my loss which God intended for a benefit. An^ why should I to no end and in
vain afflict my self for it? I knew when I possessed it I must forgo it
once, and now I am the more mine own, when I can say that is mine own no
more. Do thou hear this O Christian? and thou too, do thou hear this, O
thou hellish fiend? This discourse, this feelin^ have they of their riches who
are predestined to everlasting life; neither can they ever lose so much, as
not to retain this liberty to say; It is no loss we sustain, but only a
gainful kind of trade, where for a little expense we purchase our selves
u^va^uable wealth, we buy heaven for a small portion of ground we tread on.

intaglio etching of a rose tree Emblem V.

Patience in Tribulation

Blesed are ye y^ weep now for ye shall laugh Luck 6: V. 21



The fifth Sign Of Predestination,
IS patience in the midst of long affliction, signified by the pricky
Rose-tree, with the w^r^, Beati qui nunc fletis quia ridibi^is: Luke 6.2^.
Blessed a^e ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Abraham objected to the ri h
Glutton in his torments, Recordare filiquia recipisti bona in vita tue, Lazarus
similiter m^la, nunc tu cruciaris, laetatur Lazarus: Son remember that thou
in thy life time receivedst g^od things, and Lazarus evil things; Now
therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented. In thy l fe time thou did
rejoice and Lazarus suffered, now Lazarus rejoices whilst thou art tormented.

Thus by the just judgment of God the courses of things do vary; we are either
to suffer here in this world, or afterward in that other, which we are not
acquainted with; wherefore we are ^rudently to make our election of one of
them, since they imply a necessity which no man can avoid. St. Chrysostom
says, If thou see any one addicted to virtue, and withal opp^est with any
c^lamity, you may well account him happy, in that whilst he satisfies in this
li^e for the sins which he has committed, he has a reward p epared for him in
the next.

It is impossible that he that enterpriseth to f^ght against the vices of the
time, should not incur great persecution: It mis-beseems the Champion of God to
attend u^ to his pleasures; those who presented themselves in the lists, came
not with their stomachs overcharged with me^t; and what are these present
things but so many lists to fight in, so many combats, wars, oppressures, and
hard exigents? There is another time assigned us to rest, in this we are to
expect nothing but tu^moyles, and adversities. There is none so simple when he
is armed and prepared to the combat to look for ease; why did thou enter the
list, if that be thy pretense? why did thou undertake to wage a war against
nature and voluptuousness; Neither let it afflict thee that others live in
peace, whilst thou art fiercely assaulted with tempt^tions, for wh^t were that
but to condemn the holy Apostle of imprudence, who thus exhorts us: Omne
gaudium existimate fratres mei cum in tentationes varias incideritis. Dear
brethren, 1 James.
esteem it all your joy when you shall fall into sund y temptations. There is
no man more unhappy than he who never experienced any adversity, for it is an
evident sign that God rejects hi^ as a faint-hearted soldier. The fight
against adversity is only worthy to be presented on honors Theater. Therefore
it is an assured token of our future beatitude, to rejoice in our sufferings,
and even then when we are baited with evils on every side, to lift up a
cheerful and erected mind to heaven, though our tears in the mean time run
trickling down our cheeks. Our Savior Christ well knew that we were only
rich in our sufferings, that we had no solid joy except the hope of our future
recompense, and yet he confidently bids us, gaud^t and exultate, to exult and
rejoice as if already we were comple^tly happy. Whereas on the contrary, how
often do we vainly lament and afflict our selves? how often like little
infants do we childishly make our moan, and shrink aside out of pure fear
at every blow? not having apprehension enough to discern that it is the
fatherly and health-restoring hand of God, which launceth us, whereas no child
but has discretion enough, to know that the gashes which Surgeons make are
our cures, and first overtures of our recovery. And so in like manner God only
lances us to cure us and recover us, and no ways to deprive us of our lives,
as St. Peter witnesses, Si quid patiamini propter justitiam beati, 1 pet. 3.
If you suffer any thing for righteousness sake (says he) you are happy in
it; for it is a singular grace if any of you suffer, and that unjustly any
tribulation for the conscience of God, otherwise what were it to suffer
injuries when you do amiss? but if you tolerate them patiently for doing
well, you will become gracious with Almighty God. To which effect St. Gregory
likewise says: It often happens that the elect, who are directed on the way
of eternal felicity, are subject here to perpetual adversit^es, in being
despised by every one, and accoun^ed unworthy of all worldly favor; whilst in
the mean time their virtues set them off most brightly in the eyes of their
secret Judge, and they shine most gloriously in the merits of their lives, they
refused not to be despised, whilst they fear to be honored, they extenuate
their bodies with continency, whilst in their souls they singularly increase
in their dilection, they always inure their minds to patience, and rejoice
with an erected mind as often as they suffer injuries for righteousness sake.

The first Paragraph.
IT is not the wont of the eternal providence to nourish a virtuous person in
delights, but it tryes hardens and apts him to its peculiar ends: Yet so, as in
the mean while it assures him, Cum transieris per aquas tecum ero: When thou
shall pass by waters I will be with thee, and the floods shall not overwhelme
thee; when thou walk in fire thou shall not burn, neither shall the flames
scorch thee; for so God uses to drench us both in water and fire, but suffers
us neither to be bu^nt nor swallowed up, he makes trial of us both in freezing
cold, and glowing heat, but for those whom he has predestined to everlasting
life, he neither permits the fire to consume them, nor waters drown them, for
God is faithful (says the Apostle) who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that which you are able, but will make your profit of temptation that you may
be able to sustain.

Blosius does treat excellent well of this sign of predestination, where he
affirms that there is no more infallible sign of divine election, than when a
man undergoes affliction or what else adversity, not only without repugnance,
but with patience and due submission, since nothing, says he, is more
profitable for him than to suffer; And this is the inestimable jewel of that
ring, with which God espouses to himself a pious soul; whose prerogative is
so great as St. Chrysostom does solemnly affirm. Nihil esse melius quam male
pati propter Deum. That nothing is better than to suffer evil for Almighty
God. For then the elect may well be said to drink of the torrent in the way,
Psalm. 109.
for which their heads shall be exalted, afterward even to heaven. Now they
are pressed down and trodden under foot, that afterward like palms they they
may rise the higher for it: It is (...) verity which God would have us
thoroughly penetrate, that the good which we aspire to, is infinite, and of
difficile access, a d therefore not to be atta^^ed to bu^ by much p^ine and
lab^ur, in conf^rmity to which that holy Ancho^i^e said excellent well, Marcus.
that God well knowing our ^mbecillity ^oth use to bestow no remarkable favor
upon any one whom he has not first apted for the receiving of it by some or
other ^rud^nt calamity. So Moses had no ^oon^r forsaken the Court of Pharaoh by
the e^press command of God himself, but presently both poverty, ignomi^y, and
contempt, with the extreme danger ^f his life, by the procurement of the King:
And lastly, his flight and banishment did all consp^re to work his destruction.
We may perceive says St. Gregory, th^se whom God elects by their pious
actions, and bitter sufferings; whom likewise it may be gathered how rigorously
our just Judge will punish the reprobate at the latter day, when he is so
severe now toward those, wh^m he affects most.

Wherefore those Chistians do much deceive themselves; who imagine to go
whole (as it were) to heaven, without being well bruised before, for let them
but take a general view of of all, and they will find, that the richer men are
in virtue, the more they are stored with tribulations, and that those commonly
who most abound in wealth, and are the greatest favorites of fortune, are
those who most excel in wickedness. Such beasts as are designed for the
shambles, we see are suffered freely to grase in the best pastures, whilst
others are tired out with toil and labor; even so those who are predestined
to heaven, and not suffered at liberty to disport themselves, but are always
with afflictions. Insomuch as the same Blosius truly affirms from the
authority of another holy person. Quemcunque Deus potioribus donis exornare
sublimiterque transformare decrevi^, eum non blande and mol iter lavare se^
totum in mare amaritudi^is i^mergere consuevit. That when God once decrees to
advance a man to any eminent degree (of perfection) and endow him with his
rich^st favors, he uses not only to dip him lightly in, but even to plunge him
into a whole sea of bitterness.

The second Paragraph.
THE Doctrine of Hippocrates and Galen is, to preserve and cherish our selve^:
to hate and abnegate our selves is the Doctrine of Christ. Insomuch, as all
those who have ever attained to celestial beatitude, may appropriate to
themselves that saying of Them^stocles, 1 Cor. 12.
Perieramus nisi periissemus, we had perished, if we had not perished. Many
have been preserved by being lost, and without doubt as many had b ene as
unhappily lost, if God by their happy loss had not prevented it. And So Saint
Paul, when others imagined him utterly to be lost, began then first of all to
think that he had found himself, Placet mihi in infirmitatibus, etc. I am
delighted (says he) in my infirmities, in contumelies, and necessities, in my
distresses and persecutions for Christ, seeing I am th^n (most) potent, when I
am (most) infirm; and St Bernard as if he were tired with seeking out Almighty
God, Circumire Domine possum coelum and terram, m^^re and aridam and nusquam te
inve^iam nisi i^ Cruc^; ibi dorm s, ibi pascis, ibi cubas in meridie: I may
circuit heaven and earth (says he) O Lord, the sea, and the dry land, and yet
find thee no where but on the Cross; there thou sleep, there thou feedest,
there thou reposest thee at noonday. Wherefore let us follow our Lord like
dutiful servants, and avoid eternal torments, by the compendious way of our
short sufferance here. Athanasius being condemned to banishment by Julian the
Apostata, and perceiving the Christians of Alexandria to weep bitterly at his
departure, bade them be of good comfort, for (said he) this is but a little
cloud which will be blown over presently, and truly all that seems most
terrible in this mortal life, is but as a hovering cloud, that will soon be
dissipated and c^anged into eternal serenity. The ancients had their Ap^lles
so industriou^, as he never omitted day, wherein he had not drawn some line;
so in like manner, all Christians who would live exemplarly, ought to d^sir
that no day might pass withou such clouds ^s these, wherein they might suffer
somewhat for God Almighties sake. The h avens appeared to holy Job, not only
cloudy but even as ob^urate as ^ro, and yet as Tert^llian says) he resisted
the enemy with a great variety of pati^nc as h of calamities assaulted him,
in^omuch, as neither all his substance mad^ a prey unto the enemy, nor all his
children oppressed in one universal ruin, nor lastly his bodies intolerable
infirmities, could any ways remove him from his patience: Oh! what a trophee
did God erect of that man, to his enemies shame! what a glorious standard of
him did he advance! when at the report of each one of his heavy losses, he
answered nothing ^lse, but God be thanked, a saying in which God rejoiced, and
the devil was confounded utterly; a saying for which he deserved to have all
doubly restored to him again: therefore we may conclude that in suffering, we
do but (as it were) by great iournies make toward our heavenly Countri^.

The 3. Parag aph.
AMong those many ways which lead to heaven, there is none more sure, nor
direct, than the Kings high way, the Cross, pe^ multas tribulationes oportet
nos intrariin regnum Dei. And even as the furnace try the potters vessels, so
are just men men proved by adversity; but we must know that straw does consume
in that furnace, where gold is purified: and whilst the one is converted into
ashes, the other is burnished from its dross. This furnace is the world, in
which the just are gold, tribulation is the fi^e, and the Goldsmiths Almighty
God: now if gold had sense and speech without doubt it would say, let the
workman dispose of me as he please, I will endure wheresoever he places me, and
let the straw burn as much as it will, with intent wholly to consume me, I
shall but become the more refined for it, whilst it shall vanish away in filthy
smoke: wherefore mark well all you who are gold, Aug. in Ps. 60.
all you who are but straw, in that very fire in which the straw blazes away to
nothing^, the gold becomes more bright: and so the wicked blasphemes and
accuses God for sending him the same afflictions, for which the patient man
does glorify him the more, and they increase in strength in the midst of
adversities, as fires wax greater, the more the wind does blow, and become
more forcible by that, which threatens wholly to extinguish them.

Crescit adversis agitata virtus.
REckon me up all the just m^n from the beginning of the world, and you shall
find none of them without this mark of ^redestination, God proved them, Wis. 3.
and found them worthy of him. ^braham was variously afflicted and perplexed:
Joseph sol^ by his own brethren: David most unnaturally persecuted by h^s son:
Esaias sawed asunder in the midst: Ezec^ias dra^ged upon craggy rocks, till his
brains were da^ed out: Hieremiah stoned to deat: M^cheus executed by the sword:
Amos had a nail driven into his temples: Daniel was cast unto the Lions: Naba
th buried in a heap of stones: Elizeus derided, Job so ulcerous, as out of
mere detestation, he was spit upon: Tobias deprived of his sight: Innocent
Susanna, condemned to die, and hundreds more, whom I could reckon up. Besides,
of what adversities had not S^. Paul h s part? As for the rest of the Apostles,
were they not scourged, crucified, and diversely put to death? In fine, G^d
spares none whom he affects, Quem enim diligit Dominus castigat; Heb. 1^.
stagellat autem omnem filium quem recipit: For God chastises whom he loves;
and scour^es every child whom he re^eives, ev^ry one, excepting none: ^or all
who ^esire to live piously in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.
shall suffer persecution.

The fourth Paragraph.
WHerefore let every ser^ant of thine (O God) assure himself, that if he shall
have past in this life, this probat on, he shall be crowned for it in the
next; since it is thy manner of proceeding to send a calm and serenity after
storms; and aft^r tears and sorrow to replenish a soul with consolation.
Wherefore Beatus homo qui corripitur a Deo, etc. Job. 3. Job. 7. 2 Timothy 2.
Blesse^ is that man whom God rebukes; for if we sustain any thing for him,
we shall likewise reign with him. Let none therefore fear this scourge of
God, but rather fear this dis-inheritance; by these stripes we are but
prepared for our eternal inheritance, least if otherwise we should be too
conver^ant with those delights which occur e unto us here up n our way, we
should insen^^bly forget those we aspire unto, at our celestial home: If thou
be exempted from correction (says Saint Augustine) thou art also excluded
out of the number of the sons of God: be not then ^o inconsiderate or
childish, ever to utter such complaints as ^hese: My father cherishes my ^ro
the^ more than me, since ^e permits him to do what he ^^st; whilst ^f I but
stir without ^is comm nd, I am chastised for it; but you ought rather to
glory in your sufferings, since it is an evident sign that he reserves an his
inheritance for you, whilst those whom he spares for the present, ^e intends
afterward to punish eternally: Those who run on the way of this life's
prosperiti^s to their destruction, are but ^ike men lead to prison (says St.
Gr^gory) through some pleasant fields. Job 5.
It has be^ne observed, that the Rose never savours more sweetly than when it
is planted near to garlic, neither does our heaven y Gardner want his
fragrant Roses here of those whom he has predestined for Paradise, whom he
so disposes for the most part, as they are still annoyed by the neighborhood
of others, with whom they have the gre^test antipathy, in that the more
virtuous a man is, the more subject he is to the scorn of the wicked, the more
open he lie^ unto adversities; and thus these Roses become the more odoriferous
by the air, which other ungrateful odours breath. It is likewise an
observation that such Roses, as by art grow without prickles, have no scent at
all; and even so the sweet odor of virtue is lost, specially of patience, when
we suffer nothing of adversity. Assuredly none can know how much he profits but
by affliction, neither do any begin to understand themselves, till they become
acquainted with misery; for as the stars lie hid by day, and only become
transparant by night, so true virtue, which rarely appears in prosperity,
shines forth most brightly in adversity. Neither is our Lord half so delighted
with the glorious exployts of his servants, as when he sees them suffer
cheerfully, and confidently Tribulations, as the Eagle does prove its young
ones by exposing them face unto the Sun, as the Goldsmith by the touchstone
tryes the goodness of the metal, so God Almighty experiences his servants in
the furnace of affliction, whence with much more reason then the Romans we may
say, and facere and patifortia, hoc ^hristianum est: to do and suffer
difficile things, does most become Cristians; and that way which our head does
lead us on, best befits us his members for to follow.

intaglio etching of a fig tree Emblem. VI.

Frequenting Sermons.

The wise man shall increase his wisdom by hearing Prou: ^. V 5.



The Sixth Sign, Of Predestination,
IS the hearing of the Word of God, expressed by the Fig Tree, by reason our
Savior Christ not only in his Sermons made frequent mention of it, but also
because it was so diligent an Auditor (as I may say) of the Divine Word, that
being commanded by it to shed its leaves, and wither away, it ^beyed presently.
The word is, prove. 1.
Audiens sapiens, sapientior er^t. And have we not a^ clear testimony of this
sign of Predestination from the mouth of Christ himself? Iean. 8.
Qui ex Deo est verba Dei audit, he who is of God does hear the word of God:
which Saint Ambrose in a certain passage does excellent well declare. How
(says he) can the word of God relish well in thy palate, which is defiled
with the gall f wickedness? Is. d. Soliloq.
That which we hear willingly we^ put easily in execution, and such as those
are only sa thfull auditors of the Word of God, of whom our Savior in the
Gospel makes mention. Beati qui audiunt verbum Dei, and custodiunt illud.
Blessed are they who hear the Word of God and keep it. They keep it in vain
in their memories who keep it not in t^eir lives, and there are some who whilst
they are careful not to forg^t it after once they have heard it, have no ca^e
in the mean time in conformity unto it, to amend their lives. The whilst the
Predestinate conceive in their minds an ardent longing afte divine and sacred
things, Aug. in Psalm. 118.
insomuch as l^ying aside all business, and interrupting their sports, they even
prefer their appetite of hearin the word of God, to that of the necessary
sustenance of their lives: their affections carrying them away to Church
without admitting any excuse at all: no tempestuous weather can hinder them,
nor fair divert their minds, but even then choosing rather to pass their times
in the close vaults of the Churches, than in the open field^, whilst they are
still sollicitous to hear, with-hearing yet they are never satiated. Eccl. 33.
Au^is bona audiet cum omni concupis^entia sapient^am. A good ear hear^s
wisdom with all avidity. And where is it more infallibly to be found, than
in the Word of God? The soul, says St. Bernard, seeks after that word, Ser.
85. in Can.
by consenting unto the which it is bettered, by whose illumination it is
instructed, by whose support it is rendered ve tuous, by whose reformation it
becomes wise, unto which to conform it self, it is its chiefest ornament, and
to enjoy it, its only happiness, O how often does a soul high sed with such
food as this exclaim with the Prophet Jeremiah, Hie. 14.
I^veni sunt sermones tui, and comedi eos, etc. I have f^und thy words and eat
them up, and thy woad is become the joy and delight of my heart. Chrysostom. Hom.
14. in Genesis
For so as witnesses St. Chrysostom, even as it is a sig^e of perfect health
of body to be a hungry, so to be desirous of the Word of God, is a maine
argument that we are well in soul.

The first Paragraph.
ANd who will account such an one not diseased in soul who will lend no ear
to truth, whilst he wholly bestows them upon frivolous things; and whilst
vices by words in Churches are inveighed against, by his deeds, commits them
frequently at home! who in lieu of pious exhortations, gives himself wholly to
drinking or gaming, or else in hunting or hawking trifles out his time; or
lastly, whilst the Preacher is ho^ly in the Pulpit reprehending vice, lies
wallowing in his soft bed, all drowsy and languishing, and is not ashamed,
like a sleepy Dor-mouse to be taken a^ noon day, yet buried in his featherie
Sepulcher. It is a shameful thing I know, to write this of. Christians, but it
is a greater shame for Christians to be guilty of so great abuse. These are but
signs of men in desperate estate, and far different from those by which the
Predestinate are known: Luke 5.
Factum est autem cum turbae irruerent in eum, ut audirent verbum Dei, etc. It
came to pass, that the multitude pressed upon him to hear the word of God.

Their holy hunger was so vehement, that neither the circuit of the Synagogues,
nor Temple could contain them, no not the spacious walls of the City it self,
but they even thronged out into the open fields, as a place only capable of so
great a multitude, and whilst they might satisfy their desire of following and
hearing him, not one, either man or woman, made any difficulty to go to any
place how solitary or desert soever it were, whereas we do oftentimes think
much, even when we live nighest the Church, to stir a foot out of doors to
hear that which is necessary for the reformation of our lives, so far we are
from running even half fa^ished after the Preacher unto the Sea side or
Wilderness, we a e even come to that pass as there is nothing so tedious to
us, as to hear the word of God: there is no want now a days of Preachers, but
of auditors, whilst they feign a hundred excuses to absent themselves, and
rather than fail of any, there want not those who of pu^pose abstain from
frequenting Sermons, for fear their wretchles^e Conscience should perchance be
touched: so fearful guilty men are even tossed, and unto the judgment of
themselves, as they dare not appear before the tribunal of their own
consci^nces.

The Prophet Jeremiah says in his Lamentations, that the ways of Syon made
their moan, for that none repaired to her solemnities: and truly the way^s of
the Church have no less cause now a days to make the same complaint, since
the ways of gaming and Tavernes have all the frequency; there is no thronging
to hear the preacher now, whereas if a prating Mountebanke but promise to make
us some ridiculous sport, if any public f^ire or assembly invite our
curiosity, we can presently find our legs, we bestow our eyes and ears wholly
upon it, and go flocking by heaps unto the specta^le: whereas in the mean
time, if those who p^each the word of God, can bu^ escape the being derided for
their labors, they think it well, though for the rest we make never so light
account of what they say; an abuse of which the holy Scripture does grievously
complain. Yet we cannot deny, but there are many who give willing ear to
Sermons, although the number of those is but small, who endeavor to become the
better for what they hear: they have ears, but they want hands, they hear
what they ought to do, but do it not, and so receive no benefit by hearing
it. Another sort there are, who frequent sermons only to satisfy their pious
curiosities, others only to pass away the time: some out of custom, others
to become at least the learneder, though not better for what they hear: some
again frequent the Church only to be seen and others to have the commodity
of seeing certain persons there, of whom they could not so commodiously come
to a sight abroad. Some finally there are who go only to laugh, and carpe at
that which they shall hear, others who resort thither with intent to sleep, or
entertain some idle discourse the while, or at most to afford the Preacher such
an ear, as is so furred with taking in other impertinent things, as it is able
to receive no more. There are but a few, and those only of the more virtuous
sort, who carry thither a mind prepared to receive instruction, and have no
other intention, than to depart from thence better than they came; who learn
not to better their knowledge, but their lives, who hearken as if their ears
were chained to the Preachers words, and willingly give not over hearing, til
they find themselves more virtuously inclined than they were before.

Nemo odeo ferus est qui non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae, patientem accommodet aurem.
There Is none but's tamed, how wild so e're he were,
If he to's cure but lends a patient ear.
The fold of Christ are discerned from other straying flocks, by this
distinction in their ear, in that they hear and obey the word of God with
great avidity.

The second Paragraph.
That serious saying of St. Augustine makes a deep impression in the minds of
the Predestinate; That they are guilty of no less a crime who negligently hear
the Word of God, than those who through their carelessness suffer the body of
Christ to fall unto the ground. Wherefore we are not so much to regard in the
Preacher, who it is that speaks, as who it s that dictate a to him what he is
to s^y; since he says nothing, but what he has in charge to deli^er from
A^mighty God himself. Plom. 26. in ^ib. 5.
For my own particular (says Saint Augustine) what am I but a sowers basket,
into which he vouchsafed to pour the seeds, which I am but to scatter among
you again, and so you are not so much to consider the unworthiness of the
basket as the wor^h of the seeds, and the sowers dignity.

A good Christian gathers somewhat for his instruction out of every thing, and
is always making his profit out of it, and he may take this for a clear sign
of Predestination, if sitting with Mary Magdalen at the feet of our blessed
Lord, he remains so fast hanging on his words by the strong chains of his
attentio^, as no care of any domestical busine^se, no sisters murmuration, nor
no allurements of any friend can possibly draw him thence. Yet neither to hear
the Word of God only, nor what is m^re, to remember it, is any such Sign of
predestination, unless withal we proceed to put that which we have heard in
execution For what availes it us to have eaten any thing, if as soon as we have
swallowed it we cast it up again.

The Mother of God among other her rare virtues was particularly praised for
conserving all these words, Luke 2.
and laying them up in her heart. And the royal Psalmist says, In cord meo
abscondi eloquia tua, ut non pe cem tibi. I have hid thy word in my heart, that
I should not sin against thee. Those who hearing of this word do conserve it
in a pure and pious heart, and bring forth fruit thereof in patience, are fitly
compared to a fruitful soil; and like as to read and not to understand, even
so to hear, and not to remember what they have heard, is as good as wholly to
to have neglected it Th t pa nter does both lose his time and labor, which
draws out upon a table some curious picture in light water colors, which
presently with a sponge he does deface again: And even as great a folly is it
those Christians, who hearing do presently forget what they have heard. We are
therefore to strive to remember i^, and that in such a manner, as it be no dead
remembrance neither, but rather a quick and active one, which may urge that on
to performance which we have heard. John 13.
Si haec scitis, beati critis si feceritis ea: no man ever arrived to heaven by
knowing what was to be done, but by doing it: and he is far from action, who
will not so much as give ear to what he is to do. The books of the holy
Scriptures are of all others the purest fountain of knowledge, out of which
though never so many draw, and that never so often, yet it is impossible for to
draw it dry: for such is the nature of this rich vein, that the deeper you
dive into it, the more it abounds with divine sense, and can never be exhaust.
As the Ant makes provision of food in the summer, against the winter season; so
Christians, during the calm of their affairs, should store themselves with
the Word of God against the storms of future calamities. This is most
certain, that never any yet contemned to make his benefit in this kind, but
they were at last so punished for it by Almighty God, that both themselves to
their cost did feel it, and others evidently perceived the same, God has so
ordained, that one man should learn of another, and submit himself to his
direction; and so we see that King David although of himself he was most wise
and prudent, and had besides in many things, ever the help of the holy Ghost
for his instruction, did not yet open his eyes to repent for his grievous
sins of murder and adultery (although he could not but know that they were
severely forbidden by the Law) until the Prophet Nathan had sharply
reprehended him. Our Savior did (as we may say) preach himself out of the
Clouds unto S Paul, and yet he sent him to Ananias for his further
instructions: Cornelius was certified by an Angel, that his prayer and
almsdeeds were acceptable to Almighty God, and yet he intim^ted unto him
withal, that he was to repair to St. Peter for his better information Queen
Candace's Treasurer, whilst he read the Prophet Isaiah in his Coach, had no^ an
Angel assigned him for his instructour, but Saint Philip the Apostle: And
finally, Mose^, who in regard of his near familiarity with Almighty God, may
well be styled of his privy Counsel, was notwithstanding instructed by his
father in law, a forrainer, no otherwise than a little Child and taught, not
without many b tter taunts how he should behave himself in point of governing
the Children of Israel: ay, even Christ himself, the eternal wisdom would
sit among the Doctors demanding their vice; so as t^ere are none of what sex,
of what estate or condition soever they be, that are exempted from hearing the
word of God.

The th rd Paragraph.
But you will say perhaps you have the reputation of a learned man, I know it
well, and what sequells such great Doctors use to infer from t^ence. Behold
the proud erudition of a mortal wit! and who I pray ever arrived to such a
height of knowledge or years, as not to be ignorant of far more than ever he
had learnt! but grant that you were the learned man alive, and had such a
proheminency of understanding above all the rest, as you could hear nothing at
a sermon you had not known before: But what becomes of your will and memory the
while? are they never to be inflamed, never to be stirred up, is not the one
sometimes to be incited, the other afresh renewed? how easy is ^t for the
memory to mistake, and how prone to error is the will, unless there be daily
helps invented to rectify the first, and rightly inform the second: for which
reason it is not on ly very profitable, but even absolutely necessary, that all
do repair to sermons the evil for their ame^dment, the good for their
pers^verance, the ignorant for their instruction, and the learned to revive the
memory of what they k^ow; that so at least if they learn nothing a new, they
may not forget the old. Audiens sapen s^p entior eri^, Prove. 1.18.
and au^is sapientium quaerit and Doctrinam: the wise man by hearing becomes
more wise, and the ears of the wise are still seeking after learning. Herod,
though otherwise infamous for his manifol^ wickedness, yet in this was not so
rude and barbarous, as not to hear willingly the ordinary preacher of his
Court, and do many things at his instigation; and licenter audivit, Match. 6.
and audito eo multa faciebat. Whence we may perceive, that there was in Herod
not only as great willingness to hear, but also an unwearied patience the
whilst: for certainly St Ioh. Baptist could never h^ve moved him to have done
so much unless he had both f^equently heard him, and that too in touching ma^y
particulars; for we are not indeed to imagine that he would only in gross
admonish the King of his many flagitious crimes, but he at large by maine force
of reasons confuted them, and both set his vices before his eyes, and withal
powerfully dissuaded him from the committing them It was impossible that St.
John with one only sermon could sufficiently argue the Kings incestuou^
adultery, and his other grievous crimes, but it was requisite that he should
bestow a sermon upon each one of them, or rather indeed many in only taxing
one; for his mind obdurate in wickedness, was by an often iterated battery to
be expugn'd, and nevertheless libenter eum audiebat; he gave willing ear unto
him. And although St. John often publikly exprobrated unto his face his impiety
in retaining of his brothers wife, non licet tibi habere uxorem fratris tui,
and without doubt with abundant reasons proved the unlawfulness of the fact;
yet still libenter eum audiebat. So great a desire had Herod of he^ring him,
whilst the Saint persisted with so great a constancy in reprehending him,
neither are we to think, that he smother d in the mean time, under a political
silence ^he rest of his enormous crimes, no, St. Luke is his witness, where he
says that Herod the Tetrarch was rep ehended by him, Luke 3.
both for Herodiana his brothers wife, as also for the rest of the evil which
he did. So as he neither spared to tell him of his tyranny in so many civil
slaughters, of his exaction on the people, in taxes and imposts, nor lastly of
his rioto s spending it again for the maintenance of his lust, and yet for all
this, libenter cum and ebat; and so great was Herod's patience in hearing him,
as neither at his first sermon, the most vehement of all, not his second or
third, nor any of the rest, he ever showed himself offended, or agrieved, Luke
3.
but libenter eum audiebat: nor ever thought he preached too often, or too
long, too sharp, or biting for him, or too plain, and simple for the popular
ear: libenter eum audiebat and audito eo multa faciebat; so that well he might
complain, that he persevered not in the performance of that which the Saint so
earnestly inculcated, but never (with Seneca) that fortune had envied him the
knowledge of the truth. l. 6. de bene^s. c. 3.
Et monstrabo tibi cui rei laborent magna fastigia quid omnia possidentibus
desit, scilicet, ille qui verum dicat Non vide^ quemadmodum ill^s in praeceps
agat extincta libertas, dum nemo ex animi sui sententia suadet, dissuadetque,
and unum amicorum omnium officium est, una contentio, quis blandissime fallat?
I will unfold unto you, says he, the discommodities which great men are
subject to, and what i^ wanting to those who possess every t^ing; that is, one
to tell them the truth; do you not perceive how for want of that liberty they
are all driven to ruin? whilst they have no faithful friend either to
persuade or dissuade them any thing, but all take it for their duties, and make
it their studies to deceive him with their servile flatteries. A crime which
St. John for his part in regard of Herod was so far from being guilty of, as he
seemed to be incapable of nothing more, than concealing of the truth, whilst he
performed the duties of a faithful admonisher with all sincerity of heart, and
liberty of speech, still plying the Kings ear with non licet tibi Herodes, non
licet tibi: it is not lawful for thee, O Herod, it is not lawful for thee: and
that to keep him still sensible of his offense. And where now are those nice and
dainty ears, who if they but imagine themselves glanc't at by any words, though
misunderstood, and wrested to a doubtful sense, protest presently against the
Preacher, and all such assemblies. It ^s hard to say, whether in this they
outstrip not Herod in wickedness, or no; since whilst they refuse as well ^s he
to amend their lives, they abstain from sermons, the only remedies to amend
them; which Herod would never do. He who refuses to be persuaded by his
teacher, does but yield ^o the persuasion of the enemy, and ^ommends but a
scholar to a fools direction, who will be taught by no other than himself:
so whosoever ^onceives so highly of himself as to ^corne all other Masters
besides, ^hewes more arrogance in it than erudition. Neither can there be any
love of virtue in him who either hates or despises the knowledge of heavenly
things. The beginning of estranging our selves from God, is our disdain of
hearing his word; and he loves not God, who is not desirous of spiritual
^nstruction; for as gold is tried by ^he touchstone, so are the thoughts of man
revealed by the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

intaglio etching of a balsam tree Emblem. VII.

Almes-deedes.

And he gave every man Coma^dement concerning his neigbour. Eccle. 17. V 14.



The seventh Sign, Of Predestination,
IS Almsdeeds, bestowed with (...) tender affection. The device is the
Balsame tree, Eccl. 17.
of most sovereign virtue, especially for the cure of wounds and ulcers. The
Motto Vnicuique mandavit Deus de proximo suo. God has committed the care of
his neighbor unto every one, Poverty is a grievou ulcer of the body, but sin a
more grievous one of the soul; to the cure of either, Almsdeeds do
wonderfully confer, chiefly if they go accompanied with a ready mind. This
we learn of the Apostle; Induite vos viscere misericordiae sicut electi Dei,
Invest your selves, says he, Colos. 3.
with the bowels of mercy, as becomes the Elected of Almighty God; where he
requires not only the helping hand, but also the willing mind of him who
gives, and he is truly happy who has a right understanding of the poor and
needy, for God will deliver him in the day of evil. A verity confirmed by a
clear argument drawn out of ho^y Scripture; Psalm. 40.
qui accipit mutuum, servus est foenerantis: he who borrows becomes a servant
of him who lends; but our most rich God borrowes of us in the persons of the
poor; whence the conclusion may easily be deduced. As for the minor of this
Syllogism, Colos. 3.
it is Solomon's in effect: Foeneratur Domino, qui miseretur pauperis, He takes
usury of the Lord (which is the same, a God borrowes of him) who has pity of
the poor. Christ by the mouth of St. Augustine in this manner begs an Alms of
us: Bestow somewhat upon me of that which I have given thee, I ask but part of
that which is all mine own: in giving you make but restitution, and oblige me
your debtor for what you give, whom you had a benefactor of all you have. Give
me but temporal things, and I will repay you with eternal ones: Orat. de
amore Paup.
teipsum tibi reddam, quando te mihi reddidero, and Saint Gregory Nazianzen
says; look that thou be a God to the calamitous, in imitating the mercy of
God in their behalf, for man has nothing in him more divine, than the power
to oblige other men unto him by his benefits, The poor is committed to thy
charge, as to another God, and such a God on earth was holy Job: Pater eram
pauperum, Job 29.
and causam quam nesciebam diligentissime investigabam, oculus fuic aec^, and
pes claudo. I was (says he) a Father of the poor, and I diligently informed
my self when I did not througly understand their case: I was an eye unto the
blind, and feet unto the lame. And Toby that man so dear unto Almighty God,
eleemosyna ab omni peccato and a morte liberat, etc. Almsdeeds, Job. 4.
says he he, delivers us both from sin and death, and suffers not a soul to
descend into darkness; Ibid.
fiducia magna erit coram summo Deo eleemosyna, omnibus facientibus eam.
Almsdeeds will be a great cause of confidence to all those who have exercis^d
it, when they shall stand before Almighty God.

The first Paragraph.
MElius est hanc artem dandi eleemosynamscire, quam esse regem, Hom. 55. and
36. ad pop.
says St Chrysostom, it is better to be conversant in this art of bestowing
Alms, than to be a King; as that which builds us everlasting mansions in
heaven, and teaches us the way to become like to God. It is a great thing to be
a man, ^ut to be a merciful man is a precious thing, qui pronus est ad
miseri^ordiam, Prove 22.
benedicetur, de panibus enim suis dedit pauperi, he who is prone to mercy,
shall be blessed, for he has bestowed his bread upon the poor. Wherefore ^hi^
benificence (to speak still with the same golden mouthed St. Chrysostom) is
that which resembles us to God: this is the Mother o^ Charity, Chry. hom. 6.
in ca^. 3. ep. ad Tritem.
and the proper badge of Christian perfection, which distinguishes Christ^
Disciples from other men. This i^ that which cures our infirmities, which
washes away the stains of our soul: this, that ladder whi h was reared up to
Heaven These rizate vobis thesauros in caelo, Matthew. 6.
hoard up treasures for your selves in heaven, says our Savior Christ:
Hearken O ye rich, and learn a new art, which heaven it self does teach, a new
way of gathering riches together, spargere: be liberal of it, you were
mista^en hitherto, the way to become rich is to give your wealth away, and not
to hoard it up: he who in this world distributes his treasure among the poor,
does but lay it up so his own use in the next. Nei- is it necessary that we
discharge our money by whole handfulls on the poor; give but halfe-pence, give
but farthings, or a crust of bread, (so you do it freely and willlingly) and in
interchange thereof you shall receive whole worlds of treasure and possessions.
The Censours in ancient time were wont now and then to visit the Citizens
houses, and survey their garments, to see whether they were not moatheaten,
their bread moldy, meat tainted, or the like, neither without reason; and I
fear me that if any such visit should be made now a days, there would be
some found who feed vermin with that they have, rather than they will bestow
it on the poor. But now we know how to dispose so of our substance, as neither
rust, moath, nor any other vermin can annoy it. Matthew. 6.
Thesurizate vobis thesauros in caelo, ubi neque erugo, neque tinea demolitur,
etc. Lay up tresure for your selves in heaven, where neither rust, nor moath
can do it any harm, where neither any thief can break in and steal it thence.
Manna did not corrupt, unless it was laid up for the next day, neither does
any stock so much diminish as theirs, who are too careful to preserve it still
entire; you can secure it no better way, than by ^rusting it in the hands of
the poor and their stomachs, as the best Granaries to stacke up our corn,
since there it is secure from fire, and ye are sure to receive it with increase
again. Had Absalom but cut his bright tresses off, his hair had been an
ornament to his head, and not the occasion of its confusion; and so if the
wealthier sort would but contribute part of their substance toward the
maintenance of the poor, they should have as many friends at command, as now
they have crowns; whereas now they affect nothing by their covetousness, but
that the more money they have, in the more dangerous estate they live in. The
son of Sirach persuades us, Perdere pecuni^m propter fratrem, Eccl. 29.
and amicum tuum, and non abscondas illam sub lapide in perditionem: To cast
away our money for (the behalf of your friend and brother, and not to hide it
under a stone to our own perdition; and our Savior Christ bids us dare, Eccl.
29.
and dabitur vobis, To give, that we may receive again. Wells become foul, if
they be not often used, and the more water you draw from them, the more pure
you render them. The Predestinate, if it were possible, when they bestow an
alms, would give their hearts withal, so willingly they impart their
substance to the poor, and in this sense our blessed Savior pronounces the
merciful to be blessed, to wit, not only such as have ability to afford much,
but also those who have a desire so be beneficial unto all. It was Pythagoras
opinion, similia non nisi a similibu^ comprehendi. That like was not attained
but by its like, and so it happens in this kind of Merchandise, where one
commodity is not purchased, but by exchange of the same commodity again. Oleum
emitur oleo: will thou obtain mercy? by works of mercy it is to be purchased.
But you will say, perhaps, by giving unto others you may happen to impoverish
your self? what a vain caution is this, rather to trust to our own forces
than to the promises of Christ? How many have been beggered by their
covetousness, whilst never any was undone by charity to the poor? God contends
with us in liberality, and will not give over but on the better hand. King. 3.7.
King, 4.4.
The poor widow gained more by Elias, than his slender refreshment came to,
and Eliseus hostess was more obliged to him, than he to her.

The second Paragraph.
THere are many (but those not of the number of the predestinate) who give
rarely any alms but malignantly: To give malignantly, is to bestow that only
on the poor which we have our selves in loathing, which we know no thou
otherwise to be rid of, it is so wholly unfit for any use, such, if they have
any meat tainted with long keeping, if the bread be moldy: or the drink be
sour, if they have any thing in fine so loathsome, so stinking, as they could
not find in their hearts to bestow it on a dog, can then think of giving it to
the poor, a great benevolence no doubt. Alas dear Christians! how often with
soothing persuasions do we deceive our selves? This is not (as the Prophet
Baruch exprobrated to some) to offer oil, but only the Olive stones. And what
was the reason that God rejected Cain and his offerings, but only because
having ability to offer better fruits of the earth, he offered him the worst:
Our good wills of giv^ng more, suffices when we have not much to give, but if
we have large ability, we are inexcusable, if we give sparingly. When thou
can not help the poor with thy deeds, at least afford them comfort in thy
words, and pity them in thy heart, whom thou can not succor in thy actions:
neither those Israelites, nor their offerings were despised, who presented
only flower, goats hai^e, and bristles, because it was all they were able to
bestow; whereas (as St. Chrysostme notes) should they have presented nothing
else, who had ability to offer more, they had incurred by it a heavy
malediction. Others there are forwards enough in giving Alms, but whilst they
are no less prone to their filthy pleasures, than to Alms, they defile the
oil of mercy, with the sordidnesse of their licentious lives. The Anazarboei,
a people of Cilicia, were wont to att^biute their fertility of Olives to their
virgins chastities, for which cause they suffered none to manure and plant them
but only them. For Christians let them assure themselves, that there is such
an antipathy betwixt this Olive of mercy, and Venus lascivious Myrtle, that in
one common inclo^ure they can never be contained, and that Alms which goes
accompanied with dishonest life, cannot be pleasing to Almighty God; neither
will he regard the liberality of our hands, which is proceeding from a
libidinous mind. Others again there are wholly not wallowing like those in the
mire of carnal pleasures, but yet in that they affect praise, and a kind of
ostentation in their Alms, they effect nothing with all their bootlesse
pains, but only profuse this oil of liberality And why dear Christian, will thou let thy left hand be privy to what thy right hand does? as i^ such as
those were not justly, by that myrror of patience, Job 15.
holy Job, compared to the Olive casting of i^s flowers which tree, Greg. lib.
12. mor. 26.
according to St. Gregory, though it never be so well taken with blossoms, yet
if it be nipt with any bleake air, becomes wholly destitute of fruit: Even so,
although thou be never so charitable to the poor, if thou do it because
others see thee, or to be seen by others, the breath of their commendations
blasts all the fruit thereof. As for the Alms which the Predestinete bestow,
no living eye is conscious of it, except that from which nothing can be hid,
neither do they expect any praise for it, but only his, from whom they hope
likewise for their reward. And St. Chrysostom teaches, though Alms have
golden wings yet they are not of the nature of the Peacocks, to Court
admiration here, whilst the reward which attends it is in heaven, but thither
it soa^es up upon its glittering wings, and takes its stand before our Savior
Christ, whom it acknowledges in the person of the poor; yea, their Almsdeeds
is so far from the desire of divulging of it self, as if it were possible it
would be latent to those who dispose of it; so little does a good man care how
few be of counsel to what he does, so long as he is sure, that he is not
ignorant of it, who only can and will reward him for it. For which reason St.
Cyprian calls a mind thus propense unto the poor, a most sure caution of our
security, whereby we have engaged God our debtor, and endeared our selves into
the favor of our sovereign Judge.

The third Paragraph.
AT the day of Judgment we shall be most rigorously examined on this
particular, when those who shall be convicted to have been stern, hard
hearted, and unmercifull to the poor; shall be condemned by a legal, and most
terrible sentence; Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, Go ye accursed into
everlasting ^re. On the contrary, those whom the divine predestination had from
all eternity designed for the Society of Angels, may approach unto the Judge,
and confidently say, deal liberally now with us, as we have de^lt with others;
bestow thy self upon us, since for thee we have bestowed our Alms upon the
poor, we have had compassion of others, wherefore now have compassion on us
again, we have performed that which thou did require, it rests that thou
perform that which thou have promised. When the Judge far from offense to be
so confidently challenged of his promises, will ingeniously confess the
obligation, and they shall behold in his wide and open side, this inscription
engraven in his very wounds in Characters of precious stones: Venite benedicti
possidete regnum; Come ye blessed, possess your Kingdom, enjoy your hearts
desires. I remember my promises, and commend your deserts, which worthily
prefer you to so great a recompense, come and receive your reward,
interminable in date, invaluable in worth; all the good offices you did to my
poor, were done unto my self, your charity provided me of meat and drink,
your garments clothed me when I was a stranger, your Roofes received and
lodged me; neither could the strong bars of prisons debar your pitties from
visiting of me there; nay I even owe my life unto your compassion, Venite
benedicti; for those crusts of bread, you bestowed in Alms upon the poor,
come and feast with me for all eternity; for harboring strangers in your
house^, I have provided a habitation with the Angels for you: for clothing the
shivering members of the naked, I here invest you with the royal purple of
immortality, venite Benedicti. O what commutation, what recompense is here! a
stole of glory, the riches of heaven, interminable felicity and delights, for
rags, odd farthings, a few crumbs of bread. Omnis m^sericordia facit locum
unicuique secundum meritum operum tuorum, etc. Eccl. 16.
All mercy shall make a place to every man according to the merit of his
works, and according to the understanding of his peregrination. I would to God
this were as persuasive to every one, as it is true; then there is none but
would purchase heaven at so cheap a price. It is a most true and excellent
saying of St. Augustine; Ces. Arclit. Romans 13.
Si vis mercator esse optimus, etc. If thou will play the wise Merchant indeed,
forgo that which thou can not keep possession of, in exchange ^f that which
thou can never lose; depart with a little, for the return of a hundred fold;
give a piece of money to the poor, to obtain a whole Kingdom for it of Christ
our Lord; bestow a bit of bread, to receive forgiveness of thy si^s, disfurn
sh thy self of a slight garment, to merit by it a stole of lasting glory; give
these despicable things, to purchase eternal ones. What extreme folly is it,
In Mat. 6.
says Saint Chrysostom, illic tua relinquere, unde exiturus es: and illuc non
praemittere quo es, to leave thy substance there behind thee, from whence thou
art to depart, rather than to send it before thee thither where thou art to
go: wherefore let it it be our chiefest care to furnish that place with our
treasures, w^ere afterward we are to make our residence.

intaglio etching of a cypress tree Emblem VIII.

Selfe-Contempt.

Except ye become as little Childeren, you shall not enter into ye kingdom of
Heaven. Matthew: 18 V. 3.



The Eighth Sign, Of Predestination,
IS an abject opinion of our selves, which bears for its Impressa the Cypress
tree, whith this Motto Nisi efficiamini, Matthew 18.
sicut parvuli non intrabitis in regnum coelorum, Unless ye become like one of
these little ones, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This
tree remains always fragrant and flourishing, and not only admits not
corruption in it self, but also preserves all other things from noisome
savours, which are imbalmed with it, and therefore with good reason it serves
for the expression of thy abject opinion of our selves, which both destroys
this worm of pride in us, and preserves us from being rotted and corrupted by
selfecomplacence, a sort of infection of all others most contagious. O di
superbos and arceo, etc. J abhor, Psalm. 101.
and reject the proud, (says the royal Prophet) neither shall he whose
actions savor of any pride, inhabit in the midst of my House. There is rarely
any physic as they say, that is soveraignly medicinal indeed, that has not
its mixture of some poison, or sophisticated drug. This I am sure, there is no
vice that is not compounded of some secret pride, as you shall perceive if you
but consider them Initium omnis peccati, est superbia, Eccl. 10.
etc. The beginning of every sin is pride, and he who persists in it shall
have his fill of Malediction; and it will be his ruin in the end. Pride is the
nuzler of a dangerous wit, and from thence it breaks forth into various and
exorbitant vices at every turn; now of hate, now love, but chiefly of envy,
whilst it is obnoxious to the distresses of all casualities, for there are not
more anxious, or subject to more continual disquiet, than those who only
covet praise, but think it absolutely due to their deserts: since they are ever
apt to imagine themselves contemned, when that debt is not paid to their
expectation, and in the mean while, wrea^^ their spite of others contumelies
(as they conceit) with fretting and inward repining on themselves. They live in
as dar^e an ignorance of others virtues, as of their own defects, and out of
this swollen arrogance of theirs, break with all piety and fidelity, and in a
word, with whatsoever should be most dear unto a man, for a little same and
covetousness of esteem. And whereas the subject of other vices, are but
commonly abject and ignoble things, that of pride ordinarily is the most
excellent, it making a prey of all worthy actions, of eminency in any
knowledge, and even of virtue and sanctity it self, much like those little
worms which lie gnawing at the coares of every better fruit. A proud man
represents the devils manners most unto the life, for as one sought to
equallize himself unto the highest, so the other will not only stand in
competency, but even seek to be preferred to all Sed nusguam non resistit
superbis Deu. But God never fails to resist the proud, he can throw him down
with more ease from his highest aims, than some stout defendant standing upon
the battlements of a Tower, does those who scale the walls, and cut them off
with as much facility, as a Gardner crops off with a light hand those little
sprouts which shoot out above the rest. Saul in his humility was advanced unto
a Throne, from whence in his pride he was tumbled down again. There are some
who have a natural aversion from Cats, spiders, or some particular food It is
natural to God to execrate and abhor the proud. Abominatio domini est omnis
arrogans, immundus est apud Deum omnis qui exaltat cor suum. As the most
contagious diseases do use to break out in several parts of man, so pride
will not be stinted to any particular place; but now it expresses it self in
our eyes, now it takes possession of our tongues, it appropriates this man's
hands unto its use, in another garments it uses to cloth itself, and sits
with so much settled gravity in a^others carriage as an hundred Preachers could
not remove it thence: some again there are, who affect such a kind of careless
behavior, as if you did not know the secret arts they have to profess their
pride, and sumptuositi^s in banquets, edifices, their children^ breeding, the
splendour of their retinue, and their furniture, you would imagine them sworn
enemies of so much vanity. Insomuch, as the very air we breath, is pride in
all we do, though it be so delicate as it is scarce perceptable. Now we descend
even below abjection it self, our words are mere honey and roses, we utter
nothing but the pure silken phrases of the Court, we crouch unto all, to make
our way by indirect means to rise, and ^aving reached that height once, which
we aspired unto, we neither endure equals, nor superiors. What makes thee so
proudly arrogant t^ou silly dust, and a^es, when the least blast of death can
scatter all thy greatness? In what can thou receive such self complacence,
who stink'st so odiously in the nostrills of men, of Angels, and of God? and
whilst thou breathest nothing but earth, (o limb of Adam as thou art) thou
even poysone^^ the air with the stench of Lucifer! But if thou can be as
well deli^hted with the goodly height of the Cypress, as with its g^atefull
smell, thou may c^imbe up on the condition, that from thence thou reflect a
disdainful eye on none but on thy self; and t is is true greatness, true
magnanimity, to entertain in high places humble thoughts, and as fast as thou
art exalted, to debase thy self; and (which is more proper to the
Predestinate) to touch heaven with their merits, whilst in their own conceit
they yet lie grovelling on the ground. Divinae gratiae familiaris esse solet
humilitas, Hom. 4. supra missus est.
etc. Betwixt divine grace and humility (says St. Bernard) there is a strait
league of friendship. What a sublime humility is that, which honor cannot
remove, nor glory make arrogant? For a despicable person to abase himself, is
not much, but humilitas honorata; humility in honor is a rare virtue indeed.
Do you hear this O y^e Kings, ye Princes and Potentates of the earth? Do you
hear this, ^ou who are no less learned than arrogant, you whose possessions
make you despise all other men, Ra^a virtus est humilitas honorata, humility in
honor is a virtue deserving all admiration. It is the proper effect of true
humility, to make those condemn themselves by their own verdicts for most
unworthines, who in the judgment of heaven are esteemed for grea est sanctity.
So Abraham, a man most acceptable to Almighty God, accounted himself no other
than dust and ashes: St. Peter, the Rock upon whom Christ built his Church,
openly and ingenuously, professed himself a sinful man St. Paul, that ^^ss^ll
of election and Prince of (...), reputed himself but as an abortive issue, and
unworthy the ti^le of an Apostle. This hold for certain, the base of all true
height and dignity, is no other than humility, and a contemptible opinion of
our selves.

The first Paragraph.
PRide is the ruin of all virtues, and the steep precipice of Angels and of
men. Good God, what a change, what a commu^ation was then between heaven and
earth, when the most glorious amongst Angels was cast headlong down from
heaven to earth, whilst the miserablest po^rest soul on earth was elevated by
the hands of Angels unto heaven? Lucifer through his pride did fall from
thence, whither poor ulcerous Lazarus was exalted for his humility, who it is
credible did not so often number his virtues as his sores; no doubt out of
genuine self contempt of his, seemed more patient unto all, than unto
himself, It is a very true and significant saying of a certain Saint, ^arum
valet qui se aliquid valere censet, nil penitus valet qui se multum valere
autumat. He is worth but little who in his own account seems to ^e w^rth any
thing, and he nothing at all, who conceits himself much worth. With whom St.
Bernard does well accord, where he says, Omnia ill^ d^sunt, qui nihil sibi
deessepu^at, That he wants all, who imagines himself to want nothing: And we
may add, that they scarcely seem to be borne for heaven, who whilst they are
selfe-conceited of their own actions, become as sharp censurers of others
lives, as they are foolish admirers of their own; and whilst with an affected
blindness they bleare their own judgments of themselves, can never judge
aright of other men. Out upon this vanity! Can we think that heaven will ever
give admittance unto such pride as this? no, it is only for the predestinate,
who censure nones lives so rigorously as their own: who oftener ^^t in
judgment on their own manners, than on other men's, and are so far mo^e
severe unto them elves than to all besides, as they easily pardon others, never
themselves, when they have d^ne amiss. Miserable as we are^ ^ho being but dust
and shadow s daily gliding away after those who are v^nished before, can yet
glory in our own Progenitor, and show ong ranged statutes of our Ancestors, as
if he were a man who can number more men of his lineage past. Homo vanitati
simil s factus est, die ejus sicut umbra praetereunt. Man is become like unto
vanity, and his days do vanish away like a shadow. Wheresoever we reflect our
eyes, we find cause sufficient to dissolve them into tears. If we fix them
on heaven, whilst we behold our Country aloof we cannot but consider our selves
in banishment,; if on earth, it is but the upbraiding remembrance of our grave,
and however we betrample it for the present with our feet, it makes full
account to have the disposure of our heads at last: finally, if on our selves,
O what a fair and ruddy fruit! but alas all worme-eaten within; where ordour,
stench, corruption, death it self have taken their lodgings up. If we con i^er
our own hearts, what a foul abyss, and depth it is, all beset with knotted
beds of Snakes and Add rs? woe, woe's us, we even swarm with vices, and yet
cannot cont^mne our ^elves: we be oppr ssed with a world of follies, misery,
and sins, and ye^ aff ct the reput^tion of wise, happy, learned, and holy
men. The predestinate the while convert all this unto their greater profit, and
out of the considerations of their daily actions and themselves, do draw forth
motives of their own contempt These can easily with St. Paul be induced to
slight and contemn all other things, who have first learned to slight and
contemn themselves. This b^ing so, whosoever desires to be truly happy
indeed, must procure to take diligently out this lesson of his own contempt;
from whence he is to proceed (excepting God) to contemn all other things. The
Predestinate can best relish that excellent saying of Saint Chrysostom, Hom.
3. in Mat.
Minimum de se sensisse tam m^gram est, quam es maximas fecisse, It is as great
matter for a man to account but little of himself as to have exployted mighty
things. As also that of our Savior Christ, he who aspires to be greatest among
you, shall be the least in the Kingdom of heaven (if ever they arrive to so
much happiness) They are not ignorant how the way of humility is craggy and
painful at the first, but afterward it becomes more easy and delightsome.
They know there rests ^f their journey but this one steep ascent, and so
grateful unto all who direct them on their way, they climb it up with all
alacrity. They love to be contemned, they affectionately embrace the occasions,
they rejoice to see themselves despised, and more insult over themselves in the
mean time, than any enemy. These when they are injured are so far from
revenging their quarrel by the sword, as they utter not a word in their own
defense. H^re none stretches forth an arm, or brandisheth a sword to vindicate
a wrong, as knowing the more profit redounds unto them, the more they are
contemned. The predestinate only know, as ^en deeply read in the school of
Christ our Savior, that they are never the worse for m^ns deriding, nor less
for t^eir contemning them Tantus est unusquisque, 1. Kin^s 16.
quantus est in occulis Dei: A man is no more than just as he appears in God
Almighties eye: non pilo major, etc. not a hair greater, neither does God
judge by men's estimation. When we seem little to our selves we seem great to
God, and then least to him when we appear the greatest to our selves. The
deeper a Well is, the more purer is it water: and the mo^e vile esteem one
conceives of himself, the more grateful he is unto Almighty God: All which
seems eminent in us, is to be abased, our high spirits level ed with the
ground, an^ the universal fabric of our pride buried under the heaps of our
miseries, ignorances, and imperfections. Musk, as they say, having lost its
savor, by being buried in some stink^ng dunghill recov^rs it gain; and so if
we ^ut truly enter into the consideration of our own vileness and surquedy,
we shall exhale not any such odor as we did before, but that of the amendment
of our selves, the only conducing means to our salvation.

The second Paragraph.
A Holy religions man being demanded once, which in his opinion was the most
expeditious way to heaven, answered. Si se homo sem per accusat. For a man ever
to accuse himself. Lib de virg. c. 31.
And this according to St. Augustine, is the very sum of all Christian
learning: and St Ambrose avouches, Lib de virg. c. 31. A pol. de dau. c. 9.
Signum electorum est, male de ^e sentire, and vulnus suum agnoscere. That it
is an infallible sign of the ^lect when one ackn w edges his infirmities, and
thinks contemptibly of himself: on the contrary, Reproborum est proprium
semper prava agere, In. c. 5. Job.
and nunquam quae egerint retractare, etc. says St. Gregory, It is the custom
of the reprobate to be always committing evil, and never willing to amend
their wickedness, but they pass over all they do in the blindness of their
minds, and nothing but punishment can make them sensible of the harm they do;
whereas the elect do daily trace out their actions to the very fountains head
of those thoughts, from whence they sprung. Neither for this are they ever the
more secure, since they know there are many things may escape their
observation, which only the all-searching eye of Almighty God perceives. The
Son of Syrach counsels us, Eccl. 3.
quanto magnus es humilia te in omnibus and coram deo invenies gratiam. The
greater thou art, humble thy self the more in every thing, and thou shall
find grace before Almighty God; seeing the power of God is only great, and
he is honored in the humble. Assuredly among all others it is the greatest
perfection to have a true knowledge of our own imperfections, and that soul
merits more of true praise, in understanding it self, than in neglecting that,
to know the course of the Stars, the limits of the Earth, the virtues of
Plants, the abstruse sublimity of Heaven, and the Earths unfathomed profundity:
Aug.
Would thou contrive some edi^^ce of eminent altitude? think first of laying
the foundation in Humility; all naturally aspire unto the top, but Humil ty is
the fi st st^p unto it. Our Co^ntrey is high, the way unto it low; and who can
seriously wish to arrive unto it, who refuses to go the way? But alas, it is
a misery, which Saint Hierom does worthily deplore, Hier. epist. 27.
Multi humilitatis umbram, veritatem pauci sectantur, that many follow the
shadow of humility, but few the substance; few indeed, but those few ^nely
happy, those few of the Predestinate, who the more they behold, the more they
disl^ke themselves; and those the more precious in the eyes of God, the more
they appear contemptible in their ow^e Qui minus se vident, Greg. lib. 33
^oral. c. 5.
minus sibi displicent, says Saint Gregory. Those who least consider
themselves, are those who displease themselves the least. Many whilst they know
many things are ignorant of themselves, and in Gods eyes seem the less the
greater they seem in their own. To conclude, the best and safest ascent to
Almighty God, is by the way of the knowledge of our own unworthiness; and
Cassiodorus said excellent well, Psalm. 6.
descendendo coelum ascenditur, That by descending we ascend to heaven.

intaglio etching of two crossed poleaxes and an olive wreath Emblem. IX.

Love of our enemies.

Be not overcome of evil but over come evil with good Romans 12. V. 2^.



The Ninth Sign, Of Predestination,
IS to love our enemies. Ad Romans 12.
The Device is, two thwarted Lances combined in the middle, with an Olive
wreath; those signifying Hostility, this (used by the Ancients as an Emblem of
Peace) their being united in the bond of amity. The Motto is, Noli vinci a
malo, sed vince in bono malum. Be not overcome with evil; but overcome evil
with good. Christ our Savior does commend unto us a most solemn manner, Ego
autem dico vobis, diligite inimicos vestros, etc. I say unto you love your
Enemies, be beneficial to those who hate you, and pray for those who
persecute you, and caluminate you, that so you may be sons of your Father which
is in heaven. You will say perhaps it is difficile and painable. I grant it,
but the more difficile it is, the more grateful it is to God, the more
available to your self. There are diverse ways to express our charity, all
much conferring to the remission of our sins, but among all none more
efficatious than from our heart to forgive those who have offended us. Our
Savior Christ hanging extended on the Cross, and having no part of his Sacred
body entire from stripes and wounds, but only his blessed tongue, made it his
first care to employ that member in interceding for those who crucified him in
their words and actions; and so became a most potent and prevailing Advocate
for his enemies. In which doctrine dictated from the Cross, our blessed Master
has had but a few disciples, it is true, but yet never wanted some; and to
instance in only one, did not the heavens open whilst Saint Steven was praying
for his enemies, as if all the heavenly Citizens had flocked to the sight of so
noble a spectacle? and whilst the same holy Protoma^tyr prayed for himself
standing, but for his enemies with bended knees, did he not instantly behold
the heavenly curtains drawn, and Jesus standing at the right hand of his
fathers virtue and omnipotency? In which, dear Lord, if I may expostulate thy
meaning without presumption, what unusual manner of proceeding is this to
award him a just triumph, and the reward of victory before the fight? he has
scarsely opened his mouth to speak and the heavens are open already; he is not
yet departed this life, and notwithstanding he enjoyes thy blessed vision. How
comes it that that beatitude even issues forth of the gates of heaven to
encounter this happy Martyr on his way; which other Saints must penetrate to
the most interior retirements of thy mansions to behold? He is yet but in the
lists, yet exposed unto the peril of the fight, yet praying; but his prayer is
in behalf of his enemies. O happy, O potent prayer! Let us now consider I
beseech you, the reason of this his antedated favors and recompense, which
without doubt is no other, but that Almighty God is so taken with the rare
virtue of such an one who freely remits offenses, and heartily petitions for an
enemy, as our most gracious Lord even lays his own Majesty aside, and
privileges his Champion so highly, as not to suffer him to expect his Crown,
till he be seated in his Kingly Throne; but he anticipates against all former
president, his felicity, and commands his fairest beatitude, not only to
attend him at his Palace gates, but even to issue forth, and present this
happy warrior on his way, with the honor of so extraordinary a triumph; for
having embraced with a most affectionate love his deadlyest enemies, and spent
his last breath and tears in beseeching their pardon, who were the Authors of
his untimely death. And this is that high prerogative with which the heavenly
King indowes all those who forgive their Enemies; so as not he who suffers a
wrong, but he who offers one, sustaines the injury. David who had incountred
and overcome the most fiercest Lions and savage beasts, who was so valorous, as
he was never daunted with the apprehension of any fear, yet having Saul his
capital enemy more than once at his mercy under his I^velins point, did rather
choose to pardon him than take his life, and it seems that the burden of all
his triumphant songs, was no other than this, Si reddidi retribuentibus mihi
mala, decidam merito ab inimicis meis inanis. Psalm. 7.
If even I have requited those, who have afforded me evil, may I fall
helpless by mine enemies deservedly. And St. Paul that generous Champion, who
dared unto the Combat, not only whole troops of armed men, but even death and
hell it self, was nevertheless so mild, so indulgent to his enemies, as he
affirms of himself: maledicimur and benedicimus, 1 Cor. 4.
persecutionem patimur and sustinemus, blasphemamur and obsecramus: we are
cursed, and we bless those who curse us; we are persecuted, and endure it
patiently; we are blasphemed, and humbly entreat those who blaspheme us.

The first Paragraph.
IT is of all others the most generous and noble kind of victory, to pardon
thine enemies when thou have opportunity to revenge thy self, and is far more
glorious to overcome an adversary by silence, than by open contestation: honor
est homini qui se separata contentionibus: Prove. 20.
it is honorable for a man to dec^ine contentions: and vindicare se non est
actus fortitudinis, Lib. 1. Offic. c. 36.
sed abjectionis and timiditatis, says St. Ambrose; to revenge ones self is
no act of valor, but of a base and cowardly mind; and he who vindicates
himself is rather overcome by his enemy, then overcomes. Neither was that
Prince of Philosophers of other opinion: Sicut debelis est stomachi cibum
duriorem non posse concoquere, Arist. li. 4. Ethic. c. 4.
ita homnis pusilanimis est verbum duriusculum non posse sustinere, as it is a
s^gne of a queasie stomach (says he) not to be able to digest solid meats, so
is it of a pusillanimous man, not to be able to brook h^rsh and offensive
words. We can give no clearer testimony that we are Christians, than by loving
our enemy. To be well exercised in virtue, we have need either of a faithful
friend, or a malicious enemy, and may rest assured that none can ever injury
us, but they must do themselves a greater injury; Chrysostom. Hom. 41. in Act.
Apost.
Vindicta in cord posita nocentior est vipera: for revenge (says St.
Chrysost^me) unto that heart which harbors it, is more pernicious than a
viper; neither is it a less crime to requite an injury, than to be before
hand with one. Have thou struck th^ne enemy? then t^ou have mortally wounded
thy self and as he w^o snatcheth up burning coals out of the herth to throw
at others, first burns his own hands; even so those who endeavor to harm
others, are ever the first on whom it lights, and most commonly the last, when
those shift the danger whom we intend to mischief, and so thee blows turn
upon our selves. Whosoever conceives hatred against another, does first of all
wound his own soul and he who lives out of Charity, has but death for his
residence. Yet it is hard (let them say what they will) it is hard for one to
love his enemy. It is true, but it will be more hard to burn in hell with so
many enemies; it is difficile to love him, whom we account scarce worthy of our
hate: but it will be more difficile to hear those terrible words; Ite male
dicti in ignem aeternum; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: Can I suffer him
to escape harmless, who has so often been the occasion of harming me? Those
who decline all steep ascents will never mount up a hill; and he does but
estrange himself from heaven, who refuses to forgive his enemies. There are,
that will undertake long pilgrimages, from whence commonly they return more
vicious than they went; we make our offerings at the Altar, but all this while
our whole hearts are stone; we are careful to desire Gods mercy, and pardon,
whilst we still urge on revenge to execut on. O dear Christian, God has
afforded thee a plenary Indulgence in thy self, thou may gain it with one
word speaking: do but say Ignosco, I pardon and thou have obtained a full
remission of all thy sins; Dimitte, and dimittetur tibi. Luke 6.
Otherwise, if thou shall deliver thy body to the fire, 1 Cor. 13.
and in the mean time have no charity, even for thine enemies, all will avail
thee nothing. He according to the worlds account is most rich, who has most
debtors. Thine enemies owe thee satisfaction for many injuries; keep them still
thy debto^s, and so enrich thy self. Make up thy accounts, see what thou owe
to others, and what residue is remaining for thy self; without doubt thou
would^t esteem thy self a wealthy man if all thy debts were cleared. How
deeply art thou indebted to Almighty God? insomuch as through thy negligence
thou art wholly unabled to give him satisfaction: take then a provident course;
assign him over to the debtors, and so by their inte^vention quit thy bonds,
which of thy self thou could never have cancelled. Dimitti, and dimittetur
tibi, forgive thy neighbor when he offends against thee, Eccl. 28.
and then at thine humble petition thine own offenses shall be forgiven thee;
if thou forget those small reckonings betwixt thee and thy neighbor, God will
release thee thy mighty arrerages. You k^ow well that saying of St Hierom: o
^ormidolosa sententia, etc. O horrible sentence (says he) God will not remit
us our great debts, unless we remit our brothers their smaller ones; and we
are to expect at Gods hands again such pardon, as we afford our enemies.

The second Paragraph.
WHerefore, whosoever thou art, have compassion at least of thy self, and
rather than to hate thine own se fe, love t^ine enemy: the plea ure of revenge
is short, but that of mercy is perpetual: Wherefore Noli vinci a malo, Romans 12.
sed vince in bono malum: Be not overcome (I beseech you) of evil, but
overcome evil with good. If thine Enemy be a hungry, bestow food upon him: if
thirsty, assuage it but with a draught of water, a d thou shall heap hot
burning coals upon his head, Prove. 25.
and God will reward thee for it: vince in bono malum. St Chrysostom speaking
of this victory says, that in the Olympic gam s, where the Devil was
president, it was enacted, Male faciendo vincere, In c. 12. ad Romans
that they should overcome by violence, and all fou e means: but in those
where C^r st presides, there is a decree quite opposite to this, where not he
who strikes, but he who is stricken meriteth a Crown. If we did strive to
excel in meekness, how invincible should we be, how far above all injury
and wrong? O then never utter such odious words as these, reddam malum, I will
repay evil, Prove. 20.
but expecta Dominum and liberabit te, do but expect our Lord, and he will
undertake thy cause. Neither say, I will deal with him as he has dealt with
me. Alas, why to your own loss should you seek another harm and detriment?
why do you bite those stones which are thrown at you, like some Mastiffe Cur,
and not rather turn upon the hand which threw them? Ridiculous blindness! why
art thou so furious against thine enemy? 2 Kings 16
Dimitte eum, ut maledicat: dominus enim praecepit et ut malediceret tibi: let
him revile thee still, for it is God who has appointed him. Those who are
condemned to dye, are not angry with the E^ecutioner, but with the Judge; and
why, silly as thou art, do thou bend thy forces against him who inflicts upon
thee thy sufferings, and not rather consider by whose warrant it is done? Is it
not God, who for thy greater good has singled thee out such an adversary as
this, to the end to punish thee for thy passed crimes? The Devil could not
have bereaved Job Job
of one herd of cattle, but by express permission of Almighty God: whe^fore
he said well, (not the devil) but the Lord bestowed them on me, and deprived me
of them again. Our Savior Christ told Pilate when he gloried in his power:
John 19.
non haberes potestatem, etc. Thou should have no power over me, unless it
were given thee from above. And this were an excellent answer to give an enemy.
Diverse have more profited by their enemies, than by their dearest friends. The
Church had had no Martyrs if all its Tyrants had been exti^pated: and should
we have no enemies, we should be deprived of many a glorious Crown. Dioclesian
did no less advance and propagate the Church by his inhumane cruelty, than
Constantine by his reverence toward it and liberality. That rich ^armer in the
Gospel commanded that both the corn and weeds should be suffered to grow up
together: Sinite utraque crescere; whereas we overhasty and violent to our
own perditions, no sooner can espy a weed above the ground, but we cry out
presently, to the fire with these Thistles, let this Darnell be burnt, let our
enemies be destroyed. Stay, stay dear Christians, we ought not to take this
violent course as yet: when the harvest comes, there will be order given to the
husbandman, to gather, first of all, the Cockle and Darnell into bundles, and
cast them into the fire: and why then should we discredit our own zeal with
our own in considerate haste; why are we so forward to drag ou^ ene^ies to
deserved punishment? Never fear it, such weeds as these shall not escape the
sikle and the fire; but as yet the harvest is not come, Matthew. 6.
expect a wh le. Our Savior Christ teaching his Disciples a form of Prayer,
consisting of seven Petitions to his heavenly Father, does not without profound
mystery particularly repeat and expound that which concerns the forgiveness
of offenses, to signify thereby without doubt, that for the rest it might
suffice to have only insinuated them unto the^, but that this could never be
inculc^ted enough: Nunquam enim nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis dicitur. And
even in this respect the royal Psalmist enlarges himself in Psalm. 118.
commendations of the law: Latum mandatum tuum nimis, thy law (says he) O
Lord, is exceeding broad, indeed so broad, as to command us to extend the
bosom of our loves, not only to our acquaintance, but to mere strangers, as
well to our adversaries, as those who are beneficial to us, to the worthy and
unworthy, unto friends and enemies alike. No exterior mark of any dignity
does so testify a man to be learned, wealthy, or noble, as the actual loving
of our Enemies does us, to be the Sons of Almighty God. But, who (you will
object) is so absolute a master of himself, as not to be transported
sometimes, through violence of passion and danger, to some extraordinary
expression of our aversion from an enemy. But we must know that it becomes a
Christian, to refrain his anger, and curb such violent motions as these. St.
Augustine says rarely well Audisti convitium? ventus est. Ser. 3. inter. 17.
Hom.
Iratus es? fluctus est Vento igitur flante, fluctu surgente periclitatur
navis, periclitatur cor tuum: audito convitio vindicari vis, and ecce
vindicando te fecistinaufragium, Do thou hear thy self ill spoken of?
(says he) it is but a wind: art thou offended at it? it is but a billow; but
when this wind and billows meet, thy heart is in jeopardy, the poor ship is
in danger to be cast away, Thou resolvest to revenge thy self for those
offensive words, and behold it is the wrack of thee. And he proceeds to give
the the reason for it, and quare hoc? Why is all this? says he: quia dormit in
te Christus, oblitus es Christum nimirum excidit tibi Christum cum
crucifigeretur inimicis suis non Crucem, sed veniam a patre lachrimis exorasse,
Because Christ is a sleep in thee, thou have forgotten Christ, thou do not
remember how Christ, whilst he was crucified, besought his Father even with
tears, to pardon, and not to punish his enemies. And now behold how Christ is
a sleep in thee, who taught thee not only to watch, but even to dye to
pleasure thine enemies. O therefore awake Christ within thee by expostulating in
this manner with thy self: And who am I, that I should revenge me of mine
enemies? Who knows whether I may not sooner meet with death, than my revenge
can meet with them? and then O miserable as I am, what will become of me, when
Christ shall disclaim my departing soul, when he shall reject me, who has
taught mildness, not anger, who has professed himself a master of submission,
not of revenge, of charity and pardon, not hate and rancorous spite?

The third Paragraph.
But revenge has neither eyes nor ears, it is carried blind and deaf away by
the swing of every sudden passion, so as with good reason that ancient Poet
declares himself agrieved.

-- Verum ita sunt isti nostri divites
Si quid benefacias, Plaut in Pan. Act 3. See ult.
levior pluma est gratia,
Si quid peccatu^ est, plu^beas iras geru^t.
It is the fashion now of the richer sort, if you do them any pleasure, their
thanks are lighter than a feather, for it; but if once you displease them the
memory of it lies as heavy as lead upon their galled minds. Where he seems to
have lively disciphered such as now a days suffer their friendships to be
blown away, and vanish with the least wind of an offense, whilst they rivit the
hate of an injury as deeply in their minds, as if it were sodered there with
sheets of lead O Christians for shame be more prone to pardon, least we be
found more defective herein than very Heathens themselves, least we be
convinced with so many clear examples and testimonies of theirs, as to have no
colorable excuse left to pretend for pardon at that last general day, Pompey
the great is no less famous in History, for his constancy to his friends, his
easiness in forgiving offenses, and facility in admitting of any satisfaction,
than for his three glorious triumphs over the third part of the universal
world. Augustus Caesar in these express terms pardoned Cinna, who had
conspired against his life: O Cinna, once more I grant thee thy life; the first
time as to an Enemy, now as to a Traitor and a Paracide: and hereupon he
bestowed upon him the Consular dignity: and the issue of this his clemency was,
that he experienced him ever after most loyal to him, and Cinna dying, left
him inheritor of all he had. Phocian, a man of most innocent life, and one who
had borne Offices of highest dignity in the Common wealth, being condemned to
dye, some of his friends, as the hangman was presenting him with the poisoned
Cup, asked him, What service he would command them to his Son? Nothing (said
he) but that he would never call to mind what a draught the Athenians enforce me
this day to drink. It is recorded of Julius Caesar, that he was unmindfull of
nothing but injuries. But who is there of us, who would not think it a blemish
to t^eir reputations, to have such an opinion as this conceived of them? how
freshly do we bear injuries in mind? how sensible are we of them, and whilst
we write down benefits in light dust, we record them in solid flint, manet alta
mente repostum: neither can the authority of Almighty God himself prevail, to
bring us to reconciliation. God long ago has sev^rely prohibited all revenge,
in declaring, Deuteronomy. 32.
mea est ultio and ego retribuam in te^pore; Revenge belongs to me, and in time
I will reward them: and notwithstanding, how many are there who impiously
answer him again, No, o Lord, revenge belongs to me, and I will requite them:
Our Lord replies, It is my revenge, let me alone with it; And yet man desists
not: nay, rather mine, leave the managing of it to me; you O Lord are too soon
appeased, your revenge is too too slow. And thus with most intolerable
presumption we usurp the authority of Almighty God, and dare even impiously to
wrest the sword out of Gods hands to strike our enemies, whose punishment he
reserves to himself, and against a^l right put on the severity of a judge,
whilst we are parties in the offenc^ our selves.

The fourth Paragraph.
IT is recounted by diverse credible Authors, how a certain person who had
received an injury had recourse once to one Sisovius an ancient holy man;
Rufin. Aquil l. 3. n. 7^. Paschas^e. 10. Pelag. libell 1^. r. 10. Palla^l. in
a^pen Puusi Hist. n 13.
to whom after he had declared his agrievances, as the manner is, with all
exaggeration of circumstance, he besought him to let him declare himself a man,
and revenge himself. The same with all instancy of prayer desired him not to
show himself so far a man, as to become a Devil: For his revenge, God would
have care to dispose all for his greater good; wherefore he was to commit it
wholly unto him, and even according to true fortitude this was the
sufficientest revenge that he could take, who might assure himself that his
enemy should never escape the divine hands unpunished. The other replied,
Father I am fully resolved never to pardon him, nor to desist till I have
requited him with the like injury. For heavens love, answered the holy man, be
a man, but so as you be a Christian withal, and consider more what reason may
persuade you, than what your violent passion may suggest: Why, said the other,
it is no other than reason which puts me upon this resolution, not to spare
him, who cares not for sparing any. O but, said Sisovius, you cannot determine
your own right your self, nor execute what you have determined; it is only
in Gods power to punish his creatures, he is the Lord of vengeance, and
therefore may freely take revenge; for us we ought not intermeddle in it.
Besides I am sure you are not ignorant how Christ has not only counseled but
even commanded us to pardon, nay to pray for, to love, and do good unto our
enemies. Father, said he, never persuade me, my heart is a tempestuous sea, and
can never be calmed until I have taken vengeance of mine enemy. Then answered
Sisovius, since you are so resolved, respit at least your anger until we have
commended ou^ selve^ to God in prayer. And thereupon they both fell down upon
their knees: when the holy man began, prescribing unto the other (as it were)
this for ^e of Prayer. O God we have no need of thy assistance any more,
neither do we request thee hereafter to be solicitous for us. We will
sufficiently provide for our selves; revenge belongs unto us, and we will
reward our foes as they deserve. Behold even now we are upon the point of
subjecting our enemies as foot-stooles under our feet. These words so lively
touched the heart of that other man, that casting himself all along at
Sisovius feet, he vowed with many tears there in the place, so wholly to lay
aside all thought of his revenge, as never thereafter, by the least word to
call it to mind again. And this is that, which he, who only by excellence is
just, commanded us; this is the peculiar distinction of the sons of God, not
only to make no difficulty to remit offenses, but even to recompense them with
benefits. 2 These. 5.
Videte nequis malu^ pro malo alicci reddat, etc. look (says the Apostle)
that none of you requite evil for evil, but always that which is good,
pursue toward each other, and toward al^; But our Savior Christ in more
express terms does oblige us unto more perfection. Vobis dico qui auditis,
^uke 6.
etc. to you I say that do hear me, love your enemies do good to them that
hate you, and bless those who curse you; and according as you will that men
do to you, do you also the like to them again. And, if you love them that
love you, what thanks is it to you? for sinners love those who love them: and
if you do good to those, who do you good, what thanks is it to you? For
sinners also do the like; but do you love your enemies, and your reward shall
be much, and you shall be Sons of the highest, because himself is beneficial
to the evil and ungrateful. This with good reason thou do enjoyne us, this
with great liberality thou do promise us. But, O dear Lord, how many are
there who will not hear thee? How many that care so little for thy
Commandment, as their hates and lives have both but one period? They protest
against that effeminate baseness, as they title it, to be easily persuaded to
put up a wrong. For their parts they should account it their only felicity to
repay the injurer in his own coin again: and if Solomon-like they might be
masters of their wish, a hundred times rather than Wisdom, they should desire
Revenge. These are they who never cease to importune Almighty God: Da mihi
Domine inimicorum meorum animas; Grant me, O Lord the souls of mine enemies;
as for the rest I refer it unto thee. This is the true spirit of revenge
indeed, neither to regard the Law of God, nor to be terrified with his threats,
to be so far from putting up an injury, as to return it as soon as it is
offered them, at every light word to vent their choler, and when anger has
once stirred them up, to follow every impulse of their enraged minds, seeking
with all earnestness their enemies destruction. Haec ulciscendi libido,
according to Tertullian, negotium curat aut gloriae aut malitiae: sed gloria
ubique vana est, and malitia Domino odiosa; hoc quidem loco maxim, quia malum
duplicat quod semel factum est. This lust of vengeance does labor either to
satisfy its malice, or desire of glory: for glory it is a mere vanity, and
malice is an odious thing to Almighty God, especially in these circumstances
where of a single offense we make a double one. All the differene betwixt him
who provokes unto an injury and him who is provoked, is only this, that the
one has his hand first in mischief, the other last, and both are alike guilty
of offending God. For he counsels us, when we are stricken on the one cheek,
presently to offer the other, and not to desist till we have tired out our
enemies malice with our patience: assuring our selves that so we shall annoy
him more, than if we put our selves upon our own defense, since he for whose
sake we suffer all, will for our sakes chastise him with deserved punishment.
Why then should we arrogate unto our selves the right of our defense, which
God unto our greater glory has reserved unto himself? He is the undertaker for
our patience; whosoever trusts him with his wrongs, he will revenge them; with
his losses he will redress them; with his griefs he will remedy them; finally
with his death, and he will restore him unto life again.

The 5. Paragraph.
But you will object with the Poet: Iuu. 1. Saty.
Semper ego auditor tantum nunquam ne reponam
Vexatus toties?
Shall I be still a hearer vexed so often, and never requite them?


Never (dear Christian) never, although a hundred, although a thousand times,
if thou will declare thy self a true Son of God, commit thy cause to him, and
the while suffer, Baruch. 4.
and be silent. Nocentes peribunt qui te vexaveru^t and qui gratulati sunt in
tua ruina punientur: The wicked who have vexed thee shall perish, and those who
rejoiced in thy ruin shall be punished. Colos. 3.
He who has done an injury, shall be rewarded according to his misdeeds. You
will say perhaps, I am content to forgive mine enemy, but yet I will not forget
the injury, I will remember him. If this be all thy charity, be assured that
God will requite thee with the like: Homo homini reservat iram, and a Deo
quoerit medelam? etc. M^n to man (says the Son of Syrach, Eccl. 28.
reserveth anger, and does he seek for remedy of God? He has not mercy of a
man, like unto himself, and does he entreat for his own sins? he, flesh as
he is, reserveth anger, and does he demand propitiation of God? Who shall
obtain any thing for his sin by prayer? It is but a vain pretext of clemency
to say, I will not revenge my self, but yet withal I will not fo^ge the
injury; either give that which thou resolvest to give, without any reservation
at all, or never expect by it to purchase heaven. You know what threatening
language our Savior uses, Sic and Pater meus coelestis faciet vobis, Matthew. 18.
etc. So my heavenly Father will deal by you if each of you do not forgive
your brother from your hearts, etc. But you will say for my part I should be
ready enough to pardon him; neither am I so jealous for mine own honor; but
that public office which I sustastaine is interest in it, that no injury
offered to my private person do pass unpunished. For Gods love, dear
Christians, let us not stand too much on ceremonies, in things which so nearely
concern our salvation; this is but a flourish of a few ayry words. Stephen was
a public officer as well as you, and yet we see he was no ways imboldned by
it, to take up stones, and deal by his persecutors as they dealt by him:
neither did he suppose that any convenient course to defend his dignity, but
with a most sincere heart he cried out, Domine Jesus ne statuas illis hoc
peccatum: O Jesus do not impute this sin unto them. And so our crucified Lord,
not only as he was son of man, but of Almighty God, besought his Father, even
with tears, to pardon his enemies. Pater dimitte illis. No, there is no mortal
creatures of so high a dignity to whom it can be any loss of reputation to
forgive an injury, especially if it concern no other than himself: Levit. 1^
non quaeras ultionem nec memoreris injuriae Civium tuorum, do not seek for
vengeance not bear in mind the injuries of your own Citizens. But you will
say, he has injured you without a cause. Had it not been causeless, it had
been no injury; where both are alike faulty, neither are injured. But what do
I talk of cause? What cause did Joseph give unto his brethren in only making
relation of his dream? And yet afterward being chief Governor of Egypt, in
a generous kind of silence, he buried all offense. But this of yours is of
exorbitant strain. And wherefore all this exaggeration? If the offense were
light, your reward for pardoning of it would be but small. We can never rise to
any eminent degree of perfection, but by the way of suffering great injuries.
Harken what St. H^erome says in this particular: Deus faber est, S. Hier. in
c. 5 Matthew.
inimici lima sunt, and mallei, quibus nos ille expurgat Sanctosque soulpit.
God is the statu^ry, and our enemies are his chissells and hammers, with which
he polishes us, and m^kes us into Saints. H^th your enem^es ever stoned you, as
they did Saint P^ul, or scourged and crucified you, as they did our Savior
Christ? But you will allege you are noble, and he who injured you is but some
base borne pesant some Son of the earth. O Samian Pot-sheard art thou not of
the same Clay (or little better) of which thine enemy is made? thou noble? if
thou permits thy self once to be over come by this appe^ite of revenge, know
thou art no longer the offspring of a noble family; but the slave of sin.
Wherefore be advised by the wise man: Memento novissimorum and define
inimicari, Remember the last things, Eccl. 28.
and cease to be at enmity. You will tell me, though you would never so feign
forgive your enemy, yet you cannot overcome your self therein. The reason is,
because you will take no pains to get the victory I know that as long as you
nourish grudgings in your m^ndes, all your thoughts which arise from thence,
taste of nothing but bitterness, whilst your bosom is no other but a nurcery
of nettles, thorns, and briars, with which your ulcerated Conscience is stung,
and smarts unto the very blood. Do you burn with desire of revenge? haste
with all speed to extinguish the flame, least in debarring your own entrance
into heaven, you but accelerate the fire of hell, where you shall burn for all
eternity. The sustaining of injuries is the ga^es of heaven, and, qui vindicari
vult, a Domino inveniet vindictam and peccata illius servans servabit; Eccl. 2^.
he who will be revenged, shall find vengeance of our Lord, and with great
observancy he will keep his sin. You can take no sleep perhaps, nor have an
appetite to any food, as long as you behold a Mardocheus sitting securely at
the Palace gate, as long as you see your enemy uncontrolled, conspiring your
ruin. How bravely we deceive our selves to our own perdition? Ezekiel tells
of cerraine Soldiers, qui posuerunt gladios suos sub capitibus suis, Ezekiel. 32.
and descenderunt ad infernum cum armis suis, who laid their swords under their
heads, and so descended together with their weapons into hell: behold a new
manner of pillow, to sleep on swords. And truly they take their rest upon no
other, who are so desirous of revenge, as they never rest but when they are
fighting, quarrelling, harming of other men. In this manner Cain, that primitve
disciple of the Devil (as St. Basil terms him) for no other end sought his
brothers destruction, but upon the ruin of his glory for to build his own,
though the effect was far contrary to his expectation. Esau found no place for
any mercy, although he sought it with instancy of many tears: so Saul, Ad.
Heb. 12
so Antiochus were shamefully repulst even from the Altar of mercy, to which
they fled; and that deservedly, since they never spared any whom they held for
enemies: Eccl. 28.
Iudicium sine misericordia fiet illi qui uonfecerit misericordiam, He shall
have judgment pass upon him without any mercy, who has not afforded mercy
unto others; whereas King David redoubled his wickedness with a foul relapse,
and dyed his infamous Adultery in blood, and yet he no sooner began to show
himself contrite, he had no sooner pronounced these two short words Peccavi
Domino, 2 Kings 12.
I have sinned against the Lord, but he heard presently from the mouth of the
Prophet Nathan Dominus peccatum tuum transtulit. The Lord has remitted your
sin. How often did Antiochus confess that he had sinned, and with grievous
cries implore the Divine pity, vowing offerings to the Temple, and promising
for the time to come an entire conversion; and yet his petition never would be
heard; and from whence proceeded this differeece of favor, but from their
different carriages toward their enemies? For David wilst he was inferior to
no King, in prowess and deeds of arms, was superior unto all in pardoning his
foes, insomuch as he esteemed revenge the most unworthy his dignity of all
other crimes; whereas that other Tyrant behaved himself in more than hostile
manner toward his own Citizens, breathing forth nothing but swords, fire,
blood, slaughter, and revenge.

The 6 Paragraph.
THough Physicians most commonly use not to give over t eir patients till they
see them so faint as they require a tomb (as it were) to lean their bones
against; yet the^e are some maladies so pestiferous as at first sight of the
patient, the can say, He is but a dead m^n, go and provide him a grave. In like
manner though in this life we are not to despair of the salvation of any, how
wicked soever they be; notwithstanding this is such an incurable disease, where
the vitiated bowels even swim with gal, and the m^nde is tortured with the
pangs of hatred, and desire of revenge, that St. John plainly declares his
opinion of such an one: 1 John 5.
Make ready a Sepulcher for this miserable wretch, for his sin is mortal,
and to the death; neither would I advise any to pray for him. They rarely
recover who are once obstinate in revenge, and there is no sense, where there
is nothing but bitterness. Eccl. 22.
But although all the wise and learned men in the world cry out against us:
though all the Prophets threaten us, Angels exhort us to bury our injuries in
forgetfulness, and enter into league of friendship with our enemies, yet we
despise them all, and desperately persever in pursuit of our revenge. La^^ of
all, the Learned and wisest of all wise and learned men, the instruction of
Prophets, and King of Angels with sovereign power, supreme authority, does
visit us himself not so much by way of persuasion as by authority to bring us
to accord, not to give us counsel, but an absolute law, and yet with extreme
audacity we remain still obstinate. But mark this Dialogue, how Christ our
Sovereign King commands, and how his subjects contrary his command. Here
stands our Savior Christ, and in his fathers name com^ands them: Matthew. 5.
Luke 6.
Ego autem dico vobis, diligite inimicos vestros: I say unto you, love your
enemies. ^here stands his rebellious subjects, and answer him presumptuously
again: O Christ this is lost labor you do command in vain. To you I spe^ke,
to you who are Christians. We side our selves presently with Heathens, and
none gives ear to Christ. I say unto you, resist not evil; So we shall be
counted cowards and weak spirited. Pray for those who persecute and calumniate
you. How seldom, and how cold this prayer is; That you may be Sons of your
Father who is in Heaven. We shall buy this title at too dear a price. Do good
to those who hate you. It is against our natures, O Lord command us somewhat
more tolerable. Forgive others, and you shall be forgiven your selves. It is
impossible, content your self, we cannot do it. In brief, we will not restrain
our anger, bridle our selves, nor contain our hands; as for our thoughts, how
is it possible to govern them? If you shall remit to men their offenses, your
heavenly father will remit you yours. For us, we are resolved to perish, so our
enemies perish with us.

The 7. Paragraph.
O Christians, and is Heaven then such an odious thing as you must needs make
such impetuous haste to hell? Do you not remember the daily petition which you
make, Et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus, And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive? Do you not perceive your obligation from hence,
to love your enemy, under pain of binding your self unto the forfeiture, as
often as you supplicate Almighty God to forgive you, as you forgive other men,
when you do but say in a manner, For me, I am resolved to pardon no man, but to
take revenge on all, and persecute them with implacable hatred to the death;
wherefore do thou, O Lord if thou please, requite me with the like. No this is
the language of the reprobate, the predestinate are of a far different strain:
it is impossible to provoke them by any injury beyond their custom of
interceding in this manner for their enemies; Father forgive them, and impute
not this sin unto them; for my part, I freely pardon them, I freely forgive
them, without all thought of ever revenging it. This is the style of the
Predestinate. And here, before I draw to a conclusion, I would desire to know
of thee whosoever read this, and yet bear a grudge unto thine enemy in
thy mind, whether thou believe all this to be true or no? without doubt you
will not deny it, unless you can believe the truth would conspire with
falsehood to deceive you, Christ with untruth. Supposing then that all is true,
as most true it is, what impious contumacy is this in you? what obstinate
contempt of the Law of God? what presumptuous contradicting of the will of
Christ? Christ exhorts you with all earnestness to pardon, forgive, and love
not only y ur friends, but even your enemies, be they whom they will; and yet
do you remain obstinate, yet do you hate your foes? Will you yet afford them
no forgiveness? yet cannot you love those who maliciously have detracted you?
Do you care so little for Christ, so little for Almighty God? do you set so
light by heaven, by your eternal salvation so light? cannot all this extort
from you one such word as this, seriously uttered, and proceeding from your
heart: Ignosco, dimitto, I pardon, I forgive, and beseech Almighty God to do
the like, if perchance any have offended me? Yet do thou stand like a
senseless statue, without all voice and motion of forgiveness? Yet out of
that iron bosom of thine, do thou breath nothing but such ominous sounds as
these: away with mine enemies, an evil death be with them, and all that is
evil else? Yet do thou blow out nothing but revenge, death, and destruction
against thine enemies? Is your hate of your enemies not yet extinguished, do
you yet refuse to o^ey the commandments of our Savior Christ? If so, go with
other Christians your like, take what way you will, you can never be out of it;
one way or other you will arrive infallibly unto your journies end, the kingdom
of everlasting woe and wretchedness. Go on confidently, blindfold as you are,
and assure your selves that every path you can take will lead you unto hell;
the certain course you can take to arrive thither, is by mistaking of your way,
in the mean while, hold this for certain, Non potest amare Deum qui non cessat
odisse inimicum, That he cannot love God, who cease not to hate his Enemy.

intaglio etching of an old man carrying a cross Emblem X.

Detestation of Sins past

I will come unto thee quickly and remove thy candlestick out of his place
except thou repent Reu: 2 V. 5.



The Tenth Sign, Of Predestination,
IS the detestat on of our passed sins. The D vice is, An aged man bearing his
rosse. The Motto, Veniam tibi cito, Apoc 2.
and movebo candelabrum tuum ^e loco suo, nisi poenitentiam egeris. I will come
presently to thee, and remove thy Candlestick out of its place, unless thou
repent. St. Austin esteems it a mo t flagitiou, crime to rejoice and glory in
the remembrance of our passed ^ins, wher^as we ought rather to conceive great
sorrow for them, and endeavor with all diligence to extirpate them ^or a the
same Saint truly affirms in another place, qui pectus suum tundit, nec cor
igat peccata, solidat, Lib. 5. de lib. Arbitr.
non tollit He that bears his breast, and does not amend his life, rather
inroots his sins more in him, than extirpates them. The royal Prophet affirms
of himself in the midst of his lamentations, pecca^u^ meu^ contra me est
semper, that hi^ sins were alway^s against him; and theref^^e he beseeches God
with ^uch instancy of prayer, to create in him a new heart, and renew a right
spirit in him: Cor mundum crea in me Deus and spiritum rectum innova in
vis^eribus meis And such as those a^e only truly happy, Psalm. 50.
who imitate this holy sorrow, and prosecute their sinne^ with such a generous
hate as this; who grieve only, because they are grieved no more, and afflict
themselves, because they do not afflict themselves enou^h. This is a true
sorrow indeed, according to Almighty God, which (to speak with the Apostle)
makes repentance unto salvation, 2 Cor. 7.
not to be repented of. Where we are maturely to consider the w^rd in stabilem
salutem, to lasting and permanent salvation, to salvation not to be repented
of: For many by Repentance acquire the state of Salvation, but alas their
salvation is not permanent and lasting. For which cause our Savior expressly
admonishes us, Nisi paenitentiam habue^itis, Luke 13.
omnes similiter peribitis, ^nlesse ye have repentance, ye shall all likewise
p rish; where he in^ nuates unto us, that it is not enough to repent, but we
must also have repentance, that is, be conversant in it; neither is it to be
undertaken only at certain times, and then intermitted, for so long again;
but we are still to actuate our selves therein, with a firm purpose of
persevering. And this is the Doctrine delivered to us from that Angellicall
mouth: St. Tho.
vera and ser^a penitentia non tantum a peccatis praeteritis expiat, sed etiam
preservat a futuris: that true and sincere repentance, does not only expiate us
from our passed sins, but also preserves us from future ones; he does not
repent for his sins, who has not the like purpose withal, of never falling
into the like sins again.

The first Paragraph.
CHrist having healed the Paraletick in the Gospel, John 5.
commanded him to take up his bed and walk, which he performed instantly: and
sustulit grabatu^ suum and ambulabat. The occasions of sinning are first to be
avoided, and removed out of the way, and then we are to proceed to a most
virtuous course of life The Prodigall-child being almost starved with hunger
said, Surgam and ibo ad patrem meum. I will rise, and go to my Father. Neither
did he only say he would go, but he went indeed; whereas we, for the most
part, when it comes to this, through our own negligence do lose both us^ of
hands and feet, we are only active in words, nothing in deeds; mighty of our
tongues and feeble of our hands; we bend the bow, but never sho^t the arrow; we
purpose much, but never perform any thing; we are sorry when we are fallen
i^to any sin, but use no d^ligence in providing not to fall again. And as
those who wish to have their wounds cured, but apply not the remedy, so we
would avoid the falling into sins, but divert not the stream of affections
which carries us toward them Age finds us still procrastinating, and seeking
of delays; our li^e hastes away, whilst we do nothing, but purpose, and make
fair promises, and is past before we put them in execution; when death arrests
us in midst of our long purposes, and derides us for having consumed so many
years in resolving what to do, without doing any thing Such an one was St
Augustine once, but not long such an one: he ^id not diferre that till he was
old, which no man can undertake too young: Dicebam apud me intus, Ecce m^ do
fiat, 8 Cons. c. 11.
modo fiat: Et cum verbo jam ibam in placitum, jam pene faciebam, and non
faciebam nec relabebar tamen in pristina, sed de p^oximo stabam, and
r^sp^rabam. Retinebant me nugae nugarum, and vanitates vanitatum antiquae
^micae meae, and succu^iebant vestem me^m carneam and submurm rabant: dimittis
ne ^os? I said in my self (says he) behold I will do it shortly, and ^^or^ly
it shall be done. And having said this, I was satisfied, I was even upon the
point of performance, but performed nothing; yet I returned not wholly to my
old customs again, but stood panting not far of. I was stayed and detained by
those old friends of mine, the toys of toys, and vanities of vanities; and
shaking me by this same vestment of flesh, they muttered these words, Will you
forsake us then? Yes truly he forsook you, and wholly discarded you, he shook
off your intolerable yoke, and detested in such manner the ways of his former
life, as he never thereafter set foot in them again.

The second Paragraph.
WE often undertake a better course of life, but we persever not in it, and so
whilst we go not forwards with our web, it unravels again, and becomes as
mi^hapen as it was before. We want not (as we may well suppose) many pious
endeavors, ho y thoughts, pure intentions, and wise deliberations; and in all
which, we are but like the Athenians, who enacted excellent laws, but were
stark naught to urge them on to execution, or provide they might not be
antiquated by the times abuse. We prescribe to ou^ selves a most laudable
course of life, and most conducing to our salvation, but at every little
tediousness, and molestation we desist from it; we fortify our selves with
many holy, and fiery purposes, but at the first parley of our rebellious flesh,
at the first solicitation of our alluring enemy, seconded with others of that
flattering crew, we render up our selves, and without any resistance suffer our
selves to be trailed into the filthy pu^dle of our former sins, so unconstant
is o^r Repentance, and so little durable. O dear Christian, thou have resolved
to lead a life most pure, to decline all occa^ons which may blemish it, to
refrain thine eyes, the ^ollicitors of lust, and mortify the unrulinesse of
thy flesh, and thou do well therein. Thou beginnest to deb^t thy tongue from
mis-beseeming words; to harbor an aversion from reading lascivious books. And
all this very well Thou purposest to suppress thy anger, to moderate thy
passions, to reject all enmity, and banish envy wholly from thy mind, and thou
do excellent well. Thou resolvest to be more reserved in speech, to be silent
whilst others are detracted of, and patient when the self art injured; and all
this excell^nt well. But how far more excellent were it to remain still
constant to our purposes? whereas, alas how many are there, who yesterday could
bridle their tongues, contain their lubricities, suppress their angers, and
overcome themselves, who to day are wholly effused on their former
licentiousness, and in receiving again the servile yoke of unruly lust, and a
licentious tongue, and giving the reins of their furious passions, become as
very sl^ves to vices as they were before It is no true repentanc, wihich is not
stable, and permanent, but rather inconstancy and light volubility of mind. We
are like those cowardly fencers, who at blunt can handle their weapons skilf
lly, and make great flourishes, but being challenged to the field at sharp, the
glaunce of the naked weapons so dazles their eyes, as they run dastardly away,
and expose their backs to those wounds which make them fearfully turn away
their face. We are like unexpert foot men, who at their first setting out do
keep a mighty ado, ut they are presently all in a sweat, and forced to take
up, before they have half run the race. How often do we undertake matters of
great consequence, which we begin lauda^ly, and for a time hopefully pro^^cute,
until^ by degrees we languish, afterward come to fall, and at the len^th lie
grovelling all along? That ^ice makes vain ostentation of blossoms, which only
promises fruit, b t never produces any; That Architect lays but a bootlesse
foundation on which he never ra^seth a building up; and what does it avail a
Mariner to hoise up sail, weigh Anchor, and betake him to the stern, if he
never put to sea, or else make for land again, as soon as he is out of the
havens mouth? And what do we but lay the foundation with this Architect, and
never go forward with the building we have in hand? Begin our Exordium with
the Orator, but rarely come to our peroration? Set Sail with the Mariner but
for every little blast, stand for the harbor again: What have we more
frequently in our mouths, than I will amend my manners, I will reclaim my life,
and yet, what is less seriously performed? Straight from the receiving of the
Sacraments we start out courageously toward the Goal, but before we have
run half way, we faint and lay us down for wea^inesse. When none can
discern in us any memorial of good purpose we ever had, or of that sacred
refection; so mindful we are still of injuries, so forgetful of what we
piously resolved; so as with good reason Polybius says, Man is accounted the
wisest of all animated things, bu^ for my part I hold him the foolishest of
all: for other Animals are ever wary after they have once received harm: The
Fox is never taken in the same Gin again: the Wolf shuns the pi^-f^ll, the
dog a cudgel the second time; but only man is so unwary, so oblivious a
thing, as from time to to time be falls most commonly into the same sins again.

The third Paragraph.
GOd complains by the Prophet ^saiah, Non posuisti haec, etc. Thou have not
taken this to heart, Isaiah 4^.
neither remembered the latest things; and I have s^id, even when thou have
committed all this, return unto me, and she has not returned: Repentance,
(says St. Bernard) without amendment ^vails us nothin^; For if one build an
edifice, and another demolish it, what obtain they but their labor for their
pain: Eccl. 34.
Qui enim baptizatur a mortuo, etc. For he who is w^sh^d from the dead, and
touches him again, what does his washing benefit him? True repentance goes
ever accopanyed with amendment; when gluttony is stinted, luxury amortized,
^ride depressed, and our bodies subjec^ed unto holiness, which were before
slaves of iniquity. And all this we promise faithfully to execute; and yet a
day scarcely pasteth, sometimes not an hour, before all our promises are
forgot, and we returned to our f^rmer bent again: And what Isaiah does so
much deplore, of a wholesome sadness, we make our meriment, Venite sumamus
vinum, Isaiah 56.
and impleamur ebrietate, and erit sicut hodie, sic and cras, and multo
amplius, Come give us some wine, and let us take our fill of drunkenness, as
we do to day, so let us tomorrow, and that with advantage. We are just of
Pharaohs condition, for he, as soon as he perceived the rain, hail, and
thunder to be passed over, began to sin more licen^iously than before; so we,
after we have obtained remission for our former sins, do commonly fall into
more grievous ones. How often do we seem Lambs in the morning, and become
Lions before night, wearing Tygres natures, mask^d under humane shapes? How
often do we appear Angels when we rise, and yet before the evening becom^
scarcely men? So often we change viz^rds, and most commonly the most ugly is
that which best pleases us. And thus of vessels of glory, alas, with too
frequent change, and vicissitude, we become the vessel^s of ignominy and shame:
Sicut autem aegrotantes, Hom. 3. ap po^.
(says Chrysostom) nisi semper ordinate vixerint nulla ipsis discidisciplinae
per tres aut quatuor dies servatae utilitas, sic and peccantes nisi semper
sobrii sint, nihil prod^rit ipsis duorum, aut trium dierum correctio. As
infi^me persons, unless they have lived orderly before, receive no ben^fit by
temperating themselves only for a day or two: so unless sinners do get a
habit of maturity, the amendment of three or four days will nothing profit
them. Have you not marked young Chickens, how whilst they are stragl^ng up and
down to pick up worms, and flies, the Kite so^ring aloft, singles out one of
them, and stooping suddenly snatches it away with her, when all the rest run
c^ying to hide themselve under their mothers wings; but not being able long to
contain themselves there, they must out again, and utterly unmindfull of
their former danger, they are all dispersed, as busy as before; when the Kite
watching its opportunity again, ketches up another, and flies away with it:
then in as grear a fright as they were before, they flock again unto their
feathery refuge; where after they have lurked a while, all their fear and
danger is forgot again, and so they sally out, and meet with the like
encounters, so long, until the poor d^m have never a Chicken left: even just
in this manner death does play with us; h^re he seizes upon a neighbor, there
on a kinsman, o^ near friend of ours, whose loss, in that so ne^re a blow
has reference to our selves, not without reas^n, make s us tremble and lament,
and seriously bethink our selves of amending our lives; but how long do h this
terror, these lamentations last? Some day or two, and then we pu^sue our
wonted trains again, and forgetting wholly our sorrow and heaviness, we
burst forth into immoderate laughter, and our old rio^ousnes, we seek out
unjust ways to thrive, we return to our own forsworn intemperance, and all
our other circular vices, effusing our selves with unrestrayned
licentiousness, on the accustomed excesses, of our passed life, and so long we
continue in this dead security, until death with its cold hand does gripe our
hearts, and make our eyes run with the last tears we shall ever shed. Then
that will only profi^ us which we have done, and to wish to have done this or
that, will avail us naught: Then our most of comfort will be to remember that
which cost us most pain to effect it. But we neither sufficiently credit our
selves, nor others, in point of this verity: to day we conceive a detestation
of our sins, and to morrow commit the like, or more grievous ones again,
dallying in this manner with Almighty God, when we have scarsely washed away
one sin, with repentant tears, but we commit another worthy of as many more,
connecting (as it were that chain of iniquity, which Isaiah the Prophet so
condoles, Isaiah 5.
and yet so menaceth withal. Vae qui trahitis iniquitatem in funibus, and quasi
vinculum plaustri peccatu^. Even so we add sin to sin, and for the most part,
the latter more enormious than the first: so we are always inclining unto the
worse, like Antiochus Epiphanes, of whom it was said, That he was a good child,
an ill youth, and a wicked man. By the address of Repentance and Confession
being delivered from our sins, we are fervent for the first week after, the
second we grow tepid, and the third wax wholly cold; insomuch, as losing all
spirit, we become dead again. O men, more changeable than the Moon, who not
only every month, but every week, nay often every day have their increase,
waine, excesses, and defects! How many tides do daily ebb and flow within the
Euripus of a narrow breast? How often from fruitful Olives do we degenerate
into wild and savage plants? O volubility, O inconstancy of ours, more variable
than fortune it self, which when it cease to be good, only by degrees, at
least becomes bad. Prove. 11.
Impius facit opus instabile, The work of the impious is unconstant and
wavering.

But on the contrary, the paths of the just are like a resplendant light,
Procedit, Prove. 4.
and crescit usque ad perfectum diem, which gains of the sky increases to a
perfect day. The Predestinate have such a horror from any sin, as they wholly
break of all commerce with it, thy know how dangerous a thing it is, to dally
in this manner with Almighty God, to repent us of one sin to day, and to morrow
to commit others, to repent afresh. They never remember without hearty sorrow,
on what guilty terms they once stood with Almighty God; not forget how
hamously then they offended him; which is our only efficatious way to obtain
grace and favor of Almighty God, who then forgets himself offended by us,
when we with sorrow remember our offense.

intaglio etching of an anchor Emblem XI.

Propension of our Will to good

I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto ye end
Psalm: 119 V. 112.



The eleventh sign, Of Predestination.
IS the propension of our will to good, whose Device is an Ancho, with these
words: Inclinavi cor meum ad faciend as justificationes tuas in aeternum
propter retributionem, Psalm. 119.
I have inclined my heart to fulfill thy Laws for ever, etc. This inclination
of our mind does then declare it self, when one shall have firrmly resolved
with himself, never, although it imported the loss of his life, and all he
had, to defile his conscience with any deadly sin. Psalm. 118.
^uravi and statui custodire judicia iustltiae tuae. I have resolved and sworn
(says the royal Prophet) to observe the judgments of thy righteousness; and
St John, Quod si cor nostrum, etc. John 5.
If our own hearts reprehend us not, then we may confidently have our recourse
to God. Father Lewis of Granado affirms that it is a sign of all others the
most evident of reprobation, when one does easily, and without any sense of
sorrow fall into mortal sin. He is but too far gone in wickedness, who will not
so much as seriously desire to return to good; whereas, to be willing to
become good, is a great part of goodness. For the predestinate, as they would
nothing which is evil, so would they nothing but what is pleasing to God.
Wherefore with St. Paul every hour and moment they are crying out, Acts 9.
Domine, quid me vi^ facere, O Lord what would you have me to do? th^re is
nothing which for your sake I will refuse, nothing which I shall esteem too
hard, or difficile, nothing so painful or grievous, but in having you for help
and guide, I will with my sufferance overcome it all; Psalm. 39.
and there where my ability comes short, I will supply with the ardency of my
desires; where my feet connot carry me, I will mount upon the wings of my
cogitations, and as the Heli^trop to its beloved Son, so I, O Lord, w^l wholly
conv^rt my will to thine. In capite libriscriptu^ est de me, ut facerem
voluntatem tuam, In the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I
should do thy will; It has been mire only desire O my Lord, etc. I have
obtained to place thy Law in the midst of my heart, in the midst of my
memory, my understanding, and my will. St. Bernard one ever ready pressed for to
obey the Divine will) pauperimus ego (says he) non habeo nisi unum minimum,
voluntatem meam, and non dabo illam ad voluntatem illius, qui toto se totum me
comparavit? Miserable and needy wretch as I am, I have but one mite, this Will
of mine, and shall I not bestow that upon his Will, who to redeem me wholly,
did wholly give himself? Without doubt it is most just, and reasonable that the
Divine Will should be the Author, and a rule to ours: Constitui and conformavi
voluntatem meam divinae, etc. I have resolved (say^s Epictetus) to confo^me my
Will to the Divine Will. Will he visit me with sickness? then be it so; that I
enterprise any thing? I will undertake it then; that I possess any thing? his
pleasure be it? that I forgo it? behold I am prepared; finally, that I should
dye? I am content. And who now, when I am thus resolved can enforce me to an
thing against my willl, more then they can God himself? Thus much had a
Heathen conceived of these verities, who only lived in the blind night of
ign^rance; and what a shame then were it for Christians in the clear Sunshine
of Christianity not to behold as much as he? Fiat volunt as tua, thy Will, O
Lord, be done in earth, Matthew. 1.3.
as it is in heaven. Wherefore accing^mini and estote filii pote tes, ut
pugnetis adversusnationes, etc. arm your selves, and be mighty s^ns, that you
may fight against these nations, (against the frequent assaults of vices) but
as it shall be the will of heaven, so be it done.

The first Paragraph.
IN Cities according to the principal clock the common ones use ordinarily to
be set, and why likewise should not the wills of every man conform themselves
like little clocks, unto the great celestial one only, the Will of Almighty
God? Sicut fuerit voluntas in coelo, sic fiat. As the Will shall be in heav^n,
so let it be. It is incredible how ^ratefull unto God is such an act as this.
God congratulated with himself, as for some extraordinary happiness: Inveni
David filium less virum secundum cor meu^, qui faciet omnes voluntares meas, I
have found David the son of l^sse, a man according to mine own heart, who
performs my will in every thing. God had long sought for such a man, he laid
wayt for one of that mind and disposition, who in all occurrences should
propose unto himself, no other aim than the performing of his will; and having
found such an one, even like one overjoyed, our most bountiful father cries
out, I^veni qui faciet omnes voluntate^ meas I have found him who will do my
will in every thing. And t^is was the reason why the Son of God was so exact
himself in fulfilling his fathers will: Descendide coelo non ut faciam
voluntatem meam sed voluntatem ejus, John 6.
q i misit me. I have descended from h aven, not to do mine own will, but the
will of him who sent me From the rule of this direct and sovereign Will, they
are but too far swarved, who not only not obey at a beck, but ever stir not
for its absolute command; Prove. 14.
Sapiens timet and declinat a malo, stultus transilit and confidit, the wise
man fears and so escapes evil, whilst the fool is confident and boldly leaps
into it. And this is as the Scripture says, Prove. 30.
comedere ac tergere os and dicere non sum operatus malum, to eat and wipe
their mouth clean again, and say I have done no harm. Those who are of this
mind do but laugh whilst they engage their souls unto the devil; they lose
their part of heaven, and do not feel the loss, as accounting it but a light
and trivial one.

The second Paragraph.
But on the contrary, the predestinate do lay so sure a foundation of virtue
in their minds, that they conceive a horror from all kind of offense, and from
the least shadow of any sin, and never consent to take pleasure in that which
may be displeasing to Almighty God, but they put on this firm resolution to
perform that which may be most acceptab^e unto God, although thereby they
should incur the displeasure of all the world Thither they bend all their
thoughts, and hence all discourse is derived, neither may we doubt, but from
their inflamed wills with greater ardor then Ep^ctetus did, they will burst
forth into these louder exclamations, O my God, and my love, far be it from
me, that I should not ever have the same will with thee: no, no, my will is
thine, or rather indeed I have no will longer of mine own, since all I have is
thine. And now of necessity I must f^llow thy will, since it is all I have. I
neither do, nor ought to desire any thing, O my God, but that which pleases
thee. Is it thy pleasure then that I be sick? then be it so; or poor? and that
too; to endure much pain? and that; would thou have me suffer contumelies
and injuries? I am resolved to be despised and contemned, although it would
touch me to the quick, I am prepared; will thou deprive me of all solace and
delight? I am resolved to be perplexed in mind, although it should last to the
^orlds e^d, I am content; will thou bereave me of all that a hich I most
affect? although it is most hard to depart with that we love, yet I likewise
will, since thou will have it so; will thou have me dye? of all difficile
things, this is most difficile, and yet I should not refuse to dye a thousand
times, so I might ^ut breath my last in the dea^e arms of thy most sacred
will: and that a violent death? In spite of nature I would embrace it too:
w^lt thou have me a Saint in Heaven? O my God, it is my hearts desire; or a
damned soul in Hell? ^las sweet jesus if ever thou had been so minded, it
had been done, since I have deserved it, but it is apparent it is a ^^ing thou
never desire, since thou shedst thine own precious blood to hinder it. But
yet if it were possible (as it cannot be) and I might have my choice whether
thy will should be tra^sgressed, and I a Saint in heaven, or else I damned, and
thy blessed will fulfilled, O my God, I should make no difficulty to conclude,
that it were far better for me to be damned, than thy will left undone. But,
O thou sovereign goodness, I am sure thou desire not my death, since thou
wast pleased that thine own Son should dye, to the end that I might live I
beseech thee therefore, O heavenly father, for the most hitter death of that
only Son of thine, that thou would preserve me from eternal death Look
upon those wounds, look upon that blood which for my sake was sacrificed, when
to spare thy servant, thou would not spare thy son. Behold me thy humblest
servant, O thou immortal ^ing at the least sign of thy good pleasure, ready
at thy command; all that, shall be most gratefu^ unto me which proceeds from
virtue of thy holy will; Paratum cor meu^, Deus, paratum, Psalm. 127.
cor meum, my heart, my God, is prepared, my heart is ready. Such servants as
these their heavenly master has in high esteem, who with such a vigilant eye
observe every least sign of his sacred pleasure, as they make it no other than
a law to theirs. And with a cheerful countenance are ever ready to say,
Dominus est, quod bonum est in oculis faciat, etc. He is our Lord, let him do
that which is best pleasing in his eyes, for there is nothing better than to
have regard to Gods Commandments.

The third Paragraph.
THE Grecians do commend that celebrated saying of theirs, ne quid nimis, not
too much of any thing; but thou, O Lord, have expressly commanded, mandata tua
custodiri nimis, that thy commandments should be very much observed. God would
have all his servants so ready and prompt at every command of his, at every
beck, as they should never pass a day, no not so much as that whereon they
should suffer the greatest affliction, without repeating over this short
sentence a thousand times both in heart and mouth, quod vult Deus fiat, be it
as it pleases God; and by this means the will of men so virtuously disposed
becomes to be the will of God himself, since they hold themselves constant to
this resolution, never to will any thing which may be displeasing to his Divine
Majesty; whence it comes that whatsoever they desire, they obtain, since they
desire nothing else than only to conform themselves to the will of God, as
knowing that to be most true which St. Hierome writes unto Paula upon the
occasion of Blella's death. God is good, (says he) and therefore of necessity
being so good as he is, al must be likewise good, which he ordaines; neither
can men of God receive any thing in ill part, which is proceeding from so good
a God. Are they in health? they render than ^s then to their Maker for it; are
they diseased? even in this they acknowledge and praise their Makers will; are
they deprived of their dearest friends? they cannot but bewail so sad an
accident, but yet in remembering that God has disposed it so, they bear their
losses with an equal mind; has death ravished away an only child? a loss
how ever grievous, yet to be sustained, since he who lent it, demands it back
again; are they overtaken with extreme poverty, or more grievous infirmity,
afflicted to be contemned, and opprobriously dealt withal, subject to a
thousand inluries and scorns? For all this you shall never haare them utter
other words, but sicut Domino placuit, ita factum est, ita been factum, etiam
in hoc laudetur Deus. God has done as it pleased him, and thrrefore he has
done well, for which cause even in this be he likewise blessed and praised;
Benedictus Deus in aeternum, God be blessed for ever. Whosoever are fastened to
God, as by an Anchor with such a Will as this, do awayt their latest hour
with all security, and account all misfortunes in the mean time for short,
which with so fortunate an end are to be closed up.

intaglio etching of a lute Emblem XII.

Moderation of our passions.

And unto thee shall be his desire and thou shall rule over him Genesis 4. V. 7.



The twelfth sign, Of Predestination.
IS the moderation of our passions, or the victory of temptations, The Device
is a Strung Lute: the Motto, sub te erit appetitus tuus, and tu dominaberis
illius, Gen 3.
Thy desire shall be subject unto thee, and thou shall master it. Those who
are of Christ (as the Apostle confidently avers) have mortified their flesh
with its vices and concupiscences; and St Bernard elegantly represents our
Savior inviting u^, Sermon. de S. And.
qui vult venire post me abneget semet ipsum; ac si dicat qui me desiderat, se
despiciat, and qui vult facere voluntatem meam, discat frangere suam, those
that will follow me let them deny themselves (as much as to say) let those who
would love me, despise themselves, and those who would fulfill my will, learn
to break their own. That which most fatigates us in the fight, is that which
most crowns us being Conquerors; and we have no way to become absolute Masters
of our lives, but by daily killing our affections in us. For whilst they live,
our reason is either dead, or obscured quite. For which cause the Royal
Prophet besought Almighty God to unvaile his eyes that he might behold the
wonders of the Law: revela occulos meos, and considerabo mirabilia de lege tua.
I know, O Lord, that there are great and sublime ^ecrets ontained in this holy
law, but alas, for as much as I am a man burth^ned with the load of my flesh,
and subject to variety of passions and affections, and am not ignor nt withal
what a powerful faction there is of them who d^squiet and blind my heart; it
is thy piety alone which must open mine eyes, and disperse those thick mists of
passions which encompasse them. Seneca treating of these passions of ours,
Facilius est initia eorum prohibere, Ep. 85. and ^16
quam impetum regere; nam sicut in preceps dato corpori nullum sui arbitrium
est, nec resistere dejectum potest, sed omne consilium irrevocabilis
praecipitatio abscidit, ita animus si in iram, amorem, aliosue affectus se
projecerit, non facile reprimet impetum, etc. It is easier to prevent them in
the beginning, than afterward to moderate their violence; for as a body
rouling down some steep descent, is utterly unable to cont^ine it self, by
reason his irrevocable fall has deprived him of all use of force or
delib^ration; even so a mind once precipitating it self into anger, love, or
any other passion, can with great difficulty resist their violent motions,
since it is the nature of vice never to rest, till it has tumbled us into the
very depth of all calamity. Wherefore it is best to begin even with the first
seed of these passions to root them out. We are to make head against our
enemies, on the frontiers of our dominion, lest if they mak^ impression unto
the heart thereof, they accept of no conditions from those they have
vanquished. How much b^tter is it to be a patient, than a mighty man, an
overcommer of himself than a vanquisher of Cities? Malior est patiens viro
forti, and qui dominatur animo suo expugnatore urbium

The first Paragraph.
BLessed are those (says St. Augustine) who make peace within themselves who
so govern all the motions of their mind as to render them obsequious unto
reason; and blessed are those who in subduing the concupiscences of their
flesh, become the Kingdom of Almighty God, where the mind enjoyes an absolute
dominion, the corporal senses bring all in due subordination, and as inferior
serv^nts no ways resisting to that superior power This is that peace which
the Angels proclaimed at Christ's Nativity, to which nevertheless none can
attain, but by war and violence. Hence it is, that God delivered the
Commandments to Moses, at the sound of warlike Trumpets, when we should
imagine that soft and harmonious music should have better sympathized with
those religious Rites to which the laws had peculiar reference; that trumpets
had more proportion with wars, than with the Church. But so it is (dear
Christians) we are drawn forth into the field, we are pressed unto the wars by
this our heavenly Lawgiver, neither can any truly observe his Laws, who
refuses to fight against those who impugn them. None can overcome their flesh
by cherishing it, none without a battle conquer he tempting enemy, or the
frowns or smiles of the inconstant world: We are to hold every affection for an
enemy, which the adversaries of the divine Law shall oppose against us, and as
such resist it with our uttermost power. He that is offended at his crimes, and
yet favors his passions, does but lop the branches from an evil tree, whilst
he permits the root to furnish the stock with moss. St. Chrysostom in
pondering these words of our blessed Savior; qui viderit mulierem ad
concupiscendam illam, etc. He who shall behold a woman to lust after her, has
already committed adultery with her in his heart, says, non modo morbum, sed
and morbi radicem evellit Christus, etc. Christ does not only take away the
disease, but even the root thereof. The root of adultery is this evil of
concupiscence, and so together with adultery he condemns the mother of it,
concupiscence. In like manner, he does not only prohibit murder, but
likewise anger which provokes us to it, and the firebrands of anger,
opprobrious speech. Of all passions two of the most vehement are love and
anger, and without extreme rigor never to be restrained. Gentleness and mild
persuasion can do no good with them; and as for anger it does not importune
the mind like other vices, but carries it away headlong with it. Who would
desire to wound his enemy on that condition to leave his hand incorporate in
the wound, and not be able to withdraw it back? and yet such is the nature of
anger to engage us so far as we can never come clearly off again. It will
not stick at any wickedness, and whosoever it has designed to strike at with
its thunder, it is never appeased, till it have discharged upon him a deadly
wound. He whom it rules is like the stone called Pyrites, which is set on fire
wheresoever you strike it with the flint. Prove. 29.
An angry man provokes quarrels, and he who is apt to take exceptions, will
be the readier to sin. Wrath and anger are execrable things, and there is
scarsely any plague has cost mankind so dear, for Vtrum stultum interficit
iracundia, and parvulum occidit in vidia. Anger kills the fool, and envy
murdereth the little one. Wherefore, dear brethren (says St. Augustine) ne
obsecro tantum malum nobis inducamus, Lib. 4. de Civit. Dei. c. 6.
etc. I beseech you let us not call such a plague upon our selves, the souls
sickness, the night of reason, an alienation from God, oblivion of friendship,
the overture of war, the plenitude of calamity, and the worst of devils; which
is the more warily to be avoided, more it infects with its daily incursions. In
omnes personas hic ardescit affectus, tam ex amore^ scitu^ quam ex odio, non
minus inter seria, quam inter lusus and jocos; nec interest ex quam magna causa
nascitur, sed in qualem proveni at animum: sic ignis, non refert quam magnus,
sed quo incidat, nam arida scintillam quoque fovent usque ad incendium. Sen.
Ep. ^8.
This passion (says Seneca) conceives a heat burning against all sorts of
persons, and is begotten as well out of love as hate, no less from serious
businesses than sports and meriment: neither are we so much to regard from what
cause it arises, as into what bosom it lights: for so it makes no matter how
great the fire be, but where it takes, since any dry thing will nourish, even a
spark till it wax a mighty fire. But (says he in another place) there is
nothing yet so hard and difficile, which the mind of man cannot overcome, and
there are no passions so headstrong and violent which cannot be restrained by
sk lfull managing, L ^ der^. c. 1^
quodcunque sibi imperavti animus obtinuit, let but the mind absolutely
command, and it will obtain any thing. What a happiness were it then to be
delivered from such mighty evils, as anger with frenzy, rage and cruelty,
furiousness and other the like passions with which it ever goes accompanied.

The second Paragraph.
THat which this wise Roman said of anger, we may also apply to pride and envy,
those two ordinary furies which hant humane breasts, as likewise to those
equal sisters in wickedness; and to conclude, to all the other crew of vicious
affections. And say, what a happiness were it, to be delivered from such maine
evils, and have our mind composed to a blessed tranquillity to a certain
harmony, and concordance of all our copidities? He therefore is blessed, who is
the less indulgent of liberty to his affections, the more free he desires to
be himself from vices servitude, who to secure reasons dominion in him,
crucifies his unruly passions. For Gally-sl^ves they have some cessation from
labor, some time, though never so short allotted them to rest; but those who
are slaves to their affections do never enj^y any rest, but their mind is in
continual agitation, by the turbulent motions of their restless thoughts.
Servietis diis alienis die ac nocte, Hier. 16.
qui non dabunt vobis requiem, you shall serve strange Gods day and night,
which will not give you rest. And therefore the son of Syrach advises us,
post concupiscentias tuas non eas, Eccl. 18.
do not follow thy concupiscence; but as a headstrong horse is to be reined
hard, and one that is ready, pricked on with the spur; so we are to manage
our affections, by urging some, whilst, for the most part, we do curb the rest.
None can more truly hate himself, than he who loves himself with such a
pernicious love, as becoming by it wholly dissolved in voluptuousness, he is
neither able to obtain any thing of himself, or deny himself any thing. Let
such as these consider what the Apostle presages of them: Romans 8.
Si s^cundum carnem, etc. If you live acco ding to the flesh, (says he) you
shall dye, but if you shall mortify the works of the flesh, you shall live.
The command of ones self is the greatest Empire as man can aspire unto, and
consequently to be subject to our passions the most grievous slavery; neither
is there any triumph more glorious, then that of the victory obtained of our
selves, where whilst the conflict is but short, the reward shall ever last. He
overcomes his affections, who refuses to serve them, and he serves them, says
S. Ambrose, Quicunque metu frangitur, vel delectatione, Li. 2. de Iac. and vita
beata
irretitur, vel cupitatibus ducitur, vel indignatione exasperatur, vel maerore
d^^icitur: whosoever is dismayed by fear, enthralled by pleasure, inve^gled
with desires, exasperated by offfences, or dejected with sadness. Neither is
there any viler servitude, according to Seneca than that which is voluntarily
undergone, Ep. 47.
where one serves his lust, another his avarice, a third ambition. A good man
(as witnesses Saint Augustine) albeit he serve, is free, whereas a wicked,
although he be a Monarch, is a slave, and that not to one man alone, but (what
is more intolerable) to as many Masters as he has vices. The desires of men
are as various as their visages, and outward lineaments; and even as in those
among men of the same kind, there is strange diversity, so is there no less
in the affections and propensions of our mind: here one burns in the fire of
concupiscence, another is led captive in golden chains, a third consumed with
envy, this by drinking destroys his health, this too much given to gamning,
and this to idleness, the whilst, none will ever be persuaded, (as if one
could not be drowned as well in wine as water) that their ruin can arise from
thence, where they have placed their chief felicity. Saint Gregory says
excellently well, Lib. 4. in Reg. c. 4.
Reprobae menti valde placet quod concupiscit, sed in aeterna poena quod ei
modo est dulce amarescet. A reprobate mind is pleased above measure with its
own desires, but that which now is so svveet unto it, will afterward to its
eternal pain be changed into bitterness. Dan. 13.
O wretch, thou art deceived with specious show, and desire has subverted thy
heart, and made thee long after fleeting waters, with a frustrated appetite.
What felicity can a man receive from his libidinousnes, which according to St.
Ambrose does burn us worse than a fever, far more inflame us, and sooner
cast us down; Febre libido flagrantior est, graviusque inflammot, and
praecipitat; but when that violent heat is asswag^d, when the fit is past, then
the eyes of our conscience do open, and a man becomes all confounded and
ashamed at the ugliness of his reproachful fact; then he stands in dread of
Almighty God, and feign, if he knew how would hide his guilty head; but in
vain, for the deformity is so manifest, and all secrets lie unfolded before
Almighty God, and therefore the thought of judgment does strike him into
horror, out of the conscience of his selfe-guiltinesse. And what is the thirst
of wealth, but a notorious spur to every wickedness, which is rather more
provoked than quenched by possessing that which it desires; which torments the
mind no less with solicitude of that it enjoyes, than that it wants? And
whereas all other vices grow old with man, this then becomes most youthful and
vigorous. Hate and envy are two importunate evils, which unless you kill (as
it were) in the cradle, there is little hope of overcomming them thereafter
with that facility as you do other affections. As for gluttony, those who
serve it have a pernicious mistress of it, which the more obsequiously you
serve, the more insolent it grows, and by reason of its near affinity with
lasciviousnes, in humouring and feeding it, you do but nourish an enemy of
Chastity. Who then is there, and we will give him deserved praise, who can
justly glory wi h holy Tobias, Tob. 3.
mundam servavi animam meam ab omni concupiscentia, I have preserved my soul
pure from all concupiscence? Such a soul were like a Lute indeed, with all its
strings in tune.

The third Paragrah.
SAul being commanded by Almighty God to kill Agag the King of the Amalikites,
did notwithstanding only imprison him; and this is our way of proceeding with
our passions, which so they break not forth to any exorbitancy in the
exterior, we take no thought for rooting of them out, how ever seditiously in
our interior they behave themselves. And what is this but through a vicious
pity, to confine those to prison, whom we should condemn to die; and whilst
we spare a concealed enemy to arm him to proceed against us in public
hostility? For so those vices which at first were only committed by chance, and
unawares, are converted by degrees into nature and custom, till at last they
impose upon us a necesity of sinning, and make us cry out, when we perceive our
selves brought every way into straits by our domestical enemies; I cannot
overcome my self in this, it is impossible for me to abstain from that to
which I have been accustomed so long; you had as good bereave me of my life, as
debar me the fruition of such and such a pleasure And by this manner our
vices become incorporate to our manners, and by neglecting to root up our
passions whilst they were but little shrubs we perceive our selves at la
through our connivance overgrowne with whole woods of them, and encompassed
with so vast a wilderness, as it exceeds our forces to extricate our selves.
Yet even then we are no ways to despair, since one custom may be expelled by
a better one, and the richer our Crown will be, the more the fight is dangerous
and difficile. Volenti cum bono Deo vincera certa est victoria. Let but a Moses
with his rod check the waves of the sea, and for the rest GOD will provide that
the children of Israel may find a safe passage through them, whilst they
swallow up the whole hosts of the Egyptians. Let us but take arms, and inure
our selves to fight, and we shall repulse the Ammorites and the Cannanites from
infesting us? ^ob 7.
Militia est vita hominis supra terram, man's life is (but) a warfare on the
earth. And above all let each one hold himself suspected, since no man has a
more traiterous enemy. There is no coming to any agreement with this foe, no
trusting to any treaty or composition, but only that day will set an end to
his hostility, which closes up our lives. It is a divine sentence of St.
Cyprian, Voluptatem vicisse voluptas est maxima, nec ulla major est victoria,
quam ea quae a cupiditatibus refertur. Qui enim hostem vicit, fortior fuit
altero; qui vero libidinem represserit fortior fuit seipso, There is no greater
pleasure than to subdue our pleasure, nor truer victory, than that we obtain
over our desires. For he who overcomes his enemy is only stronger than another
man, but he who resists his libidinousnesse is stronger than himself. A
curious Musician never leaves tampering with his instrument, till it be in
tune, and so the predestinate ceases not to compose his affections, till they
agree among themselves in a harmonious peace. If we will believe Plato the body
is but a Lute, and the soul the Lutenist, which now tunes one string, now
another, as it finds occasion: now it moderates the eyes, and now the tongue;
now it contains the ears, and now the hands; and whenever the passion of
anger, or lu^urie chance to rise too high, it reduces them to the right pitch
of reason again. He was a skillful Musician indeed who said: Castigo corpus
meum and in servitutem redigo, 1 Cor. 9.
I chast^se my body, and bring it into subjection. And so the principal care of
the predestinate, is, daily to examine the instrument of his affections, and
now to strive against his choler, now repress his envy, now excitate his
drowsinesse, now moderate his sadness, and now refrain his joy; he is still
practicing on it, and so long tunes up some strings, and lets down others, till
it agree in perfect harmony. The predestinate permits nothing to his
affections, he favors none less then himself, nor suffers any the least
offense of his, to pass unpunished. Therefore to conclude, it is a true sign
of predestination, and that they are of Christ who crucify their flesh, with
its vices and concupiscences.

A Treatise added as a Crown to the twelve signs of Predestination, Of the
great scarcity of the predestinate.
TO crown that which has been said, Sermon. 2. d^ oct. Pasch.
Mellifluous St. Bernard furnishes us with an excellent discourse of his: Our
Lord knows (says he) who are belonging unto him, and he only knows whom he
has elected from the beginning; neither is there any who can tell whether he
be worthy of love or hate. Seeing then (as it is most certain) we have no
certainty, ought it not to be most grateful to u^, to gather some probable
sign of this our election? or can our spirit take any rest, as long as it has
no testimony of its predestination? Therefore it is a faithful speech, and
worthy of all acceptance, which infolds the testimony of our salvation. The
word of which both affords great comfort to the elect, and disfurnishes the
Reprobate of all excuse: for the signs of life being once manifest, whosoever
neglects them, is clearly convinced to have received his soul in vain, and
slightly to esteem of that desirable land. None can justly accuse any but
himself, if he perceive in him no sign of Predestination: for God has not
predestined any by chance or hazard unto heaven or hell, Acts 15.
since notum a saeculo est Domino opus tuum, thy work is known unto our Lord
from eternity; but in foreseeing the merits of every one, he has allotted them
accordingly, either reward or punishment, Resp. 3. ad c. ^biect. Gallicar.
as St. Prosper most truly ^ays. It implys no necessity that men should perish,
because they are not predestined, but they are not predestined because God
fore saw that by their own wilful perversity they needs would perish. Lib. ad
Simplic. q. 2. Ep. 105.
And St. August. avouches the Doctrine, where he says, that God hated not
Esau, as a man, but Esau as a sinner, since God detests nothing in man but sin.
And again only sin (says he) does render the way to heaven inaccessible.
Whilst all of us tend unto one only jail, alas what diversity is there in
those ways we go, we run, and we perish in? The way of life is narrow, that
of perdition, broad rosy, and pleasant; there we must climb up a craggy
clift, here we slide easily down into a dale, facilis descensus Averni, the
descent to hell is easy. Truth cries out unto us exhorts, and admonishes us:
Intrate per augustam portam, etc. Enter by the narrow gate, since the gate is
broad, and the way spacious which leads to perdition, and many there are who
enter by it; whereas the gate is straight, and the way narrow which conducts to
life, and there are few who find it. And it inculcates the same again,
Enforce your selves to enter by the narrow gate, For I say unto you, Matthew. 7.
Luke 13.
there are many who are desirous to enter in, and yet cannot. A narrow way
indeed it is, which we cannot go but alone, and unaccompanyed? Romans 22. Gal.
6. Cor. ^.
each one of us is to render account unto God Almighty only of himself; each
one to undergo his own burden; each one according to his works that he has
done shall receive reward^. And this is that which made our Savior break forth
into those doleful words, Multi sunt vocati, pauci vero electi, Many are
called, but few are chosen. How many by the force of this one word pauci, few,
have, as it were by some sudden thunder clap been awaked out of the dead trance
of their licentious lives? How many at the bare report thereof have retired
themselves into solitary caves and deserts from all society, and commerce with
men? How many thousand Martyrs has it made expose themselves to wracks,
prisons, fires, torturings, gibbets, wild beasts, and the executioners utmost
rage and cruelty, whilst you might hear from them no other voice than this, it
is no hard matter to dye for us, who are to live again among those few of the
elect; sheath your swords in our bodies, and spare not, so long as our souls
may be numbered among those few, but happy who are saved. Who of them would not
find courage enough to say: Could I be extended on a hundred Crosses, I would
not shrink to escape one of them; had I a hundred necks, I would stretch them
all out under the Axe; it should be my pastime to dye a hundred times, and I
should esteem my torments only as restoratives so as I may be admitted after
all into Paradise in company of those few who are predestinate? from hence
proceeded that generous sa ing of that glorious Martyr Saint Ignatius, Let all
crosses come, fire, wild beasts, and as many torments as the devil can invent
so as I may enjoy my Christ, I care not, How many has this same thunder of our
Saviour^ words, this only one word, pauci, a few, recalled from the rank
meddowes of luxury, to the house of sorrow and repentance, they choosing rather
to be saved with a few, than perish with many, since they perish no l^sse who
perish in company, non minus perit qui perit in tu^ba? And of th^s great
sca^city of those who are saved, we have for our warning had frequent examples
in every age ^his was the only subject of Noah's preaching, that Herald of
justice, (as S. Paul terms him) for an hundred years and more; and yet men
were so obdurate in their wickedness, as out of that infinite multitude then
alive, only eight souls were saved in that wooden arc or prison, and of
those few, impious Cain was one; for so you shall as rarely find any society of
good without the admixture of some bad, as the fragrant rose without the bryer
cleaving to it. And so God being upon the point of destroying the Land of Sodom
and Gomorrah, was yet content with ^brahams request to hold his hands and spare
the^, if he could but have picked him out ten just men of such innumerable
multitudes as they were, and yet so great was the scarcity of the good, as they
were not to be found; whereupon the Angels advises Lot, Festina and salva te,
to make speed and save himself; and so only three persons were preserved from
so general a calamity as was the burning of two such mighty Cities, whose
ruins are even extant to this day, the monuments of the wrath of Almighty God.
Neither in more ambiguous manner is the paucity of the predestinate expressed in
that passage of sacred Scripture, when Moses leading under his conduct out of
Egypt 600000. fighting men, besides women and children, and others
promiscously without number of lesser note, but only two of such a world of
people arrived unto that plentiful land of promise; all the rest being buried
in that mighty Sepulcher of that vast desert, the receptacle of so many
thousand dead. As for Pharaoh who followed them with such warlike preparation,
to restrain them of their liberty again, he together with all his army was
buried in the red sea, the gaping sepulcher of such a mighty host: Exodus 3^.
quis non timebit te o Rex gentium, who will not stand in awe of the O Lord of
the Gentiles? Besides for their falling into actual idolatry, Moses proclaimed
among the children of Israel: Si quis est Domini iungatur mihi, etc. whosoever
is our Lords, let him join with me, and they slew that day of them ^3000. a
lamentable issue of one act of Idolatry; to signify how much God Almighty does
detest one mortal sin. So Iosuah having taken by that mysterious stratagem the
City of Ierico put all the men and living creature in it unto the sword and
fire, and so that mighty City, like some carcass in its funeral fire, was all
unto a heap of ashes consumed away, only one house surviving so great a ruin,
so great a calamity. And Gedeon in his expedition against the Midianites, out
of 32000. chose only 300. out for that present enterprise, and dismissed all
the rest. Judges 7.
For God has no respect of any number, but of the good; neither is the way to
hell so long, but in one breath it may be gone by committing of one mortal
sin, whereby we become traitors to the Divine Majesty, and meriting eternal
punishment. So in former times for one libidinous act 40000. Hebrews, and
50600. Benjamites were slain; and how dear did the Benjamites with the loss
of so many thousand souls, pay for the curiosity of their eyes, when they
looked with too great irreverence on the Ark of God? Neither is this great
scarcity of the predestinate less clearly s^t before our eyes in the sacred
history of the Kings, where Absolon leading an Army of rebels against the King
his father, a messenger in all haste ran to let David understand, that all
Israel with their whole heart did follow Absolon, toto cord universus Israel
sequitur Absalon: 2 Kings. 15.
and Seba seditiously stirring up a sort of tumultuous people against the King,
there comes another advice to David, that all Israel was revolted from him, and
followed Seba: Separatus est omnis Israel a David secutusque est Seba. 2 Kings
20.
Do but behold the world, and you will even say as much of it; for Christ,
another David does trace us out the way with his own blood, with his own
gored footsteps, having his head crowned with thorns, his shoulders charged
with the infamous burden of the cross, his dying eyes floating with blood and
tears, in which doleful equipage he ascends mount Calvary, and invites us to
follow him; but alas how few are they who do accompany him, who are content to
be crucified with him, according to their several conditions? So as we may
lawfully say, that all the world is set upon malice: totus mundus in maligno
positus est, and with their whole hearts follow, not Seba, but rather Satan,
and leave our Savior in Mount Golgotha alon^. To this purpose likewise may be
applied that other passage of holy Scriptures, where 70000. Israelites are
recorded to have been consumed by pestilence, only because David out of a
presumption of his own forces did cause the people to be mustred All which
examples were but the first draught, and shadow of the wonderful scarcity of
the predestinate, which our Savior afterward in his Sermons so lively painted
forth. Reckon all the Jews according to the computation of the Apocalypse, from
Abraham to the day of Judgment predestinate to be saved, and you shall find
only 144000. of them, scarcely the thousand part to pa^e on that account. And
that which is said, of them may be applied with a certain proportion unto all
other Nations; for the praedictions of our Savior have reference unto all,
forasmuch as he affirmed not only of the Jews, that few of them should walk
in the narrow path of life, but he directs his speech generally to all: pauci
invenient eam, few shall find it. In confirmation of this verity, the Prophets
are every where frequent. Hell has dilated its soul (says Isaiah) and opened
its mouth boundless wide; and that because impiety like a fire embraces (all.)
It shall consume the thorn and bryar, the very thicket of the grove shall be
burnt, and the pride of the smoke shall roll along; for thorns and briars
shall overgrow the universal earth. And where shall you not find whole
wildernesses of briars of libidinousnesse and luxury? what place is free from
the pricking thorns of cares, and solicitude, not so much of purchasing
heaven, as wealth? So as truly we may say, the earth is infected with its
inhabitants, in that they have transgressed the laws, altered right, and
antiquated an eternal league; all are addicted to their own w^yes, and each
one unto the most new fangled. And Hieremy in no less a mournful Hier. 3.
strain bewayles this great penury of the good; Circuit the ways of
Jerusalem and behold, and observe, and search in the streets, do you find a
man that does Justice and regards his faith? Brass and Iron there is corruption
in all. Not only the rich, but (what you will more wonder at) even the poor are
infected with pride and riotousnes; and poverty now is in league with vices
too, a general corruption has tainted all, as well brass, as silver, and more
rich mineralls. And the Prophet exploring the origin and sours^ of all this
evil says, I attended, and l^stned, and no man speaks of any good, (which is
so much verified in these times of ours) no man does repent for his sins, Hier.
8.
saying what have I done? all are attent to their own courses, like horses
rushing furiously into the battle. Woe to the earth, woe to the men thereof,
The whole world is filled with a^ulteries Neither does Michaeas less lament
this excessive dearth of virtue: Woe unto me (says he) there is not one
cluster of grapes fit to be eaten, Mich. 7.
the Saint is perished on earth, and the upright is not (to be found) among
men. Which consideration made the royal Prophet shed so abundant tears: God
(says he) Ps. 13. and 1^
has looked down from heaven o^ the sons of men to behold if there were any
that would understand, and seek after God; (but) all were depraved, all were
become wholly u profitable; there is no man, no not so much as one, that does
any good. And truly whosoever does but consider these lamentable days of
ours, and the variety of corruption, which is crept into our manners, he would
be of the same opinion with this holy King, and conclude our Age most
resembling to that immediately before the deluge, When there was nothing but
eating, and drinking, Matthew. ^4.
marrying, and giving in mar^i^ge, t ll that d^y, when Noah entered into the
^rke: neither had they any understanding, till the deluge came upon them, and
destroyed them all. Even so you will imagine, that virtue were wholly banished
fom the earth, or if perchance any vouchsafe to harbor her, it is but only in
passing, and by way of courtesy, not that she can challenge right to any
habitation of her own; which is the reason she is no where permanent; whilst
vice does so sway all, and has such absolute dominion, as it is no longer a^le
to reckon how many kingdoms it stands possessed of; masked injustice, and
prying envy, exployting boldly whatsoever they please, and that filthy vice of
Luxury, odious to heaven, and pernicious to earth; with an incredible kind of
audacity. So that comparing the number of the good, reduced unto so few, unto
so many Myriades of evil, we may well say with Bias, Rari boni, pravi p^urimi;
and St. Ambrose to this effect; in comparison of the reprobate (says he) the
number of the Elect is but very small, seeing you shall find every where
multitudes of sinners, every where whole troops of them in the way of
perdition, so as it may be truly said indeed, That the ways of Syon Lament,
Lamen. c. 1
whilst the paths of Babylon do laugh. And really whosoever but reflects the
eyes of his mind upon the way which he buts upon, the precipice of hell, he
shall perceive it so frequented, so thronged with passengers,, as one shoves
another forwards out of a kind of sport or jolity; and provoked by one another
examples, they make as much haste to the torments of hell, as they would do
unto some solemn feast. The whilst the way to vices is not only proclive, but
even precipitious; on the other side, the way which tends to virtue is but
narrow, frequented but by few, and those for the most part of private quality,
as Isaiah did insinuate in that Prophetical complaint of his, These shall be
in the midst of the earth, Isay 24.
in the midst of the people, just as if a few Olives which are remaining should
be shaken out of the Olive tree, and grapes when the Vintage is ended. Where
the scarcity of the good may be understood by those few scattering bunches of
grapes, by those few Olives which were left to be gleaned, whilst the rest were
gathered, and the excessive multitude of evil by the precedent plentiful
harvest of grapes and Olives: For there is no truth (says the Prophet Oseas)
there is no mercy, Ose 4.
there is no knowledge of God on earth, but slandering, lying, murder, theft,
and adultery do swarm^; and sanguis sanguinem tetigit. This scarcity of the
good, is but too apparent, which the Prophets thus deplore; unto whose tears
succeed the Apostles complaints in the new Testament, where St. John affirms
all the world to be set on malice: Ephesians. 15.
totus mundus in maligno positus est: and St. Peter in this manner sorrowfully
argues, Si justus vix salvabitur, peccator and im^ius ubi apparebunt? If the
just shall scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and impious appear? St.
Paul lamen^s wi^h often iterating the same, Phil. 2.
that all seek things that are their own, not things that are Jesus Christ's.
And our Savior Christ himself affirms, Matthew. 11. Luke 6. Luke 8 17. and 14.
that the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and only the violent take it by
force. Neither in the mean while abstaines from threatenings, Vae vobis, etc.
woe unto you (says he) who are rich, for you have your consolation; woe to you
which are full, for you shall hunger; woe to you who now laugh, for you shall
lament, and weep. And this likewise is lively set before our eyes in the
parable recounted by S Luke, where one part of the good seed, is said to lie
withering away among the stones, another choked among thorns and briars; a
third l^ghts in the high way, where it is trodden under foot: and scarcely a
fourth part meets with a fruitful soil. So likewise of ten Lepers whom our
savior cleansed, only one returned to thank him for curing him; of those who
were invited to the feast, not one but found an excuse to absent himself, and
as often as the fish-poole was stirred by the Angel, of so many diseased
persons, who lay awaiting the occasion, only one was cured; Only a Nicodemus
of all the Magistrates of the Jews would venture to private conference with
our Savior Christ; and of so many covetous and wealthy Citizens of Ierico, of
so many Camels (to use St. Bedes phrase) laden with their wealth, ^nely one
Zacheus would discharge his bunchy back of his rich load, and restoring all
which he had unjustly got, assay to enter by the narrow gate; Only one Matthew
from his intricate accounts; only one Magdalen from her dissolute life, is
recorded to be converted to a more innocent one. St. Paul preaching before a
frequent assembly of people at Philippi a City of Macedonia, only one Lydia
approved hi Doctrine; another time discoursing of Christian Religion at Athens,
in the public palace before a great and learned aud^tory, only Denis, and
Damaris assented to what he said; the rest for the m st p^^t mo^k^ng, and
de^iding him: and i^ that renouned assembly of 72. of the Jewish M^gi^tr^tes,
Luke 23.
the^e was sca^ce one or two found, who th^^sted not after ou^ S v^^urs
precious blood: L^kewise at his Crucify ng, there were many spectators, but
lovers, and imitators of his Cross a very few. So in these our days, there
are many Sermons, but rarely any who amend their lives for them; v^c^s are s
fficiently inveighed ag^ins^, but seldom sufficiently amended; (...) men are
so far from desiring to amend t^em, as they cannot endure to have them
mentioned. Multi vocati, pauci electi, there are many called, but few chosen:
alas but few indeed! There are many (says St. Gregory) adjoyne themselves
unto the faith, but few make use of it to attain to heaven. And as upon the
floor you shall find more straw than corn, more leaves th^n fruit upon the
tre^s, more prickles than roses on the briars, every where flints, but a few
precious stones; even so the number of those whom the Divine providence
promotes to beatitude is but small, compared to the multitudes of wicked men.
How truly has Jeremy p^^phesied, Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, etc.
All the world is wasted with a desolation, because there is none who considers
in his heart: there is none who considers in h^s he^rt indeed, since the
thoughts of o^r hear^s are so fleeting and inconstant, as they are still
wandering, and never can apply themselves long to any thing that is good and
virtuous. And this is the reason why we have no more apprehension of hell, no
more desire and longing after heaven. This accusation may be urged as well
against Christians, as any other men, that they make no account of the
desirable Land: pro nihile habuerunt terram de fiderabilem; Psalm. 105.
for what is more to be defiled than heaven? and yet by reason we have so
little commerce with it in thought, we either conceit this kingdom of the
blessed as some tedious thing, or else desire it nothing so fervently as we
ought. From thence the devil conceives such hopes, and acquires such force
against us as Job affirms of him, Job 40.
Ecce absorbebit fluvium, etc. That he shall not wonder if he swallow up a
flood, and he confides to have Jordan flow into his mouth. And for this reason
(says that mirror of patience) verebar omnia opera mea sciens quod non
parceres delinquenti; cap. 9.
I was suspicious of all my actions, as knowing that thou sparest not the
delinquent; I have all my words, works, and even my thoughts suspected, when I
consider the rigid Justice of Almighty God. This was the motive of St.
Hilarions, who (as St. Hierome recounteth) was most grievously pe^plex^ at the
Article of death, and in a deadly fear to present himself before the
tribunal of Christ. There remained but a little vital heat unperished in his
feeble body, and excepting his senses, there were no signs in him of a living
man, ^hen sadly lifting up his eyes and voice together, Egredere (said he) quid
times? egredere anima mea, quid dubites? Septuaginta prope annis serviisti
Christo, and mortem times? Depart (said he) what do thou fear? depart my
soul, what do thou doubt? Thou have served Christ almost these seventy
years, and now at last art thou afraid to dye? No, his soul was not so much
appaled at death, as that the approach of that judgment it was to undergo.
And now let every Christian consider with himself, with what security he can
revell and take his pleasure; whilst such Saints as they do tremble, when they
come to dye; let them if they think good, hoard up treasures of gold and
silver, mischief and ruin one another with mutual enmity and hate, hunt
after honors, and hauk for soaring glory; deny nothing to their humors and
delights, alleging forsooth, that God allotted the earth, of which you are
inhabitants to the use of the sons of men, and reserved the heavens to be
disposed by the sovereign Lord thereof. Take then your liberties in seeing,
thinking, and doing every thing you have a fancy to, make as many figaries as
you list, think every thing lawful which you have a mind unto, let your body
take its fill of contentment, be sure to live at your ease, walk in the ways
of your heart, and take your own eyes for guides: Et scitote quod pro omnibus
his adducet vos Deus in judicium, Eccl. 11.
etc. But yet be assured, that for all these you must render an account to God;
and though a man live never so many years, and have past them all over to his
hearts content, yet he is to be mindful of the dismal time, of those many
days, Ibid.
which when they arrive, will argue all that is past of vanity. Wherefore let
your endeavor rather be to procure by your good works a certainty of your
vocation and election. Satagite ut per bona opera certam vestram vocationem and
electionem saciatis. Pet. 1.
What the signs of predestination are you have already understood. 1. Not only
to love our friends, but our enemies. 2. To relieve ^he poor, not only by the
bounty of our hands, but also with the affection of our minds. 3. To endure all
afflictions patiently, and praise God Almighty for sending them. 4. To set
light by the goods of fortune, in regard of heaven. 5. and 6. To consider how
smally it availes us to hearken to the interior admonitions of God, or
exterior of men, if we neglect to put them in execution. 7. So to detest our
former sins, as never to commit the like again. 8. To imagine we are not pleas
ng to God, until we become displeasing to our selves. 9. Not to persuade our
selves that we love Jesus Christ, so long as we love and cherish not his
presence within our selves. 10. To resist stoutly our vicious inclinations,
especially at first, since then every one can overcome them if he list 11. To
lay a sure foundation of virtue in our minds, lest otherwise we be always
wavering: 12 To become so familiar wiih death by often thinking of it, as we
may the less fear it when we come to dye: for he never dies unwillingly who
daily and seriously imagines that he must dye at last: And this is the way to
that life, wholly devoyd of death. And now let each one take a surveigh of his
own conscience, whether these signs of Predestinations, whereby he may
conceive a certtaine hope that he is not strayed from the way of the good,
which leads into heaven, be extant in him or no: As for the way of the
wicked, although for the present it seems smooth and levelled, yet it ends in
hell and utter darkness at the last: and notwithstanding, by reason the
entrance to it seems so commodious and delightsome, there are so many flock
unto it to their perditions, as our own eyes may testify that true saying of
our Savior Christ, Lata porta and speciosa via est quae ducit a^perditionem,
etc. that the gate is wide, and the way spacious which leads to perdition; and
many (too many alas) are those who enter by it. It is reported by diverse
credible Authors, that a certain holy Anchoret beheld in a vision souls
falling as thick into hell as flocks of snow, or drops of rain, insomuch as
the damned all amazed at their multitude, not without good reason imagined the
world to be at an end, as thinking it impossible, considering their number who
descended into hell, that any more persons shauld be left alive.

St. Vincent Ferrerius of St. Dominicks order, that mirror of preachers, and
religious men, did once in a public sermon discourse with great efficacy of
the scarcity of the predestinate, and confirmed it with a Wonderful example;
whose words in reverence of so great a person I will be as exact in reporting,
as the difference of language will give me leave. Before our Saviors coming
into the world (says he) in humane flesh, S. Vinc. D^min. Septuag. sermon. 6.
post initium.
more than five thousand years were already past, and except some of few of
the children of Israel, all the rest of the world was damned. Imagine with your
self besides, in the time of the Law of Moses how many Children have dyed
without Circumcision; as also in the time of the Law of Christ how many without
Baptism; of all which number likewise not one is saved. Moreover how many
Jews, Sarazens, Pagans, and Jnfidels, how many wicked Christians (for faith
and Baptism cannot save a man unless they be accompanied with good life) and
how many other Christians are there besides, who although they have faith, are
yet proud, avaricious, of lewd life, and given to many other vices, etc. And
here note the example of the Archdeacon of Lions, who having resigned his
Benefice undertook a course of austere penance for forty years together in
the wilderness. This holy man after his death appeared to the Bishop of Lions,
who desiring of him to discover somewhat unto him of the other world: the Saint
answered, that thirty thousand in the world had dyed the same day with him,
whereof only 5. were saved, himself, and St. Bernard being two of them. This is
the reason why our Savior advises us with so much solicitude to e^ter by the
narrow gate: Jntrate per a gustam portam. This narrow gate of paradise is the
will of God to which every one must conform himself who desires to enter into
paradise. The broad gate is our own will, and the spacious way is worldly
conversation; as to eat and drink our fill, to follow our lustful appetites,
take our pleasure, revenge our selves of those who have injured us, and the
like: So as pauci sunt electi, but a few are saved: To which exhortation of St.
Vincent, we will add another example recounted by an approved Author.

A famous Preacher in Germany, named Bertold of Saint Francis Order, inveighing
once in a great audience with much vehemence of speech against a certain vice,
a woman there present, conscious of her own guiltiness therein, conceived so
great a terror at his words, that on the sudden in the midst of so great a
throng she fell down for dead: But afterward being restored to life again, by
the joint mediation of the peoples prays, she declared unto them, how she had
bin presented before the judgment seat of Almighty God; and among many other
particulars, how of 60000. of all nation, as well Christians as infidels, who by
diverse sorts of death had departed this life at the same instant with her only
3. souls of so huge a multitude entered heaven, and all the rest damned to
eternal fire. O how true is it, that many enter indeed by the large and
spacious way of perdition! St. Chrysostom grounding himself on the sense of
these words of our Savior Christ, does confidently affirm; that the number is
far greater of those who go to hell, but yet the kingdom of God, though it
has fewer inhabitants is more capacious: Multi sunt plures ghennam
ingredientes, Tom. 9. hom. 14.
sed maius est Dei regnum licet habeat paucos. And tell me, says he, how many
think you of those, who live in this city shall be saved? I know that which I
shall say will ^ffend your ears, but notwithstanding I will utter it: Of so many
thousand, sca^cely one hundred; and I doubt me whether I have not been too
large in my account: For alas how much malice is there now a days in the
younger sort, in the elder how much negligence, etc This was the discourse of
that most prudent and saintly man, that Doctor of the Church, and light of the
world St. Chrysostom, in that mighty and populous City of Antioch, and that
too in such a time, when the fervor was not yet extinguished of the Primitive
Church and who then shall wonder if S Paul with so much solicitude does admonish
us to work our salvation with fear and trembling, Ad Phil. 2.
cum metu and tremore v stram salutem operamini; and our Saviout Christ in such
express terms exhorts us to endeavor to enter by the narrow gate. Luke 13.
Truth cries out unto us, strive to labor and endeavor with all your forces to
enter into this gate by works worthy of repentance, into which we cannot be
admitted without much industry, and a resolution to overcome all difficulties
whatsoever; and those who falter and go lingering on, may never hope to arrive
unto it For unless the minds intention be fervent indeed, says Saint Bede, and a
man forcibly overcome himself, he will easily recoyle, and be wholly unable to
persev^r in so narrow a passage: so great is the effusion of the unruly
appe^ites of his flesh, to say nothing of the tentations, and persecutions
which the world, and the devil procure those who endeavor to enter by this
narrow way. And even as a water-man who rows against the stream must add so
much the more force unto his Oar, so those who steer on their souls toward
heaven, in spite of the practices of the enemy, must enforce themselves with
all the virtue they have to overcome the violence they find with greater
violence, for fear their souls should be carried away by force of the stream
like boats into irrecove^able error: Evigilate itaque justi, 1 Cor. 15.^
and nolite peccare, Wherefore all you that are just be watchful, and do not
sin: neither is any to be accounted watchful, but such as in all places, at al
times so lead their lives, as if each day were the l^st they should ever see,
and have so wary an eye over their conscience in all thoughts and works, as if
they were inst^ntly to dye. Let us therefore do that whilst we may, which
(otherwise) when we may no longer, we shall wish to have done; Quae seminaverit
homo haec and metet, a man shall reap, only that which he has sown, and so
he who sowes in his flesh does reap corruption from his flesh again; Gal. 6.
whereas he who sowes in spirit, does reap from his spirit an eternal life,

FINIS.

