THE Sham-Lawyer: OR THE LUCKY EXTRAVAGANT.

As it was Damnably ACTED at the Theater Royal In DRURY LANE.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black Boy over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street, 1697.

PROLOGUE.
AS want of Coin did store of Banks beget;
So Poets swarm upon this Dearth of Wit.
And as those Banks, when ready Cash grew scant,
Excused non-payments by the public want:
Ill Poets so, when you on them reflect,
Their proper Faults upon the Times reject.
Shoals of damned Play-wrights in our Pits are found
Like Brother Bankrupts for each other bound;
Who, sinking first themselves beneath the Test,
With joint Endeavor strive to damn the rest:
And, having failed to satisfy the Town,
Turn Levellers and cry all credit down.
Fools, Frenchmen, Players, fill the crowded Pit,
Those sworn Confederates to write down Wit.
Instead of Manly sense, and strong writ Plays,
They bring you Harlequin, and Opera's.
They let you thus, like Children, have your will,
Knowing how fond you are of Rattles still.
These Practices on us have brought such Ills,
That half our Customers protest our Bills;
And our Receipts of late to less amount
Than formerly by double Bank discount.
Our young Beginner, fearing this to day,
Offers Security for his first Play.
To raise his Stock he wise provision made,
Of a rich Partner to support the Trade:
Whose visible Estate, and Credit yet
Make his Bills current through the Land of Wit,
Which upon sight, if any doubt be made
In specie shall in new milled Wit be paid.
For like our Mints, our Scribler has made bold,
To make all new by melting down the Old.
Nor can you blame him, if he has the Skill,
But to maintain the Ancient Standard still;
For, what he finds in weight deficient grown,
He will make good with Bullion of his own.
Thus much he thought was to the Critics due:
Next comes his Complement fair Sex to you.
He would not raise your Blushes by his Play,
Nor suffer Scandal on the Stage to day.
On Knaves alone at present he makes War;
For only such are brought unto the Bar:
And yet the Fool did the whole City spare.
Like running Traders thus he does begin,
By courteous dealing first to draw you in.
If to his word this time you find him just,
It may encourage you to greater Trust.
Next time perhaps alone He Will undertake,
And by your Favors in your Debts may break.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Careless, A Witty, Extravagant Gentleman, that by his Negligence has almost
ruined his Estate. Mr. Cibber. Friendly, A Gentleman of Wit and Honor, but
careful of his Affairs, Friend to Careless, and in Love with Florella. Mr.
Harland. Serj. Wrangle, An Old, Rich, Knavish, Covetous, Jealous Lawyer. Mr.
Bullock. Homily, A Formal, Affected, Hypocritical, Sottish, Ignorant,
Old-fashioned Curate, of the Lawyer's Parish. Mr. Johnson. Spade, A Merry,
Drunken, Beggarly Knave, Sexton, and Pot-Companion to Homily. Mr. Hains.
Famine, A Pleasant, Hungry, Half-starv'd Fellow, Servant to the Sergeant, and
Pimp to Friendly. Mr. Pinkeman. Affidavit, A Tricking, Raskally Solicitor, and
Creature of the Serjeant's. Swearhome, Clenchi^, Two Knights of the Post,
Instruments of the Sergeant, and Affidavit.
WOMEN.
Olympia, A Young Widow of Quality, a Woman of great Honor and Fortune. Mrs.
Knight. Florella, A Woman of Wit, Beauty, and Honor, Wife to Wrangle, quondam
Mistress to Friendly, and yet in Love with him. Mrs. Rogers. Mrs. Vernish, A
Match-making Bawd. Mrs. Powel. Gentlemen, Officers, and Attendants to the
Widow.
THE Sham-Lawyer: OR, THE LUCKY-EXTRAVAGANT.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Careless and Friendly. Friend. PRithee dear Careless consider a little,
and try to manage the last Stake, I Am no great Friend to plodding business, but
thy Extravagance makes me Grave: I Am ashamed to see thee thus varying thy
outside continually like a Camelion, a few days will reduce thee to the same
Diet too.


Carel. Yes, yes, i am like to edify by such a Preacher, whose life's a
continued contradiction to his Doctrine, now art thou it is ten to one going to
a Whore and a Treat, and recommend'st thrift to me, only to give the better
relish to thy own iniquity, like a Pampered Chaplain's preaching Abstinence,
and surfeiting all the time on the Luxury of his Lords's Table.


Friend. A wise Gamster need not absolutely forswear Play; but I Am mad to see
you a* Bubble to your own Indiscretion; and in a world so full of Sharpers
thinking you play upon the Square.


Carel. Hang Caution, it is the Companion of Fools; I tell thee Friendly, that
among all the numerous Follies of Mankind, there is none so ridiculous, and so
destructive to our ease as that which they call Discretion, it is a Bridle put
into the mouths of Asses, by which they are ridden, and managed to other Men's
Humors; I defy it, and from hence forward Wit be my Wealth, and Pleasure my
Business.


Friend. Pleasure and Wit are Mistresses that must be treated high, a Poor
Lover can no more hope a Favor from either, than from a Town-Jilt, or a
Courtier; it is never Flood with them, when the Pocket is at low E^^. If you
would preserve their Favor, keep your Estate, when that is gone you will find
they will soon desert you.


Carel. Does true Wealth then consist only in the number of Acres? No let the
dull Landed Clods manure the Dirt they sprang from, and when they^ve worn
themselves out in the Slavery, fatten it with a Dunghill of their own
Carcases; I cultivate a more fruitful Soil; my Brains my Estate; my Wit my
Plow; Pleasure my Crop; the whole Town my Tenants; the Tavern my Storehouse;
every Man's Purse my Exchequer; thine or any Friends Wardrobe mine; and your
Houses (when I please) my Lodging. Thus I Have given a Particular of my Revenue,
acquired without Purchase; enjoyed without Settlement; and collected without
trouble; My Friends are all my Stewards; for what one brave Spirit enjoys is
common to all; Nature and great Souls know no limits; they scorn the mean
distinctions of Meum and Tuum.


Friend. You Have spent your Estate to a fine Purpose, and are in a fair way to
make a Philosopher, a Diogenes the second; pray reserve a Tub for a habitation,
th^^ you may secure some retreat at last. It vexes me to see you so easy and
ca^eless, as to hug those that devour you: No raw Squire was ever fonder of the
Rooks that made a Cully of him; or thought 'em civiller Gentlemen for supplying
him with Money to cheat him of it again.


Carel. Faith! He that has any such designs against me may cheat himself; me he
cannot. When I had my Estate I was plagued with a Nursery of Beggars, called
Footmen; kept Hospitals for Curs and Kites; and Mustered Regiments of Fools and
Knaves every day at my Table; that surfeited on my Folly, and paid with a
Country Proverb, God bless the F^under.


Friend. That was your Fault, and is so still; must you needs sacrifice to
Knaves, or Fools? Could you not avoid the Caterpillars of the Country, that
only devoured the Fruit, but you must harbor worse Vermin here, that will
consume the Land, and prey at last, like Lice upon your Body?


Carel. It Is Nature's fault (if it be one) that made me a Lover of Mirth and
Pleasure, not Business. I find my self a Sociable Creature with natural
Appetites about me; those I gratify; a Prince can do no more; then why should
I by an unnecessary solicitude disturb the quiet enjoyment of 'em.


Friend. This you might have secured the continuance of by a timely Providence;
not suffered all to be shared thus, like a wrecked Vessel, by Villains that
would knock your Brains out to secure their own titles to the Prize.


Carel. What different notions Men have of things! What you call Extravagance
was the height of Policy in me. I examined all my Nature's demands, and found I
had no occasion for 3000l. a year, why then should I be encumbered with it? A
Snail's happier in's Shell, than if he had all Versailles upon his Back. I
resolved therefore to turn the Tables, and make other Men my Proveditors, as I
had been theirs.


Friend. Nobly resolved truly; but you're a little beside your Natural
Philosophy; for your Beasts of P^ey never make good Venison, you will never be
able to make a Meal of 'em. Besides you have taught 'em wit at your own cost.


Carel. Hang 'em Locusts (do you think I mean my Creditors?) If the World were
an absolute Wilderness, I would starve e're I would prey upon such Insects. No,
I mean those Gentlemen, my Friends, that have been as free with me, and are
sensible of their Obligations.


Friend. Friends, that are sensible of Obligations! where do those Monsters
grow? Has all thy Wit, and thy dear bought Experience taught thee to know the
World no better? Don't you know that Friends are a sort of Summer-Companions,
that leave you at the first approach of Winter, and that to oblige a Man, is a
sure way to make him shun you, when your necessities begin to call for a return?


Enter Two or Three Tenants. 1 st. Ten. There he is, let us lay it home to him.


2 d. Ten. I Will warrant you, a Paper-mill shall be silence to me. (to Car.)
Sir, an't like your Worship, here be some of your poor Tenants --


Carel. It Is a Lie, and does n't like my Worship, you're no Tenants of mine.
Would Ye have an abatement of your Rent for Repairs, or Taxes? March into the
City, there are those that love to be troubled with you.


1 st. Ten. We beseech you, Sir, don't be undone for your own Good.


Carel. Sirrah, whistle to your Horses, and let them edify, and trouble your
empty Noddle no more with my Good.


2 d. Ten. We beseech you, Sir, consider our hard case, We shall be turned out
of Doors; pity us, as we do you: Say what we must do.


Carel. Sow Hemp, and hang your selves with it, Rascals; or go, and fawn upon
your new Landlord, flatter his sordid Covetousness, call it thrift, and rail at
my Prodigality, and witness his Forgeries. You look like thriving Knaves, he will
find you Employment as Knights of the Post; and that may prefer you to the
Pillory; those superfluous Lugs of yours well pruned may yield you as great a
Crop, and bring you as much Dirt (since you're so fond of it) as my Farms. Or,
if you would rather, take a Purse, and let the Gallows provide for you the shortest
way; your Countenances will become a Halter, and a Psalm. There Is advice for
you: No Replies, but vanish. Am I so low as your pity, Slaves?


1 st. Ten. Good Sir, have Compassion on Us for our Wives, and poor Children's
sakes.


Carel. Who bid you get 'em? Have Not you Threshing Work enough, but Children
must be banged out of the Sheaf too? Our Beau's, with all their Strengtheners
get nothing but Diseases; But these Rogues, Friendly, upon a Clove of Garlic,
a piece of hard Cheese that would starve the Rats, and break a Saw, and a
little sour Milk, can mount like Stallions; and expect I should maintain these
Tumblers.


Friend. Whatever thou have for the Children, thou do n't use to want
Compassion for the Women; pray take 'em into Consideration.


Carel. Do You hear Fellows, your Wives I think may be wholesome, send 'em to
me, and I Will teach 'em Trades they shall live by; as for the Brats, let the
Parish, that club'd to beget 'em, join to maintain 'em.


1 st Ten. Sir, your Father's Worship would ha'us'd us better?


Carel. My Father's Worship was an Ass for using you at all, else he had never
left me the Plague of such an Estate, which I have parted with to get rid of
you.


2 d. Ten. Nay, an' you abuse us thus, you must bear with us, if we tell You
your own. Pray, what maintained your Whores, and supplied your riotous
Extravagance? Who found you Money for the Gaming-Ordinaries, and paid your
Tavern, Taylor's and Surgeon's Bills? Our Labor sure. For without it, all you
Father's Estate would have afforded you no better Fare, than your Horse has.


1st. Ten. Your Father, rest his Soul, kept a noble House, and bid his Friends
and Neighbors welcome to good Meat and Drink; kept good Horses, Hounds and
Hawks; and could hunt a whole Summer's morning in his own Grounds; and all this
he thought himself beholding to our honest Industry for, that brought him in
good Rents.


Carel. Dogs, do you remonstrate, you saucy Puppies? You that were necessary to
his Estate indeed, but like the Dung, that lay upon it, a necessary Nuisance
that made it rich and nasty; that were company only for his Dogs, and lived
like 'em upon the Reversions of his Table.


2d. Ten. Those Dogs lived better, and at more liberty, than you will do in a
little Time; in the King's Bench you will think that Dung-Civet, and wish for those
dirty Acres to take the Air in, and these Dogs to wait upon you.


Carel. Rascals, Villains, I Will teach you Manners.


[Offers to beat 'em, Friendly interposes. Friend. Begone, honest Friends,
you have heated him, and the next time let your Zeal be more respectful.


1st. Ten. Yes, we will go, but it shall be like Rams to return with greater
force; We Will teize him into Reason.


Ex. Tenants. Fr. Is your Mortgage past Redemption, Careless?


Carel. Faith, I think not, but it is as bad, for I Have neither Money nor
Inclination to redeem it.


Fr. I Have both, and you shall n't part with it so: Shall that Rogue insult us
both, get my Mistress from me first, and then your Estate?


Carel. We may be bound to thank him for both, as we may manage matters, and
make him keep a Mistress for you, and gather Rents for me.


Fr. That Is my present aim, which I miss, if, though the Lawyer hold the Plow,
the Crop ben't of my Sowing; thither I Am bound this minute.


Carel. It Is a laudable Design; but why in this trim, Thou that usest to
out-brave the Spring? A green Bag would become thee better now, than a
Billet-Doux; Love's Merchants should all be gay Adventurers.


Fr. There Is a Mystery in that, a little time will unriddle to you. But here
comes the Pilot, that must conduct me into the wished Harbor.


Enter Homily and Spade. Carel. Faith, I like thy Fancy, of making the Spirit
Pimp for the Flesh, very well; these Spiritual Guides seldom miss the way to
the Carnal Part; these Conscience-Brokers, these Scruple-Mongers are the best
Bellows to blow such Flames with; and this of 'em all the fittest Engine in
Europe for your purpose: For he has as little Conscience as Learning, but it is
as craving as his Stomach, and governed by it; a Treat, or a Bribe makes him
your Creature.


Hom. Hard Times, Spade, very hard Times; we pray, and pray, but to little
purpose; formerly, if a good warm Sermon would n't kindle Men's Zeal, it would
their Fires, and Men of our Function were sure of two or three good Meals at
least in a Week gratis; now, in spite of all we can say, their Kitchins are as
cool as their Charities.


Spade. Nay, if you complain, Sir, what may we poor Sextons do, that live upon
the bare Sound of Prayers? We rise, and ring the Bells, and get good Stomachs,
and may eat the Ropes when we have done to satisfy 'em.


Hom. We used to earn now and then a comfortable Ten Shilings by Preaching an
old Sermon, but our Benefic'd-Men are grown so provident, that they buy 'em
ready Printed as cheap as we can, and preach 'em themselves. When had we a
Christning, Spade?


Spade. Not this ten Weeks: they have gi'n over getting Children: The Taxes, the
Seas, and Usury undo us, take off their Edges, and blunt their Plough-shares.
There are some poor Laborers, that perhaps once in seven years, by helping one
another produce some few puny Butter-Prints, that seldom hold the Christning
without shrinking in the wetting.


Hom. The young Mad-Caps carry their Diseases into Flanders, there the Pox, or
the Enemy dispatches 'em, and there is the profit of their Burials lost.


Spade. Ay, and they are grown so hard-hearted of late, that they will not die at
home; and so cheat the King, and the Parson of their Duties. I Have buried but
one Man these three Months, and that was an Apothecary that pined for want of
Business.


Hom. It Is a healthy year, a lamentable healthy year, the Air's too wholesome.
What a torment it is to have a slender Stipend, and an Immortal Parish.


Spade. You're allowed to pray against all Weathers foul, or fair, as you see
fit, Master; why not against all Airs too, good or bad?


Hom. It Is n't in the Cannon, Man, I Would give my best Cassock, that it were.


Spade. It Is strange! they are starved too, yet they will not die here, they will not
Earth. A good Plague now, or half dozen new fantastical Fevers, that would turn
up their Heels by whole sale, and take the Doctors in their grave
Consultations, that there might be no natural help for Money. How merrily my
Bells won'd go then!


Hom. Hold there, Boy, Doctors and Apothecaries, are our Friends, let us spare
them; For tho they are slow, they are certain. O! for Mr. Bolus, and Mr. Glister,
the two great Apothecaries in our Neighborhood again, they did but give 'em a
shake, and they dropped like ripe Fruit from the stalk. Now we must either remove
to some muddy air, or wait for a Contagious Season.


Spade. Oh! for the Hundreds of Essex here, Master, that Nursery of Agues,
Agues that will shake Men's Souls out, and never stay for Drugs, Possets, or
Plasters.


Hom. Gouts, Rheumatisms, and dead Palsies. --


Spade. I like that word Dead monstrously: But for those Gouts and Rheumatisms,
they will hang an Arse a scurvy while. The Pox, Small Pox, or Epidemical Surfeits
are rich Marle, and make a Churchyard fat, and the Sexton merry.


Car. (to Friend.) Never doubt you Levite, he is as true a Tumbler, as e're was
played at a Coney; I Will warrant he fetches her.


Fr. Prithee leave me now, and anon you shall hear further from me.


Car. Farewell, and if you want my assistance, send me your Instructions, and
I Will pursue 'em with more Application than ever the Lawyer did a rich Client's
Breviate; I Am a very able Councellor in a case of Cuckoldom.


Ex. Car. Fr. Sir, your most humble Servant, is not your name Homily?


Hom. It is, Sir, your Will with me, I pray?


Fr. Are not you Curate of the Neighboring Parish?


Hom. I am so, Some Funeral Sermon, (Aside.) or some secret slip to be
Baptized, or some stolen Fortune to be privately married, and concealed, Fortune
an'^ be thy will.


Fr. Sir, I Have a little business with you at your good leisure.


Hom. I pray, Sir, be free, if it be matter of Privacy, this Man's my Sexton,
and (...), be trusted.


Fr. Sir, O my business is partly with him too, and I am glad to meet you both
so opportun^ly.


Hom. Well, Sir, I partly guess your Business, -- you would be Married, I
suppose, -- and desire secrecy, this may be done, -- and with security too, --
it is but antedating the Certificate.


Fr. There will be no occasion --


Hom. Excuse me, Sir, I say there will be occasion, give me leave to understand
these matters, -- it is part of my Trade. For without an antedated Certificate,
how will you evade the Act of Parliament, which obliges to a discovery?


Fr. You say true, Sir, but my Business is of another nature.


Hom. Cry you mercy, Sir; Perhaps you have transgrest, and the fruit of it calls
for our Assistance; nay, never blush for the matter, young Blood is warm, and
the offense is veni^l, the Lambs of God will play, it is best to sow our wild
Oats in our Youth, we make the better Christians for it after. Here Is my Sexton
too, if you have occasion, shall for a small Sum oblige the Parish to take care
of it.


Spad. Or if you would quit your Hands of the Mother, for Forty Shillings, I Will
bring one that shall Marry her, and so rid you at once of both, if she be yet
undeliver'd.


Fr. I thank you both, Gentlemen, but you're wide of the matter still.


Hom. Have you lost any Relation, or Friend, and would have a Funeral Sermon? I
shall be very reasonable: For a Father 40s. shall suffice, a Mother, Brother,
or Sister 30s. an Uncle, or Aunt 20s. and for a Friend, or more distant
Relation 10s. Say your Price, and it shall be done accordingly.


Fr. Still you prevent me, Sir; but to be short, my Business is from an Old
Friend of yours in New England.


Hom. A Friend in New England! Sir, I know no Body there: His Name pray, and
Business?


Fr. That Letter there will inform you of both.


Spad. Have a care of a Trick, Master; He looks like a Sharper, I don't like
him.


(Aside to Hom.) Hom. Never fear, Cantabit Vacuus, all I Have to lose is my
Learning, and that he may put in a Nut-shell.

(Aside to Spade.) Reads the LETTER. SIR,
SINCE my Settling in New England I Have sent several Letters to you to desire a
Correspondence, and a continuance of our Ancient Friendship; But never
receiving any Answer, I have doubted either your Death or Removal from London,
or at least the miscarriage of all my Letters. For I could not persuade my self
that either length of Time, or distance of Place could discard from the Memory
or Affections a Friend so early, and so deeply rooted in 'em: I conjure you
therefore by that strict and mutual intimacy contracted in our Youth, and so
long continued (till that necessary to my Affairs, but cruel divorce forced me
from you hither about twenty years since) to take care of this Young Man my
Son, the Bearer, and see him placed under the Care and instruction of some
able, experienced, and sober Lawyer; and in so doing you shall not only make
amends for your past forgetfulness, but further oblige an acknowledging as well
as

Your real and hearty Friend, TRADEWELL.



Hom. New England -- Several Letters -- Ancient Friendship -- Tradewell -- A
very ancient Friend sure! For the Duce a Man of that Name can I remember in New
or Old England!


Fr. You look, as if you had forgot my Father, Sir.


Hom. No, I look as if I would remember; for I cannot forget what I never knew.


Fr. I Have heard my Father say, You were Students, and Chamber-fellows together
in Oxford, till he Married.


Hom. It Is impossible, Young Man, I Am a perfect Stranger to the Name, and have
no more acquaintance in New England than in Catay.


Spad. Look sharp, Master, this Fellow would banter us out of our Wits. Do You
hear Friend, have you no Letters for me?


Fr. No Letters, but I was charged by my Father to give his Love to honest Old
Spade the merry Sexton, if you be he.


Spad. Hah! have I unknown Friends too? Hark ye, Young Man, what time of the
Moon is it? Ha'ye been worm'd since ye came over? If I know your Father, or any
of your Kin, hang me in my own Bell-Ropes.


Fr. Gentlemen, I thank you, I was told you were the Men; but it may be my
Father's Friends are dead, and you of the same Names succeed 'em. You do
honestly to undeceive me; For I had a Present of 60 Pistols to deliver to them,
as a Token of my Father's Love, but since you are n't the Men.


Hom. Pray, Sir, have a little Patience, and let me think, pray stay a little,
and let me remember, it vexes me to forget an Old Friend, an intimate Friend.


Spad. A kind Friend too, that sends so lovingly, Master.


Hom. We hard Students have very slippery Memories; but we must be the Persons:
For he and I have been Curate and Sexton in this Parish these 35 Years. I must
remember sure.


Spad. Pray remember, Master, such Friends are not to be forgotten.


Hom. Stay, methinks I have him now, let me see a goodly, proper, strait, well
timber'd, grave Gentleman with --


Fr. Black Hair.


Hom. Very right, with a goodly Beard, when he was in England he lived next
Door to the --


Fr. To the Sign of the Holy Lamb hard by this Place.


Spad. Alack, alack, what Squire Tradewell, Master? Oh 'twas a Noble Gentlem^n.


Fr. (...)-a-mercy Letter, now it operates.


Aside. Hom. ^^^ee what a Treacherous Knave this Time is; how has he played the
Wag (...) me, to make me forget my best, my dearest Friend? He Married, let
(...) --


Fr. (...) ^^e^lthy's Daughter.


Hom. (...) very same, I Married 'em, I remember your Mother perfectly well, as
if it were but Yesterday, a Goodly Lady she was. Oh! the Feasting, the Masks,
the Mirth, we had at that Wedding.


Friend. How this Money rubs up their Memories! For Ten Pistols more they would
make her the Great Mogul's Daughter.


(Aside.) Hom. Your Father and I had both one Soul. Look Spade, whose Eyes are
those? Look in's Face, if he ben't the very Picture of Squire Tradewell. I
think you was born here.


Fr. I was about five Years old, when he carried me over with him.


Hom. Your Name is --


Fr. Samuel.


Hom. That was your ^ather's Name, I think, Well Gentleman I Baptized you, and
a sweet Child you were then; See now, Time, that consumes us, shoots him up
still sweeter.


Spad. A wondrous sweet Child you were, I Have kissed ye, and played with ye, and
dandled ye in my Arms a hundred, and a hundred times, and swung ye in my
Bell-Ropes; ye loved swinging.


Fr. Lying Rascals, now their Memories are whetted, if it were for their
purpose, they would remember Adam's Grandfather.


(Aside.) Hom. Well, Young Gentleman, You're welcome to your Native Air. How
does the Noble Gentleman, your Father? when will he bless his Country in his
Return?


Fr. Very shortly, Sir; till which Time he entreats your care of me, and
desires you to accept of these fifty Pistols, as a small earnest of his future
Gratitude, and acknowledgments of your Services.


(Gives to him. Hom. Sir, I am bound ever to be his very humble Beadsman, and
most assiduous Orator.


Spad. Lord, Lord, how Sickness decays our Intellects! This is the very
Gentleman, that before your last long Sickness, when I lay so ill at the same
time too, Master, about two years ago, we used constantly to remember in our
private Devotions; that a Fever should have such influence over our Memories!


Hom. Well, it shall be so no more; I shall ever hence forward remember him,
Good Gentleman.


Fr. My Father was used to say, that his Neighbor Spade the Sexton was a very
honest, but a wondrous Merry Man, and a Good Fellow; and therefore desired me
to give his Love and these Ten Pistols to him.


Gives him Money. Spad. Ah! it is my noble, generous Master still; and you shall
see I can be merry as ever upon so joyful news as of his Health.


Fr. Thanks to the Gold, for half the Sum more thou would sing a Psalm as merrily
at his Execution.


(Aside.) Spad. Shall's to the Dog and Duck, Master, or to the Whelp and Bacon?
there is a Cup of rare Stingo abroach, such as you love, and as good true Nantz,
as e're was tipped over Tongue.


( To Hom.) Hom. No, Spade, My Charge has been nicely bred, those Houses are
too mean for his high Keeping: We must have something befitting his fine
Stomach. Step and provide us something at the Rummer. You see, Sir, we aren't
dainty, homely Places and mean Cheer serve us usually; we don't pamper our
selves, we mortify the Carnal Man, but upon such an extraordinary Occasion to
remember an old loving Friend, and in respect to you Sir.


Fr. I humbly thank you, Sir, but it needs not, I Am not delicate, and have at
present no Appetite but to my Study, which must be the Law. I desire you to
excuse me.


Spad. But, Sir, you may be hungry, you must be hungry, pray do nothing rashly;
Study creates Appetite mainly, but ben't too violent, it impairs the Health;
Take your refreshment first, it is time, and then to your Study. Here Is my
Master, had never been what he is at these years, if he had studied immoderately.


Fr. I thank you both for your Care, but I desire you to dispense with me at
this time. But, Sir, I suppose my Father in his Letter has made it his request,
as I do mine, to place me under the Instructions of some Lawyer of great
Business; and for his Pains and Care he shall be gratified with two hundred
Guineas, besides his own demand for my Lodging and Diet. I Have heard much of
Sergeant Wrangle.


Spade. What, not eat, nor drink, first; Sure he has n't heard any thing of the
Serjeant's House keeping yet. Well, he is an Ass, and so we will use him. (Aside.)
Young Gentleman you shall be a Lawyer, and surfeit upon Cook and Littleton.


Hom. Sir, You Have hit happily upon Sergeant Wrangle, he is an able Councellor,
and makes more noise in Westminster Hall, than half the Lawyer's there; he is
Master of that Art. He Is my near Neighbor and Parishioner, I Will recommend you
to him. See yonder he comes, and Mr. Affidavit, the famous Solicitor, with him,
and one or two more.


Enter Wrangle, Affidavit, and others. Wran. Well, Gentlemen, you have played
your Parts to a Miracle, I suppose we have gi'n 'em their Bellies full of this
Cause; they will know who they plead (Non est factum) to next time.


Aff. When I lose a Cause for want of Witnesses, I Will bid adieu to Practice* as
if I could n't prove any Man's Hand when I Have a mind to it. Mr. Swearhome I never
knew you so out in my life, so shamefully out-sworn, so baff^'d, by a young
Fellow too, that has n't been above five or six years at the Business.


Sw. Whose Fault was that? I went according to my Instructions: You knew the
merits of the Cause, and should have informed me better.


Wran. He had the disadvantage indeed of being first sworn, but Mr. Nickit
retrieved all.


Sw. Ay, he saw where the Pinch was, he swore last, I Have known you Mr.
Affidavit, call for the Book even toward the Conclusion of a Cause to no
purpose; if I might have had the Book again, the Cause should n't have stuck, I
warrant ye.


Wran. Come, come Gentlemen, you have all done to admiration, and the Cause has
succeeded accordingly, 't has paid you nobly. Well, a rich Client's a Blessing:
A rich litigious Lord's Cause is an Estate; that is never starved: there are
those that expect a Man should drudge for a single Fee, but they thrive in
proportion.


Affid. Hang the Penurious, their Causes like their Purses have poor Issues.
Good Fees beget good Causes; the Times are Aguish, and a Plea must be warmly
lined to keep it in heart.


Nick. The Prerogative of Crowns goes far, and those that will spare no cost,
need want no Witnesses; experienced, fearless Witnesses, that understand their
Businesses, and will make no unnecessary Scruples.


Wran. Well, Gentlemen, you are all Men of Sagacity in our Business, and never
let a Clause run a-ground upon Truth, but you help it off again immediately,
and set it afloat. I Have known Witnesses sometimes over-set a Cause foully for
want of your Discretion: Too much truth is a very bad Ingredient in a Witness,
a little now and then sets a Cause off handsomely, but laid on too thick, it
obscures the Colors, and instead of giving a gloss, like an ill Varnish it
hides all the Beauty. Mr. Swearhome, and Mr, Nicki^, did my Lord make good his
promise to you?


Both. Very nobly indeed Mr. Sergeant, we are very much obliged to you, and
whenever you have occasion, we hope you will command us in your own Affairs gratis.


Wrang. I Am glad on it, my Lord's a wise Man, and knows how to value your
Services. Call upon me anon at my House, I Have occasion for your hands to some
Writings, and yours Mr. Affidavit.


All. Mr. Sergeant we are your Servants, and bound to be at your Devotion;
command whose Land or Money you please, we will not shrink from you.


Exit Affidavit and Witnesses. Homily, Spade, and Friendly come up to him. Hom.
and Spade. A good Morrow to your Worship, Mr. Sergeant.


Wrang. Thank you Master Homily, thank you good Neighbor Spade. Have ye any
Business with me? if so, be brief, I Am full of Business, and every minute's
precious.


Hom. We know your Hours are taken up with full Employ, and therefore have
brought this young Gentleman of a considerable Family, and Heir to a great
Estate, and of a promising Aspect.


Wrang. He appears no less; but to what end Neighbors?


Hom. To be your Pupil, Sir, and study the Law under your Instructions.


Wrang. Alas, Sir, I should be glad to serve you, but I Am a private Man, and my
House strait not fit to receive a man of your Quality, scarce large enough for
my small family, Besides, Sir, you must pardon me, if I be a little scrupulous,
these Times make us all so; I mean you no affront, Sir.


Fr. To secure my Honesty, I Will deposite two hundred Guinea's, which I would
beg you to accept, as a Gratuity for the favor of your Instruction; and for my
Diet whatever you please I can agree to with thanks.


Wrang. That Is an Honest Pledge, yet there needs none, your Face and Carriage,
Sir, declare an innate honesty.


Fr. So strong an Inclination I have to the Law, and hear so great a Character
of you, Sir, that the meanest corner in your House will be more acceptable to
me than a Palace; Books, and your Direction, are all I covet; I shall have no
resort to me, no company; these two are all my acquaintance in this Town.


Wrang. So much the better; a Student should be retired and frugal; to take you
would straighten me very much, my Affairs and the straightness of my House
considered. Could you be contented with a hard Lodging in the Out-parts of my
House?


Fr. Any thing, Sir, that is dry and wholesome, I Am not wantonly bred.


Spad. Would he would live with me, and learn to dig?


Hom. Mark but his mind to Learning.


Wrang. I do, and like it wondrously. Thanks to his Money. (Aside.) He Will prove
a great Lawy(...).


Hom. But he is so mod^, Sir, he is too bashful for a Lawyer.


Wrang. Not at all, it is a good Sign. Come, Sir, with me, but you must keep to
your Apartment. Good morrow Neighbors, I thank ye.


Hom. Good morrow to your Worship, young Gentleman I Will come sometimes, and
crack a Case with you.


Fr. My good Friends, I thank you both.


Ex. Wrangle, Friendly. Hom. Fare 'em well, let us to the Tavern Spade, and
enjoy our selves, and pray for the Fool, the Founder.


Spad. And pray for more such fools, more Friends, and fools from New England.


Hom. From Lapland, or whatsoever quarter the Wind blows Money, I Will know 'em,
instantly, nay, I Will be akin to 'em, I cannot miss a man that brings Money.


Spad. I Will change my Trade, Master, and live by the living, let the dead
stink, it is a poor stinking Trade.


Hom. If the young fool should chop upon his Wife now, and handle her Case,
that is a Law Point that would make the Lawyer start; it is a hidden. Point worth
the canvasing.


Spad. The Woman was n't born to so much happiness; he is too demure; he has no
heat; Study consumes his Oil.


Hom. I say, if he should sting her home, I should love him for it; for to say
truth, though I call him Worshipful, the Lawyer's an arrant Dogbolt, a stingy
narrow sou^^d Wretch, that starves the very Rats and Mice out of his House, and
so jealous, that he starts if but the shadow of a man enter at his Window. I
wish him a Cuckold upon Record, and if my Youngster should dub him. -- But
let us leave that to the will of Fate, and over a Cup of lusty Canary let us
Prophecy.

If Fools are doomed the Favorites of Fate,
Then they that deal with 'em are fortunate.

Exeunt Ambo. ACT II. Scene, Wrangle's House.
Scene Opens, and discovers Wrangle sitting at a Table, with Money, Jewels, and
Writings before him; an Egg roasting at a Candle, and Famine his Man tending
it. Wran. LET riotous Prodigals lavish away both health and treasure to please
their wanton Palates, and gorge intemperate Luxury. Let 'em debauch their
Appetites, and consume their Fortunes to purchase Surfeits, and nurse up
diseases; Let 'em be served in Gold and Silver, and indulge themselves in rich
Soups, and costly Ol^o's, in high Ragou's, and nice Fricafsee's till they grow
more lusty and salicious than pampered Cardinals; where does this end? Their
Dishes come to us that are wise and provident to pay for their Sawces, and
their Luxurious Carcases either fatten a Churchyard early, or at length
encumber an Hospital. These are the fruits of their excess and vanity, which
the frugal and industrious reap the benefit and comfort of. The wise take other
measures, and know that Nature's content with a little; this Egg to me's a
greater Feast, and contains more Dainties, than French Cook ever dressed, or
Glutton thought of. In this are health and content, all that wise Nature asks.


Fam. I fancy my Nature's none of the wisest then, Sir; for she would never be
satisfied so; yet she knows what is good for her self, and has taught my Stomach
to be more craving.


Wrang. OF my Conscience thou'st a Wolf in thy Belly, thou insatiable Rascal,
nothing will suffice thy ravenous Gut, I saw you eat two Apples just now:
Prodigious!


Fam. (aside.) 'T had been a Prodigy indeed, if I had owed 'em to your
Liberality.


Wrang. To feed thee as long as thou'd'st cram, would bring a Dearth upon the
Land; had thou been one of the five thousand that were fed by Miracle, there
had been no Fragments brought away; thy Mind's always on thy Guts, sure thy
soul lies there.


Fam. I cannot tell that; but I Am sure 't had need, otherwise they would shrink up
quite they are so empty; for I get nothing else to put into 'em here.


Wrang. Ungrateful Rascal, had not you the Water I boiled 'tother Egg in, to
make you hearty Broth? are ye never to be satisfied?


Fam. Yes, Sir; but I might as soon make the Philosopher's Stone on it. you gave
it me in water, and if 'twere n't for good manners, I could give't you again in
Wind; 'twas so hearty.


Wrang. Hold your tongue, Sirrah! and look to my Egg; how does it roast.


Fam, It heats apace, Sir.


Wran. Turn it then. Where Is your Mistress? Why is n't she here?


Fam. The very sight of this Egg has made him Cockish; what would a Dozen
Buttered do? (Aside,) She Is within, Sir.


Wran. Within, Sir, at what? Is she getting --


Fam. At the Window, getting a good Stomach.


Wrang. I mean, what is she doing, Sirrah?


Fam. Praying heartily, Sir, upon her knees, that Heaven would send her a good
Dinner, a substantial Dinner, there is no fear of want of Stomachs here, the air
of this House is the thinnest and keenest in Europe. They that can live upon
our Housekeeping, may surfeit upon the pickings of a Spaniards Teeth. My
Mistress, Sir, I doubt is a little of my Constitution, she loves a good Meal.


Wrang. Nothing but Cluttony and Intemperance goes down with you, Sirrah. Had
n't she two Sprats for Supper last night, and Oil to 'em too? Was n't she sick
with eating?


Fam. Yes, she had Oil, and was sick with eating it, 'twou'd have turned a
Dutchman's Stomach; some Lamp or other furnished it.


(Aside.) Wrang. Well, I Will have that Window stopped up; for I observe there are
always swarms of Bea^^'s plying under it; as thick as Pimps, or Persons at
White Hall, or Porters at Billingsgate. Go call your Mistress, Sirrah.


Exit Famine, and reenters with Florella. VVrang. Come, my Dear, I sent for
thee from the Window in pure Tenderness, the (...) too ^harp for thy delicate
Constitution; thou should not come (...) that Window, it is too bleak, and
exposes thee too much to the cold Wind; I Will stop it up.


Flo. Come, I know your disease; it is your Jealousy, not your Affection (...)
you (...) of me. How have I deserved to be mewed thus like (...)?


VVrang. Retirement, my Florella, is the Pleasure of Life; Oh that I could
enjoy what thou do! that my affairs would suffer me to be always with thee!
Privacy and good Housewifery are the best Ornaments of a Wife, a Virtuous
Woman, like a Rose, the less she is blown upon is the sweeter. Why should the
Windows be opened to let in Scandal, and Censure, when the wholsomest Air blows
inward.


Flo. Of what use are the the sweetest Flowers, if none come near enough to be
refreshed by, or perceive their Odours, yet they too only flourish in open air,
shut up they wither and die: So my Fame which might shine to the Honor of us
both, like a choked Lamp, is suffocated by your base Suspicions. No, my
Reputation which no malice could ever touch, is tarnish'd by your Jealousy.
What occasion must the World imagine I Have given for so severe a Confinement?


Fam. (Aside.) Well said Mistress, to him again; He has but little skill in
Husbandry I find; for I fancy his own House the fittest Soil in England to sow
Horns in; and I Am mistaken in my man, if he has n't brought home, as able a
Seeds-man.


VVrang. Don't misconstrue my Love; you are fair, my Dear, and the fairest
Flowers are soonest blasted. It Is not that I doubt thy Virtue; but the World is
envious, and I would fence thee as well from its malice, as Temptations.


Flo. If you believe me just and true, why daren't you trust me to my Liberty?
The seeds of Virtue thrive poorly in the shade, set 'em in the warm Sun, and
they spring gloriously. Why have n't I my Coach, rich Clothes, Jewels, and
Equipage, like other Lawyers Wives? Neither my Fortune, nor my Person are
inferior to any of 'em; your sordid temper makes me vain, and tell you so.


VVrang. Fie, Florella, don't take example by those foolish extravagant Women,
that stick their Husbands wealth upon 'em in trifles, and only mark out a Gaudy
Path to their own infamy and ruin.


Flo. No such matter, they visit, and enjoy themselves, live plentifully and
merrily; and the indulgence of their kind Husbands binds them faster to 'em.


Fam. (Aside.) Well argued Mistress, keep your hold, Madam.


VVrang. What is it you can desire, or wish? here is what may satisfy the most
covetous eye. Here are Diamonds, Rubies, [Takes 'em up one after another.] as
fair as e're came from Ormus, or Bengal, worth Princes Ransomes, and Pearl, as
rich and orient, as Cleopatra's Banquet, all Nature's wealth, the Treasures
both of Sea and Land. Here Is the work too of the most celebrated Artists,
Watches, Seals, Lockets, Rings, Crochets, and Neck-laces, that young
Extravagants purchase of Christian, and T^mpion, at the Price of their undoing;
where're they circulate, it is here they center, the reward and fruit of honest
industry, and good husbandry. All these are thine; what can they show to vie
with 'em, that carry all about 'em?


Flo. And what am I the happier for all these? what use are they of to me, more
than if they were in the Mine? All this is but wealthy Beggary, and I enjoy no
more than starved Prisoners, Confinement, want and hunger. But my Patience
shall no longer bawd to my own misery. Here Is a Treat, two Eggs, and a Sallad,
that would n't give a single Caterpillar a Dinner.


Fam. Nay, his Table's so loaded always, that his Cat's starved, and the Mice
have taken Sanctuary in the Church to avoid the same fate, and mend their
Quarters.


(Aside.) VVrang. Come, prithee Dear, be satisfied, it is only my care of thy
health; I should be loath, by our own thri^tless folly to become a constant
Revenue to Doctors and Apothecaries. Come, come, though what we have's but
little, it is wholesome and 'cleanly. I Have been my self both Caterer, and Cook,
Sweet.


Fam. A Pox of the Cook, that cannot lick his Fingers.


(Aside.) Flo. Can you think a Woman of my Birth and Fortune, can bear such
usage patiently? Such Avarice and Inhumanity? Is^t not enough that you're
incapable of being a Husband, but you must perform the Office of a Jailer to
confine and starve me?


VVrang. Come be pacified, and I Will add another Course to our Feast, you shall
have Milk, and stewed Prunes for a Collation.


Fam. With Sugar to 'em, Sir.


VVrang. This Rogue would ruin our West India Plantations to fill but the
hollow of his sweet Tooth. Come, Florella, let us sit down, and think the Roman
Dainties at our Table; it is all but fancy.


Fam. If that would do, I Have as strong a fancy to a good Meal, as the best of
them. Let the Devil take those ^gg-shells to equip his Witches for Lapland.
Now, in my opinion, it is Treason against all good Stomachs to hear a tedious
Grace said to no Meat. Well, I Have a Rhadish yet, but that is transitory. I Will
steal off, and feast with it, upon the smell of the next Cook's Shop.


(Aside. Ex. Fam. Flo. What Man was that you brought in with you?


Wrang. A young Man, that is to study the Law under me, I Have taken him into the
House, my Dear; but he sha'n't disturb thee, he sha'n't come near thee, but at
Meals. Did see him?


Flo. Yes, as you crossed the yard together.


VVrang. How do like him? it is a silly, Bookish, Bashful wretch; but he pays
nobly, he desires but three Months Instructions, and he has given me 200
Guinea's before hand.


Flo. I caren't for that, he sha'n't stay here. What a Life shall I lead
betwixt your Jealousy and Covetousness? whenever I see him, I shall be in fear
of one, or shame for 'tother.


VVrang. OF my Conscience, thou need'st not apprehend either. He Is such a raw
Phlegmatic cold thing, thou might wear him in thy Bosom, and never warm him;
his mind's o'th Law, and not on lewdness.


Flo. Do, trust him, and repent it, do. I say he sha'n't stay, I know your
Jealous temper too well, I Will have no more of those fits.


VVrang. Thou shall n't, Dearest, I amn't Jealous of thee for any Man, much
less for him. Do but comply, and thou shall have the profit of his Board to buy
thee Pins, which will be considerable; For he is willing to give any rate, and
yet so modest, that he is contented with the old Wood-room for a Lodging.


Flo. That used to hold Fuel, now you have brought Fire into it, but it is your own
doing, and against my Opinion; Take notice therefore, if your Jealousy, which
is arrant Tinder, should catch the Flame, I shall regard it only, as an Ignis
fatuus.


VVrang. Fear nothing, Chicken, there is no danger; I Will call him to thee, and
thou shall agree with him about the Terms thy self.


Exit Wrangle, and reenters with Friendly, with a Law-book in's Hand. VVrang.
What, hard at it still? this is too violent to last, all things must have their
(...); Nature requires it. Come take breath, Sir, and consult your health, as
well as study. See how modest he is, speak to him, Wife, and encourage him.


Flo. Sir, you're welcome to such poor accommodation as our House can afford.


Fr. Thank ye, Madam, I Am not nice, any thing serves my turn; Books, and your
good Husband's Instructions are all my ambition.


VVran. He Is a very Book-worm, and feasts upon old Volumes, I must commit him
to your care, Wife; H's so bashful, he will starve there else, before he will speak.


Flo. Since it is your Pleasure, Sir, it shall be mine. And his too, or I
mistake my Man.


(Aside.) Knocking within. Enter Famine. Fam. 'Sir, here are three Gentlemen
desire to speak with you about earnest business.


Wran. I Will wait on 'em immediately. (Exit Fam.) (to Flor) Wife, make much of
my Pupil, and divert him, he is melancholy. (Aside.) He Is the best Client I Have
had these two Terms, not excepting my Lord Feewell. Encourage him, and manage
him smoothly, thou may get what thou will out of him.


Exit Wrangle. Flo. I shall get something for you then, you often dream of, but
little think so near you now. (Asid.) How long have you been destined for the
Law, Sir? You Have too much Gravity for your years, you look wise, and dull
enough for a Recorder.


Fr. I Have lost abundance of precious time, Madam, and would study hard to
redeem it, every minute was invaluable, but they are past, and I would employ my
utmost care to improve the remaining; it is that makes me so thoughtful, not my
natural temper.


Flo. Come, you over-act your Part, I know you Friendly, this Disguise fits as
awkardly upon you, as the Hab* of a Non-Con Parson would upon a Dancing Master.
Your Money has blinded him, he is easily imposed upon, when he gets by it. Though
there is nothing more common, than for your Hypocrites in general to cheat one
another. But could you imagine, that two years absence, and this Disguise could
^ide you from my Knowledge.


Fr. My dear Florella, (Runs and offers to embrace her.) thou art the only
Volume in the Lawyer's study, that I covet; let Wrangle tumble over the rest,
and fill his head with Learned Jargon, Law Billingsgate, and scold from Cook
and Littleton to justify his Knavery; let him (...) the Milch Purses of
Litigious Fools, I envy him nothing he enjoys, but thee.


(Offers to embrace her, she puts him back.) Flo. Hold Friendly, it is too much;
I Am now another's right, and must not grant, what I before might give, when
'twas my own; you freely had my heart, my Body was another's purchase, who must
alone enjoy it.


Fr. Curse on your sordid Uncle, that (...) that, and yet withheld the rest.
He knew too well the Price, that Beauty yields, and would n't truck for Love or
Hearts; but prized the Lot (...) I my then low Stock, then stepped this Muckworm
in, out bid my (...) I Would the Ma^^^*^ and took Possession; Curse on 'em both*
But, (...) has been ki^der since, and given me my Elder Brother's Estate;
suffer me therefore to resume my right; and since 'twas an unjust Purchase made
over my head, and in my wrong; thus, thus I seize my own.


(Catches her in's arms.) Flo. O Friendly, but too well I love you, therefore
as you tender my safety, rake not into the ^mbers of our disquiet, nor seek to
revive a Flame, that will consume us both. I Am bound by Sacred Vows, and what
Love prompts me to, Duty forbids.


Fr. Let not your Superstition wrong my Love, mistaken Notions, and false
Principles, not zeal for real duty, raise these doubts. The Matrimonial Vow's
reciprocal, as our Allegiance claims Protection, Conditions unperform'd on
either Part, make void the Obligation on 'tother. If you contract with an
insolvent Man for an Estate, are you bound to make good your Counter-part, if
he regards not his. Marriage is an agreement witnessed only, and ratified by
Law on certain terms, of which if he has failed, your Bond is cancelled, the
Knot's dissolved, and you are mine again, by all the Canons both of Church and
Nature.


Flo. Urge me no further, Friendly, it is a crime in me to hear you plead in
such a cause; But you have a Powerful Advocate within, that fain would raise
rebellion in my Blood; down, down, thou Traiterous warmth, that swell'st my
Veins. How has my Husband failed, how forfeited?


Fr. As well may Winter boast the Summers Fruits, and chill December vie with
scorching July; as he pay down the Hymeneal dues, numbed with the Frost both of
his Age and Temper, no Joy can spring through such an Icebound Clay. This Air's
too bleak for Love to wanton in; he seeks the cheerful Sun to prune, and bask
in, and keeps his Revels on warm Downy Beds, whose Genial warmth revive, his
drooping Joys. These, these, my dear Florella, shall be thine, return but Love
for Love at thy Devotion.


Flo. Tempt me no more, too well you know your Power, and would despise, and
hate me for my Frailty, should you prevail. Why will you urge it then?


Fr. Dearest, charming Florella.


(Gresps her in his Arms.) Enter Famine. Fam. Madam, my Master's just at my
Heels.


(Exit Fam. Enter Wrangle.) Wran. How now Wife? What Is the matter, Pupil? Why
this disorder in both your countenances? What Is the meaning of this confusion?
You look angry, Sir; Why Sirrah, Famine, Rascal, what makes you run away?


Flo. O! My Dear, I Have committed such a Folly, such a Fault, I never was guilty
of the like before. But it is your Fault, you --


Wran. Why, what is the matter? what have ye done? tell me, speak quickly; Have
ye --


Fr. (Aside.) I Am ruined, discovered, all my hope's lost, I shall be insulted
over by Careless, and whooted at by all the Boys in Town.


Flo. Such rudeness, such an Affront I Have given this Gentleman, as I doubt he
never will pardon, and I can make no Apology for.


Wran. I Am glad it is no worse, I had rather they should quarrel than agree too
well, (aside.) What have you done, how have you affronted him.


Flo. He mentioning New England, and I not dreaming he was of that Country, I
told him some Stories of that Place, which I have formerly heard my Cousin
Ramble tell; His Color went, and came, he looked first Pale, then Red, then
Pale, and Red again, which I not thinking him concerned, ne^r minded imputing
it only to his excessive Bashfulness till by the extreme disorder, and
confusion I perceived him under, I found it touched him nearer.


Wran. 'Twas indiscreetly done, but like a Woman, rather than want Tattle, to
out with all they know at first sight to any Body. Sir, you must pardon her;
you must follow the rule of Law, in like cases, where if any Persons offend
without malice, or ill design, they are acquitted; you will find it in your
reading; it is called Chance-medley. See an' he ben't discomposed still. Why
Wife, ask his Pardon, Wife.


Fr. Sir, your Lady's not in fault, it is my misfortune, that there is too much
truth in what was said, which I had not temper enough to cover my concern for.
But I beg to be excused the uneasy repetition of Particulars.


Flo. Sir, I ask your Pardon, and will hereafter offend you in that manner no
more.


Wran. Come, come, all is well, we will drink a Glass to a better understanding,
and bid my Pupil welcome; come you will agree the better hereafter, as Bones once
broken knit the closer.


Fr. I hope you are a Prophet, Lawyer?


(Aside.) Wran. Fam^ne.


Enter Fam. (...) Did you call, Sir?


Wran. Fetch the Bottle, and the ^l^ss out of my Writing-Desk.


Fam. The Ink-Bottle, Sir?


Wran. No, the Bottle of He^rts-ease, Sirrah, and wash the Glass.


Fam. Shall I tie a String to it, Sir? it may be swallowed unawares else.


Wran. Away, Sirrah, and do as I bid you, here is the Key.


Exit Fam. and returns with a Bottle, a Leather Case, a Scrue Top, with a
Padlock to it, and an Usquebaugh-Glass. Wran. Come, fill a Glass, it warms the
Stomach, and moderately used is Cordial, too much destroys Health, and ruins
the strongest Constitution. Come Pupil to ye; -- How thou fill'st Villain! --
This Rogue's in League with some Apothecary sure to throw us all into Fevers.


(Drinks. Fr. A very little, pray; (to Fam.) I Am not used to strong Liquors.
Madam, to your best Thoughts.


Flo. They Are at present how to make you reparation, Sir. Come, Dearest,
Success to the Gentleman's undertaking, that his Studies may thrive.


Wran. It Is a good wish, he sha'n't want my Assistance.


Fr. I thank you both for these undeserved favors.


Wran. I Have been reconciling two Quarrelsome Neighbors, they had no Money, so
I even advised 'em to a Reference; it is the best way of ending poor Causes.
It Is for rich Booties, Golden Birds, we spread the Nets o'th Law. (Aside to
Flor^lla.) Ha'ye agreed on the rate.


Flo. (aside. to Wr.) He offers more than I can in Conscience take, or you
desire.


Wran. (Aside to Flor.) Phoo, Phoo, Scruples are Bug-bears for Children: Be
wise, and close with him.


Flo. (Aside to Wr.) Well, since you advise it, I will.


Wran. Come, my Dear, thou can sing, give my Pupil one Song, and then leave
us to discourse of his Studies.


A SONG by a Lady.
WHy was not Wit with Beauty joined?
I hate ^ Face without a Mind.
If e're I to that Sex submit,
'Twill be to Cloe's powerful Wit.
For Coelia, though divinely fair,
Art may improve, or Age impair.
When Wit alone, my Passion moves!
The only thing which Time improves.
The God with Wit must tip his dart,
And pierce my Ear, to wound my Heart.
Exit Florella. Fr. Sir, I am very sensible, that the Business of a Lawyer
depends not wholly ^^on Learning, or great reading in the Law, there are other
mea^^^ (...) be (...) to introduce a Man to Practice.


(...). You observe very well; For in our Profession, as in all others, it is
(...) m^^it, but a little unheeded, artificial management, that recommends us
(...) the world, and gets Business, tho the thoughtless crowd impute it to our
^^ill and Ability. So the City-Divines insinuate themselves into the favor of
the People, by Preaching up Popular Doctrines, and declaiming for Liberty and
Property, the Contract implied betwixt the King and Subject in the Oaths of
Coronation and Allegiance, and the lawfulness of Rebellion upon disgust, and
the necessity of curbing the Prerogative; at Court they raise themselves by
advancing the Divine Right of Monarchy, and urging the dangerous consequences
of disobedience, and making Resistance to the Higher Powers, and enforcing the
Religious Obligation to the Civil Authority, and the danger of using our own
Eyes, and consulting Carnal Reason in matter of Faith. The circumstances of
Time and Place are nicely to be considered; For that which is Orthodox at
Whitehall, is seldom calculated for the Meridian of Cheapside.


Fr. Nay, the Spiritual Compass in that respect is like the Mariners and the
Priests, like their Needles, though they agree in their main aim, have their
several Points at which they certainly vary.


Wrang. In Physic, the Doctors grow famous by affronting Galen and
Hippocrates, and complementing Apothecaries; by writing long Bills filled with
unnecessary Medicines; by repeating Draughts, Bolus's, and Pearl Cordials, and
emptying the Patients Pockets to fill their Windows; by caresling Old Midwives,
and bribing Nurses, and Favorite Servants; by making impertinent officious
Visits. Philosophical Gossipings, and talking Nonsense liberally to Old Ladies
in Cramp Terms; by commending the insipid Receipts they show 'em, and
communicating now and then a Dispensatory Water for an Arcanura of their own;
by reading in their Coaches what they don't understand in their Studies; by
running into Cabals to recommend their own Faction, and decrying the rest of
their Profession; by frequenting Conventicles, and Lecture-Sermons to please
Knaves, and cheat Fools into an Opinion of their Religion; by talking
perpetually of Monstrosities, and unusual Phoenomena, though at the same time
they cannot distinguish betwixt a Chamoelion, and a Dutch Sooterkin. These are
the Acts that make 'em famous, it is no matter for Learning, they need not cure,
if they can but amuse the People; A Collection of Journals, or Transactions
equips 'em for Philosophers, a Slaughterhouse for Anatomists, and their
Grand-mothers for Chemists.


Fr. Well, there are Cheats in all Trades, not excepting ours; and I find it is
easier much to be a Man of Business, than a Man of Skill. I Have lost so much
time in New England, that I would fain take the shortest cut to the Knowledge
and Practice of the Law. For that end I desired to be placed under your
Instructions; whatever you are pleased to communicate, shall be further
acknowledged.


Wrang. You say honestly; and I Will deal by you like a Son, I Will let you into
all the Mysteries of our Art, and if you can but follow my Directions, I Will
make you a Master of it too, one Month in my House shall be worth seven years
in your Study.


Fr. Sir, you bind me to you, and doubt not but by your good Lectures to prove
such a Proficient, as you need not be ashamed on.


Wrang. Most Gentlemen take a wrong method in breeding their Sons to the Law,
they send 'em to the Inns of Court, where, if they prove Students, (which very
few do) they drudge away seven years, in making common Place-Books from
Reports, and Statute-Books, before they are called to the Bar; and many saunter
away seven, and seven more, before they be sent to it again with a Fee.


Fr. My Father was very sensible of that, which made him take other measures.


Wrang. He Is a wise Man, I warrant him; For with an experienced Practiser, you
shall learn more thriving Law in a few Months, than in your whole Life in a
Study, if he will be free and communicate, which any one will do upon a good
consideration.


Fr. That shall not be wanting, Sir, my Father has taken care for that, and I Will
see his Commands performed.


Wrang. You do wisely both. But to be successful in our Profession, there is an
aptness of Temper required. Some Men set up for such a scrupulous, inflexible
honesty, that they are n't to be moved an Inch from what they call their duty
upon any consideration, that start, and boggle at the have oblique Proposition.
Have nothing to do with 'em, not one in a hundred of 'em, proves worth a
farthing. Do you love Money heartily?


Fr. Entirely, I never part with it, but to get more of it, or something more
valuable, as I hope to do now.


Wrang. Very good. Then you need not pore upon Law Books continually, and cite
Cases as some do; a moderate skill in Law-terms, and a com(...) knowledge of the
common Practice of the several Coats will carry you through all, with a little
Address, which I Will teach you.


Fr. Under so great a Master it is impossible to miscarry.


Wrang. When you're called to the Bar, you must make an interest in some
Attorneys and Solicitors, which you may easily do by letting 'em (...) in all
the Fees, they bring you, and giving 'em Authority to use your (...) when e're
they have occasion for a Councel's Hand without a Fee, which they frequently
have. These things may seem at first to lessen your profit; but trust me they
return with Interest upon Interest.


Fr. But how must I behave my self at the Bar, when I come there; for if Law
ben't necessary, I suppose, there must be other Qualifications in its stead.


Wrang. You're young, and seem to have good strong Lungs; are you well
breathed? are you long winded?


Fr. Very long winded, when I was a Boy, I could out-holloa e're a Hunter in
New England.


Wrang. It Is the best Qualification for the Bar in the World. Then when you're
retained in any Cause, be sure you talk enough, talk abundance, no matter what;
if you* can outwind the Antagonist's Council, your Points gained.


Fr. But will the Court suffer that? will not the Bench take notice of it.


Wrang. No matter for that, you must n't be easily snub'd, if the Court give
you a Check, go on still; and if at last they force you to desist, sit down
sullenly, and say not a word more in the cause, if it ^oes for you, your Client
will hug you, and attribute all his success to your zeal at first; if otherwise
he will impute it to the partiality of the Judge that would n't hear you out.
There Is Councellor Noisie is one of the best Lawyers for that, that ever tired
the Court.


Fr. I Have heard much of your Fame, Sir, for this Politic way of Practice.


Wrang. Time has been Pupil; but my Lungs are past the best, they will not serve
me now as they have done. You Will be of a rare Age for it, when you come to it.
When your Adversarie's Witnesses are called, be sure to give 'em frequent
Interruptions by Questions, sly cunning Questions, there is a great deal of Art
in managing an Adversarie's Witness well; by neat address most of 'em may be
made Evidences for you; but you must ask 'em cunningly; you may lead 'em
whither you please, and draw what answers you will from 'em. But if the adverse
Council discover and countermine you, to cross Purposes with 'em immediately,
ask 'em Questions innumerable to the Point or not, it is all one, it confounds
'em, confounds the Court, and perplexes the Cause.


Fr. But how must we do to defend our own Witnesses from the same Practice
o't'other side?


Wrang. They must be prepared before hand; a well-instructed Witness is all in
all. 'Twou'd make a Man mad to see what Witnesses are brought out of the
Country sometimes, there is no hammering a right impression in their heads. If
you would have a Cause go glibly forward, never trouble those thick skull'd
Rogues, but take two or three of your own training, or that you have tried; and
I Will warrant your Cause for miscarrying.


Fr. But are they so easy to be had?


Wrang. There are about this Town abundance of very pretty apt fellows, that
either through a natural inclination to appear in public, or their
necessities, are very ready to receive any Impression from Money.


Enter Famine. Fam. Sir, there is Madam Olympia, and Mr. Affidavit without, and
desire to speak with you.


Wrang. Wait on. 'em in. [Exit Famine, Friend offers to go.] Nay, you may stay
Pupil, we may have occasion for your Hand. This Mr. Affidavit's the ablest
Solicitor in England, he has always his Witnesses, and his Implements in such
order, 'twou'd do one's heart good to be of Council for him.


Enter Olympia and Affidavit. Wrang. Madam, I Am your Ladyships most humble
Servant, the 10000l. was paid to me yesterday according to your Order; How will
your Ladyship be pleased to have it disposed of?


Ol. That Is what I Am come about Mr. Sergeant; I Have two or three offers, and am
in some doubt which to take, they all appear fair.


Affid. Does your Ladyship persist in your resolution of accepting an
Assignment of Squire Careless's Mortgage, there can be no better Security in
the World.


Fr. I wish she would, she is a Woman of Honor, and Careless may expect
kindness and civil Treatment from her; but I Am afraid these Knaves will trick
her; I Will watch 'em.


[Aside. Ol. If Mr. Sergeant will use me well, I Am willing enough; for I don't
care to break the Sum, and it is too big to lend upon any, but Land-Security.


Wrang. Madam, I Will ask nothing of you for my Bargain; Pay me my Principal and
Interest at seven per Cent. which is the Interest Mr. Careless should have
paid, and it is your Ladyships.


Aff. Take him at's word, Madam; if I had the Money to lay down, as you have,
I Would not take 5000l. for my Bargain, as I could manage it. Your Ladyship may
afford the Serjeant's Lady a Present of a Noble Piece of Plate.


[Aside to Olympia, Friendly over-hearing. Ol. You might perhaps, but I cannot.
Whenever Mr. Careless, or his Friends, think fit to redeem it, I shall take no
advantage.


[To Affidavit. Fr. It Is nobly answered, and Careless shall know his Obligation
to thee.


[Asid. Aff. How foolishly some People throw away these Golden Opportunities,
but that I know the Sergeant too well, I could make a shift to raise the Money.
But we Sharpers never play with one another.


[Aside. Ol. What Is the Sum, Mr. Sergeant?


Wrang. The Principal, Madam, 17000l. the Interest 3500l. and some odd Pounds,
but you shall know to a Farthing.


Ol. Well, let the Writings be drawn that they may be perused by my Council,
and the rest of your Money shall be ready upon Sealing.. Mr. Sergeant where is
your Lady, I must see her; why will not she visit me sometimes? I almost take it
ill.


Wrang. She stirs so little abroad, she is not fit to wait upon your Ladyship*
Famine, bid your Mistress wait upon her Ladyship immediately.


[Exit Fam. [Clashing of Swords heard without, and a Shriek. Wrang. Ha! what
Noise is that?


Aff. It Is the Clashing of Swords sure, keep the Door fast.


Friendly opens the Door, enter Florella in a fright, and after her Careless
backwards with his Sword dr^wn, Friendly claps to the Door. Fr. What Is the
matter, Sir? you are not hurt I hope.


Car. No, thanks to your timely Inter(...) Sir; my worst hurt is, my Regret,
for having been the (...) fair Lady.


Flo. If my Fright has (...) in the safety of a Gentleman* it is very welcome to
me.


Car. I Am a stranger, Madam, to that sweet voice, yet I Am glad to hear it sound
a more pleasing Note.


Ol. May a Woman be so bold as to ask the occasion of this Quarrel, Sir?


[Exit Friendly. Car. The Sergeant there, Madam, or Mr. Affidavit, can better
resolve that Question than I; these were some of their Mirmydons, I suppose,
they were Catchpoles, Bailiffs, Madam.


Wrang. Upon my word. Mr. Careless, 'twas n't at my Suit.


Aff. Nor any, that I know of, I do assure you, Sir.


Car. Well then you two have got enough by me; will you be my Bail?


Wrang. Indeed, Sir, you must excuse me, you know you're a great many thousand
Pounds in my debt, and pay no Interest, you take no care o'that.


Car. Don't you take care o'that? Don't you receive my Rents. Thou perplexer of
Causes, thou tormenter of the Law, the Stomach of an Ostriege is but a Type of
thy Conscience, that can digest any thing, though never so hard and bulky. Can
thou swallow three thousand Pounds a year, and disgorge nothing? I don't owe
you any thing, Sir; do I?


Enter Friendly. Aff. No, Sir, but I Have made a solemn resolution never to Bail
any Man, though he were my Father. Besides, we don't know at whose Suit, nor for
what this Action is brought.


Fr. I Have inquired that, it is at the Suit of one Mr. Snip, a Tailor, for 70l.


Aff. Sir, I Am sorry I cannot serve you in this Affair, in any thing else --


Car. Why thou Buckram Bag-Carrier, thou Bastard, Son of Parchment, thou Nit to
the Lay, thou Cur that art grown fat upon the scatterings of my Extravagance,
dare thou bark at me? your Man his scarce worn out the Livery that came off
your own Back; and dare you insult? Of all my Follies, or misfortunes this is
the worst, that I should want, or expect any kindness from such Grubs, such
grovelling Muck worms.


Ol. A brave spirited, mettl'd Fellow.


[Aside. Car. But I Will take care to provide such ^^ine for you, Horse le^ches,
as shall make you discharge the Go^^ you swell with, I will ye Blood suckers, I
will.


[Friendly steals privately to him, and slips a Ring into his hand. Fr.
[Aside.] Here take this Ring and ^awn it to him, it is worth two hundred Pound,
to morrow you shall redeem it.


Flo. Pray, my Dear, oblige the Gentleman, it is in your own power to repay your
self.


Ol. Mr. Sergeant, you ought not to let the Gentl^man suffer, since you
withold his Estate.


Wrang. So, h'as brought the Women over to his Party already, a handsome, wild
young Fellow, ^^'r misses their good word.


[Aside. Car. Ladies, I Am extremly obliged to you both for this Favor; your
Beauties ought to command, not su^: But to such a fordid Wretch I Have a better
Advocate, one that (...), and ^hin^s with (...) Luster in his greedy ^yes, than
all the Charms you are Mistresses of. [(...) the Ring.] Here, Lawyer; I know
you love (...) Security: You understand these Things. ^^^'er look a-skew, Man;
it is right, and cost Two Hundred (...). What dare you and upon it?


Wran. I don't care to meddle with such things; I don't know the Value of 'em.


Ol. [Aside,] Lend him 200l. upon it, and place it to my Account, and give me
the Ring, and Bail him, and I Will indemnifie you.


Wran. Well, Madam; if you will secure me, it shall be done.. [Aside.] [To
Careless.] Now, Sir; after all these Provocations and Indignities, you may
justly expect I should insult over your Necessities: But, to let you see how
little those Indecencies your Passion has made you utter, have affected me,
I Will lend you 200l. upon your Ring, which shall be yours again whenever you
please to redeem it; and will be your Bail to this Action. Mr. Affidavit, pray
call in the Officer; but let his Followers keep without.


Car. For the Money, you have a Pledge, I sha'n't part with; and for the rest,
you know how to lick your self whole.


Ol. Still brave, and like himself: He cannot return Thanks for a Service, he
does n't think done out of Kindness.


[Aside. Fler. I shall be a Widow suddenly, I hope: This Generosity looks like
a Lightning before Death.


[Aside to Friendly. Friend. Heaven verify the Omen, Madam.


[Aside to Florella. Enter Affidavit, and Officer. Wran. O, Mr. Trappum! Are
you the Man? Pray, What Summ's this Action for? What Is the Debt? and at whose
Suit?


Off. The Debt's 70l. and at Mr. Snip's Suit.


Wran. Well, I Will be the Gentleman's Bail: You Will take my Word till anon, and
not molest him?


Off. An't were for 1000l. an't please your Worship.


Wran. Well, call two or three Hours hence, and the Business shall be done.


Off. God bless your Worship; 'Servant, Master.


[Exit Officer. Wran. Sir, I Will fetch your Money.


[Exit Wrangle. Car. Ladies, this wonderful Conversion's owing to your Charms;
your Eyes are the happiest S^ars ever influenc^d my Fortune.


Ol. So they are if you knew all; I could give a more natural Solution of this
Miracle, if I durst. [Aside.] It Is this Lady has wrought this Miracle; she is
Lady of the Ascendant here.


Flor. Mine, Madam, have shed their Influence long since: It Is for your
Ladyship, to work such strange Conversions.


Car. I shall impute it to the happy Conjunction of Both. Had I only such
bright Constellations to consult, I should turn Astrologer, and never be out in
my Predictions.


Enter Wrangle. Wran. I must break off this Parley, that extravagant Fellow
will solicit my Wife before my Face else. [Aside.] Sir, here is your Money;
it is all Gold, except a little Silver to make the Samm even.


Ol. Mr. Sergeant, You Will take care to dispatch those Writings as fast as you
can? But don't let Mr. Careless know a Syllable.


[Aside. Wran. I Will wait upon your Ladyship with them, in a few Hours.


Ol. Mr. Sergeant, your Servant: Madam, your most humble Servant.


Car. Your Ladyship will permit me to wait upon you to your Coach? Madam, your
humble Servant: Gentlemen, yours.


[Exeunt Car. and Olymp. Wran. Come, let us walk in: Mr. Affidavit, I have
further Business with you.


[Exeunt Wrangle, Florella and Affidavit. Friend. For my part, I cannot believe
this Miracle; there is some deeper laid Knavery, than I can fathom the Bottom
of: I Will follow'em, and try what Discovery may be made.

I dare not yet to such Conversions trust,
Where M^sers generous prove, and Knaves are just.

[Exit. ACT III.
Enter Friendly and Careless. Car. CAN you guess the meaning, Friendly, of the
Lawyer's surprising Change? If ill Language and Railing work so well with him,
I Will make my self Master of all the Rhetoric of Billingsgate, to pleasure him;
the best Breathed, loudest Scold there, shall be a civil, modest Person to me.


Friend. That Is a Groundless Fancy. Quarrelling's his Trade, and Scolding his
daily Exercise at the Bar; it is as familiar to him as Snuff to an Irishman,
and he takes it as unconcernedly. If you had as much Malice as a disappointed
She-Saint, as much Scandal as a Secret Historian, with the Lungs and Front of a
Scotch Field-Preacher, you would never be able to rail him out of a single Doit.
There Is some Roguery a foot, which I Would fain trace.


Car. Why should he send the Ring back without Money? He knows I Am too sensble
of his Knavery, for him to trust to my Honor. There Is the Ring, Friendly, and
my Thanks.


[Gives him a Ring. Friend. This is none of my Ring; it is a fairer, and worth
more than mine. Here, take it again, and wear it: We Are in a Labyrinth now, and
this may prove a Clue to guide us out again.


Car. What! more Miracles? Nay, even keep it till I redeem yours. Sure some
Qualm of Conscience has o'ertaken this harpy Sergeant; some honest Devil or
other has frighted him into a Fit of Repentance, and he begins to refund now
with the same Grace that Thieves make Restitution at the Gallows. Oh, for your
Spiritual Pimp now, to perfect this good Work of the Devil's beginning.


Friend. ^'m apt to think the Flesh has more to do in this Matter, than the
Devil. I fancy I Am Oedipus enough to solve this Riddle. Who brought this King?


Car. I don't know: 'Twas sent to me, at the R^se, sealed up, and superscrib'd,
but nothing written within the Paper: Before I could come out of the Room, the
^^essenger was gone.


Friend, Let Us see the S^al; something may be made of that perhaps. What Is
here? A Lady throwing out a Rope to a drowning Cupid! More Mystery still! Do
you understand Hieroglyphics, Careless?


Car. Not very well; but I can guess at this. Faith, Friendly, I Am sorry to be
thy Rival: I suppose the Serjeant's Lady has taken a Fancy to my Person, and
either robbed or whead^'d her Husband out of this Ring, and sent it me, as an
Earnest of her Inclination. It Is as unwelcome as Press-Money to me; I don't
like the Service, for your sake: Prithee keep it, and serve for me. Pox on it,
this Clerk-like Figure thou make, disgusts her.


Friend. No, take it again: You're mistaken; it is one that can draw surer and
deeper than Florella. What think you of the Widow Olympia?


Car. I remember she pleaded for me to the Lawer, indeed.


Friend. I can tell you more than that; she has taken your Estate into her
Care, and perhaps designs as much for your Person.


Car. If she is any Design, my Body's at her Devotion; an easy Fine shall make
her Mistress of it: But I don't care for making a Settlement, or granting too
long a Lease.


Friend. How can a Lease be too long, where the Consideration is worth more
than the Inheritance? Come, don't trifle with your good Fortune; like a foolish
Cat, that plays with a Mouse till she loses it.


Car. I Am afraid I Am more likely to be the Mouse; if this Female Pufs should
get me into her Clutches, you must rescue me, Friendly; you must be my
Deliverer.


Friend. Never fear, Man; if she does, she will use you like a Kitten. What a
faint-hearted Soldier art thou, to shrink before the Enemy comes in view!


Car. A prudent General would be cautious of bringing himself under a Necessity
of Engaging where the Success is doubtful, and even Victory is certain Loss.


Friend. What careful Officer would not quit Quarters that lie waste; and
venture something to win a rich Soil, with a great Crop standing, and plentiful
Magazins?


Car. But no wise Commander would fight himself into a Nook, though never so
rich, to be penned in there, who'd all the rest of the Country to forage in at
liberty. These Women of Honor expect such a deal of Constancy and Sincerity,
that I dare not venture on'em. I cannot swim, and therefore care no more to
Love, than wash out of my Depth; I should be lost if I did.


Friend. These raw Lovers are like fearful Boys, that put first one Foot into
the Water, then the other, and so prolong their Pain; when it is but plunging
boldly to be out on it.


Car. Yes, yes; you that are in, cry it is warm, to draw more Fools after you:
But we that are dry and warm on Shore, have no reason to trust to such
shivering, chattering Invitations.


Enter Famine. Car. Here comes your starved Pimp: 'Twou'd puzzle a nice
Virtuoso to tell which weighs most, he, or his Shadow. How now, Shotten Herring?


Friend. How is it, Famine? What Wind blew thee hither?


Fam. Faith, a brisk Wind might blow me like a Feather, Sir: I Have ballasted my
Stomach well out of your Bounty; otherwise, the least Blast would have over-set
me: I was afraid to venture into the Sun, for-fear of being drawn up among the
Motes that play in the Beams.


Friend. Well, mind my Business, and thou shall fare better than my Lord
Mayor's Carver; thy Belly shall be all thy Care, and thou shall out-feed a
Catholic Priest at Easter.


Fam. Shall I see good Days, Days of Plenty again? Then hang this penurious
Master of mine; let him eat his Cheese unpar'd, and eat the Rhind of his Bacon
himself; I Will no more of 'em. If you will but provide for my Belly well, you
shall furnish his Head as you please.


Friend. Thou shall be fat and Iusty, Si^rah; it shall be Carnival all the
Year: Effect but this, thou shall be-rich too.


Fam. Hang Money, Sir, it is mercenary; Give me Meat plenty, and drink in
abundance. Oh the delicious flavor, the ravishing Ha^tgoust of a Savoury
Venison Pasty! the pomp and state of a fat Turkey marches up to the Table! in my
mind his Entry's a Nobler sight than the Venetian Ambassadors. Let Trave'lers
pra^e of stately Fdifices abroad; to me there is no Structure so magnificent, as
a lofty towering Goose-Pye; the Pastry Cook's the noblest Architect; ay, and
Engineer too; 'twould do a man's heart good to storm such Outworks: At a Breach
in those Walls, I could out-charge a Marshall of France.


Car. The Rogue will surfeit upon Imagination. Hark ye, Famine; Is there no
procuring a Favor of you under all these? A Man might corrupt a whole Polish
Diet, and influence an Election at an easier rate.


Fam. O Lord, Sir; I always make my Price according to the Commodity. If you have
a Mind to deal with me, you will find me the most reasonable Man breathing: A
Cod's Head, or a Side of Salmon, attended by a Brace of Roasted Congers,
slank'd with Stewed Carps, and a Train of Soles, Tenches, Whitings and Smelts,
Sauc'd with Lobsters, Cray-fish and Shrimps shall fetch you a Countess.


Car. This is for a Lenten Sinner, you Rogue. But, suppose my Appetite to stand
more to the Flesh; What Pen'worths can you afford?


Fam. A Jolly Pheasant, with a Guard of Ducks, Woodcocks, Partridges, Quails,
Snipes, Plover, Ruffs, and a Mob of Larks about 'em, shall lay any inferior
Quality as flat as a Flounder before ye.


Car. How if a Man should design against the City?


Fam. A Hanch of Venison, and a Pyramid of Sweetmeats, shall procure you a
Lady Mayoress; a Couple of Capons and Sawsages, and a good large Marchpane, an
Alderman's Consort; a Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters, and two or three
Castle-Custards, a Common-Council-Man's or Deputy's YokeFellow: The rest are
such kind Turtles, a Glass of Rhenish and Sugar, and a Cheese-cake brings 'em
to Billing infallibly.


Car. Well, but I Am ambitious of Luck at Horseflesh: What say you to the
Parson's Help-meet?


Fam. Oh, Sir! a Tythe-Pig and Plumb-Sauce does the Business: Or, if she be
Non-con, a fat Loin of Veal, and a long Canting Grace, brings her under Hatches
effectually.


Car. You Are the reasonablest Pimp in Christendom: If you were half as able,
you should to Court for Preferment; and be made Ranger-General of all the
Pettycoat-Chaces.


Fam. If I were in heart now, I could work Miracles; but the Truth is, my
starving Allowance has somewhat enfeebl'd my Talent: But, with your
Encouragement, I shall soon recover it.


Friend. Give me but the least Glimpse of Success, and never a Zealous,
Believing Sister in the City ever cherished Precious, Painful, Mortifying
Brother with half the Luxury that I Will treat you.


Fam. My Stomach's a tiptoes already: Here comes one that looks like a, dainty
Bit; Shall I fetch her to you? Say the Word, and you shall see, there is n't a
better Dog for a Duck in England, than I am.


Friend. Hold, Sirrah; it is the Widow Olympia: Out with your Guns, Careless;
and salute her with a Broadside; she has the Weather-gage of you, she bears
down upon you, and gives you Chase, you see. I Will leave you to grapple with,
and board her, if you can.


Car. Leave your Setter with me, I Have Occasion for him. Famine, you must go
with me.


Fam. To Dinner, or Supper, Sir?


Car. I Have dined already; but to a good Supper, if you deserve it.


Fam. I Have a Sister, Sir, that People say is handsome: Shall I fetch her, Sir?


Enter Olympia, and Servants. [Exit Friendly Car. Is your Mistress fond of your
Master, Famine?


Fam. Fond of him, Sir! A tame She-Bear would n't couple with him: He Is so
bristly, there is a Warren of Fleas perpetually frisking about him.


Car. Sirrah, be careful, and assistant to my Friend, and thou shall eat
EggBroth no more, nor lick the Dust and Flies out of the Dish where Oil has
been. Blow up your Mistress, Rogue; poison her with his Praises.


Fam. Let him blow her up, Sir, as Butchers blow their Veal; let him poison
her; let him infuse the kind Venom; she will swell notably, no doubt on it.


[Olympia advances toward Careless; he addresses to her. Car. Madam, I Am happy
in this Opportunity of paying my Thanks for the extraordinary Favor conferred
upon me at the Serjeant's. Acknowledgments are, I confess, but poor Returns to
such weighty Obligations: But your Generosity, like the Bounty of Heaven,
admits of no other.


Ol. I Am a perfect Stranger to these weighty Obligations you speak of Sir: But
I should have been very glad it had been in my Power to be serviceable to a
Gentleman of Mr. Careless's Merit: But the Serjeant's Generosity took away all
Occasion.


Car. His Generosity, Madam, is like the false Compassion of a Crocodile; only
shown to those he is about to devour. But I had rather owe it to your Ladyship's
Power over him: Don't rob me of the Satisfaction of being your Debtor.


Ol. I wish you were so neither to him, nor me, Sir. But, methinks, a Man of
your Interest, and Sense, should not be taken in Snares you're aware of.


Car. It Is in vain to struggle when we are in the Toil; it only pinches us the
harder.


Ol. Have (...) no Friends that will help you at this Pinch? You Have been so
ready to assist others, that I should expect to see Crowds pressing to be the
first to other their Service.


Car. For that very Reason you see none of 'em, Madam: For, since they cannot
make it an Obligation, and lend me Money, they wo'n't pay it, as a Debt due.
Yet I have one Friend left, would help me to play the Fool again, and redeem my
Estate.


Ol. Why do you refuse his Kindness? Can an Estate be a Burden to you?


Car. An insupportable one. I Am wise enough now to see my past Folly: Yet I
find it in my Nature to play the Fool again, and therefore I would not have it
in my power. I like the Bever's Policy; I know what it is I Am hunted for, and
therefore throw it 'em, to compound for my Quiet all my (...)


Ol. What a brave-soul'd Fellow were this, if he could be wrought from this
wild Conceit? [Aside.] But can you tamely suffer your self to be abused and
cheated by that Brace of Jugglers.


Car. There your Ladyship touches me to the quick. I Have as much of the
Christian Spirit of Revenge, and could swinge 'em with as little Mercy or
Remorse as the Saints Elect (as they think themselves) do those they call
Reprobates; I could handle 'em with as much Severity as the late Reforming
Scotch Kirk-Apostles did their Episcopal Clergy. No, I shall reach Sergeant
Hocus Pocus, and his Tumbler too, I hope, in spite of his Law Legerdemain.


Ol. Can you guess at the Occasion of that sudden Turn of Temper to day? I
should as soon have expected a Revolution in the State.


Car. I was in hopes your Ladyship could have untied the Knot for me: It was a
Miracle of your working. But you, Madam, like the Sun, are alone insensible of
your own Influence; and are blind to the Luster of those Charms, which the rest
of the World see, and are governed by.


Ol. This Ceremony don't become you, Mr. Careless; your merry Freedom sits
better by half upon you. I Am too much a Woman, not to be vain, if I could tell
for what.


Car. The natural Magic of your Charms has done more than Medaea's were
feigned to do; for it is more to make an old Miser honest and generous, than to
make an old Cripple youthful and vigorous; the Sergeant has sent me my Ring
again.


Ol. How Is this! Does he take it for his own still? [Aside.] I must undeceive
him. Are you sure it is the samo, Sir? It Is ill trusting to his fair Show. Is'nt
it counterfeit? Your own seemed to be worth a great deal more than 'twas left
for: This looks like a Trick.


Car. [Aside.] Friendly's in the right on it; she has some Design upon me by her
Concern. Let him put such Tricks upon me as often has he thinks fit; it is not
the same indeed, it is a richer.


Ol. Are you sure it came from him?


Car. So, I see she is concerned; I Will drive this a little farther. [Aside. I
did not see the Messenger, Madam; but I was told, 'twas his Man.


Ol. Pray, Sir, let me see it; I have a little Skill in such Toys. [She pulls
off her Glove, and compares it with Friendly 's Ring upon her own Finger.] The
Stone is fair and right, and of a good Water; I thought mine a very good one,
but yours far exceed it. [She holds them together.] [Aside.] ^^re ne'll know
his own Ring again.


Car. You say true, Madam; but I Will not be obliged to him, Curmudgeon; I Will
carry't back, and redeem my own. What your Ladyship hinted just now is very
reasonable; we ought as much to suspect the Civilities of such Men, as the
Devil's Kindness; there is always a Design for themselves at the Bottom.


Ol. O fie! Mr. Careless, you cannot be so dull as you would make your self; this
looks more like a Lady's Favor, than an Usurers. If it should be from his
Lady, you would be guilty of an inexcusable Folly. You may remember, she would not
have had him taken the Ring.


Car. Troth, Madam, I cannot believe so well of my self; but if it be sol've a
Friend will set a greater Value upon it: He Will hug himself, as if he were in
Possession of the Indies. He shall have it.


Ol. [Aside.] Stupid and insensible! A Boy, that had but carried a Citizen's
Wife's Book to Church half a Year, would have been quicker of Apprehension --
Do you make so light of the Favors of Ladies, Sir?


Car. I Am not acquainted enough with 'em to know the true Value of 'em. I was
always afraid of trading in that way, Madam; for fear of dealing to loss, or
making bad Debts.


Ol. How can that be in a Trade that is carried on purely by Truck? How can the
Stock be diminished, where an Equivalent is always deposited?


Car. That might be the ancient way of Traflick, Madam; but the Case is very
much altered in our Times: There Is no such thing as Retail Truck now; and your
Sex are grown such arrant Brokers, you're for dealing altogether by the Lump,
and rate a Man's Stock by the Bulk, not th'intrinsick Value: Nay, you're such
very Jews, there is no Credit to be had amongst you; not a Favor without Ready
Money, or Church-security for such extravagant Demands, that it is the Business
of a Man's Life to raise the Interest, without hope of ever discharging the
Obligation.


Ol. That Is because so many of you make your selves wilful Bankrupts, there is
no trusting to you; you break on purpose to compound with one at an easy rate,
and set up with the remainder for fresh Credit with others.


Car. Can you blame us, or wonder? If, when you make your Service so hard, we
make our Escape by running away. They that sell themselves to the Western
Plantations, have their Liberty at the Expiration of a certain Term of Years,
and may set up for themselves; but nothing but Death sets us free from your
Yoke, unless we will be beholding to our Heels for our Liberty.


Ol. You ought to be punished, as Deserters of the basest kind, that mutiny
without Reason, and are'nt content to disparage the Service, but run from your
Colors with your Pay in your Pockets beforehand.


Car. It Is but Justice, when you put us upon harder Duty than we list our
selves for; a poor Soldier of yours is never excused a Tittle of it; and if he
stirs a Foot beyond his Post for a little necessary Provision, a little fresh
Provant, you're ready to treat him as a Revolter.


Ol. Haven't we reason to keep up strict Discipline among such licentious
Free-booters, that have no regard to Civil Quarters, but where you come make
all Free Plunder.


Car. How can it be otherwise, when the Allowance from your Magazins is so
small, and you give us so little room to forage for our selves in.


Ol. Well, we poor Women are in as bad a Condition, as Frontier Towns, that, to
secure themselves from the Insults of their Enemies, are forced to take in a
Garrison that oppresses them as bad.


Car. Only you not being under the same Apprehensions of your Neighbors, have
a Stratagem to keep us low, which they dare not make use of; you oblige us to
such frequent, unnecessary Firings, that the Terror of our Artillery's lost,
it is grown a mere Scarecrow; you will not trust us with Ammunition enough at a
time for any great Enterprise.


Ol. Well, I should rejoice heartily to see you in Love: I hope your Mistress
will revenge the Quarrel of her Sex upon you.


Car. That makes me stand upon my Guard; for your Ladyship has all the Power of
a Conqueror, with the Principles of a Tyrant: For, though I Am willing enough to
be a Subject, I don't care to be a Slave.


Ol. If it should ever be my Fortune to tri^mph over you, I should so insult,
that your Panishment should make more Proselytes to Love's Church, than ever
the Inquisition did to the Roman. I wish 'twere come to that; [Aside.] you're
an Arch-Heretick, that seduce and d^bauch Multitudes from the Faith. How can
you clear your self?


Car. Here comes one that will save me the Expense of an Apology, she is just
the Reverse of your Ladyship: The Knowledge of her justifies the greatest
Aversion we can conceive to your Sex; as of you, the greatest Deforence for it.
Many a tough old Brood-Hen has she sold to greedy Coxcombs, for Virgin-Pullets.
She Is Hymen's Press-Mistress General, and has ecoy'd and trepanned more Fools
in one Year into his Wars, than ever Tooly did to Flanders; and abused those
that trust her, worse than ever the Dutch or Portugueze did the poor ridiculous
ind^^^s; and has made more unnatural Couples, than all the Primitive
Persecutions: She Is the Counter-part of those Persecutors; for, like them, she
binds dead Bodies to live ones; and as they used to dress Christians in the
Skins of Beasts, and set Dogs upon them; so the dresses Beasts in Humane
Figures, and sets Christians upon 'em; and by that means has planted Colonies
of Monsters in the World. She Is the Voucher of Cracked Maidenheads, the Scourer
of Tarnish'd Reputations, the Botcher of Broken Fortunes, the Varnisher of
Faded Complexions, the Plaisterer of Rough-cast Faces, the --


Enter Mrs. Vernish. Mrs. Vern. [Aside.] Mr. Careless, and the Lady Olympia!
Does the Wind sit there? No wonder she has received all my Proposals so coldly of
late. No Profit blows from that Corner; I must try if my Breath can turn the
Stream of her Inclinations, or raise a Storm that may wreck his Hopes. Now help
me, Female Malice, and Invention. -- Madam, I Am your Ladyship's most humble
Servant: Well, I don't know what it is; but certainly, you have some Charm about
you, that all the World's so fond of ^ou; I Am sure I Have no Comfort the Day I
don't see you. I Have been, I vow, I can scarce tell you where, since I parted
from you: I Have made a Visit to my Lady Scruple; from thence, I went to Sir John
Finicel's; so to Great Squire Noble's; then to my Lord Treat-W^^s, where I was
obliged to dine; there was abundance of Company, I had much ado to get away: My
Lord, and the young Ladies are so intolerably fond of me, by their Good Wi^^^*
should never be from 'em. But the Talk of all the Drawing-rooms was of you, and
Mr. Careless.


Ol. ^f me, and Mr. (...) What could they say of me?


Vern. Nay, nothing but your due, Madam: They say, you carry all be fore yo^,
and conquer where (...) you come: The Men praise and admire you, th'e Women all
en^^ (...) jealous of you; they think you the Universal Ri^val, that rob 'em of
all (...).


Ol. ^^ey've little reason for either: I Have as little Ambition, as Merit, to
rob n^ (...) 'em. But, what do they say of Mr. Careless and me?


Vern. Only that ever since Mr. Careless made his Addresses to you, fine Mrs.
Washwell has been ready to break her Heart; she sighs and starts, rails at you,
scolds at her Woman, beats her Marmouset, and weeps all Day and Night. Well,
you're a sad Man, Mr. Careless; I must needs say it to your Face; to abuse such
a pretty, tender Creature, as she is, so: For, on my Conscience, before she
knew you, she was as Spotless as Innocence it self; and has n't the least
Blemish in her Fame, but what her Love for you has brought upon her.


Car. If your Report be true, she deserves no Censure now, but that of a Fool
upon my Score: If she had let me know her Mind, I Would have laid her Itch
effectually ever this. Pox on it, what an unlucky Rogue am I, if this be true,
not to know it sooner!


Vern. Really, Sir, I beg your pardon, if I Have imprudently blab'd any thing
that was a secret to Madam Olympia, but I did n't imagine she could be ignorant
of a thing, that all the Town talks so publicly of. Nay, they talk confidently
of no less than a contract before you prevailed. But you do well to take care
of a Ladies Reputation, that suffers for you, it is like a Gentleman however if
you can be her Lover no longer. I Am sorry for my Indiscretion, and do assure
you it shall go no further for me; and Madam Olympia's too discreet a Lady too
use, what she hears to the prejudice of a young unhappy Creature.


Ol. If one part of your Story be no truer, than the other, the Lady need n't
break a moments rest for the matter. I do assure you Mr. Careless has never
made the least address of Love to me.


Car. Contracted to one, and in Love with another. Faith, Mistress Vernish, I
always took you for an able Woman of Business, but I never was conscious of
this wondrous dexterity of yours before; you have had the guidance of my Hand
many a time, but never of my Heart, that I know of.


Vern. Well, I Am glad to hear you both disown it, I protest I am heartily glad
for the poor young Thing's sake; Poor Soul she took the report so heavily, that
she was fit for no place but Bedlam, she loves you to distraction; your
unkindness would kill her. But I Will go and undeceive her; it is an Act of
Charity. Poor Wretch!


Car. Nay, if there be any thing in what you say 'twere more Charity to bring
her to me, I could comfort her more substantially; But, Madam, how long has
this Wooing been betwixt you and I? The next time we meet we shall be married I
hope, it is pity this Farce should end without a Wedding.


Vern. Come, come, leave your Fooling, Sir, and make much of your Lady, her
Affection deserves your tenderest care. But, Madam, I was about to tell you
(when this Discourse interrupted me) that you are the happiest Lady living;
there is my Lord Strutwell, Sir Featherall Peacock, Mr. Janty, and several
others are ready to die for you; But my Lord, Oh my Lord's a Man beyond all
Competition, without exception; Such a graceful person, and so Noble an Air and
Mien! Well, in my Opinion, the rest of our Nobility are Hobby Horses to him,
nothing but Tinsel and Trappings. On how I long to see your Train held up,
Madam, I Have a little Nephew would make your Honor a very pretty Page.


Car. Now have I an itching after this Lady; if it be but to countermine this
Pandress, this Match-jobber, this Mummy of Concupiscence; I did n't know the
keenness of my own Stomach till she gave me this whet. Love comes upon me like
the Smallpox upon some others, there must be something to drive it from the
Heart, before 'twill appear; I find it coming out plentifully, thanks to her
Dose; [Aside.] In my Opinion, your Lord, moves like a Puppet by Wires, I Have
seen many a better Figure in Gilt Ginger-Bread.


Ol. I begin to smell this Plot, it is too rank; but I Will know the bottom before
I discover my apprehension of it. [Aside.] Titles, and state the Pageantry of
Honor may catch young Giddy Girls; but if my Lord would take me, he must bait
his Hook with something more valuable than his Patent, Mistress Vernish.


Vern. Madam, you have too much discretion for a Lady of your years; you're just
of a fit Age to relish the Pleasures of the Town, and methinks should n't deny
your self 'em. A Lady of your Beauty and Fortune may justly expect to appear in
the Park with a Coronet behind your Coach, to take place in the Drawing Room at
St. James's amongst the greatest Quality, and sit at the front of my Lord
Steward, or my Lord Chamberlain's Seats at all the Balls of Whitchall. Nay, I
believe, my Lord, may have a White-Staff, or a Star and Garter when he pleases;
and do you count these things nothing?


Ol. I despise the low, mean Ambition of those empty shallow Creatures, that
amuse themselves with such gaudy Trifles, and place their whole satisfaction in
hollow Sounds and Formal Ceremonies of Place and Precedence. Give me the Man --


Vern. Nay, for a Man, I think there is n't a finer Gentleman about the Court,
than my Lord is. Who Powders, or Essences higher? Who dresses, or dances
better? Who Sings, Fences, or Vaults finer than he? Then he is as Proper, a
well-set Man as e're you saw, and as fit for a Ladies Service; 'twould do your
heart good to see him a Horseback, he sits so gracefully in the Saddle.


Car. So! she is given him a recommendation for a Brothel; she thinks no
Qualifications required in a good Husband but those of a Stallion. [Aside.]
Mrs. Vernish is a discreet Woman, she knows for what intent, Man and Woman were
Originally brought together, and would pro^de you a Husband of tried ability to
answer his Maker's purpose, Madam.


Ol. Mrs. Vernish, and I take very different measures of Men ^^en; He that
would win me, must have a stronger Brain than Back, and a Head better mounted
than his Heels; I hate Fellows that like Tumblers are so equally po^s'd at both
ends, they might (but for the Figure) serve themselves indifferently of either
for Basis, or Capital.


Vern. Madam, a little experience of my Lord, would convince you, that he is
quite another sort of Man, than you take him for; But I cannot expect that a
nice young Lady should declare at first Proposal infavour of the finest
Gentleman in the World, a little time I hope will bring (...) to a better
Opinion of his Lordship.


Car. Mrs. Vernish is so approved a Judge of men's (...)es, that it is almost
Heresy to dispute her Authority, and wou' d undou(...) recomm^nd no Body to
your Ladyship without sufficient evidence of the^^ (...) a^ Qualifications.


Vern. I never ^ail of your good word Mr. Careless; but it is (...) matter for
that; her Ladyship shall always find me ready, and zealous to serve her, when
ever she pleases to command me. And so shall you too, Sir; for I Will go this
Minute to your Mistress, and set her Heart at rest, poor Soul!


Ol. The greatest Service you can do me at present, Mrs. Vernish, is to
undeceive any body that may have received any Impression from the Report which,
you say, runs about Mr. Careless and me. Sir, your Servant: I hope the Town
wo'n't be so uncharitable, as to censure you any longer upon my Account.


Car. I wish your Ladyship feared their Censure no more than I do; they should
have more Occasion.


[Exeunt Olympia and Vernish. Car. Gone together! I must take care of that old
Copulation-Broker, she has Mischief in heart against me; she is a stalking now,
and is too well practiced a Sports-woman to be suffered with Security to pursue
her Game. Olympia has Wit enough, it is true; but most Women nowadays have
such Green Sickness Appetites, that it is ill laying Trash in their way. They
must be inter rupted; [Aside.] -- Famine, dog Madam Olympia, and that old Hag;
and, if possible, over-hear their Discourse, and bring me an exact Account.


Fam. I Will do it, never fear, Sir: No Plotter that designed to turn Evidence,
and hang his Brother-Rogues, shall take more particular notice.


[Exit Famine. Car. Love and Jealousy are Twins, I find; and tread upon one
another's Heels: No sooner do I begin to like this Woman, but I wish no body
else did. Well, now I begin to feel the Folly of my Extravagance; the Disgrace
I suffered by it before her to day, at the Serjeant's, had so damped me, that,
like a Cowed Cock, I durst not venture one Stroke, not so much as a Sparring
Blow, though she gave me both Provocation and Encouragement. What a Fool have I
been? And now I Am turning Coward too. A Man's Courage, I perceive, ebbs and
flows with his Fortune: I must try to recover both; but how, 's a Question I Am
not able to answer. Of all those Multitudes I Have lavished an Estate away upon,
not one would assist me with Ten Pound to save me from the Gallows, Friendly
excepted; the rest avoid me, as if I were a Dun: Friendly alone acknowledges,
like a Man of Honor, my past Services; but I Am afraid of striking him upon the
same Rock with my self, and --

Enter Homily, Spade, a Strong-water-man, Victualler, Ale-house-keeper,
Parishioners. -- But I must quit the Thoughts of my own Business, to mind my
Friend's now.


Hom. Don't prate to me; I Will stay no longer among you: Ignorant, lazy Knaves I
found ye, and Fools I leave ye. I Have preached Spoon-meat to ye these Twenty
Years, that a Child might swallow; and yet you are Blockheads still: You Have
neither Faith nor Money to save ye.


Str. Wat. If the Shepherd will suffer the Sheep to be scabby --


Hom. No you are rotten --


Spade, Would they were, for my sake.


Hom. I Have 'nointed ye, and tarr'd ye all over with my Doctrine, yet the Murren
sticks to ye; you are mangy still, in spite of all. Fare ye well.


Ale-house-k. Nay, pray be n't so passionate in the Heat of your Sack; don't
let it elevate you too much. Come, we have been kind Hearers, and you a quiet
Teacher, that would not trouble us too often with Sermons; one that, rather
than vex your Audience, would sleep with 'em. Come, I know you are good-natured.


Str. W. Don't grow proud, and let your Wine make you forget the jolly Bowls
you have ^mptied at my House, Neighbors, I shall think my Punch unhallowed
Liquor, if I have not you two to say Grace, with a merry Catch to it, I Would rather
drink it without a Toast.


Vict. Nay, my Shovel-Board will grow melancholy, if Master Homily ben't there
to give the leading Push, and set the rest to work.


Ale. Can ye find in your Heart to leave my Nine Pins? Oh! the many fair Tips
I Have seen you make! and must we lose ye now? Nay, I Have laid a dozen of Stout
upon your Head, Master, against Neighbor Tipwell the Blacksmith, who tips all
Nine oftenest together, and it is to be decided to night.


Hom. All this will not do; you shall find I can have better Preferment, than to
ring all into a rout of Dunces all my Life.


Sir. W. Prithee, Neighbor Spade, speak for us, and next Parish meeting we will
move the Churchwardens to mend your Salary.


Sp. I speak for you? No, ye shall find the Key under the Church Door, you may
go in, and drive away the Daws, I speak for Capons? Not one of ye has got a
Child these ten Years.


Hom. There you will find the old Surpless with one Sleeve, and the Cutwork Cope,
that hangs by Geometry; Pray turn 'em carefully, they 're very tender. There Is
the Poor's Box, with the Inscription half rubbed out, for fear of waking your
Charities; if you find any thing in it, give't to pious Use, that is, spend it.


Sp. There are the remnants of the Books, all that the Churchwardens Pipes
have spared, they have smoaky Zeals against hard Places.


Vict. Never let us part thus: Come you have been good Customers to us all, both of
you; I Have a rare Gammon of Bacon at home, I Will give it ye, and we will be merry to
night.


Str. W. I Will give a Bowl of Punch to it.


Ale. And I Derby, and Stout, their Skins full.


Hom. This don't move me; if you would have us stay; if you would have the comfort of
our Companies --


Ale. Hark ye, Neighbor Spade, in your Ear; persuade him but to stay, and we will
all wipe out both your Scores, and you shall have fresh Tick with us for as
much, and as long as you please.


[Aside. Sp. Well, since you're old loving Neighbors, I Will try,but --


Hom. Let Weddings, Christnings, Churchings, Funerals, and merry Gossipings go
about briskly.


All. They shall, they shall.


Sp. Then, if you please Master, we will try 'em one half Year longer, and see if
they will mend.


Hom. Be it so. We'll send your Gammon, and you your Punch to my Neighbor
Spiggot's here, and we will come and taste his Stout.


Both. It shall be done; come let us have the old Song, and then let us away, and
dust it about.


A SONG.
Though to Sots all the Day
We cant, and we pray,
And preach up Mortification;
We reserve the Delight
Of the Bottle for Night,
And there we find Revelation,
Let Fools, that believe,
Dull Morals receive,
And lavish their precious time so;
Wine alone can inspire
Celestial Fire,
And the Bottle is Jure Divino.
[Careless comes up to 'em. Car. How the Rogue swells, this Money has made him
so merry, he will not be in's Wits again these three months. H's as Simony in's
heart, and looks as big as if Friendly's money had purchased a Deanery for him.
Now will I dash all his Pride, and good Humor, in a moment.


Hom. Begone, Neighbors, I take your Submission graciously, and will meet you.
Here comes a Gentleman, that is no Company for you.


[Ex. Parish. Car. Mr. Homily, I Am glad to find you here.


Hom. I thank you, Sir; have ye any Letters, any kind Tokens from New England,
or any remote Part. You look like a Traveller.


Car. I come to tell you, ye've received great Sums from one Friendly, a young
Merchant, that has robbed his Master.


Sp. (Aside) This News comes from a Cold Country, it freezes.


Car. Do you shrink, Monsieur Curate? Can you sing a Psalm handsomely at the
Gallows, Rascals?


Hom. We beseech you, Sir, we have most of the Money left, we'll refund, or do
any thing in our Power; Good Sir, be merciful.


(Both kneel. Car. Since you're penitent, I take you to Grace, but you must do
as I bid you, if ye falter --


Spa. Hang us both, we shall deserve it.


Car. Well, follow me --

Lawyer beware; for if my Plot succeed,
My just Revenge hangs heavy over thy Head;
I serve my Friend, and for thy Knavish Life
I punish thee, and in it oblige thy Wife.
[Exeunt Omnes. ACT IV. Friendly's House.
A SONG.
IN vain Melissa we defend
Our selves against your conquering Eyes;
Since each melodious Breath you send,
Does through our Ears our Hearts surprise.
In you Love all his Darts employs,
The secret Sparks, your Eyes inspire,
The charming Accents of their Voice,
Blow up into a raging Fire.
Thus, while our Eyes and Ears are charmed
by either Sense we are betrayed;
For, all Attempts thus doubly armed,
The Conquest's sure when you invade.
So Mariners their Ruin view,
When two fierce Elements conspire;
And while the eager Flames pursue,
In Crowds they drown; to shun the Fire.
Enter Friendly and Florella. Friend. HEre v'are welcome, and must command,
Madam; for, all that I call mine, must pay their Homage where I do. How could
that Swine, your Husband; keep so sweet a Turtle in so filthy a Sty? A
Squirrel's Box is a nobler Apartment; and a Fox's, a sweeter.


Flor. It Is the securer Retreat for Innocence; unguarded Virtue is scarce safe
any where. The Negligence of our House frights away Temptation: Pomp and
Delicacy only invite Luxury and Wantonness. It Is the cleanly Sweetness of the
Bees, that invites Drones to their Hives.


Friend. True, Madam: But there are infinitely greater Swarms of nasty Flies
that infest the rankest Shambles, that not only consume what they immediately
prey upon, but taint all they leave behind 'em too. But what is this to thee,
who art all Sweetness; and, like a flowring Tube-Rose, may be raised in a
homely Bed; but blown, should be translated to the Apartments, and for the
Delight of Princes.


Flor. My Fortune's quite the Reverse of this; for I was raised first in an
Alcove, and thence transplanted to a Dunghill; but there I Have taken root, and
there must grow. Second Removes are dangerous.


Friend. I cannot consent to leave so precio^s a Plant in a spent, barren,
heartless Soil, where not a wholesome Blast can have Access, and nothing thrives
but Sapless Avarice, and rank Jealousy, amongst heavy Damps that choke the
noble Senses, and poisonous Fogs that almost suffocate the Vital Heat. I must
remove you, or find means to open a Way for the sweet Air of Conversation to
come freely at you.


Flor. That were a Service, indeed. The Plant you speak of has taken too deep
root, to be torn rudely up: If you could purge the Soil from those foul Weeds
that overrun it, and turn the fresh Streams of Liberty through't -- But it is
in vain to attempt it; it is more than a Herculean Labor.


Friend. Then I Will do more than Hercules, and effect it.


Enter Careless. Car. I Am afraid you will scarce do half so much in a Night, as
he did, if you talk away your Time thus. Is this a Time for Debate, when you
should be in Action? What a raw Soldier are you, to be gravely consulting, when
you should be mounted, and in Arms? The Enemy's just upon you, Man -- Wrangle
will be here in a Quarter of an Hour.


Friend. You Are such a Hotspur, Careless, you are for engaging at all
Adventures, without considering how to bring all safe off again.


Car. Well, for my part I think the suddenest Resolutions are always the
briskliest executed; and I observe, that your Men of over cautious Conduct,
that are for securing all, generally manage away their fairest Opportunities.


Flo. For Heaven's sake, Gentlemen, don't let us be surpised here by my
Husband; I Am undone if we be.


Car. Fear nothing, Madam, I Have Scouts abroad to observe his motion^, that will
give us a timely alarm, when he approaches; he is the Common Enemy, and
therefore we ought to enter into a Joint Confederacy against him.


Flo. You may have reason enough, Mr. Careless, to proclaim open War against
him; but what just pretense have Mr. Friendly, and I?


Fr. Abundance more than he, Madam; for he has only invaded Careless's Estate,
which it is ten to one but some Body else would have done. From you he has taken
your Liberty, and though he be in right but your part in Authority, yet in
violation of all his Articles h'as deposed you not only from all Power, but
even from the rights of a Freeborn Subject, and like a Tyrant insults over his
Equal, as his Slave. Me he has injured yet more enormously; for he has robbed me
of you, a Treasure of infinitely more value, than Wealth, Liberty, or Power, a
Robbery, that he can never make restitution for, nor I forgive. Unless he could
call Time back again, and restore those unvaluable Minutes that are past.


Car. It Is a sign you know the worth of 'em, you spend those few you have to so
much purpose. You're like a formal, old Pedant I once knew, that would declaim
nonsensically about the Preciousness of Time, and the sin of mispending a
moment for several Hours together.


Fr. I thank you for your Correction, it is just and kind. My dear Florella
let us withdraw, and redeem all we can.


Flo. What occasion for withdrawing? since Mr. Careless is entered into the
League, I declare it no Counsel without his Presence; I Will have no private
Caballing amongst Confederates; it looks suspicious.


Fr. No, Madam, if we do but agree upon the several Quota's to be contributed
to the common Cause and Interest: We may take our measures apart without breach
of union.


Car. Now is he as impatient to show his zeal, as a newly hired Irish Footman
his diligence and expedition, that posts away with his Errand, and when he has
run himself out of Breath must come back for it again.


Enter Famine. Fam. Sir, I Have endeavored to obey your command, but I Would as soon
undertake to muster an Army by Rote upon once hearing 'em called over, as to
repeat what she said. I Have heard People talk much of one Fame, for a notable
Gossip; but if she has half the Tongue of this Scandal-spreader, or half the
Intelligence, I Will hang for her; compared with her, I dare swear, she would appear
a Bashful, silent, sober Body.


Car. What can you remember nothing particular?


Fam. Yes, abundance more than perhaps you will have patience to hear. I never
took my self for a man of so much ^isdom before; but I suppose you both saw it
in my face, Gentlemen, ^lse you had never employed me in such weighty Affa^^s.
Well, Discretion is an admirable thing, it is imp^^sible to be a good Pimp
without it.


Car. If you have done admiring your own Parts, give us some proof of 'em, and
let us hear how like a discreet Pimp, you have managed for me. What did you hear?


Fam. The Scandal of all the Town, Sir, and a great deal more; besides the
secret History of your Life, and of all your Family ever since the Conquest,
and long before, which that Retailer of live flesh, traced farther back than
Welsh Pedigree, or Hebrew Genealogy e're reached.


Car. How did Olympia relish all this Stuff? did she listen with any sort of
satisfaction, or disgust?


Fr. As a Socinian would to the Athanasian Creed; I Will warrant her.


Fam. She seemed to regard* her sometimes with neglect, sometimes with scorn
and indignation, but she was extremely nettled at something she told her you
reported of her, and after they parted, ordered one of her Servants to find out
where you were immediately, and bring her word. Whereupon I stepped to him, asked
him two or three impertinent Questions, scrapt acquaintance with him, and
informed him, that I was coming to you at Mr. Friendly's, and desired his
Company, as far as his business lay my way, he immediately excused himself, and
turned about after his Lady. Have I done well, Sir?


Car. Admirably well. Thy Belly shall be regaled for this anon, Sirrah. Away to
your Post, and Scout against the Serjeant's coming.


[Exit Fam. Fr. It Is so, Ol^mpia's caught; Love has laid his Lime-twigs upon
her, now let her flutter, and struggle as much as she will to get loose, it but
entangles her more. What luck's this, Careless, thus with Art to catch the very
Bird, that all the s^^llful Fowlers about the Town have been beating the Bush,
and spreading their Nets for so long? --


Re-enter Famine followed by Olympia. Exit Fam. Fr. Madam, this Visit's an
Honor, I Am extremely proud of, but the Obligation is yet the greater for being
unexpected, the only Circumstance that could raise it higher.


Ol. Unexpected, Sir, how can that be? I thought Mr. Careless had made nothing
a secret to you. --


Car. Madam, if this Honor was intended to me, I am yet more obliged, than my
Friend, because less deserving; but I was altogether as much a Stranger to the
intended Favor.


Ol. I Have heard it often said indeed, that true Friends were like
Fiddle-strings tuned to an Unison, touch but the one, and the other would
immediately answer in the same Note; but I never met with an instance so exact
to the Letter before.


Fr. Madam, the Honor done to my House by your Presence is too great to need
the Address of a Surprise to heighten it; But your Gallantry in taking it off,
raises the Obligation beyond the reach of my Acknowledgments. But --


Ol. Come leave this ^anter, Mr. Friendly; it is ungenerous to insult in your
own House. [Speaks with an air of Scorn.] You may well boast your Power over
me, Mr. Careless, when you see I follow you thus up and down.


Car. I wish I had merit enough to engage you once to think of me; so far am I
from the vanity of assuming this favor to my self.


Ol. The vanity of some men, I find, like their courage appears only, when the
Subject of it is removed. How long have you been thus humble, Sir?


Car. This Question from your Ladyship surprises me extremely, because (...)


Ol. Is it so familiar a thing with you to boast of Favors never received, that
you wonder it should be taken amiss? Our Sex had need be cautious how they
converse; for we can scarce speak civilly to a man, we accidentally meet, but
he makes his Brags of Favors and Appointments.


Car. There are such Fellows, it is true, Madam, that imagine all the World
steers their Course by their vain Blasts; and believe it as easy to cheat
others into a great Opinion of their Extraordinary Accomplishments, and
irresistible charms, as themselves. But I Have always endeavored to deserve
another Character; and would n't willingly injure any person, much less your
Ladyship.


Ol. Those that have the baseness to traduce us behind our Backs, seldom have
the courage to justify it to our Faces.


Fr. Mr. Careless has always born himself with so much honor; that I must
think it impossible, he should be guilty of any thing so base. It must be
malice, Madam, that has fixed this Scandal upon him. I Am sure he honors your
Ladyship too highly any way to offend you.


Ol. I do believe it malice; But it is malice with such Demonstration in its
mouth, that it is impossible to doubt the Truth of the information, tho I am
convinced of the insincerity of the intention of it.


Car. By this, Madam, I guess my Accuser to be Mrs. Vernish, but as to my
particular offense, I am still in the dark, and cannot grope my way out, unless
your Ladyship be pleased to afford me a little light.


Ol. Have ye been so free with me that you can but guess at the Informer, and
are in doubt of the nature of the Affront?


Car. It Is the knowledge of her inveterate malice, and my own innocence, that
guides me to one, and keeps me in a maze for the other.


Ol. To confront your impudence, tho it feeds your Vanity, I will for once
produce an Evidence shall confound you. Do you know this Ring? [Pulls off her
Ring and shows it.] A Hint's sufficient I suppose to make your Blushes betray
your Guilt.


Car. I think I saw it upon your Ladyships Finger just now; but am not
conscious what it can accuse me. Pray, Madam, explain your self.


Ol. This is gallant impudence; a hissed Actor could n't keep the Stage with
more unconcerned confidence; or a bilk'd Poet vindicate his damned Play with
more Arrogance in his Preface. Sure you think I Am in Love with you for your
Assurance, you would show some more taking Quality, to countenance the Scandal else.


Car. Rather let me be thought guilty, Madam, than offend by an unseasonable
Justification. Yet I could wish --


Fr. I perceive, Madam, we are in a Labyrinth of Error, which tho I cannot
absolutely lead you out of, yet, I hope to point you to the Clue, that may
Careless, let us see your Ring. Do you know this, Madam?


Ol. What Is this, a Confederacy to affront me? Yes, I do; since you will have a
Triumph, 't shall be a short one. I own I sent it to that unworthy man, out of
compassion for his wrongs, or perhaps a concern more tender. For I (...) own a
weakness I Have overcome, and shall blush no more, unless with in^^^. Nay more,
know that 'twas I that lent the money; to me you (...) your Liberty, not the
Sergeant. I sent the Ring, because I scorn a Pledge, (...) though your own
might be a means to betray from whence it came. There it is, return me that;
and then insult, 'twill become you, and I can laugh at it.


Car. Madam, I own the Justice of your Anger, and my punishment; but it is my
dull unapprehensive stupidity, that deserves it; not vanity, or insolence, as
you are misinformed.


Ol. Go tell Mrs. Vernish, I thought it not enough to send you one Ring to
engage you to meet me, but I must follow you, to give you another.


Fr. Madam, I can safely aver, that till this moment he knew not to whose
Generouty, he owed the ^ing; so far it was impossible for him to boast any such
favor from your Ladyship.


Ol. Sir, I cannot blame you for endeavoring to bring your Friend off; but
'twill puzzle all your Skill. Was possible for him not to know his own Ring,
when he saw it upon my Finger?


Friend. 'Twas scarce possible he should; for it was not his, but mine, slipped
into his Hand in the Time of his Distress at the Serjeant's, never seen by him
before.


Ol. How Is this! Then my Passion has fooled me into Confession, I must again
blush for; [Aside.] But how could Mrs. Vernish come by her Information, since I
did not so much as trust my own Servant with the Knowledge of what he carried?


Car. That part of the Knot remains yet to be disintangl'd. Leave that to me;
and as I clear my innocence, let me merit your Pardon, Madam.


Flor. While Justice seemed to be on your side, Madam, I durst not interpose;
but since all things are in so fair a way to an Ecclaircisement, let me beg you
to suspend your Resentments, and give Mr. Careless time to provide for a fair
and equal Trial.


Ol. I could not deny you a more unreasonable Request, Madam.


Enter Famine. Fam. Here comes my Master, and Mr. Homily.


Friend. It Is time for us to withdraw then: Ladies, will you please to honor
my House so far, as to accept of a small Collation.


Exeunt Friendly, etc. at one D^or. Enter at the other Wrangle and Homily.
Wrang. Is It possible he should be so rich? A poor Fellow, that was Sexton to
the A^^-houses, rather than Parish; and buried the dead Remains of their
halfempty'd Pots in his own Belly, or earned his Drink by setting up the
Nine-Pins for those that played; spung'd Tobacco out of the next Man's Box, and
sa^^^z'd himself into the Chimney-corner in Winter, gratis.


(...). It Is true; he was always a very close, scraping Fellow; and that fills
(...), Sir: Though his Gains were small, yet he has been many Years raking
together. T^^a're learned, Sir; and know the Adage, ex gravis fit Acervus.


(...). (...) he used to be reckoned a notable Good Fellow, one that would --


Hom. Sometimes, Sir; when he hop'st to drink a Man into a Fever, or a Surfeit,
and (...) by his Grave.


(...). It Is very strange. But we see by honest Thrift, and Endeavor, what
mighty things may be effected.


Hom. (...), qui v^tulum tulit. Milo, Sir, by carrying a silly Calf, (with
Sub^^^sion to your Worship,) come to carry a Bull. From a Penny to a Pound*
from one pound to many, is the Progress of the World, Sir.


Wrang. It Is so. But he loved to eat well too; and that, methinks --


Hom. At another Man's Cost, Sir; there he would play the Cormorant, and devour
more than the Graves he made. At home he lived like a Chamelion, upon Air; grew
fat upon the Brewis of an Egg-shell; and surfeited upon the Smell of a Cook's
Shop, that a Month scarce fasted it away again.


Wrang. An Apoplexy, you say; and he desires I would be his Executor. What
Relations has he?


Hom. None, Sir, that I know of.


Wrang. His Mind will be the quieter. What D -- s has he?


Hom. None, Sir: He never esteemed their Art.


Wrang. It Is vain and useless in such Extremities; it but prolongs Men's
Miseries. Who has he about him?


Hom. Several that flock about him, like Crows about a Carrion; as well
Gentlemen, as others, that claim his Friendship, and some his Kindred too: Rich
Men cannot want Heirs. Some of 'em, under pretense of Care of his Health, have
removed him hither, and lodged him like a Prince, only to insinuate themselves
into his Favor at his last Moments.


Wrang. They do ill to trouble him; very ill. But we shall take care --


Hom. Will you walk in, Sir? This is the Door of the Chamber where he lies.


[Homily knocks; the Scene opens, and presents an Alcove Room, Spade lying as
in Bed, Careless and others standing about the Bed, a Table, with Pen, Ink and
Paper, a Candle, Porringer of Blood, Glasses, Pots, and other Apothecaries
Utensils scatte'd about it.] Hom. Pray stand further, Gentlemen, and give him
Air; you will not suffer him to breath.


Wrang. How do you, Neighbor Spade? I Am sorry to find you in so weak a
Condition.


Spa. Ah! Master Sergeant, you're welcome; but I am fleeting.


Wrang. Methinks he looks fresh and well, and his Eyes lively.


[Aside to Hom. Hom. A Glimmering before Death only. Mind how he fumbles with
the Sheet.


[Aside to Wrangle. Spa. Pray -- sit down -- Sir -- Ive made -- bold -- to send
for you -- to take care of what -- I leave.


Wrang. Pray don't trouble him, he is weak, and his Brain disturbed.


Spa. Don't weep, Friends; I must leave you; -- we must all drop in our turns:
It Is a Debt we owe the Worms, and they will not be cheated. -- Give me a Drop or
two of Cordial, to raise my Spirits, and e^^lt my Voice -- Sir, I intend to
make you Whole and Sole Executor to this my Last Will and Testament; and
therefore I desire you would, before these my Friends and Neighbors, solemnly
engage to see it executed.


Wrang. I do; and, before these Gentlemen, give my Oath to perform every thing
to a tittle, according to the Tenor of the Will.


Spa. Imprimis, I bequeath my Body to the Grave, a Legacy that is rarely unpaid.
Item, I give to Mr. Searjeant Wrangle, for his Care and Pains requisite to the
just Execution of my Will --


Wrang. What do you give, Neighbor?


Spa. A 1000l. it is too little, but I Have many to serve. Item, I give to my old
Master Homily 300l. to buy Books, and understand 'em. You Have a learned Head,
stuff it with Libraries; but don't run the Parish mad with Controversies, nor
preach Abstinence to Longing Women. -- Item, I give 500l. to be laid out in
purchasing the Advowsons of Small Livings, to be bestowed in Dower with stale
Maids, and Oat-meal-eating Damsels of this Parish, at the Direction of Master
Curate and the Churchwardens, to procure 'em the Benefit of the Clergy.


Hom. It Is a pious, and a meritorious Legacy.


Spa. Item, I give 10l. to the Lineing of Mr. Churchwardens Pew, that they may
sleep warm at Church. -- Item, I give 100l. to enlarge the Churchyard, and to
build two new Houses, for Apothecaries to sit Rent-free in, and fill it.


Wrang. These are mad Legacies.


Spa. Item, I give 20l. to purchase some loud, new Stops to the old dumb Organ,
to drown the Churchwardens snoring, in lieu of those they have already pip'd
out of the Parish. -- Item, to all Ringers I bequeath new Ropes, to be applied
as their own Discretions shall direct. -- Item, I give 10l. per Annum for ever,
to be laid out in Spirit of Clary, and Candy'd Satyrion, to be distributed, by
way of Dole, to the Married Men of this Parish, once every Month, for the
Comfort of their Wives, and the Profit of Master Homily and his Successors. --
Item, I give 10l. toward repairing of the Pulpit, that Master Homily may sleep
in Comfort in it.


Wrang. This is mere Frenzy; these Legacies are void in Law: He Is Non Compos
Mentis now: Take notice of it, Mr. Homily.


[Aside to Hom. Hom. He Is Delirious, and raves a little now; but 'twill soon be
over, and he will be composed again.


[Aside to Wrangle. Spa. Item, I give 20l. toward the stopping Leaky Vessels;
for I doubt there are few sound Keels in the Parish.


Car. Will Not you remember us, that are your Friends, and take care of you in
your Sickness.


Spa. I do, and will take care of yours; therefore I leave you Mercury and
Turpentine, Sarsaparilla and Guajacum in abundance; strong Syringes, and
careful Surgeons; warm Tubs to sweat in, and wholesome Diet-drinks: Make good
use of 'em, you have Occasion.


Wrang. Ha'ye done giving?


Spa. I Am loath to give more from you, because IN know you will be a faithful
Executor. Yet, to pious-Uses, if you please, a little.


Hom. Now he grows temperate again.


Spa. To the Re-marrying of poor young Widows --


Hom. It Is a charitable Will; for it is pity to see so many tight Vessels
moulder in the Dock, for want of Ballast to put out with. What Is your Pleasure
in that Point?


Spa. I give Two Hundred Else of Lockram, that there may be no strait Doings in
their Linen, but the Sails cut according to their respective Burdens. -- Item,
I give 500 Mark, to build an Hospital for Honest, Wise Men: For Fools and
Knaves, crowd 'em out of the Parish. 'Twill be but very small; yet more, I
doubt, than will be soon filled.


Wrang. I doubt so too: 'Twou'd puzzle an Oracle to show a Man that is both wise
and honest in the three Kingdoms.


[Aside. Hom. Arn't you weary yet?


Spa. Never of Well-doing. But I Will give no more away. Five Hundred Acres of
Land, Arable and Pasture, lying and being in the Vale of Fools; Two Ships
homeward bound from the Isle of Expectation, called the False Hope, and the
Banter; with my Stock of Cattle, Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Hogs, etc. with all my
Money, Mortgages, Bonds, and other Debts; my Plate, Jewels, and rich Movables,
I leave to discharge these Legacies; the rest, and Residue, to my Executor.


Wrang. If he be worth all this, he will be the richest Wind-fall I ever had;
[Aside.] You make me your Executor?


Spa. I do; Whole and Sole Executor. Pray Gentlemen, be Witnesses: I declare
this to be my Last Will and Testement; See me sign it.


[Spade signs the Will; Careless and others, as Witnesses. Spa. I wish I had
more; but this may suffice an honest, reasonable Mind.


Wrang. You say true, and make it rich too. Is this House and Furniture yours?


Spa. Alas, no Sir; the noble Gentleman that owns it, was pleased to
accommodate me during my Illness: I must restore it with my last Breath, or my
Recovery.


Wrang. Ha'ye no other than that in Tickle-Trout-Alley? That looks like a
deserted Snail-shell inhabited by a Spider, hung with Cobweb-Arras: All the
Furniture I could ever see there, was an old Worm-eaten Truckle-bed, two old
crippl'd Wooden Chairs, and a broken Joint-stool: These promise no such mighty
Treasure. Where shall I find this Estate? Where shall I raise these Sums?


Spa. Where you think good. Your Worship's wise, and know Business; know where
the Wealth lies --


Wrang. Think good! -- Will that raise Thousands?


Spa. Your Worship's an able, and a just Man, and will see my Will faithfully
executed; you have sworn it, that is my Comfort. E'n raise 'em where you please.


Wrang. Where I please! Very well. Where am I? What Time of the Year is it? Does
the Dog Star reign, that you are all mad?


Car. You Are in Fool's Paradise; and this is the First of April. What will you
take for the Profit of this Executorship?


First Gent. I hope you will take care that the Legacies be paid out of hand; the
Parish is poor, and wants 'em. What will you take to advance the Money?


Second Gent. Make Ensurance upon your Ships, Mr. Sergeant; the Banter's richly
laden, and the Seas are dangerous; abundance of Privateers are upon the Coasts.


Car. Give you Joy, Mr. Executor. Will you sell the rich Furniture of
Tickle-Trout-Alley? You Will keep the Hangings, I suppose, to your self: You live
like a Spider, in Cobwebs, and entangle and devour like Flies, all the Fools
that come to you.


Wrang. I must dissemble my Resentments, they will teaze me to Madness else.


Spa. Give me a little more Cordial, I faint else. [Drinks.] Methinks I begin
to feel my Spirits return. Well, a faithful Executor is as good as Drying Pan
to an Apoplectick Man's Head.


Wrang. This is Careless's Doings; these Worms durst not have turned their Heads
against me, though I had trod on 'em. I must smother the Fire they have kindled
in my Breast, till it may blaze to the Destruction of 'em all. [Aside. Well,
you're merry, I see, Gentlemen; I hope you mean nothing but Mirth, and will
drive the Jest no farther.


Car. I hope it is driven Home already.


Hom. We mean nothing more than Mirth, harmless Mirth, Sir?


Wrang. Well, I Have loved a Jest my self in my time, and therefore can excuse it
in others. But 'twas a little hard to make an Old Man the Subject of it,
Neighbors; but Mr. Careless has some Reason, and therefore I forgive you all;
and that we may be thoroughly reconciled, I desire your Companies all at Supper.


Car. etc. We'll wait on you.


Wrang. And you, Neighbor Spade; your Fit will be over by that time.


Spade. I Will endeavor, Sir, as well as a Sick Man may.


[Exit Wrangle. Car. We (...) meet anon at the Sergeants, Gentlemen, and
Triumph in the Success of (...) Plot.

(...) this one Path to different Ends we move:
I, guided by Rev^ge; my Friend, by Love.

[Exeunt omnes. ACT V. SCENE Wrangle's House.
Enter Wrangle. Wrang. Abused, insulted, and made a Fool of! -- An April Fool!
-- To be caught with an old stale Boy's Trick; a Trick that Children see
through, and Schoolboys laugh at -- Have I been thus long fameas for my
Cunning through all the Courts of Westminster, the Terror of Mad Fools, and Wild
Extravagants of all Degrees and Qualities; and am I fallen at last so low, as
to be practiced upon like a raw Prentice in his first Year? No, Mad-cap, since
you have put me in the Humor, you shall see some of my Frolicks ever the Sun set
yet; I Will show you a Gambol of the Law, a Trick that shall stick by you, and
make ye remember the First of April as long as ye live. As for the Curate, I Have
that shall make him put the Lawyer before the Devil into his Litany. Nor shall
my Wealthy Treasurer escape me, I Will be his Executor yet before he dies; he
shall wish he had met with the Man he stole the last Shroud from in my stead --
What, no Body within? Sure my House is become the Residence of Silence; no
Sound to be heard; not a Whisper stirring -- My Wife, my Pupil, my Servants all
abroad; I wish I been't Metamorphos'd.

Enter Famine half drunk. -- How now, Raskal? How dare you leave my House
ungarded?


Fam. What need of a Guard? Your Money's so well fortified, it may defy a
French Army; the biggest Battery in Flanders would not open a Breach to it: And
for any thing else, your House is as secure, as if the Plague-mark were set
over the Door; no Body will venture into it,


Wrang. Why, you Impudent Villain! What Suburb Bawdy House do you reel from
now, to affront me in the Strength of the Brandy ye pim^'d for? Stand off; you
stink of Leeks and Toasted Cheese, worse than a Welsh Company of Foot Soldiers
upon St. David's Day.


Fam. Leeks and Toasted Cheese compared with your Housekeeping, are an
Entertainment for a Prince of Wales. A Cameleon would be starved in your House,
there is not so much as wholesome Air for him.


Wrang. Are ye so lusty, Sirrah? Do you kick at your keeping, you saucy Rogue?
I Will bring down your high Stomach? ye shall starve for this; you shalln't so
much as smell Meat these Six Weeks; no, not so much as feast your Imagination
with a Picture of any thing that is earable.


Fam. I caren't, there are Services to be had, and Masters too, that know how
to value a Man of my Parts, and Abilities for Service. Masters that will make
me eat and drink better, and more lustily every day, than you do at a Client's
Charge, when he treats his Jury or Witnesses. You may get a Dog, Sir, to lick
your Dishes, and see if he will stay with you. I Am provided.


Wrang. Are you so, Sirrah? But I Have another Place for you in Bridewll, where
Hemp shall be both your Task and your Diet.


Fam. I thank your Worship; I hope I shall have the Honor to work a Necklace
for you there.


Wrang. You shall have Forty Lashes the more for that, Brazen-face.


Fam. Cursed Cows have short Horns, Sir: I hope to be out of your reach. Yet I
thank your Worship for your Bounty.


Wrang. Pandar, Snarling Dog.


[Throws a Book at him. Fam. Now for a Law-Tempest; the Codices are broke loose
already: How the Sea rises! How it tumbles and foams! Sir, you're Horn-mad;
I Will fetch a Doctor to you.


[Exit Famine Wrang. It Is done, and this Rogue's made drunk to embolden him to
abuse me with it. I Am made a Monster, and shall hereafter appear like a Comet,
for People from all Quarters to gaze, Fools to wonder, and Boys to point and
laugh at. I shall be sung in Ballads, and made a Byword to scoff others by --
But here she comes; I must conceal my Grief, till my Revenge has brought it to
a Head, and heal.


Enter Friendly and Florella. -- So! What sweet Voyage have you been making?
What Relation have you been to visit? Whose Garden did you take the Air in?


Flo. At the old Trade again? Your Jealousy pursues me even to Church, and
brings a Scandal upon my very Devotions.


Wrang. Yes, yes; Women Cuckold their Husbands very devoutly now-adays. 'Twas
Woman, and the Devil, ruined us all Originally; but as if they weren't
sufficient, they draw the Priest into the Confederacy too now.


Flo. You Would best deny me the Liberty of going to Church, and taking care of my
Soul; but, in spite of your Tyranny, my Conscience shall be my Guide.


Wrang. I wonder where abouts a Woman's Conscience lies, or how far it extends;
it is more than any man could ever fathom. But I find it has this good property
of a Bawd, its pretenses are always very fair, let its designs be never so
foul; I don't like the spiritual Tumbling, it looks one way and plays another.
Who went with you?


Flo. This Oaf here, and let every Rascal, justle me so, that he made me almost
ridiculous; I was forced to drive him along, and push him on, till the People
laughed and fleer'd --


Wrang. How! did ye push him on? Was he so stupid?


Flo. In the middle of Church-time, he fell fast asleep, and snor'd so, that
the stops of's Nose were louder than the Organ; after that --


Wrang. Ay, what after that?


Fr. Madam, I confess my self unfit to wai^ on you; yet forgive aed spare me
this time, and the next --


Flo. No, T'll publish your Moral Virtues: He talked in his sleep of
Declarations, Ej^ctments, Warrants and Executions, till he frighted almost all
the People out of the Church. Am I to be thus manned always?


Wrang. I see through this; but I must pull in my Claws till* I can seize and
gripe my Prey. [Aside.] Well Pupil, your over-bashfulness has vexed her you see.
Forbear her sight a while; and the next time have more Courage.


Fr. I wish I may, I*'^^ endeavor all I Am able.


[Exit Friendly. Flo. I shall make no further Trial; I Will neither be disgraced
nor suspected for him another time. Now, Sir, your groundless Jealousy
deserves to be punished with what you fear; if you continue to suspect my
Virtue, you will provoke me to give you cause.


Wrang. Well, my Dear, be pacified, and I Will offend thee so no more. I must go
about a little Business; but to let thee see I Am resolved to reform, and please
thee, I Have invited Mr. Careless, and the Curate, and some Gentlemen to Supper,
if they come before I return, bid 'em welcome.


[Ex. Wrang. Flo. This Confidence, I Am sure, is counterfeit, and he has
mischief in his Heart. But armed with innocence, I can dare his malice.


[Re-enter Friendly. Fr. I Am glad to find you keep the Field last, Madam: But
Victory's your Slave, and waits your motions; where e're you come, you conquer.
Is the Enemy f^ed?


Flo. Only retreated, I doubt an Ambuscade.


Fr. We Are aware, and shall easily defeat him. But, Madam, let us lose no more
precious moments, it is dangerous. Love's an active flame, that unfed will
consume us.


Flo. And fed, will destroy both our Honor and Repose. It Is a Thief, that if
he ben't strictly watched; where're he is harbored steals away the most
pr^cious Movables, and if not prevented, is never to be brought to Justice.


Fr. Madam, you have no reason to complain of his injustice, since, tho he
borrows from your Eyes his Power, he lays at your feet the spoil. I Am both a
witness and an instance, Madam; does a faithful heart like mine, deserve no
return?


Flo. Yes, it has as much as my Honor will permit, and more it never shall.
I Will not make such a Present of my Heart, as shall lessen the value of it.


Fr. Can the Enjoyment of Heaven, lessen our value of Happiness?


Flo. No; but I Am not so much a Bigot, as to be deceived with an imaginary
view, and lose the real Prospect. I Have considered it, and am convinced, that
what I can give, is like the Presents of poor Tenants to their great Landlords,
it may ruin me, ^^t can make you never the richer.


Fr. The value of things above the common way of Traffic is Arbitrary, and
depends upon the esteem of those that possess 'em, and you cannot prize a Favor
higher, than I am ready to bid ^or it.


Flo. Have a care how you advance, if I should take you at your word, you might
repent your Bargain.


Fr. I should only fear breaking in your Debt; since the Purchase is more than
I Am worth.


Flo. We need not dispute that. For what you would contract for, I cannot make
you a good Ti^le to, and am resolved to be honest to a Scruple.


Enter Careless, Olympia, Homily, and Spade. Car. [to Flo.] Madam, this is my
second trespass upon your House to day --


Flo. You're welcome, Sir; but I hope you're better pleased with the present
Occasion, than the last.


Car. In this at least I ought to be, that with this Lady I Have brought a better
Apology, than the Serjeant's invitation.


Flo. She commands her welcome, where e're she comes, but more particularly
here.


Ol. All Occasions of waiting upon you, Madam, are very acceptable to me; but
Mr. Careless has promised before you to unfold a Mystery, that at our parting
we did not understand, and to clear himself and me.


Car. I Will make good my Promise, Madam, immediately.


Exit Careless, and reenters with Mrs. Vernish. Car. Now, Mrs. Vernish, you
must to this Company unriddle, you must tell the Truth, the whole Truth; or I
shall deliver you over again to the Tormentors. What was your design? Who set
you on? And whence had you the information you pretended to this Afternoon?


Vern. I hope your Ladyship, will not let me suffer for my zeal to serve you; Mr.
Careless has laid an Action of a Thousand Pound upon me for telling you, what I
heard. It Is well known I Am a Woman of Reputation and Conscience, and what I
said was in pure tenderness of you. For my part I have no malice to any Body,
and would n't wrong any man for the World.


Ol. I can say nothing to the matter, Mrs. Vernish; if you have injured Mr.
Careless, it is but justice to leave him to his Liberty to seek Reparation, as
he thinks fit.


Vern. Heaven, that sees my Heart, Madam, knows that I never bore any malice to
Mr. Careless.


Fr. Every Carted Bawd in Town, can plead more in her own Justification than
this.


Car. All this is beside your Text, Mother Sodom; confess ingenuously, who set
you to work, and for what End; otherwise you know your Lodging: It Is in vain
for you to expect mercy, without showing true signs of your Repentance.


Vern. Immediately after Mr. Careless and you were gone from the Sergeants,
Madam, he came to me, and told me, that you had just then Bailed Mr. Careless,
and lent him Two hundred Pound upon a Ring, desired me to pump out of your
Servants how you disposed of it; which I effected by one, that I employed to
trepan your Servant, under pretense of Drinking with him, who saw both the Ring
and the Direction.


Car. This is but half satisfaction; there remains a reckoning for the Story of
Mrs. Washwell. --


Ol. It Is enough for us, Sir; I Am satisfied. You may make up the rest of your
Account with her at leisure.


Car. Here, take her away; and set her by till she be called to the Ba^ again.


Friend. The Lawyer has been scolding at his sweet Lady this half Hour for
going to Church; I suppose to prepare himself for some bawling Cause.


Hom. How! for going to Church? What! Does he deny her Liberty of Conscience?
We'll have him up in the Spiritual Court for it, there is Law for him, that will
make Cook and Littleton sweat.


Spa. For my part, all I can do to be further revenged on him, is to eat
lustily; if that will do it, I Will crucify him: I wish I could clap a Tire or
two more of Teeth into my Head, to grind him.


Friend. We Have a Design to reduce the Sergeant to Reason, Madam; and procure
his Lady for the future the same Liberty that others have, and she ought to
have. Will your Ladyship join with us in so good a Work?


Ol. I shall be proud to contribute any thing in my power toward it.


Friend. Be pleased to let one of your Servants fetch the Writings of Mr.
Careless's Estate; I shall open such a piece of Villainy to you, as you little
suspect, Madam.


Ol. Waitwell, run, and bid my Woman send the Black Box of Writings in my
Closet.


Friend. To care such a Cankered Knave, his Sores must be laid open, they are
foul to the Bone.


Enter Wrangle, followed by a Constable, and Bailiffs, and others disguised.
Wrang. So, they are all in the Toil already: Keep back all, only you that are to
lay the Cloth. [Comes forward, with one like a Drawer.] So, you're welcome,
Gentlemen; you're Men of Honor, and punctual to your Appointment. Come, let us
be merry.


Car. We intend no less: An Hour of Freedom's worth an Age of Juggling.


Spa. I Am come too, to specify my Stomach: Your Worship's Generosity has
wrought a miraculous Cure upon me.


Wrang. And thou shall have it filled, my merry Lad; my bonny, bounteous
Testator: Thou shall find me the kindest Executor that ever was bilk'd by a
Recovery; it shall be filled till it groan again.


Spa. Let it have fair Play; and if it founder --


Wrang. Faith, the Trick you put upon me, nettl'd me cruelly at first; but when
I considered that it was but a Jest, and carried off so neatly, it made me
extremely merry: I was so tickled with the Mirth!


Hom. Harmless Mirth always works so. No^, should we have been in earnest, it
might have sowr'd your Humor, and filled your Head with strange Matters. For,
Things thrust home in earnest --


Wrang. Very certain. But you're merry Wags all; and you shall see I can be
merry too. Madam, [to Olympia,] your Ladyship's an unexpected Guest; I could
wish I had Entertainment proper for you; but you will excuse it, I hope. I don't
like her Company; but I must push my Revenge now; [Aside.] Come, bring in
Supper: I Have made no great Preparation* to make the Room smell; only a Cold
Treat: Every Man his Dish, if it please your Palates --


Enter Bailiffs, with Dishes (...). Wrang. Come, fall to, Gentlemen; eat a bit,
that we may drink a Glass.


Car. What Is this? an Execution?


Wrang. Much good do you, Sir; it is a little tough, but it is sound; a good
Stomach will digest it easily: It Is but 1000l. Nay, never stir; your Sword's
gone, and these are Bailiffs.


Hom. a Citation, and a Warrant to appear before the Judge of the Arches!


Wrang. Can you conjure, Mr. Marr-Text? To your Prayers, the Devil's in your
Dish; I Have raised him, now try if you can lay him.


Hom. I must go to the Necessary House.


Wrang. You need not; your Fear will make ye find the way to your Breeches. How
do you like your Mess, my wealthy Sexton? What Legacy would you give now? What
would you pay down upon the Nail, to escape my Clutches?


Car. Have you betrayed us? and dare you insult?


Wrang. Invited, you mean! Fall to, you have diligent Men about you, and shall
want nothing that may persecute you.


Car. As bold and brave, as like a Lion, as you swagger now, I shall make you
hang your Ears like an Ass yet, ever we part.


Wrang. O, yes! The Lawyer's a Fool, an April-Fool, a Thick-skull'd Fellow; fit
only to be the Sport of such Triumphant Wits. Within this Half Hour you shall
have a Second Dish of new Debts from all your Creditors; new Invitations to
Whips and Halters for my loving Neighbor Spade; and Excommunications,
Suspensions and Sequestrations for the learned Curate. A Masque of all your
Furies shall dance to you.


Car. Have a care of being taken in your own Pit-fall. Do you think to catch us
in a Cobweb? Do you hear, Purse-Gelder? The First of April is n't over yet.


Ol. He braves it out nobly; his Courage don't sink in the least. I Am resolved
once more to redeem him, whatever comes on it.


[Aside. Wrang. If you threaten, you go to Prison directly, without Mercy. I Have
a better Guard without. Do you know this Man, Curate? He Is an Apparitor, that
comes to tell you a pleasant Story of an old Whore, and half a dozen Bastards,
you have palm'd upon the Parish. You know the Penalty.


Hom. Good Sir, be compassionate; and I Will -- [whispers the Sergeant in the
Ear.] In Verbo Sacerdotis, I will.


Wrang. No, no Bribery: I Will swinge ye. Thou rash, inconsiderate Fool, can
thou hope for Compassion? And you Lenten-Chaps, that lay sick, and mocked me; I
'll make you such at Heart. Yes, you shall die, but not worth a Sheet to wind
you in; not so much as that you stole, with the Ring, from the Merchant's
Grave. Do you smell me now?


Spa. Good Sir, have a little Mercy.


Wrang. Mercy! yes; as much as a Halter can show ye: You smell strong of Hemp,
Rascal; the Gallows wait for you: It Is n't a Penitential Psalm shall save you.


Car. What! Are you treating about a separate Peace, Rogues? Have a Care what
you do, we shall turn our Arms upon you; we allow no Neutrality.


Enter Famine. Fam. Mr. Sergeant, yours: Now I Am no longer your Servant,
methinks I Have an Inclination to be your Friend; I Have brought you some Clients:
They are not over-stock'd with Fees, it is true; but I know you're a charitable
Man, and love Business in Forma Pauperis.


Wrang. I Am glad to see you; my Revenge had not been complete without you.


Fam. I heard there was Meat in your House, and came to wonder at it; it is a
Miracle that never happened in my days here. The Dishes are licked clean, I
see, already; according to the ancient Custom of this House, you suffer nothing
to go from the Table.


Wrang. You come a little of the latest; however, there is a Service left for
you. Mr. Constable, have this Fellow to Bridewell, and let him be soundly
lashed thrice a Week, and beat Hemp for his Diet.


Fam. Sir, I desire you to spare this Ceremony; you treat me like a Stranger:
Pray give your self no Trouble; since I Am too late, I can go as I came.


Exit Famine running. Wrang. [To Florella and Friendly,] Your Punishment, and
yours, I reserve to a further Opportunity, for Reasons best known to my self.


Enter Servant, who gives a Black Box to Olympia. Flor. My Punishment! -- I Have
been too tame, too submissive a Wife to your base Usage. But since you dare
provoke me --


Friend. Be resolute, Madam; I Will stand and fall in your Defense: And he that
dares to brand your Fame, or taint your Virtue, is a Rascal, though your Husband.


Wrang. How Is this? Who have we here? a New England Bully?


Friend. No; but a Gentleman of Old-England: One, whose Relation to your Lady,
put him upon this Stratagem, to prove her Virtue, and your Barbarity and
Villainy; both which I find far to exceed Belief.


Wrang. I doubt he will prove nearer akin to her Issue, if ever she has any,
[Aside. Sir, you have taken upon you a troublesome Office; you may repent.


Friend. Not easily. I can pronounce her Virtue fixed as a Rock, never to be
moved, and unalterable as Fate. But since you are so stubborn, I Will try to
reclaim you by Force.


Friendly stamps with his Foot; Enter a Tipstaff, and other Officers, with
Affidavit, Swear-home and Clench-it. Friend. Do you see these forging
Instruments of yours? They shall suffer, and you too with 'em, unless you come
immediately to Composition, upon such directionary Terms as I shall order. I
watched your Privacy, and overheard all your Villainy practiced against this
Lady; and took care to lay a Trap for your Under-Vermin.


Affidavit. A while after we came from your House, we were apprehended upon a
Warrant from my Lord Chief Justice for Forgery, and have been ever since in
Custody.


Friend. Let Us see the Writings of Mr. Careless's Estate. In one Week's time
these had been all a Blank! See, Madam; some of the Letters are vanished
already, the Names are almost lost.


Car. Now, Sergeant, what will you give to ensure your Ears?


Wrang. Well, Gentlemen, you have over-reached me, and I am an Ass: But propose
your own Conditions, and I submit to 'em.


Friend. Mr. Careless, What Reparation do you think fit to demand, for the
Injuries he has done you?


Car. Only let him produce the real Writings of my Estate.


Wrang. Here they are. [Takes 'em off the Side-Table, and gives 'em to Car.


Car. These are right. Then here I pay 'em, where they, and more, than I am
worth are due.


[Gives 'em to Olympia. Fr. [to Ol.] Now, Madam, what satisfaction can he make
you?


Ol. Let him obtain his Wife's Pardon, and promise hereafter to be as subject
to his Wife, as she has been to him, and I am satisfied.


Flo. I thank your Ladyship, for your care of me, let me but live hereafter
free, and unsuspected, and that is past shall be forgotten.


Fr. You hear, Sir, the Terms of your Indemnity. Allow your Lady, Maintenance
suitable to her Quality, and Liberty answerable to her Virtue, and all shall be
baried in silence.


Wrang. You Have made me truly sensible of my Folly; and henceforth Wife, you
shall be at your own discretion, both in point of Liberty and Expense.


Fr. Since there wants a sufficient Guarantee, you must be a while upon good
Behavior.


Spa. Gentlemen, you forget your fellow Laborers; must we have no reparation?


Fr. What do you desire?


Hom. Let him turn his Sham-Treat into a real One.


Fr. Mr. Sergeant, as an easy Fine, to ratify our Articles of Reconciliation;
you're condemned to treat this good Company to night in reality.


Wrang. With all my heart; let the Officers be discharged on all parts, and you
shall see I Will commence my Reformation in good earnest.


Ol. Mr. Careless I Have found you a Man of so much Honor, that here I make you
a Present of your Estate again, and with it of my self, if you think it worth
the Acceptance.


Car. Madam, you make me blush for my own want of Merit, but since your Bounty,
like that of Heaven out-strips my boldest wishes, with Joy I receive what I
durst never presume to ask.


Re-enter Famine. Fam. Nay, Gentlemen, before you ratify the Articles of
Peace, let me be comprehended.


Wrang. You shall; and for this once, I Will try the stretch of your Belly.


Fam. I thank your Worship, I Have a good Stomach at your Service.


Fr. Mr. Sergeant, you have played the Jealous Ass, and mistaken your Ears for
Horns. Let that mistake be rectified, and henceforth you shall know me as a
sincere Friend, that shall never design either against your Lady's Virtue, or
your Quiet.


Wrang. When I relapse again to Jealousy,
May they to real Horns converted be.
And may all else their their Faults, as timely know,
And to like means the like Conversion owe.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
Spoken by SPADE.
ON Business I Am returned so quick this way,
Sent by the Author to interr his Play.
He waits within in mortal Expectation
Of his own Sentence in his Play's Damnation.
Like Malefactor at the Bar, he stands,
And his Grand Jury's Countenances scants.
For, as some Plants, ever the rude Hand approach,
Contract themselves, and shun the Fatal Touch:
So our Young Scribler dreads the Critics here,
And shrinking from their Gripe, betrays his Fear.
I saw him shake at every sour Grimace;
Which, multiplied by Fear, as by a Glass,
Each Fac' appeared a File of Critics, laid
Against our Poet here in Ambuscade.
Moved at his Case, I could not well refuse
This last kind Office to's expiring Muse.
If he has sinned against this Pious Place,
And show as little Wit, as you do Grace;
His Crime's confessed, and he hopes Absolution,
And craves a short Reprieve from Execution:
Which gained, he now by me invites you all,
TO attend him to his Muse's Funeral.
For, though some Precedents of late are found,
Without embalming Muse defunct unsound
To keep her Six Days stinking above Ground;
Our modest Author ordered me to say,
He valued not the Mummy of a Play.
He further sent me, having tried my Skill,
To be his Deputy, and make his Will:
First, To the Critics he would leave his Wit,
If they could but be reconciled to it.
Which I Will maintain's so little, and so light,
They need not fear spoiling their Judgments by it.
Yet since this Legacy's out of their Way,
He leaves besides the Carcass of his Play:
For well he knows 'em to be Birds of Prey.
To you, sweet Beaus, he fain would something leave,
But he has nothing, that you would receive.
His Vanity's a thing you never wanted,
Who boast so much of Favors never granted.
He Would leave you Courage, and a March to Flanders,
In quest of Fame, and hopes to be Commanders;
For you can brag at ho^. like Alexanders.
He told me too, what staggered much my Faith,
That if you ventured to scare the French from Aeth,
Some Roguish Bullet there might take the Pains
To undeceive the World, and show your Brains.
To the Masked Ladies it is his great Mishap,
He cannot so much as give one Civil Clap.
But that is no Rarity to them, he knows,
For it is their usual Present from the Beaus.
Last to us Players, this he bid me say,
He gives to us the Profits of his Play:
But if i^ takes, he sends for it next Day.
FINIS.

