ALBION AND ALBANIUS: AN OPERA.

Performed at the QUEENS Theater, in Dorset Garden.

Written by Mr. Dryden.

Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos.
Virg. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Iudge's Head in Chancery Lane,
near Fleet Street. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
IF Wit has truly been defined a propriety of Thoughts and Words, then that
Definition will extend to all sorts of Poetry; and amongst the rest, to this
present entertainment of an Opera. Propriety of thought is that Fancy which
arises naturally from the Subject, or which the Poet adapts to it. Propriety of
Words, is the clothing of those thoughts with such Expressions, as are
naturally proper to them: and from both these, if they are judiciously
performed, the delight of Poetry results. An Opera is a poetical Tale or
Fiction, represented by Vocal and Instrumental Music, adorned with Scenes,
Machines and Dancing. The supposed Persons of this musical Drama, are generally
supernatural, as Gods and Goddesses, and Heroes, which at least are descended
from them, and are in due time, to be adopted into their Number. The Subject
therefore being extended beyond the Limits of Humane Nature, admits of that
sort of mavelous and surprising conduct, which is rejected in other Plays.
Humane Impossibilities, are to be received, as they are in Faith; because where
Gods are introduced, a Supreme Power is to be understood; and second Causes are
out of doors. Yet propriety is to be observed even here. The Gods are all to
manage their peculiar Provinces: and what was attributed by the Heathens to one
Power, ought not to be performed by any other. Phoebus must foretell, Mercury
must charm with his Caduceus, and Juno must reconcile the Quarrels of the
Marriage Bed. To conclude, they must all act according to their distinct and
peculiar Characters* If the Persons represented were to speak upon the Stage,
it would follow of necessity, That the Expressions should be lofty, figurative
and majestical: but the nature of an Opera denies the frequent use of those
poetical Ornaments: for Vocal Music, though it often admits a loftiness of
sound: yet always exacts an harmonious sweetness; or to distinguish yet more
justly, The recitative part of the Opera requires a more masculine Beauty of
expression and sound: the other which (for want of a proper English Word) I
must call, The Songish Part, must abound in the softness and variety of
Numb^rs: its principal Intention, being to please the Hearing, rather than to
gratify the understanding. It appears indeed, Preposterous at first sight, That
Rhyme, on any consideration should take place of Reason. But in order to
resolve the Problem, this fundamental proposition must be settled, That the
first Inventors of any Art or Science, provided they have brought it to
perfection, are, in reason, to give Laws to it; and according to their Model,
all after Undertakers are to build. Thus in Epique Poetry, no Man ought to
dispute the Authority of Homer, who gave the first being to that Masterpiece
of Art, and endued it with that form of Perfection in all its Parts, that
nothing was wanting to its excellency. Virgil therefore, and those very few who
have succeeded him, endeavored not to introduce or innovate any thing in a
Design already perfected, but imitated the plan of the Inventor: and are only
so far true Heroique Poets, as they have built on the Foundations of Homer.
Thus Pindar, the Author of those Odes, (which are so admirably restored by Mr.
Cowley in our Language,) ought for ever to be the Standard of them; and we are
bound according to the practice of Horace and Mr. Cowley, to Copy him. Now, to
apply this Axiom, to our present purpose, whosoever undertakes the writing of
an Opera, (which is a modern Invention, though built indeed, on the foundations
of Ethnique Worship,) is obliged to imitate the Design of the Italians, who
have not only invented, but brought to perfection, this sort of Dramatique
Musical Entertainment. I have not been able by any search, to get any light
either of the time, when it began, or of the first Author. But I have probable
Reasons, which induce me to believe, that some Italians having curiously
observed the gallantries of the Spanish Moors at their Zambra's, or Royal
Feasts, where Music, Songs and Dancing were in perfection; together with their
Machines, which are usual at their Sortiia's, or running at the Ring, and other
Solemnities, may possibly have refined upon those Moresque Divertisements, and
produced this delightful Entertainment, by leaving out the warlike Part of the
Carousels, and forming a poetical Design for the use of the Machines, the Songs
and Dances. But however it began, (for this is only conjectural,) we know that
for some Centuries, the knowledge of Music has flourished principally in
Italy, the Mother of Learning and of Arts; that Poetry and Painting have been
there restored, and so cultivated by Italian Masters, That all Europe has been
enriched out of their Treasury: and the other Parts of it in relation to those
delightful Arts, are still as much provincial to Italy, as they were in the
time of the Roman Empire. Their first Opera's seem to have been intended for
the Celebration of the Marriages of their Princes, or for the magnificence of
some general time of Joy. Accordingly the Expenses of them were from the Purse
of the Sovereign, or of the Republic, as they are still practiced at Venice,
Rome, and other Places at their Carnivals. Savoy and Florence have often used
them in their Courts, at the Weddings of their Dukes: And at Turin
particularly, was performed the Pastor Fido, written by the famous Guarini,
which is a Pastoral Opera made to solemnize the Marriage of a Duke of Savoy.
The Prologue of it, has given the Design to all the French, which is a
Complement to the Sovereign Power by some God or Goddesses: so that it looks no
less than a kind of Embassy from Heaven to Earth. I said, in the beginning of
this Preface, that the Persons represented in Opera's, are generally, Gods,
Goddesses and Heroes descended from them, who are supposed to be their peculiar
care: which hinders not, but that meaner Persons, may sometimes gracefully be
introduced, especially if they have relation to those first times, which Poets
call the Golden Age: wherein by reason of their Innocence, those happy Mort^ls,
were supposed to have had a more familiar intercourse with Superior Beings:
and therefore Shepherds might reasonably be admitted, as of all Callings, the
most innocent, the most happy, and who by reason of the spare time they had, in
their almost idle Employment, had most leisure to make Verses, and to be in
Love: without somewhat of which Passion, no Opera can possibly subsist.

It Is almost needless to speak any thing of that noble Language, in which this
Musical Drama, was first invented and performed. All, who are conversant in the
Italian, cannot but observe, that it is the softest, the sweetest, the most
harmonious, not only of any modern Tongue, but even beyond any of the Learned.
It seems indeed to have been invented for the sake of Poetry and Music: the
Vowels are so abounding in all Words, especially in the Terminations of them,
that excepting some few Monosyllables, the whole Language ends in them. Then
the Pronunciation is so manly and so sonorous, that their very speaking has
more of Music in it, than Dutch, Poetry and Song. It has withal derived so
much Copiousness and Eloquence from the Greek and Latin in the composition of
Words, and the formation of them, that (if after all, we must call it
barbarous) it is the most beautiful and most learned of any Barbarism in Modern
Tongues. And we may, at least, as justly praise it, as Pyrrhus did the Roman
Discipline, and Martial Order, that it was of Barbarians, (for so the Greeks
called all other Nations) but had nothing in it of barbarity. This Language has
in a manner been refined and purified from the Gothic, ever since the time of
Dante, which is above four hundred Years ago; and the French, who now cast a
longing Eye to their Country, are not less ambitious to possess their Elegance
in Poetry and Music: in both which they labor at Impossibilities. It Is true
indeed, they have reformed their Tongue, and brought both their Prose and
Poetry to a Standard: the Sweetness as well as the Purity is much improved, by
throwing off the unnecessary Consonants, which made their Spelling tedious, and
their pronunciation harsh: But after all, as nothing can be improved beyond its
own Species, or farther than its original Nature will allow: as an ill Voice
though never so thoroughly instructed in the Rules of Music, can never be
brought to sing harmoniously, nor many an honest Critic, ever arrive to be a
good Poet, so neither can the natural harshness of the French or their
perpetual ill Accent, be ever refined into perfect Harmony like the Italian.
The English has yet more natural disadvantage than the French; our original
Teutonique consisting most in Monosyllables, and those encumbered with
Consonants cannot possibly be freed from those Inconveniences. The rest of our
Words, which are derived from the Latin chiefly, and the French, with some
small sprinklings of Greek, Italian and Spanish, are some relief in Poetry; and
help us to soften our uncouth Numbers, which together with our English Genius,
incomparably beyond the triffling of the French, in all the nobler Parts of
Verse, will justly give us the Preheminence^ But, on the other hand, the
Effeminacy of our pronunciation, (a defect common to us, and to the Danes) and
our scarcity of female Rhymes, have left the advantage of musical composition
for Songs, though not for recitative, to our neighbors.

Through these Difficulties, I have made a shift to struggle, in my part of the
performance of this Opera; which, as mean as it is, deserves at least a Pardon,
because it has attempted a discovery beyond any former Undertaker of our
Nation: only remember, that if there be no North-East Passage to be found, the
fault is in Nature, and not in me. Or as Ben. Johnson tells us in the
Alchymist, when Projection had failed, and the Glasses were all broken, there
was enough however in the Bottoms of them to cure the Itch; so I may thus far
be positive, That if I have not succeeded, as I desire, yet there is somewhat
still remaining, to satisfy the Curiosity or Itch of Sight and Hearing. so Wise
as not to be imposed upon, and fooled out of their satisfaction. The newness of
the undertaking is all the hazard: When Opera's were first set up in France,
they were not followed over eagerly; but they gained daily upon their Hearers,
till they grew to that height of Reputation which they now enjoy. The English I
confess, are not altogether so Musical as the French, and yet they have been
pleased already, with the Tempest, and some pieces that followed, which were
neither much better Written, nor so well Composed as this. If it finds
encouragement, I dare promise my self to mend my hand, by making a more
pleasing Fable: In the mean time, every Loyal Englishman, cannot but be
satisfied with the Moral of this, which so plainly represents the double
restoration of his Sacred Majesty.

POSTSCRIPT.
This Preface being wholly Written before the Death of my late Royal Master,
(quem semper acerbum, semper honoratum, sic Dii voluistis, habebo,) I have now,
lately, reviewed it, as supposing I should find many notions in it, that would
require correction on cooler thoughts. After four Months lying by me, I looked
on it as no longer mine, because I had wholly forgotten it; but, I confess,
with some satisfaction, and perhaps a little vanity, that I found my self
entertained by it; my own Judgment was new to me, and pleased me when I looked
on it, as anoth^r Man's. I see no Opinion that I would retract or alter, unless
it be, that possibly the Italians went not so far as Spain, for the Invention
of their Opera's. They might have it in their own Country; and that by
gathering up the Shipwrecks of the Athenian and Roman Theaters; which we know
were adorned with Scenes, Music, Dances and Machines, especially the Grecian.
But of this the Learned Monsieur Vossius, who has made our Nation his second
Country, is the best, and perhaps the only Judge now living: As for the Opera
it self, it was all composed, and was just ready to have been performed when
he, in Honor of whom it was principally made, was taken from us.

He had been pleased twice or thrice to command, that it should be practiced,
before him, especially the first and third Acts of it; and public^ly declared
more than once, That the compositio and Chorus' s, were more Just, and more
Beautiful, than any he had heard in England. How nice an Ear he had in Music
is sufficiently known; his praise therefore has established the Reputation of
it, above censure, and made it in a manner Sacred. It Is therefore humbly and
Religiously dedicated to his Memory.

It might reasonably have been expected, that his Death must have changed the
whole Fabric of the Opera; or at least a great part of it. But the design of
it Originally, was so happy, that it needed no alteration, properly so called:
for the addition of twenty or thirty lines, in the Apotheosis of Albion, has
made it entirel^ of a Piece. This was the only way which could have been
invented, to save it from a botch'd ending; and it fell luckily into my
imagination* As if there were a kind of fatality, even in the most trivial
things concerning the Succession; a change was made, and not for the worse,
without the least confusion or disturbance: And those very causes which seemed
to threaten us with troubles, conspired to produce our lasting Happiness.

Names of the Persons Represented; in the same Order as they appear first upon
the STAGE.
Mercury. Augusta. London. Thamesis. Democracy. Zelota. Feigned Zeal. Archon.
The General. Juno. Iris. Albion. Albanius. Pluto. Alecto. Apollo. Neptune.
Nereids. Acacia. Innocence. Tyranny. Asebia. Atheism or Ungodliness. Proteus.
Venus. Fame. A Chorus of Cities. A Chorus of Rivers. A Chorus of the People. A
Chorus of Furies. A Chorus of Nereids and Tritons. A Grand Chorus of Hero's,
Loves and Graces.
The FRONTISPIECE.
THe Curtain rises, and a new Frontispiece is seen, joined to the great
Pylasters, which are on each side of the Stage: On the flat of each Basis is a
Shield, adorned with Gold: In the middle of the Shield on one side, are two
Hearts, a small Scrowl of Gold over 'em, and an Imperial Crown over the Scrowl;
on the other, in the Shield are two Quivers full of Arrows Saltyre, etc. Upon
each Basis stands a Figure bigger than the life; one represents Peace, with a
Palm in one, and an Olive Branch in the other Hand; to other Plenty, holding a
Cornucopia, and resting on a Pillar. Behind these Figures are large Columns of
the Corinthian Order adorned with Fruit and Flowers: over one of the Figures on
the Trees is the King's Cipher; over the other the Queens: over the Capitals,
on the Cornice sits a Figure on each side; one presents Poetry crowned with
Laurel, holding a Scrowl in one Hand the other with a Pen in it, and resting on
a Book; the other painting with a Pall^^ and Pencils, etc. On the sweep of the
Arch lies one of the Muses, playing on a Base Voyal; another of the Muses, on
the other side, holding a Trumpet in one Hand, and the other on a Harp. Between
these Figures, in the middle of the Sweep of the Arch, is a very large Panel
in a frame of Gold; in this Panel is painted on one side a Woman representing
the City of London, leaning her Head on her Hand in a dejected Posture.
(showing her Sorrow and Penitence for her Offenses;) the other Hand holds the
Arms of the City, and a Mace lying under it: on the other side, is a Figure of
the Thames with his Legs shakle'd and leaning on an empty Vin^ behind these are
two Imperial Figures; one representing his present Majesty; the other the
Queen; by the King stands Pallas (or Wisdom, and Valor,) holding a Charter for
the City, the King extending his Hand, as raising her drooping Head, and
restoring her to her ancient Honor and Glory: over the City are the envious
devouring Harpyes flying from the face of Majesty: by the Queen stand the three
Graces holding Garlands of Flowers, and at her feet Cupids bound, with their
Bows and Arrows broken, the Queen pointing with her Scepter to the River, and
commanding the Graces to take off his Fetters: over the King in a Scrowl, is
this Verse of Virgil, Discite justitiam, moniti, and non temnere Divos.
Over the Queen, this of the same Author,
Non ignara mali, miseris succurere disco.


ERRATA.
PAge 7th, Line 3d. for Hypocracy, read Hypocricy

Page 9. line the last, for the, read thy.

Page 11. line the third, for you, read yon.

Page 16 read the sixteenth line thus*

With Pity Jove beholds thy State.

Page 17. the last line, read. And from her Mantle*

Page 22. line the third, read it thus,

Sea-raceing Dolphins are trained for our Motion.

Ibid. line the 7th, for unattended, read ^attending.

PROLOGUE To the OPERA.
By Mr. Dryden.
FUll twenty years and more, our laboring Stage
Has lost, on this incorrgible age:
Our Poets, the John Ketches of the Nation,
Have seemed to lash ye, even to excoriation:
But still no sign remains; which plainly notes,
You bore like Hero's, or you bribed like Oats.
What can we do, when mimicking a Fop,
Like beating, Nut-trees, makes a larger Crop?
Faith we'll even spare our pains: and to content you,
Will fairly leave you what your Maker meant you.
Satyr was once your Physic, Wit your Food;
One nourisht not, and the other drew no Blood.
We now prescribe, like Doctors in despair,
The Diet your weak appetites can bear.
Since hearty Beef and Mutton will not do,
Here Is Julep dance, Ptisan of Song and show:
Give you strong Sense, the Liquor is too heady;
You're come to farce, that is Asses milk, already.
Some hopeful Youths there are, of callow Wit,
Who one Day may be Men, if Heaven think fit;
Sound may serve such, ere they to Sense are grown;
Like leading strings, till they can walk alone:
But yet to keep our Friends in countenance, know,
The Wise Italians first invented show;
Thence, into France the Noble Pageant past;
It Is England's Credit to be cozn'd last.
Freedom and Zeal have choused you over and over;
'Pray' give us leave to bubble you once more;
You never were so cheaply fooled before.
We bring you change, to humor your Disease;
Change for the worse has ever used to please:
Then it is the mode of France, without whose Rules,
None must presume to set up here for Fools:
In France, the oldest Man is always young,
Sees Opera's daily, learns the Tunes so long,
Till Foot, Hand, Head, keep time with every Song.
Each sings his part, echoing from Pit and Box,
With his hoarse Voice, half Harmony, half Pox.
Le plus grand Roy du Monde, is always ringing;
They show themselves good Subjects by their singing.
On that condition, set up every Throat;
You Whiggs may sing, for you have changed your Note.
Cits and Citesses, raise a joyful strain,
It Is a good Omen to begin a Reign:
Voices may help your Charter to restoring;
And get by singing, what you lost by roaring.
EPILOGUE To the OPERA.
By Mr. Dryden.
AFter our AEsop's Fable, shown to day,
I come to give the Moral of the Play.
Feigned Zeal, you saw, set out the speedier pace;
But, the last heat, Plain Dealing won the Race:
Plain Dealing for a Jewel has been known;
But never till now the Jewel of a Crown.
When Heaven made Man, to show the work Divine,
Truth was his Image, stamped upon the Coin:
And, when a King is to a God refined,
On all he says and does, he stamps his Mind:
This proves a Soul without allay, and pure;
Kings, like their Gold, should every touch endure.
To dare in Fields is Valor; but how few
Dare be so thoroughly Valiant to be true?
The Name of Great, let other Kings affect:
He Is Great indeed, the Prince that is direct.
His Subjects know him now, and trust him more,
Than all their Kings, and all their Laws before.
What safety could their public Acts afford?
Those he can break; but cannot break his Word.
So great a Trust to him alone was due;
Well have they trusted whom so well they knew.
The Saint, who walked on Waves, securely trod,
While he believed the beckning of his God;
But, when his Faith no longer bore him out,
Began to sink, as he began to doubt.
Let us our native Character maintain,
It Is of our growth, to be sincerely plain.
TO excel in Truth, we Loyally may strive;
Set Privilege against Prerogative:
He Plights his Faith; and we believe him just;
His Honor is to Promise, ours to Trust.
Thus Britain's Basis on a Word is laid,
As by a Word the World it self was made.
FINIS.
ALBION, AND ALBANIUS; An OPERA.
Decorations of the Stage in the First Act.
THE Curtain rises, and there appears on either side of the Stage, next to the
Frontispiece, a Statue on Horseback, of Gold, on Pedestal's of Marble,
enriched with Gold, and bearing the Imperial Arms of England: one of these
Statues is taken from that of the late King, at Charing Cross; the other, from
that Figure of his present Majesty (done by that noble Artist Mr. Gibbons) at
Windsor.

The Scene, is a Street of Palaces, which lead to the Front of the Royal
Exchange; the great Arch is open, and the view is continued through the open
part of the Exchange, to the Arch on the other side, and thence to as much of
the Street beyond, as could, properly be teaken.

Mercury descends in a Chariot drawn by Ravens.

He comes to Augusta, and Thamesis. They lie on Couches, at a distance from
each other, in dejected postures; She attended by Cities, He by Rivers.

On the side of Augusta's Couch are Painted Towers falling, a Scarlet Gown, and
Gold Chain, a Cap of Maintenance thrown down, and a Sword in a Velvet Scabbard
thrust through it, the City Arms, a Mace with an old useless Charter, and all
in disorder. Before Thamesis, are broken Reeds, Bull-rushes, Sedge, etc. with
his Vrn Reverst.

ACT I.
Mercury Descends. Merc. THou glorious Fabric! stand for ever, stand:
Well Worthy Thou to entertain
The God of Traffic, and of Gain!
To draw the Concourse of the Land,
And Wealth of all the Main.
But where the shoales of Merchants meeting?
Welcome to their Friends repeating,
Busy Bargains deafer sound!
Tongues Confused of every Nation?
Nothing here but Desolation,
Mournful silence reigns around.

Aug. O Hermes! pity me!
I was, while Heaven did smile,
The Queen of all this Isle,
Europes Pride,
And Albions Bride;
But gone my Plighted Lord! ah, gone is He!
O Hermes! pity me!

Tham. And I the Noble Flood, whose tributary Tide
Does on her Silver Margent smoothly glide;
But Heaven grew jealous of our happy state:
And bid revolving Fate,
Our Doom decree:
No more the King of Floods am I,
No more the Queen of Albion, She!

These two Lines are Sung by Reprises, betwixt Augusta and Thamisis. Aug. O
Hermes! pity me!

Tham. O Hermes! pity me!

Sung by Augusta and Thamesis together. Aug. Behold!

Tham. Behold!

Aug. My Turrets on the ground
That once my Temples crowned!

Tham. The Sedgy Honors of my Brow's dispersed!
My Urn reverst!

Merc. Rise, rise, Augusta, rise!
And wipe thy weeping Eyes:
Augusta! for I call thee so!
It Is lawful for the Gods to know
Thy Future Name,
And growing Fame.
Rise rise, Augusta, rise.

Aug. O never, never will I rise!
Never will I cease my mourning,
Never wipe my Weeping Eyes,
Till my plighted Lord's returning!
Never never will I rise!

Merc. What brought Thee, Wretch, to this despair?
The Cause of thy Misfortune show.

Aug. It seems the Gods take little Care
Of Humane things below,
When even our Sufferings here they do not know!

Merc. Not unknowing came I down,
Disloyal Town!
Speak! did not Thou
Forsake thy Faith, and break thy Nuptial Vow?

Aug. Ah it is too true! too true!
But what could I, unthinking City, do?
Faction swayed me,
Zeal allured me,
Both assured me,
Both betrayed me!

Merc. Suppose me sent
Thy Albion to restore,
Can thou repent?

Aug. My falsehood I deplore!

Tham. Thou see her mourn; and I
With all my Waters, will her Tears supply.

Merc. Then by some loyal Deed regain
Thy long lost Reputation,
To wash away the stain
That blots a Noble Nation!
And free thy famous Town again
From force of Usurpation!

Chor. of all. We'll wash away the stain
That blots a noble Nation,
And free this famous Town again
From force of Usurpation.

[Dance of the followers of Mercury. Aug. Behold Democracy and Zeal appear,
She that allured my Heart away,
And He that after made a prey.

Merc. Resist, and do not fear!

Chor. of all. Resist, and do not fear!

[Enter Democracy and Zeal attended by Archon. Democ. Nymph of the City! bring
thy Treasures,
Bring me more
To waste in Pleasures.

Aug. Thou have exhausted all my Store,
And I can give no more.

Zeal. Thou Horny Flood for Zeal provide
A new Supply; And swell thy Moony tide,
That on thy buxom Back the floating Gold may glide.

Tham. Not all the Gold the Southern Sun produces,
Or Treasures of the famed Levant,
Suffice for Pious uses,
To feed the sacred hunger of a Saint!

Democ. Woe to the Vanquished, woe!
Slave as thou art,
Thy Wealth impart,
And me thy Victor know!

Zeal. And me thy Victor know,
Resistless Arms are in my hand,
Thy Bars shall burst at my Command,
Thy Towry Head lie low.
Woe to the Vanquished, woe!

Aug. Were I not bound by fate
For ever, ever here,
My Walls I would translate
To some more happy Sphere,
Removed from servile fear.

Tham. Removed from servile fear,
Would I could disappear
And sink below the Mayn;
For Commonwealth's a Load
My old Imperial Flood
Shall never never never bear again.

Thamesis and Augusta together. A Commonwealth's a Load
Our old Imperial Flood
Shall never never bear again.

Them. Pull down her Gates Expose her bare;
I must enjoy the proud, disdainful fair.
Haste, Archon, Haste
To lay her waste!

Zel. I Will hold her fast
To be embraced!

Them. And she shall see
A Thousand Tyrants are in thee,
A Thousand thousand more in me!

Archon to Aug. From the Caledonion Shore
Hither am I come to save thee,
Not to force or to enslave thee,
But thy Albion to restore:
Hark! the peales the People ring,
Peace, and freedom and a King.

Chor. Hark! the Peales the People ring.
Peace and freedom and a King.

Aug. Tham. To Arms! to Arms!

Archon. I lead the way!

Merc. Cease your Alarmes!
And stay, brave Archon, stay!
It Is Doomed by Fates Decree!
It Is Doomed that Albion's dwelling,
All other Isles excelling,
By Peace shall Happy be!

Archon. What then remains for me?

Merc. Take my Caduceus! take this aweful Wand,
With this the Infernal Ghosts I can command,
And strike a Terror through the Stygian Land.
Commonwealth will want pretenses
Sleep will Creep on all his Senses;
Zeal that lent him her assistance,
Stand amazed without resistance.

Archon touches Democracy with a Wand. Them. I feel a lazy slumber lays me down!
Let Albion! let him take the Crown!
Happy let him reign,
Till I wake again!

[falls-asleep. Zel. In vain I rage, In vain,
I rouse my Powers;
But I shall wake again;
I shall to better Hours.
Even in slumber I will vex him;
Still perplex him,
Still incumber:
Know you that have adored him,
And Sovereign power afford him,
We Will reap the gains
Of all your pains
And seem to have restored him!

[ Zel. falls asleep. Aug. and Tham. A stupyfying sadness
Leaves Her without motion;
But sleep will cure her madness,
And cool her to Devotion.

A double Pedestal rises: On the Front of it is painted, in Stone color, two
Women; one holding a double Faced Vizor; the other a Book, representing
Hypocracy and Phanaticism; when Archon has charmed Democracy and Zeal with the
Caduceus of Mercury, they fall a sleep on the Pedestal, and it sinks with them.
Merc. CEase, Augusta! Cease thy mourning,
Happy days appear,
Godlike Albion is returning
Loyal Hearts to Cheer!
Every Grace his youth Adorning,
Glorious as the Star of Morning,
Or the Planet of the Year.

Chor. Godlike Albion is returning, etc.

Merc. to Arch. Have away, Loyal chief, have away.
No delay, but obey:
To receive thy loved Lord! have away.

Ex. Arch. Tham. Medway and Isis, you that augment me,
Tides that increase my watery store,
And you that are Friends to Peace and Plenty,
Send my merry Boys all ashore;
Sea Men Skipping,
Mariners Leaping,
Shouting, Tripping,
Send my merry Boys all ashore!

A Dance of Watermen in the King's and Duke's Liveries. The Clouds divide, and
Juno appears in a Machine drawn by Peacocks; while a Symphony is playing, it
moves gently forward, and as it descends, it opens and discovers the Tail of
the Peacock, which is so Large, that it almost fills the opening of the Stage
between Scene and Scene. Merc. THe Clouds divide, what Wonders,
What Wonders do I see!
The Wife of Jove, It Is she,
That Thunders, More than thundering He!

Juno. No, Hermes, No;
It Is Peace above
As it is below:
For Jove has left his wandering Love.

Tham. Great Queen of gathering Clouds;
Whose Moisture fills our Floods,
See; we fall before Thee,
Prostrate we adore Thee!

Aug. Great Queen of Nuptial Rites,
Whose power the Souls Unites,
And fills the Genial Bed with chaste Delights,
See; we fall before Thee
Prostrate we adore Thee!

Juno. It Is ratified above by every God,
And Jove has firm'd it with an Awful Nod;
That Albion shall his love renew:
But oh, ungrateful Fair,
Repeated Crimes beware,
And to his Bed be true!

Iris appears on a very large Machine. This was really seen the 18th of March
1684. by Capt. Christopher Gunman, on Board his R. H. Yacht, then in Calais
Pierre: He drew it as it then appeared, and gave a draught of it to us. We have
only added the Cloud where the Person of Iris sits. Juno. SPeak Iris, from
Batavia, speak the News!
Has she performed my dread Command,
Returning Albion to his longing Land,
Or dares the Nymph refuse?

Iris. Albion, by the Nymph attended,
Was to Neptune recommended,
Peace and plenty spread the Sails:
Venus in her shell before him,
From the Sands in safety bore him,
And supplied Etesian gales.
[Retornella Archon on the Shore Commanding,
Lowly met him at his Landing,
Crowd's of People swarmed around;
Welcome rang like Peals of Thunder;
Welcome, rent the Skies assunder;
Welcome, Heaven and Earth resound.

Juno. Why stay we then on Earth
When Mortals laugh and love?
It Is time to mount above
And send Astraea down,
The Ruler of his Birth,
And Guardian of his Crown.
It Is time to mount above,
And send Astraea down.

Mer. Iu. Ir. It Is time to mount above,
And send Astraea down.

[Mer. Ju. and Iris ascend. Aug. and Tham. The Royal Squadron Marches,
Erect Tryumphal Arches,
For Albion and Albanius:
Rejoice at their returning,
The passages adorning:
The Royal Squadron marches,
Erect Triumphal Arches
For Albion and Albanius.

Part of the Scene disappears, and the 4 Triumphal Arches erected at his
Majesty's Coronation are seen. Albion appears, Albanius by his side, preceded
by Archon, followed by a Train, etc. Full Chor. HAil, Royal Albion, Hail.

Aug. Hail Royal Albion, Hail to thee,
Thy longing Peoples expectation:

Tham. Sent from the Gods to set us free.
From Bondage and from Usurpation!

Aug. To pardon and to pity me,
And to forgive a guilty Nation!

Tham. Behold the differing Climes agree.
Rejoicing in the Restoration.

Entry; Representing the Four parts of the World, rejoicing at the Restoration
of Albion. ACT II.
The Scene is a Poetical Hell. The Change is Total. The Upper part of the
House, as well as the Side Scenes. There is the Figure of Prometheus chained to
a Rock, the Vulture gnawing his Liver. Sisiphus rolling the Stone, the Belides,
etc. beyond, abundance of Figures in various Torments. Then a great Arch of
Fire. Behind this Three Pyramids of Flames in perpetual agitation. Beyond this,
glowing Fire which terminates the Prospect. Pluto, the Furies, with Alecto,
Democracy and Zelota. Plut. INfernal Offspring of the Night,
Debarred of Heaven your Native right,
And from the glorious Fields of Light,
Condemned in shades to dragg the Chain,
And fill with groans the gloomy Plain;
Since Pleasures here are none below,
Be ill our good, our joy be Woe;
Our Work to embroil the Worlds above,
Disturb their Union, disunite their Love,
And blast the Beauteous frame of our Victorious Foe.

Democ. and Zelot. together. Oh thou for whom those Worlds are made,
Thou Sire of all things and their end,
From hence they spring, and when they fade
In Shuffled Heaps they hither tend;
Here Humane Souls receive their Breath,
And wait for Bodies after Death.

Democ. Hear our Complaint and grant our Prayer.

Pluto. Speak what you are,
And whence you fell?

Democ. I am thy first begotten care,
Conceived in Heaven; but born in Hell,
When Thou did bravely undertake in fight
You Arbitrary Power,
That rules by Sovereign might,
To set thy Heaven-born fellows free
And leave no difference in Degree,
In that Auspicious Hour
Was I begot by Thee.

Zelota. One Mother bore us at a Birth,
Her Name was Zeal before she fell;
No fairer Nymph in Heaven or Earth
Till Saintship taught her to rebel:
But loosing Fame
And changing Name
She Is now the Good Old Cause in Hell.

Plut. Dear Pledges of a Flame not yet forgot,
Say, what on Earth has been your lot?

Them. and Zel. The Wealth of Albion's Isle was ours,
Augusta stoopt with all her stately Towr's!

Them. Democracy kept Nobles under.

Zel. Zeal from the Pulpit roared like Thunder.

Them. I trampled on the State.

Zel. I lorded over the Gown.

Them. and Zel. We both in Triumph sat
Usurpers of the Crown.
But oh Prodigious turn of Fate!
Heaven controuling,
Sent us rolling, rolling, down.

Plut. I wondered how of late our Acherontique shore
Grew thin, and Hell unpeople'd of her Store;
Charon for want of Use forgot his Oar.
The Souls of Bodies Dead flew all Sublime,
And hither none returned to purge a Crime:
But now I see since Albion is restored,
Death has no Business, nor the vengeful Sword.
It Is too too much that here I ly
From glorious Empire hurled;
By Jove excluded from the Sky,
By Albion from the World.

Them. Were Commonwealth restored again,
Thou should have Millions of the slain
To fill thy dark abode.

Zel. For He a Race of Rebels sends,
And Zeal the Path of Heaven pretends;
But still mistakes the rode.

Pluto. My laboring thought
At length has wrought
A bravely bold design,
In which you both shall join;
In borrowed shapes to Earth return;
Thou Commonwealth, a Patriot seem,
Thou Zeal, like true Religion burn,
To gain the giddy Crowds Esteem.
Alecto, thou to fair Augusta go,
And all thy Snakes into her Bosom throw.

Them. Spare some to fling
Where they may sting
The Breast of Albion's King.

Zel. Let Jealousies so well be mixed,
That great Albanius be unfixt!

Pluto. Forbear your vain Attempts, forbear;
Hell can have no admittance there:
The Peoples fear will serve as well,
Make him suspected, them Rebel.

Zel. Y' have all forgot
To forge a Plot
In seeming Care of Albion's Life;
Inspire the Crowd
With Clamours loud
TO involve his Brother and his Wife.

Alecto. Take of a Thousand Souls at thy Command,
The basest, blackest of the Stygian band:
One that will Swear to all they can invent,
So thoroughly Damned that he can never repent:
One often sent to Earth,
And still at every Birth
He took a deeper stain:
One that in Adam's time was Cain:
One that was burnt in Sodom's flame,
For Crimes even here too black to name:
One, who through every form of ill has run:
One who in Naboth's days was Belial's Son:
One who has gained a Body fit for Sin;
Where all his Crimes
Of former Times
Lie Crowded in a Skin.

Pluto. Take him;
Make him
What you please;
For He
Can be
A Rogue with ease.
One for mighty Mischief Born:
He can Swear and be Forsworn.
Pluto and Alecto take him, etc. Take him, make him what you please;
For He can be a Rogue with ease.

Pluto. Let us laugh, let us laugh, let us laugh at our Woes,
The Wretch that is damned has nothing to lose.
Ye Furies advance
With the Ghosts in a Dance,
It Is a Jubilee here when the World is in trouble:
When People rebel
We frolic in Hell;
But when the King falls, the pleasure is double:

A single Entry of a Devil followed by an Entry of 12 Devils. Chorus. Let us
laugh, let us laugh, let us laugh at our VVoes;
The Wretch that is damned has nothing to lose.

The Scene changes to a Prospect taken from the middle of the Thames; one side
of it begins at York-Stairs, thence to White Hall, and the Mill-Bank, etc. The
other from the Saw-Mill, thence to the Bishop's Palace, and on as far as can be
seen in a clear Day. Enter Augusta; She has a Snake in her Bosom, hanging down.
Aug. O Jealousy, Thou raging ill,
Why have thou found a Room in Lovers Hearts,
Afflicting what thou can not kill,
And Poisoning Love himself, with his own Darts?
I find my Albion's Heart is gone,
My first offenses yet remain,
Nor can repentance Love regain;
One writ in Sand, alas, in Marble one.
I rave, I rave, my Spirits boil
Like flames increased and mounting high with pou'ring Oil:
Disdain and Love succeed by turns;
One freezes me, and the other burns; It burns.
Away soft Love, Thou Foe to rest,
Give Hate the full possession of my Breast.
Hate is the nobler passion far
When Love is ill repaid;
For at one blow it ends the War,
And Cures the Lovesick Maid.

Enter Democracy and Zelota; one represents a Patriot, the other Religion. Them.
LEt not thy generous passion wast its rage,
But once again restore our golden Age;
Still to weep and to complain,
Does but more provoke disdain,
Let public good,
Inflame thy Blood;
With Crowds of Warlike People thou art stored,
And heaps of Gold;
Reject thy old,
And to thy Bed receive another Lord.

Zel. Religion shall thy Bonds release,
For Heaven can loose, as well as tie all;
And when it is for the Nations peace
A King is but a King on Trial;
When Love is lost, let Marriage end,
And leave a Husband for a Friend.

Them. With Jealousy swarming
The People are Arming
And frights of oppression invade 'em.

Zelot. If they fall to relenting,
For fear of repenting,
Religion shall help to persuade 'em.

Aug. No more, no more Temptations use
To bend my Will;
How hard a task it is to refuse
A pleasing ill?

Them. Maintain the seeming duty of a Wife,
A modest show will jealous Eyes deceive,
Affect a fear for hated Albion's Life,
And for imaginary Dangers grieve.

Zelot. His Foes already stand protected,
His Friends by public Fame suspected,
Albanius must forsake his Isle:
A Plot Contrived in happy hour
Bereaves him of his Royal Power,
For Heaven to mourn and Hell to smile.
The former Scene continues. Enter Albion and Albanius with a Train. THen Zeal
and Commonwealth infest
My Land again;
The fumes of madness that possessed
The Peoples giddy Brain,
Once more disturb the Nations rest,
And dye Rebellion in a deeper Stain.
2.
Will they at length awake the sleeping Sword,
And force revenge from their offended Lord?
How long, ye Gods, how long
Can Royal patience bear
The Insults and wrong
Of Mad-mens jealousies, and causeless fear?
3.
I thought their love by mildness might be gained,
By Peace I was restored, in Peace I Reigned:
But Tumults, Seditions,
And haughty Petitions,
Are all the effects of a merciful Nature;
Forgiving and granting,
E're Mortals are wanting,
But leads to Rebelling against their Creator.

Mercury descends. Merc. With pity Jove beholds thy State,
But Jove is circumscribed by Fate;
The over whelming Tide rowls on so fast,
It gains upon this Islands wast:
And is opposed too late! too late!

Albion. What then must helpless Albion do?

Merc. Delude the fury of the Foe,
And to preserve Albanius, let him go;
For it is decreed,
Thy Land must bleed,
For Crimes not thine, by wrathful Jove;
A Sacred Flood
of Royal Blood,
Cries Vengeance, Vengeance loud above.

Mercury ascends. Albion. Shall I, to assuage
Their Brutal rage,
The Regal stem destroy;
Or must I lose,
(To please my Foes,)
My sole remaining joy?
Ye God's what worse,
What greater Curse,
Can all your Wrath employ?

Alban. Oh Albion! hear the Gods and me!
Well, am I lost in saving Thee.
Not exile or danger can fright a brave Spirit
With Innocence guarded,
With Virtue rewarded;
I make of my sufferings a Merit.

Albion. Since then the Gods, and Thou will have it so;
Go: (can I live once more to bid Thee?) go,
Where thy Misfortunes call Thee and thy Fate:
Go, guiltless Victim of a guilty State,
In War my Champion to defend,
In peaceful Hours, when Souls unbend,
My Brother, and what is more my Friend!
Born where the Foamy Billows roar,
On Seas less Dangerous than the Shore:
Go, where the Gods thy Refuge have assigned:
Go from my sight; but never from my Mind.

Alban. Whatever Hospitable ground
shall be for me, unhappy Exile, found,
Till Heaven vouchsafe to smile;
What Land so e're,
Though none so dear,
As this ungrateful Isle;
O think! O think! no distance can remove
My vowed Allegiance, and my Loyal Love.

Albion. and Alban. The Rosy fingered Morn appears,
And from and her Mantle shakes her Tears,
In promise of a glorious Day:
The Sun, returning, Mortals chears,
And drives the Rising Mists away,
In promise of a glorious Day.
[Ritornelle.
The farther part of the Heaven opens and discovers a Machine; as it moves
forwards the Clouds which are before it divide, and show the Person of Apollo,
holding the Reins in his hand. As they fall lower, the Horses appear with the
Rays and a great glory about Apollo. Apoll. ALL Hail ye Royal pair!
The God's peculiar care:
Fear not the malice of your Foes;
Their Dark designing
And Combining,
Time and truth shall once expose:
Fear not the malice of your Foes.
2.
My sacred Oracles assure,
The Tempest shall not long endure;
But when the Nations Crimes are purged away,
Then shall you both in glory shine;
Propitious both, and both Divine:
In Luster equal to the God of Day.
Apollo goes forward out of sight.
Neptune rises out of the Water, and a Train of Rivers, Tritons, and Sea Nymphs
attend him. Thames, OLd Father Ocean calls my Tide:
Come away* come away,
The Barks upon the Billows ride,
The Master will not stay;
The merry Boson from his side,
His Whistle takes to check and chide
The lingering Lads delay,
And all the Crew alowd has Cried,
Come away, come away.
See the God of Seas attends Thee,
Nymphs Divine, a Beauteous Train:
All the calmer gales befriend Thee
In thy passage over the Main:
Every Maid her Locks is binding,
Every Triton's Horn is winding,
Welcome to the watery Plain.

Chacon. Two Nymphs and Triton Sing. YE Nymphs, the Charge is Royal,
Which you must convey;
Your Hearts and Hands employ all,
Hasten to obey;
When Earth is grown disloyal,
Show there is Honor in the Sea.

The Chacon continues. The Chorus of Nymphs and Tritons repeat the same Verses.
The Chacon continues. Two Nymphs and Tritons. Sports and Pleasures shall attend
you
Through all the Watery Plains,
Where Neptune Reigns:
Venus ready to defend you,
And her Nymphs to ease your Pains,
No storm shall offend you,
Passing the Main;
Nor Billow threat in vain,
So Sacred a Train,
Till the Gods that defend you,
Restore you again.

The Chacon continues. The Chorus repeat the same Verses, Sports and Pleasure.
etc. The Chacon continues. The two Nymphs and Triton Sing. See at your blessed
returning
Rage disappears;
The VVidow'd Isle in Mourning
Dries up her Tears,
With Flowers the Meads adorning,
Pleasure appears,
And love dispels the Nations causeless fears.

The Chacon continues. The Chorus of Nymphs and Triton repeat the same Verses,
See at your blessed returning, etc. The Chacon continues. Then the Chorus repeat,
See the God of Seas, etc. And this Chorus concludes the Act. ACT. III.
The Scene is a view of Dover, taken from the Sea: a row of Cliffs fill up each
side of the Stage, and the Sea the middle of it, which runs into the Peer:
beyond the Peer, is the Town of Dover: on each side of the Town, is seen a very
high Hill; on one of which is the Castle of Dover; on the other, the great
Stone which they call the Devils drop. Behind the Town several Hills are seen
at a great distance which finish the view. Enter Albion bareheaded: Acacia or
Innocence with him. Albion. BEhold ye Powers! from Whom I own
A Birth immortal, and a Throne:
See a Sacred King uncrown'd,
See your Offspring, Albion, bound:
The gifts you gave with lavish hand,
Are all bestowed in vain:
Extended Empire on the Land,
Unbounded over the Main.

Acacia. Empire over the Land and Main,
Heaven that gave can take again;
But a mind that is truly brave,
Stands despising,
Storms arising,
And can never be made a Slave.

Albion. Unhelpt I am, who pitied the distressed,
And none oppressing, am by all oppressed;
Betrayed, forsaken, and of hope bereft:

Acacia. Yet still the Gods and Innocence are left.

Albion. Ah! what can thou avail,
Against Rebellion armed with zeal,
And faced with public good?
O Monarch's see
Your Fate in me!
To rule by Love,
To shed no Blood,
May be extolled above;
But here below,
Let Princes know
It Is fatal to be good.

Chorus of both. To rule by Love etc.

Albion. But see! what prodigies are these?

Acacia. Your Father Neptune from the Seas,
Has Nereids and blew Triton's sent,
To charm your discontent.

Nereids rise out of the Sea and Sing, Tritons dance. FRom the low Palace of
old Father Ocean,
come we in pity your cares to deplore:
Sea-spouting Dolphins are tamed for our motion,
Moony Tides swelling to roll us ashore,
2.
Every Nymph of the flood, her Tresses rending,
Throws of her Armlet of Pearl in the Main;
Neptune in anguish his Charge unattended,
Vessels are foundring, and Vows are in vain.

Enter Tyranny, Democracy, represented by Men, attended by Asebia, Zelota,
Women. Tyran. HA, ha, it is what so long I wished and vowed,
Our Plots and delusions,
Have wrought such confusions,
That the Monarch's a Slave to the Crowd.

Democ. A Design we somented,

Tyr. By Hell it was new!

Them. A false Plot invented,

Tyr. To cover a true.

Democ. First with promised faith we flattered,

Tyr. Then jealousies and fears we scattered.

Asebia. We never valued right and wrong,
But as they served our cause;

Zelot. Our Business was to please the throng,
And Court their wild applause:

Asebia. For this we bribed the Lawyers Tongue,
And then destroyed the Law's.

Chor. For this, etc.

Tyran. To make him safe, we made his Friends our Prey;

Them. To make him great we scorned his Royal sway,

Tyran. And to confirm his Crown, we took his Heir away.

Them. TO increase his store,
We kept him poor:

Tyran. And when to wants we had betrayed him,
To keep him low,
Pronounced a Foe,
Who e're presumed to aid him.

Asebia. But you forget the noblest part,
And Masterpiece of all your Art,
You told him he was sick at Heart.

Zelot. And when you could not work belief
In Albion of the imagined grief;
Your perjured vouchers in a Breath,
Made Oath that he was sick to Death;
And then five hundred Quacks of skill
Resolved it was fit he should be ill.

Asebia. Now heigh for a Commonwealth,
We merrily Drink and Sing,
It Is to the Nations Health,
For every Man's a King.

Zelot. Then let the Masque begin,
The Saints advance,
To fill the Dance,
And the Property Boys come in.

The Boys in White begin a Fantastic Dance. Chor. Let the Saints ascend the
Throne.

Them. Saints have Wives, and Wives have Preachers,
Guifted men, and able Teachers;
These to get, and those to own;

Chor. Let the Saints ascend the Throne.

Asebia. Freedom is a bait alluring;
Them betraying, us securing,
While to Sovereign power we foar.

Zelota. Old delusions new repeated,
Shows 'em born but to be cheated,
As their Fathers were before.

Six Sectaries begin a formal affected Dance, the two gravest whisper the other
Four, and draw 'em into the Plot: They pull out and deliver Libels to 'em,
which they receive. Democr. SEE Friendless Albion there alone,
Without Defense
But Innocence;
Albanius now is gone.

Tyran. Say then, What must be done?

Them. The Gods have put him in our hand.

Zelota. He must be slain!

Tyran. But who shall then Command?

Them. The People: for the right returns to those,
Who did the trust impose.

Tyran. It Is fit another Sun should rise,
To cheer the World, and light the Skies.

Them. But when the Sun,
His race has run,
And neither cheers the World, nor lights the Skies;
It Is fit a Commonwealth of Stars should rise.

Asebia. Each noble vice,
Shall bear a Price,
And Virtue shall a drug become:
An empty Name
Was all her Fame,
But now she shall be Dumb.

Zelota. If open Vice be what you drive at,
A Name so broad we'll never connive at.
Saints love Vice, but more refin'dly,
Keep her close, and use her kindly.

Tyran. Fall on.

Them. Fall on: Ere Albion's death we'll try,
If one or many shall his room supply.

The white Boys dance about the Saints: The Saints draw out the Association,
and offer it to 'em: They refuse it and quarrel about it: Then the white Boys
and Saints fall into a confused Dance, imitating fighting: The white Boys at
the end of the Dance, being driven out by the Sectaries with Protestant Flails.
Albion. SEE the Gods my cause desending;
When all humane help was past!

Acacia. Factions mutually contending,
By each other fall at last.

Albion. But is not yonder Proteus Cave,
Below that steep,
Which rising Billows brave?

Acacia. It is: And in it lies the God asleep:
And snorting by,
We may descry,
The Monsters of the deep.

Albion. He knows the past,
And can resolve the future too.

Acacia. It Is true!
But hold him fast,
For he can change his hew.

The Cave of Proteus rises out of the Sea, it consists of several Arches of
Rock work, adorned with mother of Pearl, Coral, and abundance of Shells of
various kinds: Through the Arches is seen the Sea, and parts of Dover Peer: In
the middle of the Cave is Proteus a sleep on a Rock adorned with Shells, etc.
Like the Cave. Albion and Acacia, seize on him, and while a Symphony is
playing, he sinks as they are bringing him forward, and changes himself into a
Lion, a Crocodile, a Dragon, and then to his own shape again: He comes toward
the front of the Stage, and Sings. Symphony. Proteus. ALbion, loved of Gods and
Men,
Prince of Peace too mildly Reigning,
Cease thy sorrow and complaining;
Thou shall be restored again:
Albion, loved of Gods and Men.
2.
Still thou art the care of Heaven,
In thy Youth to Exile driven:
Heaven thy ruin then prevented,
Till the guilty Land repented:
In thy Age, when none could aid Thee,
Foes conspired, and Friends betrayed Thee;
To the brink of danger driven,
Still thou art the Care of Heaven.

Albion. To whom shall I my preservation owe?

Proteus. Ask me no more! for it is by Neptune's Foe.

Proteus descends. Democracy and Zelota return with their Faction. Democ. Our
seeming Friends, who joined alone,
To pull down one, and build another Throne,
Are all dispersed and gone:
We brave republic Souls remain.

Zelot. And it is by us that Albion must be Slain:
Say, whom shall we employ
The Tyrant to destroy?

Democ. That Archer is by Fate designed,
With one Eye clear, and the other blind.

Zelota. He seems inspired to do it.

Omnes. Shoot Holy Cyclop, shoot.

The one Eyed Archer advances, the rest follow: A fire arises betwixt them and
Albion. [Ritornel. Democ. Lo! Heaven and Earth combine,
To blast our bold design.
What Miracles are shown?
Nature's alarmed,
And Fires are armed,
To guard the Sacred Throne.

Zelota. What help, when jarring Elements conspire
To punish our audacious Crimes.
Retreat betimes,
To shun the avenging Fire.

Chor. To shun the avenging Fire.

[Ritor. As they are going back a Fire arises from behind: They all sink
together. Albion. Let our tuneful accents upwards move,
Till they reach the vaulted Arch of those above;
Let us adore 'em;
Let us fall before 'em:

Acacia. Kings they made, and Kings they love*
When they protect a rightful Monarch's Reign,
The Gods in Heaven, the Gods on Earth maintain.

Both. When they protect, etc.

Albion. But see what glories guild the main.

Acacia. Bright Venus brings Albanius back again,
With all the loves and graces in her train.

A Machine rises out of the Sea: It opens and discovers Venus, and Albanius
sitting in a great Scallop-shell, richly adorned: Venus is attended by the
Loves and Graces, Albanius by Hero's: The Shell is drawn by Dolphins: It moves
forward, while a Simphony of Fluts-Doux, etc. is playing till it Lands 'em on
the Stage, and then it closes and sinks. Venus Sings. ALbion, Hail; The Gods
present Thee,
All the richest of their Treasures,
Peace and Pleasures.
To content Thee,
Dancing their eternal measures.

Graces and Loves, Dance an Entry. Venus. But above all humane blessing;
Take a Warlike Loyal Brother,
Never Prince had such another:
Conduct, Courage, truth expressing,
All Heroic worth possessing.

Chor. of all. But above all, etc.

Here the Hero's Dance is performed. [Ritor. Whilst a Simphony is playing; a
very large, and a very glorious Machine descends: The figure of it Oval, all
the Clouds shining with Gold, abundance of Angels and Cherubins flying about
'em, and playing in 'em; in the midst of it sits Apollo on a Throne of Gold: he
comes from the Machine to Albion. Phoeb. From Jove's Imperial Court,
Where all the Gods resort;
In awful Council met,
Surprising news I bear:
Albion the Great,
Must change his Seat,
For He Is adopted there.

Ven. What Stars above shall we displace?
Where shall he fill a Room Divine?

Nept. Descended from the Sea Gods Race,
Let him by my Orion shine.

Phoeb. No, Not by that tempestuous sign:
Betwixt the Balance and the Maid,
The Just,
August,
And peaceful shade,
Shall shine in Heaven with Beams displayed,
While great Albanius is on Earth obeyed:

Ven. Albanius Lord of Land and Main,
Shall with fraternal virtues Reign;
And add his own,
To fill the Throne;
Adored and feared, and loved no less:
In War Victorious, mild in Peace,
The joy of men, and Jove's increase.

Acacia. O Thou! Who mount'st the Ethereal Throne,
Be kind and happy to thy own;
Now Albion is come,
The People of the Sky,
Run gazing and Cry,
Make Room, make Room,
Make room for our new Deity.

Here Albion mounts the Machine, which moves upward slowly. A full Chorus of
all that Acacia sung. Ven. Behold what Triumphs are prepared to grace
Thy glorious Race,
Where Love and Honor claim an equal place;
Already are they fixed by Fate,
And only ripening Ages wait.

The Scene changes to a walk of very high Trees: At the end of the Walk is a
view of that part of Windsor, which faces Eaton: In the midst of it is a row of
small Trees, which lead to the Castle-hill: In the first Scene, part of the
Town and part of the Hill: In the next the Terrace Walk, the King's Lodgings,
and the upper part of St. George's Chapel, then the Keep; and lastly, that
part of the Castle, beyond the Keep.

In the Air is a Vision of the Honors of the Garter; the Knights in Procession,
and the King under a Canopy: Beyond this, the upper end of St. George's Hall.

Fame rises out of the middle of the Stage, standing on a Globe; on which is
the Arms of England: The Globe rests on a Pedestal: On the Front of the
Pedestal is drawn a Man with a long, lean, pale Face, with Fiends Wings, and
Snakes twisted round his Body: He is incompast by several Phanatical Rebellious
Heads, who suck poison from him, which runs out of a Tap in his Side.

Fame. REnown, assume thy Trumpet!
From Pole to Pole resounding:
Great Albion's Name;
Great Albion's Name shall be
The Theme of Fame, shall be great Albion's Name,
Great Albion's Name, Great Albion's Name.
Record the Garters glory:
A Badge for Hero's, and for Kings to bear:
For Kings to bear!
And swell the Immortal Story,
With Songs of Gods, and fit for Gods to hear;
And swell the Immortal Story,
With Songs of Gods, and fit for Gods to hear;
For Gods to hear.

A full Chorus of all the Voices and Instruments: Trumpets and Ho-Boys make
Returnello's of all Fame sings; and Twenty four Dancers join all the time in a
Chorus, and Dance to the end of the Opera. FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe History of the League, Written in French by Monsieur Maimbourg. Englished
upon His Majesty's Command, by Mr. Dryden.

Miscellany Poems in Two Parts; containing new Translations of Virgil's
Eccloges. Ovid's Love-Elegies, several parts of Virgil's Eneids, Lucretius,
Theocritus, Horace, etc. With several Original Poems never before Printed. By
the most Eminent Hands: Published by Mr. Dryden.

Threnodia Augustalis: A Funeral Pindarick Poem, Sacred to the Happy Memory of
King Charles the 2d. By Mr. Dryden.

Sold by Jacob Tonson, at the Iudge's Head in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street.


