Upon the most Hopeful and ever-flourishing sprouts of Valor, the
indefatigable Centrys of the Physick-Garden.
ALLthough no brandish't Cherubins are here,
Yet Sons of Adam venture not too near,
Nor pluck forbidden fruit: if with intent
To visit Paradise be Innocent.
Here Is your [Nil ultra] else; in each of these
Is both a Pillar and an Hercules.
If you not dread their looks, yet may you fear
The many strange Fatalities they bear.
The Emblem of Mortality the Yew
Does likewise now the Armed Agent show;
And if unwary Mortals slight their Guard,
They doubly make the Garden a Churchyard.
In this Conjunction mischiefe's never scant,
The Saturnine's become a Martial Plant:
Far off, in Heaven it self are these bad Stars;
What here at hand, when Saturn clubs with Mars.
The Hesperian Dragon, were it not a Fable,
Then these our Porters is less admirable.
Their blood is Poison; Pestilent their Breath;
And very shade the shadow is of Death.
But since in England they can do no harm
Internal, they for outward mischief Arm;
Desperate Poison in most Foreign ground,
Instead of Sickness, here they mean to Wound.
(As lately Rebels served that Blessed Head,
When Poison might not do, they struck Him dead)
Who dares be safe? no Turk is Armed so,
When every member of them is a Bow.
Even Arms are Armed; Bows chargd with Mace or Bill;
So that at once with Sroke and Shot they Kill.
And lop each limb you cannot strike them dead;
Each limb will multiply like Hydra's head.
Some Vegitables do themselves Protect
With Prickles, Stings, or Stinks of same effect.
Our Garden Genii, more general,
Do not defend themselves alone, but all.
Old Heroes hung their Weapons, so as these,
For signal Victories on signal Trees:
But, sure of Conquest, these presumptuous Sophys
Do antidate: are Victors both and Trophys.
If Quibling Cambridge, when they next Commense,
"Shall say, here is Terrae filii without sense,
"And very Block-heads: know that they were meant
For Military not a learned intent.
Valor and Wit at equal Honor fly,
Yet Valor often, seldom Wit dwells high.
As Wisemen most are Cowards; so it is fit
That Combatants have neither Fear nor Wit.
Their Education though they may not brand,
Bred in the Gardens Garden of the Land.
Manners make Men, of Men, means Wickham's Box,
Our Yews declare they may be made of Stocks,
By culture too: And Trunks assume of late
The grand Proprieties of Humane state:
Coucht in an Oak the Soverainty ye knew;
See here appropriate valor in the Yew.
Say, they are Speechless too: the Men of Swords
And truly valiant are not men of Words.
They Murmur though, and shake their Crests disturbed
By saucy Winds: nor would their rage be curbed,
Were It not in vain their Honor to repair,
When it is to fight the Winds, and beat the Air.
Jove whispers Peace; or else we well might wonder
He, so secure, lets rust his dastard Thunder.
These Earth-borne Giants take a different course,
By plots more perilous then was their Force.
Each Man's an Ambuscado; and may well
Be said at once Perdue and Centinell.
How they advance toward Heaven Night and Day
And strength increases still upon the way.
Yet march unseen: But Joves all-kenning eye
Did soon these wily stratagems espy.
Else might the All-conqueror have been surprised,
As was our own, by men in Boughs disguised.
So that Apollo's sent a league to treat,
And to Caresse them with his gentle heat;
With numerous Presents of his golden Rays;
And farther promise of serener days.
Else would their force crack Heavens chariot wh^^^^
But prorstrate Earth too hangs about their heels;
And as an Ancient loyal Sabine Wife,
Ventures to intercede, and part the strife.
So men, whose humbler scope is heavens Crown,
With darling Earth are clogged and fettered down.
Could we believe but what old people do;
They were not only Men, but Christian too,
Who fright the Div'll himself; had God but set
In his first Colony this Amulet;
No work for Cherub had there been: no doubt
The Fiend had been, and not poor Man cast out.
And Proserpine might here have filled her lap
With only flowers, and not an after-clap.
From Sons of Adam now we must retrieve
One warning to the Daughters next of Eve.
You Ladies whom Priapus cannot affright,
Whose toyish weapon rather does invite,
(Proscribed for his indulgence) since you are
Beneath displeasure, therefore do not dare
To use the Garden so as Men use you;
At once to love ye, and deflowre ye too.
Gardens of Beautys, many in pursuit
Are of your own choice flowers, and rarest fruit*
Weak is your Sex; you know the Devilish in Swine
Was nere repulsed by hedge of Eglantine.
If yet the Courtier Fox, or Ruffian Bore
That mound have never undermined and tore,
Thus fortify your selves; in your defense
Set Giant Honor, Giant Conscience.
So shall you never keep, by this advice,
Knaves Kitchen-Garden, but Fools Par^^^^^
So farewell Heroes; Who shall Si ng of you
When as Heroic is Georgick to o.
Printed 16 64 Joh. Drope M. of A. Fellow of Magd Coll the author.


