ALL for LOVE: OR, THE World well Lost. A TRAGEDY, As it is Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL; AND Written in Imitation of Shakespeare's Style.

Written by Mr. Dryden.

Facile est verbum aliquod ardens (ut ita dicam) notare: Idque restinctis
animorum incendiis irridere. Cicero. In the SAVOY: Printed for H. Herringman,
and Sold by R. Bently, J. Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. 1692.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Earl of Danby, Viscount Latimer, and Baron
OSBORNE of Kiveton in Yorkshire, Lord High Treasurer of England, One of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of
the Garter, etc.
My LORD,
THE Gratitude of Poets is so troublesome a Virtue to Great Men, that you are
often in danger of your own Benefits: For you are threatened with some Epistle,
and not suffered to do Good in quiet, or to compound for their Silence whom you
have Obliged. Yet, I Confess, I neither am, nor ought to be surpised at this
Indulgence; For your Lordship has the same Right to Favor Poetry which the
Great and Noble have ever had.

Carmen amat, quisquis carmine digna gerit. There is somewhat of a tie in
Nature betwixt those who are Born for Worthy Actions, and those who can
transmit them to Posterity: And though ours be much the inferior part, it
comes at least within the Verge of Alliance; nor are we unprofitable Members of
the Commonwealth, when we animate others to those Virtues, which we Copy and
Describe from you.

It Is indeed their Interest, who endeavor the Subversion of Governments, to
discourage Poets and Historians; for the best which can happen to them is to be
forgotten: But such, who, under KINGS, are the Fathers of their Country, and by
a Just and Prudent ordering of Affairs preserve it, have the same Reason to
Cherish the Chroniclers of their Actions, as they have to lay up in safety the
Deeds and Evi^ of their Estates: For such Records are their undoubted Titles to
the Love and Reverence of After-Ages. Your Lordships Administration has already
taken up a considerable part of the English Annals; and many of its most happy
Years are owing to it. His MAJESTY, the most knowing Judge of Men, and the best
Master, has acknowledged the Ease and Benefit he Receives in the Incomes of His
Treasury, which you found not only Disordered, but Exhausted. All Things were
in the Confusion of a Chaos, without Form or Method, if not reduced beyond it,
even to Annihilation: So that you had not only to separate the Jarring
Elements, but (if that boldness of Expression might be allowed me) to Create
them. Your Enemies had so Embroiled the Management of your Office, that they
looked on your Advancement as the Instrument of your Ruin. And as if the
clogging of the Revenue, and the Confusion of Accounts, which you found in your
Entrance, were not sufficient, they added their own weight of Malice to the
Public Calamity, by forestalling the Credit which should Cure it: Your Friends
on the other side were only capable of Pitying, but not of Aiding you: No
farther Help or Counsel was remaining to you, but what was founded on your
Self; And that indeed was your Security: For your Diligence, your Constancy,
and your Prudence, wrought more surely within, when they were not disturbed by
any outward Motion. The highest Virtue is best to be trusted with its Self, for
Asistance only can be given by a Genius Superior to that which it Assists. And
it is the Noblest kind of Debt, when we are only obliged to God and Nature. This
then, My Lord, is your just Commendation, That you have wrought out your Self a
way to Glory, by those very Means that were designed for your Destruction: You
have not only restored, but advanced the Revenues of your Master without
Grievance to the Subject: And as if that were little yet, the Debts of the
Exchequer, which lay heaviest both on the Crown, and on private Persons, have
by your Conduct been Established in a certainty of Satisfaction. An Action so
much the more Great and Honorable, because the Case was without the ordinary
Relief of Laws; above the Hopes of the Afflicted, and beyond the Narrowness of
the Treasury to Redr^ss, had it been managed by a less able Hand. It Is
certainly the Happiest, and most Unenvied part of all your Fortune, to do Good
to many, while you do Injury to none: To receive at once the Prayers of the
Subject, and the Praises of the Prince: And by the care of your Conduct; to
give Him Means of Exerting the chiefest, (if any be the chiefest) of His Royal
Virtues: His distributive Justice to the Deserving, and His Bounty and
Compassion to the Wanting. The Disposition of Princes toward their People,
cannot better be discovered than in the choice of their Ministers; who, like
the Animal Spirits betwixt the Soul and Body, participate somewhat of both
Natures, and make the Communication which is betwixt them. A King, who is Just
and Moderate in his Nature, who Rules according to the Laws, whom God made
Happy by Forming the Temper of His Soul to the Constitution of His Government,
and who makes us Happy, by assuming over us no other Sovereignty than that
wherein our Welfare and Liberty consists; A Prince, I say, of so excellent a
Character, and so suitable to the Wishes of all Good Men, could not better have
conveyed Himself into His Peoples Apprehensions, than in your Lordships Person;
who so lively express the same Virtues, that you seem not so much a Copy, as an
Emanation of Him. Mod^ration is doubtless an Establishment of Greatness; but
there is a steadiness of Temper which is likewise requisite in a Minister of
State: So equal a mixture of both Virtues, that he may stand like an Isthmus
betwixt the two Encrooching Seas of Arbitrary Power, and Lawless Anarchy. The
Undertaking would be difficult to any but an Extraordinary Genius, to stand at
the Line, and to divide the Limits; to pay what is due to the Great
Representative of the Nation, and neither to inhance, nor to yield up the
undoubted Prerogatives of the Crown. These, My Lord, are the proper Virtues of
a Noble Englishman, as indeed they are properly English Virtues: No People in
the World being capable of using them, but we who have the Happiness to be Born
under so equal, and so well-pois'd a Government. A Government which has all the
Advantages of Liberty beyond a Commonwealth, and all the Marks of Kingly
Sovereignty without the danger of a Tyranny. Both my Nature, as I am an
Englishman, and my Reason, as I am a Man, have bred in me a Loathing to that
specious Name of a Repu^ck; That mock-appearance of a Liberty, where all who
have not part in the Government, are Slaves; And Slaves they are of a viler
Note than such as are Subjects to an absolute Dominion. For no Christian
Monarchy is so Absolute, but it is Circumscribed with Laws: But when the
Executive Power is in the Lawmakers, there is no farther check upon them; and
the People must suffer without a Remedy, because they are Oppressed by their
Representatives. If I must s^rve, the number of my Masters, who were Born my
Equals, would but add to (...) Ignominy of my Bondage. The Nature of our
Government above all others, is exactly Suited both to the Situation of our
Country, and the Temper of the Natives: An Island being more proper for
Commerce and for Defense, than for extending its Dominions on the Continent:
For what the Valor of its Inhabitants might gain, by Reason of its Remoteness,
and the Casualties of the Seas, it could not so easily preserve: And therefore,
neither the Arbitrary Power of one in a Monarchy, n^r of many in a
Commonwealth, could make us greater than we are. It Is true, that vaster and
more frequent Taxes might be gathered, when the Cons^nt of the People was not
Asked or Needed; but this were only by Conquering abroad to be Poor at home:
And the Examples of our Neighbors teach us, that they are not always the
Happiest Subjects whose Kings extend their Dominions farthest. Since therefore
we cannot win by an Offensive War, at least a Land-War, the Model of our
Government seems Naturally contrived for the Defensive part: And the Cons^nt of
a People is easily obtained to contribute to that Power which must protect it.
Felices nimium bona si sua norint, Angligenae! And yet there are not wanting
Malcontents amongst us, who Surf^iting themselves on too much Happiness, would
persuade the People that they might be Happier by a Change. 'Twas indeed the
Policy of their old For father, when himself was fallen from the Station of
Glory, to seduce Mankind into the same Rebellion with him, by telling him he
might yet be freer than he was: That is, more free than his Nature would allow,
or (if I may so say) than God could make him. We have already all the Liberty
which Freeborn Subjects can enjoy; and all beyond it is but License. But if it
be Liberty of Conscience which they pretend, the Moderation of our Church is
such, that its Practice extends not to the severity of Persecution, and its
Discipline is withal so easy, that it allows more freedom to Dissenters than
any of the Sects would allow to it. In the mean time, what Right can be
pretended by these Men to attempt Innovations in Church or State? Who made them
the Trustees, or (to Speak a little nearer their own Language) the Keepers of
the Liberty of England? If their Call be extraordinary, let them Convince us by
working Miracles; for ordinary Vocation they can have none to disturb the
Government under which they were Born, and which protects them. He who has
often changed his Party, and always has made his Interest the Rule of it, gives
little Evidence of his Sincerity for the Public Good: It Is manif^st he changes
but for himself, and takes the People for Tools to work his Fortune. Yet the
Experience of all Ages might ^t him know, that they who trouble the Waters
first, have s^ldom the benefit of the Fishing: As they who began the late
Rebellion, enjoyed not the Fruit of their Undertaking, but were crushed
themselves by the Usurpation of their own Instrument. Neither is it enough for
them to Answer, that they only intend a Reformation of the Government, but not
the Subversion of it: On such pretenses all Insurrections have been founded;
It Is striking at the Root of Power, which is Obedience. Every Remonstrance of
private Men, has the seed of Treason in it; and Discourses which are couched in
ambiguous Terms, are therefore the more dangerous, because they do all the
Mischief of open Sedition, yet are safe from the Punishment of the Laws. These,
My Lord, are Considerations which I should not pass so lightly over, had I room
to manage them as they deserve: for no Man can be so inconsiderable in a
Nation, as not to have a share in the welfare of it; and if he be a true
Englishmen, he must at the same time be fired with Indignation, and revenge
himself as he can on the Disturbers of his Country. And to whom could I more
fitly apply my self, than to your Lordship, who have not only an inborn, but an
Hereditary Loyalty? The memorable constancy and sufferings of your Father,
almost to the ^uine of his Estate for the Royal Cause, were an earnest of that,
which such a Parent and such an Institution would produce in the Person of a
Son. But so unhappy an occasion of manifesting your own Zeal in suffering for
his present Majesty, the Providence of God, and the Prudence of your
Administration, will, I hope, prevent. That as your Fathers Fortune waited on
the unhappiness of his Sovereign, so your own may participate of the better
Fate which attends his Son. The Relation which you have by Alliance to the
Noble Family of your Lady, serves to confirm to you both this happy Angury. For
what can deserve a greater place in the English Chronicle, than the Loyalty and
Courege, the Actions and Death of the General of an Army Fighting for His
Prince and Country? The Honor and Gallantry of the Earl of Lindsey, is so
illustrious a Subject, that it is fit to adorn an Heroic Poem; for He was the
Proto-Martyr of the Cause, and the Type of his unfortunate Royal Master.

Yet, after all, My Lord, if I may speak my thoughts, you are happy rather to
us than to your self: for the Multiplicity, the Cares, and the Vexations of
your Employment, have betrayed you from your self, and given you up into the
Possession of the Public. You are Robbed of your Privacy and Friends, and
scarce any hour of your Life you can call your own. Those who envy your
Fortnne, if they wanted not good Nature, might more justly pity it; and when
they see you watched by a Crowd of Suitors, whose importunity it is impossible
to avoid, would conclude with Reason, that you have lost much more in true
Content, than you have gained by Dignity; and that a private Gentleman is
better attended by a single Servant, than your Lordship with so clamorous a
Train. Pardon me, My Lord, If I speak like a Philosopher on this Subject; the
Fortune which makes a Man uneasy, cannot make him Happy: and a Wise Man must
think himself uneasy, when few of his Actions are in his Choice.

This last Consideration has brought me to another, and a very seasonable one
for your Relief; which is, That while I pity your want of leisure, I have
impertinently Detained you so long a time. I have put off my own Business,
which was my Dedication, till it is so late, that I am now ashamed to begin it:
And therefore I will say nothing of the Poem, which I Present to you, because I
know not if you are like to have an Hour, which, with a good Conscience, you
may throw away in perusing it: And for the Author, I have only to beg the
continuance of your Protection to him, who is,

MY LORD, Your Lordships, most Obliged, most Humble, and most Obedient Servant,
JOHN DRYDEN.

PREFACE.
THe death of Anthony and Cleopatra, is a Subject which has been treated by the
greatest Wits of our Nation, after Shakespeare; and by all so variously, that
their Example has given me the confidence to try my felf in this Bow of
Ulysses amongst the Crowd of Suitors; and, withal, to take my own measures, in
aiming at the Mark. I doubt not but the same Motive has prevailed with all of
us in this attempt; I mean the excellency of the Moral: for the chief Persons
represented, were famous Patterns of unlawful Love; and their end accordingly
was unfortunate. All reasonable Men have long since concluded, That the Hero
of the Poem, ought not to be a Character of perfect Virtue, for, then, he could
not, without injustice, be made unhappy; nor yet altogether wicked, because he
could not then be pitied: I have therefore steered the middle course; and have
drawn the character of Anthony as favorably as Plutarch, Appian, and Dion
Cassius would give me leave: the like I have observed in Cleopatra. That which
is wanting to work up the pity to a greater height, was not afforded me by the
story: for the crimes of Love which they both committed, were not occasioned by
any necessity, or fatal ignorance, but were wholly voluntary; since our
passions are, or ought to be, within our power. The Fabric of the Play is
regular enough, as to the inferior parts of it; and the Unities of Time, Place
and Action, more exactly observed, than, perhaps, the English Theater requires.
Particularly, the Action is so much one, that it is the only of the kind
without Episode, or Underplot; every Scene in the Tragedy conducing to the main
design, and every Act concluding with a turn of it. The greatest error in the
contrivance seems to be in the person of Octavia: For, though I might use the
privilege of a Poet, to introduce her into Alexandria, yet I had not enough
considered, that the compassion she moved to her self and Children, was
destructive to that which I reserved for Anthony and Cleopatra; whose mutual
love being founded upon vice, must lessen the favor of the Audience to them,
when Virtue and Innocence were oppressed by it. And, though I justified Anthony
in some measure, by making Octavia's departure, to proceed wholly from her
self; yet the force of the first Machine still remained; and the dividing of
pity, like the cutting of a River into many Channels, abated the strength of
the natural Stream. But this is an Objection which none of my Critics have
urged against me; and therefore I might have let it pass, if I could have
resolved to have been partial to my self. The faults my Enemies have found, are
rather cavils concerning little, and not essential Decencies; which a Master of
the Ceremonies may decide betwixt us. The French Poets, I confess, are strict
Observers of these Punctilio's: They would not, for example, have suffered
Cleopatra and Octavia to have met; or if they had met, there must only have
passed betwixt them some cold civilities, but no eagerness of repartee, for
fear of offending against the greatness of their Characters, and the modesty of
their Sex. This Objection I foresaw, and at the same time contemned: for I
judged it both natural and probable, that Octavia, proud of her new-gain'd
Conquest, would search out Cleopatra to triumph over her; and that Cleopatra,
thus attacked, was not of a spirit to shun the encounter: and it is not
unlikely, that two exasperated Rivals should use such Satyr as I have put into
their mouths; for after all, though the one were a Roman, and the other a
Queen, they were both Women. It Is true, some actions, though natural, are not
fit to be represented; and broad obscenities in words, ought in good-manners to
be avoided: expressions therefore are a modest clothing of our thoughts, as
Breeches and Petticoats are of our Bodies. If I have kept my self within the
bounds of modesty, all beyond it is but nicety and affectation; which is no
more but Modesty depraved into a Vice: they betray themselves who are too quick
of apprehension in such cases, and leave all r^asonable Men to imagine worse of
them, than of the Poet.

Honest Montaigne goes yet farther: Nous ne sommes que ceremony; la ceremony
n^s us emporte, and laissons la substance des chooses: Nous nous tenons aux
b^ches, and abandonnons le tronc and le corpse. Nous avons appris aux Dames de
rougir, oyans seulement no^nmer ce qu' else ne craignent aucunement (...):
Nous n'esons appeller a droict nos members, and ne craignons par de les
employer a toute sort de debauche. La ceremony nous defend d'exprimer par
paroles les chooses licites and naturelles, and nous l'en croyons; la raison
nous defend de n'en fair point d'illicites and mauvaises, and person ne l'en
croid. My comfort is, that by this opinion my Enemies are but sucking Critics,
who would fain be nibbling ere their Teeth are come.

Yet; in this nicety of manners does the excellency of French Poetry consist:
their Heroes are the most civil people breathing; but their good breeding
seldom extends to a word of sense: All their Wit is in their Ceremony; they
want the Genius which animates our Stage; and therefore it is but necessary when
they cannot please, that they should take care not to offend. But, as the
civillest Man in the company is commonly the dullest, so these Authors, while
they are afraid to make you laugh or cry, out of pure good manners, make you
sleep. They are so careful not to exasperate a Critic, that they never leave
him any work; so busy with the Broom, and make so clean a riddance, that there
is little left either for censure or for praise: for no part of a Poem is worth
our discommending, where the whole is insipid; as when we have once tasted of
palled Wine, we stay not to examine it Glass by Glass. But while they affect to
shine in ttifles, they are often careless in essentials. Thus their Hippolitus
is so scrupulous in point of decency, that he will rather expose himself to
death, than accuse his Stepmother to his Father; and my Critics I am sure will
commend him for it: but we of grosser apprehensions, are apt to think that this
excess of generosity, is not practicable but with Fools and Madmen. This was
good manners with a vengeance; and the Audience is like to be much concerned at
the misfortunes of this admirable Hero: but take Hippolitus out of his Poetic
Fit, and I suppose he would think it a wiser part, to set the Saddle on the
right Horse, and choose rather to live with the reputation of a plain-spoken
honest Man, than to die with the infamy of an incestuous Villain. In the mean
time we may take notice, that where the Poet ought to have preserved the
character as it was delivered to us by Antiquity, when he should have given us
the Picture of a rough young Man, of the Amazonian strain, a jolly Huntsman,
and both by his profession and his early rising a Mortal Enemy to Love, he has
chosen to give him the turn of Gallantry, sent him to travel from Athens to
Paris, taught him to make Love and transformed the Hipp^litus of Euripides into
Monsieur Hippolite. I should not have troubled my self thus far with French
Poets, but that I find our Chedreux Critics wholly form their Judgments by
them. But for my part, I desire to be tried by the Laws of my own Country, for
it see^s unjust to me, that the French should prescribe here, till they have
(...) Our little Sonnettiers who follow them, have too narrow (...) (...) or
Poetry. Poets themselves are the most proper, though I conclude (...) the only
Critics. But till some Genius as Universal, as Aristotle, shall arise, who can
penetrate into all Arts and Sciences, without the practice of them, I shall
think it reasonable, that the Judgment of an Artificer in his own Art should be
preferable to the opinion of another Man; at least where he is not bribed by
interest, or prejudiced by malice: and this, I ^uppose, is manifest by plain
induction: For, first, the Crowd cannot be presumed to have more than a gross
instinct, of what pleases or displeases them: every Man will grant me this; but
then, by a particular kindness to himself, he draws his own stake first, and
will be distinguished from the multitude, of which other Men may think him one.
But, if I come closer to those who are allowed for witty Men, either by the
advantage of their quality, or by common fame, and affirm that neither are they
qualified to decide Sovereignly, concerning Poetry, I shall yet have a strong
party of my opinion; for most of them severally will exclude the rest, either
from the number of witty Men, or at least of able Judges. But here again they
are all indulgent to themselves: and every one who believes himself a Wit, that
is, every Man, will pretend at the same time to a right of judging. But to
press it yet farther, there are many witty Men, but few Poets, neither have all
Poets a taste of Tragedy. And this is the Rock on which they are daily
splitting. Poetry, which is a Picture of Nature, must generally please: but
it is not be understood that all parts of is must please every Man; therefore is
not Tragedy to be judged by a witty Man, whose taste is only confined to
Comedy. Nor is every Man who loves Tragedy a sufficient Judge of it: he must
understand the excellencies of it too, or he will only prove a blind Admirer,
not a Critic. From hence it comes that so many Satyrs on Poets, and censures
of their Writings, fly abroad. Men of pleasant Conversation, (at least esteemed
so) and indu'd with a trifling kind of Fancy, perhaps helped out with some
smattering of Latin, are ambitious to distinguish themselves from the Herd of
Gentlemen, by their Poetry;

Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in illa
F^rtuna.
And is not this a wretched affectation, not to be contented with what Fortune
has done for them, and sit down quietly with their Estates, but they must call
their Wits in question, and needlessly expose their nakedness to public view?
Not considering that they are not to expect the same approbation from sober
Men, which they have found from their flatterers after the third Bottle? If a
little glittering in discourse has passed them on us for witty Men, where was
the necessity of undeceiving the World? Would a Man who has an ill Title to an
Estate, but yet is in possession of it, would he bring it of his own accord, to
be tried at Westminster? We who write, if we want the Talent, yet have the
excuse that we do it for a poor subsistence; but what can be urged in their
defense, who not having the Vocation of Poverty to scribble out of mere
wantonness, take pains to make themselves ridiculous? Horace was certainly in
the right, where he said, That no Man is satisfied with his own condition. A
Poet is not pleased because he is not rich; and the Rich are discontented,
because the Poets will not admit them of their number. Thus the case is hard
with Writers: if they succeed not, they must starve; and if they do, some
malicious Satyr is prepared to level them for daring to please without their
leave. But while they are so eager to destroy the fame of others, their
ambition is manifest in their concernment: some Poem of their own is to be
produced, and the Slaves are to be laid flat with their faces on the ground,
that the Monarch may appear in the greater Majesty.

Dionysius and Nero had the same longings, but with all their power they could
never bring their business well about. It Is true, they proclaimed themselves
Poets by sound of Trumpet; and Poets they were upon pain of death to any Man
who durst call them otherwise. The Audience had a fine time on it, you may
imagine; they sat in a bodily fear, and looked as demurely as they could: for
'twas a hanging matter to laugh unseasonably; and the Tyrants were suspicious,
as they had reason, that their Subjects had 'em in the wind; so, every man in
his own defense set as good a face upon the business as he could: 'Twas known
beforehand that the Monarchs were to be Crowned Laureats; but when the Show
was over, and an honest Man was suffered to depart quietly, he took out his
Laughter which he had stifled; with a firm resolution never more to see an
Emperor's Play, though he had been ten years a making it. In the mean time, the
true Poets were they who made the best Markets, for they had Wit enough to
yield the Prize with a good grace, and not contend with him who had thirty
^egions: They were sure to be rewarded if they confessed themselves bad
Writers, and that was somewhat better than to be Martyrs for their Reputation.
Lucan's example was enough to teach them manners; and after he was put to
Death, for overcoming Nero, the Emperor carried it without dispute for the best
Poet in his Dominions: No man was ambitious of that grinning Honor; for if he
heard the malicious Trumpeter proclaiming his Name before his Betters, he knew
there was but one way with him. Mecoenas took another Course, and we know he
was more than a great Man, for he was witty too: but finding himself far gone
in Poetry, which Seneca assures us was not his Talent, he thought it his best
way to be well with Virgil and with Horace; that at least he might be a Poet at
the second hand; and we see how happily it has succeeded with him; for his own
bad Poetry is forgotten, and their Panegyricks of him still remain. But they
who should be our Patrons, are for no such expensive ways to fame: they have
much of the Poetry of Mecoenas, but little of his Liberality. They are for
persecuting Horace and Virgil, in the Persons of their Successors, (for such
is every Man, who has any part of their Soul and Fire, though in a less
degree.) Some of their little Zanies yet go farther; for they are Persecutors
even of Horace himself, as far as they are able, by their ignorant and vile
Imitations of him; by making an unjust use of his Authority, and turning his
Artillery against his Friends. But how would he disdain to be Copyed by such
hands! I dare answer for him, he would be more uneasy in their Company, than
he was with Crispinus their Forefather in the Holy Way; and would no more have
allowed them a place amongst the Critics, than he would Demetrius the Mimique,
and Tigellius the Buffoon;

-- Demetri, teque Tigelli,
Discipulorum inter jubeo plorare Cathedras.
With what scorn would he look down on such miserable Translators, who make
Doggrel of his Latin, mistake his meaning, misapply his Censures, and often
contradict their own? He is fixed as a Landmark to set out the bounds of
Poetry,

-- Saxum, antiquum ingens
Limes agro positus litem ut discerneret arvis:
But other Arms than theirs, and other Sinews are required, to raise the weight
of such an Author; and when they would toss him against their Enemies,

Genua labant, gelidus concrevit frigore sanguis,
Tum lapis ipse, viri vacuum per inane volutus
Nec spatium evasit totum, nec pertulit ictum.
For my part, I would wish no other revenge, either for my self or the rest of
the Poets, from this Rhyming Judge of the Twelve-penny Gallery, this Legitimate
Son of Sternhold, than that he would subscribe his Name to his Censure, or (not
to tax him beyond his Learning) set his Mark: for should he own himself
publicly, and come from behind the Lions Skin, they whom he condemns would be
thankful to him, they whom he praises would choose to be Condemned; and the
Magistrat^ whom he has Elected, would modestly withdraw from their Employment,
to avoid the scandal of his Nomination. The sharpness of ^is Satyr, next to
himself, falls most heavily on his Friends, and they ought never to forgive him
for commending them perpetually the wrong way, and sometimes by contraries. If
he have a Friend whose hastiness in writing is his greatest fault, Horace would
have taught him to (...) minced the matter, and to have called it read^ness of
thought, and a flowing Fancy; for Friendship will allow a Man to Christen an
imperfection by the Name of some Neighbor virtue:

Vellem in amicitia sic erraremus; and isti
Errori, nomen virtus poss^sset honestum.
But he would never have allowed him to have called a slow Man hasty, or a
hasty Writer a slow Drudge, as Juvenal explains it:

-- -- Canibus pigris, scabieque vetust^
Levibus, and siccae lambentibus or a lueernae
Nomen erit, Pa^dus, Tygris, Leo; si quid adhuc est,
Quod fremit in terris violentius.
Yet Lucretius Laughs at a foolish Lover, even for excusing the Imperfections
of his Mistress:

Nigra (...) est, immunda and foetida (...).
Balba loqui non quit, (...); muta pudens est, etc.
But to drive it, ad Aethiopem Cygnum is not to be endured. I leave him to
interpret this by the Benefit of his French Version on the other side, and
without farther considering him, than I have the rest of my illiterate Censors,
whom I have disdained to Answer, because they are not qualified for Judges. It
remains that I acquaint the Reader, that I have endeavored in this Play to
follow the practice of the Ancients, who, as Mr. Rymer has judiciously
observed, are and ought to be our Masters. Horace likewise gives it for a Rule
in his Art of Poetry,

-- -- Vos exemplaria Graeca
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
Yet, though their Models are regular, they are too little (...) (...) lish
Tragedy; which requires to be built in a larger Compa^ (...) could give an
instance in the Oedipus Tyrannus, which was the Masterpiece of Sophocles; but
I reserve it for a more fit occasion, which I hope to have hereafter. In my
Style I have professed to imitate ^e Divine Shakespeare; which that I might
perform more freely, I have disincumber'd my self from Rhyme. Not that I
condemn my former way, but that this is more proper to my present Purpose. I
hope I need not to explain my self, that I have not Copied my Author servile^y:
Words and Phrases must of necessity receive a Change in succeeding Ages: but
it is almost a Miracle that much of his Language remains so pure; and that he
who began Dramatick Poetry amongst us, untaught by any, and, as Ben. Johnson
tells us, without Learning, should by the force of his own Genius perform so
much, that in a manner he has left no Praise for any who come after him. The
occasion is fair, and the Subject would be pleasant to handle the difference of
Styles betwixt him and Fletcher, and wherein, and how far they are both to be
imitated. But since I must not be over-consident of my own performance after
him, it will be prudence in me to be silent. Yet I hope I may affirm, and
without vanity, that by imitating him, I have excelled my self throughout the
Play; and particularly, that I prefer the Scene betwixt Anthony and Ventidius
in the first Act, to any thing which I have written in this kind.

PROLOGUE to Anthony and Cleopatra.
WHat Flocks of Critics hover here to day,
As Vultures wait on Armies for their Prey,
All gaping for the Carcass of a Play!
With Croaking Notes they bode some dire event;
And follow dying Poets by the scent.
Ours gives himself for gone; you have watched your time!
He fights this day unarmed; without his Rhyme.
And brings a Tale which often has been told;
As sad as Dido's; and almost as old.
His Hero, whom you Wits his Bully call,
Bates of his mettle; and scarce rants at all:
He Is somewhat lewd; but a well-meaning mind;
Weeps much; fights little; but is wondrous kind.
In short, a Pattern, and Companion fit,
For all thee keeping Tonyes of the Pit.
I could name more; A Wife, and Mistress too;
Both (to be plain) too good for most of you:
The Wife well-natur'd, and the Mistress true.
Now, Poets, if your fame has been his care;
Allow him all the Candor you can spare.
A brave Man scorns to quarrel once a day;
Like Hectors, in at every petty fray,
Let those find fault whose Wit's so very small,
They Have need to show that they can think at all:
Errors like Straws upon the surface flow;
He who would search for Pearls must dive below.
Fops may have leave to level all they can;
As Pigmies would be glad to lopp a Man.
Half-Wits are Fleas; so little and so light;
We scarce could know they live; but that they bite.
But, as the Rich, when tired with daily Feasts,
For change, become their next poor Tenants Ghests;
Drink hearty Draughts of Ale, from plain brown Bowls,
And snatch the homely Rasher from the Coals:
So you, retiring from much better Cheer,
For once, may venture to do penance here.
And since that plenteous Autumn now is past,
Whose Grapes and Peaches have Indulged your taste,
Take in good part from our poor Poets board,
Such rivell'd Fruits as Winter can afford.
Persons Represented.
By MArc Anthony, Mr. Heart. Ventidius, his General, Mr. Mohun. Dollabella, his
Friend, Mr. Clarke. Alexas, the Queens Eunuch, Mr. Goodman. Serapion, Priest of
Isis, Servant to Anthony, Mr. Griffin. Another Priest, Servant to Anthony, Mr.
Coysh. Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, Mrs. Boutell. Octavia, Anthony's Wife, Mrs.
Corey. Charmion, Cleopatra 's Maids. Iras, Anthony's two little Daughters.

Scene Alexandria.

ALL for LOVE; OR, THE World well Lost.
ACT. I. SCENE, The Temple of Isis.
Enter Serapion, Myris, Priests of Isis. Serap. POrtents and Prodigies are
grown so frequent,
That they have lost their Name. Our fruitful Nile
Flowed e're the wonted Season, with a Torrent
So unexpected, and so wondrous fierce,
That the wild Deluge overtook the haste,
Even of the Hinds that watched it: Men and Beasts
Were born above the tops of Trees, that grew
On the utmost Margin of the Water-mark.
Then, with so swift an Ebb, the Flood drove backward
It slipped from underneath the Scaly Herd:
Here monstrous Phocoe panted on the Shore;
Forsaken Dolphins there, with their broad Tails,
Lay lashing the departing Waves: Hard by 'em,
Sea-Horses floundring in the slimy Mud,
Tossed up their heads, and dashed the ooze about 'em.
Enter Alexas behind them.
Myr. Avert these Omens, Heaven.

Serap. Last night, between the hours of Twelve and One,
In a lone Isle of the Temple, while I walked,
A Whirlwind rose, that, with a violent blast,
Shook all the Dome: the Doors around me clap,
The Iron Wicket that defends the Vault,
Where the long Race of P^olomies is laid,
Burst open, and disclosed the mighty dead.
From out each Monument, in order placed,
An Armed Ghost start up: the Boy-King last
Reared his inglorious head. A peal of groans
Then followed, and a lamentable Voice
Cried, Egypt is no more. My blood ran back,
My shaking Knees against each other knocked;
On the cold Pavement, down I fell (...),
And so unfinished left the horrid Scene.

Alexas showing himself. And, Dreamed you this? or, Did invent the Story?
To frighten our Egyptian Boys withal,
And train 'em up betimes in fear of Priesthood?

Serap. My Lord, I saw you not,
Nor meant my words should reach your Ears; but what
I uttered was most true.

Alex. A foolish Dream,
Bred from the fumes of indigested Feasts,
And holy Luxury.

Serap. I know my duty:
This goes no farther.

Alex. It Is not fit it should.
Nor would the times now bear it, were it true.
All Southern, from you Hills, the Roman Camp
Hangs over us black and threatening, like a Storm
Just breaking on our Heads.

Serap. Our faint Egyptians pray for Antony;
But in their Servile Hearts they own Octavius.

Myr. Why then does Antony dream out his hours,
And tempts not Fortune for a noble Day,
Which might redeem what Actium lost?

Alex. He thinks it is past recovery.

Serap. Yet the Foe
Seems not to press the Siege.

Alex. O, there is the wonder.
Mecoenas and Agrippa, who can most
With Caesar are his Foes. His Wife Octavia,
Driven from his House, solicites her Revenge;
And Dolabella, who was once his Friend,
Upon some private grudge, now seeks his ruin:
Yet still War seems on either side to sleep.

Serap. It Is strange that Antony, for some days past,
Has not beheld the face of Cleopatra;
But here, in Isis Temple, lives retired,
And makes his Heart a Prey to black despair.

Alex. It Is true; and we much fear he hopes by absence
To cure his mind of Love.

Serap. If he be vanquished,
Or make his peace, Egypt is doomed to be
A Roman Province; and our plenteous Harvests
Must then redeem the sca^eness of their Soil.
While Antony stood firm, our Alexandria
Rivaled proud Rome (Dominions other Seat)
And fortune striding, like a vas^ Colossus,
Could fix an equal foot of Empire here.

Alex. Had I my wish, these (...) of all Nature
Who Lord it over Mankind, should perish, perish,
Each by the others Sword; but, since our Will
Is lamely followed by our power, we must
Depend on one; with him to rise or fall.

Serap. How stands the Queen affected?

Alex. O, she dotes,
She dotes, Serapion, on this vanquished Man,
And winds her self about his mighty ruins,
Whom would she yet forsake, yet yield him up,
This hunted Prey, to his pursuers hands,
She might preserve us all; but it is in vain --
This changes my designs, this blasts my Counsels,
And makes me use all means to keep him here,
Whom I could wish divided from her Arms
Far as the Earth's deep Center. Well, you know
The state of things; no more of your ill Omens,
And black Prognostics; labor to confirm
The Peoples Hearts.
Enter Ventidius, talking aside with a Gentleman of Antony's.
Serap. These Romans will over hear us.
But, Who Is that Stranger? By his warlike port,
His fierce demeanor, and erected look,
He Is of no vulgar note.

Alex. O it is Ventidius,
Our Emp'rors great Lieutenant in the East,
Who first showed Rome, that Parthia could be Conquered.
When Antony returned from Syria last,
He left this Man to guard the Roman Frontiers.

Serap. You seem to know him well.

Alex. Too well. I saw him in Cilicia first,
When Cleopatra there met Antony:
A mortal Foe he was to us, and Egypt.
But, let me witness to the worth I hate,
A braver Roman never drew a Sword.
Firm to his Prince; but, as a Friend, not Slave.
He never was of his Pleasures; but precides
Over all his cooler hours and morning counsels:
In short, the plainness, fierceness, rugged virtue
Of an old true-stampt Roman lives in him.
His coming bodes I know not what of ill
To our affairs. Withdraw, to mark him better;
And I Will acquaint you, why I sought you here,
And what is our present work,
They withdraw to a corner of the Stage; and Ventidius, with the other, comes
forwards to the front.
Ventidius. Not see him, say you?
I say, I must and will.

Gent. He has commanded,
On pain of Death, none should approach his Presence:

Ven. I bring him news will raise his drooping Spirits,
Give him new life.

Gent. He sees not Cleopatra.

Ven. Would he had never seen her.

Gent. He Eats not, Drinks not, Sieeps not, has no use
Of any thing, but Thought; or, if he Talks,
It Is to himself, and then it is perfect Raving:
Then he defies the World, and bids it pass;
Sometimes he gnaws his Lip, and Curses loud
The Boy Octavius; then he draws his Mouth
Into a scornful Smile, and cries, Take all,
The World's not worth my care.

Ven. Just, just his nature.
Virtue's his path; but sometimes it is too narrow
For his vast Soul; and then he starts out wide,
And bounds into a Vice that bears him far
From his first course, and plunges him in ills:
But, when his danger makes him find his fault,
Quick to observe, and full of sharp remorse,
He censures eagerly his own misdeeds,
Judging himself with Malice to himself,
And not forgiving what as Man he did,
Because his other parts are more than Man.
He must not thus be lost.
[Alexas and the Priests c^e forward.
Alex. You have your full Instructions, now advance;
Proclaim your Orders loudly.

Serap. Romans, Egyptians, hear the Queen's Command.
Thus Cleopatra bids, Let Labor cease,
To Pomp and Triumphs give this happy day,
That gave the World a Lord: it is Antony's.
Live, Antony; and Cleopatra live.
Be this the general voice sent up to Heaven,
And every public place repeat this echo.

Ven. aside. Fine Pageantry!

Serap. Set out before your doors
The Images of all your sleeping Fathers,
With Laurels crowned; with Laurels wreath your posts,
And strew with Flowers the Pavement; Let the Priests
Do present Sacrifice; pour out the Wine,
And call the Gods to join with you in gladness.

Ven. Curse on the Tongue that bids this general joy.
Can they be friends of Antony, who Revel
When Antony's in danger? Hide, for shame,
You Romans, your Great Grandsires Images,
For fear their Souls should animate their Marbles,
To blush at their degenerate Progeny.

Alex. A Love which knows no bounds to Antony,
Would mark the Day with Honors; when all Heaven
Labored for him, when each propitious Star
Stood wakeful in his Orb, to watch that Hour,
And shed his better influence. Her own Birthday
Our Queen neglected, like a vulgar Fate,
That passed obscurely by.

Ven. Would it had slept,
Divided far from his; till some remote
And future Age had called it out, to ruin
Some other Prince, not him.

Alex. Your Emperor.
Tho grown unkind, would be more gentle, than
T'upbraid my Queen for loving him too well.

Ven. Does the mute Sacrifice upbraid the Priest?
He knows him not his Executioner.
O, she has decked his ruin with her Love,
Led him in Golden Bands to gaudy slaughter,
And made perdition pleasing: She has left him
The blank of what he was;
I tell thee, Eunuch, she has unmann'd him:
Can any Roman see, and know him now,
Thus altered from the Lord of half Mankind,
Unbent, unsinew'd made a Woman's Toy,
Shrunk from the vast extent of all his Honors,
And crampt within a corner of the World?
O, Antony!
Thou bravest Soldier, and thou best of Friends!
Bounteous as Nature; next to Nature's God!
Could thou but make new Worlds, so would thou give 'em,
As Bounty were thy Being, Rough in Battle,
As the first Romans, when they went to War;
Yet, after Victory, more pitiful,
Than all their Praying Virgins left at home!

Alex. Would you could add to those more shining Virtues,
His Truth to her who loves him.

Ven. Would I could not.
But, Wherefore waste I precious hours with thee?
Thou art her Darling mischief, her chief Engine,
Antony's other Fate. Go, tell thy Queen,
Ventidius is arrived, to end her Charms.
Let your Egyptian Timbrels play alone;
Nor mix Effeminate Sounds with Roman Trumpets.
You dare not fight for Antony; go Pray,
And keep your Cowards-Holy-day in Temples.
[Exeunt Alex. Serap. Re-enter the Gentleman of M. Antony.
2 Gent. The Emperor approaches, and commands,
On pain of death that none presume to stay.

1 Gent. I dare not disobey him.
[Going out with the other.
Vent. Well, I dare.
But, I Will observe him first unseen, and find
Which way his humor drives: the rest I Will venture.
[Withdraws. Enter Antony, walking with a disturbed Motion, before he speaks.
Antony. They tell me it is my Birthday, and I Will keep it
With double pomp of sadness
It Is what the Day deserves, which gave me breath.
Why was I raised the Meteor of the World,
Hung in the Skies, and blazing as I traveled,
Till all my fires were spent; and then cast downward
To be trod out by Caesar?

Ven. aside. On my Soul,
It Is mournful, wondrous mournful!

Anto. Count thy Gains.
Now, Antony, Would thou be born for this?
Glutton of Fortune, thy devouring youth
Has starved thy wanting Age.

Ven. How Sorrow shakes him!
[aside. So, now the Tempest tears him ^p by the Roots,
And on the ground extends the noble Ruin.
Ant. having thrown himself down. Lie there, thou shadow of an Emperor;
The place thou pressest on thy Mother-earth
Is all thy Empire now: now it contains thee;
Some few days hence, and then 'twill be too large,
When you are contracted in thy narrow Urn,
Shrunk to a few cold Ashes; then Octavia,
(For Cleopatra will not live to see it)
Octavia then will have thee all her own,
And bear thee in her Widowed hand to Caesar;
Caesar will weep, the Crocodile will weep,
To see his Rival of the Universe
Lie still and peaceful there. I Will think no more on it.
Give me some Music; look that it be sad:
I Will sooth my Melancholy till I swell,
And burst my self with sighing --
Sofe Music. It Is somewhat to my humor. Stay, I fancy
I Am now turned wild, a Commoner of Nature;
Of all forsaken, and forsaking all;
Live in a shady Forest's Sylvan Scene,
Stretched at my length beneath some blasted Oak;
I lean my head upon the Mossy Bark,
And look just of a piece, as I grew from it:
My uncomb'd Locks, matted like Misleto,
Hang over my hoary Face; a murmuring Brook
Runs at my foot.

Ven. Methinks I fancy
My self there too.

Ant. The Herd come jumping by me,
And fearless, quench their thirst, while I look on,
And take me for their fellow-Citizen,
More of this Image, more; it lulls my thoughts.
[Soft Music again.
Ven. I must disturb him; I can hold no longer.
[Stands before him.
Ant. starting up. Art thou Ventidius?

Ven. Are you Antony?
I Am liker what I was, than you to him
I left you last.

Ant. I Am angry.

Ven. So am I.

Ant. I would be private: leave me.

Ven. Sir, I love you.
And therefore will not leave you.

Ant. Will not leave me?
Where have you learnt that Answer? Who am I?

Ven. My Emperor; the Man I love next Heaven:
If I said more, I think 'twere scarce a Sin;
You Are all that is good, and good-like.

Ant. All that is wretched.
You will not leave me then?

Ven. 'Twas too presuming
To say I would not; but I dare not leave you:
And, it is unkind in you to chide me hence
So soon, when I so far have come to see you.

Ant. Now thou have seen me, art thou satisfied?
For, if a Friend, thou have beheld enough;
And, if a Foe, too much.

Ven. weeping. Look, Emperor, this is no common Dew.
I have not wept this Forty years; but now
My Mother comes afresh into my Eyes;
I cannot help her softness.

Ant. By Heaven, he weeps, poor good old Man, he weeps!
The big round drops course one another down
The furrows of his Cheeks. Stop 'em, Ventidius,
Or I shall blush to death: they set my shame,
That caused 'em, full before me.

Ven. I Will do my best.

Ant. Sure there is contagion in the tears of Friends:
See, I have caught it too. Believe me, it is not
For my own griefs, but thine -- Nay, Father.

Ven. Emperor.

Ant. Emperor! Why, that is the style of victory,
The Conquering Soldier, red with unfelt wounds,
Salutes his General so: but never more
Shall that sound reach my Ears.

Ven. I warrant you.

Ant. Actium, Actium! Oh --

Ven. It sits too near you.

Ant. Here, here it lies; a lump of Lead by day,
And, in my short distracted nightly slumbers,
The Hag that rides my Dreams --

Vent. Out with it; give it vent.

Ant. Urg not my shame.
I lost a Battle.

Vent. So has Julius done.

Ant. Thou favour'st me, and speak not half thou think;
For Julins fought it out, and lost it fairly:
But Antony --

Ven. Nay, stop not.

Ant. Antony.
(Well, thou will have it) like a Coward fled,
Fled while his Soldiers fought; fled first, Ventidius.
Thou long'st to curse me, and I give the leave.
I know thou come prepared to rail.

Ven. I did.

Ant. I Will help thee -- -- I have been a Man, Ventidius.

Ven. Yes, and a brave one; but --

Ant. I know thy meaning.
But, I have lost my Reason, have disgraced
The name of Soldier, with inglorious ease.
In the full Vintage of my flowing honors,
Sat still, and saw it pressed by other hands.
Fortune came smiling to my youth, and wooed it,
And purple greatness met my ripened years.
When first I came to Empire, I was born
On Tides of people, crouding to my Triumphs;
The wish of Nations; and the willing World
Received me as its pledge of future peace;
I was so great, so happy, so beloved,
Fate could not ruin me; till I took pains
And worked against my Fortune, chid her from me,
And turned her loose; yet still she came again.
My careless days, and my luxurious nights,
At length have wearied her, and now she is gone,
Gone, gone, divorced for ever. Help me, Soldier,
To curse this Madman, this industrious Fool,
Who labored to be wretched: prithee curse me.

Ven. No.

Ant. Why?

Ven. You are too sensible already
Of what you have done, too conscious of your failings,
And, like a Scorpion, whipped by others first
To fury, sting your self in mad revenge.
I would bring Balm and pour it in your Wounds,
Cure your distempered mind, and heal your fortunes.

Ant. I know thou would.

Ven. I will.

Ant. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Ven. You Laugh.

Ant. I do, to see officious love
Give Cordials to the dead.

Ven. You would be lost then?

Ant. I am.

Ven. I say, you are not. Try your fortune.

Ant. I have to the utmost. Do thou think me desperate.
Without just cause? No, when I found all lost
Beyond repair, I hid me from the World,
And learnt to scorn it here; which now I do
So heartily, I think it is not worth
The cost of keeping.

Ven. Caesar thinks not so:
He Will thank you for the gift he could not take.
You would be killed, like Tully, would you? do,
Hold out your Throat to Casar, and dye tamely.

Ant. No, I can kill my self; and so resolve.

Ven. I can die with you too, when time shall serve;
But Fortune calls upon us now to live,
To Fight, to Conquer.

Ant. Sure thou Dream'st, Ventidius.

Ven. No, it is you Dream; you sleep away your hours
In desperate sloth, miscalled Philosophy.
Up, up, for Honor's sake; twelve Legions wait you,
And long to call you Chief: by painful Journeys,
I led 'em, patient, both of heat and hunger,
Down from the Parthian Marches, to the Nile.
'Twill do you good to see their Sunburned Faces,
Their skar'd Cheeks and chopped hands; there is virtue in 'em,
They Will sell those mangled Limbs at dearer Rates
Than you trim Bands can buy.

Ant. Where left you them?

Ven. I said, in lower Syria.

Ant. Bring 'em hither;
There may be life in these.

Ven. They will not come.

Ant. Why did thou mock my hopes with promised aids
To double my despair? They Are mutinous.

Ven. Most firm and loyal.

Ant. Yet they will not March
To succor me. Oh trifler!

Ven. They petition
You would make have to head 'em.

Ant. I Am besieg^d.

Ven. There Is but one way shut up: How came I hither?

Ant. I will not stir.

Ven. They would perhaps desire
A better reason.

Ant. I have never used
My Soldiers to demand a reason of
My actions. Why did they refuse to March?

Ven. They said, they would not fight for Cleopatra.

Ant. What was it they said?

Ven They said they would not fight for Cleopatra.
Why should they fight, indeed, to make her Conquer,
And make you more a Slave? to gain you Kingdoms,
Which, for a Kiss, at your next Midnight Feast,
You Will sell to her? then she new names her Jewels,
And calls this Diamond such or such a Tax,
Each Pendant in her ear shall be a Province.

Ant. Ventidius, I allow your Tongue free license
On all my other faults; but, on your life,
No word of Cleopatra: She deserves
More World's than I can lose.

Ven. Behold, you Powers,
To whom you have entrusted Humankind;
See Europe, Africa, Asia, put in balance,
And all weighed down by one light worthless Woman!
I think the Gods are Antony's, and give
Like Prodigals, this nether World away,
To none but wastful hands.

Ant. You grow presumptuous.

Ven. I take the privilege of plain love to speak.

Ant Plain love! plain arrogance, plain insolence:
Thy Men are Cowards; thou an envious Traitor;
Who, under seeming honesty, have vented
The burden of thy rank o'reflowing Gall.
O that thou were my equal; great in Arms.
As the first Caesar was, that I might kill thee
Without a Stain to Honor!

Ven. You may k^e;
You have done more already, called me Traitor.

Ant. Art thou not one?

Ven. For showing you your self,
Which none else durst have done; but had I been
That name, which I disdain to speak again,
I needed not have sought your abject fortunes,
Come to partake your fate, to dye with you.
What hindered me to have led my Conquering Eagles
To fill Octavius's Bands? I could have been
A Traitor then, a glorious happy Traitor,
And not have been so called.

Ant. Forgive me, Soldier:
I Have been too passionate,

Ven. You thought me false;
Thought my old Age betrayed you: kill me, Sir;
Pray kill me; yet you need not, your unkindness
Has left your Sword no work.

Ant. I did not think so;
I said it in my rage: prithee forgive me:
Why did thou tempt my Anger, by discovery
Of what I would not hear?

Ven. No Prince but you,
Could merit that sincerity I used,
Nor durst another Man have ventured it;
But you, e're Love misled your wandering Eyes,
Were sure the chief and best of Human Race,
Framed in the very pride and boast of Nature,
So perfect, that the Gods who formed you, wondered
At their own skill, and cried, A lucky hit
Has mended our design. Their envy hindered,
Else you had been Immortal, and a pattern,
When Heaven would work for ostentation sake,
To copy out again.

Ant. But Cleopatra --
Go on; for I can bear it now.

Ven. No more.

Ant. Thou dare not trust my Passion; but thou may:
Thou only love; the rest have flattered me.

Ven. Heavens blessing on your heart for that kind word.
May I believe you love me? speak again.

Ant. Indeed I do. Speak this, and this, and this.
[Hugging him. Thy praises were unjust; but I Will deserve 'em,
And yet mend all. Do with me what thou will,
Lead me to victory, thou know the way.

Ven. And, Will you leave this --

Ant. Prithee do not curse her,
And I will leave her; though, Heaven knows, I love
Beyond Life, Conquest, Empire; all, but Honor,
But I will leave her.

Ven. That Is my Royal Master.
And, Shall we Fight?

Ant. I warrant thee, old Soldier,
Thou shall behold me once again in Iron,
And at the head of our old Troops, that beat
The Parthians, cry aloud, Come follow me.

Ven. O now I hear my Emperor! in that word
Octavius fell. Gods, let me see that day,
And if I have Ten years behind, take all;
Ill thank you for the exchange.

Ant. Oh Cleopatra!

Ven. Again?

Ant. I Have done: in that last Sigh she went.
Coesar shall know what it is to force a Lover,
From all he holds most dear.

Ven. Methinks you breath
Another Soul: Your looks are more Divine;
You speak a Hero, and you move a God.

Ant. O, thou have fired me; my Soul's up in Arms,
And Man's each part about me: once again,
That noble eagerness of Fight has seized me;
That eagerness with which I darted upward
To Cassius's Camp: In vain the steepy Hill.
Opposed my way; in vain a War of Spears
Sung round my head; and planted all my shield:
I won the Trenches, while my foremost Men
Lagg'd on the Plain below.

Ven. Ye Gods, ye Gods,
For such another hour.

Ant. Come on, my Soldier!
Our Hearts and Arms are still the same: I long
Once more to meet our Foes; that Thou and I,
Like Time and Death, marching before our Troops,
May taste fate to 'em; Mow 'em out a passage,
And entering where the foremost Squadrons yield,
^egin the noble Harvest of the Field.
[Exeunt.
ACT. II.
Cleopatra, Iras, and Alexas. Cleop. WHat shall I do, or whither shall I turn?
Ventidius has o'rcome, and he will go.

Alex. He goes to Fight for you.

Cleo. Then he would see me e're he went to fight:
Flatter me not: if once he goes, he is lost:
And all my hopes destroyed.

Alex. Does this weak passion
Become a Mighty Queen?

Cleo. I am no Queen;
Is this to be a Queen, to be besieged
By yon insulting Roman; and to wait
Each hour the Victor's Chain? These ills are small;
For Antony is lost, and I can Mourn
For nothing else but him. Now come, Octavius,
I have no more to lose; prepare thy Bands;
I Am fit to be a Captive: Antony
Has taught my mind the fortune of a Slave.

Iras. Call Reason to assist you.

Cleo. I have none.
And none would have: my Love's a noble madness.
Which shows the cause deserved it. Moderate sorrow
Fits vulgar Love; and for a vulgar Man:
But I have loved with such transcendent passion,
I soared, at first, quite out of Reasons view,
And now am lost above it -- No, I Am proud
It Is thus, would Antony could see me now;
Think you he would not sigh? though he must leave me,
Sure he would sigh; for he is noble-natur'd,
And bears a tender heart ^ I know him well.
Ah, no, I know him not; I knew him once,
But now it is past.

Iras. Let it be past with you:
Forget him, Madam.

Cleo. Never, never, Iras.
He once was mine; and once, though now it is gone,
Leaves a faint Image of possession still.

Alex. Think him unconstant, cruel, and ungrateful:

Cleo. I cannot: if I could, those thoughts were vain;
Faithless, ungrateful, cruel, though he be,
I still must love him.
Enter Charmion. Now, What news my Charmion?
Will he be kind? and Will he not forsake me?
Am I to live, or dye? nay, Do I live?
Or am I dead? for when he gave his answer,
Fate took the word, and then I lived, or died.

Char. I found him, Madam --

Cleo. A long Speech preparing?
If thou bring'st comfort, have, and give it me;
For never was more need.

Iras. I know he loves you.

Cleo. Had he been kind, her Eyes had told me so,
Before her Tongue could speak it: now she studies,
To soften what he said; but give me death,
Just as he sent it, Charmion, undisguis'd,
And in the words he spoke.

Char. I sound him then
Encompassed round, I think, with Iron Statues,
So mute, so motionless his Soldiers stood,
While awfully he cast his Eyes about,
And every Leaders hopes or fears surveyed:
Methought he looked resolved, and yet not pleased.
When he beheld me struggling in the crowd,
He blushed, and bad, make way.

Alex. There Is comfort yet.

Char. Ventidius fixed his Eyes upon my passage,
Severely, as he meant to frown me back,
And sullenly gave place: I told my message.
Just as you gave it, broken and disordered;
I numbered in it all your sighs and tears,
And while I moved your pitiful request,
That you but only begged a last farewell,
He fetch an inward groan, and every time
I named you, sighed, as if his heart were breaking,
But shunned my Eyes, and guiltily looked down;
He seemed not now that awful Antony
Who shook an Armed Assembly with his Nod,
But making show as he would rub his Eyes,
Disguised and blotted out a falling tear.

Cleo. Did he then weep? and, Was I worth a tear?
If what thou have to say be not as pleasing,
Tell me no more, but let me die contented.

Char. He bid me say, He knew himself so well,
He could deny you nothing, if he saw you;
And therefore --

Cleo. Thou would say, he would not see me?

Charm. And therefore begged you not to use a power,
Which he could ill resist; yet he should ever
Respect you as he ought.

Cleo. Is that a word
For Antony to use to Cleopatra?
Oh that faint word, Respect! how I disdain it!
Disdain my self, for loving after it!
He should have kept that word for cold Octavia.
Respect is for a Wife: Am I that thing,
That dull insipid lump, without desires,
And without power to give 'em?

Alex. You misjudge;
You see through Love, and that deludes your sight:
As, what is strait, seems crooked through the Water;
But I, who bear my reason undisturbed,
Can see this Antony, this dreaded Man,
A fearful slave, who fain would run away,
And shuns his Master's Eyes: if you pursue him,
My life on it, he still drags a chain along,
That needs must clog his flight.

Cleo. Could I believe thee! --

Alex. By every circumstance I know he Loves.
True, he is hard pressed, by Interest and by Honor;
Yet he but doubts, and parlies, and casts out
Many a long looked for succor.

Cleo. He sends word,
He fears to see my face,

Alex. And would you more?
He shows his weakness who declines the Combat;
And you must urge your fortune. Could he speak
More plainly? To my Ears, the Message sounds
Come to my rescue, Cleopatra, come;
Come, free me from Ventidius; from my Tyrant:
See me, and give me a pretense to leave him.
I hear his Trumpets. This way he must pass.
Please you, retire a while; I Will work him first,
That he may bend more easy.

Cleo. You shall rule me;
But all, I fear, in vain.
[Exit with Char. and Iras
Alex. I fear so too!
Though I concealed my thoughts, to make her b^ld:
But, it is our utmost means, and Fate befriend it.
[Withdraws. Enter Lictors with Fasces; one bearing the Eagle: then Enter
Antony with Ventidius, followed by other Commanders.
Ant. Octavius is the Minion of blind Chance,
But holds from Virtue nothing.

Ven. Has he courage?

Ant. But just enough to season him from Coward.
O, it is the coldest youth upon a Charge,
The most deliberate fighter! if he ventures
(As in Illyria once they say he did
To storm a Town) it is when he cannot choose,
When all the World have fixed their Eyes upon him;
And then he lives on that for seven years after,
But, at a close revenge he never fails.

Ven. I heard, you challenged him.

Ant. I did, Ventidius.
What think thou was his answer? 'twas so tame, --
He said he had more ways than one to die;
I had not.

Ven. Poor!

Ant. He has more ways than one;
But he would choose 'em all before that one.

Ven. He first would choose an Ague, or a Fever:

Ant. No: it must be an Ague, not a Fever;
He has not warmth enough to die by that.

Ven. Or old Age, and a Bed.

Ant. I, there is his choice.
He would live, like a Lamp, to the last wink,
And crawl upon the utmost verge of life:
O Hercules! Why should a Man like this,
Who dares not trust his fate for one great action,
Be all the care of Heaven? Why should he Lord it
Over Fourscore thousand Men, of whom, each one
Is braver than himself?

Ven. You conquered for him:
Philippi knows it: there you shared with him
That Empire, which your Sword made all your own.

Ant. Fool that I was, upon my Eagles Wings
I bore this Wren, till I was tired with soaring,
And now he mounts above me.
Good Heavens, Is this, is this the Man who braves me?
Who bids my age make way: drives me before him,
To the World's ridge, and sweeps me off like rubbish?

Ven. Sir, we lose time; the Troops are mounted all.

Ant. Then give the word to March:
I long to leave this Prison of a Town,
To join thy Legions; and, in open Field,
Once more to show my Face. Lead, my Deliverer.
Enter Alex.
Alex. Great Emperor,
In mighty Arms renowned above Mankind,
But, in soft pity to the oppressed, a God:
This message sends the mournful Cleopatra
To her departing Lord.

Ven. Smooth Sycophant!

Alex. A thousand Wishes, and ten thousand Prayers,
Millions of Blessings wait you to the Wars,
Millions of Sighs and Tears she sends you too,
And would have sent
As many dear embraces to your Arms,
As many parting Kisses to your Lips;
But those, she fears, have wearied you already.

Ven. aside. False Crocodyle!

Alex. And yet she begs not now, you would not leave her,
That were a wish too mighty for her hopes,
Too presuming for her low Fortune, and your ebbing Love,
That were a wish for her more prosperous days,
Her blooming Beauty, and your growing kindness.

Ant. aside. Well, I must Man it out; What would the Queen?

Alex. First, to these Noble Warriors, who attend,
Your daring Courage in the chase of Fame,
(Too daring, and too dangerous for her Quiet)
She humbly recommends all she holds dear,
All her own Cares and Fears, the care of you.

Ven. Yes, witness Actium.

Ant. Let him speak, Ventidius.

Alex. You, when his matchless Valor bears him forward,
With Ardor too Heroic, on his Foes
Fall down, as she would do, before his Feet;
Lie in his way, and stop the paths of Death;
Tell him, this God is not invulnerable,
That absent Cleopatra bleeds in him;
And, that you may remember her Petition,
She begs you wear these Trifles, as a pawn,
Which, at your wished return, she will redeem.
Gives Jewels to the Commanders. With all the Wealth of Egypt:
This, to the great Ventidius she presents,
Whom she can never count her Enemy,
Because he loves her Lord.

Ven. Tell her I Will none on it;
I Am not ashamed of honest Poverty:
Not all the Diamonds of the East can bribe
Ventidius from his Faith. I hope to see
These, and the rest of all her sparkling store,
Where they shall more deservingly be placed.

Ant. And who must wear 'em then?

Ven. The wronged Octavia.

Ant. You might have spared that word.

Ven. And he that Bribe.

Ant. But have I no remembrance?

Alex. Yes, a dear one:
Your Slave, the Queen --

Ant. My Mistress.

Alex. Then your Mistress,
Your Mistress would, she says, have sent her Soul,
But that you had long since; she humbly begs
This Ruby Bracelet, set with bleeding Hearts,
(The emblems of her own) may bind your Arm.
[Presenting a Bracelet:
Ven. Now, my best Lord, in Honor's name, I ask you,
For Manhood's sake, and for your own dear safety,
Touch not these poisoned Gifts,
Infected by the Sender, touch 'em not,
Miriads of bluest Plagues lie underneath 'em,
And more than Aconite has dipped the Silk.

Ant. Nay, now you grow too Cynical, Ventidius.
A Lady's Favors may be worn with Honor.
What, to refuse her Bracelet! On my Soul,
When I lie pensive in my Tent alone,
'Twill pass the wakeful hours of Winter nights,
To tell these pretty Beads upon my Arm,
To count for every one a soft embrace,
A melting Kiss at such and such a time;
And now and then the fury of her Love.
When -- And what harm's in this?

Alex. None, none my Lord,
But what is to her, that now it is past for ever.

Ant. going to tie it. We Soldiers are so awkward -- -- help me tie it.

Alex. In faith, my Lord, we Courtiers too are awkward
In these Affairs: so are all Men indeed;
Even I, who am not one. But shall I speak?

Ant. Yes, freely.

Alex. Then, my Lord, fair hands alone
Are fit to tie it; She, who sent it, can.

Ven. Hell, Death; this Eunuch Pandar ruins you.
You will not see her?
[Alexas whispers an Attendant, who goes out.
Ant. But to take my leave.

Ven. Then I have washed an Aethiope. You Are undone;
You Are in the Toils; you are taken; you are destroyed:
Her Eyes do Caesar's Work.

Ant. You fear too soon.
I Am constant to my self: I know my strength;
And yet she shall not think me barbarous, neither.
Born in the depths of Africa: I Am a Roman.
Bred to the Rules of soft Humanity.
A guest, and kindly used, should bid farewell.

Ven. You do not know
How weak you are to her, how much an Infant:
You are not proof against a Smile or Glance;
A Sigh will quite disarm you.

Ant. See, she comes!
Now you shall find your error. Gods, I Thank you:
I formed the danger greater than it was,
And, now it is near, it is lessened.

Ven. Mark the end yet.
Enter Cleopatra, Charmion and Iras.
Ant. Well, Madam, we are met.

Cleo. Is this a Meeting?
Then, we must part?

Ant. We must.

Cleo. Who says we must?

Ant. Our own hard fates.

Cleo. We make those Fates our selves.

Ant. Yes, we have made 'em; we have loved each other
Into our mutual Ruin.

Cleo. The Gods have seen my Joys with envious Eyes;
I have no Friends in Heaven; and all the World,
(As 'twere the business of Mankind to part us)
Is armed against my Love: even you your self
Join with the rest; you, you are armed against me.

Ant. I will be justified in all I do
To late Posterity, and therefore hear me.
If I mix a Lie
With any Truth, reproach me freely with it;
Else, favor me with silence.

Cleo. You command me,
And I am dumb.

Ven. I like this well: he shows Authority.

Ant. That I derive my ruin
From you alone -- --

Cleo. O Heavens! I ruin you!

Ant. You promised me your silence, and you break it
E're I have scarce begun.

Cleo. Well, I obey you.

Ant. When I beheld you first, it was in Egypt,
E're Caesar saw your Eyes; you gave me love,
And were too young to know it, that I settled
Your Father in his Throne, was for your sake,
I left the acknowledgment for time to ripen.
Caesar stepped in, and with a greedy hand
Plucked the green Fruit, ever the first blush of Red
Yet cleaving to the bough. He was my Lord,
And was, beside, too great for me to Rival,
But, I deserved you first, though he enjoyed you.
When after, I beheld you in Cilicia,
An Enemy to Rome, I pardoned you.

Cleo. I cleared my self --

Ant. Again you break your Promise.
I loved you still, and took your weak excuses,
Took you into my Bosom, stained by Caesar,
And not half mine: I went to Egypt with you,
And hid me from the business of the World,
Shut out enquiring Nations from my sight,
To give whole years to you.

Ven. Yes, to your shame be it spoken.
[aside.
Ant. How I loved
Witness ye Days and Nights, and all your Hours,
That Danced away with Down upon your Feet,
As all your business were to count my Passion.
One day past by, and nothing saw but Love;
Another came, and still 'twas only Love:
The Suns were wearied out with looking on,
And I untir'd with Loving.
I saw you every day, and all the day;
And every day was still but as the first:
So eager was I still to see you more.

Ven. It Is all too true.

Ant. Fulvia, my Wife, grew jealous,
As she indeed had reason; raised a War
In Italy to call me back.

Ven. But yet
You went not.

Ant. While within your Arms I lay,
The World sell mouldring from my Hands each Hour,
And left me scarce a grasp (I thank your love for it.)

Ven. Well pushed: that last was home.

Cleop. Yet may I speak?

Ant. If I have urged a falsehood, yes, else, not.
Your silence says I have not. Fulvio died;
(Pardon, you gods, with my unkindness died)
To set the World at Peace, I took Octavia,
This Caesar's Sister; in her pride of youth
And flower of Beauty did I wed that Lady,
Whom blushing I must praise, because I left her.
You called; my Love obeyed the fatal Summons:
This raised the Roman Arms; the Cause was yours,
I would have sought by Land, where I was stronger;
You hindered it: yet, when I fought at Sea,
Forsook me fighting; and (Oh stain to Honor!
Oh lasting shame!) I knew not that I fled;
But fled to follow you.

Ven. What haste she made to hoist her purple Sails!
And to appear magnificent in flight,
Drew half our strength away.

Ant. All this you caused.
And, Would you multiply more ruins on me?
This honest Man, my best, my only Friend,
Has gathered up the Shipwreck of my Fortunes;
Twelve Legions I have left, my last recruits,
And you have watched the news, and bring your eyes
To seize them too. If you have ought to answer,
Now speak, you have free leave.

Alex. aside. She stands confounded:
Despair is in her Eyes.

Ven. Now lay a sigh in the way, to stop his passage:
Prepare a Tear, and bid it for his Legions;
It Is like they shall be fold.

Cleo. How shall I plead my cause, when you, my Judge
Already have condemned me? Shall I bring
The Love you bore me for my Advocate?
That now is turned against me, that destroys me;
For, love once past, is, at the best, forgotten;
But oftener sours to hate: 'twill please my Lord
To ruin me, and therefore I Will be guilty.
But, could I once have thought it would have pleased you,
That you would pry, with narrow searching Eyes
Into my faults, severe to my destruction:
And watching all advantages with care,
That serve to make me wretched? Speak, my Lord,
For I end here. Though I deserve this usage,
Was it like you to give it?

Ant. O you wrong me,
To think I sought this parting, or desired
To accuse you more than what will clear my self,
And justify this breach.

Cleo. Thus low I thank you.
And since my innocence will not offend,
I shall not blush to own it.

Ven. After this
I think she will blush at nothing.

Cleo. You seem grieved,
(And therein you are kind) that Caesar first
Enjoyed my love, though you deserved it better:
I grieve for that, my Lord, much more than you;
For, had I first been yours, it would have saved
My second choice: I never had been his,
And never had been but yours. But Caesar first,
You say, possessed my love. Not so, my Lord;
He first possessed my Person; you my Love:
Caesar loved me; but I loved Antony.
If I endured him after, 'twas because
I judged it due to the first name of Men;
And, half constrained, I gave, as to a Tyrant,
What he would take by force.

Ven. O Siren! Siren!
Yet grant that all the love she boasts were true,
Has she not ruined you? I still urge that,
The fatal consequence.

Cleo. The consequence indeed,
For I dare challenge him, my greatest Foe,
To say it was designed: it is true, I loved you,
And kept you far from an uneasy Wife,
(Such Fulvia was.)
Yes, but he will say, you left Octavia for me; --
And, Can you blame me to receive that love,
Which quitted such desert, for worthless me?
How often have I wished some other Caesar,
Great as the first, and as the second young,
Would court my Love to be refused for you!

Ven. Words, words; but Actium, Sir, remember Actium.

Cleo. Even there, I dare his Malice. True, I Counseled
To fight at Sea; but I betrayed you not.
I fled; but not to the Enemy. 'Twas fear;
Would I had been a Man, not to have feared,
For none would then have envied me your friendship,
Who envy me your Love.

Ant. We Are both unhappy:
If nothing else, yet our ill fortune parts us.
Speak; Would you have me perish, by my stay?

Cleo. If as a friend you ask my Judgment, go;
If as a Lover, stay. If you must perish:
It Is a hard word; but stay.

Ven. See now the effects of her so boasted love!
She strives to drag you down to ruin with her:
But, could she 'scape without you, oh how soon
Would she let go her hold, and haste to shore,
And never look behind!

Cleo. Then judge my love by this.
[Giving Antony a Writing. Could I have born
A life or death, a happiness or woe
From yours divided, this had given me means.

Ant. By Hercules, the Writing of Octavius!
I know it well; it is that prescribing hand,
Young as it was, that led the way to mine,
And left me but the second place in Murder. --
See, see, Ventidius! here he offers Egypt,
And joins all Syria to it as a present,
So, in requital, she forsake my fortunes,
And join her Arms with his.

Cleo. And yet you leave me!
You leave me, Antony; and yet I love you.
Indeed I do: I have refused a Kingdom,
That Is a Trifle:
For I could part with life; with any thing,
But only you. O let me die, but with you!
Is that a hard request?

Ant. Next living with you,
It Is all that Heaven can give.

Alex. aside. He melts; We conquer.

Cleo. No: you shall go: your Interest calls you hence;
Yes, your dear interest pulls too strong, for these
Weak Arms to hold you here. --
[Takes his hand. Go; leave me, Soldier;
(For you're no more a Lover:) leave me dying:
Push me all pale and panting from your Bosom,
And, when your March begins, let one run after
Breathless almost for Joy; and cry, she is dead:
The Soldiers shout; you then perhaps may sigh,
And muster all your Roman Gravity;
Ventidius chides; and strait your Brow clears up.
As I had never been.

Ant. Gods, it is too much; too much for Man to bear!

Cleo. What is it for me then,
A weak forsaken Woman? and a Lover? --
Here let me breath my last: envy me not
This minute in your Arms: I Will die apace:
As fast as ever I can; and end your trouble.

Ant. Dye! Rather let me perish: loos'nd Nature
Leap from its hinges. Sink the props of Heaven,
And fall the Skies to crush the nether World.
My Eyes, my Soul; my all! --
[Embraces her.
Ven. And what is this Toy
In balance with your Fortune, Honor, Fame?

Ant. What is it, Ventidius? it out-weighs 'em all;
Why, we have more than Conquered Caesar now:
My Queen's not only Innocent, but Loves me.
This, this is she who drags me down to ruin!
'But, could she 'scape without me, with what haste
Would she let slip her hold, and make to shore,
And never look behind!
Down on thy knees, Blasphemer as thou art,
And ask forgiveness of wronged Innocence.

Ven. I Will rather die, than take it. Will you go?

Ant. Go! Whither? go from all that is excellent!
Faith, Honor, Virtue, all good things forbid,
That I should go from her, who sets my love
Above the price of Kingdoms. Give, you Gods,
Give to your Boy, your Caesar,
This Rattle of a Globe to play withal,
This Gu-gau World, and put him cheaply off:
I Will not be pleased with less than Cleopatra.

Cleo. She wholly yours. My heart's so full of joy,
That I shall do some wild extravagance
Of Love in public; and the foolish World,
Which knows not tenderness, will think me Mad.

Ven. O Women! Women! Women! all the Gods
Have not such power of doing good to Man,
As you of doing harm.
[Exit.
Ant. Our Men are Armed.
Unbar the Gate that looks to Caesar's Camp;
I would revenge the Treachery he mea^ me;
And long security makes Conquest easy.
I Am eager to return before I go;
For, all the pleasures I have known, beat thick
On my remembrance: how I long for Night!
That both the sweets of mutual love may try,
And once Triumph over Caesar e're we die.
[Exeunt.
ACT III.
At one door, Enter Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras, and Alexas, a Train of
Egyptians: at the other, Antony and Romans. The entrance on both sides is
prepared by Music; the Trumpets first sounding on Antony's part: then answered
by Timbrels, etc. on Cleopatra's. Charmion and Iras hold a Laurel Wreath
betwixt them. A Dance of Egyptians. After the Ceremony, Cleopatra Crowns
Antony. Ant. I Thought how those white arms would fold me in,
And strain me close, and melt me into love;
So pleased with that sweet Image, I sprung forwards,
And added all my strength to every blow.

Cleo. Come to me, come my Soldier, to my Arms,
You Have been too long away from my embraces;
But, when I have you fast, and all my own,
With broken murmurs, and with amorous sighs,
I Will say, you were unkind, and punish you,
And mark you red with many an eager kiss.

Ant. My Brighter Venus!

Cleo. O my greater Mars!

Ant. Thou joinst us well, my Love!
Suppose me come from the Phlegraean Plains,
Where gasping Giants lay, cleft by my Sword:
And Mountain tops pared off each other blow,
To bury those I slew: receive me, Goddess:
Let Caesar spread his subtle Nets, like Vulcan,
In thy embraces I would be beheld
By Heaven and Earth at once:
And make their envy what they meant their sport
Let those who took us blush; I would love on
With awful State, regardless of their frowns,
As their superior God.
There Is no satiety of Love, in thee;
Enjoyed, thou still art new; perpetual Spring
Is in thy arms; the ripened fruit but falls,
And blossoms rise to fill its empty place;
And I grow rich by giving.
Enter Ventidius, and stands apart.
Alex. O, now the danger's past, your General (...)
He joins not in your joys, nor minds your Triumphs,
But, with contracted brows, looks frowning on,
As envying your Success.

Ant. Now, on my Soul, he loves me; truly loves me;
He never flattered me in any vice,
But awes me with his virtue: even this minute
Methinks he has a right of chiding me.
Lead to the Temple: I Will avoid his presence;
It checks too strong upon me.
[Exeunt the rest. As Antony is going, Ventidius pulls him by the Robe.
Ven. Emperor.

Ant. looking back. It Is the old argument; I pr'ythee spare me.

Ven. But this one hearing, Emperor.

Ant. Let go
My Robe; or, by my Father Hercules --.

Ven. By Hercules his Father, that is yet greater,
I bring you somewhat you would wish to know.

Ant. Thou see we are observed; attend me here,
And I Will return.
[Exit.
Ven. I Am waining in his favor, yet I love him;
I love this Man, who runs to meet his ruin;
And, sure the Gods, like me, are fond of him:
His Virtues lie so mingled with his Crimes,
As would confound their choice to punish one,
And not reward the other.
Enter Antony.
Ant. We can conquer,
You see, without your aid.
We have dislodged their Troops,
They look on us at distance, and, like Curs
Escaped from the Lions paws, they bay far off,
And lick their wounds, and saintly threaten War.
Five thousand Romans with their faces upward,
^ye breathless on the Plain.

Ven. It Is well: and he
Who lost 'em, could have spared Ten thousand more,
Yet if, by this advantage, you could gain
An easier Peace, while Caesar doubts the Chance
Of Arms! --

Ant. O think not on it, Ventidius;
The Boy pursues my ruin, he^ll no peace:
His malice is considerate in advantage;
O, he is the coolest Murderer, so stanch,
He kills, and keeps his temper.

Ven. Have you no friend
In all his Army, who has power to move him,
Mecaenas, or Agrippa might do much.

Ant. They Are both too deep in Caesar's interests,
We'll work it out by dint of Sword, or perish,

Ven. ^ain I would find some other.

Ant. Thank thy love.
Some four or five such Victories as this,
Will save thy farther pains.

Ven. Expect no more; Caesar is on his Guard:
I know, Sir, you have conquered against odds;
But still you draw Supplies from one poor Town,
And of Egyptians: He has all the World,
And, at his back, Nations come pouring in,
To fill the gaps you make. Pray think again.

Ant. Why do thou drive me from my self, to search
For Foreign aids? to hunt my memory,
And range all over a wast and barren place
To find a Friend? The wretched have no Friends --
Yet I had one, the bravest Youth of Rome,
Whom Caesar loves beyond the Love of Women;
He could resolve his mind, as Fire does Wax,
From that hard rugged Image, melt him down,
And mould him in what softer form he pleased.

Ven. Him would I see; that Man of all the world:
Just such a one we want.

Ant. He loved me too.
I was his Soul; he lived not but in me:
We were so closed within each others Breasts,
The Rivets were not found that joined us first.
That does not reach us yet: we were so mixed,
As meeting Streams, both to our selves were lost;
We were one Mass; we could not give or take,
But from the same; for he was I, I he.

Ven. aside. He moves as I would wish him.

Ant. After this,
I need not tell his Name: 'twas Dollabella.

Ven. He Is now in Caesar's Camp.

Ant. No matter where,
Since he is no longer mine. He took unkindly
That I forbad him Cleopatra's sight;
Because I feared he loved her: he confessed
He had a warmth, which, for my sake, he stifled;
For 'twere impossible that two, so one,
Should not have loved the same. When he departed,
He took no leave; and that confirmed my thoughts.

Ven. It argues that he loved you more than her,
^lse he had staid; but he perceived you jealous,
And would not grieve his Friend: I know he love you.

Ant. I should have seen him then ere now.

Ven. Perhaps
He has thus long been laboring for your Peace.

Ant. Would he were here.

Ven. Would you believe he loved you?
I read your Answer in your Eyes; you would.
Not to conceal it longer, he has sent
A Messenger from Caesar's Camp, with Letters.

Ant. Let him appear.

Ven. I Will bring him instantly.
Exit Ventidius, and Reenters immediately with Dollabella.
Ant. It Is he himself, himself, by holy Friendship
[Runs to embrace him. Art thou returned at last, my better half?
Come, give me all my self.
Let me not live,
If the young Bridegroom, Ionging for his Night,
Was ever half so fond.

Dolla. I must be silent; for my Soul is busy
About a noble Work: she is new come home,
Like a long absent Man, and wanders over
Each Room, a Stranger to her own, to loo^
If all be safe.

Ant. Thou have what is left of m^
For I am now so sunk from what I was,
Thou find'st me at my lowest Water-mark.
The Rivers that ran in, and raised my Fortunes,
Are all dried up, or take another course:
What I have left is from my native Spring;
I Have still a Heart that swells, in scorn of Fate.
And lifts me to my Banks.

Dolla. Still you are Lord of all the World to me.

Ant. Why, then I yet am so; for thou art all.
If I had any Joy when thou were absent,
I grudged it to my self; methought I robbed
Thee of thy part. But, Oh my Dollabella!
Thou have beheld me other than I am.
Have thou not seen my morning Chambers filled
With Sc^pter'd Slaves, who waited to salute me:
With Eastern Monarchs, who forgot the Sun,
To worship my uprising? Menial Kings
Ran coursing up and down my Palace-yard,
Stood silent in my Presence, watched my Eyes,
And, at my least Command, all started out
Like Racers to the Gaol.

Dolla. Slaves to your Fortune.

Ant. Fortune is Caesar's now; and what am I?

Ven. What you have made your self; I will not flatter.

Ant. Is this friendly done?

Dolla. Yes, when his end is so, I must join with him;
Indeed I must, and yet you must not chide:
Why am I else your Friend?

Ant. Take heed, young Man,
How thou upbraid'st my Love: The Queen has Eyes,
And thou too have a Soul. Can thou remember
When, swelled with hatred, thou beheld'st her first
As Accessory to thy Brothers Death?

Dolla. Spare my Remembrance; 'twas a guilty day,
And still the blush hangs here.

Ant. To clear her self,
For sending him no Aid, she came from Egypt.
Her Gally down the Silver Cydnos rowed,
The Tackling Silk, the Streamers waved with Gold,
The gentle Winds were lodged in Purple Sails:
Her Nymphs, like Nereids, round her Couch, were placed;
Where she, another Sea-born Venus, lay.

Dolla. No more: I would not hear it.

Ant. O, you must!
She lay, and leant her Cheek upon her Hand,
And cast a Look so languishingly sweet,
As if, secure of all Beholders Hearts,
Neglecting she could take 'em: Boy's, like Cupids,
Stood fanning, with their painted Wings, the Winds
That played about her Face: But if she smiled,
A darting Glory seemed to blaze abroad:
That Men's desiring Eyes were never wearied;
But hung upon the Object: To soft Flutes
The Silver Oars kept Time; and while they played,
The Hearing gave new Pleasure to the Sight;
And both to Thought: 'twas Heaven or somewhat more;
For she so charmed all Hearts, that gazing Crowds
Stood panting on the shore, and wanted Breath
To give their welcome Voice.
Then, Dollabella, where was then thy Soul?
Was not thy Fury quite disarmed with Wonder?
Did tho^ not shrink behind me from those Eyes,
And whisper in my Ears? Oh, tell her not
That I accused her wi^h my Brothers Death!

Dolla And should my Weakness be a Plea fer yours?
Mine was an Age when Love might be excused,
When kindly war^th, and when my springing youth
Made it a Debt to Nature. Yours --

Ven. Speak boldly.
Yours, he would say; in your declining Age,
When no more heat was left but what you forced,
When all the Sap was needful for the Trunk,
When it went down, then you constrained the Course,
And robbed from Nature, to supply Desire;
In you (I would not use so harsh a Word)
But it is plain Dotage.

Ant. Ha!

Dolla 'Twas urged too home.
But yet the loss was private that I made;
'Twas but my self I lost: I lost no Legions;
I had no World to lose, no Peoples Love.

Ant. This from a Friend?

Dolla. Yes, Anthony, a true one;
A Friend so tender, that each Word I speak
Stabs my own Heart, before it reach your Ear.
O, judge me not less kind because I chide:
To Caesar I excuse you.

Ant O ye Gods!
Have I then lived to be excused to Caesar?

Dolla. As to your Equal:
While I wear this, he never shall be more.

Dolla I bring Conditions from him.

Ant. Are they Noble?
Methinks thou should not bring 'em else; yet he
Is sull of deep dissembling; knows no Honor,
Divided from his Interest. Fate mistook him;
For Nature meant him for an Usurer,
He Is fit indeed to buy, not conquer Kingdoms.

Ven. Then, granting this,
What Power was theirs who wrought so hard a Temper
To honorable Terms!

Ant. It was my Dollabella, or some God.

Dolla. Nor I; nor yet Mecoenas, nor Agrippa:
They were your Enemies; and I a Friend
Too weak alone; yet 'twas a Roman's Deed.

Ant. 'Twas like a Roman done: show me that Man
Who has preserved my Life, my Love, my Honor;
Let me but see his Face.

Ven. That task is mine,
And, Hea^'n thou know how pleasing.
Exit Vent.
Dolla. You Will remember
To whom you stand obliged?

Ant. When I forget it,
Be thou unkind, and that is my greatest curse.
My Queen shall thank him too.

Dolla. I fear she will not.

Ant. But she shall do it: the Queen, my Dollabella!
Have thou not still some grudgings of thy Fever?

Dolla. I would not see her lost.

Ant. When I sorsake her,
Leave me, my be^ter Sta^s; f^r she has truth
Beyond her beauty. Caesar tempted her,
At no less price than Kingdoms, to betray me;
But she resisted all: and yet thou chid'st me
For loving her too well. Could I do so?

Dolla. Yes there is my reason.
Re-enter Ventidius, with Octavia, leading Antony's two little Daughters.
Ant. Where? -- Octavia there!
(Starting back.)
Ven. What, is she poison to you? a Disease?
Look on her, view her well; and those she brings:
Are they all Strangers to your eyes? has Nature
No secret Call, no whisper they are yours?

Dolla. For shame, my Lord, if not for Love, receive 'em
With kinder Eyes. If you confess a Man,
Meet 'em, embrace 'em, bid 'em welcome to you.
Your Arms should open, even without; your knowledge,
To clasp 'em in; your Feet should turn to Wings,
To bear you to 'em; and your Eyes dart out,
And aim a kiss ere you could reach the Lips.

Ant. I stood amazed to think how they came hither.

Vent. I sent for 'em; I brought 'em in, unknown
To Cleopatra's Guards.

Dolla. Yet are you cold?

Octav. Thus long I have attended for my welcome;
Which, as a Stranger, sure I might expect,
Who am I?

Ant. Caesar's Sister.

Octav. That Is unkind!
Had I been nothing more than Caesar's Sister,
Know, I had still remained in Caesar's Camp;
But you Octavi^, your much injured Wise,
Though banished from your Bed, driven from your House,
In spite of Caesar's Sister, still is yours.
It Is true, I have a heart disdains your Coldness,
And prompts me not to seek what you should offer;
But a Wife's Virtue still surmounts that Pride:
I come to claim you as my own; to show
My Duty first, to ask, nay beg, your kindness:
Your hand, my Lord; it is mine, and I will have it.
[T^king h^s hand.
Ven. Do, take it, thou deserve it.

Dolla. On my Soul,
And so she does: she is neither too submissive,
Nor yet too haughty; but so just a mean,
Shows, as it ought, a Wife and Roman too.

Ant. I ^ear, Octavia, you have begged my Life.

Octav. Begged it, my Lord?

Ant. Yes, begged it, my Ambassadress,
Poorly and basely begged it of your Brother.

Octav. Poorly and bafely I could never beg;
Nor could my Brother grant.

Ant. Shall I, who, to my kneeling Slave, could say,
Rise up, and be a King; shall I fall down
And cry, Forgive me, Caesar? shall I set
A Man, my Equal, in the place of Jove,
As he could give me being? No; that word,
Forgive, would choke me up,
And die upon my Tongue.

Dolla. You shall not need it.

Ant. I will not need it. Come, you have all betrayed me:
My Friend too! To receive some vile Conditions.
My Wife has bought me, with her Prayers and Tears;
And now I must become her branded Slave:
In every peevish Mood she will upbraid
The Life she gave: if I but look awry,
She cries, I Will tell my Brother.

Octav. My hard Fortune
Subjects me still to your unkind mistakes.
But the Conditions I have brought are such
You need not blush to take: I love your Honor,
Because it is mine; it never shall be said
Octavia's Husband was her Brothers Slave.
Sir, you are Free; Free, even from her you loath;
For, though my Brother bargains for your Love,
Makes me the Price and Cement of your Peace,
I have a Soul like yours; I cannot take
Your Love as Alms, nor beg what I deserve.
I Will tell my Brother we are reconciled;
He shall draw back his Troops, and you shall march
To rule the East: I may be dropped at Athens;
No matter where, I never will complain,
But only keep the barren Name of Wife,
And rid you of the trouble.

Ven. Was ever such a strife of sullen Honor!
Both scorned to be obliged.

Dolla. Oh, she has touched him in the tender'st part;
S^e how he reddens with despite and shame
To be outdone in Generosity!

Ven. See how he winks! how he dries up a Tear,
That fain would fall!

Ant. Octavia, I have heard you, and must praise
The greatness of your Soul;
But cannot yield to what you have proposed:
For I can never be conquered but by Love;
And you do all for Duty. You would free me,
And would be dropped at Athens; was it not so?

Octav. It was, my Lord.

Ant. Then I must be obliged
To one who Loves me not, who, to her self,
May call me thankless and ungrateful Man:
I Will not endure it, no.

Ven. I Am glad it pinches there.

Octav. Would you triumph over poor Octavia's Virtue?
That Pride was all I had to bear me up;
That you might think you owed me for your Life,
And owed it to my Duty, not my Love.
I have been injured, and my haughty Soul
Could brook but ill the Man who slights my Bed.

Ant. Therefore you Love me not.

Octav. Therefore, my Lord,
I should not love you.

Ant. Therefore you would leave me?

Octav. And therefore I should leave you -- if I could.

Dolla. Her Soul's too great, after such injuries,
To say she Loves; and yet she lets you see it.
Her modesty and silence plead her Cause.

Ant. Oh, Dollabella, which way shall I turn?
I find a secret yielding in my Soul;
But Cleopatra, who would die with me,
Must she be left? Pity pleads for Octavia;
But does it not plead more for Cleopatra?

Ven. Justice and Pity both plead for Octavia;
For Cleopatra, neither.
One would be ruined with you; but she first
Had ruined you: the other, you have ruined,
And yet she would preserve you.
In every thing their Merits are unequal.

Ant. Oh, my distracted Soul!

Octav. Sweet Heaven compose it.
Come, come, my Lord, if I can pardon you,
Methinks you should accept it. Look on these;
Are they not yours? Or stand they thus neglected
As they are mine? Go to him, Children, go;
Kneel to him, take him by the hand, speak to him;
For you may speak, and he may own you too,
Without a Blush; and so he cannot all
His Children: go, I say, and pull him to me,
And pull him to your selves, from that bad Woman.
You, Agrippina, hang upon his Arms;
And you, Antonia, clasp about his Waste:
If he will shake you off, if he will dash you
Against the Pavement, you must bear it, Children;
For you are mine, and I was born to suffer.
[Here the Children go to him, etc.
Ven. Was ever sight so moving! Emperor!

Dolla. Friend!

Octav. Husband!

Both Childr. Father!

Ant. I am vanquished: take me,
Octavia; take me, Children; share me all.
(Embracing them.) I Have been a thriftless Debtor to your Loves,
And run out much, in Riot, from your Stock;
But all shall be amended.

Octav. O blessed hour!

Dolla. O happy Change!

Ven. My joy stops at my tongue;
But it has found two Channels here for one,
And Bubbles out above.

Ant. to Octav. This is thy Triumph; lead me where thou will;
Even to thy Brothers Camp.

Octav. All there are yours.
Enter Alexas hastily.
Alex. The Queen, my Mistress, Sir, and yours --

Ant. It Is past. Octavia, you shall stay this night; To morrow,
Caesar and we are one.
[Ex. leading Octavia, Doll. and the Children follow.
Ven. There Is News for you; run,
My officious Eunuch,
Be sure to be the first; haste forward:
Haste, my dear Eunuch, haste.
Exit.
Alex. This downright fighting Fool, this thick-scull'd Hero,
This blunt unthinking Instrument of Death,
With plain dull Virtue, has out-gone my Wit:
Pleasure forsook my early'st Infancy,
The Luxury of others robbed my Cradle,
And ravished thence the Promise of a Man:
Cast out from Nature, disinherited
Of what her meanest Children claim by kind;
Yet, Greatness kept me from Contempt: that is gone.
Had Cleopatra followed my advice,
Then he had been betrayed, who now forsakes.
She dies for love; but she has known its joys:
Gods, is this just, that I, who knows no joys,
Must die, because she loves?
Enter Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras, Train. Oh, Madam, I have seen what blasts my
Eyes!
Octavia's here!

Cleop. Peace with that Raven's note.
I know it too; and now am in
The Pangs of Death.

Alex. You are no more a Queen;
Egypt is lost.

Cleop. What tell thou me of Egypt?
My Life, my Soul is lost! Octavia has him!
O fatal Name to Cleopatra's love!
My kisses, my embraces now are hers;
While I -- But thou have seen my Rival; speak,
Does she deserve this Blessing? Is she fair,
Bright as a Goddess? and is all perfection
Confined to her? It is. Poor I was made
Of that course matter which, when she was finished,
The Gods threw by, for rubbish.

Alex. She Is indeed a very Miracle.

Cleop. Death to my hopes, a Miracle!

Alex. bowing. A Miracle;
I mean of Goodness; for in Beauty, Madam,
You make all Wonders cease.

Cleop. I was too rash:
Take this in part of recompense. But, Oh,
[Giving a Ring. I fear thou flatter'st me.

Char. She comes! she is here!

Iras. Fly, Madam, Caesar s Sister!

Cleop. Were she the Sister of the Thund'rer Jove,
And bore her Brother's Lightning in her Eyes,
Thus would I face my Rival.
[Meets Octav. with Ventid. Octav. bears up to her. Their Trains come up on
either side.
Octav. I need not ask if you are Cleopatra,
Your haughty Carriage --

Cleop. Shows I am a Queen:
Nor need I ask you who you are.

Octav. A Roman:
A Name that makes, and can unmake a Queen.

Cleop. Your Lord, the Man who serves me, is a Roman.

Octav. He was a Roman, till he lost that Name
To be a Slave in Egypt; but I come
To free him thence.

Cleop. Peace, peace, my Lover's Juno.
When he grew weary of that Houshold-Clog,
He chose my easier Bonds.

Octav. I wonder not
Your Bonds are easy; you have long been practiced
In that lascivious Art: he is not the first
For whom you spread your snares: let Caesar witness.

Cleop. I loved not Caesar; 'twas but gratitude
I paid his Love: the worst your Malice can,
Is but to say the greatest of Mankind
Has been my Slave. The next, but far above him,
In my Esteem, is he whom Law calls yours,
But whom his Love made mine.
Oct. coming up close to her. I would view nearer
That Face, which has so long usurped my right,
To find the inevitable Charms, that catch
Mankind so sure, that ruined my dear Lord.

Cleop. O, you do well to search; for had you known
But half these Charms, you had not lost his heart.

Octav. Far be their knowledge from a Roman Lady,
Far from a modest Wife. Shame of our Sex,
Do thou not Blush, to own those black Endearments
That make sin pleasing?

Cleop. You may Blush, who want 'em: if bounteous Nature, if indulgent Heaven
Have given me Charms to please the bravest Man;
Should I not thank 'em? should I be ashamed,
And not be Proud? I am, that he has loved me;
And, when I love not him, Heaven change this Face
For one like that.

Octav. Thou love him not so well.

Cleop. I Love him better, and deserve him more.

Octav. You do not; cannot: you have been his ruin.
W^o made him cheap at Rome, but Cleopatra?
Who made him scorned abroad, but Cleopatra?
At Actium, who betrayed him? Cleopatra.
Who made his Children Orphans? and poor me
A wretched Widow? only Cleopatra?

Cleop. Yet she who loves him best is Cleopatra.
If you have suffered, I have suffered more.
You bear the specious Title of a Wife,
To gild your Cause, and draw the pitying World
To favor it: the World contemns poor me;
For I have lost my Honor, lost my Fame,
And stained the Glory of my Royal House,
And all to bear the branded Name of Mistress.
There wants but Life, and that too I would lose
For him I love.

Octav. Be It so then; take thy Wish.
Exit cum suis.
Cleop. And it is my Wish,
Now he is lost for whom alone I lived.
My sight grows dim, and every Object dances,
And swims before me, in the maze of Death.
My Spirits, while they were opposed, kept up;
They could not sink beneath a Rivals scorn:
But now she is gone they faint.

Alex. Mine have had leisure
To recollect their Strength, and furnish Counsel,
To ruin her; who else must ruin you.

Cleop. Vain Promiser!
Lead me, my Charmion; nay, your hand too, Iras:
My Grief has weight enough to sink you both.
Conduct me to some Solitary Chamber,
And draw the Curtains round;
Then leave me to my self, to take alone
My fill of Grief:
There I till Death will his unkindness weep:
As harmless Infants moan themselves asleep.
Exeunt.
ACT IV.
Antony, Dollabella. Dolla. WHy would you shift it from your self, on me?
Can you not tell her you must part?

Ant. I cannot,
I could pull out an Eye, and bid it go,
And the other should not weep. Oh, Dollabella,
How many Deaths are in this word Depart!
I dare not trust my tongue to tell her so:
One Look of hers, would thaw me into Tears,
And I should melt till I were lost again.

Dolla. Then let Ventidius;
He Is rough by Nature.

Ant. Oh, he will speak too harshly;
He Will kill her with the News: Thou, only thou.

Dolla. Nature has cast me in so soft a Mould,
That but to hear a Story feigned for Pleasure
Of some sad Lovers Death, moistens my Eyes,
And robs me of my Manhood. -- I should speak
So faintly; with such fear to grieve her Heart,
She Would not believe it earnest.

Ant. Therefore; therefore
Thou only, thou art fit: think thy self me,
And when thou speak (but let it first be long)
Take off the edge from every Sharper sound,
And let our parting be as gently made
As other Loves begin: will thou do this?

Dolla. What you have said, so sinks into my Soul,
That, if I must speak, I shall speak just so.

Ant. I leave you then to your sad task: Farewell.
I sent her word to meet you.
(Goes to the door, and comes back.) I forgot;
Let her be told, I Will make her peace with mine:
Her Crown and Dignity shall be preserved,
If I have power with Caesar. -- O, be sure
To think on that.

Dolla. Fear not, I will remember.
[Ant^ny goes agi^ to the door, and c^mes back.
Ant. And tell her, too, how much I was constrained;
I did not this, but with extremest force:
Desire her not to hate my Memory,
For I still cherish hers; -- insist on that.

Dolla. Trust me, I Will not forget it.

Ant. Then that is all.
(Goes out, and returns again.) Will thou forgive my fondness this once more?
Tell her, though we shall never meet again,
If I should hear she took another Love,
The News would break my Heart. -- Now I must go;
For every time I have returned, I feel
My Soul more tender; and my next Command
Would be to bid her stay, and ruin both.
Exit.
Dolla. Men are but Children of a larger growth,
Our Appetites as apt to change as theirs,
And full as craving too, and full as vain;
And yet the Soul, shut up in her dark Room,
Viewing so clear abroad, at home sees nothing;
But, like a Mole in Earth, busy and blind,
Works all her folly up, and casts it outward
To the Worlds open view: thus I discovered,
And blamed the Love of ruined Antony;
Yet wish that I were he, to be so ruined.
Enter Ventidius above.
Ven. Alone? and Talking to himself? concerned too?
Perhaps my Guess is right; he loved her once,
And may pursue it still.

Dolla. O Friendship! Friendship!
Ill can thou answer this; and Reason, worse:
Unfaithful in the Attempt; hopeless to win;
And, if I win, undone: mere madness all.
And yet the occasion's fair. What injury,
To him, to wear the Robe which he throws by?

Ven. None, none at all. This happens as I wish,
To ruin her yet more with Antony.
Enter Cleopatra, talking with Alexas, Charmion, Iras on the other side.
Dolla. She comes! What Charms have sorrow on that Face!
Sorrow seems pleased to dwell with so much sweetness;
Yet, now and then, a Melancholy smile
Breaks loose, like Lightning, in a Winter's night,
And shows a moments day.

Ven. If she should love him too! Her Eunuch there!
That Porcpisce bodes ill weather. Draw, draw nearer,
Sweet Devil, that I may hear.

Alex. Believe me; try
[Dollabella goes over to Charmi^n and Iras; seems to talk with them. To make
him jealous; jealousy is like
A polisht Glass held to the lips when Life's in doubt:
If there be Breath, 'twill catch the damp and show it.

Cleop. I grant you Jealousie's a Proof of Love,
But it is a weak and unavailing Medicine;
It puts out the Disease, and makes it show,
But has no power to cure.

Alex. It Is your last Remedy, and strongest too:
And then this Dollabella, who so fit
To practice on? He Is handsome, valiant, young,
And looks as he were laid for Nature's bait
To catch weak Women's Eyes.
He stands already more than half suspected
Of loving you: the least kind word, or glance,
You give this Youth, will kindle him with Love:
Then, like a burning Vessel set adrift,
You Will send him down amain before the Wind,
To fire the Heart of jealous Antony.

Cleop. Can I do this? Ah no; my Love's so true,
That I can neither hide it where it is,
Nor show it where it is not. Nature meant me
A Wife, a silly harmless household Dove,
Fond without Art; and kind without Deceit;
But Fortune, that has made a Mistress of me,
Have thrust me out to the wide World, unfurnished
Of falsehood to be happy.

Alex. Force your self.
The event will be, your Lover will return
Doubly desirous to possess the good
Which once he ^ar'd to lose.

Cleop. I must Attempt it;
But Oh with what regret!
Exit. Alex. (She comes up to Dollabella.)
Ven. So, now the Scene draws near; they are in my reach.

Cleop. to Dol. Discoursing with my Women! Might not I
Share in your Entertainment?

Char. You have been
The Subject of it, Madam.

Cleop. How; and how?

^as. Such praises of your Beauty!

Cleop. Mere Poetry.
Your Roman Wits, your Gallus and Tibullus,
Have taught you this from Citheris and Delia.

Dolla. Those Roman Wits have never been in Egypt,
Citheris and Delia else had been unsung:
I, who have seen -- had I been born a Poet,
Should choose a nobler Name.

Cleop. You flatter me.
But, it is your Nation's vice: all of your Country
Are flatterers, and all false. Your Friend's like you.
I Am sure he sent you not to speak these words.

Dolla. No, Madam; yet he sent me --

Cleop. Well, he sent you --

Dolla. Of a less pleasing Errand.

Cleop. How less pleasing?
Less to you self, or me?

Dolla. Madam, to both;
For you must mourn, and I must grieve to cause it.

Cleop. You, Charmion, and your Fellow, stand at distance.
(Aside.) Hold up, my Spirits. -- Well, now your mournful matter;
For I Am prepared, perhaps can Guess it too.

Dolla. I wish you would; for it is a thankless office
To tell ill News: and I, of all your Sex,
Most fear displeasing you.

Cleop. Of all your Sex,
I soonest could forgive you, if you should.

Ven Most delicate advances! Woman! Woman!
Dear damned, inconstant Sex!

Cleop. In the first place,
I am to be forsaken; is it not so?

Dolla. I wish I could not Answer to that Question.

Cleop. Then pass it over, because it troubles you:
I should have been more grieved another time.
Next, I Am to lose my Kingdom. -- Farewell, Egypt.
Yet, is there any more?

Dolla. Madam, I fear
Your too deep Sense of Grief has turned your Reason.

Cleop. No, no, I Am not run mad; I can bear Fortune:
And Love may be expelled by other Love,
As Poisons are by Poisons.

Dolla. -- You o'erjoy me, Madam,
To find your Griefs so moderately born.
You Have heard the worst; all are not false, like him.

Cleop. No; Heaven forbid they should.

Dolla. Some Men are constant.

Cleop. And Constancy deserves Reward, that is certain.

Dolla. Deserves it not; but give it leave to hope.

Ven. I Will swear thou have my leave. I have enough:
But how to manage this! Well, I Will consider.
Exit.
Dolla. I came prepared,
To tell you heavy News; News, which I thought,
Would fright the Blood from your pale Cheeks to hear:
But you have met it with a Cheerfulness
That makes my Task more easy; and my Tongue,
Which on another Message was employed,
Would gladly speak its own.

Cleop. Hold, Dollabella.
First tell me, were you chosen by my Lord?
Or sought you this Employment?

Dolla. He picked me out; and, as his Bosom-Friend,
He Charged me with his words.

Cleop. The Message then
I know was tender, and each Accent smooth,
To molli^e that rugged word Depart.

Dolla. Oh, you mistake: he chose the harshest words,
With fiery Eyes, and with contracted Brows,
He Coined his Face in the severest stamp:
And fury shook his Fabric like an Earthquake;
He heaved for vent, and burst like bellowing Aetna,
In Sounds scarce humane, "Hence, away for ever:
"Let her be gone, the blot of my renown,
"And bane of all my hopes:
[All the time of this Speech, Cleop. seems more and more concerned, till she
sinks quite down. "Let her be driven a^ far as Men can think
"From Man's commerce: She Will poison to the Center.

Cleop. Oh, I can bear no more!

Dolla. Help, help: Oh Wretch! Oh cursed, cursed Wretch!
What have I done?

Char. Help, chafe her Temples, Iras.

Iras. Bend, bend her forward quickly.

Char. Heaven be praised,
She comes again.

Cleop. Oh, let him not approach me.
Why have you brought me back to this loathed Being,
The abode of Falsehood, violated Vows,
And injured Love? For Pity, let me go;
For, if there be a place of long repose,
I Am sure I want it. My disdainful Lord
Can never break that quiet; nor awake
The sleeping Soul, with hollowing in my Tomb
Such words as fright her hence, Unkind, unkind.

Dolla. kneeling. Believe me, it is against my self I speak,
That sure deserves Belief; I inju^'d him:
My Friend never spoke those words. Oh, had you seen
How often he came back, and every time
With something more obliging and more kind,
To add to what he said; what dear Farewels;
How almost vanquished by his Love he parted,
And leaned to what unwillingly he left:
I, Traitor as I was, for love of you,
(But what can you not do, who made me false!)
I forged that Lie; for whose forgiveness kneels
This self-accus'd, self-punish'd Criminal.

Cleop With how much ease believe we what we wish!
Rise, D^llabella; if you have been Guilty,
I have contributed, and too much Love
Has made me Guilty too.
The advance of kindness which I made, was feigned,
To call back fleeting Love by Jealousy;
But 'twould not last. Oh, rather let me lose
Than so ignobly trifle with his heart.

Dolla. I find your Breast fenced round from humane reach,
Transparent as a Rock of solid Crystal;
Seen through, but never pierced. My Friend, my Friend!
What endless Treasure have thou thrown away,
And scattered, like an Infant, in the Ocean,
Vain sums of Wealth which none can gather thence.

Cleop. Could you not beg
An hours Admittance to his private Ear?
Like one who wanders through long barren Wilds,
And yet foreknows no Hospitable Inn.
Is near to succor Hunger,
Eats his fill, before his painful March:
So would I feed a while my famished Eyes
B for^ we part; for I have far to go,
If Death be far, and never must return.
Ventidius, with Octavia, behind.
Ven. From hence you may discover -- Oh, sweet, sweet!
Would you indeed? the pretty hand in Earnest?
[Takes her hand.
Dolla. I will, for this Reward. -- Draw it not back,
It Is all I ever will beg.

Ven. They turn upon us.

Octav. What quick Eyes has Guilt!

Ven. Seem not to have observed 'em, and go on.
They Enter.
Dolla. Saw you the Emperor, Ventidius? Ven. No.
I sought him; but I heard that he was private,
None with him, but Hipparchus his Freedman.

Dolla. Know you his business?

Ven. Giving him Instructions,
And Letters, to his Brother C^r.

Dolla. Well,
He must be found.
Exeunt Dol. and Cleop.
Octav. Most glorious impudence!

Ven. She looked methought
As she would say, Take your old Man, Octavia;
Thank you, I Am better here.
Well, but what use
Make we of this Discovery?

Octav. Let it die.

Ven I pity Dollabella; but she is dangerous:
Her Eyes have power beyond Thessalian Charms
To draw the Moon from Heaven; for Eloquence,
The Seagreen Sirens taught her Voice their flattery;
And, while she speaks, Night steals upon the Day,
Unmarked of those that hear: Then she is so charming,
Age buds at sight of her, and swells to youth:
The holy Priests gaze on her when she smiles;
And with heaved hands forgetting Gravity,
They bless her wanton Eyes: Even I who hate her,
With a malignant joy behold such Beauty;
And, while I Curse, desire it. Anthony
Must needs have some remains of Passion still,
Which may ferment into a worse Relapse,
If now no^ fully cured. I know, this minute,
With C^sar he is endeavoring her Peace.

Octav You have prevailed: -- but for a farther purpose Walks off.
I Will prove how he will relish this Discovery.
What, make a S^rumpet's peace: it swells my Heart:
It must not, ^na' not be

Ven. His Guards appear.
Let me begin, and you shall second me.
Enter Antony.
Ant. Octavia, I was looking you, my Love:
What, are your Letters ready? I have given
My last Instructions.

Octav. Mine, my Lord, are written.

Ant. Ventidius!
[Drawirg (...) ^de.
Ven. My Lord?

Ant. A word in private.
When saw you Dollabella?

Ven. Now, my Lord,
He parted hence; and Cleopatra with him.

Ant. Speak softly. 'Twas by my Command he went,
To bear my last farewell.

Ven. aloud. It looked indeed
Like your farewell.

Ant. More softly. -- My farewell?
What secret meaning have you in those words
Of my Farewell? He did it by my Order.

Ven. aloud. Then he obeyed your Order. I suppose
You bid him do it with all Gentleness,
All kindness, and all -- love.

Ant. How she mourned,
The poor forsaken Creature!

Ven. She took it as she ought; she bore your parting
As she did Caesar's, as she would another,
Were a new Love to come.

Ant. aloud. Thou do belie her;
Most basely, and maliciously belie her.

Ven. I thought not to displease you; I have done.

Octav. coming up. You seem disturbed, my Lord.

Ant. A very trifle.
Retire, my Love.

Ven. It was indeed a trifle.
He sent --

Ant. angrily. No more. Look how thou disobey'st me;
Thy Life shall answer it.

Octav. Then it is no trifle.

Ven. to Octav. It Is less; a very nothing: you too saw it,
As well as I, and therefore it is no Secret.

Ant. She saw it!

Ven. Yes: she saw young Dollabella --

Ant. Young Dollabella!

Ven. Young, I think him young,
And handsome too; and so do others think him.
But what of that? He went by your Command,
Indeed it is probable, with some kind Message;
For she received it graciously; she smiled:
And then he grew familiar with her Hand,
Squeezed it, and worried it with ravenous Kisses;
She blushed, and sighed, and smiled, and blushed again;
At last she took occasion to Talk softly,
And brought her Cheek up close, and leaned on his:
At which, he whispered Kisses back on hers;
And then she cried aloud, That Constancy
Should be rewarded.

Octav. This I saw and heard.

Ant. What Womam was it, whom you heard and saw
So playful with my Friend!
Not Cleopatra?

Ven. Even she, my Lord!

Ant. My Cleopatra?

Ven. Your Cleopatra;
Dollabella's Cleopatra?
Every Man's Cleopatra.

Ant. Tou ^t.

Ven. I do not lie, my Lord.
Is this so strange? should Mistresses be left,
And not provide against a time of Change?
You know she is not much used to lonely Nights.

Ant. I Will think no more on it.
I know it is false, and see the Plot betwixt you.
You needed not have gone this way, Octavia.
What harms it you that Cleopatra's just?
She Is mine no more. I see; and I forgive:
Urge it no farther, Love.

Octav. Are you concerned
That she is found false?

Ant. I should be, were it so;
For, tho it is past, I would not that the World
Should Tax my former Choice: That I loved one
Of so light Note; but I forgive you both.

Ven. What has my Age deserved, that you should think
I would abuse your Ears with Perjury?
If Heaven be true, she is false.

Ant. Tho Heaven and 'Earth
Should witness it, I Will not believe her tainted.

Ven. I Will bring you then a Witness
From Hell to prove her so. Nay, go not back;
[Seeing Alexas just entering, and starting back. For stay you must and shall.

Alex. What means my Lord?

Ven. To make you do what most you hate; speak truth.
You are of Cleopatra's private Counsel,
Of her Bed-Counsel, her lascivious hours;
Are conscious of each Nightly change she makes,
And watch her, as Chaldeans do the Moon,
Can tell what Signs she passes through, what day.

Alex. My Noble Lord.

Ven. My most Illustrious Pandar,
No fine set Speech, no Cadence, to turned Periods,
But a pla^ homespun Truth, is what I ask:
I did, my self, over hear your Queen make love
To Dollabella. Speak; for I will know,
By your Confession, what more past betwixt 'em;
How near the business draws to your Employment;
And when the happy hour.

Ant. Speak truth, Alexas, whether it offend
Or please Ventidius, care not: justify
Thy injured Queen from Malice: dare his worst.

Oct. aside. See how he gives him Courage! how he fears
To find her false! and shuts his Eyes to truth,
Willing to be mi^ed!

Alex. As far as love may plead for Woman's frailty,
U g'd by desert and greatness of the Lover;
So far (Divine Octavia!) may my Queen
Stand ev^ excused to yo^, for loving him,
Who is your Lord: so far, from brave Venttdius,
May her past Actions hope a fair Report.

Ant. It Is well, and truly spoken: mark, Ventidius.

Alex. To you, most Noble Emperor, her strong Passion
Stands not excused, but wholly justified.
Her Beauty's Charms alone, without her Crown,
From Ind and Meroe drew the distant Vows
Of sighing Kings; and at her Feet were laid
The Scepters of the Earth, exposed on heaps,
To choose where she would Reign:
She thought a Roman only could deserve her;
And, of all Romans, only Antony.
And, to be l^ss than Wife to you, disdained
Their lawful Passion.

Ant. It Is but Truth.

Alex. And yet, though Love, and your unmatched Desert,
Have drawn her from the due regard of Honor,
At last, Heaven opened her unwilling Eyes
To see the wrongs she offered fair Octavia,
Whose holy Bed she lawfully usurpt,
The sad Effects of this improsperous War,
Confirmed those pious Thoughts.

Ven. aside. O, wheel you there?
Observe him now; the Man begins to mend,
And Talk substantial Reason. Fear not, Eunuch,
The Emperor has given thee leave to speak.

Alex. Else had I never dared to offend his Ears
With what the last necessity has urged
On my forsaken Mistress; yet I must not
Presume to say her Heart is wholly altered.

Ant. No, dare not for thy Life, I Charge thee dare not,
Pronounce that fatal word.

Octav. aside. Must I bear this? good Heaven, afford me patience.

Ven. On, sweet Eunuch; my dear half Man, proceed.

Alex. Yet Dollabella
Has loved her long, he, next my God-like Lord,
Deserves her best; and should she meet his Passion,
Rejected, as she is, by him she loved -- --

Ant. Hence, from my sight; for I can bear no more:
Let Furies drag thee quick to Hell; each torturing hand
Do thou employ, till Cleopatra comes,
Then join thou too, and help to torture her.
Exit Alexas, thrust out by Antony.
Octav. It Is not well,
Indeed, my Lord, it is much unkind to me,
To show this Passion, this extreme Concernment
For an abandoned, faithless Prostitute.

Ant. Octavia, leave me: I am much disordered.
Leave me, I say.

Octav. My Lord?

Ant. I bid you leave me.

Ven. Obey him, Madam: best withdraw a while,
And see how this will work.

Octav. Wherein have I offended you, my Lord,
That I am bid to leave you? Am I false,
Or infamous? Am I a Cleopatra?
Were I she,
Base as she is, you would not bid me leave you;
But hang upon my Neck, take slight Excuses,
And fawn upon my Falsehood.

Ant. It Is too much,
Too much, Octavia; I am pressed with Sorrows
Too heavy to be born; and you add more:
I would retire, and recollect what is left
Of Man within, to aid me.

Octav. You would mourn
In private, for your Love, who has betrayed you;
You did but half return to me: your kindness
Lingered behind with her. I hear, my Lord,
You make Conditions for her,
And would include her Treaty. Wondrous proofs
Of Love to me!

Ant. Are you my Friend, Ventidius?
Or are you turned a Dollabella too,
And let this Fury loose?

Ven. Oh, be advised,
Sweet Madam, and retire.

Octav. Yes, I will go; but never to return.
You shall no more be haunted with this Fury.
My Lord, my Lord, Love will not always last,
When urged with long unkindness, and disdain;
Take her again whom you perfer to me;
She stays but to be called. Poor cozened Man!
Let a feigned parting give her back your Heart,
Which a feigned Love first got; for injured me,
Tho my just Sense of wrongs forbid my stay,
My Duty shall be yours.
To the dear Pledges of our former Love,
My tenderness and care shall be transferred,
And they shall Cheer, by Turns, my Widowed Nights:
So, take my last farewell; for I despair
To have you whole, and scorn to take you half.
Exit.
Ven. I combat Heaven, which blasts my best Designs:
My last Attempt must be to win her back;
But Oh, I fear in vain.
Exit.
Ant. Why was I framed with this plain honest Heart,
Which knows not to disguise its Griefs, and Weakness,
But bears its workings outward to the World?
I should have kept the mighty Anguish in,
And forced a Smile at Cleopatra's falsehood:
Octavia had believed it, and had staid;
But I am made a shallow-forded Stream,
Seen to the Bottom: all my clearness scorned,
And all my Faults exposed! -- See, where he comes
Enter Dollabella. Who has profaned the Sacred Name of Friend,
And worn it into Vileness!
With how secure a Brow, and specious Form
He gilds the secret Villain! Sure that Face
Was meant for Honesty; but Heaven mis-match'd it,
And furnished Treason out with Natures Pomp,
To make its work more easy.

Dolla. O, my Friend!

Ant. Well, Dollabella, you performed my Message?

Dolla. I did, unwillingly.

Ant. Unwillingly?
Was it so hard for you to bear our parting?
You should have wished it.

Dolla. Why?

Ant. Because you love me.
And she received my Message, with as true,
With as unfeigned a Sorrow, as you brought it?

Dolla. She loves you, even to madness.

Ant. Oh, I know it.
You, Dollabella, do not better know
How much she loves me. And should I
Forsake this Beauty? This all-perfect Creature?

Dolla. I could not, were she mine.

Ant. And yet you first
Persuaded me: how come you altered since?

Dolla. I said at first I was not fit to go;
I could not hear her sighs, and see her tears,
But Pity must prevail: and so, perhaps,
It may again with you; for I have promised
That she should take her last farewell: and, see,
She comes to claim my word.

Enter Cleopatra.
Ant. False Dollabella!

Dolla. What Is false, my Lord?

Ant. Why, Dollabella's false;
And Cleopatra's false; both false and faithless.
Draw near, you well-joyn'd wickedness, you Serpents,
Whom I have, in my kindly Bosom, warm
Till I am stung to Death.

Dolla. My Lord, have I
Deserved to be thus used?

Cleop. Can Heaven prepare
A newer Torment? Can it find a Curse
Beyond our Separation?

Ant. Yes, if Fate
Be just, much greater: Heaven should be ingenious
In punishing such Crimes. The rolling Stone,
And gnawing Vulture, we slight Pains, invented
When Jove was young, and no Examples known
Of mighty Ills; but you have ripened sin
To such a monstrous growth, 'twill pose the Gods
To find an equal Torture. Two, two such,
Oh there is no farther Name, two such -- to me,
To me, who locked my Soul within your Breasts,
Had no Desires, no Joys, no Life, but you;
When half the Globe was mine, I gave it you
In Dowry with my Heart; I had no use,
No fruit of all, but you: a Friend and Mistress
Was what the World could give. Oh, Cleopatra!
Oh, Dollabella! how could you betray
This tender Heart, which with an Infant-fondness.
Lay lulled betwixt your Bosoms, and there slept
Secure of injured Faith?

Dolla. If she has wronged you,
Heaven, Hell, and You revenge it.

Ant. If she wronged me,
Thou would evade thy part of Guilt; but swear
Thou love not her.

Dolla. Not so as I love you.

Ant. Not so! Swear, swear, I say; thou do not love her;

Dolla. No more than Friendship will allow.

Ant. No more?
Friendship allows thee nothing: thou art perjured. --
And yet thou did not swear thou lov'dst her not;
But (...) so much, no more. Oh trifling Hypocrite,
Who dare not own to her thou do not love,
Not own to me thou do! Ventidius heard it;
Octavia saw it.

Cleop. They are Enemies.

Ant Alexas Is not so: he, he confessed it.
He, who, next Hell, best knew it, he avowed it.
(To Dol.) Why do I seek a Proof beyond your self?
You whom I sent to bear my last Farewell,
Returned to plead her stay.

Dolla. What shall I Answer?
If to have loved be guilt, then I have sinned;
But if to have repented of that Love
Can wash away my Crime, I have repented.
Yet, if I have offended past forgiveness,
Let not her suffer: she is innocent.

Cleop Ah, what will not a Woman do who loves!
What means will she refuse, to keep that Heart
Where all her joys are placed! 'Twas I encouraged,
It Was I blew up the Fire that scorched his Soul,
To make you jealous; and by that regain you.
But all in vain; I could not Counterfeit:
In spite of all the Damms, my Love broke over,
And drowned my Heart again: Fate took the occasion;
And thus one minutes feigning has destroyed
My whole Life's truth.

Ant. Thin Cobweb Arts of Falsehood;
Se^n, and broke through at first.

Dolla. Forgive your Mistress.

Cleop. Forgive you Friend.

Ant. You have convinced your selves,
You plead each others Cause: What Witness have you,
That you but meant to raise my Jealousy?

Cleop. Our selves, and Heaven.

Ant. Guilt witnesses for Guilt. Hence, Love and Friendship;
You have no longer place in human Breasts,
These two have driven you out: avoid my sight;
I would not kill the Man whom I loved;
And cannot hurt the Woman; but avoid me,
I do not know how long I can be tame;
For, if I stay one minute more to think
How I am wronged, my Justice and Revenge
Will cry so loud within me, that my Pity
Will not be heard for either.

Dolla. Heaven has but
Our sorrow for our sins; and then delights
To pardon erring Man: sweet Mercy seems
Its darling Attribute, which limits Justice;
As if there were Degrees in Infinite;
And Infinite would rather want perfection
Than punish to extent.

Ant. I can forgive
A Foe; but not a Mistress, and a Friend:
Treason is there in its most horrid shape,
Where trust is greatest: and the Soul resigned
Is stabbed by its own Guards: I Will hear no more;
Hence from my sight for ever.

Cleop. How? for ever,
I cannot go one moment from your sight,
And must I go for ever?
My Joys, my only Joys are centered here:
What place have I to go to? my own Kingdom?
That I have lost for you: or to the Romans?
They hate me for your sake: or must I wander
The wide World over, a helpless, banished Woman,
Banished for love of you; banished from you?
I, there is the Banishment! Oh hear me; hear me,
With strictest Justice: For I beg no favor:
And if I have offended you: then kill me,
But do not banish me.

Ant. I must not hear you.
I have a Fool within me takes your part;
But Honor stops my Ears.

Cleop. For pity hear me!
Would you cast off a Slave who followed you,
Who crouch'd beneath your Spurn? -- He has no pity!
See, if he gives one tear to my Departure;
One look, one kind farewell: Oh Iron heart!
Let all the Gods look down, and judge betwixt us,
If he did ever love!

Anth. No more: Alexas!

Dolla. A perjured Villain!

Anth. to Cleop. Your Alexas; yours.

Cleop. O 'twas his Plot: his ruinous Design
^'ingage you in my love by jealousy.
Hear him; confront him with me; let him speak.

Anth. I have; I have.

Cleop. And if he clear me not --

Ant. Your Creature! one who hangs upon your Smiles!
Watches your Eye to say or to unsay
Whatever you please! I am not to be moved.

Cleop. Then must we part? Farewell, my cruel Lord,
Th'appearance is against me; and I go
Unjustifi'd, for ever from your sight.
How I have loved, you know; how yet I love,
My only Comfort is, I know my self:
I love you more, even now you are unkind,
Than when you loved me most; so well, so truly,
I Will never strive against it; but die pleased
To think you once were mine.

Ant. Good Heaven, they weep at parting.
Must I weep too? that calls 'em innocent.
I must not weep; and yet I must, to think
That I must not forgive --
Live; but live wretched, it is but just you should,
Who made me so: Live from each others sight:
Let me not hear you meet: Set all the Earth,
And all the Seas, betwixt your sunder'd Loves:
View nothing common but the Sun and Skys:
Now, all take several ways;
And each your own sad fate with mine deplore;
That you were false, and I could trust no more.
Exeunt severally.
ACT V.
Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras. Char. BE juster, Heaven: such Virtue punished thus,
Will make us think that Chance rules all above,
And shuffles, with a Random hand, the Lots
Which Man is forced to draw.

Cleop. I could tear out these Eyes, that gained his Heart,
And had not power to keep it. O the Curse
Of doting on, even when I find it Dotage!
Bear witness, Gods, you heard him bid me go;
You whom he mocked with imprecating Vows
Of promised Faith -- I Will die, I will not bear it.
You may hold me. --
[She pulls out her Dagger, and they hold her. But I can keep my Breath; I can
die inward,
And choke this Love.
Enter Alexas.
Iras. Help, O Alexas help!
The Queen grows desperate, her Soul struggles in her,
With all the Agonies of Love and Rage,
And strives to sorce its Passage.

Cleop. Let me go.
Art thou there, Traitor! -- O
O, for a little Breath, to vent my Rage!
Give, give me way, and let me loose upon him.
-- --

Alex. Yes, I deserve it, for my ill-timed truth.
Was it for me to prop
The Ruins of a falling Majesty?
To place my self beneath the mighty flaw,
Thus to be crushed, and pounded into Atoms,
By its o'erwhelming weight? It Is too presuming
For Subjects, to preserve that wilful power
Which Courts its own Destruction.

Cleop. I would reason
More calmly with you. Did not you o'er-rule,
And force my plain, direct, and open Love
Into these crooked paths of Jealousy?
Now, what is the event? Octavia is removed;
But Cleopatra's banished. Thou, thou, Villain,
Has pushed my Boat, to open Sea; to prove,
At my sad Cost, if thou can steer it back.
It cannot be; I Am lost too far; I Am ruined:
Hence, thou Impostor, Traitor, Monster, Devil. --
I can no more: thou, and my Griefs, have sunk
Me down so low, that I want voice to Cu^e thee.

Alex. Suppose from Shipwrack'd Seaman near the shore,
Dropping and faint, wi^h climbing up the Cliff,
If, from above, some Charitable hand
Pull him to safety, hazarding himself
To draw the others weight; would he look back
And Curse him for his Pains? The Case is yours;
But one step more, and you have gained the height.

Cleop. Sunk, never more to rise.

Alex. Octavia's gone, and Dollabella banished.
Believe me, Madam, Antony is yours.
His Heart was never lost; but started off
To Jealousy, Love's last retreat and covert:
Where it lies h^d in Shades, watchful in silence,
And listening for the Sound that calls it back,
Some other, any Man, ('it is so advanced)
May perfect this unfinished work, which I
(Unhappy only to my self) have lest
So easy to his hand.

Cleop. Look well thou do it; else --

Alex. Else, what your silence threatens -- Antony
Is mounted up the Pharos; from whose Turret,
He stands surveying our Egyptian Galleys,
Engaged with Caesar's Fleet: now Death, or Conquest.
If the first happen, Fate acquits my Promise:
If we overcome, the Conqueror is yours.
A distant shout within.
Char. Have comfort, Madam: did you mark that Shout?
Second Shout nearer.
Iras. Hark; they redouble it.

Alex. It Is from the Port.
The loudness shows it near: good News, kind Heavens.

Cleop. Osiris make it so.
Enter Serapion.
Serap. Where, where is the Queen?

Alex. How frightfully the holy Coward stares!
As if not yet recovered of the Assault,
When all his Gods, and what is more dear to him,
His Offerings were at stake.

Serap. O horror, horror!
Egypt has been; our latest hour is come:
The Queen of Nations from her ancient Seat,
Is Sunk for ever in the dark Abyss:
Time has unrowl'd her Glories to the last,
And now closed up the Volume.

Cleop. Be more plain:
Say, whence thon come, (though Fate is in thy Face,
Which from thy haggard Eyes looks wildly out,
And threatens ere thou speak.)

Serap. I came from Pharos;
From viewing (spare me and imagine it)
Our Lands last hope, your Navy. --

Cleop. Vanquished?

Serap. No.
They fought not.

Cleop. Then they fled.

Serap. Nor that. I saw,
With Antony, your well appointed Fleet
Row out; and thrice he waved his hand on high,
And thrice with cheerful Cries they shouted back:
'Twas then, false Fortune, like a fawning Strumpet,
^out to leave the Bankrupt Prodigal,
With a dissembling Smile would kiss at parting,
And flatter to the last; the well-tim'd Oars
Now dipped from every Bank, now smoothly run
To meet the Foe; and soon indeed they met,
But not as Foes. In few, we saw their Caps
On either side thrown up; the Egpptian Galleys
(Received like Friends) past through, and fell behind
The Roman rear: and now, they all come forward,
And ride within the Po^t.

Cleop. Enough, Serapion:
I Have heard my doom. This needed not, you Gods:
When I lost Antony, your work was done;
It Is but (...) malice. Where Is my Lord?
How bears he this last ^low?

Serap. His fury cannot be expressed by words:
Thrice he Attempted headlong to have fallen
Full on his Foes, and aimed at Caesar's Galley:
Withheld, he raves on you; Cries, He Is betrayed
Should he now find you. --

Alex. Shun him, 'seek your safety,
Till you can clear your Innocence.

Cleop. I Will stay.

Alex. You must not, haste you to your Monument,
While I make speed to Caesar.

Cleop. Caesar! No,
I have no business with him.

Alex. I can work him.
To spare your Life, and let this Madman perish.

Cleop. Base fawning Wretch! would thou betray him too?
Hence from my sight, I will not hear a Traitor;
'Twas thy Design brought all this ruin on us;
Serapion, thou art honest; Counsel me:
But haste, each moment's precious.

Serap. Retire; you must not yet see Antony.
He who began this mischief,
It Is just he tempt the Danger: let him clear you;
And, since he offered you his servile tongue,
To gain a poor precarious Life from Caesar,
Let him expose that fawning Eloquence,
And speak to Antony.

Alex. O Heavens! I dare not,
I meet my certain Death.

Cleop. Slave, thou deserve it.
Not that I fear my Lord, will I avoid him;
I know him Noble: when he banished me,
And thought me false, he scorned to take my Life;
But I Will be justified, and then die with him.

Alex. O pity me, and let me follow you.

Cleop. To Death, if thou stir hence. Speak, if thou can,
Now for thy Life, which basely thou would save;
While mine I prize at this. Come, good Serapion.
Exeunt Clop. Serap. Char. Iras.
Alex. O that I less could fear to lose this Being,
Which, like a Snow-ball, in my Coward hand,
The more it is grasped, the faster melts away.
Poor Reason! what a wretched Aid art thou!
For still in spite of thee,
These two long Lovers, Soul and Body, dread
Their final Separation. Let me think:
What can I say, to save my self from Death?
No matter what becomes of Cleopatra.

Ant. within. Which way? where?

Ven. within. This leads to the Monument.

Alex. Ah me! I hear him; yet I Am unprepared:
My gift of lying's gone;
And this Court-Devil, which I so often have raised,
Forsakes me at my need. I dare not stay;
Yet cannot far go hence.
Enter Antony and Ventidius. Exit.
Ant. O happy Caesar! Thou have Men to lead:
Think not it is thou have conquered Antony;
B^t Rome has conquered Egypt. I Am betrayed.

Ven. Curse on this treacherous Train!
Their So^l and Heaven infect 'em all with Baseness:
And their young Souls come tainted to the World
With the first breath they draw.

Ant. The Original Villain sure no God created;
He was a Bastard of the Sun, by Nile.
Ap'd into Man: with all his Mother's Mud
Crusted about his Soul.

Ven. The Nation is
One Universal Traitor; and their Queen
The very Spirit and Extract of 'em all.

Ant. Is there yet left
A possibility of Aid from Valor?
Is there one God unsworn to my Destruction?
The least unmortgag'd hope? for, if there be,
Methinks I cannot fall beneath the Fate
Of such a Boy as Caesar.
The World's one half is yet in Antony;
And, from each Limb of it that is hewed away,
The Soul comes back to me.

Ven. There yet remain
Three Legions in the Town. The last Assault
Lopt off the rest: if Death be your Design;
(As I must wish it now) these are sufficient
To make a heap about us of dead Foes,
An honest Pile for burial.

Ant. They Are enough.
We'll not divide our-Stars; but side by side
Fight em^lous: and with malicious Eyes
Survey each other's Acts: so every Death
Thou giv'st, I Will take on me, as a just Debt,
And pay thee back a Soul.

Ven. Now you shall see I love you. Not a word
Of chiding more. By my few hours of Life,
I am so pleased with this brave Roman Fate,
That I would not be Caesar, to outlive you.
When we put off this Flesh, and mount together,
I shall be shown to all the Etherial crowd;
Lo, this is he who died with Antony.

Ant. Who knows but we may pierce through all their Troops,
And reach my Veterans yet? It Is worth the tempting,
TO o'er-leap this Gulf of Fate,
And leave our wandering Destinies behind.
Enter Alexas, trombling.
Ven. See, see, that Villain;
See Cleopatra stamped upon that Face,
With all her cunning, all her Arts of Falsehood!
How she looks out through those dissembling Eyes!
How he sets his Countenance for deceit;
And promises a Lie, before he speaks!
Let me dispatch him first.
(Drawing)
Alex. O, spare me, spare me.

Ant. Hold; he is not worth your killing. On thy Life,
(Which thou may keep, because I scorn to take it)
No Syllable to justify thy Queen;
Save thy base tongue its Office.

Alex. Sir she is gone,
Where she shall never be molested more
By Love, or you.

Ant. Fled to her Dollabella!
Die, Traitor, I revoke my Promise, die.
(Going to kill him.)
Alex. O hold, she is not fled.

Ant. She is: my Eyes
Are open to her Falsehood; my whole Life
Has been a Golden dream, of Love and Friendship.
But, now I wake, I Am like a Merchant, roused
From soft repose, to see his Vessel sinking,
And all his Wealth cast over. Ungrateful Woman!
Who followed me, but as the Swallow Summer,
Hatching her young ones in my kindly Beams,
Singing her flatt'ries to my morning wake;
But, now my Winter comes, she spread her wings,
And seeks the Spring of Caesar.

Alex. Think not so:
Her Fortunes have, in all things, mixed with yours.
Had she betrayed her Naval force to Rome,
How easily might she have gone to Caesar,
Secure by such a Bride!

Ven. She sent it first,
To be more welcome after.

Ant. It Is too plain;
Else would she have appeared, to clear her self.

Alex. Too fatally she has; she could not bear
To be accused by you; but shut her self
Within her Monument: looked down, and sighed;
While, from her unchanged face, the silent tears
Dropped, as they had not leave, but stole their parting.
Some undistinguished words she inly murmured;
At last, she raised her Eyes; and, with such Looks
As dying Lucrece cast, --

Ant. My heart forbodes. --

Ven. All for the best: go on.

Alex. She snatched her Poniard,
And, ere we could prevent the fatal Blow,
Plunged it within her Breast: then turned to me,
Go, bear my Lord (said she) my last Farewell;
And ask him if he yet suspect my Faith.
More she was saying, but Death rushed betwixt.
She half pronounced your Name with her last Breath,
And buried half within her.

Ven. Heaven be praised.

Ant. Then art thou innocent, my poor dear Love?
And art thou dead?
O those two words! their Sound should be divided:
Had thou been false, and died; or had thou lived,
And had been true --. But Innocence and Death!
This shows not well above. Then what am I,
The Murderer of this Truth, this Innocence!
Thoughts cannot form themselves in words so horrid
As can express my Guilt!

Ven. Is It come to this? The Gods have been too graciou:
And thus you thank 'em for it.

Ant. to Alex. Why stay'st thou here?
Is (...) ^or thee to spy upon my Soul,
And see its inward mourning? Get thee hence;
Thou art not worthy to behold, what now
Becomes a Roman Emperor to perform.

Alex. Aside. He loves her still:
His grief betrays it. Good! The joy to find
She Is yet alive, compleats the Reconcilement.
I Have saved my self, and her. But, Oh! the Romans!
Fate comes too fast upon my Wit.
Hunts me too hard, and meets me at each double:
Exit.
Ven. Would she had died a little sooner tho,
Before Octavia went; you might have treated:
Now 'twill look tame, and would not be received.
Come, rouse your self, and lets die warm together.

Ant. I will not fight: there is no more work for War.
The business of my angry hours is done.

V^n. Caesar is at your Gates.

Ant. Why, let him enter,
(...) welcome now.

Ven. What Lethargy has crept into your Soul?

Ant. It Is but a scorn of Life, and just desire
To free my self from Bondage.

Ven. Do it bravely.

Ant. I will; but not by fighting. O, Ventidius!
What should I fight for now? My Queen is dead.
I was but great for her; my Power, my Empire,
Were but my Merchandise to buy her Love;
And conquered Kings, my Factors. Now she is dead,
Let Caesar take the World, --
An Empty Circle, since the Jewel's gone
Which made it worth my strife: my Being's nauseous;
For all the Bribes of Life are gone away.

Ven. Would you be taken?

Ant. Yes, I would be taken;
But, as a Roman ought, dead, my Ventidius:
For I Will convey my Soul from Caesar's reach,
And lay down life my self. It Is time the World
Should have a Lord, and know whom to obey.
We two have kept its Homage in suspense,
And bent the Globe on whose each side we trod,
Tell it was dinted inwards: Let him walk
Alone upon it; I Am weary of my part.
My Torch is out; and the World stands before me
Like a black Desert, at the approach of Night:
I Will lay me down, and stray no ^arther on.

Ven. I could be grieved,
But that I Will not outlive you: choose your Death;
For, I have seen him in such various shapes,
I care not which I take: I Am only troubled
The Life I bear, is worn to such a Rag,
It Is scarce worth giving. I could wish indeed
We threw it from us with a better Grace;
That, like two Lions taken in the Toils,
We might at last thrust out our paws, and wound
The Hunters that enclose us.

Ant. I have thought on it.
Ventidius, you must live.

Ven. I must not Sir.

Ant. Will thou not live, to speak some good of me?
To stand by my fair Fame, and guard the approaches
From the ill Tongues of Men?

Ven. Who shall guard mine,
For living after you?

Ant. Say, I command it.

Ven. If we die well, our Deaths w^ll speak themselves,
And need no living Witness.

Ant. Thou have loved me,
And ^ain I would reward thee: I must die;
Kill me, and take the Merit of my Death
To make thee Friends with C^sar.

Ven. Thank your kindness.
You said I loved you; and, in recompense,
You bid me turn a Traitor: did I think
You would have used me thus? that I should die
With a hard thought of you?

Ant. Forgive me, Roman.
Since I have heard of Cleopatra's Death,
My Reason bears no rule upon my Tongue,
But lets my thoughts break all at Random out:
I Have thought better; do not deny me twice.

Ven. By Heaven, I will not.
Let it not be to outlive you.

Ant. Kill me first,
And then die thou: for it is but just thou serve
Thy Friend, before thy self.

Ven. Give me your hand.
We soon shall meet again. Now farewell, Emperor.
(Embrace.) Methinks that word's too cold to be my last:
Since Death sweeps dsstinctions, Farewell, Friend.
That Is all. -- --
I will not make a business of a trifle:
And yet I cannot look on you, and kill you;
Pray turn your Face.

Ant. I do: strike home sure.

Ven. Home, as my Sword will reach.
(Kills himself.)
Ant. O, thou mistak'st;
That wound was none of thine: give it me back:
Thou robb'st me of my Death.

Ven. I do indeed;
But, think it is the first time I ever deceived you;
I^ that may plead my Pardon. And you, Gods,
Forgive me, if you will; for I die perjured,
Rather then kill my Friend.
(Dies.)
Ant. Farewell. Ever my Leader, even in Death!
My Queen and thou have got the start of me,
And I Am the lag of Honor. -- -- Gone so soon?
Is Death no more? He used him carelessly,
With a familiar kindness: ere he knocked,
Ran to the Door, and took him in his Arms,
As who should say, Y' are welcome at all hours,
A Friend need give no warning. Books had spoiled him;
^or all the Learned are Cowards by profession.
It Is not worth
My farther thought: for Death, for ought I know,
Is but to think no more Here Is to be satisfied.
(Falls on his Sword.) I Have mist my heart. O unperforming hand!
Thou never could have erred in a worse time.
My Fortune jades me to the last; and Death,
Like a great Man, takes state, and makes me wait
For my Admittance -- --.
(Trampling within.) Some perhaps from Caesar:
If he should find me living, and suspect
That I played booty with my Life! I Will mend
My work, ere they can reach me.
(Rises upon his Knees.) Enter Cleopatra, Charmion, Iras.
Cleop. Where is my Lord? where is he?

Char. There he lies,
And dead Ven^idius by him.

Cleop. My sears were Prophets; I am come too late.
O that accursed Alexas!
(Runs to him.)
Ant. Art thou living?
Or am I dead before I knew? and thou
The first kind Ghost that meets me?

Cleop. Help me Seat him.
Send quickly, send for help.
(They place him in a Chair.)
Ant. I am answered.
We live both. Sit thee down, my Cleopatr^:
I Will make the most I can of Life, to stay
A moment more with thee.

Cleop. How is it with you?

Ant. It Is as with a Man
Removing in a hurry; all packed up,
But one dear Jewel that his haste forgot;
And he, for that returns upon the spur:
So I come back, for thee.

Cleop. Too long, you Heavens, you have been cruel to me;
Now show your mended Faith, and give me back
His fleeting Life.

Ant. It will not be, my Love.
I keep my Soul by force.
Say but thou art not false.

Cleop. It Is now too late
To say I Am true: I Will prove it, and die with you,
Unknown to me, Alexas feigned my Death:
Which, when I knew, I hasted to prevent
This ^atal consequence. My Fleet betrayed
Both you and me.

Ant. And Dollabella. -- --

Cleop. Scarce esteemed before he loved; but hated now.

Ant. Enough: my Life's not long enough for more.
Thou say thou will come after: I believe thee;
For I can now believe whatever thou say,
That we may part more kindly.

Cleop. I will come:
Doubt not, my Life, I Will come, and quickly too:
Caesar shall triumph over no part of thee.

Ant. But grieve not, while thou stay'st
My last disastrous Times:
Think we have had a clear and glorious day;
And Heaven did kindly to delay the Storm
Just till our close of Evening. Ten years love,
And not a moment lost, but all improved
To the utmost Joys: What Ages have we lived?
And now to die each others; and, so dying,
While hand in hand we walk in Groves below,
Whole Troops of Lovers Ghosts shall flock about u^,
And all the Train be ours.

Cleop. Your words are like the Notes of dying Swans,
Too sweet to last. Were there so many hours
For your unkindness, and not one for Love?

Ant. No, not a minute. -- This one kiss -- more worth
Than all I leave to Caesar.
(Dies.
Cleop. O, tell me so again,
And take Ten thousand kisses, for that word.
My Lord, my Lord: speak, if you yet have being;
Sigh to me, if you cannot speak; or cast
O^e look: Do any thing that shows you live.

Iras. He Is gone too far, to hear you;
And this you see, a Lump of senseless ^lay,
The leavings of a Soul.

C^ar. Remember Madam,
He charged you not to grieve.

Cleop. And I Will obey him.
I have not loved a Roman not to know
What should become of his Wife; his Wife, my Charmion^
For it is to that high Title I aspire,
And now I Will not die less. Let dull Octavia
Survive, to mourn him dead: my Nobler Fate
Shall knit our Spousals with a tie too strong
For Roman Laws to break.

Iras. Will you then die?

Cleop. Why should thou make that Question?

Iras. Caesar is most merciful.

Cleop. Let him be so^
To those that want his Mercy: my poor Lord
Made no such Covenant with him to spare me
When he was dead. Yield me to Caesar's pride?
What, to be led in Triumph through the Streets,
A Spectacle to base Plebeian Eyes;
While some dejected Friend of Antony's,
Close in a Corner, shakes his Head, and mutters
A Secret Curse on her who ruined him?
I Will none of that.

Char. Whatever you resolve,
I Will follow even to Death.

Iras. I only feared
For you; but more should fear to live without you.

Cleop. Why, now it is as it should be. Quick, my Friends,
Dispatch; ere this, the Town's in Caesar's hands:
My Lord looks down concerned, and fears my stay,
Lest I should be surpised;
Keep him not waiting for his Love too long.
You, Charmion, bring my Crown and richest Jewels,
With 'em, the Wreath of Victory I made
(Vain Augury!) for him who now lies dead;
You, Iras, bring the Cure of all our Ills.

Iras. The Aspicks, Madam?

Cleop. Must I bid you twice?
Exeunt Char. and I^as. It Is sweet to die, when they would force life on me,
To rush into the dark abode of Death,
And seize him first; if he be like my Love,
He is not frightful sure.
We Are now alone, in secrecy and silence;
And is not this like Lovers? I may kiss
These pale, cold Lips; Octavia does not see me;
And, Oh! it is better far to have him thus,
Than see him in her Arms. -- O welcome, welcome.
Enter Charmion, Iras.
Char. What must be done?

Cleop. Short Ceremony, Friends:
But yet it must be decent. First, this Laurel
Shall Crown my Hero's Head: he fell not basely,
Nor left his Shield behind him. Only thou
Could triumph over thy self; and thou alone
Were worthy so to triumph.

Char. To what end
These Ensigns of your Pomp and Royalty?

Cleop. Dull, that thou art! why, it is to meet my Love;
As when I saw him first, on Cydnos bank,
All sparkling, like a Goddess; so adorned,
I Will find him once again: my second Spousals
Shall match my first, in Glory. Haste, haste, both,
And dress the Bride of Antony.

Char. It Is done.

Cleop. Now seat me by my Lord. I claim this place;
For I must Conquer Caesar too, like him,
And win my share of the World. Hail, you dear Relics
Of my Immortal Love!
O let no Impious hand remove you hence;
But rest for ever here: let Egypt give
His Death that Peace, which it denied his Life.
Reach me the Casket.

I^s. Underneath the fruit the Aspick lies.

Cleop. putting aside the leaves Welcome, thou kind Deceiver!
Thou best of Thieves; who, with an easy key,
Do open Life, and unperceived by us,
Even steal us from our selves: discharging so
Death's dreadful Office, better than himself,
Touching our Limbs so gently into slumber,
That Death stands by, deceived by his own Image,
And thinks himself but Sleep.

Serap. within. The Queen, where is she?
The Town is yielded, Caesar's at the Gates.

Cleop. He comes too late to invade the Rights of Death.
Haste, bare my Arm, and rouse the Serpents fury.
[Holds out her Arm and draws it back. Coward Flesh --
Would thou conspire with Caesar, to betray me,
As thou were none of mine? I Will force thee to it,
And not be sent by him,
But bring my Self, my Soul to Antony.
[Turns aside, and then shows her Arm bloody. Take hence; the work is done.

Serap. within. Break open the Door,
And guard the Traitor well.

Char. The next is ours.

Iras. Now, Charmion, to be worthy
Of your great Queen and Mistress.
[They apply the Aspicks.
Cleop. Already, Death I feel thee in my Veins;
I go with such a will to find my Lord,
That we shall quickly meet.
A heavy numness creeps through every Limb,
And now it is at my Head: my Eyelids fall,
And my dear Love is vanished in a Mist.
Where shall I find him, where? O turn me to him,
And lay me on his Breast. -- Caesar, thy worst;
Now part us, if thou caust.
(Dies.) Iras sinks down at her feet, and dies Charmion stands behind her
Chair, as dressing her Head. Enter S^on, two Priests, Alexas bound, Egyptians.
2. Pr^. (...), Serapion, what havoc Death has made!

Serap. 'Twas (...) ^ar'd.
Charmion, is this well done?

Char. Yes, it is well done, and like a Queen, the last
Of her great Race: I follow her.
(Sinks down; Dies.)
Alexas. It Is true,
She has done well: much better thus to die,
Than live to make a Holy Day in Rome.

Serap. See, see how the Lovers sit in State together,
As they were giving Laws to half Mankind.
The impression of a Smile left in her Face,
Shows she died pleased with him for whom she lived,
And went to Charm him in another World.
Caesars's just entering; grief has now no leisure.
Secure that Villain, as our pledge of safety
To grace the Imperial Triumph. Sleep, blessed Pair,
Secure from humane Chance, long Ages out,
While all the Storms of Fate fly over your Tomb;
And Fame, to late Posterity, shall tell,
No Lovers lived so great, or died so well.

Epilogue.
POets, like Disputants, when Reasons fail,
Have one sure Refurge left and that is to rail;
Fop, Coxcomb, Fool, are thundered through the Pit;
And this is all their Equipage of Wit.
We wonder how the Devil this difference grows,
Betwixt our Fools in Verse, and yours in Prose?
For, 'Faith, the quarrel rightly understood,
It Is Civil War with their own Flesh and Blood.
The Threadbare Author hates the gaudy Coat;
And swears at the Gilt Coach, but swears a foot:
For it is observed of every Scribbling Man,
He grows a Fop as fast as ever he can;
Prunes up, and asks his Oracle the Glass,
If Pink or Purple best become his Face.
For our poor Wretch, he neither rails nor prays;
Nor likes your Wit just as you like his Plays;
He has not yet so much of Mr. Bays.
He does his best; and, if he cannot please,
Would quietly sue out his Writ of Ease.
Yet, if he might his own Grand Jury call,
By the Fair Sex he begs to stand or fall.
Let Caesar's Power the Men's ambition move,
But grace you him who lost the World for Love.
Yet if some' antiquated Lady say,
The last Age is not Copied in his Play;
Heaven help the Man who for that Face must drudge,
Which only has the wrinkles of a Judge.
Let not the Young and Beauteous join with those;
For should you raise such numerous Hosts of Foes,
Young Wits and Spark he to his aid must call;
It Is more than one Man's work to please you all.
FINIS.

