INNOCENCE and TRUTH VINDICATED: OR, A Sober REPLY to Mr WILL's ANSWER to a
Late TREATISE of BAPTISM.

Wherein the Authorities and Antiquities for Believers, and against Infants
Baptism, are Defended, and the mis-representations and Forgeries he boasts of,
all returned upon himself.

With a brief Answer to Mr Blinmans Essay.

By Henry Danvers.

Vt ex lapidum attritu ignis elicitur, sic saepe veritas ex alternantium imo
and altercantium sermonum conflictu. Lipsius. Prove. 18.17. He that is first in
his own Cause, seems just, but his Neighbor comes and searches him.
Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1675.

THE PREFACE.
IT is an Ancient and well approved Maxim among the Learned, that the more
truth is winnowed and sifted, the more opposed and contended against, the more
transparent and illustrious it appears. Veritas ventilata plus rutilat and
impugnata magis elucesit.

A further confirmation whereof you may meet with, from the late opposition Mr.
Will's has made against the truth, in his late Book called Infants Baptism
attested and vindicated by Scripture and Antiquity, in an Answer to a treatise,
by Mr. H.D. etc.

Wherein notwithstanding the dilligent search, he tells us, he has made in the
University Library at Oxford, the utmost assistance that all the learned
writers Mr. Marshall, Baxter, Cobbet, Cotton, Holmes, etc. can give him to
disprove and weaken the Authorities urged from Scripture and Antiquity for
Believers against Infants Baptism, ye^ you will find they serve but so much the
more to illustrate that truth he pretends to foil, giving only an opportunity
for further confirmation and ratification, and to create more full satisfaction
or conviction to any that have been in suspense, as to the truth of any of
those Authorities urged by me. Wherein notwithstanding his great flourish and
noise you will find he is not able to reprove the truth so much as of one of
those many Authorities in the Historical part, and excepting that one in the
Doctrinal part, viz. Calvin for Eckius, not another that is considerable in the
whole Book.

Therefore all that I have to ask of the Candid Reader (at whose Bar the
matter is now br^ught betwixt Mr. Will's and me) is only to do themselves and
the truth in Question so much right as to afford the Common Justice of an open
Ear; that having heard the Recrimination, they will also attend to what is said
herein for vindication.

Wherein y u have his Arguments duly weighed, and refuted, his caviling
exceptions answered; his pretended forgeries, and falsehoods, disproved; the
Antiquities of Believers Baptism defended; the innovation, groundless
Tradition, and novelty of Infants Baptism confirmed. The witness against it by
eminent men and famous Churches for many Ages maintained; his injurious
Calumnyes and reproaches (that he not only designs to load the Professors of
believers Baptism with, but the Profession it self also) detected and
reproved, The groundless custom of sprinkling instead of Dipping further
evinced.

As for his undue and uncomly reflections, the haughty, bitter wrathful,
frothy and provoking spirit, he appears in, through the whole Book, s^
unbecoming Christian candor, his holy Profession, or the nature of the
ordinance treated of, I shall the beast concern my self ab^ut, but leave it to
him that can convince and will certainly reck^n for such hard speeches for his
names sake; and rather so far as concerns my self with Job, to bind it about
me for a Crown, Job. 31.36. And as exhorted Mat. 5. To rejoice to be accounted
worthy to suffer contempt and reproach for the truth sake, etc. then to render
Railing for Railing. It being also ever judged the sign of a bad cause, for
persons to betake themselves to such courses, and thereby to supply the want of
matter and sound Argument with rage, clamor and noise.

The Scripture arguments it is true I have little meddled with, and that for
these following reasons.

First, because the Historical part upon which so much stress has been laid
(though the leanest part of the controversy) was the principal new thing added
by me (it being as Mr. Will's observes, next to an impossibility to offer any
new Scripture, or almost any new Argument that has not been before urged in
the controversy;) and is mainly therefore by him opposed.

Secondly, Because he has ingeniously confessed, that there is no express
Scripture f^r the same; And so many of themselves with one Mouth have owned,
the necessity of express Scripture to warrant and justify the practice of every
part of Gods worship, and that to practice any thing in the worship of God
without express warranty from the Word, is superstition and false worship. And
that such a Principle ought to be held fast as the great Protestant Bulwark to
secure us against all Popish Innovations and Traditions: and which is a
sufficient answer out of their own Mouths against any thing they urge from
pretended inferences and farr-fetch't Consequences, being all that can possibly
be said for it.

Thirdly, because M. Tombs has now given a particular Answer to him and Mr.
Blinman therein, who being none of those rigid Anabaptists that Mr. Will's
expresses so much enmity against, his Arguments may be more acceptable to him.

And 4ly. because I intend to do it more particularly hereafter, (if God
please) by it self, having yet much to reckon with Mr. Will's for his further
abuses, and grand mistakes in the Doctrinal part.

In the next place, it is very observable, and I desire the Reader to take
special notice of it, that the things he would so injuriously Father upon me he
is himself found foully guilty of; making good Prove. 26.27. and of which I shall
point you to a few instances, viz.

First, that the forgeries and prevarications he charges upon me, do all return
upon himself; and not one of them made good against me, as appears from l. 1.
to p. 29.

Secondly, that the several falsehoods he lays to my charge are all of them of
his own making and not one of them to be proved against me, as is particularly
evidenced from p. 29. to p. 62.

Thirdly, the notorious abuse he has put upon Authors by forgery, curtilations*
mis-quotation, mis-translation, and which fully appears by the following
instances, viz.

1. by making an Auth^rity of his own for Infants Baptism, and fathering it
upon Basil in the 4. Cent. in his Book contra Eunom, and asserting it to be the
very next lines to what I had repeated from him, thence reproving me for
unfaithfullness, in leaving it out, and to be duly suspected in all my
Quotations, when not one syllable of any such thing is to be found in him as
demonstrated p. 43. to 49.

2. For mis-translating, mis-representing, abusing and curtailing Greg. Nazien.
as appears, p. 8. and 9. and p. 47. and 48.

3. For his curtailing and abusing the old confession of the Waldenses, leaving
out a considerable part thereof, and then making flourishes and inferences upon
it, as p. 110.

4. By abusing his Reader with a supposititious Testimony, of Athanasius, when
the Author from whom he brings it owns it to be forged, p. 37, 38, 39. etc.

5. His egregious unfaithfullness in that notorious abuse he puts upon
Osiander, pretending that he certifies several things out of Peter Clumacenses,
against Peter Bruis, bel^nging to the 12. Cent. when he knew them to be the
Lying slanders of the Monks inquisitors against the Albegois, in the 13. Cent.
and of which he picks only 5. particulars out of 20. as p. 118. to 123.

6. His abusing, and mistranslating, a passage out of Cassander quite contrary
to what he expresses; falsely thereby, accusing the Minis's for the very crime
therein he acquits them, p. 160. to 163.

7. His abusing Erasmus, telling us that he testifyes in his Censure before
Origens Homelyes on the Romans, that it was Jeroms Version, and not Ruffinus's;
and that Jeroms Preface was prefixed thereto; Whereas Erasmus says the quite
contrary in both, viz. First, that it did appear to be Ruffinus 's and not
Jeroms, and 2ly, that the said Preface was a cheat of the Book sellers, and
none of Jeroms, as p. 86.

8. His abusing his Reader by a Quotation from Vicecomes, as though he
testified, that till Luthers time none denied Infants Baptism, when he does the
quite contrary in the same place, giving an Account of so many before Luther
that did it, viz. Vincentius, Victor, Hinemarus, the Henrici, and Apostolici,
Wickliff, Strabo, Vives, etc. as p. 127.

9. By further abusing the Reader in telling him, that Rainarius in his
Catalogue of the Waldensian errors, gives not in their denying of Infants
Baptism as a great Argument they were for it being one of the Monks inquisitors
employed to that end; when he does it expressly in Totidem verbis, as p. 125.

10. His double dealing about Dr. Tailors Arguments against Infants Baptism in
his Liberty of Prophecy, suggesting as though Dr. Tailor himself and Dr.
Hammond had refuted them, whereas they suppose most of them to remain good
against those common pleas for Infants Baptism; but do not undertake to answer
them because many of those Arguments usually brought by Paedobaptists are not
good in themselves. p. 52.

Fourthly, Fearful ositanacy or heedlesness, repeating my words truly in one
place, and yet afterward Fathering the quite contrary upon me; as p. 32.

Fifthly, Notoriously partial in his Answers all the Book through, replying to
some things he judges weak, and leaving others unanswered, and yet vaunting
over the whole: as for instance, in the 4. Cent. I give the sayings of 10
Fathers for adult Baptism, he replys only to 4. of them, says not a word to
the rest, and yet concludes against them all, as p. 6. etc. So in like manner
as to the 10. Instances given from the most eminent men not baptized till aged,
though the children of Christian Parents, replys only to 4. and not a word to
the other 6. and yet concludes against them all, as though he had particularly
answered to them, as p. 11. to 15. (though his reply as you will find, is as
insignificant in both as his silence.) And further I produce 3. Councils in the
4. Cent. for the same, to which he weakly replies, he can produce 3 times ten
Counsels for Infants Baptism, viz. in after centuryes when by Popish Counclls
it was injoind and imposed as p. 10. And again I quote Spanhaemius and Osiander
to prove a thing, he takes notice only of Spanhaemius that speaks to part, but
not to Osiander that speaks to the whole; and yet, reproves me for my mistake
as p. 148. etc.

And further he allows but two witnesses for Believers Baptism only, viz Boemus
and Srabo, and yet leaves multitudes of them unexcepted against; and unreplyd
to, as p. 2. etc. In like manner excepts against but 6. of above 40. particular
witnesses against Infants Baptism, and yet allows but 2. viz. Hinc^^arus and
Adrianus, as p. 104, 105. And again, I quote eleven several Churches denying
Infants Baptism, he exceps only against 3 says nothing to all the rest, yet
owns none of them. p. 17.

Sixthly, the inveteracy of spirit testified all along both against the
professors and profession it self of Beleivers Baptism only, especially in his
railing and false accusations, from p. 145. to 171.

As for my Epitomizing and repeating some of Mr Tombs s Arguments, and not
always mentioning his name, which he calls Plaigiarisme, I do confess in that
my collection, I have not so punctually mentioned all our own party from Book
to book, wherein (except in the Historical part) I do little more then bring to
remembrance, in a new Method (for the benefit of the present age) what has
heretofore in large Treatises been writ upon this subject, which I think is
usual in Polemical writings, and if I mistake not, Mr Sydnham does the same
thing without mentioning of names, from whom the arguments are brought (which
may be endless;) And if I have been thereby injurious to any I beg their
pardon; I am sure I have not been so to the truth; But herein I conceive Mr
Will's has not dealt fairly, 1st to reprove me for the same thing he does
himself, for I could draw paralells too upon him if I would be troublesome and
impertinent; and 2ly to avoid answering the force of the Arguments, upon
pretense they are another not my own, which I conceive savours little of
ingenuity and will scarce go for current pay.

It is true, it must be owned that Mr Tombs how much soever slighted by M.
Will's (though in some things very different from most that own this way) has
done very worthily in this controversy, and was an eminent instrument that God
raised up amongst the learned to plead and defend that despised truth, and
whose learned labors and unanswered Books do witness for him in the gate,
though M. Will's is pleased so ignorantly to vaunt it, and tell us in his
Epistle, that the Arguments for believers against Infants Baptism are a parcel
of Trite overworn things, a nauseous crambe or repitition of old routed
Arguments, that had been in effect trampled upon and confuted again and again,
though his Anti-paedobaptism in 3 parts, containing near as I judge 1500. pages
in quarto, replying to what had been written by above 20 several persons are
all of them, if I am not misinformed unreplied to to this day

And further, I must inform the Reader that had any modest endeavors
prevailed, these things had more privately (without this troubleing the world)
been rectifyd between Mr Will's and me, But he having as he tells us received
from the learned his Album calculum, or approbation, would not by any means be
stopped in his career for the supposed victory and glory; And how far he has
merrited that high Encomium given by his Imprimatur, M. B. in his Epistle
Recommendatory is to be considered, who tells us, that much thanks is due to
him the reverend Author from the Church for answering my Arguments
satisfactorily, and by searching into, and so fully confuting all my pretended
antiquities, thereby defending (as he says) Gods truth and the Churches right,
whilst other of his brethren by ignorance and sloth, treacherous silence or
silly unsatisfactory. Arguings, have betrayed the cause.

But whether instead of the Churches thanks they ought not both (in Mr B's own
language) to have the Church told of them, for pestering the world with such
impertinencyes, one for his heedless writing of them, and the other for his
rash and careless Commendation, is submitted to judgment.

And lastly, Whether it is not now demonstrably evident to all men that will
impartially consider, that notwithstanding the confident vainglorious boast of
these great undertakers, that till better proof be manifested there as yet
appears as little Antiquity for Infants Sprinkling in the first Ages, as (they
themselves acknowledge) express scripture for the same.

THE WITNESSES FOR Believers Baptism Freed from Forgery and Prevarication.
CHAP. I. The Baptism of Believers, with the Authorities urged for the
necessity of Confession of Faith before it; is defended and the Quotations out
of the Magdeburg's, vindicated from Mr. Wills's charge of Prev^rication and
Falsehood.
THe Method I shall observe he ein, shall be to give you a brief account of
the Antiquities, and Authorities brought by me, to prove the necessity of Faith
before Baptism; and then his Exception against them, and my Reply thereto:
whereby the Reader may be able to make an easy, and speedy judgment, at whose
door the Prevarications and Falsehoods lie.

Having, as you will find, in the 6. first Chapters by 6. Arguments from posi^ve
scripture proved: That Believers upon Profession of Faith, are the only
Subjects of Baptesme; did in my 7. Chapter (by way of Illustration only)
confirm the same, from the eminent Testimony that had been born thereto,
throughout all ages. Firmly witnessing, That Confession and Profession of
Faith. with free choice, was necessary before Baptism; And which evidence, as
I have given it you, through all the Centuries, you may gather up under 2.
Heads: All the Authorities under 2. Heads.
First, What has been said thereto by the Ancients themselves, in the first
four Centuries, before Infants Baptism was enjoined (and how confirmed by our
modern Writers); And secondly, what witness of that kind has been born
thereto, after Infants Baptism was imposed, as well by those that denied
Infants Baptism, as those that owned, and practiced it; not only of the Romish
Church, but others through all the rest of the Centuries.

Mr. Wills charge for Prevarication and Falsehood.
To which Testimonies Mr. Wills makes his Exceptions, charging me with
Prevarication, in relating somethings partially, others falsely, and for the
most part contrary to the intention of the Writers; and to that degree, that
except only two: viz. Boemus and Strabo. That I have perverted the sayings of
all the Authors throughout the Centuries.

But how he makes this charge appear, is now to be the Question. And therefore
in order to the due Examination thereof, we shall join issue with him, and put
it to the trial, how and in what particulars he will make good, either the
Prevarications, or falsehoods, suggested by him.

First as to the Prevarications.

The Prevarications he mentions, must appear, 1. Prevarications.
either in the Authorities produced before* or since Infants Baptism was
enjoined.

First, as to those produced by me, before Infants Baptism was imposed: viz.
from the four first Centuries, It is manifest, that as to all the Testimonies I
bring in the three first Centuries, so positively affirming, that Profession of
Faith was to proceed Baptism: He gives no material Exception, only says this
of Tertulian, page 6. second part: That the Magdeburgs tell us indeed, that
Tertullian in this age, opposed himself to some that Asserted Infants Baptism,
affirming that the Adult were the only proper Subjects. But how weakly he does
it, may be seen afterward, when we come to examine the witness^s, of which
Tertulian is the Van.

So that I hope, it will be acknowledged, None in the 3. first Cent.
that here is no Prevarication, or perverting evidence, in these my first
Testimonies in the three first Centuries; and where you will find there is more
then seven times two. Boemus and Strabo being none of their number, so that if
we should go no further, my first Proposition stands firm, that Believers
Baptism was the only Baptism for near 300. years.)

But to proceed, I perceive his great cry against me, is for the Authorities I
produce out of the fourth Century; but how justly, will speedily appear.

I do indeed say, that it is manifest to me, from the Evidence the Magdeburg's
give us herein: That Adult Baptism only practiced in the 4. Cent. appears.
That it was the approved and universal practice of this Age, as well in the
Eastern, as Western Churches, to Baptize upon Profession of Faith.

And which is made good by a threefold evidence. 1. From the sayings of the
Fathers.
First, from the sayings of the Fathers, and greatest men of this Century, both
in Africa, Asia* and Europa.

2. Decrees of Councels.
Secondly, from the positive Decrees of three Eminent Counsels in this Age.

Thirdly, from the pregnant instances of ten of the most eminent Men, 3. From
the Children of Christians not Baptized till aged.
that were not Baptized till aged, though the Children of Christian Parents, in
this Century.

First, from the sayings of the Fathers, both in the East and West.

First, that it does not appear, that any other then Adult Baptism was
practiced in the Churches of Africa, Africa.
1. Athanasius.
is manifest by the sayings of Athanasius, and Arnobius, 2. Arnobius.
two of the most eminent in those Parts, in this Age: Who do positively affirm,
as appears by their saying, at large p. 55, 56. That Teaching, Faith, and
Desire should, according to Christ's Commission, precede Baptism. And to which
we may add, what we have from Optatus Milevitanus 3. Optatus Milev.
an other Person of great Name in this Church, in this Age; who tell us in his
4. Book, as say the Magdeburg's, Century 4. page 237. That none denies; but
that every Man by nature, though born of Christian Parents, is unclean, and
that without the Spirit he is not cleansed, and that there is a necessity of
the Spirits cleasing before Baptism: So that the house must be trimmed, and
fitted for the Lord (viz as he says, the Soul of the Believer is) that God may
enter and dwell in it; according to the saying of the Apostle: You are the
Temple of God, and he dwells in you.

Secondly, that is was the Faith, and Practice of the Churches of Asia, Asia.
appears by the like sayings, of Bazil. Greg. Nazienzen, Ephrim. Syrus,
Epiphanius, etc. as at large you have them p. 55, 56, 57.

Thirdly, that it was the universal practice in the Western, or European Europ.
Churches, appears also from what is witnessed hereto, by Hilary, Ambrose,
Jerome, and Marius Victorinus, in the foresaid Pages. And therefore do the
Magdeburg's, upon Hilary's testimony, say, that the Western Churches did so
observe it. And from Jerome's testimony, do also tell us, that it does appear
till his time, that the Western Churches did so continue, to Baptize the Adult
upon Profession. (The Reader being desired, in both those Testimonies p. 55,
56. to put Western for Eastern.

Secondly, the truth of this further, 2. Three Councels.
appears from those Decrees of the three Councels: viz. The Carthagenian
Council in Africa; And the Laodicean, and Neocesarean Councels, in Asia; so
positively decreeing: That Teaching, Confession, Faith* and free Choice, ought
to preceed Baptism, which you have in page 89.

Thirdly, a third Argument, 3. Ch^ldren of Christians not Bap ised.
that Adult Baptism was the only approved Baptism of this Age, I demonstrated
from those ten Remarkable Instances, of the most eminent men in this Century:
that were not Baptized, though the Children of Christian Parents, till they
were able to make Profession of their Faith, viz. Constantin, Bazil, Greg.
Nazienzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine, Nectarius, Valentinian, and
Theodosius.

Four of the 10 excepted against.
To the first ten Testimonies, of the sayings of the Fathers, Mr. Wills except
only against four, viz. Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, and Nazienzen, because he
says, they are all of them express for Infants Baptism; and which are
therefore perverted by me, because I bring them for Believers Baptism only,
who were for Infants Baptism also.

To which I say, that if but four of the ten be excepted against, then we have
six more stand good for us, besides the former ( viz. 15. not excepted against)
as perverted* But

The four Wit. vindicated. Viz. Basil.
Secondly, it cannot be denied, but these four are very full in their
Testimonies, for Adult Baptism; only for Basile says expressly, Faith must
needs precede, and that none else were to be Baptized, and what can be more
full. Athanasius Athan.
as express also as he, for Teaching, and Faith from Christ's Commission before
Baptism. And Nazianzen Naz.
as positive as either, That they neither Baptized any of Old without
Profession, and that it was dangerous then so to do, and therefore advised,
that Infants Baptism should be deferred, till they were capable to make some
Confession. And Ambrose Ambrose.
as full also, That the Baptized should not only make Confession, but desire
the same. Therefore if any of them should contrary hereto say, Infants should
be Baptized, it would not only contradict the acknowledged Rule, the general
confessed practice of the Age, but themselves also in the aforesaid Testimony
born by them.

But thirdly, neither does it appear upon a due search, for ought I can yet
find, that these four did so contradict themselves, in asserting Infants
Baptism, as affirmed. For

First, Athan not for Infants Baptism,
Athanasius is much injured in Fathering those Questions to Antiochus upon him,
in the 114, and 124. whereof Infants Baptism is asserted, it being a forged,
and spurious thing, and none of his, as I shall make manifest presently by
undeniable proof.

Secondly, neither will it appear, that Basil. Nor Basil.
has any where asserted Infants Baptism, as I shall fully demonstrate in it is
place also, and Mr. Wills his egregious mistake about it.

Thirdly, As for the Testimony that he produces, that Ambrose was for Infants
Baptism, Nor Ambrose.
from that saying of his, lib. 2. de Ab. cap. 11. Because every age is
obnexious to sin, therefore every age first is fit for the Sacrament, is no
proof for the same; 1. Because Circumcision is there only meant. 2. If
Baptized, then those of every age, that are fit for that Sacrament, must be
supposed (as he before tells us) viz. those only that are capable to confess
Faith and desire Baptism; otherwise (by this testimony as he would carry it)
not only all Children, but all Men, and Women in the World, the Bad as well as
the Good* the Unbelievers as well as the Believer, being all obnoxious to sin,
are therefore esteemed the fit subjects of Baptism. But suppose Ambrose was
positive for Infants Baptism, it is but the opinion of one Doctor, that
contradicts himself too, and that against the judgment, and practice of the
Age.

Fourthly, As for the testimony he urges from Greg. Nazienzen, which has the
most in it, we shall duly Examine; He tells us page 11. that Greg. Nazienzens
words are express in the case, and makes manifest that he was absolutely for
Infants Baptism, in his 40. Oration, viz. Have thou a young Child let it be
early consecrated, yea (...) from its Infancy (as Mr. Wills renders the word)
and therefore as in his 3. Oration they Baptized all ages, as he said.

Nazian. not absolutely for Infants Baptism.
To which I answer, that from his translating the word (...) Infants, to
conclude him absolutely for Infants Baptism, is to impose a falacy upon his
Reader, when he knows the word siggnifies a state of Childhood also, that is
capable of understanding, as it is taken 2 Timothy 3 15. And that from a Child thou
have known the Scripture; the word is, (...), and therefore Nazienzen must be
understood by his early Consicration, to mean not in the Cradle, but as he
explains himse^f, so soon as they are capable to know Mysteries except only in
the case of danger of death; and which is to Baptize not so much a Child as a
dying Person. And that he means not the Infants state is manifest, because in
the same 40. Oration he has these words (speaking of those who decease without
Baptism:) viz. Neither can they Re^eive Baptism, either p^rhaps by Reason of
Infancy* or some altogether involentary, chance by which it is that even they
who would obtained not the gift. Whereby it is manifest, that in his time
I^fancy was one of the Obstacles that hindered Baptism, and whereby Persons
deceased without it. And therefore by that passage, in his third Oration, of
all ages Receiving Baptism, is to be unde^stood, such only that are capable of
Instruction in the Faith, and the Mysteries of that Ordinance, whether young
Men, old Men, or Fathers, having before declared, is so dangerous to come
unprepared to it. Therefore Gregory's testimony, so much leaned upon, to prove
Infants Baptism in this Century, signifies nothing. And Doctor Barlow tells us
that as Tertullian in the former Age condemned it, as an unwarrentable, and
irrational Custom, so did Nazienzen (as he says) dislike it too, and would
not have them brought to Baptism, till they were of some age, and able to
answer for themselves, in his Oration (...).

Infant Bap a sea? qua Infant, but ^s a dying Person; and which was through a
superstitious conceit, that Baptism might save them; as some give the
Eucharist, and Extreme unction, when they are just departing; In like manner
there was also in this Age an opinion, that some had to Baptize Children, Sick
Persons Baptized for cure.
to cure them of their Bea^ly diseases, Magd. Cent. 4. c. 6. p. 423. As they
were grown Persons also in the next Age to cure them, Aug. to. 7. col. 89. c.
But what are either of these to that Ordinance of Baptism? Tertullian that, as
Doctor Barlow tells us, was so great an opposer of Infants Baptism, as
irrational, and unwarrentable, yet had this fancy of Baptizing a dying Child,
to save it; which signifies just nothing to the thing pleaded for, and that
Persons may as well bring Protogenes for an Authority, that pretended to
Baptize the sick Children of this Age, to cure their deceases; as Gregory, and
Tertulian for Baptiz^ng of dying Children, to save their Souls.

So that all our instances from the sayings of our Eminent Men, stands as yet
firm for us, notwithstanding what Mr. Wills has said to the contrary.

Secondly, as to the Decrees of the three Councels, he says this: That if it
must go by the number of Councels, they shall carry it; for if I name three,
that must be supposed to be against Infants Baptism, he thinks he should not
exceed, if he said, he could name ten times three for it. Besides he conceives,
that these three Councels mentioned by me, had respect only to Pagans, in those
their Decrees, from what Mr. Marshall had said in answer to that of Neocaesaria.

His exceptions against the Councels very frivolous.
To his first answer, I say, It is granted I think (as I have made it ready to
his hand;) he may quote the Canons of thirty Councels, for Infants Baptism, in
the following ages (and a stout argument, no doubt for it.) But what are such
Decrees to this fourth Century, wherein I produce three for Believers Baptism,
upon Profession and free choice; and he not one in this time (as indeed it is
impossible he should) there being none found to ordain any such thing, till
after this Century.

And as to his conception, that the Neocaesarian Council means only Pagans, and
not the Children of Christian Women, as he says. Mr. Marshal has made appear;
and therefore in his usual civility tells me, how impudent it is in me to
trouble us with this silly Ridiculous story.

He must therefore know, that he and Mr. Marshal, both do miss the Case, the
stress of the Decree lies not about the Parent, but for the Exclusion of all
Children, whether of Pagan, or Christian Parents; because confession, and free
choice is required in that Sacrament. And therefore says Grotius from the
Glossers, That an Infant cannot be Baptized, because it has no power to
confess, or choose the Divine Baptism. And which speaks reason, says Doctor
Tailor, and intimates a practice which was absolutely universal in the Church,
of interrogating the Catechumens, concerning the Articles of their Creed, which
is one Argument says he, that either they did not admit Infants to Baptism,
or that they did praevaricate egregiously, in asking Questions of them, who
themselves know, were incapable of giving answers.

So that we have as little prevaricated in our Councels, as in our Fathers.

Thirdly, the next exception he makes, Excepts against 4. of the 10. not
Baptized in their Infancy.
is against the Instances of those eminent Men not Baptized till aged, and of
the ten before mentioned, he gives in exceptions only against four, viz
Constantin, Nazienzen, Chrysostom, and Austin.

By which we have gained, six other unperverted Authorities more; and surely it
is of much weight, that if six such eminent Persons, the Children of Christian
Parents were not Baptized, till they could make a Confession of their Faith; it
is a substantial Argument, that Believers Baptism was the Baptism generally
owned in this Age, and that Infants Baptism was not yet received as an
Apostolical Tradition, and ordinance of Christ, whilst so many Renowned
worthyes of this Age, the Parents of these great Men, should neglect to Baptize
them in their Infancy; for the Argument lies there, and not as Mr. Wills so
weakly reasons, from some misapprehensions in the parties themselves, as in p.
17.

Constant. the Son of Christians Parents, as
But as to the Exceptions themselves: First, as to Constantin, if he, and Mr.
Marshal doubt whether Constantin had Godly Parents at his birth: As good
Historians, as they do not. As Grotius and Dailly Dailly.
witnessing, to Helana's Christianity before his birth, as p. 60. and 62. And
the Magdeburgs Magd.
to that of his Father, Cent. 4. p. 61. Out of Eusebius in these words,
Constantinus Constantii Imperatoris Filii, bonus a bono, pius a pio.
Constantine the son of Constantius, a good man from a good, a holy man from a
holy one.

Nazian. the Son of Christians Parents, as Magd.
As to that of Nazienzen, I wonder Mr. Wills should cavil about him, seeing he
knows the Magd^burgs, in the Account they give of his life, tell us from such
undeniable Authority: That his Father Gregorius was a pious Bishop, and his
Mother Nonna a gracious holy Woman before his Birth, and that she by prayer
obtained this her son of God; and how from his youth he did patrizare and
matristatim a puero Paternis moribus imbutus est, Mag. Cent. 4. page 9^4, etc.
Besides in confirma^ion thereof, Doctor Hall Dr. Halls.
(as Mr. Tombs tell us) in his Honor to his married Clergy, 2 Book 8. Sect.
says: That Nazienzen was begotten of his Father being a Bishop, and to prove
it, brings his Fathers words, speaking to him to persuade him to help him in
his charge, which he translates out of the Greek: viz. The years of thy age,
are not so many as of my Priesthood, confirming what was said above out of the
Magdeburgs.

As for Chrysostom he says: Mr. Marshal says, Chrisost. Christian Parents, as
it is uncertain, whether Father and Mother were Christians at his birth. But
as for that we will let it rest upon Grotius's testimony, Grotius.
as you have it p. 61. whom none can think a partial Author in this Case,
being so firmly for Infants Baptism, and without dispute so well read in
Antiquity.

And as for Austin I will recommend you to two instances, to make it good,
Austin Christian Parents, as
and clear Mr. Wills doubts: The one is Doctor Tailor; Dr. Tailor.
not in his Liberty of Prophecy (which is excepted against by Mr. Wills, but
how warrentably we shall hereafter examine) but in one of his last pieces, viz.
in his Deswasive against Popery, printed 1667. where you have him in Sect. 3.
p. 117. thus expressing himself: viz. That there is no pretense of Tradition,
that the Church in all ages did Baptize all the Infants of Christian Parents:
it is more certain that they did not do it, then that they did: in the first
Age St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, and St. Austin, were born of Christian Parents, and
yet not Baptized until t^eful age of a man: and more that the Apostles did
Baptize any Children, is not at all reported by any c^edible Tradition.

The other is Mr. Bazter, Mr. Baxter.
an evidence that in this Case is not to be rejected, who is pleased to tell us
in a very late piece, viz. his Principles of Love p 7.

That he knew that in the days of Tertullian, Nazienzen* and Austin, men had
liberty to be Baptized, or to bring their Children, when and at what age they
pleased, and that none were forced to go against their consciences therein. And
that he knew not that our Rule or Religion is changed, or that we are grown any
wiser or better then they. And again Christian Direct. p. 827. Thus

That ancient Christians had liberty to let their Children stay till age, as
they thought best. And that Austin, and many Children of Christian Parents were
Baptized at age.

And upon the whole, we may add what Doctor Barlow Dr. Barlow.
says to this purpose, page 64. I am sure that in the Primative times they
were Catechumeni, then illuminati or Baptizati; and that not only Pagans, and
Children of Pagans converted, but Children of Christian Parents also.

Thus we have gone through our first four Centuries, and the proofs urged to
this point of History from them; and therein I hope the Reader will fully
acquit me, from that charge of Prevarication, in perverting the Authorities
brought by me to witness, that in these times Confession, and Profession of
Faith, was held necessary to precede Baptism.

That only the Adult Baptized in the first ages confirmed by Divert.
And that I am not mistaken, nor alone in my apprehension herein, I shall repeat
a few, both of the Ancient and Modern Writers, that have so fully confirmed the
truth hereof, affirming with much positiveness, that [only] the Adult, upon
Confession of Faith, were the Subjects of Baptism in these first times.

Walafrid Strabo Strabo.
in Rebus Eccles. p. 26. That in the first times the grace of Baptism was wont
to be given, to them Only, who were come to that integrity of mind and body,
that they could know and understand, what profit was to begotten by Baptism;
what was to be confessed, and believed; and lastly, what was to be observed by
them that are new born in Christ.

Beatus Rhenanus Rhenanus.
in Anotat. sup. Tertull. says: That the old custom was, that those that were
come to their full growth, were Baptized with the Bath of Regeneration; which
custom he said continued for some of the first Ages.

Rupertus Rupertus.
in his 4. Book of Divine Offices cap. 18. says: That in former times the
custom of the primative Churches was, that they administered not the Sacrament
of Regeneration, but Only, to the Chatecumens, who were instructed in the Rules
of Faith, Rehearsing the same.

Jo. Boemus Boemus.
Lib. 2. de Gent. Mor. It was in times past, says he, the Custom to administer
Baptism, Only, to those that were instructed in the Faith, etc.

Doctor Hamond Dr. Hamond.
in his Cat. lib. 1. c. 3. p. 23. says, That All Men were instructed in the
Fundamentals of Faith anciently, before they were permitted to be Baptized.

Mr. Baxter Mr. Baxter.
in his Saints Rest. part. 1. cap. 8. Sect. 5. says: That Tertullian, Origin,
and Cyprian, who lived in the 2. and 3. Centuries, do all of them affirm, that
in the primative times None were Baptized, without an express covenanting,
wherein they renounced the World, Flesh, and Devil; and engaged themselves, and
promised to obey him.

The Testimonies for Adult Baptism, after Infants Baptism was enjoined.

1. From particular Persons, 1. that denied Infants Baptism.


In the next place, for further confirmation of this truth, I gave you in some
Testimony that was born thereto, after Infants Baptism was established, in the
fifth Century; and that not only from those that denied Infants Baptism, but
from those that owned and practiced it, Papists and others, through the rest of
the Centuries.

Of the first I produced several Eminent men, as p^rticular witnesses, some of
which I shall mention, viz

Crescon.
Cresconius page 230. who said that there was no true Baptism, but such as was
administered after Faith.

Faustus.
Faustus Regienses, page 230. That personal and actual desire was requisite, in
every one that was to be Baptized.

Albanus.
Albanus, who was put to death for his witness hereto, p. 230.

These eminent People, called Swermers, The Swermers
in the sixth Century: That from Christ Example of Baptism reproved, the evil
custom of Infants Baptism, p. 231,

Bishop of Apamen,
The Bishop of Apamen, and Zoroaras, who did defend the Baptism of Believers
to be the only Baptism, page 231.

Adrianus.
Adrianus Bishop of Corinth in the 7. Century, who did stoutly defend Believers
Baptism, not permitting an Infant to be Baptized in his Diocese, page 231.

Hinemar.
Hinemarus, Bishop of Laudum, refusing Infants Baptized, only Believers, 235.

The Egyptian Divines, Egyptian Divines.
in the seventh Century, taught Faith before Baptism, in opposition to the
Romish Baptism; p. 232.

Carolus, Carolus.
Bishop of Maylant, taught that only such as were instructed and confessed
Faith, and manifested a holy life, were to be baptized.

Jacob de Roor, Jacob de Roor.
owned only, that Baptism that Christ commanded after teaching and believing;
and which the Apostles did also practice; and which, says he, must needs be
after believing, because it is for the burying of sin, the Bath of
Regeneration, the Covenant of a Christian li^e, and the putting on the Body of
Christ, and planti^g into the true Olive Tree Jesus Christ, and for the right
entrance into the Spiritual Ark etc.

Besides many others I forbear to mention, but refer you to the Book it self;
And which I suppose are all f^ll p^oper, and pertinent witnesses in the case,
and against none of which he makes any excep^ion, and which I hope you will add
to all the rest, besides the two he will please to allow me.

I do also bring into this evidence, 2. The Churches that denied Infants
Baptism, witnessing for ^^lievers o^^^^.
besides many particular Persons, an Account of several Churches, that have in
their Principles, and Practices, confirmed this of Believers Baptism, after
profession of Faith, and which are as follows.

The Donatists 1. D^natists.
that taught that none should be baptized, but those that believed, and desired
the same, p. 222.

The Waldenses 2. ^^^dense
that taught, that by Baptism the Believers we^e Received into the holy
Congregation, there protesting, and declaring openly their Faith, and amendment
of life, p. 239.

3. Germans.
The Churches of Christ in Germany owned, and contended for this Faith, and
practice; and many sealed the same with their blood, p. 157.

4. Helvetians.
The Churches in Helvetia asserted the same, and many suffered Bonds, and
Martyrdom from Protestant Brethren, for the profession thereof, p. 260.

5. Thessalonians.
The Churches in Thessalonica of the same Faith, and practice, p. 76.

6. Flemings.
The Churches of Christ in Flanders asserting the same, and multitude of
Martyrs that witnessed thereto by blood, p. 267, etc.

7. Bohemians.
The Churches in Bohemia witnessing to this truth, and their great sufferings
for the same, page 271.

8. Hungarians.
The Churches of Hungaria of the same practice, p. 274.

9. Poles.
The Churches in Poland of like Faith, and practice, p. 274.

10. Transilvanians.
The Churches in Transylvania of the same practice, 274.

11. English.
The Churches in this Nation owning the same Principle, and practice; viz.

First, In the time of the ancient Britains, p. 226.

Secondly, Under the name of Lollards from the Waldensian Barbe of that Name,
page 278. p. 203, 204.

Thirdly, Under the name Wickliffians, who asserted also that Believers were
the only Subjects of Baptism, p. 283.

And Lastly, Since Henry the Eight's time, under the name of Anabaptists, p.
306.

Against which latter testimony, from these respective Churches in these
several Regions, he only excepts against the Donatists, Waldenses, and ancient
Britains, denying that they were of this Faith and practice, which you have
particulerly replied to in the third Chapter, where the witnesses against
Infants Baptism are defended.

But in the mean time it must be remembered, that the rest stand good, as not
excepted against.

Secondly, you have the Testimony, 2. The witness born to Baptism after Faith,
by those that owned Infants Baptism.
born to this truth by many Eminent Men, and Churches, that have owned, and
practiced Infants Baptism, since the imposing thereof; some of whom are these
that follow, as you find them in the respective Centuries; viz Chrysostom,
Austin, Gregory, Cassiodorus, Haimo, Rabanus, Anselm, Algerus, Rupertus,
Lumbard, Albertus, Belarmine, Grotius* Luther, Calvin, Hamond, Dailly, Tailor,
Baxter, Church of England. All or most of them, affirming with the Church of
England, that Faith and Repentance is required in all those that are to be
Baptized, viz. Repentance whereby they forsake sin, and Faith whereby they
steadfastly believe the Promises.

To all which Testimony Mr. Wills especially quarrels me, for perverting, as he
says, Mr. Wills exceptions against this part for the Testimony.
their sayings, against there intended senses, by improving what they say for
Adult Baptism (wherein they meant only Strangers, and Pagans converted to the
Faith) against Infants Baptism, which is in an other way, and upon an other
Account, And for being so notoriously contradictious to my self, in saying they
are for Believers Baptism in one part of the History, and yet the same Men,
and Councels, for Infants Baptism in an other.

intended so; I have done no injury.

1. Not quoted for Anab^ptist.
First, because I do not quote them as Anabaptists, or to prove that Believers
Baptism was the only B^ptisme of those Centuries (that would have been
madness, and contradiction with a witness, and which he seems to father upon me.

2. But Argum^nt. ad homineur.
Secondly, because nothing is more fair or frequent then to improve men's own
sayings against themselves, for their better conviction and clearing the truth;
as Mr. Tombs has brought Mr. Baxters 20. Arguments against himself, and
therefore called his Book Felo de se; and no more injury done thereby, then Mr.
Tombs says, was done by Bishop Morton, in alleging the Romanists words in
there writings, as an Advocate for the Protestants against themselves, but
right done thereby, as he says, to the Church of God. So that what they say
respecting the Commission, for the necessity of teaching, profession, and
confession, and so as their w rds necessarely exclude any other but such
c^pable Subjects, what injury to improve it for the truth (and to which I have
spoken, much to prevent Cavils of this kind, as you will find it p. 85, 86, and in
the Praeface)

Austin so for Adult Baptism, in w^rds as to exc ^^e ^ntan^s.
For instance, If Austin tells us in one place, That (...) put due Examination,
both to Doctrine and Conversation* ought to be Baptized* and that no ig^orant
or scandelous Person, without due instruction, and fruits of Repentance, are to
be admitted to Baptism, what can be spoken more agreeable to truth, and more
indeed to assert Believers Baptism; to be the only B^ptisme, and to exclude
any other that are no^ capable to act Faith, or testefy fruits, for if no
other, as he says, then not Infants.

Yet the same Austin in contradiction hereto says, How weakly and
contrad^ctiously Austin asserts Infants Baptism.
Let Infants be baptized by the Faith of another, to take away Original sin,
without which they can neither be Regenerated or save^ Now, compare these two
together, what sound Christian will not say, that Austin before spoke the mind
of Christ, in wholesome sound word? and herein his own words, if not corrupt
and heretical; For as one well observes that such Doctrine as this, was the
greatest poison, that ever the Father of Lies powered into the hearts of
Sinners; to make People think, that sprinkling a little water on the face could
Regenerate, take away sin, and save the Soul, and beget grace ex opero operato
by the work done.

Calvin in one place tells us, 2. Calvin for Believers Baptism by Rule.
the due and right order of Baptism from the Commission, saying thus viz. That
Men may rightly offer themselves, to Baptisme^ Confession of sins is required*
otherwise the whole action would be nothing else but sp^rt.

Yet in another place in contradiction hereto says: Let the Children of
Believers be baptized, Calvin for Infants Bap^isme, in contradict^on hereto,
without Rule.
because God having taken their Parents into Covenant, they themselves a^^ also
to be imbrac^d in the same Covenant; Neither is Baptism hereby separated from
Faith and teaching, because though Children have not yet Faith, nor are capable
of teaching, yet their Parents have both

But by what Rule or Reason this latter is urged, and how possibly to be
Reconciled with the former, so agreeable to both, is the knot to be untyed.

3. Mr. Baxter for Believers Baptism, by precept and Example.
So also Mr. Baxter upon Christ Commission, Matthew. 28.20. This says he, shows
the Disciples their several works in their several Orders; viz. First, to make
Disciples, which Mark calls Believers. Secondly, is to Baptize them, whereto is
annexed the promise of Salvation. Thirdly, to teach them all other things,
which are after to be learned in the School of Christ: And that to contemn this
order, is to contemn all Rules of Order; professing his conscience is fully
satisfied from this Text, that it is one sort of Faith even saying, that must
go before Baptism, the Profession whereof the Minister must expect, as page 3.
And again, if there can be no Example given in Scripture, of any one that was
baptized without the Profession of saving Faith, nor any precept for so doing,
then we must not baptize any without it. But the Antecedent is true, says he,
from the practice of all baptized in Scripture, which he particularly
enumerates, and then says, so is the consiquence.

What can be said more consonant to truth, more agreeable to the Scriptures, and
what more in justification to the Baptism of Believers, and to the Excluding
all others incapable of Profession. Mr. Baxter for Infants Baptism, without
Precept or Example.


And yet the same Mr. Baxter tells us, that an Infant is to be Baptized: but by
what Rule? Why, s ith he, upon the Account of his Parents Faith? But where is
that to be found in the Precept? Is it baptize the believing Parent and his
Child? is that found in the order of the Commission, or is a Child to be found
in all the pregnant Examples, in the New Testament, that he has given us?

When Mr. Baxter, or any one in his behalf, can reconcile Mr. Baxter to Mr.
Baxter; Austin to Austin, Calvin to Calvin, I shall own my mistake herein, till
then must believe, that it is good service, to improve their contradictions to
themselves, and for the service of that truth, that they so vigourously oppose.

But thirdly, 3. Reply. No injury done them from their own expositions of their
sayings.
there is no injury done to them in the sense, that most of the Doctors, both
Papists and Protestants, have given us themselves; respecting those
expressions, about the necessity of Repentance and Faith, before Baptism; and
how they reconcile them to Infants Baptism: And which we have so fully done to
our hand, in the English Liturgy, that will put it out of doubt. You know it is
there expressly told us, that Faith and Repentance is required, in all that are
to be baptized, [good and sound Doctrine.] But then the Question, you know, is
put: How do Infants, who by reason of their tender age cannot perform them?
v^z. can neither Repent nor Believe, [sound Doctrine still.] To which they
answer, Yes; they do perform them by their sureties; So that we are to
understand, that though Infants cannot Repent nor Believe, which yet is so
necessarly required in every one that is to be baptized, yet that others may
undertake for them, answer the Commission for them, Repent, Believe, Confess
for them, and declare a willingness in their name to be baptized; and this is
actually done by the sureties, as our English Liturgy directs (and every days
experience tells us in the ^hristning of Children) which interpretes to us, the
ancient way of Interrogating Sponcers, and which is performed after this
manner: How by Sureties Infants do confess and profess Faith and Repentance,
and so capable of Baptism.
viz. The Priest says to the surety, Do thou forsake the Devil, and all his
works, etc. Then the surety must answer, I forsake them all. Priest, Then,
Do thou believe in God the Father, rehearsing the Creed? S. To which he is
to answer, All this I steadfastly believe. P. then, Will thou be baptized into
this Faith? Yes, says the Surety in the name of the Child, that is my desire.
This was the Custom of old, and with Infants Baptism established, (though it
is true they had Sureties, or Witnesses, for grown Persons, before Infants
Baptism was enjoined.) Yet now because the Commission required Faith and
Repentance, therefore was this invention found out to answer it. And therefore
says Lud. Vives in his Comment. l. 1. c. 27. That none were baptized of old,
but those of age, who did not only understand what the water meant, but desired
the same

Lud. Vives why sureties invented for Infants.
The perfect Image wh^reof, says he, we have yet in our Infants Baptism; for
it is asked of the Infant, will thou be baptized? f^r whom the Sureties answer I
will; And so says Strabo page 60. and Jo. Boemus p 73.

Mag^ebu^g Century 5. p. 516. Infantes aliena Fice baptisari: Infants are to be
baptized by the Faith of another,

Therefore called Fidejussors, or Sureties, that plight Faith for them; and
Sponsors, that answer for them; Susceptors, that undertake Promise, Vow, and
Renownce for them.

So that this appears, to be the untying the knot, the Reconciling or the
seeming difficulty, of the necessity of Confession, consent, and desire with
Infants Baptism, so making the Commission but one general Rule, to baptize
both Adult and Infants, the Adult by his own Mouth and Faith, the Infant by the
Mouth and Faith of another. Therefore all these sayings of these latter
Doctors, and learned Men, speaking to the nature of Baptism; wherein
Confession and Profession is required, is to be understood, not as Mr. Wills
would have it, to intend only Adult Persons, Pagans, and Heathens, but to
intend Infants also; otherwise it would be to make two Baptismes, and
necessitate two Commissions: one for the Adult, and the other for Infants. But
in as much, as none is to be found for the latter, they include and involue all
in the former.

Therefore by my producing, these proofs from all the Paedobaptists, as the
true sense of the Commission, and a general Rule to baptize upon, it will be
manifest, that I do not bring them contrary to the mind of the Writers, being
urged to confirm and establish Believers Baptism, according to Christ's
Commission. The Lutherans are positive, that Children have actual Faith, and in
Baptism hear the Word, use Reason, etc. And all the rest, that others Repent,
Believe, Profess, Confess, desire for them, viz. either the Surety, or the
Parent.

improve their general Rule for Believers Baptism, against Infants Baptism,
contrary to their intention, because they intend Infants not otherwise to be
baptized, but as professed Believers in this way.

Intention, wherefore it is brought under this Head, where we do not so
immediately concern our selves against Infants, which is an other part, but for
Believers only; though I grant consequentialy it does so, for if a personal
Professing of Faith, be only intended in the Commission, and that no such thing
as a surety is to be found in that Text, or any other, to profess or confess,
for an other, so as to warrant, the party confessed for, to be a proper subject
of Baptism.

Then it will follow, that all those sayings, make only for Believers in their
own Persons, to the excluding all that are incapable of Personal Confession and
Profession: When any such thing as a surety in Baptism, to believe, repent,
and confess for an other is made out from Scripture, they may have Reason to
complain, but till then, no injury is done, so to clear the truth, from their
own grants and sayings. But that there is no such thing in the Scripture, take
the acknowledgement of some of their own party.

Magd. against sureties.
The Magdeburgs Century 1. p. 497. Do tell us, that Godfathers, or Fidejussors
for Infants, or others, they find nothing of in the Scriptures; that in the
second of the Acts they offered themselves to Baptism, and that it would be
very ridiculous, to think the Apostles would baptize none without Sureties.

And Doctor Tailor page 84. I know, says he, Dr. Tailor against sureties, and
his Reasons.
God might if he would have appointed Godfathers, to give answer in the behalf
of Children, and to be Fidejussors for them, but we cannot find any Authority
or Ground, that he has; and if he had, that it is to be supposed he would have
given them Commission, to have transacted the solemnity with better
circumstances, and have given answers with more truth; for the Question is asked
of Believing in the present, and if the Godfather answer, in the name of the
Child, I do believe, it is notorious, they speak false and ridiculous, for the
Infant is not capable of Believing, and if it were, he were also capable of
dissenting, and how then do they know his mind? and therefore, says he,
Tertullian and Gregory Nazienzen gave advice, that the Baptism of Infants
shall be deferred, till they could give an account of their own Faith. If you
would be further satisfied about these Sureties or Gossips, why and for what
use, viz. for Bells and Churches, and grown Persons as Infants, read page 84.
100. 128, 129, and 141.

admit of Godfathers, what do you say to Fathers? why may not they Repent, and
Believe for the Child, and so answer the Commission, especially being a
believing Parent, and in Covenant, according to what Mr. Wills repeates from
Mr. Calvin? p.

sureties, where the Parent is expressly forbidden that Rite, none being
permitted to undertake for his Child, neither Father nor Mother, as Vicecomes
tells us at large, from the Decrees of the Councels, chapter 33. p. 92. Mr. Baxter
owning it against the Canon Law also. Neither will you find one syllabe in all
the New Testament, to relieve you; and therefore must either find out a New
Commission, for baptizing Persons without personal Repentance, and Faith, or
renownce, the practice of sprinkling Infants, that are so incapable to do any
thing thereof. And which case you have very fully, and honestly put by Master
Baxter, in his Christian Directory page 817. And how well resolved you have it
remarkt, page 217. and worthy of your perusal, upon this point especially; it
being brought herein, into such a narrow compass, for if no Scripture ground to
baptize an Infant, by a Gossio or Parents Faith and Confession, then Infants
Baptism is certainly a nullity, and out of doors by their own grants. And
therefore till Mr. Baxter, or some Body else, give us a better solution in that
case of Conscience, we may say in his own words: That for Persons to be
baptized without a professed Contract ^ is a Baptism not of Christ's
appointment, and that being done without Repentance and Faith, is a
profanation says Mr. Baxter, and ridiculous says Calvin.

Now, therefore upon the whole, let the Reader judge, whether my several
proofs are not full, proper, and pertinent; And whether Mr. Wills upon the
closing of his seventh Chapter, respecting my proofs upon the Centuries, has
spoken like a judicious, sober, considerate Person; in saying:

That besides Jo. Boemus and Strabo, he may truly say, that from the beginning
of the Century to the end, this Unfaithful Man has perverted the sayings of
all Authors, which he has quoted, and upon consideration of his carriage
herein, I am confident of those two things:

First, that never any Writer did more prevaricate, and show more Falsehood then
he has done.

Secondly, that he would certainly have forborne, if he had thought, any man
would have been at the trouble, to examine and search whether he says truth or
no.

I say, it is referred to judgment, My Appeal upon the proofs and the
Prevarication charged.
whether any sober man can judge, Mr. Wills has read the Book he so contems,
vehemently asperses, and inveighs against; Or secondly, if he has, whether he
did consider what was either written by the Author, or by himself in answer? And
thirdly, If so, whether he ought not to be esteemed a Person extremely void of
Reason or Conscience, and that prejudice did more prevail with him then
impartial judgment?

Secondly, concerning the Falsehoods he charges me with. 2. The Falsehoods.

BUt in the next place* if it be supposed, the Authorities aforesaid are full
and proper, and that I am acquit of the Prevaricatione? yet what do I say to so
many Falsehoods charged upon me, in the egregious abuse put upon so many
Authors, in leaving out, and curtailing some of their sayings, and adding to
ot^ers; pretending they say, that which they do not, and so making Authorities
of my own, the chapter and page being so punctually given in against me.

weight in it, and the rather, because it proceeds from one that professes
himself, a solid grave Person, a Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Arts,
and a learned man; and one that besides has spent so much time lately, as he
tells us, in the University Library at Oxford, to trace these Quotations and to
detect their errors, and delivered them with so much certainty, that nothing
(as in that confident boast he expresses it) but an Index Expurgatorius can
Relieve me, and which is not to be had in England.

herein, I may very well be esteemed, the unworthy Person that he would indeed
render me to be, that is guilty of so much Prevarication, Forgery, and Falsehood.

prove forgeries of his own, and no truth in any one of them, that then such a
Stratagem bespeaks no less malignity to my Person, then to the truth witnessed
by me, and that he has justly contracted to himself, the Odium, and infamy he
would Reflect upon me* according to the equal decision, given us in the Case,
Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Prove. 19.15.

Therefore to the Examination of the charge, I freely join issue with him, in
order to the sp^edy trial, at whose door the Falsehoods lie; for one of us (it
must be agreed on all hands) is notoriously guilty, and so we shall proceed to
the particulars, as we find them in order.

The first whereof he thus begins with, 1. Falsehood charged.
in his Preface, etc. He has much injured the famous History of the
Magdeburgenses, in very many places, by misrepresenting what they say: As that
they tell us, that in the first Century the Apostles Baptized only the aged,
which (says he) is false, for he himself added the word Only, as is shown (he
says) chapter 7. part 1. p. 2. 3. Falsehood charged.
Where he again repeates it, saying, that the Magdeburgs in Century 1. l. 2. c.
6. p. 496. do not say, that the Apostles Baptized only the Adult. And again in
his page 38. mentioning my Repetition of that aforesaid saying, of the
Magdeburgs gives the following return.

Very good Sir, Now you have learned to set down things right, but why did you
say in the 56. (of the first Impressions) that the Magdeburg as to the Subjects
of Baptism tell us [That in this age they only Baptized the Adult] was this,
says he, Lapsus calami aut mentis: The slip of the tongue, or the mind.

Falsehood, of his own making, upon me three several times; for he can find no
such words in my Book. My words are expressly thus: viz. As to the Subjects of
Baptism they, viz. the Magdeburgs tell us: That in this Age [they finde] they
baptized only the Adult, or Aged, etc. I do not say, that they tell us, that in
this Age they [baptised only the Adult] these are his words. But that they tell
us, they find they baptized only the Adult, for so they tell us, they find
Examples for the one, not for the other. And if I have not guessed right, let
any sober Man in his senses judge, they tell us in these words: Bapt zatos esse
Adultos, tum Judaeos, tum Ge^t^s exempla p^obunt, Act. 2.8, 10, 16, 19. De
Infantibus Baptizatis quidem anotata nom leguntur: That Examples testify (from
the aforesaid Scriptures) that the Adult, both Jews, and Gentiles were
baptized; But of the baptizing of Infants, they read not of one Example upon
Record. So that if they find many Examples for the one, and none for the other,
well it may be said, they find Examples, only for the one, viz. for the Adult^:
[Only] to them, as he fa^sly suggested) but my fence upon those their words,
and no other then I presume every one will give. And wherein his shameful (
Oscitancy, as he calls it, or) heedlessness is the more to be remarked, for he
himself in his first words of the 7. chap. 1. part. does repeat my words, as I
express them; viz. [that they find only the Adult or Aged, whether Jews or
Gentiles, baptized in that Century.] And afterward charges me three times over
with the saying an other thing, inculcating it with many agrivating
circumstances, and as worthy of the greatest observation, puts it in the Van of
the Falsehoods. And it was one of the first things that I met with, from a
Friend that was in his Booksellers Shop, where some Ministers were heard to
say, upon the reading thereof, that I wanted morallity, in so dealing with
Authors; Though truly if I had said the word, I do no know where such a heinous
crime had lain. So that this is plain to you, that first I neither said those
words; Nor secondly, did I add the word only to the Author.

In the next place, in his Preface he tells us, of two other
misrepresentations; viz. That I say, the Magdeburgs tell us, that the Custom of
dipping the whole Body in water, was changed into sprinkling a little water in
the face, in the first Century. Whereas there is not (as he says) the least
hint of this matter in this Century, nor the following; but the contrary, for
they tell us, as page 4. part. 1. the word (...), signifies abluo, luo: viz. to
wash; and that the Christian Baptism, was taken from the Jewish washings, of
which the Apostle speaks Heb. 9, 10. diverse Baptismes. And so says he, the
Author fathers that upon the Century Writers, which they speaks not.

Wherein these two Falsehoods are charged upon me: First, in bringing the
Mag^eburgs, 3. Falsehood charged.
to assert the Ceremony of Baptism to be by dipping, which they do not, but
the contrary.

Secondly, In affirmi^g that they say, 4. Falsehood charged.
the rite was changed in that Century, from dipping to sprinkling, when there
is not the least hint, either in this or the following Century, of any such
thing.

you) who having told us, viz. the Magdeburgs Century 1. chap. 6. p. 148. That
as to the place of Baptism, it was, as occasion was offered, in Rivers and
Fountains, etc. And that the manner of it, was by dipping in these words: viz.
Ministrum Baptismi in aquam baptizandos immersisse, seu lavasse, in nomine
Patri, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, probat verbum (...), quod immersionem in
aquam significat, and quod Paulus immersionem illam allegorice de
mortificatione and resurrectione exponit, Romans 6. Col. 2. Et Phrases ille
quibus Baptismus Lavacrum dicitur, Ephesians. 5 and Titus 3. Et quod Ananias jubet
Paulum abluere peccatum, Act. 22. etc.

That the word (...), signifying an Immersion, (or dipping) in water, proves
that the Minister of Baptism did dip, or immerge the Baptized, washing them in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and that Paul did expound this
immersion, by the Alligorical Death and Resurrection, Romans 6. and Col. 2. And
therefore Baptism is called, the Lavar, or washing of Regeneration, Ephesians. 5.
and Tit. 3. And that Ananias commanded Paul to wash away his sins.

The truth hereof Master Wills could not but know, and no other then I did
before in substance declare, and therefore for him to say, that they do not say
this, but the contrary, is to me wonderful strange. Neither do they mention any
thing of all those ten Lines, of his, said to be in this place, as though they
took the word to signify Washing, in opposition to Dipping; and if in any
other part of the Book they do say so, it will but discover a contradiction to
themselves, but especially to the truth, that with so much evidence, they have
here demonstrated, therefore what apparent injury this is let all men judge.

Notorious as this; for I do not say, That the Magdeburgs tell us, that the
custom of dipping the whole Body, was changed into sprinkling, etc. This
Century as he fathers upon me.

All that I say is this, (and they are my own words, not theirs, after I had
mentioned their understanding, of that Rite and Ceremony, from the nature of
the word, and usage thereof in Scripture) viz.

Which said custom of dipping the whole Body in water, was changed into
sprinkling a little water in the face; And not as Mr, Wills perverts my words,
That I say, [they tell us so] I neither expressed, nor intended any such thing,
much less that they should tell us, of any such change that Century. Whereas as
he says well, that there is not the least hint of the matter of sprinkling in
this or the following Century. And which I do also afterward take notice of,
in thee words:

That until the third Century we find not any, that upon any consideration did
admit of sprinkling: The first we meet with, is in Cyprians Epist. to Magnus,
about Clynical Baptism, which might sufficiently have satisfied Mr. Wills,
that I did neither express, or could intend the words as he carries them I did
also in my second Impression, (which I presume he could not, but see waiting so
many months for its coming forth, before he would put his, into the Press, as
his Printer and Stationer both informed me) make some better distinction, by
putting the foregoing words into a different carracter, least these latter
words should be supposed not to be my own, and which might have been further
light to him, if prejudice had not blinded the eye, discovering that his
business was, that if he could not find a hole, he would make one. And that the
Ancients for these four first Centuries, used, and asserted Dipping, Mr. Wills
that reads the Centuries, cannot be a Stranger to, as testified by so many of
the Fathers.

5. Falsehoods charged.
An other Falsehood he would father upon me, is that, I should say p. 113. of the
former which is page 101. of the last, that they tell us: That the custom of
dipping the whole Body into water, was changed into sprinkling in the third
Century, and that cites the Magdeburgs Century 3. p. 125, 126. Where he says,
they say no such thing, but the contrary.

that I say to that point, as you will find, is this; viz. Many were the
corruptions about Baptism, that in this Age were creeping in, some whereof, I
mentio^ed, and amongst the rest, Altering the form from dipping to sprinkling:
But I do not quote page 125, 126. for that, but for the superstitious Rites,
but did only thereby intend (as after I expressed it p. 204.) that pass^ge in
Cyprians Letter to Magnus, admitting sprinkling to a sick Person; I do not
therefore say, it was charged, but that is was amongst those corruptions that
were creeping in. And withal do in the same place say, That they do not find
by an^ Authentic Testimony, that any one Person was actualy baptized in this
manner this Age. And p. 204. That we find not any, upon any consideration, that
did admit of springling till Cyprians Letter, etc. Which afterward was brought
into use for sick Children, and then for all Children.

And yet this unfaithful Man, notwithstanding all these my expressions to the
contrary, is not ashamed to say, That I say, the custom of dipping the whole
Man, was changed into sprinkling, in the third Century, and that I quote for it
Cent. 3. p. 125, 126. when I neither do the one nor the other. And concerning
this rite of dipping, you will hear more of me to this point, in a following
Chapter; whereby you will understand, that notwithstanding this Notion of
Cyprians, about sprinkling the sick, yet that dipping was the universal custom,
which was observed for the first four Centuries, and some Ages after, as I
shall manifest from approved Authors.

In the next place, he charges me with fathering several things upon the
Magdeburgs, respecting the fourth Century, whereof one word is not to be found
in them, as his page 10. 1. part 7. chapter.

As first, 6. Falsehood charged.
That it was the universal practice of this Age, to baptize the Adult, upon
Profession of Faith, Whereas they say the quite contrary, proving, says he,
that in the Churches of Africa they baptized Infants in this Age by Athanasius
114, and 124 Questions to Antiochus. And that they baptized Infants in the
Churches of Asia, by Gregory Nazienzens absolute determinations to Baptize
Infants.

Magdeburgs do say in so many words, that it was the universal practice of this
Age, to Baptize the Adult upon Profession of Faith, as he would insinuate: But
as you will find my words to be, as page 55. That from the several Authorities
they give us, out of the learned Fathers and Councels, they tell us so; viz. by
the instances they do produce, and which I have before at large demonstrated,
so that at least wise I judge, I have cause to think so.

And as to the two instances he gives, to detect my forgery, they signify
nothing: As to that of Gregory Nazienzens, we have said enough already, to
which we refer you, and which will substantialy acquit me from this charge.

And secondly, as to that of Athanasius Questions to Antiochus, prooving that
they Baptized Infants in the Affrican Church, particularly the 124. Question,
which he mentions page 10. chapter 7.1. part: I shall show you presently it was a
mere piece of forgery, and no truth at all in it, and which Mr. Wills could not
well be ignorant of, though he would thus abuse the World with this Story. But
he should have done well, to have told you, what that 124. Question was, that
he so much brags of; which I perceive he was unwilling to do upon another
score, least his instance might do him more hurt, then good, though the 114, he
mentions at large; The thing expressed therein, as the Magdeburgs tell us, is
this: Quod Infantem ait ter in aq^am immergemus, and ter educimus mortem, and
triduanum Resurrectionem fignificamus Cent. 4. c. 6. p. 419.

That we dip the Infant, says he, three times in the water, and three times
bring it out again, signifying the death, and three days Resurrection of
Christ. So that you see the Reason, why he was ashamed of his instance, because
he was afraid, with the proving his Infants Baptism, he should have offered
some thing for the rite of dipping, which is so loathsame to him, and so loose
more, then he should get by the bargain.

It is true the Inventer of this lie, must tell some thing that was true, as to
the season he intends it, which was the trine immersion, that from Tertullians
time, till after this Age, was so much used, as Jerome, Ambrose, Bazil, yea all
of them with one mouth do declare; as the learned Vossius to this point
shows, These. 6. page 32, to 42. concluding after the recital of most of the
Fathers, and Ancients to prove it. Haec satis ostendunt ter immersisse Veteres,
and mystici quid in eo constituisse. These (Authorities) enough show, that the
Ancients did use the threefold immersion, and the mystery designed, and
contained therein. And which is not mentioned, that a three fold dipping is
approved, or that there was any ground for it (but a perfect invention, wherein
these Fathers did so much abound) only that sprinkling was not the rite, and
that dipping was owned to be the custom in these first times, which Mr. Wills
will not admit.

Secondly, 7. Falsehood charged.
he charges me to pervert the saying of Athanasius, as when speaking for Adult
Baptism, he might not be for Infants Baptism also. Whereas he meant by the
former only Pagans, and Infidels who according to Christ's Commission must first
be taught, then baptized. Athanasius (says he) was for Infants Baptism, and
it was practiced in his days, as appears by the 114 Question to Antiochus,
Where he resolves a doubt that might arise from the death of Infants, whether
they go to Heaven or no? Seeing, the Lord says, suffer little Children to come
to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven? And the Apostle says, Now your
Children are holy, it is manifest that the Infants of Believers, which are
baptized do as unspotted, and faithful enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Where, says he, mark again how unworthly Antipaedobatists abuse the Fathers,
in saying their strongest Argument for Childrens Baptism, is from Tradition,
which they fly too, for want of Scripture. Implying here are two Scriptures for
Infants Baptism, improved by this Father, one Mat. 19.14 of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven; and the other because the Infants of Believers are baptized,
they are therefore holy, alluring to holiness of Children, mentioned by the
Apostle 1 Cor. 7.14 as though that was obtained by Baptism, and which was the
opinion of some of the Ancients also.

remarked from this famous instance? and Anabaptists unworthyness too? in
taking no more regard, how well they proved Infants Baptism of old from the
Scripture?

But now this Book of Questions fathered upon Athanasius, proving such* an
other Fable, as that goodly piece that was fathered upon Dionysius: It will
only serve further, to discover what inventions, the Father of Lies had (by the
working of the Mystery of Iniquity) not only to beget and usher in, but to
nurish and strengthen this Illegetimate Birth, but the artifice, also he had to
time the several forgeries; viz Dionysius for the first; the Popes Decretals,
and Justin Martyrs Responses, for the second; Origen's Stories, for the third;
these Questions of Athanasius, for the fourth Age. And how ready and willing
Persons are to this very time, to catch up any of these lying Fables, to
strengthen themselves in deceits; Nay, there is good ground to believe, that
they know them so to be, that so abuse the World therewith. For how can Mr.
Wills, that is so well read in the Magdeburgs, be ignorant, how notably they
have detected this Cheat, and the reasons and grounds they give of its
Spuriousness? and therefore it must needs be so much worse in him, to impose
this falacy a fresh, and so to improve it too, as though it was a piece of
Gospel.

Know therefore, besides what Merningus, and Montanus say of its forgery, of
which I gave you a hint page 57. (whereof Mr. Wills would take no notice:) And
what Scultetus (as Mr. Tombs tells us) in his Medul. Pat. p. 2. l. 1. c. 42.
says of it also. The Magdeburgs do give us this account, which I presume Mr.
Wills can tell you, as well as my self, being so considerable a Remark in the
History of Athanasius his life, as you have it Century 4. cap. 10. p. 1032 in
these words, speaking of his works: Quartus tom^^ quaedam habet a diversis
translata interpretibus, ut Libellum de variis Quaestionibus Sacrae Scripturae
ad Antiochum Principem, interpret Valentino Ampelandio quem Librum Athanasii
non esse indeliquet, quod ab ejus Authore Athanasius citatur Quaestion vigesima
tertia hoc modo, and haec quidem multum valens in Divina Scriptura Magnus
Athanasius, nos vero qui ab ipso sumus illuminati, etc. Accidit huc quod multos
videre est in eo scripto, nav^s atque opiniones ab Athanasio alienas.

The fourth Tome has some things translated by diverse Interpreters, as for
instance the Book of various Questions of the holy Scriptures to Prince
Antiochus (Valentinus Ampelandius being the In-Interpreter) which Book that it
is not Athanasius's, is thence manifested, because Athanasius is cited by the
Author thereof in the 23. Question, in this manner: And these things indeed
says the great Athanasius, who was mighty in the Scriptures; b^^ we who are
enlightened by him, etc.

And hereto it may be added (say they) that one may see in that Writer many
errors and opinions, that are far from Athanasius's.

By which you may see, the design of this wicked cheat, by fathering this false
thing upon this man of name, to wit to bring some Reputation upon Infants
Baptism, as though owned and practiced by the great Athanasius in this Age,
and which our Antagonist falls in with, and improves to the utmost: First, in
the severe check he is pleased to give me, for perverting, as he calls it, the
Testimony given by him for Adult, against his judgment, and practice of
Infants Baptism, as appears by these two Questions urged. Secondly, for our so
little regarding what the Fathers say, when they urge Scripture, as well as
Tradition for Infants Baptism, witness those two pertinent Scriptures, urged
by this eminent Father.

Thirdly, for drawing the injurious conclusion, that Infants Baptism was not
practiced in Africa in this Age, from his Testimony for Adult Baptism, when
the contrary so manifestly appears from those Questions.

But now this goodly story, proving a lie, does not the contrary to all these,
naturally Revert upon himself? And fully discover, that till we have better
evidence to the contrary, that however Athanasius played the Bishop, and
baptized his School-fellow, when a Boy in sport, that when he came to better
understanding, he gave continuance to no other Baptism, then to that of the
Adult only, according to Christ's Commission.

The next piece of fraud and injustice he charges upon me, 8. Falsehood charged.
is the curtailing and leaving out part of a Sentence, quoted out of Bazil page
65. mentioned by him chap. 7. 1. part. page 13. and hinted at also in his
Preface: The Quotation is to prove, as he Remarks, that Adult Baptism was then
only practiced in the Eastern Churches, which are two sayings out of Bazil: One
out of his 3. Book against Eunomius, viz. must the faithful be sealed with
Baptism, Faith must needs precede, and go before. And in his Exhortation to
Baptism, that none were to be baptized but the Catechumens, and those that
were duly instructed in the Faith. Upon which he says, Now this is sufficient
to impose a fallacy upon any Reader, that has no Aquaintance with that Father,
and understand not in what sense he speaks, who would not think that this
Ancient Doctor was against Infants Baptism, and that no such thing was owned
in the Church in his days? [very true, and so one would indeed, for if Faith
must go before, and Children have no Faith, then only professed Believers were
the Subjects.] And again, if None but the Catechumens, and those instructed in
the Faith were to be Baptized, then surely no Children were to be Baptized, who
were so incapable, both of the one, and the other; Therefore by the way it must
be granted, that this was a proper proof, to evidence, that the Eastern Church
in his time admitted only of Adult Baptism, which he is pleased to say, is so
abominably false.

And to evince my Forgery and Falsehood, from the good acquaintance he would
have, you think, he had with this Father, that the same Author, viz. Bazil in
the very next lines, to which I had above cited, speak thus, as he confidently
affirms: What then say you of Infants, which neither know good nor evil, may we
baptize them? Yea says ^e, for so we are taught by the Circumcising of
Children, And therefore, says he, hence-forward have a care, Reader, how ye
trust the Authors Quotations, for the palpable abuse done to this Father.

will presently understand. Know therefore, that the Quotations out of Bazil's
Exhortation to Baptism, you will find in the Magdeburgs Century 4. cap. 6. p.
416. in these words, Bazilius non alios quam Catechumenos Baptizatos esse
scribit: Basil, say they, writes that none other but the Catechumens were
baptized: And then in the next lines immediately following, nothing intervening
say, Qui in Paschale convocabantur in Exhortatione ad Baptismum: Who are called
together at Easter to be exhorted in order to their Baptism. There being no
such syllable, nor any thing like it, either in the forgoing or following
words, I have also searched. all that the Magdeburgs say of that Father, and
all Bazils works themselves, and particularly the third Book against Eunomius;
but can find nothing like it. I have also Examined the great Dutch Book of
Martyrs, that recites most of the principal pass^ges that Bazil speaks of
Baptism; and who from Mirningus and Montanus, their great Century Writers, do
testify, that he was altogether for Adult, and wholly against Infants Baptism.
He used to say, Sicut enim credimus in Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum
Sanctum, sic and Baptizamur in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti:
As we do believe in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, so we may be
baptized in their names, Cent. 4. p. 235. And in the definition he gives of
Baptism, he calls it: Sigillum Fidei, Tessera Christiani Mili^is, similitudo
mertis sepulturae, ac resurrectionis nortuorum: The Seal of Faith, the Badge of
the Christian Soldier, and the Symbol of death, burial, and Resurrection from
the dead. And again very fully, Quicunque baptizatur, sive Judaeus, sive
Graecus, sive Masculus, sive Foemina, quacunque generit differentia nominatus,
exutus in sanguine Christi veterem hominem, cum actibus suis, and per doctrinam
ipsius novum in Spiritu Sancto indutus, qui secundum Deum conditus est in
justitia, and sanctitate veritatis, ac renovatur ad ignitionem, secundum
imaginem ejus qui condidit ipsum, etc.

That who ever is baptized, whether Jew or Greek, male or female, etc. have put
off (by the Blood of Christ) the old Man with his deeds, and by his Doctrine
have put on the new Man by the holy Spirit, who according to God is built up in
the Righteousness and holiness of the truth, and renewed in knowledge,
according to the Image of him that created him, etc. And therefore in his Book
of Baptism, does largely treat of the necessity of partaking of the Lords
Supper, that other Ordinance of Christ, immediately after Baptism.

Regenerati vero, and in nomine Filii baptisati sumus, and Filii Dei declarati
opus itaque deinceps, and nutriamur cibo vitae aeternae: Those of us that are
Regenerate, and have made declaration of the Son of God, and are Baptized in
his name, it is meet that we should immediately be nurished with the food of
Eternal life, viz. the Bread of God in that Ordinance.

And whether all this is not agreeable, to what before was said of this Doctor,
is left to the Reader to judge, being also one of those (say the Magdeburgs)
that made that former Decree in the Council of Neocaesaria. But you will say, how
came Mr. Wills by this saying, it is to be supposed, he did not make it? which
will be with him to declare, and how he came to father it upon Bazil, that no
man could ever find in him before. It is true, the words I find exactly to be
the words of Gregory Nazienzen, but not of Bazil, as Cent. 4. cap. 4. p. 234.
Oratione in sanctum Lavacrum tertia: Quid de Infantibus ais qui neque gratia,
quid ne sit paena cognorunt, nam and illos baptizemus? Maxim quidem [si
periculum aliquod imminet, melius est enim nondum rationis compotes
sanctificari quam non signatos and initiatos vita excedere] all which Mr. Wills
leaves out, then adds, Idque nobis designat post octavum diem Circumcisio illa,
quae figurale fuit signaculum. What will you say of Children, which are neither
sensible of good or evil? shall we Baptism them, yes by all means [in Case of
urgent danger, for it is better to be sanctified without their knowledge, then
to dye without it] for so it happened to the Children of Israel in Circumcision.

But suppose there had been such a Sentence, as Mr. Wills says follows, I
had cited enough of the Father, to confirm the truth of what I asserted, viz.
that instruction and Faith, according to Christ's Commission, was necessary to
precede Baptism; And that none but the Adult, that made Profession of Faith,
were to be baptized: And if he should have contradicted himself, as some others
had done, it would have been their parts that should avouch him, in the behalf
of Infants Baptism, to have reconciled such a contradiction, to those his
former assertions.

But to put the matter more out of doubt, I procured a Friend to write to
Master Wills, to know where that passage was to be found in Bazil; To which he
made this following return, viz. As to that passage of Bazil, Mr. Wills Letter
to his Friend about the Quotation of Bazil.
I do not charge Master D. with misquoting, but partially quoting, and
misapplying him, and upon Examination of my Papers, cannot find any Page, to
which that passage of mine, concerning that Father, does refer: But when I go
to Oxford, where I made my Collection, I may be able to give better
satisfaction.

Therefore upon the whole, respecting this passage, I appeal to the Reader,
whether Mr. Wills is not found tardy and justly reprovable in the following
particulars; viz.

Mr. Wills guilty of much falsehood herein.
First, for the several Falsehoods (that it is to be feared, he knowingly imposed
upon the Reader) in affirming so positively: 1. That these were the very next
Lines, to what I had above recited. Secondly, that Bazil was herein an Eminent
witness for Infants Baptism, in the fourth Century p. 136. Thirdly, from the
great acquaintance he had with this Father and his sense herein (a false and
vain glorious boast) affirms these words to be his, in his third Book contra
Eunomium page 13. comp. page 136. Fourthly, For his deceitful leaving out part
of Nazienzens words, which should discover them to be his (a great
Demonstration it was, not lapsus calami, but mentis; not a sin of ignorance, or
a mere mistake but a willful abuse.

2 False Accusation.
Secondly, for false accusing of me: First, for curtailing, partially quoting,
and misapplying; this Father stoping, where I should have gone on. Secondly,
For imposing a fallacy, and Falsehood upon the Reader, to say he was only for
Adult Baptism, when the contra^y was so manifest. Thirdly, For so palpably
^busi^g that Father, that I was not to be trusted in my Quotations, for time to
come.

Therefore, is it not very considerable, and to be remarked, that whilst he
would pretend to reprov^, and render me odious for Prevaricacation, Forgery and
Falsh^od, that he himself should be so left, to do the same things, in a far
worse manner? fulfilling Romans 2.21, 22.

Another Lie and Falsehood, declaring, 9. Falsehood charged.
as he says, want of honesty and conscience in me, p. 44. Is the bringing, the
Waldenses as Witnesses against Infants Baptism; and amongst other evidence for
the same, to produce their Co^^essions of Faith; Whereas there is not a w rd of
that impor^ance in them, but their Confessions of Faith quite otherwise, viz.
for Infants Baptism.

To which I answer, hairous charge, but what truth there is in it, and who most
guilty of lying, and forgery, th^rein, he, or I, you will easily discer^, when
you come to the Examination of that matter, in the third Chapter, to which I
refer you.

Again, there are two other instances of Forgery, and Falsehood, he charges upon
me, in abusing, and deceitfully perverting the sayings of two of our modern
Authors, Mr. Baxter, and Dr. Ta^ler, which I shall add hereto, and be
accomptable for in this place.

And first, he is pleased to say, 10. For Falsehood, and unworthy dealing with
Mr. Baxter.
That I have as an unworthy Person dealt craftily, and sinisterly with Mr.
Baxter, page 12, 13. and disingeniously perverted, and traduced, the sayings of
that worthy Man, to countinuance my Errors; Quoting diverse of his Arguments to
Mr. Blake, as though he had been only for Believers Baptism, when he had so
fully explained himself to mean Adult, not Infants Baptism, which he
particularly excepted therein.

uncivil, and unchristian Language) I say, that in my producing those Arguments
of Mr. Baxter, from Mr. Tombs. I have again, and again, given the Reasons he
produces, for the same, and that induced me to insert them; which Mr. Wills
had done well, to have taken some notice of: For if Mr. Baxter has
contradicted himself, he has no more injuiry done him, to take notice of it,
and improve it for the truth; then as Mr. Tombs tells him, the Papists had by
Bishop Mortons improving, their contradictions, for the benefit of the
Protestant Cause. And if Mr. Baxter, or any Body for him, can reconcile those
seeming contradictions. I have only put an advantage into his hand, to do
him^e^f, and the cause he pleades right, and concerning which all judgments
must be suspended, till Mr. Baxter be heard to speak for himself therein, which
he has promised to do. And I presume, since Mr. Wills has not thought good, to
answer Mr. Tombs his Arguments, or my Apology, for prod^cing those Arguments,
he had much better have forborne his uncivil Revilings upon it, which only for
the most part bespeaks, either an evil Cause, or an evil Nature, and which
neither reproves, or convinces any.

And after the same manner, he deals with me upon Mr. Baxters account, for the
repetition of some passages out of his Christian Directory (which were so
greiving, and offensive to most Protestant ears) charging me most severly, viz.
That as being possessed with a malevelant Spirit, Mr. Wills his calumny.
and filled with envy against him, and glad of an occasion to wound his
Reputation, who had so wounded our Cause, I came forth therein with a seeming
zeal for truth, but he feared with greater enmity to his Person therein.

reproach, I can truly say, I am so far from bearing enmity to his Person, more
especially for what he has said in that Book (what wonders soever (as he boasts
in his Ep.) he has done thereby, in Exorcising, or conjuring down the unquiet
Spirit (as he maliciously calls it) of Anabaptisme) wherein, as Dr. Barlo so
well observes, he has said so much, to so little purpose, there being nothing
therein like an Argument against us, and therefore no cause to envy him for the
same; That I have has an honorable regard to his Person, and a due value to
his Labors, especially where he has laid out himself to promote practical
Holynes^ (and wherein, as I have judged, his greatest Excellency lies)
supposing had he let Controversies alone, and adicted himself thereto, he would
much more have furthered the Peace, and Union, he pretends to promote. It
having been, as I have heard, a judg^ment that Bishop Vssher made of him, that
if he persisted in Polemical Writings, that he was like to prove a Troubler,
rather then a Promoter of Peace.

As for those passages, collected and Epitomized out of his ^hris^ian
Directory, they we e no less astonishi g, then greiving to many, that under
pretense to general Reconciliation. he should endeavor to R^co^cile us to so
much, both of the Doctrine, and discipline of the Church of R^me. And surely if
Conscience had not i g^^ed me, prudence had all together forbid, to have
provoked so potent and Adversary, and who uses with so much severity to treat
his Opposites: But the Cause is Gods, with whom I le^ve it, who can ple^d his
own truth in his Con^cience, and out of the Mou^hs of Babes can perfect his own
praise, because of Enemies, and Avengers.

11. Fa^shood, or delusion. respecting Dr. T^ylers work^.
An other heinous thing he lays to my charge, is for my de^usion, as he calls
it, in Doctor Taylers Case, by im^roving his s^vings, in his Liberty of
P^ophecy, as t^ough he was wholly for us. when what he says therein, was but to
represent present our f^laci us Re^^^ning, and not to speak his own j ^^gem ^t
ther^i^: And the better to convince the World her of, and stop the Mouths of
those that were ready to take a^vantage thereat, he had since put forth, an
Excellent piece called, A Consideration of the Practice of the Church, in
Baptizing Infants of Believi^g Parents. And withal that though h msel^ had not
an^wered those Arguments, in his Libert^ of Pr^p^e^y, which some thought stood
in need of an wering; Yet D cto^ Hamond h^d effectually done the same, in his
Letter of Resolution to six Q^eryes, page 35, 36, etc.

To which I reply: Arguments of D^ctor Taylers, I have already in the Pr^face
of both my Books said to this purpose. That what ever was his ju gement, or
end, in writing those things, yet it was meet to remark them to the World, that
the Wisdom, and Power of God might more appear, if an E^emy, to bring ^orth
such convincing A^guments, and Rea^ons, from his own mouth, to witness to his
despised reproached truth.

Yet truly, Reasons why the p^ea for Anabaptists was Dr. Taylers own sense. 1.
Reason.
for what as yet appears to the contrary* the Doctor seems to have spoken
therein his own, as well as ur apprehension, in the greatest part of those
Arguments, and that for these following Demonstrations:

First, Because the Doctor having spoken to all the usual Arguments: brought by
the Protestants for Infants Baptism, and answered them distinctly, does in the
conclusion (speaking his own words, say these two things very considerable.
First, that through the weakness of the Paedobaptists Arguments* which are not
good in th^mselves, those other Arg^ments in plea for the A^abaptists, are good
in ^pposing them, and so they are accidentally strenght ed (in their error, as
he calls it) by the we^^ness, and co^fi^ence of weak opp^sition. And it is to
be observed, that those Arguments, which he so reproves as weak, and with so
much Demonstration has Baffled. are these that f^llow (summed up bre sl^ in
his own words, Paedobapti^^s Argume^t^ by (...) ^ayl^r.
Liberty of Prophecy p. 228) First, the A^gume^ts pleaded from the inst^^^tio^
of the Type, viz. Circumcisi^n Genesis 17. Secondly, From the action of Christ,
calling little Children to come to him, to bless them, Matthew. 19.14. Thirdly,
From the Title Infants have to Heaven, Fourthly, From the Gospel, Instruction,
and Precept, Joh. 3, 5. Fifthly, From the energy of the promise, Acts 2.38, 39.
Sixthly, From the Reasonableness of the thing, 1 Cor. 7. Seventhly, From the
infinite necessity on the Childrens part. Eighthly, From the Apostolical
practice, who having Commission to teach all Nations, baptizing them, did
Baptize whole Households, Infants being part of Nations, and Households. Tenthly,
From the universal practice of the Church, and Gossips, to answer for them, to
supply incapacity, made good by Tradition.

The Answer he gives hereto.
These are the Arguments, that he answers distinctly, which first in the
Anabaptists plea he says, pretend fairly, and signify nothing, some of these
Alligaeions being false, some impertinent, and all the rest insufficient. And
all which (agreeable hereto) in his own words, after he had replied to every
one of them, he was pleased to pronounce weak, and insuffiicient, and which had
therefore given so much strength, and confirmation to the Anabaptists way.

2. Reason.
And Secondly, concludes all with these words, That there is much more truth,
then evidence o^ their side; and giving no better, or other Argument, to
aemonstrate that truth was with them.

Now I appeal to all Men of understanding, whether any but a Person, that
disponded the goodness of his Cause, and designed wholly to give it up, could
say, that the evidence, demonstration, or proof, was on his Adversaries side,
all his own pleas brought forth; being removed, and taken away, himself being
Judge.

But it is said, That though he mentioned no other Arguments then, yet he
afterward did, in that, which Mr. Wills calls, his Excellent piece for Infants
Baptism, Wills p. 36.

It is true, Liberty of Prophecy (that being writ 1647.) he did Anno 1653.
(being much laid at, by many of his Friends, and having given such general
offense to his whole party thereby) take himself; concerned to say something,
Being a 3. Reason.
to persuade the World he was of an other mind, though when he had said it, it
amounts to just nothing to any considering Person, and which may appear to you
from these Reasons following.

First, Because he undertakes not to answer, 1. D. Tailor Answers none of those
Arguments.
or invalidate one of those Arguments, whereby he had on the Anabaptists
behalf, overthrown all those weak Arguments, before mentioned; and that though
some judged they stood in need of answering, and that he had thoughts to have
done it, yet he forbore it upon some considerations, which Master Wills
repeates from him, p. 36.

Secondly, 2. Repeats only some of the old Baffled Arguments.
Because what he says in that Treatise (which Mr. Wills so boasts off) is not
any new thing, but some of the very same Arguments, he had before ju^ged so
weak, and insuffiicient, and had so substantially answered, and baffled. As
first, that from Circumcision. Secondly, From Children right to the Kingdom of
Heaven. Thirdly, To adopt them into the Coverant. Fourthly, From Apostolical
tradition; Only adds two or three more savoring, more grossly of Popery, viz.
from the use, and necessity of Baptism to pardon thiir sin, Regenerate, and
save them.

3. Because in other Books he confirmed the truth of them.
And Thirdly, it also appears, that he spoke his own mind and sense therein,
because in those two Books he wrote so many years after, viz. in his Di^wasive
against Popery second part; and in his Rule of Conscience, he has spoken so
much agreeable hereto, as before has been observed to you: viz. That there was
no Apostol^cal Tradition for Infants Bapti^me. That it was not practiced fill
the third, nor judged necessary till the fourth Century. That there was no
Scriptural proof for Infants B^ptisme. That the Children of Christian Parents
were not B^ptisme, till they came to understanding, for the first Ages. And
that dipping, and not sprinkling was the usage of Christ, and his Apostles, and
constant Doctrine, and pract^^e of the the Ancients for ma^y hundred years. And
which I conceive are substantial Arguments, to prove the Doctor s^o^e his owns,
as well as our judgment therein, and which I must stand by, till I see better
Reason to the contrary.

O^jection.
But it is said one Reason Doctor Tailor gives, why he did not answer those
Argu^ents, was because his worthy Fr^end Doctor Hamond, had in charity, and
humility descended to answer that Collecti^n.

Hamond in that piece, called his Letter of R^solutoin to six Queries; Bound up
now in his first volume in Folio, p. 481 does therein pretend to reply thereto;
as being, as he confesses, the most diligent Collection that he ever met with,
wherein the Arguments of the Adversaries are so enforced, that he knew not
where to furnish himself with so exact a scheame. But how far he has performed
that Task, and answered those Arguments, let the impartial Reader judge; Who
instead of answering has rath^r enforced, Dr. Hamond rather confirms then
answers those Arguments, and why.
and subscribed to the truth of so many of them, and reproved rather the
weakness, and insufficiency of so many of the chiefest Arguments, brought by
the Paedobaptists, concluding his Di^course with Doctor Taylers own words, to
that purpose, viz. I consent to the truth of the Doctors observation: That the
Anabaptists have be^n encouraged in their error, more by the accidental
advantages given them, by the weakness of those Arguments, that have be^n
brought against them, then by a^y truth of their Cause, or Excellency of their
wit, etc.

And therefore does he in that Discourse acknowledge these following things:

First, The weak argui gs from Circumcision either to its typicalness,
ide^tity; Reason of difference, or invalidity of parallel with Baptism, so as
to found Infants Baptism upon them, page 482, etc. comp. 474. sect. 20.

Secondly, The inconcludent Argument from Act. 2.39. Children their, as he
fully grants, being really their Posterity, not particularly the Infants of the
Jews, p. 490. sect. 81.

Thirdly, That to infer Infants Baptism from Christ's Precept to baptize all
Nations, is one of the blind and lame, that is of more use to betray and loose,
then to defend and secure the Fort, p. 494. sect. 96,

Fourthly, That to conclude Infants were baptized, because Households are so
mentioned to be, is unconvincing, and without demonstration, it being so
uncertain whether there was any Child in the Families, p. 471. sect. 21.

Fifthly, That Argumentt from Matthew. 19.14. are imperfect ways of Probation, p.
474. sect. 23.

The other Arguments Dr. Hamond urges for Infants Baptism.
It is true the Doctor uses other Mediums, to confirm and establish Infants
Baptism by, which are not usually urged by the Paedobaptists, and which
because the Doctor lays so much stress upon, and Mr. Wills seems also much to
glory in, we shall give you some account of them.

1. From the Jewish Baptisme^.
The first is, because Christ's Institution of Baptism, does not exclude Infants
from Baptism, there being nothing in Christ's Commission, that is against it,
page 475. fect. 75. And Mr. Wills page 131, 132. To which you have an answer in
the next Chapter, by an other hand, to whom I must refer you.

The Second, and chief of the Doctors Arguments, and upon which he seems to lay
the greattest stress, to found and enforce Infants Baptism, is from the Custom
of Baptizing amongst the Jews of old, from the first giving of the Law, from
whom Christ, as he says, took the usage, and made it a Sacrament: And who did
baptize, as he tells us, not only the Native Jews, upon their admission into
the Covenant, but the Prosolytes, both Men, and Women, and their Children also;
And which he pretends to make good, out of the Jews Talmud, by Maimonides,
Proved out of the Talmud.
a great Jewish Doctor; Rabi Joshua, another; and the Gemara Baby^, Tit.
Chirithoth, and particularly concerning their Infants, that they were baptized
upon the knowledge of the House of judgment; viz. on their desire and behalf
of the Children, and their promise to let them know, what they have undertaken
for them, as says the Doctor, and that thereby Gossips, or Susceptors are also
waranted; so agreeable to what Saint Austin says, Our Mother the Church lends
the little ones, other Men's feet, ears, and tongue, that they may come,
believe, and confess, and so be capable of Baptism, page 470. to. 474. and
which Mr. Wills takes in for Gospel too. page 141.

Now, if this be a good and substantial basis, and foundation for Infants
Baptism, and well proved, let all Men judge?

In answer to which new and strange Doctrine, I shall refer the Reader to the
Reply, that (I suppose) was made hereto, by that judicious, and learned
Gentleman Sir Norton Knatchbull, Sr. Norton Knatchbull's answer hereto.
in his Animadversiones in Lib. Novi Testamenti, page 315. Accum videam summi
judicii Viros in his temporibus, and Rabbinis fundamenta petere veritatis, etc.
But when I see in these times, some Men of the greatest judgment, to fetch the
foundation of truth from the Rabbis, I cannot but stick at it, for whence was
the Talmud sent to us (they are the words, (says he) of Buxtorf, in his
Synagoga Judicia) that we should give so much credit thereto, that we should
believe that the Mosaic Law, either may or ou^ht to be understood therefrom?
Much less the Gospel, to which they are professed Enemies: The Talmud is called
a L^byrinth of errors, and the Foundation of Jewish Fab^es: It was perfected,
and acknowledged for authentic, five hundred years after Christ: And out of
it, Maimonides drew his Doctrine, as also the rest of them; therefore we cannot
acquiesce in such testimony.

And again upon the d^fference he takes notice of, that was betwixt two of
their greatest Rabbi's, upon that point (who were cotemporaries) viz. Eliazer,
that affirmed that the Prosolytes were Circumcised, and not Baptized; And
Joshua, who a^tested the qui e contrary, that they were Baptized and not
Circumcise^, says: V^ri ve^o potius assentia? Eliezero qui affirmat quo^
Scriptura, an Joshua qui affirmat quod nusquam Scrip^ura docet: To which of
them must we ^^^ear, to Eliezor that affirms what the Scriptures te^ch or to
Joshua that asse^ts what the Scripture no where te^cheth? Though (says he) the
Rabbis too did cle^ve to the latter, etc. Magistri vero (quid mirum?) slabant
pro Rabbi Joshua, faci^bat ^nim in rem su^m, in honorem Relig^^ni^ Juda^^ae etc

Now that the blind Rabbis should establish their vain Customs, by such Jewish
Fables, is no wonder, being so left by God to blindness of eye, and hardness of
heart. But that any pro^essing Christianity, should be so left o^ God, to
assert and establish Gospel Ordinances from the Fabulous Talmud, and their
lying Rabbis, so directly contrary to the Sc^ipture, is mat^er of the greatest
admiration.

A third Argument is from Antiquity, endeavoring to p^^v^ the succession
thereof from the Apostles, and to make it out to be an Apostolical Tradition,
from the following Authorities, viz. Justin M^rtyrs Respon^es, Irenaeus, ^
^ginus, Origin, Cyprian, the Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierachy, St.
Augustine, and the Milevi^an Council. 479, to 482. The fo^ce of all which you will
have tried in the next following Ch^pter, to which I refer you. And so you have
the substance of Doctor Hamonds strong Arguments, wherein I have been the
larger, because you may be sufficiently informed, that he rather confirmed,
then answered, most of the ^nabaptists plea, before mentioned. And that the
strength of those his st^ong Arguments (having slighted and canciled so many of
the old, as weak and insufficient) may appear to you.

And that upon the whole you may have your satisfaction, wh there I had not
substantial ground, to quote Doctor Tayl^rs Arguments, he gives in his Liberty
of Pr^p^ecy, in the behalf of Believers, and against Infants Baptism, and
whether Mr. Will, had reason to charge me with delusion, for producing of them;
which as yet stand unanswered for the most part, and I believe ever will do.

CHAP. II. That Infants Baptism has neither Foundation in Scripture, or
Antiquity, is made good, against Mr. Wills his pretenses to both.
sum up what I have said, to justify the truth of the assertion, what Mr. Wills
grants thereof, wherein the force of his Objections lie, and my Reply thereto.

That no Precept or Practice for Infants Baptism.
The first thing I did herein, was to make good the Scriptures total silence,
either as to Precept, or Practice, for Infnnts Baptism, and that by the full
grant, and acknowledgement of so many of themselves; viz. the Magdeburgs,
Luther, Erasmus, Calvin, Bucer, Staphilus, Choelens, Melancton, Zwinglius,
Rogers, Baxter, page 89. to 93

As also the necessity of Scripture Precept, or Example, to warrant every
Ordinance, by the sayings of Tertullian, Austin, Theophilact, Luther, Calvin,
Ball, 6. Art. of the Church of England, page 93, to 97.

Mr. Wills Answer, and grant.
All which our Antagonist, fully grants, with our foresaid Authorities, viz.
That there is neither Precept, or Example for the Baptizing of Infants, that is
to say, Expressly, Literally, and Sillabically, p. 35, 36, 32. And that
Scripture Authority is necessary to warrant every Ordinance; But withal says
these two things, viz.

First, 1. No Scripture forbidding.
that as there is no Scripture expressly commanding so, neither is there any
Scripture, excluding, Infants from Baptism, nor any Scripture that says there
was no Infants baptized, page 36, 38, 101, 131, 132.

Secondly, 2. Good consiquence for it.
Though a thing may not expressly the commanded, as Thus says the Lord Jesus,
Baptize your Children, for they believe; yet that it may be commanded
Implicitly, and by Consiquence, though not expressly enjoined in so many words:
(And so was the Resurrection by Consiquential Reasoning proved, Act. 22.31, 32.
Act. 13.33, 34.) And what was thus commanded, is as valid, and obliging as if
it was in so many Letters, and Syllables; and thus we affirm Infants Baptism
is commanded, p. 36. And we affirm against their practice of plunging over
head, and ears, that there is no express command for the same, nor Example to
plunge them as they do, with their Clothes on, page 101. And therefore in Mr.
Baxters words tells us (in his usual Civility) what ignorant Wretches we are,
to call for express words of Scripture, when we have the evident consequence,
or sense, and is Scripture Reason (says he) no Scripture with you?

To both which I reply, First, Reply to the first.
to his first Argument, that Infants Baptism may be lawful, because not
forbidden in the Scripture, nor no where told where it was no done; May also
prove the Lawfulness of Baptizing Bells, and Church Walls, of Chrysme,
Exorcisme, Communicating Infants, and a hundred other inventions, that were
practiced of old, and still are in use amongst the Papists; neither is it any
where told us, in Express terms, that such things were not practiced.

What not commanded in worship, is forbidden.
But this we have clear in the Scripture, and and which is to be a Rule to us,
in all such Cases, that that worship, which in express terms is not comman^e^,
is expressly forbidden; and for which take the following Scriptures, viz.

Col. 2.20, 21, 22. If you be dead with Christ, from the ru^iments of the
World, why as though living in the World, are you subject to Ordinances, (touch
not, taste not, handle not) after the Commandments of Men.

Matthew. 15.9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the
Command^ments of Men.

Deuteronomy. 4.2. You shall not add unto the Word, which I command you, neither shall
you demtnish ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of the Lord
your God, which I commanded you. 12.32. What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish therefrom.

Jer. 7.31. And they have built the High places, etc. which I commanded not,
neither came it into my heart.

Jos. 1.7. Observe to do, according to all the Law, which Moses my Servant
commanded, you shall not turn from it, to the right hand, or to the left.

Which great truth, is well asserted, and defended, by Doctor Owin in his Book,
called Innocence, and truth vindicated, in reply to Doctor Parker, Dr. Park.
who having in his Ecclesiastical Policy, p. 189. said (with Mr. Wills) that
what the Scripture forbids not, it allows, and what it allows, is not unlawful,
and what is not unlawful, may lawfully be done. Doctor Owin Dr. Owin.
thus answers him, p. 345. This tale I confess we have been told by many, and
many a time, but it has been as often answered, that the whole of it, as to
any thing of reason, is captious, and Sophistical: For if, because they are not
forbidden, they may lawfully be introduced, into Divine Worship, then ten
thousand things may be made lawful; But the truth is, although a particular
prohibition be needful, to render a thing evil in it self: A general
prohibition, is enough to render any thing unlawful in the worship of God, so
we grant that what is not forbidden, is lawful; but with all say that every
thing is forbidden (that should be esteemed as any part of Divine worship) that
is not commanded. (And therefore very excellently, and undeniable proves, page
339.) That no part of Gods worship, either in the Old, or New Testament, was
lawful, but what had some express warrant, from his Word for the same: And that
all Additions, and Traditions of Men therein, God reproved, and rejected as
vain worship.

Secondly, as to his second Argument, Reply to second, viz. That express not
Consiquential Scripture for every part of worship. Mr. Collings.
that is so much a Kin to the former, viz. That implicit; and consiquential
Commands, are as valide, and obliging as if expressly enjoined, and commanded: I
shall refer him, and the Reader to some eminent Men of his own, for an Answer.

Mr. Collings before his Vindic. Minist. Evang. tells us: That in things
relating to the worship of God, it is a general Rule in which our Brethren, and
we have long since agreed, That nothing ought to be done without an express
warrant in the Gospel.

Mr. Rutherford.
Mr. Rutherford in his due right of Presbytries, page 364. does also tell us:
What the Apostles commanded not, in Gods worship, that the Churches must not do.

Dr. Owin.
But especially Doctor Owin in his Communion with God, page 169, 170, etc. says
thus, The main of the Churches chaste, and choice affections to Christ lies in
their keeping his Institutions, and his worship according to his appointment,
the breach of this he calls Adultery, and Whoredom, every where, He is a
jealous God, and gives himself the Title only, in respect of his Institutions;
And the whole Apostasy of the Christian Church, is called Fornication, Rev.
17.5. And the Church that leads the other into false worship, the Mother of
Harlots: This then they that hold Communion with Christ, are careful of, they
will admit of nothing, in the worship of God, private, or public, but what
they have his warrent for, unless it comes in his Name, with Thus says the
Lord Jesus, they will not hear an Angel from Heaven, they know the Apostles
themselves were to teach the Saints, only, what Christ commanded them, Math.
28.20.

Only plain Scripture for Gods worship.
So that what ever ventures, Persons may make in drawing Consiquences, and
Inferrences from the Scripture, for any supposed truths (wherein great care,
and caution is to be used) yet is it a known agreed Rule amongst Protestants:
That in the Worship of God, (wherein so much Sophestry has been used to
introduce, and impose, not only Ceremonies about worship, but worship it self,
from Old Testament Rites, and Observations;) Nothing therein as worship is to
be admitted, without some plain, and express word, by precept, or practice, to
warrent the same, out of the New Testament. And therefore when Doctor Parker in
the aforesaid Book falls so foul, upon this Principle (with intention to raze
this great Protestant Bulwork, and tells us p. 171. That the very Mystery of
Puratinisme, lies in this very assertion, viz. That nothing ought to be
established, in the worship of God, but what is expressly commanded, in the Word
of God, and that it is a vile, novel, and unreasonable Principle, that takes
away all possibility of settlement in the Church, and the main pretense to all
pious villainies, etc. You have Doctor Owin page 303. most worthily defending
the same, adding only this hereto [viz. as part of worship.] And which he
maintains, by the Authority of Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity* as well as
from the testimony of the most learned Protestant writers.

Doctor Hamond Dr. Hamonds.
himself tells us (as Mr. Tombs in his Review has it page 827.) viz. That it
is highly unreasonable, that an Institution of Christ, such as each Sacrament
is, should be judged of, by any other Rule, whether the fancys, or Reasons of
Men, but either the word, wherein the Institution is set down, or the Records
of the practice of Christ, or his Apostles in Scripture.

So that by all this evidence it appears, Mr. Wills his unreasonableness.
that Mr. Wills is so Hetradox, in both his positions, that he has neither
Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, or the learned Protestant Writers, to stand by
him therein. And wherein, if he persist, he gives up not only the Independent,
but whole Protestant Cause, and all our Reformation at once; For what
inventions in worship are their? that Men can impose, with any presence to
Decency, and Order, or Analogy to any of the Legal Rites, that may not be
introduced, and given way too. And Doctor Owin adds: That all the
Superstitions, and Idolatryes; yea all the Confusion, Blood, and Persecution;
yea all the Wars, that for so long a season have spread themselves over the
face of the Christian World, have come in at this door.

Resurection proved by plain Scripture.
As to the two instances he gives, to justify himself herein, we say first, as
to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, what is in more plain, and express terms
delivered to us in the Scripture? and therefore we may the better admit of
Consiquential Reasoning, in such truths, that are also plainly delivered to us,
in express terms else where.

Baptizing is Dipping in English.
And as for a plain word, to dip over head, and ears, the word it self does it,
because Dipping, or Emerging* as I make appear against Mr. Wills's Sophistry,
signifies nothing else, but so putting the thing under water, as to cover it all
over; and that not only by the most Eminent Critics, but the constant usage of
the word, both in the Old, and New Testament.

And as for the Baptizing with Clothes on, as no Scripture mentions the
putting them off, so the light of Nature teaches there should be some on. And
that the Clothes are dipped matters not, so long as the Person is dipped, as all
that experience it must needs acknowledge.

Consiquences from Circumcision proved not Infants Baptism.
Though as to plain Consiquences, and Scripture Reasoning, we admit, as well as
they, provided we have all the parts of worship kept to express words, and
Gospel Ordinances asserted by Gospel Institutions. And therefore we deny the
inferences usually drawn, from Circumcision, under the Law, for Baptism, under
the Gospel, to be either plain, proper, or true.

And because Children were Circumcised, under the Law, by an express positive
command, therefore that they may be Baptized, without any Precept, or command,
under the Gospel, holds not by any means. For though in some things
Circumcision, may have some analogy with Baptism, viz. in heart Circumcision,
or Mortification, must it therefore be good in all? it holds not. For though
the Ark, as Doctor Tailor well observes, in some thing holds Analogy with
Baptism, therefore to draw in all the Circumstances, of the one, to the other,
would make Baptism a Prodegy, not a rite; and therefore, says he, Types, and
Figures prove nothing, except some Command accompanyes. Had we as Express a
command to Baptize Children, under the Gospel, as they to Circumcise them,
under the Law, it would end the Controversy; But as we have neither Command nor
Example, as granted, so neither can there be any Analogy, either in subject,
qualification, or end, as so largely proved: Not in subject, one being to be
Males only in Israel; the other Males, and Females in all the World; Not in
qualification, one to be the Natural Seed of Abraham, without respect to Faith,
and Repentance; the other the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, with respect to Faith,
and Repentance; for that is required in all Persons that are to be Baptized, as
so fully granted. Neither in the ends, the one to enter visibly into the
National Church thereby; the other into the Spiritual Church, and to partake of
Spiritual Ordinances, so entering also into Covenant, and acting Faith in the
Promises, and sharing of Privileges, in the very act of entrance, that no
Child, under the Law, or Gospel, could be capable of.

In the next place, as to the An^iquity of enjoining Infants Baptism, with all
its impious Concomitants, of Salt, Oil, Spittle, Chrysme, Exorcisme, etc. He
grants it was not till above four hundred years after Christ in the Milevitan,
and Carthagenian Councels; But withal says, the Reason why it was not enjoined
sooner, was because the Lawfulness of it was rarely, if it all questioned
before.

A good grant from Mr. Wills for the witnesses against Infants Baptism.
To which I say, then if it be so, that the Canons in the respective Councels
enjoining, and enforcing Infants Baptism, [whereof, he says, he has above
thirty to produce] were only made upon the occasion of those that denied, or
opposed it: We have then our Witnesses throughout all Ages, confirmed by
himself; yet with all I must remember him, presently, that though these first
Canons, and those in other Centuries, were made against those that denied
Infants Baptism, to curse, and Excommunicate, and destroy them, yet it was
denied long before any Canons were made to impose it.

And further he affirms. That though Infants Baptism was not imposed, before
the fifth Century, yet that it was practiced in the former Centuryes, from the
Testimonies of Justin Martyr, and Iraeneus, Origin, and Cyprian.

To which I say, No proof that Infants Baptism was practiced in the 3. Century.
that as to the validity of our Authors testimonies, as to the practice of
Infants Baptism in the first times, we shall presently Examine; though I deny
not, but that it was discoursed before the third Century, and which appears, as
I have owned, by Tertullians Reasoning against it; but the thing I affirm, is
that it is not manifest by any Authentic Authority, that it was practiced as
an Ordinance of Christ before; As Doctor Barlow so well observes, viz. that he
does believe it came in, in the second Century, (viz. in the Notion) and in the
third, and fourth began to be practiced, and defended to be lawful, by the Text
grossly misunderstood Jo. 3.5.

And as to the Magdeburgs themselves, though they tell us, that from what they
find from Origin, and Cyprian, concerning it, they conclude it was practiced;
and that many Superstitious Rites in Baptism were also spoken of, in those
first Centuries: Yet do tell us withal in express words, Century 3. chapter 6. p.
125. Nec de susceptione, de Baptismo, explicari quidquam inveniat, in omnibus
hujus saeculi, veris and probatis Scriptoribus: Neither can one find any thing
spoken of, the Susception of Baptism, in all the true, and approved Writers of
this Ag^. They tell us indeed, of o^e only instance, mentioned by Vincentius,
who wrote of the affairs of the Gallican Churches, mentioning a Family, that
was Baptized, in the time of Aurelianus the Emperor, in which there was a Godly
young man, by name Symphorianus, who was Baptized by Benignus the Presbyter;
but with all they say of this Vincentius, Author non ita satis probatus: An
Author not so well approved of.

Therefore till any instance be produced, of any Child that was Baptized as an
Ordinance of Christ, within the first three hundred years, or toward the
Conclusion of it, I am yet unreprovable in that my assertion; For if it should
be taken for granted, that those four before mentioned had spoken of it, yet if
they do not speak of the practice of it, which is all that I assert, I am very
safe in what I have said.

Tradition the principal Ground, that has been urged for Infants Baptism.
Tradition the principal Ground upon which Infants Baptism was 1. founded
THe next thing to be enquired into, is the principal Ground, upon which Infants
Baptism was first imposed, and afterward established, which I have made
appear to be humane, or Unwritten Tradition, by diverse Authorities, both
Ancient, and Modern, p. 133.

Austin.
Austin says, That Infants Baptism is not to be believed, unless it were an
Apostolical Tradition, etc.

Bellarmin.
Bellarmin tells us, That it is an Apostolical Tradition not written, because
(says he) it is not written in any Apostolical B oks, though in the Books of
almost all the Ancients, etc.

Doctor Field, Dr. Field.
That Infants Baptism is therefore called a Tradition, because it is not
delivered in the Scriptures, that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, or that
they spould do so.

Convocation at Oxford, That without the consentaneous ju^gement, and practice
of the Universal Church they should be at a loss when they are called upon for
proof in the point of Infants Baptism. With diverse others asserting the same,
from page 133. to the 137.

To which Mr. Wills says page 115. 122. That it is a false suggestion, and
exceeding all modesty, for although the Church of Rome ascribes too much to
Tradition herein, making it equal with the Scripture; yet that the Ancient
Fathers do plead, that it comes in the room of Circumcision, and that Infants
have right thereto, from the right that the Jews Infants had to Circumcision;
And that the Protestants, when they use the word Tradition, do it as the
Fathers before them, in sensu sano: in a wholesome sense, quite different from
the corrupt sense of the Church of Rome.

To which I say, though Mr. Wills affirms, Agreement betwixt Papist, and
Protestant about the Tradition of Infants Baptism.
there is such a vast difference betwixt the Church of Rome, and them, in the
point of Tradition, about Infants Baptism, wherein he ownes them too corrupt;
yet for my part I see not, as Mr. Wills represents, the Protestant sentiments
about it, where the vast difference lies, and what reason he has to conclude,
they themselves, that hold with the Fathers herein, are so Orthodox; and the
Papists so corrupt, and Heterodox.

For do the Church of Rome ^old, 1. Papist a Tradition not written.
that it is an Apostolical Tradition not written; there being nothing written of
it in any Apostolical Book, but only found in the custom, and practice of the
Church, Treat. Bap. p. 134.

Protestant an unwriten Tradition.
So does Mr. Wills in behalf of the Protestants also affirm; viz. That Infants
Baptism is therefore called a Tradition, because it is not expressly delivered
in the Scripture, that the Apostles did baptize Infants, nor any express
Precept they should do so: And that Tradition is the practice of such things,
as are neither contained in Scripture expressly, nor the Examples of such
practices expressly there delivered, Mr. Wills p. 108.

2. Papists a Tradition gathered from the Scripture.
Do the Papists affirm: That notwithstanding it is a Tradition, or Custom of the
Church, yet that it is plainly enough gathered out of the Scriptures; viz. from
Circumcision, Bellarm. Tom. 3. L. 1. de Sacr. c. 8.

Protestant a Tradition gathered from the Scripture.
So does Mr. Wills for the Protestants, say, That notwithstanding, there is
neither pr^cept, nor practice, expressly written in the Scripture; yet it is
gathered thence by good consequence, as coming in the Room of Circumcision; and
therefore that Infants have a right to Baptism, from the right that the
Infants had to Circumcision, Mr. Wills p. 105.

3. Papists that it is of equal Authority with Scripture.
Thirdly, Do the Papists maintain, that the Ecclesiastical Tradition of Infants
Baptism (as it is gathered from the Scripture, and appointed by the Church) is
of equal authority with the Scripture it self, and to be observed with the like
holy reverence, Treat. Bapt. p. 132.

Protestant of equal Authority in Scripture.
So does Mr. Wills assert for Protestant doctrine, That the Tradition of Infants
Baptism, proved by Consequential Arguments from the Scripture, ought to be
esteemed as firm, and good as the Scripture it self, p. 117.

Do the Papists teach, 4. Papists that the Church the subject, not Author.
that Infants Baptism was the appointment of Christ himself; and practice of
the Apostles; though no mention, when it was given forth, nor when, and where
practiced, Treat. Bap. 134.

So does also Mr. Wills in the name of the Protestants affirm, Protestant that
the Church the subject, not the Author
that Infants Baptism was an Apostolical practice, and Ordinance, not that the
primitive Church was the Author, but subject thereof, Christ himself having
appointed it, and approved thereof; (though no where written) p. 119.

Fifthly, Do the Papists maintain, 5. Papists Testefied by the Ancients.
That the Truth of this Ecclesiastical Custom, of Infants Baptism, is handed
down to us, to be an Apostolical Tradition, by the writings of almost all the
Ancients, Treat. Bap. p. 133.

So do also the Protestant Paedobaptists defend, Protestant witnessed by all
the Ancients.
That the holy Ordinance of Infants, Baptism, has been perpetually observed
in the Christian Church; for there is no ancient Writer, that does not
aknowledge its Original from the Apostles, Master Wills page 102.

So that by this Parallel we cannot find, where the great difference lies,
betwixt Papists, and Protestants: But if the Papists are corrupt in the point
of Tradition about it, so are the Protestants also, being in so great an
harmony therein together.

That the Papists, and many of the Protestants, do much accord in the point of
Tradition about it, is fully owned by Mr Baxter, in his Princ^ of Love as
before.)

And that Mr. Wills, and other Protestants of his mind, do so too is manifest

For all do harmoniously acknowledge, that it is not delivered in the
Scripture, that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, or that there is any express
precept there found, they should do so, and therefore an Unwritten Tradition:
Though the Ground, and Reason thereof (they say) is ^airly to be gathered by
Consequence, p. 507. which therefore must needs be the principal Ground, the
Ground of the Ground; so that if the Unwritten Tradition prove a mistake, the
pretended Scripture Ground, to justify it, Communicating Infants is said to be
an Apostolical Tradition as well as Infants Baptism.
must needs be a mistake also: As for instance, the giving of the Sacrament to
Infants, was asserted by the sayings of the Ancients, to be an Apostolical
unwritten Tradition, and so practiced for many Ages, and this not without a
pretended Scripture ground, to justify the said practice to be good, as Doctor
Barlow observes from John 6 53. Which you have also urged by Austi^ himself,
with great vehemence, as necessary to Salvation.

Now this being since disowned, to be an Apostolical Tradition, which was the
principal Ground, the Scripture urged to prove, and justify it, does
necessarely prove a mistake. And therefore (says Doctor Barlow) upon the like
gross mistake, they did defend Infants Baptism, from John 5.3. and he affirms,
they may do one, as well as the other.

Therefore let all Men judge, whether Mr. Wills himself has not justified,
that he calls a false suggestion, and exceeding all modesty, to assert that
Tradition, has been owned to be the principal Ground of Infants Baptism: For
take away the Unwritten Tradition, then the pretended Scriptures, to justify
that, avail nothing.

It is true the Papists are larger, The Pap^sts are larger in point of
Tradition then the Protestants.
in the business of Tradition then the Protestants, and affirm a larger power,
through their Infallibility to determine about it, then the Protestants can
own; who cannot only by their infallibility tell, what our Savior said to
John* lying in his bosom, but also what he told the Disciples in the Mount, not
mentioned in the Scripture; And by the large trust committed to them, can
impose those their conclusions as Oracles, and of like Authority with the
Scriptures: As for instance, their Chrysme, Exorcisme, Salt, Oil, Spittle (very
ancient Traditions, if not more ancient then Infants Baptism it se^f) as
Appendixes, if not essentials to Baptism: And so Altars, Copes, holy Water,
Temples, Holy days, with a vast number more of like kind, gathered also from
Scripture Analogy, from Old Testament rites, as Infants Baptism from
Circumcision. And therefore do they reprove the Protestants, for not receiving
all the rest, as well as Infants Baptism, being all upon one bottom, viz.
Apostolical Tradition, gathered from Scripture's Consequence.

The Fathers also herein, The Fathers larger in point of Tradition then the
Protestants.
do seem to exceed the Protestants too (though Mr. Wills says, they do so
agree with them, in the point of Tradition, as holding it more soundly then the
Papists) viz. Cyprian, Austin, and others of the Ancients, hold Chrysme,
Exorcisme, Infants righ^ to the Supper, etc. to be Apostolical Traditions and
to be made good from Scripture proof, and Analogy; And seem to be as large
herein, as the Papists have since been: For instance, Austi^ Austin.
in his 118. Epist. ad Johan. says: Illa quae n^^ scripta, tradita custodimus,
dantur vel Apostolis, vel plenariis Consiliis, etc. The unwritten Traditions,
which we keep, are given by the Apostle^ themselves, or general Councels, etc.

And amongst other things (with Infants Baptism) he mentions the Solemnity
of good Friday, Easter Day, holy Thursday, and Wednesday; And adds, if any
other thing has occurred, which i^ kept by the whole Church, where ever it
spreads it self. This length our Paedobaptists cannot go, with the Fathers, and
Papists in other Traditions, though they hold fast that of Infants Baptism
with them, which was the main Argument for it till Luthers time, as Mr. Tombs
tells Mr. Baxter in his third part of the Review, page 767. Nor do I think Mr.
Baxter can show me one Author, till Luthers day, who made Infants Baptism, any
other then an unwritten Tradition, although they produce many of them
Scripture, for the Necessity, Reasonableness, and Lawfulness, (...) the Church
to use it, to whose authority they ascrib^ too much, in the appointing such
rites, and interpreting Scriptures to that end; I do not find tha^ the engaged
Papists cited by me, did set Tradition above Scripture, but that they make it
equal wit^ it. I grant, etc.

Therefore since (by substantial Argument) Tradition, appears to be the
principal Ground, and with so much confidence asserted, both by Papists, and
Protestants, to be made good from the writings of all the Ancients (as says
Calvin) and Bellarmine (more modestly) by the writings of almost all the
Ancients; Let us therefore, in the next place, particularly examine the
respective Authorities from Antiquity, avouched for the same; for if they fail,
the whole Fabric tumbles down. Here also:

The Antiquities urged by Mr. Wills, to prove Infants Baptism an Apostolical
Tradition, disproved.
five Authorities, 5. Authorities to prove Infants Baptism Traditional.
that have been usually brought to prove, Infants Baptism an Apostolical
Tradition, and the universal practice of the Church, which we have examined
distinctly, and given an Account of the insufficiency, and weakness, if not the
wickedness, of most of them, and which appearing falfe, all the rest depending
upon them, necessarely fall to the Ground.

The first three of them, viz. 3. of them owned to be spurious.
Dionysius the Areopagite, in the first Century; the Decretals of the first
Popes, or Roman Bishops, with Justin Martyrs Responses, in the second Century,
are all of them owned by Mr. Wills to be spurious, and supposititious; though
to this day leaned upon, by most of the Popish, and many Protestant Writers
also; whereby the Mystery of Iniquity early discover it self, not only to usher
in, but to support this Innovation, by Lies, and Forgeries.

But Mr. Wills tells us, that though these are forgeries, Justin Martyr to
Triphon examined.
yet Justin Martyrs Dialogue to Triphon, is genuine, who therein says, that it
was lawful for all to receive the Spiritual Circumcision, [viz. Baptisme]
whereby it may well be inferred, says Mr. Wills from Mr. Baxter, that if all
may receive it, then Infants, who were the Subjects of Legal Circumcision, for
they must be part of all, and not excluded, Wills 128.

Which I say, is a mere impertinency, and nothing to the purpose.

For first, here is not one word of Infants, nor of Infants Baptism, or its
Apostolicalness.

Secondly, it is very absurd (the better to hook in Children) to interpret the
word [all] to be all Men; for if all Men, then it must comprehend wicked, as
well as good; Believers, as well as Unbelievers; and which ( as confined to
Baptism, by Master Wills) is to contradict Christ's Commission, and the
Apostles practice, who limited it only to those, that repented of their Sins,
and believed the Gospel. And though it is true, the Gospel was to be preached
to all, and all of all Nations, in distinction to the Nation of the Jews, who
only were concerned in the first Commission; yet only they taught Believers
amongst them, were to be Baptized; not the ignorant, and profane; And if the
word All, be so to be understood, it is a witness for us, not them, for Infants
thereby are excluded, who are neither capable of Instruction, Repentance, or
Faith. And that it is so to be understood, let Justin himself be the
Interpreter, who not only in his Apology, before mentioned, tells us, Justin
himself contradicts Mr. Wills sense
that they Only, who were instructed in the Faith, and believed, were brought
to Baptism, to have their new Birth perfected. But in this uery Dialogue to
Tryphon, tells us, that by the Word, and Baptism, Regeneration was perfected,
in all man kind, (viz. in all that did hear, and receive the word, and were
capable to come to Baptism.) And again, that by the grace of God, and the
Baptism of Repentance, sins were expiated, as Magdeburgs Cent. 2. page 4. 7.
which sufficiently declares, that this is nothing to the purpose, except it be
to confirm Believers Baptism only.

And to which says Mr. Tombs, Mr. Baxters singular Notion.
This testimony for Antiquity of Infants Baptism, I remember not alleged by
any before Mr. Baxter, and therefore, besides the impertinency of the words, as
he himself alleges them, I see no need to search further into it, Review 2.
part p. 71.

In the next place Mr. Wills tells us of an other Antiquity, to prove Infants
Baptism Apostolical, Iraeneus testimony examined.
viz. Iraeneus, who in Lib. 2. c. 39. Advers. Haeres. tells us, that Christ did
sanctify every age, by his own susception of it, and similitude to it. All I
say, who by him are born again to God: Whereby ( says Mr. Wills) we infer,
that being born again to God, signifying Baptism, as the Ancients for the most
part took it, then were the Infants baptized in his day, Wills p. 129.

To which I reply, that if this be any more to the purpose then the former, let
all Men judge; and whether it be not far fetched, and unnaturaly screwed,
without either Reason, or truth?

Very impertinent.
For first, here is not one word of Infants Baptism, or its Apostolicalness,
and nothing but an impertinent begging Question upon Question, to make up an
inference.

Secondly, The Interpretation upon which it is founded, is wholly falacious, for
neither the Scriptures, nor Justin Martyr, do call Baptism Regeneration
absolutely, but only as it is the Symbol of Regeneration, already wrought by
the word, and so Justins words before import, and that only respecting the
Adult, that were capable thereof: For if this be true Doctrine, then must all
Hypocrites, and wicked Men, that either now, or ever were Baptized, be actually
thereby Regenerated, and so consequently saved; which is so absurd, and
Ridiculous, as nothing can be more. To which Mr. Tombs has so well answered
Mr. Baxter in his third Review, page 79. (And which was never yet replied to)
that we need say no more to it, viz.

Mr. Tombs.
But Christ was not in his Age, an Example of every age by his Baptism, as if
he did by it sanctify every age, for then he should have been baptized in every
age; but in respect to the holiness of his humane Nature, which did remain in
each age, and so exemplarily sanctify every age to God, so as that no age but
was capable of holiness, by conformity to his Example. Now if the meaning were,
that Christ came to save all that were baptized by him, on by his appointment,
then he came to save Simon Magus, and who ever are, and have been baptized
rightly, Judas himself. Therefore such a sense is most palpably false, and
therefore is this wrested by the Paedobaptists, against its meaning, to prove
Infants Baptism in his time.

So that I hope it will be manifest, that these Authorities are as little to
the purpose, as the three former, and all though these are not Supposititions,
yet wholly insignificant, and nothing to the purpose.

Whereby it is manifest, that for the first two hundred years we have not the
least proof, by any Authentic Au hor, that Infants Baptism was an Apostolical
Tradition, or that it was once practiced within that compass of time. And
therefore says Doctor Barlow, Dr. Barlow.
I believe, and know that there is, neither precept, nor practice in Scripture
for Paedobaptisme; nor any just evidence for it, for above two hundred years
after Christ. And may it not be very well concluded, in Mr. Baxters words about
Confirmation, That it was very suspicious, to find in Justin Martyrs
Description of the Christian Churches practice, no mention of it, p. 128. So
neither to find in Justin Martyr, nor, as Mr. Tombs well observes, the least
of it in Eusebius, Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, or Epiphanius,
is very good ground to conclude against it, and reproof to Mr. Calvin, who
says, Mr. Calvin and Mr. Marshal justly reproved.
that there is no Ancient Writer, that does not acknowledge, the Original of
the holy Ordinance of Infants Baptism, even from the Apostles. And to Mr.
Marshal also, who says that the Church has been in possession of Infants
Baptism this fiveteen hundred years, and that no one Authority can be found
witnessing thereto, for two hundred years after Christ.

Origen's testimony tried.
But in the next place, with greater confidence, says Mr. Wills, we adhear to
Origin, notwithstanding the frivelous cavils of the Author. It is true, Origin
is the Authority especially gloried in, as being so positive, and express for
its Apostolicalness, as it is mentioned L. 5. ad Romans c. 6. and confirmed in
Lev. l. 8. Hom. 8. and in Luke Hom. 14. In these words, the Church has
received a Tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to Children (who had
the secret Mystery of Divine things committed to them) because they being
defiled with the pollution of sin, ought to be washed, or cleansed by the
water, and Spirit, etc.

To which we have said these three things, viz.

Reason given before agaidst it in Treat. of Baptism.
First, that Origin is but one single testimony, ( as Doctor Tailor observes)
and that against so much authentic testimony to the contrary, that none but
the Adult are found in the Apostles times, and the next Century after them, to
be baptized.

Secondly, that his writings are so notorious corrupt, and erroneous, and
particulerly in the point of Baptism.

Thirdly, that many of his Works, and particulerly these that treat of
Baptism, fell into such ill hands.

Mr. Wills answer to the first.
To which Mr. Wills answers, First, that Origin was not a single testimony,
because, says he, we have the testimony of Irenaeus also. But what I^enaeus
Testimony signifies you have heard; and therefore that neither Irenaeus, or any
other but Origens Testimony was in the Case, you have Doctor Tailor in his
Deswasive against Popery, 2. part page 118. printed 1667, one of his last
pieces, saying thus: Dr. Tailor that Origin was but a single Testimony.
That there is Tradition to baptize Infants, relyes but upon two witnesses,
Origin, and Austin, and the latter having received it from the former, it
relyes wholly upon a single Testimony, which is but a pitiful Argument, to
prove a Tradition Apostolical; he is the first that spoke it: but Tertullian,
that was before him, seems to speak against it, which he would not have done,
if it had been a Tradition Apostolical. And that it was not so, is but too
certain, if there be any truth in the words of Ludov. Vives, saying, that
anciently none were baptized, but persons of riper age.

And herein the Doctor, it must be granted, speaks his own sense, not playing
the Anabaptist, as it is said he did in his Liberty of Prophecy.

To the Second, he ownes his corruptions, Mr. Wills grants the 2.
and great errors, but says to balance him, that Tertullian did not come much
short of him, in error, and corruption; that is one of my witnesses.

To which I say, let them then go together, only I shall have thereby the
better bargain for Mr. Wills, in parting with Origin parts with all, but I have
many more to witness for me besides.

To the Third, that his Homelies on the Romans, Mr. Wills to the 3. charge me
with mistake.
were all translated by Ruffinus, is my mistake, for though Ruffinus might
abuse some part of Origens works, yet that Jerome did translate his Romans, and
Luks also; and which he says, appears by Jeroms Preface, affixed to them as
Erasmus, (he tells us) confesses, and therefore, though Ruffinus has no
credit with me, he hopes Jerome may, they being Jeroms Version, and which upon
Erasmus testimony puts it beyond all doubt.

Reply to the charge ^herein Mr. Wills ^ppears to be gr^sly ^^staken.
To which I say, first, that what ever good thoughts Mr. Wills has of the
Translation of the Romans, yet Mr. Perkins is pleased, as I told him, to put it
amongst his spurious works.

Secondly, that Erasmus (what ever Mr. Wills so fa sly tells us) is so far from
asserting the Romans to be Jeroms, and not Ruffinus that he says just the
contrary, in his Censure before O^igens works, in these words: At qui l^git
ennar rationem Epistolae (ad incertus) Romanos est utrum legit Origenem, aut
Ruffinum: And he that reads his Commentaires upon the Epistle to the Romans, is
uncertain whether he reads Origin, or Ruffinus.

But is not Jeroms Preface before the Epistle? and does not Erasmus tell us so,
to put us beyond all doubt? It is true, Mr. Wills indeed tell us so; but what
credit is to be given to him, let all Men judge, when Erasmus, and Grynaeus
also, tell us the quite contrary? Erasmus his words are these: Erasmus (...)
^ct. (...) cheat.
Hic L^brarii magnifice perfricuere frontem, and in Praefatione, and in per
Oratione pro Ruffino, Hieronymum supponentes, hoc est vitrum pro Gemma Lectori
obtrudere conantes, and hactenus sane fefellerunt incautos, nam Praefatio
poterat utcunque videri Hieronymi, sed in per Oratione quasi Sori^es suo se
produnt indicio: Herein the Booksellers h^ve been very impudent, both in the
Preface, and conclusion also, putting Jerome instead of Ruffinus, that is to
say, endeavoring to obtrude upon the Reader. Glass instead of a Jewel, and
hitherto indeed they have deceived the unwary: For however, the Preface may
seem Jeroms, yet in the per-oration (or conclusion) the Rats do as it were
betray themselves by their own discovery. In like manner (as says the same
Author) Quod idem factum est in Symbolo: Eum enim librum in Cypriani nomen
transtulerunt, sed ita multis commutatis, ut ipsa res clamitet non casu, sed de
inaustria factum esse: The same thing is done in the Symbolum: For they
transferred that Book on the name of Cyprian, but many things being so changed,
that the matter it self manifests sufficiently, that it was done not by chance,
but of design.

But then says Mr. Wills, Origin upon Luke examined.
what do you say to Luke? For it is to be noted, that neither the Author, nor
any one else, has any thing to say against his Hom^lies on Luke (what ever
they have to say, on that on the Levit. and the Romans) where Origin expresses
the same thing, concerning Infants Baptism, and Mr. Perkins himself lets this
pass without the Censure of being spurious, p. 132.

To which I answer, First, 1. No Original Copy of i^.
then it is not denied, but that Leviticus, wherein is the same thing asserted,
is so spoiled by Ruffinus, that it may be justly censured, for Mr. Wills says
nothing to it, and if he did, it is all one, for Erasmus is as positive for
that, as for the other.

And as for that of Luke, Mr. Tombs Tombs.
observes in his third Review, page That Erasmus says on Luke 1.3. Sic enim
visus est sentire, quis is fuit, cujus extant in Lucam Commentarii Adamantii
titulo: For so he seems to think whosoever he was, whose Commentaries are
extant upon Luke, under the title of Adamantius which shows (says he) that
Erasmus took them not to be Origens, or at least doubted thereof.

Vossius.
And Vossius Disputatio 14. Sect. 8. p. 181. says thus (having cited Origens
whole testimony out of Luke, etc.) Sed de Origene minus laborabimus, quia quae
citabimus Graece non extant: But we care the less for Origens, because the
things we cited, are not extant in the Greek.

And Scultetus Scultetus.
in his Medul. Pat. L. 6. c 2. Cum Graeca Originis Opera non extant hodie, and
quibus Latina versio corrigi possit, and emendari: That Origens works in Greek
were not at present extant, by which the Latin v^rsion might be corrected, and
amended.

And Erasmus: Erasmus.
Atque utinam extarent Graeca Originis monument^, quo Ruffinicas arts possemus
deprehen^ere: And I wish that the Greek Copies of Origin were extant, that so
we might thereby discover the cheats of Ruffinus.

3. Origin was more a Pelagian t^^n to assert Original sin.
But Serondly, there is good Reason to question, that those things about Infants
Baptism, were not Origens, from the Reasons that is added to them, viz. to
take away Original Sin; whereas it is so well known, that Origin was not only a
great Arian, but the very Fountain, and head of them, as Jerome, and Epiphanius,
calls him Magdeb. Century 3. p. 261. etc. But notoriously did deny Original
sin, as page 265. And therefore does Doctor Owin, in his display of Arianisme
chapter 12. say Nor did Origin Pelaginise a little only, but is supposed first to
have brought Pelaginisme into the Church.

And therefore does Vossius in his History of Pelaginisme L. 4. Th. 6. page
153. So much Question, whether those passages in his works, mentioning Infants
Baptism, could be his, upon the account of Pelaginisme.

By all which I doubt not, but that the judicious Reader will conclude, there
is a good Ground, to judge this Testimony of Origens, upon all these Accounts,
to be as invallid, and insignificant, as the former; and that as yet we have
not the least evidence, to prove this our unwriten Tradition to be Apostolical.

The Last, and chiefest, Cyprians testimony examined.
that is pretended to warrant this an Apostolic Tradition, is that of Cyprian,
in his, and his 66. Bishops Epistle to Fidus, (who is placed by Usher in the
middle of the third Century, 250.) wherein it is said to this purpose, viz.

That it seemed good, not only to himself, An Epitomy of his Epistle.
but a whole Council, that Infants might be baptized before the eight day; and
the Reasons to enforce it are these that Follow. First, Because the Baptism
was simpely necessary to Salvation. Secondly, That it washes away Original Sin,
so as it is never to be imputed more. Thirdly, Because the Grace of God is
tendered to all, therefore all Children should be baptized. Fourthly, Because
Children have lesser sins then others, and so they need less pardon then Men of
grown years, therefore less hindrance in them, to come to Gods grace. Fifthly,
Because in their first birth they do nothing, but pray by their crying, and
weeping. Sixthly, Because the Soul, that is not baptized, is lost, Cypr. l. 3.
Ep. 8.

Against which I gave in three Exceptions.

Former Exceptions.
First, Because Infants Baptism is not hereby urged, for an Apostolical
Tradition, nor upon any Authority of Scripture, but upon his own, and Bishops
Arguments (as said) such as they are to enforce it, though if he should have
said, it was an Apostolical Tradition, his word would no more have been taken,
then when he tells us, Chrysme, and other inventions were so too.

Secondly, Because there is ground to Question, whether there was any such
Council: First, Because there is no place mentioned, where such a Council was
kept. Secondly, the grounds are so weak, and erroneous. Thirdly, Because it was
a doctrine so much contradicted by his great Master Tertullian. Fourthly,
Because there were many things fathered upon him, not his.

Thirdly, That if it did truly appear to be his, yet there was as little ground
to receive it upon his word, as the rest of his corrupt, erroneous, and
Antichristian doctrines, vented by him, whereof you have some account from the
Magdeburgs in his Naevi.

Mr. Wills answer to the first.
To the first he says, though he did not say, it was an Apostolical Tradition,
it follows not that he did not so own it, the Magdeburgs say that he did so
affirm it.

proof^ of Apostolical Tradition, it is necessary to bring such only, that upon
warrantable ground are positive in it: For this at the best can be urged, but
as a cons^quential proof, and far fetched too; viz. Because Cyprian in his time
gave his opinion for it, therefore it was practiced in that age, and because it
was practiced, two hundred and fifty years after Christ's time, therefore it was
the practice of the Apostles, which if allowed, would be excellent authority,
for all the Superstitious observations of Chrysme, Exorcisme, and an hundred
more of those knacks.

But he tells us, the Magdeburgs say, that Cyprian affirmed, it was so. And
that is just as much as if Mr. Wills should so affirm, except some ancient, and
authentic authority be produced for the same; and it is not yet evidenced, out
of his writings, that he any where says so.

But as to what I say, Mr. Wills Answer to the 2. part of the first
that if Cyprian had any where upon his own word told us, it had been an
Apostolical Tradition, yet it would have signified as little, as his telling
us, that Chrysme was so. He replied:

And does not the same exception lie against Tertullian, who as the Magdeburgs
tell us, was the inventer of Chrysme, and therefore (says he) is such
inflexibleness, stifness, and partiality, fair, and equal?

To which I say, If Tertullian, his Master* was the inventer of Chrysme, which
Cyprian calls an Apostolical Tradition, what credit then is to be given to his
testimony, that dares to avouch so fearful a lie so knowingly.

Secondly, If he should tell us, upon his own word, two hundred years after,
that both were Apostolical, we have great reason to distrust, that of Infants
Baptism, when we know the other is a manifest Falsehood.

Neither is there the like reason, to reject Tertullians Testimony against
Infants Baptism: First, because it is only urged as matter of Fact, that
Infants Baptism was denied by him, to be an Ordinance of Christ, the verity
whereof (I think) never any doubted, with the Reasons he gives for the same, in
his Book de Baptism^, as Doctor Barlow, and Doctor Tailor, so fully
acknowledge: Had he indeed told us, that two hundred years before him (without
any proof, but his own say so) some of the Apostles had denied it, and at the
same time told us, a manifest lie of them also, there had been, the like cause
to have questioned his evidence: And as to Tertullians testimony, so much
contemned by Mr. Wills, you shall hear more of it in the next Chapter, where my
witnesses are vindicated, against his Cavils.

Mr. Wills to the 2.
To the second Exception, as to the three Grounds I urge, why no such Council?
He first answers with a scoff (And that is strange for one that has launcht
out, as he has done, into the vast Ocean of Antiquity) then gives the reason,
why he judges there was such a Council, because so many (in the Fourth, and
fifth Century) of the Fathers, (some of whom he mentions from Doctor Hamona)
had such a venerable esteem for it. But what then?

That is no Argument, it was a Decree of such a Council, because so many had a
good esteem of it: For all the same Fathers, he mentions, esteemed very well of
Chrysme, and Exorcisme, etc. asserted by Cyprian; Does it therefore follow they
were appointed by him in Council, and to be received therefore by them, and all
others, without further dispute. But that Cyprians Dictates were not so
authentic among the Ancients, may appear by their universally rejecting, his
Doctrine of Rebaptisation, though determined in an undoubted Council, at
Carthage in Africa, under Gallus, mentioned in his Epistle to Jabajanus, and
in all his Epistles, Magdeb. Century 3. Magdeb Cent. 3. p. 194.
page 194. And that novel opinion of his, about sprinkling also, in his Epistle
to Magnus, L. 4. Ep. 7. which all of them declined for so many Ages.

As to the other three Arguments, Reply nothing to the third.
against the Council, he says nothing at all; Neither does he say one word
against those childish, erroneous, and ridiculous grounds, the (supposed)
learned Council gives for that their opinion, which I urge in the third Reason:
Only he Cavils with me for the Argument I urge from Austins Confession against
this Council, viz. that it had not been determined in any Council, saying, that
it is a pitiful mistake, and misunderstanding of Austins words; who says: Who
had not its first institution from some Counc^l. To which I say, the words are:
Nec Consiliis institutum: Neither instituted, or decreed in Councels. There is
no first: So that he did certainly, by these words, conclude against any
^nstitution, or Determinaiton, in this, as well as any other Council; and this
to be sure, if it be not in this supposed Council, of Cyprian d^termined, and
instituted, he finds it no where else (this being the first Council, that ever
is pretended to mention it, and excepting Origin he particularizeth, no
authority higher. Austins words run thus: That which the Church (viz. in his
time) held, and which had neither been institute^) in Cyprians, nor) in other
Council (so concluding against all Councels) and which was always held (yet
gives no higher account, to prove that universal Tenet then Origin) m^st
therefore be an Apostolical Tradition. A notable convincing Argument no doubt,
and so far from being next to a Demonstration, as Mr. Wills fondly asserts,
that it is next to nothing, and just as good, and authentic, as Austins
assertion, that the giving the Sacrament to Children, was Apostolical, and
necessary to Salvation.

And then in Mr. Philpots words he tells us, because we deny this of Cyprian,
to be good proof: That the verity of Antiquity is with them, and that the
Anabaptists have nothing, but lies for them, and their new imaginations, which
feign that Baptism of Children is the Popes commandment.

To which I say that what ever Mr. Philpot (that worthy Martyr) might
heretofore in ignorance affirm, and Mr. Wills may now, with so much prejudice,
repeat and second: Yet he must pardon, us if we say: That until as full a
Command from Christ, be produced for Infants Baptism, as is from the Pope for
the same, that the lie he talks of, will certainly rest at their door, who with
so much confidence assert, that it was Christ's precept, and the Apostles
practice, and yet are able to bring no more from Scripture, or Antiquity, to
warrant it, whilst all that full-mouthed, and undeniable evidence, from the
Popes Canons, and Decrees, are manifested by us for the same.

But if it should be granted Mr. Wills, that this of Cyprians Decree was
authentic, and that there was then a Determination, to baptize all Children
upon the Reasons, and Grounds mentioned therein ( viz. because Gods grace was
tendered to all. Secondly, Because Children were more capable of it, then grown
Men. Thirdly, Because it was necessary to Salvation. Fourthly, Because so avail
able to wash away Original sin. Fifthly, Because they do nothing, but pray when
they cry, in the first birth. And Sixthly, Because they would otherwise be
lost) what would it avail to prove, that their Infants Baptism that Mr. Wills
pleads for, was an Apostolical Tradition, or practiced in those first times?
For Mr. Wills renounceth this as erronous, and false, as we do his, who is
neither for the baptizing of all Children, nor upon those grounds asserted,
which he reprobates, as Popish, and Ridiculous: And therefore Protogenes his
schaeme for baptizing Children, to cure diseases, might as well have been
produced by Mr Wills as Cyprians model to save their Souls, and both like
significant to what Mr. Wills pleads for. It is true this supposed Decree of
Cyprians was the true pattern, that those first Popish Councels wrote after,
and which the Papists have followed ever since, and who therefore do as much
renounce Mr. Wills Infants Baptism, as he does theirs, upon which score it it
was that the Latins counted the Baptism of the Greek Church a nullity, and did
rebaptise those again, as the Greeks did theirs. And therefore is Calvin, and
Luther and those that made the first change, from the old pattern, put by the
Popish Writers amongst those, that positively denied Infants Baptism, for they
conclude that they had as good deny it, as so to alter the Ceremonial form, and
change the ends thereof; So that if Mr. Wills seeks for Antiquity, for the
Baptism of the Infants of Believers only, he cannot go higher then Luther or
Zwinglius, as Mr. Tombs observes, and if for the Children only of Inchurched
Parents, (which I conceive to be his judgment) he cannot extend it higher then
the New England pattern, about forty, or fifty years since.

Thus it is manifest to you, first, that there is neither Precept, nor Example,
in Scripture for Infants Baptism, as is so fully acknowledged. Secondly, That
the Scriptures silence, or its not forbidding, cannot justify any thing in Gods
worship, and that nothing but an express Scr^pture that carries, thus says the
Lord Jesus along with it, can free any from Superstition and false worship;
which fully excludes Infants Baptism by their own Grants, Mr. Wills
acknowledging (they cannot say), thus says the Lord Jesus, Baptize your
Children. And thirdly, It is as fully manifested, that the pretended Antiquity,
for the practice of Infants Baptism fails; none proving it higher by any
approved Author, then the fourth, or fifth Century: And then no other Baptism,
then has been renounced by most Protestants, as corrupt, and erroneus; And
that however the Papists, and those that go their way, may prove Antiquity as
high as the fourth, or fifth Century: Yet that Mr. Wills can go no higher for
his, then New England, or at the furthest then Luther.

CHAP. III. Wherein the Witnesses against Infants Baptism, are vindicated from
Mr. Wills Exceptions.
THe Witnesses produced by me, against Infants Baptism, were either particular
Persons, or Churches, as you have them at large mentioned in the seventh
Chapter.

And first, as to the evidence from particular Persons, Mr. Wills in his
Preface tells us: 1. From particular Persons.
That notwithstanding all the flourishes Mr. D. makes, and the numerous
Quotations, he has fetched from the Magdeburgensian History, in his seventh
Chapter, from the first Century, to the end of the twelfeth, there are but two
Persons, to be found against Infants Baptism; viz. Adrianus, and Hincmarus,
Mr. Wills ownes b^t two in the whole.
which is just the same Number, he was pleased to allow me before, for
Believers Baptism; But whether these, and their fellows, may not speed, as
well as the former, shall be put to as fair a trial, and so submitted to
judgment.

The first of my Witnesses, urged against Infants Baptism, was Tertullian, who
does, Tertullian thc first witness.
as expressed page 221. eminently oppose it, in six Arguments: First, from the
mistaken Scripture, Matt. 19.14. suffer little Children, etc. (by which it
seems some would have introduced such a practice) which could not, as he says,
be properly applied to Infants Baptism, for several Reasons urged from their
incapacaties. Secondly, from the weigthiness of that Ordinanee, which required
Caution, and consideration, and no such haste. Thirdly, from the sinfulness of
such a practice, by Profaning an Ordinance, and partaking of others sins.
Fourthly, from the absurdety of such a practice, in refusing to entrust them
with Earthly things, and yet commit Spiritual things to their trust. Fifthly,
from the Folly of exposing witnesses, propounded it seems, to supply the want
of capacity in them, and to undertake for them. Sixthly, from the consideration
that the Adult, upon many considerations, were the only proper Subjects of
Baptism. And to which we may add a Seventh (which he is pleased (so falsely) to
say, I purposly, and subtly omitted, there being no cause for it, that I
know) viz. From the insignificancy of the end, propounded for the same, viz. To
take away sin from Children.

Mr. Wills owns Tertullians wit.
To which testimony, in the First place, he gives us this acknowledgement, page
96. viz. That it is acknowledged that Tertullian, who was the first Writer of
note in the Latin Church, has diverse passages seemingly against Infants
Baptism, but yet withal it must be considered, that his Testimony (such as it
is) is but the testimony of one single Dr. in opposition to the general custom
of the Church.

Where by the way, we may take notice, that our witness is owned by him, but
the general custom of the Church, he speaks of, is yet to be proved as utterly
disowned by us, and for which there is not the least color of truth as yet
produced.

And again page 6. he does grant, That the Magdeburgs do indeed tell us, that
Tertullian in this third Age, opposed himself to some that asserted Infants
Baptism, affirming that the Adult were the only proper Subjects of Baptism.
Charges him wit^ corruption, and weakness.
But what a corrupt Person he was, and how weakly he had Reasoned, he endeavors
with much keeness to demonstrate.

In answer whereto I say, that his witness being allowed, and to be such a
Doctor of Note too, in the Latin Church, it is sufficient; and I think, we need
say nothing to those cavils of corruption, and weakness, the evidence being
acknowledged, (the main thing intended) and which will be endless to answer, in
every Authority that may be urged pro, and con.

But yet in as much as he is our first witness, and speaks so much Reason, and
truth, and so much to the purpose; And to make Mr. Wills his unreasonable
opposition, the better to appear, we shall give some distinct reply, to his
Exceptions against this our witness, whom he areignes for so much corruption in
Doctrine, and folly in this his particular witness.

And first, for that great corruption in Doctrine, 1. The corrupt Doctrine he
charges Tertullian with.
he charges him with, about Chrysme, Exorcisme, etc. I presume there are none
of his ancient Doctors comes short of him, and who were as much Montanists as
he therein, viz. Origin. Cyprian, Chrysostom, Austin, etc. only herein
Tertullian was more Orthodox, holding none of those to be Jure Divino, whilst
they took them to be Apostolical Traditions, and essential to Baptism, Magdeb.
Century 3. chap. 10. page 240. compard. 82. 225. 248. And for those evil
sentiments of God, and Christ, it is certain that Origin did far exceed him, as
you will find at large in his Naevi, page 261. etc. and which argues a very
partial mina to be so quick sighted in the one, and so stark blind in the
other. And as to his being a Montanist, before he wrote his Book of Baptism,
which Mr. Wills affirms, I see it not confirmed by any good Authority, the
Magdeburgs tell us, that from Carthage, he went to Rome, Tertullian no
Montanist before he wrote for Baptism.
and lived long there, where he wrote against the Montanist, and wrote his Book
of Prescriptions, as Helvicus says, the fifth of Severus, which Mr. Wills
ownes to be about the fortyth year of his age: And the said Helvicus tells us,
that it was twenty years after, before he wrote fore the Montanists. And he
that writes the lives of the Primative Fathers, page 82. tells us, that in the
eleventh year of Severus, Tertullian wrote his Book of Baptism, against
Qui^tila in his third Tome next to his Prescriptions, and in the fivetenth
year, his Book of the Resurrection, etc. But if he was turned Montanist before,
the matter is not much, for it must be owned, that a Man that is erroneous in
one thing, may be Orthodox enough in another: The business is, whether as to
matter of fact, he spoke these things against Infants Baptism, and that is not
denied: And in the next place, whether he spoke not reason, and truth* in that
his testimony, which in the next place we shall examine.

Therefore Secondly, as to the weakness of his Argument, which he renders so
contemptible, and ridiculous, and guilty of so much dotage, I make the
following particular reply to each exception, viz.

First, as to his first Argument, 1. He abused not the Text Mat. 19.14.
from the mistaken Scripture, he says, he abuses the Text by his Paraphrases.
But second thoughts will I presume, tell him, it is no abuse, but a very proper
answer to them, that would make the word Come in the Text; to be a coming to
Baptism; which, says he, cannot be, because Children cannot come to that
Ordinance, till they are Elder, till they know, and are taught, why they come,
etc. Will you have them made Christians, before they know Christ? An^ what
could be spoken more full, and pertinent, and more agreeable to truth?

Secondly, From his advising caution, 2. To defer Baptism is often necessary.
and consideration, from the weightiness of the Ordinance, he makes sport with
it, as he applies it afterward, to young Men, and young Women, viz. that they
shou d rather defer, and consider what they did, and how much mortification,
and sanctification, was required therein, then headily, and rashly to practice
it, and which I conceave was wholesome Council, and no ways Ridiculous, and no
other then John Baptist gave those that came to his Baptism, viz. that they
would first bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and amendment of Life,
agreeing also with the advice our Savior gives in the Case, viz. To sit down,
and consider what the Christian life calls for, and what it will cost.

The Ordinance is profaned thereby.
Thirdly, From the Sin of Profaning an Ordinance, where he charges Tertullian
with contradiction; having, as he says, else where acknowledged, that the
Children of Believers were holy, whom here he calls Dogs: Which is Mr. Wills
mistake, he calls them not Dogs, but alludes only to Christ's Proverbial saying,
of profaning an Ordinance, viz. that such a practice would be as profane, as
to cast Pearls before Swine, and holy things to Dogs.

Irrational and absurd.
Fourthly, From the absurdety of Refusing to entrust Children with temporalls,
through their want of knowledge, and activity, and yet commit greater things;
viz. spiritual to them, which he says, is a very sorry Argument, because
Children were capable of Circumcision of Old, ^^d of Benediction in the Text;
But what then? were they not merely Passive in both, and wherein neither
knowledge, Faith, or activity, was required, but all these required, and
absolutely necessary in Baptism? If thou believe with all thy heart, thou
may; which as Mr. Baxter so well observes, includes the Negative, otherwise
thou may not.

No Rule for Sureties.
Fifthly, From the folly of exposing of Sureties (a good witness against them)
which, says Mr. Wills, speaks nothing against Infants Baptism: But therein he
must pardon me, for take away Sureties (who were afterward appointed to
Repent, believe, ^onfess, promise, and Renownce, for the Children, as you have
heard) Infants Baptism must needs fall, which had its main foundation upon
them.

Sixthly, From the Consideration, Proper only for the Adult.
that the Adult Persons were the only Subjects, from the necessity of the
Prerequisites thereto, viz. Repentance, Faith, Fasting, Prayer, etc. To which
Master Wills says, that those might belong to Aliens. But what is that to
Tertullians saying? that they, viz. the Adult, are only to be baptized, from
the Reasons, before mentioned, so agreeing also with the Scripture. The end
insignificant.


Seventhly, From the insignificancy of the end propounded, viz. To take away
sin, and was not this sound Doctrine? And which, I presume, Mr. Wills himself
must conclude, much more Orthodox, then all the Decrees of the Doctors, and
Councels, requiring Children to be Baptized (upon penalty of damnation) to take
away their sins.

Now therefore what Reason he has so to vaunt over this witness, as such a
piece of Dotage, and contemn it as so Ridiculous, is submitted to judgment.
Let him but produce as good Arguments, from any of his Ancient Doctors, for
Infants Baptism, we shall not contemn them, and when he makes as good a
defense for Cyprians, and his 66. Bishops Grounds for it, we shall not slight,
and scoff at it.

But in further confirmation of this our witness, you have Doctor Barlow, Dr.
Barlow.
telling us, That Tertullian dislikes, and condemns Infants Baptism, as
unwarrentable, and irrational.

Daille.
Daille also tells us, as you have it page 149. That Tertullian was of an
opinion, that Infants were not to be Baptized.

Scultet.
And Scultetus also in his Medul, Pat. Lib. 7. cap. 42. page 1. Tells us, that
Tertullian, in his Book of Baptism affirms, that they only should be
baptized, that were capable of the knowledge of Christ.

Magdeb.
The Magdeb. do also tell us, p. 52. That he was only for Adult Baptism, and
opposed himself to those that affirmed otherwise.

Beatus Rhenanus.
Beatus Rhenanus, in his Annotations upon Tertullian, says, That those that
were come to their full growth were Baptized, which custom, says he, was long
observed.

His own grant.
But what need we offer any more, Mr. Wills himself has already owned it,
though not so honest, to add him to the other two, he granted me, which the
ingenious Reader I doubt not will do.

And as to his allegation, that this instance of Tertullians denying it, was a
great evidence, that it was early practiced in the Church, is already spoke to:
For all that can be gathered thence, is that some pleaded for such a practice,
and that it was as well confuted, and suppressed (by sound reason, and truth)
from this Person of Note; but what Man of Note witnessed for it, or that the
Church, as he says, in this time practiced it, is yet to be proved, Mr. Wills
his insinuation being not sufficient.

Above 40. particul^r ^^itnesses against Infants Baptism unanswered.
After Tertullian I have given you (from page 229, to 237, 243, 246, 286.) above
forty more particular instances of Persons, that have asserted Believers, and
denied Infants Baptism, and to which I did expect (as in Reason, and Justice I
ought) some fair return from my Antagonist, but instead thereof meet with the
quite contrary, giving me just occasion of complaint.

First, Because he only excepts against six, Except only against 6. or 7.
or seven, and objects nothing against all the rest, and yet allows me but two
of the whole Number, viz. Adrianus, and Hincmarus, saying nothing to
Vincentius, Victor, Heribertus, Cresconius, Fulgentius, Regienses, Albanus, the
Swermers, Arnoldus, Henericus, Bruno, and about thirty more, so fully denying
Infants, and asserting Believers Baptism only: And therefore may it not fairly
be concluded, that either his silence gives consent to the whole, or else his
dealing is very disingenious, and unfair.

Secondly, Because his Exceptions against those six, or seven, are so
frivolous. His exceptions weak and frivolous


First, He tells me, Berinus Berinus.
is nothing to my purpose, because he respects Pagans only; Of which let the
Reader judge, who faith as p. 232. that Baptism ought not to be administered to
any, without instruction.

Secondly, That Guillertus, and Smaragdus, Guill. and Smaragd.
were both for Infants Baptism, which I also own; But with all say, that the
Dutch Century Writers do tell us, that they both altered their minds, and which
I give you at large from them, page 234. of which he takes not the least notice.

Thirdly, That I brought in Durandus, Durandus.
a severe Encmy against Anabaptists, as a witness against Infants Baptism, p.
146. the quite contrary he will find, is true in my page 242. where I proauce him
as the great Enemy, and Persecutor of Bruno, and Berengarius, for their witness
against Infants Baptism; and is it not very injurious, and conterdictious for
him, to own that Durandus was so severe an Enemy against Anabaptists, and yet
not to acknowledge, and allow me Bruno, and Berengarius, my two witnesses I
produce, for denying Infants Baptism, that he persecuted the same, It is true
Durandus is in the Index, I do not know how, put among the witnesses, but the
said Index directs to the page, where the Story is rightly told you, and from
whence he had the account, what an Enemy he was to the Anabaptists.

Bishop of Apamen.
Fourthly, That the Bishop of Apamen, etc. was mentioned amongst my witnesses,
and page 231. said to be for Anabaptisme, yet not said to be against Infants
Baptism, page 146. But the late Century Writers, so calling them in a modern
sense, we have no Reason to doubt it.

Fifthly, That I have nothing to evidence, that Peter Bruis Pet. Bruis.
denied Infants Baptism, but the impudent Stories of two lying Abots, when he
knows I produced three, or four Evidences more, to prove it: And he also knows,
that those pretended absurdeties he would bring upon the two Abbots, viz.
Cluniacenses, and Bernard, are lying forgeries of his own, which I shall
presently demonstrate.

Sixthly, That I have no ground to say, that Wickliff Wickliff.
denied Infants Baptism, p. 146. when I produce so much evidence to prove it,
which you have from p. 283. to 289. demonstrating, that he not only affirmed,
that Believers were the only Subjects of Baptism, but withal that Children are
not Sacramentally to be baptized, and what can be more express evidence in the
case.

Another piece of injurious dealing, A notorious falacy, and abuse detected.
I have to complain against our Author for, is for his fathering so notorious a
falacy upon the Reader, and abuse upon my self, In affirming that I produce a
great Bede-role of witnesses against Infants Baptism, who were so firmly for
it, as I in contra, diction to my self grant, viz. Austin, Chrysostom, page
25. of his. And Theophilact, Anselme, Bid, Gregory, Anslbertus, Albertus,
Lumbard, etc. And the three Councels of Bracarens. Tollatan, and Constantinople
in his Recapitulation, p. 139, etc.

Whereas I have again, and ^gain said, that I produce them not as positive
witnesses against Infants Baptism, there being not one of them in my Catalogue
(which would have been madness indeed, when I have brought them in amongst
those that have asse^ted Infants Baptism) but for these Reasons only, viz.

1. First, to show what strong Arguments, Why Persons owning Infants Baptism
are produced for witnesses.
so agreeing to the Scripture Institution, and pattern, they have themselves
produced for Believers Baptism only, viz. From the necessity of Confession and
Profession of Faith, and Repentance, before Baptism

2. Secondly, upon what weak, and erroneous Grounds, they assert Infants
Baptism also, most of which I have given pro, and con, that their
contradictions, not mine, may appear.

3. Thirdly, that, that, which they make to Reconcile that contradiction, may
appear insignificant, viz. the Confession, and Profession of Gossips, or
Sureties for them, of which the Scripture makes no mention, and whereby all the
former Authorities, for Believers Baptism, may appear good for us, and against
themselves.

The witnesses produced from Churches.
Having thus cleared my Testimonies, given in from particular Persons, I come
in the next place, to examine what he has said to the witnesses, produced from
the several Churches. I have mentioned, viz. the Waldenses, Donatists,
Britains, etc. concerning whom he is pleased thus to express himself, p. 129.
And in reference to the confidence of my Antagonist, that the Waldenses,
Donatists, and Britains, were all against Infant Baptism, when none of them
were, makes good the Proverb, Pertureant Montes, etc.

But what cause he has for this confident vain glorious boast, will soon be
tried.

The Witness born by the Waldenses, against Infants Baptism, justified.
The 4. fold Evidence to prove the Wald. denied Infants Baptism.
THe first he opposes, is that of the Waldenses, whose witness, against Infants
Baptism, I make good from a four fold Demonstration, viz.

Fitst, From their Confessions of Faith. Secondly, From the witness born
thereto, by their most eminent Men. Thirdly, From the Decrees of Councels,
Popes, and Emperors, against the Body of the People, for the same. And
Fourthly, From the Footsteps thereof, they have left in the several Regions,
and Contreys, where they have been dispersed.

Upon which he makes this following reply, page 46. viz. That there are two
sorts of People, that it is like will be imposed upon by the Flourishes, which
this Champion makes, those who are ignorant, and those who are prejudiced
against Infants Baptism, no doubt but all this will pass for Gospel amongst
such: But I may say of the Author, Multa loquitur, sed nihil dicit, or rather
probat; and that which he says, is but Vox, and praeterea nihil: A great sound
of words, but no proof; and this he promises to make appear in order.

To the First, as to the Confessions of Faith, he says two things: First, that
there are no such Confessions to be found of that Nature, nor any thing that
looks like a Confession, unless it be in Vtopia, page 111. But my Adversary
has a notable dexterity, to prove, Quidlibet, ex quolibet, p. 46.

Secondly, That the quite contrary appears by their contrary Confessions of
Faith, witnessing how firmly they did assert Infants Baptism, page 46, and 64.
etc.

To both which I answer, First, that it may be manifest to the Reader, that
their Confessions of Faith, do indeed exclude Infants from Baptism, I shall
give in a Parallel betwixt, what their Confessions say, and what he, in the
Repetition thereof, makes them say, and leave it to judgment, how fairly he
has dealt therein.

What their Confessions are, as p. 239, etc.
The Waldenses Confessions of Faith.
[That God has not only instructed us by his Word] But has also ordained
certain Sacraments to be joined with it, as a means to unite us unto, and to
make us partakers of his benefits.

And that there are only two of them [belonging in Common to all Members of the
Church, under the New Testament, viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper.]

We do believe, that in the Sacrament of Baptism, water is the visible, and
External sign, which represents unto us.

That which [by the invisible virtue of God operating] is within [us] viz. the
Renovation of the Spirit, and the Mortification of our Members in Jesus Christ.

By which also we are received into the holy Congregation of the People of God
their professing, and declaring openly our faith, and amendment of life.]

We esteem for an abomination, and Antichristian, all humane inventions, as a
trouble, and prejudice to the Liberty of the Spirit.

When humane Traditions, are observed for Gods Ordinances, then is he worshipped
in vain, as Es. 19. Matthew. 15. And which is done when grace is attributed to
the External Ceremonies, and persons enjoined, to partake of Sacraments,
without faith and truth.

That Antichrist attributes the Regeneration of the holy Spirit, unto the dead
outward work of baptizing Children [into that Faith] and teaches that thereby,
[Baptisme] and Regeneration must be had, [grounding therein all his
Christianity, which is against the holy Spirit.]

What he makes their Confessions to be, p. 45, etc.
--

God has ordained certain Sacraments to be joined with the word, as a means to
unite us unto, and to make us partakers of his benefits.

And that there are only two of them --

We do believe that in the Sacrament of Baptism, water is the visible, and
external sign; which represents unto us

That which -- is within -- viz. Renovation of the Spirit, and Mortification of
our Members in Jesus Christ.

--

We esteem for an abomination, and Antichristian, all humane inventions, as a
trouble, and prejudice to the Liberty of the Spirit.

When humane Traditions, are observed for Gods ordinances, then is he worshipped
in vain, as Es. 19. Mat. 15. And which is done, when grace is attributed to the
External Ceremonies, and persons enjoined, to partake of Sacraments, without
faith, and truth.

That Antichrist attributes the Regeneration of the holy Spirit, unto the dead
outward work of baptizing Children, -- and teaches that thereby, --
Regeneration must be had: --

Whereby you have demonstrated, his great unfaithfulness in misrepresenting
their Confessions, by leaving out so many material, and considerable parts
thereof, that make against him, and then so unfairly, and untruly to say: That
there was a Harmony betwixt all the Protestants Churhes in the World, in those
Articles, and the Waldenses, because all that are for Infants Baptism, believe
the same.

But whether it be so indeed, let us examine the particulers.

1. Infants not capable to hear the Word.
First, Do all the Paedobaptists believe, That Baptism, and preaching the Word,
are joined together, to instruct the Baptized parties, and that thereby they
have union with Christ, and partake of his benefits? Pray, how is that to be
made good, in any Infant, that has no actual knowledge, Faith or understanding?

2. Nor of the Lords Supper.
Secondly, Do they indeed believe the Lords Supper, to belong in Common, with
Baptism, to all the Members of the Church; why then do not Infants partake of
one, as well as the other, since it belonges to them in Common, if Members of
the Church, as Mr. Wills says, they are?

3. Nor to understand the Symbol thereof.
Thirdly, Do Paedobaptists, with the Waldenses, believe as you say, That water
in Baptism is the usual sign, representing to the Subjects thereof, the
invisible virtue of God operating in them, viz. Renovation of the Spirit, and
Mortification of their Members? And can it be truly said, it is so to an
Infant, that is not capable to put forth any act of Faith, Repentance, or
Mortification, or discern any the least sign in the water, of any such things
signified thereby.

Fourthly, 4. Nor to make Confession of Faith before it.
Have they indeed a Harmony with the Waldenses, in what further they confess,
concerning this Ordinance? viz. That by it they are received into the holy
Congregation of the People of God, there professing, and declaring openly their
Faith, and amendment of life. But how is the Infant capable, with the
Waldensian Christians (not Pagan converts) to profess, and declare openly their
Faith, and Repentance, and so to be received into the Congregation thereby?

Fifthly, Do Paedobaptists indeed believe with them, That humane Traditions,
and Inventions, 5. That Infants Bapt^sme is a humane Tradition, and why.
are to be esteemed Antichristian ^b^m^na ions, and vain worship, and that,
that worship is vain, and Traditional, when Persons are enjoined to it, without
Faith, and truth? Why then are Infants baptized by them, that have no Faith, or
knowledge of truth? and for which there is neither Precept, or Example in Gods
word? and by themselves owned to be an unwriten Tradition?

Sixthly, Do they believe, 6. Antichrist groundsall Religion in it.
That Antichrist Grounds all Ch^istianity, and Religion, in the Baptism of
Children, attributing Regeneration to that outward work done, contrary to the
holy Spirit? Why then do they baptize Children, which as acknowledged, is the
basis, and Foundation of the false Church, and so contrary to the Spirit, and
for which there is nothing, but the Decrees of Popes, and Anti Christian
Councels, to warrant it.

Whereby you see, that Infants are manifestly excluded Baptism^^, in these six
particulers, in these Co^fess^^^s, and that Paedobaptists cannot assert the
same, without evident contradiction to themselves.

Objections to the contrary Confessions.
But in the next place, if these Confessions be good as you say, against Infants
B^ptisme, yet what do you say to those contrary Confessions, that own the
Baptizing of Inf^nts, as Master Wills has given them from Perin, p. 62, 63, 65.

admiration, that I having with that exactness, especially in the last Edition,
given you such a particular Account of all t^ose Confessions, word for word,
both of that of Bohemia, and that of Provence, and proved to you by such ample
D^moastration, the following particulers; viz. First, That none of them were
extant till the sixteenth Century, whereas the other are upon Record in the
eleventh, or twelfeth Centuries, so many hundred years before. Secondly, That
that Confession, said to be made by the Waldenses in Bohemia, to King
Ladislaus, were not Waldenses, as they themselves acknowledge in the preambule
thereof. Thirdly, Have given an account, how, and by what means, and when,
those of Provence came to introduce that Custom, so contrary to what their
ancient Barbes had instructed them in; How sadly they had ^eclined even to
going to Mass; And how contradictious that practice was, to other parts of the
Confessions, into which it was foisted; And that these Waldenses of Provence,
that made these Confessions, were inconsiderable to the Body of that People,
that was dispersed into so many parts of the World, that held the contrary. Yet
Mr. Wills should take so little notice, of what I have said; and Mr. Blindman
that has written since (who has also transcribed the said contrary Confessions)
without the least notice to what I have said, in answer thereto; which I think
is such an abuse, as was never offered by any, pretending to answer Books, and
therefore I must refer them, and all others that desire satisfaction therein,
to what I have so fully, and as I humbly conceave, unanswerably spoken to each
Confession.

The Second Demonstration, 2. From their eminent leading Men, who denied
Infants Baptism.
proving that the Walde^ses denied Infants Baptism, is from the w tness, that
was born against it, by some of their most eminent leading Men; viz.
Berengarius in the eleventh Century; Peter Bruis, Henericus, and Arnoldus, in
the twe^feth.

First, Berengarius, who was so famous, that the Waldenses were called after
his name for a hundred years after, at Mr. Clark tells us, 1. Berengarius.
and who filled all France, Italy, and England, with his Doctri e, as Matthew
Paris, and who so eminently witnessed, not only against Transsubstantion, but
Infants Baptism, which is made good.

First, From the reply that Lanifrank, Proved 1. by Lanifra^k.
Archbishop of Canterbury, gave to him upon that point, in his Book called
Scintillaris, saying, that in denying Infants Baptism, he did oppose the
General Doctrine, and general consent of the Church, Magd. Cent. 11. c. 5. p.
240.

Secondly, Cassancer out of Guitmond, 2. C^ssander.
That with the real presence, he denied Baptism to little ones, though the
latter not so publicly as the former.

3. Council in France.
Thirdly, By the Council, called by Henry the I. of France, to suppress the
Heresies of Bruno, and Berongarius, for denying Transsubstantiation, and
Infants Baptism, Bib. Pat. p. 432.

4. Thuanus.
Fourthly, from the testimony of Thuanus, witnessing, that Bruno, Archbishop of
Triers, did persecute the Beringarians, for denying Infants Baptism, as you
have it, p. 242, 243.

The witnesses to prove it not excepted against
None of which he excepts against, only says, that there were several Councels,
in which Berengarius was persecuted for the Real presence, but no mention is
made of his denying Infants Baptism, page 51.

But what then? this four fold testimony is enough to prove it.

2. P. Bruis, Henry, and Arnold.
Secondly, Peter Bruis, Henericus, and Arnoldus, all in the twelfeth Century,
and so eminent that the Waldenses for a long time were called by their names,
viz. Petrobrusiani, Henerici, and Arnoldi, did all of them, deny Infants
Baptism, Testefied by.
which is made good by these following Testimonies. viz.

First, That Peter Bruis denied it, is testified by Peter Cluniacenses, 1.
Cluniacenses charge against them.
who amongst the several things he charges him with (fifteen in numb^r) puts
his denying Infants Baptism in the front, in four particulers, Osiander
Century 12. Lib. 3. cap. 3.

2. In his L^^t^r to 3. Bishops.
Secondly, The said Peter Cluniacenses, writes to three Bishops in France, that
the Petrobrusiani, and Henerici, denied Infants Baptism and held
Rebaptization, etc. and that when he urged f^r Pae^obaptisme, the Authority of
Austin, and the Latin Fathers; Peter, and his Colegues, appealed to the
Scaipture, and the Greek Church.

Thirdly, Cassander testefies, 3. Cassander.
in his Epistle to the Duke of Cleve, that Peter Bruis, and Henericus, denied
Baptism to little ones, affirming that only the Adult should be baptized.

Fourthly, Doctor Pridieux says in his Latin Councels, 4. By the Latin Council.
that Peter Bruis, and Arnoldus of Brixia, were in the second Lateran Council
censured, for the Heresy of Rejecting Infants Baptism, Church buildings, and
adoration of the Cross.

Fifthly, Bernard, 5. Bernard
Abbot of Claravel in Burgundy, does in his Letter to the Earl of St. Giles, in
his 204. Epistle, accuse the Henerici, or Apostolici, of the Heresy of denying
Infants Baptism.

And in his 65. Sermon. on the Cant. charges them to oppose Infants Baptism,
Transsubstantiation, Purga^ory, praying for the Dead, etc. Osiand. Cent. 12. L.
3. c. 6. p. 291.

All which Bernard said, he had either by investigation (or diligent search)
personal disputation with them, or from those that were come from them, Magd.
Century 12. cap. 5. page 844 (the latter whereof Mr. Wills only takes notice
of, so partial is he in his remarks.)

Sixthly, 6. Vicecomes.
Vicecomes L. 2. chapter 1. That the Henerici, and Apostoloci, denied Infants
Baptism.

Seventhly, Doctor Hamond confesses, 7. Dr. Hamond.
that Peter Bruis, and Henry his Scholar, and the Petro Brusiani, and
Henricani, that sprang from them, opposed Infants Baptism, Tombs 3. Review,
page 827.

To all which Testimony Mr. Wills gives in this Exception, page 53. etc. That
most of this witness is gathered from lying Papists, especially two lying
Abbots, Bernard, and Cluniacenses; And tells me in as much as I have cited
Osiander, he doubts it may be some prejudice to my cause; because what ever
Osiander says of Peter Bruis, and Henericus, denying Infants Baptism, he
takes it out of the works of Peter Cluniacenses, who does Calumniari fortiter,
lay very abominable errors to their charge, and amongst others, this venial
one, of denying Infants Baptism; Now if any credit must be given to this
Abbot, it must be per totum, through out in all, or else in nothing: And verily
if his testimony be valide, and the Author from him, our opposites, need not
glory in such Waldenses, that they comported with their opinions, nor we
troubled at their dissenting from us

Let us now therefore, says he page 55. look into the wicked, and false
testimony, or account, this lying Abbot gives of those two precious Ministers
Peter Bruis, and Henricus, as Osiander takes it out of his own writings (viz.
Cluniacenses.) viz.

First, Baptismum abjiciunt: They cast of Baptism, meaning that of Infants.

Secondly, Corporum resurrectionem negunt: They deny the Resurrection.

Thirdly, Carnem comedi prohibent: They forbid eating flesh.

Fourthly, Christum non esse Deum, etc. That Christ is not God, nor took flesh
on the Virgin, etc.

Fifth^y, Ecclesiam non posse aliquid possidere nisi in communi, etc. That the
Church should possess all things in common.

Then says by this time, I suppose we may conclude that these Waldenses were
vile persons, or Cluniacenses a lying Abbot,

And then goes on, p. 57. with great severity to ch^stiseme: Now me thinks he
should blush at his indiscretion, for introducing such a Popish calumniation,
for an evidence in this matter: And if he believe this Abbot slandred Peter
Bruis, and his followers, in these things, I hope he will excuse the Reader, if
he believe he did no less, when he charge them to be against Infants Baptism.

I see by this, that when Men are engaged in a cause, and wedded to an opinion,
they will not refuse the most sordid, and shameful ways to promote it: They
will fall in with slanderous Papists, and take up what they say, to defend
their opinions, witness my Antagonist, and his Predecessor Mr. Tombs, who was
heretofore checked for this very thing, and who boldly justifies himself; and
tells us in his Precurser, page 29. that Cluniacenses, though a zealous Papist,
yet thought fit by Illyricus, to be reckoned amongst witnesses of truth in his
Catalogue; and that if such as he, and Bernard, be not taken for witnesses of
things in their time, I know not how the Protestants will make up, their
Catalogue of witnesses in all Ages; which, he says, are dangerous words.

To which I answer, first, Answer 1 his part in dealing.
first, let it be taken notice, that as to the proof offered by me, for these my
witnesses, amongst the several instances produced, he falls upon that which he
thinks the most weak, the usual method he takes with me all along, and avoids
that which he finds most strength in, which savours of a very partial mind; and
truly I conceave, were Cluniacenses testimony from Osia^der left out, there is
enough from all the rest, to prove that Peter Bruis, Henricus, and Arnoldus,
denied Infants Baptism; the latter of which the eminent Arnoldus he takes no
notice of.

2. His Falsehood.
But in the next place, since he lays so much stress, upon this supposed
mistaken part of the testimony, to cast reproach upon all the rest, we will
join issue with him, in the Examination thereof, and the rather because he
intitles Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Marshal, also to the exception too. Know
therefore, that hence, you have a further discovery of the great
unfaithfulness, and want of Conscience in the Author, for daring thus to abuse
the World with a cheat, and that which he knows to be a mere forgery of his
own, and which will I doubt, not appear to you by the following Circumstances.

1. None of Cluniac^ ses.
First, He knows that Cluni^censes, that he calls the lying Abbot, has given no
such wicked, and false testimony, as he produces from him out of Osiander; for
both Osiander, and the Magd^burgs, from whom he had it, gives an account of
sweteen particulers, where with he charges Peter Bruis, as receiving them
either from his own mouth, or as Mr. Wills acknowledges, from their own
writings, and not upon uncertain Report, p. 56. And which are these that
follows, v^z. the four first, against Infa^ts Baptism; the three next, against
Transubstantiation, the eighth, against praying for the dead; the nineth, for
Priests Marriage; the tenth, against Adoration of Crosses; the eleventh,
against superstitious adoring of Temples; the twelfeth, against Church music;
the thirteenth, for the lawfulness to eat flesh on Su^days, and Fast days; the
fourteenth, that upon common fame, as he says, they did not receive the whole
Canon of the Scripture (which says Osiander) was ask supposes the Apocriphal
writtings; and which appears by the next, the fifeteenth, that they only
received the Canon of Scripture (sol^ Canoni credunt) and that the sayings of
the Ancients were not to be compared to it. The 12 first of these Cluniacenses,
particulerly, and at large in several pages, makes answer too Magdeb. Cent. 12.
p. 832. etc. Osiander Cent. 12. L. 3. c. 3. But here is not a word, of denying
the Resurrection, Christ's Incarnation, or such abominations, said to be
delivered by Cluniacenses, and by him charged upon them.

Secondly, that Osiander, that he so often says, 2. Osiander reports no such
thing from Cluniacenses.
reports it, and that therefore I did my self injury, he doubted in mentioning
him, has not one word of any such thing as from Cluniacenses, but only makes
the repetition of those fifeteen particulers, out of the Magdeburgs word for
word, as Osiander Century 12. L. 3. cap. 3. is manifest. 3. Not charged upon
Pet. Bruis, but upon others by other hand in another Age.


Thirdly, He knows that these particulers he mentions, were not charged upon
Peter Bruis, but upon the Albegeois in the following Century, by other hands
then Bernard, and Cluniacenses, who were dead long before; for Helvicus tells
us, that Bernard (who was cotemporary with Cluniacenses, Peter Bruis, and
Henricus) flourished about 1110. And Osiander tells us, that this Albigensian
Sext, or Heresy, was charged with these things by the Monks Inquisitors,
Sabellicus, Schedelius Anno 1206. who by Pope Innocent the third, that Devil
Incarnat, what were sent to discover that People, against whom he came forth
with many of others so much murderous cruelty, by fire, and sword, with an Army
of hundred thousand Men, to root up, and destroy them: And therefore the better
to justify his cruelties, and to provoke all Europa, to come in to help these
wicked Imps of his, thus paint out these poor People, as the Monsters of
Mankind.

Why Mr. Wills did this knowingly.
Wills has done this knowingly, appears, first, by his picking out only the
five particulers, out of twenty, leaving out the most gross, viz. their owning
two Gods, viz. God, and the Devil; their condemning of Marriage; and justifying
all manner of Luxury, and uncleaness; and patronizing Thefts, and Roberies, etc.

Osiander says these things, are not reported by Cluniacenses, and Bernard,
but by Lucelbergius, Antonius, Vincentius etc.

Osiander, he uses to do.

Therefore let it be judged, whether he h^th not injuriously belyed Osiander,
belyed Cluniacenses, belyed Peter Bruis, belyed the truth, which by this
forgery he would cover, and hide; abused the World, belyed, and abused me also
in especial, whom he deals so severly with for the same, as you have heard; But
much more fear his own ^onscience, by this piece of folly, and Falsehood.

And therefore may we not well return his own words (which he gives me
hereupon: viz. Now me thinks the Author should blush at his indiscretion, for
introducing such evidence and I see by this, that when Men are engaged in a
cause, and wedded to an opinion, they will not refuse the most sordid, and
shameful ways to promote it.

Thirdly, 3. From the Decrees made against them for denying Infants Baptism.
That the Waldenses did deny Infants Baptism, appears from the Decrees of
several Emperors, and Popes, against the Body of the People for the same: And
the writings of learned Men, living in those times, which you have at large,
from p. 248, to 255. viz.

First, The Decrees of Robert, King of France, Anno 1000. first against the
Waldenses of Thoulouse, afterward against several at Orleans, for denying
Infants Baptism.

Secondly, The Decrees of the Emperor Henry the second, Anno 1017. to punish
this Sect.

Thirdly, The Decrees of the Emperor Henry the fourth, Anno 1054. for their
denying Infants Baptism* etc.

Fourthly, The Decrees of Pope Leo the nineth, Anno 1050. to establish Infants
Baptism, denied by them.

Fifthly, The Decrees of Pope Gregory the seventh, Anno 1070. for the same.

Sixthly, The Decrees of Pope Alexander the third, against the Waldenses, for
denying Infants Baptism, and the several ways he took to prosecute, and
persecute them, for the same.

Seventhly, The Decrees in the Gallican Council, against them for the same.

Eighthly, The Decrees of the general Lateran Council, against them for the same.

Ninenthly, The Decrees of Pope Lucius, Anno 1181. in the Council of Veroni,
against them for the same.

Tenthly, The Decrees of the Pope Urbane, against them for the same.

Eleventhly, The Decrees of Pope Caelestine, against them for the same.

Twelfethly, The Decrees, and bloody actings, of Pope Innocent the third,
against them for the same.

The writings also of several learned Men, of these times, that opposed the
Waldenses in this point* and charged the whole party therewith, viz. Eckbertus,
Erbrardus, Ermigendus, Cluniacenses, Bernard, Durandus, Thomas Walden; And to
whom we add some others of great eminency, that have come to hand, viz.

Ermingerdus.
Ermingerdus who wrote his Book contra Waldenses in this Age, wherein he
charge them in these words: Dicunt etiam quod nulli nisi proprio ore, and
cord hoc Sacramentum p^tat potest prodesse; Inde adducentes hunc errorem, quod
parvulis Baptismus aquae nihil prosit: They say, that the Sacrament of Baptism
can profit none, but those who with their own proper mouths, and hearts, desire
the same; from whence they draw the error, that water Baptism is not
profitable to little Children, Vet. Bib. Pat. Tom. 5. p. 1250.

And Rainerius Rainerius.
in his Book contra Waldenses, says: De Baptismo dicunt, quod ablutio quae
datur Infantibus nihil profit* item quod patrini non intelligent, quia
respondeant Sacerdoti: Concerning Baptism, they say, that that which is given
to little Children profits nothing, and that the G^ssips understand not their
Responses to the Priests, Bib. Patr. Tom. 13. page 300, 301, etc. And which
evidence I desire the Reader to take the more notice of, because Mr. Wills does
so positively deny that Rainerius, in the Catalogue of their errors gives not
the least hint of any such thing, no not one word of their denying Infants
Baptism; which, he says, is very strange, if he had understood any thing
thereof, Wills p. 96, 97, 98.

You have also Fav^n, Favin.
the French Chronologer, testifying that in these times, viz. twelfth, and
t^irteenth Century, the Albigens^s did deny Infants Baptism, esteeming it
superstitious.

Against all which he gives no particular exception, only says these two
things; First, that whereas I cite two Canons of Pope Alexander the third, that
was but just about the rise of the Waldenses, who were so called, from Peter
Waldo of Lions, about 1160. ( as Perin informs.) And which is evidence, as he
supposes, against the former Decrees, inferring that those mentioned, to be
made before that time, were before they were a People.

And Secondly, in page 60. says: That t^e^e is no co^vinc^ng pr^of to be
fetched from hence, of their being against I^fants Baptism, because they were
their Enemies, calumniating malicious Papists, that loaded them with all manner
of reproaches, to render them odious: And that unless some one does, out of
their one mouths give better ^vidence, he shall believe, with Mr. Marshal, that
this Doctrine of opposing the baptizing of Infants of Believers is an
Innovation, no ancienter then the Anabaptists in Germany, and for which he
quotes, Joseph Vice-comes L. 2. c. 1. page 103. in Mr. W^ll^ page 60. 2. part.

1. Waldense so called from the Vallyes from Ancient time
To both which I say, First, to the first Exception, you will find that Beza
tells us, that they mistake themselves, that say* they were called Waldenses
from Peter Waldo, in as much as they were so called from the place of their
abode in the Valleys, as at large you have it in mine, page 338, and 342. And
that Claudius Sciscelius, Counceler to Charles the Great, in the eight Century,
mentions them by that name, in his Book contra Waldenses. But however the
People, or Sect of the Waldenses, were known, or distinguished by several
names, as the People of Lions etc. as Eusebius tells us, p. 340. And set forth
in story under diverse names, in several Ages, as Doctor Usher tells us, and
which you have more particulerly, p. 338, etc.

And to the second, that there is convincing proof, offered from the Decrees of
Popes, Kings, and Councels, Mr. Marshals grant
let Mr. Marshals grant suffice, who in page 63. of his Defense for Infants
Baptism, says thus: I shall desire you, to show that any Company, nr Sent (if
you will so call them) have denied Infants Baptism, produce if you can, any of
their Confessions, allege any Acts of any Councels, where this Doctrine was
charged upon any, and condemned in that Council?

And which I presume is substantially done, both from their Confessions of
Faith; and from Acts of Councels also, where such were condemned.

And as to that Quotation out of Vicecomes, to prove that none denied Infants
Baptism, till the German Anabaptists, I heartily thank him for it; which you will
find does the contrary, giving an Account of several, that denied Infants
Baptism before that time, as you have it in the Quotation he refers to, p.
102, 103. telling us in these words.

That as the Adult Baptism, Vicecom. ownes that many had denied Infants
Baptism of old.
no one ever doubted thereof, witness (as he says) the Monuments, or Writings
of all the holy Fathers, and Occumenical Councels, as well as the Scriptures
themselves, especially the Acts of the Apostles.

But as for Infants Baptism, he tells us, that Vincentius, Victor, Hincmarus
of Laudum, the Hen^ric^, and Apostolici, (in Bernard, and Cluniacenses time,)
John Wickliff in his 4. Book of Trialog. c. 2. Walafrid, Strabo, Ludovicus
Vives, etc. did all of them witness against it, in their times. So that we have
a good confirming evidence, from his Authority, to establish the truth, we have
asserted, and he denied.

It is true, Vicecomes in the same place, adds amongst the rest of the
witnesses against Infants Baptism, Luther, Calvin, and Beza; and the reason
is, because they did oppose, and neglect to do it, as the Church of Rome
ordained, and practiced it; setting it up in a New way, without the Services,
and Ceremonies of the Church, and which was all one to them, as if it was not
practiced at all; and therefore did the Church of Rome renownce of old* as you
have heard; the Baptism of the Greek Church, as the Greeks renownced theirs,
rebaptised those that were baptized by either, as much as if it had not been at
all, by either side.

4. From the Footsteps they had left thereof, in several Countries.
And Fourthly, That the Walden^es did deny Infants Baptism, appears from the
Footsteps we find hereof, in those respective Regions, and places, where they
had heretofore imprinted it, as appears by the follow^ng instances, it being
acknowledged that they were dispersed all Europa over, viz.

In Germany.
First, In Germany, through all the parts thereof, where they planted Churches,
and has Schoo^s in so much, that their Barbes could travel all the Country
over, and lie every night at a Friends house, wherein, both by Doctrine and
suffering, this truth was eminently c^nfirmed, and for which you have several
instances, from most parts of the Country, from p. 256, to 260.

S^i^z^rland.
Secondly, In Switzerland, where in like manne^ it was witnessed to^ from 260,
to 267.

Flandres.
Thirdly, In Flanders, where it was also confirmed, and seal d with much blood,
page 267, to 269.

Holland.
Fourthly, In Holland, or low Countries, w^ere it was also witnessed too, with
much blood, and Martyrdom, p. 269, to 271.

Fifthly, In Bohemia, Bohemia.
where it was eminently confirme^ also, p. 271, to 273.

Sixthly, In Hungaria, Hungaria.
in like manner, p. 273, to 274.

Seventhly, In Transylvania Transylv.
evidenced also, as p. 274.

Eighthly, In Poland Poland.
a confirmation thereof, page, 274.

In England it has also been confirmed, through many Ages, by Christians under
several denominations, viz. By Waldenses, Lollards* Wickliffians, and
Anaba^tists, through all the Kings Reigns, from the Conquest to this very day,
as at large you have it from p. 275, to 310.

To all which he says thus, much by way of Conc^ssion; viz. that the Waldenses
were indeed spread, not only by per^^^ution, but by their own volontary choice
before, into all these R^gions, is not to be doubted.

But that the Opposers of Infants Baptism, in the Upper, and Lower Germany,
were the remains, and offspring of those the Waldenses, is a conceit forreig^
to all H^story, and has no Foundation in reason, or truth; and that his ipse
dixit, or saying so, is no ground for us to believe it, he affirming it only
from conjecture, and that arises also from his will, according to that saying:
Quod volumus, facile credimus: What we would have, we easily believe.

To which I say, Doctrine, and practice, by their Confessions of Faith, the
practice of their ancient, and honorable Barbes, and Worthyes, by the Decrees
of Popes, Emperors, and Councels; by the prints they have left thereof in the
several Countries ('it is confessed they were driven into) and all this by
ancient Recoras and authenti^k Testimony, which I presume I have (as yet)
undenyably done.

Then I rest confident; that the judicious Reader will acquit me of this
slander, of an ipsa dixit, and that it is only my will, and pleasure, to say
all this of my own head, and Fancy without proof. The German Baptists do in
their Martyrology, prove their dissent from the Waldenses, through out the
Centuries. Perin tells us, that Lollard was a Waldensian Barbe, and that Jo
Wickliff asserted no other but the Doctrine of the Waldenses, being instructed
ther^^n by the Lollaras

This further Testimony ^^ have met with, in the Dutch Book of Martyrs, which I
desire the Reader to take notice of, as full measure, and heaped up, as Mr.
Wills words it.

Caesarius.
First, They tell us, from Jacob Merningus p. 733. Cent. 13. chapter 5. out of
Cae^arius, That the Waldenses, and Albigenses, have rejected Infants Baptism,
saying that it is of no force* nor profitable to any, before they are taught,
and do believe, but concerning that Baptism, according to Christ's appointment,
they have a very high value, and esteem, Dutch Martyr, page 307.

Dubravius etc.
Secondly, That the Waldenses were called Anabaptists, long before John Hus,
they quote the testimony of several, viz. Dubravius, M^chovius, Cromerus, Mr.
Glancus from Merningus p. 733.

Rain^riu^.
T^i^dly, That the said Merningus page 618, 619, 629. makes it good from
Rainerius, the Monk Inquisitor, that wrote his Book contra Waldenses in the 12.
Century, That the Waldenses did deny Infants Baptism, and produces diverse of
Rainerius his Arguments, against them for the same, and which he quotes from
the Bib. Patrum Tom. 13. p. 300. Though Mr. Wills is pleased to tell us p. 97.
that Rainerius says never a word, about their denying Infants Baptism.

Fourthly, they tell us, that Balthazar Lydias, Balthazar Lydias.
in his Treat. of the Church* and of the Waldenses, p. 86. Col. 1. tells us,
that they reprove many things in the Popish Sacraments, and say, that the
bap^izing of Children is not profitable to them, Dutch Martyr p. 309.

Fifthly, That Abraham Mellinus Ab. Mellinus.
in his History of Martyrs, p. 447. Col. 1. does tell us, That the Waldenses no
cast far from them all the Sacraments of the Romish Church, and amongst them,
do wholly reject that of Infant Baptism, as unprofitable, and unnecessary,
Dutch Martyr. p. 320.

And therefore the whole of this Story, concerning this ancient honorable
People, the Walaenses is submitted to judgment, and whether I have not good
cause to conclude it, with the return (of Mr. Wills his own words upon himself)
which he speaks to me upon this very occasion, p. 44. viz.

And is it not a miserable Cause indeed, Mr. Wills his words returned upon
h^mself.
whose Advocates must still have recourse to lies for its d^fence, and an
Argument of the want of ho^esty, and conscience for Men to persist in this
Course, when more then enough has been said, to convince them of the evil
thereof; It was a solemn Rebuk, which Job gave his mistaken Friends, etc. Will
you lie (says he) for God? Surely he has no need of, nor does he require us
by any sinister, and sinful way, to justify him in his attributes, providence,
cause, or truth, As touching the matter in hand before us, if the Paedobaptists
have the truth on their side, yet certainly it is little beholding to some of
them, who have attempted to defend it by so many unwarrentable ways; In
particular I have made it appear, that the present Author, with whom I have to
deal with, is fowly criminal, in laying out the utmost of his skill, in
traducing those famous ancient Christians, as if in their several Generations
(heretofore) they had not witnessed for Believers, against Infants Baptism,
when he cannot but knew they were not only falsely, and maliciously charged (but
cruelly, and murderously handled) by their Antichristian Enemies, for their
faithful witness to these despised truths, etc.

The witness born by the Donatists, against Infants Baptism, confirmed.
Donatists.
THe next witness he opposes, is that of the Donatists, concerning whom I gave
diverse Authorities, proving that they did deny Infants Baptism.

To which Mr. Wills is pleased to say, that it is only my ipse dixit, and that
I do thereby render my self guilty, of a great mistake, to say, that of them
whereas neither the Magdeburgs ^or Danaeus in his Opusculum, nor several other
Writers, do charge any such thing upon them.

To which I say* that herein Mr. Wills deals, Mr. Wills very disingenious.
according to his wonted manner, very disingeniously with me, First, That
having given so many Authorities, and of such Antiquity to prove it, to tell
the Reader, it is my Ipse dixit only. Secondly, To deny them, and yet give no
just exception against them. Thirdly, To produce the negative (or silence
rather) of some modern Authors, to oppose so many positive Authorities,
produced by me, one of which, in all pleas, is worth a hundred Negative ones.

But that the Reader may be satisfied, I had good warranty, to justify my said
proofs, and that it was not my Ipse dixit only, I shall give them briefly to
you, with what I have since met with, to confirm the same, which are as
follows, viz.

First, From what is mentioned of Donatus himself, Donatus himself.
who, as Sebastian Frank in his Chronicle says, did teach, that no Infant
should be baptized, but only those, that believed, and desired it, p. 222.
Donatists his followersr viz.


Secondly, from what we find mentioned, of his Followers, viz.

Cresconius, 1. Cresconius.
who did oppose Austin in that point, as says Jacob Merning, p. 230, who was a
Donatist, as say the Magdeb. Cent. 5. p. 631.

Fulgentius, 2. Fulgentius.
another learned Donatist, as the Magdeb. tell us Cent. 5. p. 631. did deny
Infants Baptism, and assert only that Baptism, that was after Faith, Vicecom.
L. 3. c. 3. p. 66.

Vincentius 3 Vincentius.
Victor, another who denied Infants Baptism, as says Vicom. L. 1. c. 2. out
of Austin Lib. 3. c. 14. de Anima.

Thirdly, It does appear, from what we find in Austin Austin.
3. and 4. Books Tom. 7. c. 23. p. 433. written against the Donatists, wherein
with so much zeal, and fury, he manageth the Argument for Infants Baptism
against them, bitterly cursing those that oppose it, p. 123. Also in his
Epistle to Marcellus Tom. 7. c. 6. p. 724. he opposes himself against them,
for denying Infants Baptism.

Fourthly, Eckberius, and Emericus, Eckbertus and Emericus.
learned Writers in the twelfeth Century, contending against the Waldenses, or
Catheri, for denying Infants Baptism, do say, that the new Catheri, viz. the
Waldenses then, did in that point conform to the old Catheri, the Donatists,
and Novations, p. 224.

Thomas Walden, Tho. Walden.
that wrote against Wickliff, in Henry the fourth's time, tells us, that
Vincentius Victor, with whom Austin contended, did deny Baptism to little
ones, De Sacram. Tit. 5. chapter 53. fol. 118.

Osiande^, Fuller, and Bullinger.
Fifthly, Our latter Writers, do also agree herein, that the Donatists, and
modern Anabaptists, were all one; so says Osiander, Cent. 16. p. 176. And
Fuller in his Eccles. Histor. lib. 5. page 229. And Bullinger Lib. 5. sol. 216,
222. of Baptism.

Spanhemius Spanhem.
also, says, that the Donanists deny Infants Baptism, as appears, says he,
Austin 6. Book against the Donatists, c. 23, 24, 25. Spanh. chapter 4. p. 45.

Sixthly, Because the Donatists, and Novatians, both one in Doctrine, were
acknowledged to be the same in Principle with the Waldenses, and that the
Novatians, banished by Innocent the third out of Rome, as says Socrat. L. 7,
c. 9. did dwell in Italy, and D^lmatia, and were called by the same name with
the Wal^enses, viz. Cathari, and Fratricilli, in so much as Perin judges, they
were the same People; and Osiander confesses, that the Albigo^s came from
Rome, Cent. 13. l. 1. chapter 4. p. 329.

Therefore it is left to the judicious Reader, whether I am not sufficiently
justified, by this six fold testimony in my affirming, that the Donatists did
deny Infants Baptism; and that they may well be reckoned amongst the number of
my witnesses, and against whom Mr. Wills has made no just Exception.

But in the next place, Mr. Wills tells us, Mr. Wills slanders (...) the
Donatists.
that if it be taken for granted, they were against Infants Baptism, they
being, as he confesses, in many things so like Anabaptists, yet by what
appears from Mr. Fox, as he tells us out of Eusebius, and from Austins works,
as say the Magdebu^gs, that I have no reason to boast of my Authority, for both
Novations, and Donatists, were vi^e Persons, and always counted for Heretics

To which I say, acknowledge them as corrupt, as Origin, Cyprian, Austin, and
Chrysostom, and others of his great witnesses, that held for Chrysme,
Excorcisme, and other Superstitions, and that Regeneration was effected, in the
very act of Baptism, and th t without Ba^tisme, and the Eucharist, no Child
could be saved, yet their witness as to matter of fact, is to be owned, which
is all I produce them for, not undertaking to defend them, in all the Tenets
fathered upon them, more then Mr. Wills does those that are so undenyably
charged upon his witnesses, yet this he must give me leave to say, in
vindication of the Donatists, and Novatious, viz.

First, For the N^vations, that what Mr. Fox speaks of them, from Eusebius, an
Author of no great fame, is the less to be regarded, because he was a great
friend to the Arians, and the Novations great Impugners of them, and upon that
score it was he spoke very maliciously of them; though Socrates, an Author of
better Account, speaks very honorably of them; And Albaspanaeus upon Optat.
Milevitan, bespeaks them a very worthy People, in his 20. Observation.

Magd. say no menti^n in old ^riters of ^^eir Do^^^es.
And as for the Donatists, the Magdeburgs tell us, that they wonder, that there
is no more mention of them by the Ecclesiastical Writers, of this Age, either
by Sozamus, or others; and that only The doret, in his Heretical Fables, gives
some hints of them; And that the Hypothoses of their Dogmes, they gathered not
from any of their writings, which were not extent, but out of Austins works,
[their great Opposer] C^nt. 4. c. 5. p. 376, 377. and from whom it is that Mr.
Wills takes his scheame.

But how any can take a good mea^ure from ^ir sevearst Enemy, to make a
judgment a^^st them, and condemn them for Heretics, (...) not; for may you
not from Calvin's writ^ pick as great a charge against the Luthe^ and as great
against the Sacramentarians, out of Luthers writings? Alas what a sad People,
does Mr. Edwards make the Independents; and what a dismal black line, do the
Prelates draw upon the Presbyterians; and the Papists again upon them; and what
a sad generation are Anabaptists, if Mr. Wills may be believed; Schism being
in all the incensing crime, which draws forth all the gall, and wormwood; and
just so it was betwixt Austin, who was so Catholic in his Communion, and the
Donatists, that pressed for more purity in their separations, and from whence it
was, that all that dirt was flung upon them, and they put into such Bears
skins, as Mr. Wills puts his Opposites in.

And for those Decrees of Councels, that past upon them for Heretics, is no
good ground to conclude against them, for so they judge the purest Doctrine,
and holiest walking in many Ages, witness our Savior himself, who was censured
for a Blasphemer, and the Apostles, and Saints in every Age ever since; and who
more censured for Heresy, then the Waldenses, Lollards, and Wickliffians, their
Followers, and Disciples, that were so truly Orthodox.

The Witness said to be born against Infants Baptism, by the Ancient Britains,
defended.
THe last witness he opposes, is that born by the Ancient Britains, Ancient
Britains.
and that they denied Infants Baptism, I gave the following Arguments, and
which you have at large, p. 226. First, Why they denied Infants Baptism.
Because Mr. Fox tells us, out of Bid, and Fabian, and others, that they
refused to baptize after the manner of Rome, which Fabian as I find, more
particularly explains, to be in the point of Infants Baptism; and in
confirmation thereof gave five Arguments. First, Because they kept themselves,
both in Discipline, and Doctrine, so ezpresly to the Scripture, (there being no
express Scripture for Infants Baptism, as confessed on all hands.) Secondly;
Because they were such zealous impugners of Tradition, that being as Austin
confesses, the only Divine Authority for it. Thirdly, Because Constantine, the
Son of Christian Parents, was not baptized in this Island in his Infancy.
Fourthly, Because their custom was to baptize after Confession of Faith, being
in Union, and Communion therein with the French Christians, whereof Instances
are given. Fifthly, From the Question that was here put to Austin; viz. how
long a Child, that was no in danger of death, might stay unbaptised? which he
could not resolve, till he sent to Rome for the Solution. And to which me may
add, what the Magdeburgs tell us from Hilaries testimony, p. 55. that none but
the Adult were baptized, in the Western Churches, in his time.

Mr. Wills opposes Fabians testimony from Bid
To which he replies as follows: First, as to that o^ Fabians testimony, he
says, it is only a mistaken Paraphrase of Bid; and that Bid mentions nothing
hereof: And therefore gives what Austin replied to the Britains, in Bedes
words L. 2. c. 2. v^z. That in as much as you do contrary to our Custom [in
many things] yea to the Custom of the Universal Church, nevertheless if you
will obey me in these 3. things; viz. that you keep Easter in its proper time;
Administer Baptism, whereby we are born of God, after the manner of the Church
of Rome, and the Apostolical Church; and preach the Word of God, together with
us, unto the English Nation, we will patiently bear all other things you do,
although contrary to our Customs; but they answered, they would none of these,
nor own him for Archbishop.

To which I say, Fabian did not mistake Bid and why.
that it does appear from his Repetition out of Bid, that Fabian has fully hit
his meaning: First, Because he tells, the British Christians, that amongst many
things where in they were contrary to the Church of Rome, one was in this
particular about Baptism, wherein they did not only contradict the Universal,
but Apostolic Church. Now this must needs be in their refusing to baptize
Children; First, Because as to the baptizing the Adult, they were not contrary
to the Church of Rome, the Universal, or Apostolical Church, as appears p. 228.
Secondly, Neither could it respect the particular Mode, Rite, or Ceremony of
Baptism; for the Custom of the Church of Rome was not Universal, which was so
much opposed by the Greeks, and Eastern Churches, and not at all to be made out
to be Apostolical. Thirdly, Therefore must needs respect Infants Baptism:
First, Because the Church of Rome had particulerly enjoined, and imposed it, to
beget Infants to Regeneration, that they might be born of God, as the words of
their Canons demonstrate, and which words carry the Reason, and ends of it, and
that they intended the substance, and not the particular Ceremony of the
Ordinance. Secondly, Because Infants Baptism was so universaly received in
this seventh Age, in other parts of the World, to this end here mentioned.
Thirdly, Because it was also received, and enjoined to be an Apostolical
practice. Fourthly, It would have been Childish, and ridiculous, to have said
Baptism in general was Apostolical, which none ever denied, and so fully
before received by them; therefore Austin could intend nothing else, nor Bedes
words import any thing else; which therefore Fabian did so fully, and
significantly represent, in saying, give Christendom to Children, viz. let them
as the Church of Rome has received, and enjoined it, be born of God by
Baptism, and become Christians, as so generaly also receiv d.

And for Mr. Wills saying, They did no more reject Infants Baptism, then they
did preaching to the Saxons with Austin; Is very true, having as much Reason to
reject the one, as the other, for by preaching here with them, must be
understood Authoritively, by being ordained by them, that they might not
preach, as they did, as a company of Laymen, and Mechanics, but to be set
apart thereto by this Apostolical Ambassador, [or proud Lordly Prel^t,] which
they refused, not admitting him therein, to be their Archbishop, and which
explains Austins meaning in the business of preaching, and their denying
thereof; which they h^d as good Cause to do, as to deny their Romish Infants
Baptism. and their Superstitious, Observation of Easter; And therefore it was,
that this Ante Christian Wolf did devour, and worry this Flock of Christ,
because they refused the Popish Baptism, and Ministry. Secondly, As to those
five other Arguments given by me, to confirm the former, he says, they are
mere trifles, (which is an Excellent way of Answering, and next to Bellarmin
thou lie) which is submitted to judgment.

And Lastly, He gives another Argument, Mr. Wills says, Pelagius was a Monk of
Bangor, and for Infants Baptism.
why the Britains were not against Infants Baptism; viz. Because Pelagius
who, as he says, was one of their Fellow Monks of Bangor, yet did own Infants
Baptism; which was two hundred years before this, and which was a good
Argument, that they did also

To which I say, Questionable.
that as to Pelagius being one of these Old Britains, and belonging to this
very People, is by no good Authority to be found; For though it is true,
Humphry, Loyd and Mr. Fuller, do so guess, yet they produce no Ancient Author
to confirm it; It is true, in Austins 106. Epist. he is called Pelagius Britto,
to distinguish him from another Pelagius of Tarentius; but whether because he
was sent into that Nation, or of it, not certain.

But Secondly, If it be granted, It follows not that the Britains where of his
judgemen^, and why.
that he was a Britain, and one of these Monks, it no more follows, that they
must all be for Infants Baptism, because he was so, then that they were all
for the Pelagian Heresy, because he was the head thereof; which it is eminently
known they rejected, when they sent for the help of those famous French
Christians, Germanus, and Lupus, who were sent to them again, and again, from
the Elders, and Ministers about Lions, to expel that Poison; and therefore do I
call them the Waldesian Christians, who inhabited those parts where their abode
was, Magdeb. Cent. 5. p. 1147, etc.

An Hist. Account of Pelagius
But as to Pelagius, the Magdeburgs do give us this Account of him, from Austin,
and Lucelbergius, Cent. 5. page 1453. viz. that he was full of zeal, and
affection, a d that his beginning was good, and holy (so that, if he was a Monk
of Bangor, he began well) And that by the Catholics he was prefered, and made
one of the Monks of Syria, and that having lived long at Rome, went from thence
into England, which Islana he wholly infected with his Error (by which it
appears, that if he was one of that Society, yet that he got his poison abroad,
both of one kind, and of another) That after he fell into this Error, he wrote
many Books, and many Epistles to the learned Men of this Age, whereby he
infested the Universal Church; And several Fathers opposed him, viz. Jerome,
Austin, and others, and that his Books were condemned by many Synods, and
Councels, Magdeb. Cent. 5. page 894. 586, 587.

Now therefore what ground Mr. Wills has to conclude, the History of those
Churches, and his Book also, in that manner he does, is submitted to his better
consideration, and the Judicious Reader, and which they find in the following
words, viz.

And in reference to the confidence of my Antagonist, that the Waldenses,
Dona^ists, and Britains, were against Infants Baptism, when no^e of them
were, I shall conclude with a Distich, which I think may not improperly be
applied to his whole Discourse: Ridiculus tandem ecce Cavis Mus prodit ab
antris,
Quem gravidi Montes perturiere diu.


And from what has been said, I see no Reason why Mr. D. should be so much
offended with Mr. Marshal, and Mr. Baxter, for saying Infants Baptism was but
lately opposed, by the Anabaptists in Germany; and do appeal to the Reader,
whether Mr. Baxter does not speak true, in his plain Scripture proof, page 153.
who says, that for his part he cannot find in his small reading, any one
Divine, or party of Men, did certainly oppose, or deny Infants Baptism, for
many hundred years after Christ. And then again p. 261. the World may see, what
a cause you put such a face upon, when you cannot give the least proof, so much
as of one Man (we will allow them one, viz. Hincmarus: what not Aarianus too?
that is hard,) much less Societies, and least of all godly Societies, that did
once oppo^e, or d^ny Infants Baptism, from the Apostles days, till about
Luthers time.

Amongst the several Erratas committed by the Press, the Reader is desired to
correct these that follow, viz.
Page 4. l. last, r. cleansing. p. 5. l. 6. r. it. p 6. l. 7. r. excepts. l.
13. r. four. p. 7. l. 20. blot out first. l. 22. r. Baptism. p. 9. l. 7. r.
it, for is. l. 26. r. there were. page 19. l. 27. r. their. p. 20. l. 19 r.
their. p. 21. l. 13. r. words. p. 30. l. 27. r. infamy. p. 35. l. 25. r. these.
p. 36. l. 19. r. he cites. p. 44. l. 24. r. speaks. p. 45. l. 15. r. bearing.
l. 24. r. had. p. 59. l. 26. r. At cum. p. 80. l. 29. r. the, for they. p. 86-
l. 26. r. ad Romanos incertus est. p. 88. l last, r. Arminianisme, for
Arianisme. p. 95. l. 24. r. for. l. 27. r. both a like. p. 100. l. 24. r. for.
p. 101. l. 13. r. Paraphrase. p. 105 l. 26 r. Gislbertus. p. 107. l. 9. r.
imposing, for Fathering. p. 114. l. l. last, r. that should p. 115. 5. r. is I
think, for which I think is. p. 122. l. 8. r. for what were, were p. 125 l. 1^.
r. affirms, for dei^y. p. 128. l. 19. r. had Schools. p. 148. l. 23. 29. r.
tell, for tells. p. 159. l. 19. r. Fifthly, for Fifty. l. 20. r. the, for them.
page 158. l. 8. r. profess. l. 14. blot out a p. 142. l. 4. r. Arms, for
Armies. In the Preface Minists, for Minesters.

CHAP. IV. Wherein you have the Stories concerning the German Anabaptists
reviewed, and the Principles and Practice of Anabaptistry (as Mr. Wills calls
it) vindicated against his reproaches.
IN the reflection I made upon the Story of Tho. Munzer, and John of Leyden,
What before said hereto.
for whose sakes so much obliquity has been cast upon the Anabaptists and
their way, ever since; I principally intended these two things.

First, to show the unreasonableness of charging the innocent with the crimes
of such as are guilty: And to this Mr. Wills in the general consents, though he
tells us withal, the suspicion he has, of the Principle of Anabaptistry it
self.

Secondly, I gave a brief account of matter of fact, and therein showed that
those Germane commotions were not Anabaptistical in their Original, but moved
upon the same pretentions, as the Helvetians and others before them had done;
then gave the reasons why I thought there was ground to doubt of the truth of
what was reported concerning the horrid crimes committed by them in their
communities.

Mi. Wills res Objections,
In answer hereunto Mr. Wills reproves me. First, for denying those motions to
be Anabaptistical. Secondly, for making an odious Comparison betwixt those
commotions and them in Helvetia, p. 103. Thirdly, for mistaking matter of fact
in the Original of the Munster commotion. Fourthly, As being extremely
scandalous for my doubts concerning those horrid impieties in Munster. And
Fifthly, he charges the Principle it self as naturally leading to immorality
and division.

To these I make this brief reply.

Why the Commotions in Swevia not Anabaptistical.
First, that the Commotions in Swevia 1635. were not Anabaptistical appears by
their twelve demands, which you have mentioned at large by Osiander Cent. 16.
c. 36, p. 100. Wherein is not one word savouring of Anabaptism, but about
freedom from Exactions, and to deliver themselves from the Tyranny (as they
say) of their Princes and Bishops more Helvetiorum (which Gnedolius also
informs us, as I before mentioned) being much of the same nature with those
other Demands made by the Rusticks twenty three Years before (which was the
Year after the Revolt of Berne and Schafhuisen) of which you have also an
account in Osiander Cent. 16. L. 1. c. 6. p. 10. And that these commotions were
not fomented and principally managed by the Anabaptists may appear; First from
those first Demands, which were principally made and managed by the Papists; as
Osiander and Bishop Jewel against Harding inform, and the Articles themselves
express; and that the Latter Demands in 1625. were principally carried on by
the Lutherans, (though it is true Luther afterward Writ against them) as
Osiander tells us. In which attempt also that Year fell of them (as Paget in
his Herisography informs us) one hundred and fifty thousand: the hundred part
whereof could not be Anabaptists.

To the second he tells us it is both odious and injurious, to compare those
attempts of Geneva and the Switzers with those in Swevia, when none, as he
says, can be such Diaboli as to charge the Switzers with Robbing the Nobility,
Plundring of Towns, and Castles, Rifling of all that was Sacred, as those
Germans did.

To which I say, Why the Comparisions not odious as charged.
that the Chronicles themselves can best inform how those Cantons formerly, and
those of Basil Schafhusen and Geneva since did manage their Confederacies,
surprise their Towns and Castles, disposess their Princes, and Bishops; and
possess themselves of their Revenues Civil and Ecclesiastical. For my part I am
yet to learn (from what ever I read) where the difference lay in the attempts,
only that those Cantons had better Conduct and prospered, and the other had
neither Conduct nor Success, but miscarried in both; which if the other had
done, as much obloque might have befallen them. And you will find some Protestant
Writers as well as Popish to charge as much iregularity on the undertaking of
the one, as of the other; who will tell you that the Boores in Germany, and
they of Munster, might as warrantably turn out their Princes, Bishops, and
Canons; and posess themselves of their Revenues, as Geneva, and those of
Helvetia had done. And we are not ignorant of the several attempts that the
City of Munster has made within a few years, since wholly Popish, to deliver
themselves from the Exactions of their Bishop, which by the Bishop has been
esteemed no less seditious and rebellious, than the former.

Thirdly as to the Original of the Munster commotion, though he grants the
turning out of the Bishops, Cannons, etc. out of the Churches, and the City
also, by the Reformists. Yet tells me, I speak falsely in saying, that
Spanhamius tells us that it came to Arms betwixt the Bishops and City, who
says the quite contrary, and tells us (as he says) that it never came to
blows.

That the first stirrs in Munster was about Protestant Reformation.
To which I say, my words you will find are these, viz. That Sphanhemius and
Osiander tells us, that the first stirrs in the City was about the Protestant
Reformation, the Senate siding with Rotman and others of the Ministers against
the Papists and their Bishops, that opposed them to Arms, and this before the
coming in of John a Leyden.

Mr. Wills very partial.
I say Spanhemius and Osiander tells us, etc. He takes notice only of the
former, and it is manifest they both of them speak of those first stirs about
turning out the Bishops Canons; Spanhemius it is true speaks very briefly of
the difference and Agreement that happened betwixt the Bishop and Senate
thereupon, Though I must tell Mr. Wills it is his mistake to say, that
Spanhemius denies it came to Armies: for he says no such thing; But Osiander
from Sleyden goes to particulars: And tells us, how the Bishop drew a Force
down to a Neighboring Village called Telgeto, stopped and straightened them of
provision (for so says Sleiden) And sent messengers to command the restoring
of the Canons to their Churches again, and the turning out of Town the new
Preachers: But how that instead thereof they detayned his Messengers, and sent
a party out of the Town in the Night and surprised and brought away Prisoners,
diverse of the Bishops men; and that he himself had been taken also, if he had
not gone out of his Quarters, that Night before. And if this could be done
without Arms, and Blows, let all Men judge: and whether the reproof does not
more properly belong to Mr. Wills than my self therein.

Fourthly, As to the Suspicion (why I supposed there was cause to doubt) of the
truth of those monsterous Villanyes acted in their Communities in the Latter
part of the Siege, as mentioned by their malicious enemies the Papists, and
many of their inveterate enemies the Protestants, He says it is extremely
scandalous in two respects, First for calling into Question the matter of fact,
especially as reported by the Protestants, who were not (as he says)
inveterate enemies, but very loving friends to them. And Secondly, For
endeavoring to palliate such horrid actings of the Anabaptists, a thing never
done by any.

Why cause to suspect some of the reports about Munster.
In answer whereto I say let it in the first place be remembered, that as to the
first part of my suspicion, why those horrid enormities reported might be
scandals, viz. From the reports given them by the lying Papists (who speak as
bad things of Calvin and Luther themselves, and of the Waldenses before them,
as you have heard) he seems silently to own. first from Papists.
But his great offense lies against me for questioning the truth of what is
said thereof by the Protestant Writers such as Sleiden, Osiander, Spanhemius,
Zwinglius, etc. who were (as he says) most faithful historians, grave Divines,
and who gave punctuallly the Circumstances of time, place, opinions, etc. And
from whom he transcribes the Story: And that my injurious reflection upon them,
as though they were the Anabaptists inveterate enemies and that they were
willing to take up and improve such reports, to blast not only the whole party
of the Anabaptists but the;r Principles also, against whom they contended,
savor in me (as he says) of no less then the ebullition of a Malicious, or at
best a prejudicial Spirit.

Secondly, Several T^o estnts
To which I say, how shall we be assured, that these later writers did not make
their Reports from the Popish Writers. For Sleiden wrote not his comentary till
1555. about twenty years after the fact, and Osiander only transcribes from
Sleiden. And as for Spanhemius he wrote not till eighty years after Sleiden.
upon whom Mr. Wills lays the greatest stress, and who appears to be a very
partial and unfaithful writer respecting the Anabaptists in that his
Historical Narration printed 1646. First falsely affirming that Stork,
Stubner, and Muntzer, were the beginners of Anabaptism, and who First (as his
own words express) helped the world to be delivered of that Sect. Secondly in
his malicious charging the Anabaptists with all the old Heresies, that he could
reckon up in any old Author, viz. That they were Manichaeans, Andians,
Anthropomorphites, Trithcits, Samosatenians, Noetians, and Sabellians:
Apollinarists, and Prodianites, Anastations, Nestorians, Eutichians,
Corinthians, Photinians, Oregenianss Catharists, Novatians, Donatists,
Parmenians, Marcionites, Eunomians, Montanists, Nicolaites, Basilidians,
Cataphrigians, Gnostics, Pelagians, and Socinians. All which Opinions, he
enlarges upon, and applies to them, then which what could savor more of the
ebullition of a Malicious Spirit?

And as for Zwinglius Zwinglius cruel Enemy with the Anabaptists.
he could give no account of his business, who dyed five years before it, viz
1531. But as to this great friendsship ( Mr. Wills boasts of) By the gentleness
and tenderness that he showed to those anabaptists, that fell off from his
Church, whom he treated not as Enemies, but as his intimate friends (as he
tells us) I shall give you some particular account, wherein you will find what
is that Kindness and Gentleness, it seems we might expect from Mr. Wills if it
was in his power.

It is true at first Zwinglius was a great Friend and Companion of the
Anabaptists, and a great favourer of their opinion in opposition to that of
Infants Baptism, as Treat. Bapt. p 262.

But afterward who more Cruel amongst the Bloody Papists themselves than he,
as you have a particular account from those edicts of Zurick, wherein he had
the principal hand, p. 260. And the Inhumane Execution of them by drowning,
burning, and Starving. It is true to palliate this Cruelty, Mr. Wills tells us
from Spanhemius, that they suffered not these severities for being Anabaptists
but as perjured, disobedient and seditious persons, which is a farther
discovery of his malice and unfaithfullness.

The cruel handling of the Anabap. at Zanc.
For those very decrees of Zurick extracted by me proved, out of the Dutch
Martyrology, where they are inserted word for word, do testify that it was
merely upon the account of their Judgment for baptizing after profession, those
that had been, baptized in their Infancies. And to confirm the same, Gastius
tells us. L. 1. p. 178. That the Tigurines) or those of Zurick) do drown them
in Water, who do baptize those that were baptized before. And Hornbeck in his
Summa Controvers. p. 340. Gives us a pregnant instance thereof, telling us,
That Felix Mentzius of Zurick, was by the Command of the Magistrate (whose laws
and authorities he had broke by proceeding to rebaptize persens within their
Jurisdiction) was himself drowned in water upon 5th. Jan: Anno. 1527. And this
was Zwinglius his Kindness to his intimate Friends and Brethren (this Mentzius
having been an ancient Disciple and an Eminent preacher) And much the like
friendship they met with from their Protestant Friends at Berne and Schafhuisen
as you have it p. 256. And therefore it was no wonder, if they could be so
prodigal of their lives that they should be so lavish of their Reputations; for
the latter would only help to justify the former: for just in like manner did
the Papists deal with the Allegeois in Innocent the third his time, the better
to cover over their murderous and bloody cruelties against them.

And as to the second part of his exception against my suspicion, Why ground to
suspect those horrid things reported to be done at Munster.
which he calls a palliating of those horrid Crimes, and repeats it as if I
tied it only to the actions of Jo. Mathias, and John of Leydon, when I
mentioned my suspicion of what was reported to be done by the whole party in
the Communities in the later part of the Siege: Whereof the Public Stock might
give some occasion of Report (as it had done, as I observed, amongst the
Waldenses of old, as though with their Goods they had the Women also in common
too.) But for these following Reasons Mr. Wills must bear with me, if I do not
as yet recive it. first Bec. many learned pious men a-
First because, I cannot imagine those five Godly and Learned Ministers, viz.
Bernard Rotmannus, Hermam Strapedo, Henricuus Rullius, Godfry Straling, Julius
Frisius, and others, who had been so successful in the work of Conversion in
that place (as is cenfessed) and so many sober Citizens, who had with them
embraced that Judgment of Baptism after Faith, could so soon renounce all
Godliness and Honesty, so as to practice, or give countenance to such unheard
of Impieties, and Villainies. 2dly, because Merno Simonis (of whom Cassander
says, there were in him and his Followers tokens of a godly mind, Second The
Ministers a sober people did not charge it upon them.
says thus in his Book of Fundamentals concerning this People, viz. I doubt
not but these our beloved Brethren who lately did sin against God by defending
their Faith with Arms are in the Favor of God. And Mr. Robert Bailie in his
Anabaptism, p. 36. says the Mennonites themselves, the ill best of all who
carried the name of Anabaptists, though they Anathematize the Georgians
Heresy, yet they approve so far of the Monasterians, that they do much excuse
all their wicked practices, and put no doubt of their Saintship and acceptance
with God, notwithstanding the Crimes the world charges upon them. And what can
his signify but the Mennonists disbelief of the Crimes objected against that
wicked Community of the Anabaptists, for had they believed it, they would much
more have renounced such moral Impietys, than that of their bearing defensive
Arms, which they so witnessed against.

Third Ber. many of them very holy Martyrs.
Thirdly, Another Argument why I judge these German Anabaptists were not given
up to such Uncleanness and Wickedness is, because so many of them did (upon the
Emperors bloody Placaet) about this time, as well before and after, so
cheerfully seal their holy profession with their blood, twenty of them were
Martyred in the Palatinate, An. 1529. and 350 more in Alsatia the same year,
and many hundreds more of them suffered upon the same account, some by burning,
some by drowning, and some by beheading; of whom, the Dutch Book of Martyrs
gives an annual account. And therefore Beza in his Epistle to the Gallo-belgick
Churches, at Embden says, many of the Anabaptists are good men, Servants of
God, Martyrs of Christ, and our most dear Brethren. Quosdam inter Anabaptistas
esse bonos, veros servos Dei, Christi Martyrs, and charissimos fratres
nostros. Hornbeck Summa Controvers. L. 5. p. 364.

But Mr. Wills his chief improvement of this Story is yet behind; Which is
fitly, not only to render the Professors them of vile and contemptible, but the
Principle it self corrupt and detestable. And therefore in words at length
tells us both from himself and others, that the Principle of Anabaptism is
false and dangerous; and a Principle of darkness: upon which many black
Characters are Writ. And is not this to the purpose indeed? and beyond all that
he has said? And therefore he might have saved himself, the World, and me the
trouble, of his great Book in detecting my mistakes in Hystory, and the many
falsehoods, that he pretends me guilty of, and the Refuting of my Arguments; But
rather singly betook himself to this alone: for if he has discovered the
rottenness of the Principle, he need do no more.

But then the Question is, how he makes this appear? which you will find he
endeavors to do by two Arguments. First, from the wickedness and immorality of
those that profess it. Secondly the riggid and dividing nature of the Principle
it self.

Mr. Wills Reason why the Prim. is corrupt.
First, from the immorality of the Professors of it. Telling us, p. 94. That we
may safely affirm that Doctrine is to be suspected false, which is usually
attended with gross miscarriages in the Professors of it: for that speaks the
Doctrine Ominous, and looks like a Spiritual Judgment of God upon it. And I
heartily wish there were no ground to say, that of such a Nature is the
Doctrine of Baptizing grown Persons, in opposition to that of Infants Seed of
Believers. Evidenced by the wicked lives of those in Germany, and the
Blasphemies and immoralities of diverse Persons of our own Nation. And again, p.
106. That the Tumultuous and Rebellious carriages of those in Germany did
proceed not so much from the distempered Brains of some; but from their
opinions, and the very censtitution of their Sect. by which it will be somewhat
difficult to make it out how it may not be therefore chargeable upon all.

Answered Principles may not be tried by any thing but the Scripture, and why
In answer hereunto, I say in the first place, That Mr. Wills takes a wrong
measure, and sets up a false Standard; By judging the goodness, or badness of
Principles, or Doctrines, by the goodness or badness of the Men that profess
them; because Men may have good Conversations, that have rotten Principles,
witness the Scribes and Pharisees, of old; the Jesuits, and Quakers, since,
that may be Woolves, in Sheeps Clothing, and Devils in the shape of Angels of
Light. And on the contrary, Men may have good Principles, and yet very
unsuitable Conversations, witness the Professors, both under the Law, and under
the Gospel: for whence was it, that God destroyed and removed his People, of
old, pulled down the Tabernacle, and both Temples, and sent them into
Captivity; but for the wickedness of their lives? as Jer. 7.1. to verse 17. 1.
Cor. 10.1. to 12. And whence was it that God removed his Candlestick, from
those famous first Churches in the New Testament; but for the evil of their
doing it must we therefore conclude, that because their Conversations, were so
bad under both; that therefore their Principle, and Profession it self, was
^ought, and led thereunto, by no means? let God be true, and, every Man a liar*
for this would be to reproach the truth in every Age.

Therefore nothing but the Infallible Rule of Gods Word, can be the proper
Standard to try Doctrines by, according to particular direction in the Case,
Isa. 8. 20. Gal. 1.8. ^. John, 4.1, 2, etc. And the reason is, because all Men
are failable, and at best are but M^n.

But in the next place, we will trace Mr. Wills in his further proofs, and try
whether he be able to make good his uncharitable, not to say malicious, charge,
whereby you will be the better able to judge whether the Foundation of his
Argument is not slander and false accusation.

Mr. Wills proof fails to these of the Blasphemies and imoralities of the
German Anabaptists.
The Principle says he is false, because they are usually so that profers it
and that they are usually so appears, first by the horrid errors, and wicked
lives of those in Germany, and by the blasphemy and immoralities of diverse in
our own Nation. But how does he prove the one or the other.

First, how he proves the German Anabaptists to be so a erroneous as you have
heard by Sphanhemius his lying fictions and camera's. But concerning whose
Orthadox Faith and Doctrine, you have an Account in the Dutch book of Martyrs;
first by their public owning the Articles of Faith exhibited by the Waldenses
in the twelfth Cent. Recorded at large by Perin, and diverse other Authors; and
which they Sealed with their Blood through all the parts of Germany, France,
Italy, etc. In the several Ages ever since: whereof you have a faithful
memorial in their Book of Martyrs from time to time. And who withal do give a
punctual account of those latter conventions of their Elders out of all the
Provinces in the Low Countries, Germany, Flanders, France, etc. viz. one at
Amsterdam, 27. September 1627. And the other at Dort, 21. April, 1632. Where
the old Waldesian Articles were Subscribed and Published; and which you have at
large with the Scriptures annexed in the said Book of Martyrs, called the
Bloody Theater, Printed at Dort 1660. By which you have an account, that the
Anabaptists in Germany were not such desperate Heretics, as Mr. Wills so
untruly suggests; not but that I judge there were erronius Persons, both in
former and latter times, that owned the Doctrine of Baptism after Faith both in
Germany and England, and we find the purest Churches in the Primitive times,
were not free from Heretics of all sorts. Neither I presume will Mr. Wills our
Accuser himself, undertake, that the Doctrine of Paedobaptisme does secure from
the grossest errors that are asserted. Therefore since the Articles of Faith
that have been, and are owned, by those Churches are so sound and Orthadox,
there is no cause so to reproach them as Spanhamius before; and Mr. Wills that
now Writes after his Copy. And thus much for their Doctrine.

Then as to the Commotions and Rebellions that he tells us the way of
Anabaptisme stirred up in Swevia and Munster from the same Author; And what
unheard of Villainies were perpetrated in that City, has been already
considered, and the proofs tendered for the same; which I presume is such
evidence that no Court of Justice, nor any upright Man can pass a Judgment
upon. And truly, if matter of Fact cannot be better told us at home, witness
those many false Stories Mr. Edwards in his Gangrene, Fathered upon them; and
Mr. Baxter in his report of their Baptising naked (of neither of which Mr.
Wills takes any notice) what credit can be given to these foreign uncertain
Stories?

But if it should be taken for granted, that they in Swevia and Munster were so
Seditious and Rebellious as Mr. Wills from Spanhaemius would make them, must
all the Anabaptists in Germany, both in that Age, and ever since be so reputed,
and that their Principle leads thereto also? Yea and those very Anabaptists
too: that both then, and ever since that, bore witness against beating of Arms
at all: for so did the followers of Mennosimonis and Theodoricus, as Cassander
tells us; though so great is Mr. Wills his prejudice, that he will not admit
thereof; and rather than not make his words good will adventure to translate
that Passage M Cassander's Letter to the Duke of Cleve, quite contrary to what
he expresses concerning them; which discovers Mr. Wills to be either a very
heedless. Writer, that dares not what he says to blast the People he Writes
against: or that he does not well understand a Latin Author; or if he do,
supposes by the ignorance of his opposite, he may take the liberty to say any
thing of that kind without control: concerning which Passage, he tells us that
they, viz. The followers of Mennosimonus and Theodoricus, being as he says,
imperito quodam zelo incitati; moved by an ignorant Zeal to what they did,
having a fancy that they must destroy the wicked per vim externam by force of
Arms, and this in order to the setting up the Kingdom of Christ; which
Satanical delusion put them on upon such exorbitancies just of the same strain
with those called 5th. Monarchy-Men, that put all London into such a fright
some years since, as p. 99.

Whereas Cassander says the direct contrary in that very place viz. That
though they were guilty of other mistakes through their ignorant Zeal, Yet
tokens of a godly mind might be perceived in them by this that they (accerime
semper resisterunt) allways resisted the rage of Munster and John Battenbarg,
and taught that the Instauration and propogation of Christ's Kingdom was only by
sufferings. So that the Reader may perceive that Cassander says the quite
contrary to what Mr. Wills says of these People applying the Battenburg and
Munster Principle of Resistance to these People that notoriously held the quite
contrary; and therefore does Cassander plead with the Duke of Cleve for their
Liberty, who were therefore as he tells him, Commiseratione potius and
emendatione quam insectatione and perditione digni videantur. More worthy of
pity and amendment, than persecution and perdition. So you will understand
hereby, that he is an Author not to be much trusted in his Authorities and and
Translations.

Whereby Mr. Wills would not only have all the German Anabaptists to be charged
with that of Munstur, but even those that witnessed against it also; and is not
that very hard measure? And would Mr. Wills be content to be so dealt with?

For instance, would he think it just and equal, if we should retort his own
story upon himself, that he with so much Obliquy reflects upon us, p. 99. And
tell him, that because those Person^ that had the conduct of that affair, that
put all London into that fright, were most riged Indipentant Poedobaptists, as
certainly they were, what ever Mr. Wills may insinuate to the contrary. That
therefore all Rigid Poedobaptists (Mr. Wills himself in number also) are to be
esteemed of the same mind and spirit, notwitstanding all the witness that they,
either at that time, or ever since, would be thought to bear against that
Action: Yea, and that the very Principle of Indipendant Poedobaptism tends to
such Rebellious actions too, which is his way of dealing with those poor People.

Mr. Wills is short in his Proofs against the Anabaptists in England.
But you may better judge of his foreign intelligence and proof, by what he
tells us to our faces at home; which every body will be better able to discern,
and to make a Judgment of, viz. That dive^s Anabaptists in our own Nation are
guilty (as he tells us) of blasphemies and immoralities; and therefore the
Principle is false, etc.

To the making good thereof he brings in Mr. Baxter for a Witness, though if he
speak any thing to the purpose, the bare affirmation of a Party would, I
presume, be judged as incompetent, as if the next that Writes, should produce
Mr. Wills his say-so for authentic proof.

But let us hear what Mr. Baxter says to the point, which he tells us p. 100.
In these words, Mr. Baxters Testimony against Anabaptists.
that though Mr. Baxter knew some good and sober Men amongst them; yet that the
generality were bad enough: for so (says he) we must understand him in his
plain proof p. 143. Where he tells us to this purpose; that he had familiarly
known very many of them: And that the Ministers were for the most part
censorious Opinionatists, who designed to convert People more to their
Judgments than to Christ: And that Anabaptistry had been the ordinary inlet to
the most horrid opinion, and how negligent many are in Family Duties, etc.

Now therefore let all men judge, whether this amounts to any proof. What if
Mr. Baxter did know some of their Ministers over Zealous for their Opinion, and
some of the people too remiss; and negligent in their Duties to God? does this
prove the Immorality suggested? and for his Apprehensions, that it is the inlet
into horrid Opinions? So the Prelates think of Presbytery and the Papists of
Protestanism; is either of them therefore so? and does that prove them to be
Blasphemers, and that we must understand by Mr. Baxters words, they are for the
generality bad enough.

But suppose Mr. Baxter in his heat had indeed said what Mr. Wills would make
him say, (which we nowhere find as I know of) yet you will find Mr. Baxter in
cool blood has given another Character of the Anabaptists, of which, because
Mr. Wills will take so little notice, I shall here give it you over again upon
this occasion: which, you may be pleased to read in his own words, in his Book
called, The Defense of the Principles of Love, p. 7. viz. that Anabaptists are
Godly men, that differ from us in a point so difficult, that many of the
Papists and Prelatists have maintained, that it is not determined in Scripture,
Mr. Baxters late Testimony for the Anabaptists.
but depends upon the Tradition of the Church. And I know as good and sober
men of that mind, as of theirs that are most against them: And that, I once
motioned te^ms of Concord to the Anabaptists, and was in as h^peful a way for
Peace with them, as with most others. And in his late large Book called A
Christian Directory, he is pleased to say, p. 287. that Anabaptists may not
only be admitted to Church Communion, but may be tolerated in their practice
also. 1. Because they agree with us in all points absolutely necessa^y to
Communion. 2. That the Ancient Christians had liberty either to Baptize, or to
let them stay till Age, as they thought best 3. And that the Controversy is of
so great difficulty that if in all such Cases, none that differ be tolerated,
we may not live together in the World or Church, but endlessly Excommunicate or
Persecute one another.

Now therefore let it be considered, Whether Mr. Wills has proved his charge
against the Anabaptists in England, and so consequentl^, according to his rate
of Reasoning, proved their principle false and dangerous? And whether it is not
just and equal, that till he make good the same, he ought to be reputed by all
men, a Slanderous Person, and a false Ac^^ser of the Brethren, and as justly to
be suspected for his Foreign Intelligence, and Accusation also?

Only this I would advise Mr. Wills, that when he offers his next proof, he be
more particular as to the Persons and Crimes he charge; as also, since he
makes it so comprehensive, to take in the Generality of the Baptists, and of so
great moment as to judge their Principle by also, that the Blasphemy and
Immorality is such as is fostered and borne with by the Churches, otherwise
they are no more chargable with such Crimes, if they have cast any such wicked
Persons out of them, then the Church of Corinth was to be charged with Incest,
though they had disowned, and Excommunicated the Incestuous Person.

And truly I think I may with much confidence challenge him, or any, the worst
of their Enemies, to produce any Blasphemer, or immoral Person, so known to be,
in any of the Churches of Christ under that Denomination. But if any, either in
this Nation, in Germany, or else where, that have owned that Principle, have
turned Ranters, and Athiests, as too many, it is to be feared, have. I hope the
Principle is no more to be charged with it, than Poedobaptism is; for all the
Blasphemies and Immoralities that persons of that Persuasion do much more
frequently fall into without (or with so little) control.

M. Wills Charge the Principle to be of a dividing Nature.
Having considered the Invalidity of the first Reason, Why the Principle is
naught, viz. from the Wickedness of those that Prefess it; we come in the next
place to examine what he has farther to say to that he calls the disquieting,
dividing Nature of it, to prove it false and dangerous. Which we find p. 95. in
these words, viz. The very Principle of Anabaptistry is of a dangerous Nature,
which in that Rigidity, as some men hold it, is of a disquieting tendency,
that, as Mr. Bunian says, is not fit for any age or state of the Church. I
cannot but sigh to consider the ways of some men, whose spirits are impregnated
therewith, so that their very Constitution inclines them to nothing more than
to rent and tear, and divide the Church: The Zeal for their Opinion has, and
does still prove the greatest hinderance to the Conjunction of Christians here
in this Nation. For as soon as they become Baptists, as some call them, (and
our Opposites love to appropriate the name to themselves) they fall off from
Godly Ministers and People, differing from them, though never so holy. But let
men calmly consider, whether this is not an effect of Ignorance, and Pride; and
more from an erring, than well instructed Conscience: and what a Scandal and
Shame it is to the Christian Religion to make it thus a fomenter of Faction,
and Disturbance in the World? And what an Injury is hereby done to Christ, by
contracting, and narrowing his Interest in such a manner? But I see not how it
can be otherwise, if men adhere, and strictly keep themselves to the
Antipoedobaptistical Principle: for if our Ministers be no true Ministers, and
our Baptism a Nullity; and consequently, our Churches no true Churches, how can
they hold Communion with us? And though some that are for Baptism of Believers
do, yet it must be imputed to their good Nature, and not their Principle, which
they cross in so doing.

So that now you have him in words at length, and not in figures; as to which I
desire the following things may be considered.

First, Scandals attending it to prove it false; he seems now to make the proof
of all to lie in this, that some Persons holding the same refuse Communion with
Mr. Wills; and therefore all such as so dissent from him, are to be exposed to
scorn, and hatred, as lying, treacherous, disobedient, perjured, seditious,
filthy Persons; for holding a false, and dangerous Principle.

Secondly, The Principle of Anabaptistry it self, as some Men hold it; By his
own demonstration he here makes the mode of holding; and that by some Men only,
and not the Principle to be dangerous: for if it were the Principle it self, it
would then be contrary to all Principles, whether Natural, Moral, or Divine;
and to its self also: for Principles always remain the same in their own
Nature, and receive not any such impression from the various conceptions of
Men, as to vary in themselves.

If he had said that the Principle does not justify them that hold it most
rigidly in an evil Opinion, or Practice, his demonstration had been good: for I
am so far from justifying the Errors of those that hold either that Opinion, or
the Opinion that is contrary to it; that I fear, both Mr. Wills, and my self,
have cause to search, and to try our own ways; and to be humbled, for walking
contrary to that Principle which we both own concerning Baptism.

Thirdly, Mr. Wills says it is the Constitution of some, impregnated with this
Principle, to rend the Church. And let Men consider, whether this be not an
effect of Ignorance and Pride. Now then with Mr. Wills, it is neither the
Principle it self, nor the manner of holding it; but Ignorance and Pride: so
that If I understand his way of arguing, either Ignorance and Pride, are all
one with the Principle of Anabaptistry as terms convertible, or else the cause
of unbrotherly divisions, is not from the Principle of Anabaptistry, but from
Ignorance and Pride.

Fourthly, if the Correspondence and Communion which some Anabaptists have with
Mr. Wills, be from their good Nature, and cross to their Principles (as he
declares it is) then it seems, that as Ignorance was before the ground of their
rending from him, so here Ignorance is also the ground of their Communion with
him; as not knowing that they therein cross their own Principles, nor that they
are any way obliged to that fellowship by the Word of God, only their good
Nature inclines them not to break Company.

Fifthly, as to what he quotes from Mr. Bunian, it had surely been more
ingenuous, either to have replied himself to those six Arguments, as yet
unanswered, or provoked Mr. Bunian to have done it before he had thus joined
with him in his Anathama, for surely Reason is never convincingly answered by
railing.

Sixthly, I see not the Reason why Mr Wills, or any other Person, should be
thus severe against the Principles of Baptism, as proper only to penitent and
believing Persons, (for if he mean any thing else by the Principle of
Anabaptistry he fights with his own shadow, we being as much against
Rebaptisation, as any that oppose it) for there is nothing in the Principle it
self, but what inclines to Piety and Unity; it being designed by Christ, not
only to promote Sanctification, Romans 6.4, 5, 6. etc. But to farther Love and
Peace, as Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5. being the incorporating knitting Ordinance. Yet no
Man that ever I have heard of, ever did, or can pretend, that this Principle
perfects grace, and knowledge; and therefore now (as of old amongst the purest
Churches) are weaknesses, divisions, errors, and evils, found amongst us; and
so must it be expected, so long as an evil heart and envious Devil remains: yet
withal do we own subjection to a holy and perfect Rule and Directory, to
Correct and Rectify, all erroes and evil that may arise.

Object. But if Baptism be esteemed a visible Inlet into the Visible Church,
and that you can own Church Fellowship with none but Baptized Persons, is not
that a Dividing Principle?

Answ. It is true, it tends to divide betwixt World and Church, but not
otherwise; and is no other than all that own the Christian Religion, whether
Papists, Protestants Presbyterian and Independents acknowledge, Baptism being
also owned by the Ancients to be Janua Sacramentorum; and so positive is Mr.
Baxter for it, that he tells us in express terms, that they must deny the
Scripture that deny it: his words are these in his place Scripture, p. 24. I
know not what in show of Reason can be said to this by those that renounce not
Scripture; for what man dare go in a way that has neither Precept nor Example
to warrant it, from a way that has a full current of both? Yet they that will
admit Members into the Church without Baptism, do so.

So that till Infants Sprinkling be proved Christ's Ordinance of Baptism,
Poedobaptists (by their own acknowledgment) are not to be esteemed Visible
Members of the Church of Christ, having never had an orderly admission therein.

Object. But is not much Ingury hereby offered to Christ, thus to contract and
narrow his Interest in such a manner?

Answ. It is true, it is so said by Mr. Wills; But this is no other than
Reformation in all Ages (since the Antechristian Defection) has been charged
with, and particularly that Reformation that has been endeavored in that other
Ordinance of the Lords Supper: Therefore do the Presbyterians cry out against
the Independants for sinful Schism, as being Fomenters of Faction, and for
narrowing of Christ's Interest in their respective Seperations and Church
Communions: to the shame and scandol of the Christian Religion: the same do the
Prelates say to the Presbyterians, and the very same do the Papists say to the
Episcoparians also. But Wisdom is justified of her Children.

Thus have we acquit our Principle and Practice from Mr. Wills his False,
Unchristian, and Injurious Calumnies he has cast upon us. And shall recommend
it to the Readers consideration, whether he has not by this unreasonable (not
to say malicious) carriage toward us, witnessed too much affinity, with that
slanderous Libell, called Baxter Baptized in Blood: that was the first Answer
to the Treatise of Baptism; and which by Public Authority was Renounced, and
declared scandalous malicious.

FINIS.
A brief friendly Reply to Mr. Blindmans friendy Answer about Infants Baptism,
in his Essay tending to issue that Contraversie.
SIR
AS to your Essay which came to my hands when I was busily engaged with Mr.
Wills, I have at last got so much time to say these few things to it, Viz.

First, As to the Style and Language, I must needs acknowledge (if compared
with M. Wills) to be Sober and Christian, though not without your severe
Reflections.

Secondly, As to the Substance of what you write, I make this brief Reply.

1. So far as you have concerned your self in the Historical and Ritual parts,
this to Mr. W. may be a sufficient Answer.

2. What you or Mr. W. say to the Doctrinal part, Mr. Tombs has for the
present saved me the labor by the return he makes to you both therein: though
if God spare me Life, I intend to say something to you also hereafter. But,

3. To the main design of your Book, viz. The parity you make betwixt Infants
Baptism, and Women's Receiving the Lords Supper, wherein you suppose you have
gained so much advantage as to put an end to the Contraversie, I return as
follows:

It Is confessed I said indeed show but as good Example and Command for Infant
Baptism, as we do for Women's Receiving the Lords Supper, and it shall suffice;
Which, notwithstanding your great confidence, I see not in the least made good,
but the contrary altogether; and, which I doubt not, is hereby manifest to you
and all men.

First therefore, as to the Example urged by me, from Act. 1.14. and 2.42, 44.
viz. That Mary the Mother of Jesus, and the Women, were of the number of the
120 Disciples, and who did break bread with the 3000 that were added to them.

To which you give the following Exceptions.

First, That is it not expressly said, that the Women were Believers.

Neither in this place is Peter, and the rest of the Apostles expressly so
called, but they are called Disciples, and so are the Women, being of the
number of the 120, verse. 15. And if any doubt, Whether Mary the Mother of
Jesus, Was a Believer, It will by as good Evidence appear as that the Twelve
were so; For, so testifyeth the Angel, Luke 1.18. Elizabeth, v. 45. and her own
triumphant Faith, v. 46 to 56. And that the Women, her Companions, were so
also, there is little ground to doubt, when it is considered who they were,
viz. Mary Magdal. Mary the Wife of Cleophas, Joanna and Salom, etc. Who came
with Christ out of Galilee, and eminently administered to him, followed him to
his Cross, to the Sepulcher, anointed his Body, witnessed to his Resurrection,
and to whom he gave Direction, with the rest of his Disciples at his Ascension,
to wait at Jerusalem for the promised Spirit, Mat. 27.55, etc. Mar. 16.19. Luke
23.55, to the 11 of the 24, chap. John 19.25.

Another Exception is, That There is no mention that these women were in the
great Assembly in the second of the Acts: For, How do you know but they might
be dead, or sick, or absent, as Thomas was before, Joh. 20.24. as nothing
expressed to the contrary, so nothing expressly affirmed that they were present,
page 3.

This is very strange; For is it not expressly said, (as one continued
discourse) by Luke, chap 2.1. That they were all upon the day of Penticost,
with one accord in one place: And who could these All be that were thus
assembled, but the 120 Disciples before mentioned, who had been waiting
together by Christ's appointment for the promised Spirit, the space of ten days
since the Ascension; and who were now to Receive an Answer, none therefore
being to be absent. And that the Women were present among them upon the pouring
out of the Spirit is manifest, because Peter thereupon affirms, That the
Prophecy of Joel was then fulfilled, that foretold the pouring out of the
Spirit, upon the Daughters and Handmaids, as well as the Sons, Act. 2.16, 17.

Another Exception is this. The words, you say, upon which you lay the stress
of Women's receiving the Lords Supper here, are in express terms against you,
though you take them expressly for you, etc. It being expressly said, [That all
that believed were together.] Let us now fairly exam^ne the Greek phrase, and
we shall find it expressly of Men and not of Women, Viz. (...), the Article of
being masculine, does expressly limit it to Men and not to Women. As if he had
said, All the Men that Believed were together, and continued in the Apostels
Doctrine, breaking of Bread, etc. And to confirm the same, you will find the rest
of the Chapter speaks expressly of, and to Men, viz. (...), every Man, v. 6, 8.
(...), etc. Ye Men of Jerusalem, verse. 22. etc.

To which I say, That this Exception, in my judgment, seems to be as
defective in Grammar as in Divinity; For, as to the Grammatical part, you
cannot but remember, Sir, That our Lillys Grammar, tells us of the Figure
Sylepsis, or Conceptio, That comprehends the less worthy under the more worthy.
Indignioris, sub Digniore; as for example. Quid tu and soror facitis. Ego and
Matter, miseri perimus. Tu and Uxor, qui adfuistis, testes estote. Therefore why
should you so forget your self, as to think it strange that the beliving Women
should be comprehended under the believing Men. And as to the defect in
Divinity, What is more frequent in Scripture? Do not you know it is told us,
Genesis 5.2. Male and Female created he them, and called their name Adam, in the
day when they were created. But to some of your Instances, which I wonder to
find urged by a Person of Gravity and Learning. First, as to the Article (...),
which surely you cannot but know is so common to both sexes, (and not limited
to the Masculine Gender, as always to understand thereby the Man only, as you
say) For, it is not said, Mark 16.16. (...), He that believes, and is
baptized, is not the She fully comprehended therein also? And, 1 Cor. 7.30.31.
(...), They that weep; (...), They that rejoice; (...), They that buy; (...),
They that use this World; Does the Article in all these (and a 100 places more
of the like nature that might be produced) so limit it to the Masculine Gender,
that only men and not women are to be understood, I hope you will not say so.
And is it not said 1 Cor. 6.16. (...), They two shall be one flesh; the Article
does equally respect both. But so much for the Article (...).

Secondly, The Word (...), it comprehends both sexes, and not the Masculine
only, as 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every Man, [(...)] abide in the same calling wherein
he is called. And Jam. 1.14. Every Man, [(...),] is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust and enticed, surely must comprehend every Woman to, or
else it would be strange Divinity.

Thirdly, The Word (...), the very same, as Jam. 2.2. For if there come into
your Assembly a Man, [(...),] having a gold Ring, etc. Is not a Woman to be
understood also thereby? And Jam. 1.8. A double minded Man, [(...),] is
unstable in all his ways: And is not a double minded Woman so also? We might
trouble the Reader with the rest of your Instances of this kind, but let these
satisfy.

So that Sir, you see your Exceptions to my Examples, are utterly
insignificant, for here were Women Disciples and Believers, in Praying together
for the Spirit, and afterward receiving the same together, also continuing
together in the Apostles Doctrine, Fellowship, and Breaking of Bread, and
Prayer; neither can your pretended limitation of Masculine Words and Articles,
you see, relieve you, or invalidate our Authority. And in confirmation thereof
we may add, Act. 20.7. That the Disciples came together to break bread, Women
being as much Disciples as Men. Act. 9.36. And it is also said, 1 Cor. 11.18,
20. That the Church came together to break bread, Women being Church Members as
well as Men, Act. 8.12. though debarred some Privileges as 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13. For there is neither male nor female, but all one in Christ,
Gal. 3.28. And, being many, are one Bread and one Body; Believing Women being
as much of the Body of Christ as believing men, 1 Cor. 10.17. And who are
enjoined to keep Christ's Precepts and Commandments, left in charge for all
Disciples as well as the Men, Mat. 28.20. This of Breaking of Bread after
Baptism, being none of the least of them; And who must give account for
disobedience and neglect of duty as well as the Men.

And as your own Conscience seals to the truth hereof, so you are force also to
declare it, telling us, How unpleasing it is to you, to raise Arguments against
a known Truth, being, as you say, as much for Believing women's receiving the
Lords Supper as the men

Thus have you my Proofs for Women's receiving the Lords Supper, and the Verity
thereof confirmed by your self: Therefore in the next place we shall try
whether you have, as clear, or, as you say, more full proof for the Example of
Infants Baptism, and as to which, you give the following Instances. Viz.

First, That Lydia was Baptized and her Household, Acts 16.15. It is not said
that any of her House were Converted besides her self.

Secondly, The Household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16. it being apparent, that
House in Scripture, does comprehend Children, 1 Samuel 20.15. 2 Samuel 9.1. Exodus
1.21. etc. Therefore you say, Let impartial persons judge, whether this does
not carry as much, if not mo^e probability and evidence in it, than what has
been brought for Women's receiving the Lords Supper, and not liable to such
Exceptions from the Context, nor from any other Scripture. Wherein I join
issue with you in the Appeal; beseeching you and all men to consider.

First, Whether there be one Infant so much as named to be in either of those
Households, much less that any were Baptized in them.

But we have Women expressly mentioned to be of the Number of the 120 Disciples,
upon whom also the Spirit was poured in the day of Penticost, to whom the 3000
were joined, and who together broke Bread also.

Secondly, Are Children as expressly owned to have right to Baptism, and
enjoined thereto, and capable to descern the spiritual Mysteries thereof, and
to act Faith therein, being Believers, part of the Church, and Members of the
Body of Christ, as Women are expressly owned to have right to the Ordinance of
the Supper? and enjoined thereto, and capable to descern the spiritual
Mysteries thereof, and to act Faith therein, as being Believers, part of the
Church, and Members of the Body of Christ?

Thirdly, Is Infants Baptism acknowledged by us to be a known Truth, and that
it is unpleasant to us to raise Arguments against it, as you have in express
terms done for Women's receiving the Lords Supper?

So that here is not the least paritie, or comparison, to be made betwixt the
one or the other, there being not the least considerable pretense to imagine
that any Infants were Baptized, because it is said that Households were.

First, Because, though it is true that Infants may belong to the Household, so
may the heathen Idolaters Wife, and Servants, and that Children are said to be
in some Households, yet there are many Households wherein there are no Children,
and it is not proved that there was one Infant belonging to either of these two
Households.

Secondly, In the four Households mentioned to be Baptized in Scripture, they
are said, at least in three of them, if not in the fourth also, to comprehend
only such as were taught Believers; in those Families or Households.

As, 1st. Concerning the Jailer, Act. 16.32, 33, 34. It is said, They spoke the
Word to all that were in his House, and that He, viz. the Jailer, Believed in
God, with all his House.

2ly, Crispus, Act. 18.8. And Crispus believed on the Lord, and all his House.

3ly, Stephanus House, that was Baptized, 1 Cor. 1.16. are called, the
first fruits or Achaia, that addicted themselves to the Ministry of the
Saints, which no Infant was capable to do.

And the 4th, is the Household of Lydia, where we have good ground to conclude,
there were none Baptized in it but Believers. First because there was n^
Precept to Baptize any other. Secondly, No Example for any other. And thirdly,
From what is said of them, Act. 16.40. They were only Adult persons, capable of
Instruction and Consolation, for t^ said, Paul and Sylas, after they came out
of Prison entered into the House of Lydia, and comforted the Brethren there,
viz those in that Family that had been troubled for the hard usuage and
Imprisonment of the Apostles.

Besides, it is very probable Lydia was a single Person no Husband being
mentioned, but she in chief all along But surely, it is on their part, that say
she had Children, and baptized Children too, to prove it; For ^ yet it does not
appear, but the contrary. So that here i^ neither Child expressly, nor by any
consequence to b^ found in any of these Baptized Households.

In so much that Dr. Hamond, the last great Writ^ for Infants Baptism
confesses, in his sixth Quaery, page 471, That to conclude Infants were
Baptized, because Households are so mentioned to be, is unconvi^cing and without
Demonstration, it being so un^^rtain whether there was any Children in those
Fa^^lies. As though, If the Master of the Family Be^^ved, all the House,
whether ignorant, unconverted. ^^ophane, and Athiestical, were to be Baptized
also.

In the next place we come to examine the parity ^^twixt the Command we urge
for Women's receive^^g the Lords Supper, and that which is pretended by (...)
for Infants Baptism.

The Command we bring for Women's receiving ^^e Lords Supper, is 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a man Ex^mine himself, and so let him eat, etc. V^z. Man or Woman, for so
the Word (...), in the Greek, and ^dam, in the Hebrew signify. There being one
Me^iator betwixt God and Man, and Woman; the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.45.
Being both but one (...) Christ, Gal. 3.28.

To which you thus Reply, You gather it from the Greek Word (...), which is of
the Masculine and Femenine Gender, and so signifies Male and ^emale, which I
deny not: But I must crave leave ^o inform you, That when it is limited with
words ^f the Masculine Gender, it has reference expressly ^o Men and not to
Women; and that it is so here, ^ou say, you shall abundantly prove, because it
is ^imited; ( where you bring (...) again, and some others of like import
mentioned in the Chapter.

Secondly, From the Text it self, where the Re^ative, (...), is joined to
(...), and so it is expressly limited to the Masculine, and therefore to a Man
only, and not to a Woman. Therefore the Text must be read, Let a Man Examine
himself (expressly, not a Woman) and so let him eat, etc.

But I appeal to the sober and juditious Reader, whether this is not a mere
trifling in the things of God, and a playing with Words, to pervert the Truth?

As for the Word (...), and others of like nature, we need say no more, and to
the Relative (...), as little; Mr. Blindman knowing, I verily believe there is
little but deceit in it. For, what more frequent in Scripture, than to find
this Relative to respect both sexes? For Instance, Jam. 1.23, 24. If any be a
hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is like unto a Man beholding his natural
Face in a Glass. For he beholds himself, and goes his way, etc. which, I
presume, takes in the Woman as well as the Man. Romans 13.9. Love thy Neighbor
as thy self, the same. So Matthew. 28.19, 20. Baptizing them, and Teaching them,
the same also. So that by Mr. Blindmans rule, we have as little express Command
for their Baptism as their Communion, and that Men are only concerned in both:
So that your Exceptions to our Command, are as insignificant as those to our
Example.

Then you come, Sir, to produce your Command for Infants Baptism, which you
would make us believe is as clear, if not clearer that what has been given for
Women's receiving the Lords Supper, viz. Mat. 28.9. Go teach, or Discipulize,
all Nations, baptizing them, and that Children are Disciples, is clear you say,
from Act. 15.10. Why tempt you God, to put a Yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples?

But for your better Information in Christ's Commission, I must refer you to the
account Mr. Baxter gives of it, who tells us the right Order thereof, and
Lessons therein, Viz. That the first task is to make Disciples, which, he tells
us, by Mark are called Believers. The second is Baptize them. And the third to
Teach them all other things which are afterward to be learned in Christ's
School; Which is a right and true definition of the Text: The Word, (...), to
Discipulize or make Disciples, is nothing else but to beget them to the Faith,
by preaching the Gospel to them, the true means thereof, and then being
instructed in the Faith, they are to be Baptized therein. And therefore again,
Mr. Baxter truly tells us, That it is the constant Order, that Baptism follow
Faith, and no better than an Impious profanation of the Sacrament if it go
without Faith; And that if Faith be not the Pre-requisite to Baptism Philip
deluded and not decided the Question, when he told the Eunuch, If he Believed
with all his heart, he might. So that when you can make it appear your Infant,
as a taught Disciple, believes in Christ, you may find a Command here to
Baptize him: Otherwise, as Mr. Baxter tells us, Philips answer carries a
Negative in it, viz. If thou do not believe, thou may not be baptized.

And as for Infants Discipleship, from Act. 15.10. It is an utter mistake, the
Disciples there being those Gentile Believers that had newly received the
Faith, who were neither to be yoked with Circumcision, nor any other Jewish
Rite, only they were Enjoined to abstain from Idolathits, Blood, things
Strangled and Fornication; there being no Infant in the Case, nor concerned
herein, neither are they any where called Believers or Disciples.

Therefore, Sir, upon the whole, Let the Juditious Reader Judge betwixt us,
whether you have given as good Ground, by as full Precept or Example for
Baptizing Infants, as I have done from Gods Word for Women's Receiving the Lords
Supper? Not doubting but this search into this your Essay, will put a
comfortable End to this part of the Controversy betwixt us.

In the next place you must give me leave to return you an Answer to three or
four smart Reflections I meet with in your Book.

First, Sir, I conceive you have given me just occasion of Offense, so unduly
to mention my not taking notice of Mr. Baxters Errata, without any the least
regard to what I have so largely spoke for his Satisfaction, and my own
Vindication, (having received the like measure from Mr. Wills therein also.)
And whether the r^proving that my Omission with such severity, and wholly
passing over those Horrible things Remarkt by me (without Control, as yet) out
of Mr. Bs. Directory, savours not of too much Partiality, is recommended to
your better consideration.

Secondly, No less infurious are you, and Mr. W. also, from the consideration
of those Waldensian Confessions of Faith, where they assert Infants Baptism, to
infer my mistaking of them in the whole, and to soil all my other Testimonies
in the Book, without taking the least notice how I cited the late Confessions
word for word, proving, they were not till their Defection in the sixteenth
Century, and that then other Confessions, cit^^ by me, were in the twelveth
Cent. 400 years before; nor regarding what I Answer to every one of them, to
which I must refer you, and to what I say to Mr. Wills for the like
Disingenuity.

Thirdly, Sir, I have to blame you for a piece of unfairness, not to say
unfaithfulness, respecting the Ritual part, where, to avoid the force of the
Word Tabal, which the Septuagint renders by the Greek Word (...), and all our
Translators by the word Dip. You produce a Text, page 190, wherein (as you deal
with it) you would necessitate another Interpretation to be put upon it, viz.
Levit. 14.6. As for the living Bird, he shall take it and the Cedar-wood, and
the Scarlet, and the Hysop, and shall Dip them and the living in the blood of
the Bird that was killed [there you stop, and leave out] over the running
Water, nor taking any notice of what follows verse. 51. And Dip them in the
Blood of the slain Bird, and the running Water; But go on with your Inference,
as though the running Water was not to be concerned in the Case, and say, Is it
credible that the Bird that was killed did yield so much blood that all those
things could be Dipped under it, and Covered with it? Certainly (say you) you
must, at least, run a Synechdoche here, or else you will make nothing of it.
And if you do, and say a part of them only was Dipped, Why will you not at least
allow the same in Baptism?

But whether such dealing with Gods Word comes not under a handling the Law
partially, and dealling unfairly, not to say, deceitfully with it, is left to
your own Conscience to determine.

Fourthly, I must endeavor to vindicate myself in another unhansom Reflection,
respecting an absurdity you charge upon me, and which I conceive will return
upon your self, and Partner too, with disadvantage, which is this. You are
pleased Sir, in page 117. to tell me, in Answer to the beginning of my sixth
Chapter, That you must crave leave to tell me, that I miss it in my Logic, in
affirming the Right Subject of Baptism (viz. a professed Believer) to belong to
the Matter and Essence of Baptism; and which Mr. Wills (in conjunction with
you) carries a little further, and tells me, in his usual Style, page 90. part
2. chap. 6. It is observeable, that he who has undertaken to write a Treatise
of Baptism, ( Mark well, says he) should mistake both the Matter and Form of
it; for certainly he is out in both ( and to be sure Mr. W. will lose nothing
for want of Confidence, if that will carry it.) For the Matter, says he, all
Divines agree to be Water, and the Form, the Words of Christ. For which he
quotes Zanchy and Buchan.

To which I say, as to the point of Logic (wherein I own little skill) in
affirming, The Subject belongs to the Matter and Essence of Baptism, and that
the true Form was Dipping, I conceive I am justified by the Learned. And as to
the first, If Burgerdicius understood Logic, he tells us, That the Subject
does belong to the Matter, and is of the Essence thereof; Who divides the
Matter into the Materia ex qua, in qua; and circa quam; of which, in which and
about which; and that the two latter comprehend the Subject or Object.

And agreeable hereto, we have the Learned Tilenus giving us the Logical
Definition of Baptism, both as to Matter and Form, in his Syntag. Theol. Disp.
de Baptis. page 376. in these words. First, That the Matter of Baptism is two
fold, viz. the Constituens and Recipiens; the Constituens of two parts, viz.
External and Elementary, viz. the Water. And Internal, the Spiritual thing
signified. And the Recipiens, (...), or Subject, is the fit Person that is to
receive it. Secondly, That the Essential Form of Baptism is nothing else but
the Analogical Reason of the Signs to the Things signified. For as the
property of Water in washing away the filth of the Flesh, declares the force of
Christ's Blood in the washing away of Sin, So Diping in Water is a suitable
Analogy of the Death of the Old Man; and coming up out of the Water, the Life
of the New.

And in full agreement with him, the Learned Sir Norton Knatchbull in his
Animad. page 317. tells us from Alexander Halyes, in these words, A io cum
Alex. de Halys, Tinctio est formalis Causa Baptismi, and si Tinctio, non Lotio,
vel lavatio, vel ablutio; I say with Alexander de Halys, That Dipping is the
formal Cause of Baptism; and if Diping, then not washing or pouring.

So that if these Learned Men are Right, you, my Reprovers, are Wrong, and
deserve blame and shame for your Rashness.

And further, that the right Subject, viz. a professed Believer is of the Essence
of Baptism is manifest because, if you may alter and change that, you may
Baptize a Wall, or a Bell, a Sword, or a Standard, or what you will, and call
it the Ordinance of Baptism. So that I am hereby the more confirmed, that if
you miss it in the Right Subject, or Matter of Baptism, viz. a Professed
Believer, and err also in the due Form or Ceremony, viz. Dipping, you have
neither the Matter nor the Form of Baptism; and so, though you may call it
Baptism, yet it is a mere Nullity, and no such thing; concerning which, I refer
you t^ the Scheam thereof, in the Broadside, for further Information, and so
shall Conclude with your own Words. If these Debates may be blessed to discover
the Truth to your self, or any other, and add any thing to the making up of the
Breach, that the Lord may be one, and his Name one amongst us, in these points
wherein we yet differ; I shall have what I aimed at, and the God of Truth and
Peace, shall have all the Glory. And that the Spirit of Light and Truth may
lead into all Truth, and dispel all the Antichristian Foggs of Ignorance and
Darkness, is the Sincere Desire of

Your Unknown Friend and Servant. H. D.
The 30th. of the 8th. Month, 1674.
The Reader is desired to Correct these Escapes in this Brief Reply. Viz. Page
178. line 7. r. it is not f. is it not. p. 180. l. 20. r. is it not, f. it is
not. p. 183. l. 29. r. Idolatrous f. Idolaters. p. 184. l. 13. r. of f. or.

FINIS.

