AN ANSWER According to TRUTH, That Trembles not, nor Quakes, nor Quayleth.
Given to thirty six Quaeries, propounded by James Parnell (commonly called the
Young Quaker) to an ancient Countrey-Minister. With some Counter-Quaeries
returned by the same Minister unto the said Young Quack and his fellows.

A Word to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WE were forced, notwithstanding so many Pamphlets extant against the people
called Quakers, to give Answers to the 36. Quaeries of James Parnel the Young
Quaker, lest the Boy should be highly conceited of himself, and falsely boast,
That he understands more then the Ancients; though we doubt not but his
Quaeries be the dictates of others deceiving and being deceived, which they yet
put under the Boys name for the credit of their Cause: Not that this plot of
theirs procures any reputation to it. For neither younger nor elder of them, as
appears in this and other of their Writings, either know the truth of God, or
express it truly, no not in their mother tongue. For the composure of these
Quaeries, and bold and false wording of them, shows plainly the weakness of
all who had an hand in them: Unless (as Erasmus in his Vindication of his
Paraphrases tells the Sorbonists) they think their ill language brings
advantage to their supposed truth, and more true Language breeds suspicion of
the truth. Therefore we beseech you to read without partiality, both the said
Quaeries, and the Authors Answer to them; likewise his Counter-Quaeries to him
and them: And the Lord give you understanding to the establishment in the truth
according to Godliness, Tit. 1. 1.

W. P.

The Quakers first Quaerie.
1. When? and how? and by what? wast thou called to the Ministry which thou
professes?

Answer, Although it be easier, for him that is yet in darkness, to propound
doubts and quaeries, than for some of the children of Light to answer them on
the sudden; as appears by Nebuchadnetzars questions propounded to Daniel and
his three companions, Dan. 2. And that our Savior himself refused to answer
the Pharisees Interrogatories, till they had first answered his, Matthew. 21. 23,
24. And albeit I might put you off with Solomon's words, Prove. 26. 4. Answer not
a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him: yet lest you
should continue wise in your own eyes, and by my silence take occasion to
insult; I answer to your several Quaeries as follows, and expect that you
should do the like to mine, if you be able.

To this Quaery I say then, That I was inwardly called to the Ministry which I
profess, by the motion and gift of Gods Spirit long before you were born,
which has been Gods ordinary way: see Job 32. 8. 2 Chronicles. 20. 14. Amos 5. 7,
15. Mic. 3. 8.

2. Quaery, Whether is this call and means which thou professes, mediate, or
immediate?

Answ. It was both; for besides the immediate aforesaid, I was Ordained a
Minister by the Superiors and Governors of the Church, as the Elders and
Pastors of the Churches were formerly by Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14. 23. But I
doubt whether James Parnell was called either way to be a Teacher. If so, let
him prove it by an infallible testimony.

3. Quaery, Whether thou art guided by the same infallible Spirit which gave
forth the Scriptures?

Ans. 1. Your selves teach, That all men are taught and guided by that Spirit
at times. 2. I am, I praise God for it, usually guided and assisted by that
Spirit, which is always infallible. 3. I doubt whether any of those called
Quakers are always guided by that Spirit, for the reasons hereafter mentioned;
Nor did Paul himself always speak by that Spirit, 1 Cor. 7. 22.

4 Quaery, Whether they that are guided by that Spirit need study how or what
to preach?

Ans. Timothy had that Spirit in a greater measure then James Parnel and many
of his companions have: Yet Paul says thus unto him, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect
not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by or for prophecy, with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Meditate on these things, give thy
self wholly unto them, that thy profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto thy
self, and unto thy doctrine: continue in them: For in so doing thou shall save
thy self, and them that hear thee. Yea, if the Apostles had been put to it, to
preach upon a short Text or theme methodically, as by a long practice in the
Church it is expected from us, they must oft-times have studied for it, as I
conceive; though if we were left at large to speak as the Spirit of God moves
us, and gives matter in, I hope some of us, by Gods assistance, should speak
to as good or better purpose, than many who now pretend to the Spirits actings.

5 Quaery, Whether it is as lawful now for Tradesmen, Shepherds, or Ploughmen
to preach, if they be led by the Spirit of God, as those that spoke forth the
Scriptures?

Ans. First, if this were granted wholly, James Parnel cannot claim any
interest therein, as I conceive; For he is neither Tradesman, Plowman, nor
Shepherd, nor will take any course to maintain himself by his labor; for he
has been tried. Secondly, I say, If men be made of God spiritual, whether
Shepherds and Plowmen first, they may teach. But, thirdly, every man that has
the Spirit in some measure does not attain to that growth, height, and degree,
that they did, who gave forth the Scriptures; and therefore may not as
lawfully, nor as infallibly teach as they did, Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 8. Nor can
I discern clearly, that the best among them called the Quakers have yet reached
that degree or dispensation of the Spirit, whatever they pretend; though I
could wish with Moses, that they and all the people of God were Prophets, as
Eldad and Medad were, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them; so far
am I from ^aying any man's gifts or spiritual seize. I understand that
James Parnell was quaking the last Summer at Cambridge. It were to be wished
that he had stayed at that Jericho till his beard had been grown, before he had
prophesied.

6 Qu. Whether any are the Ministers or Messengers of Christ but those that are
guided by his Spirit, and abide in his doctrine, as the holy men of God was in
the Scripture? And whether the wind does not now blow where it lists?

Ans. To the first part of this double Quaery, I say, first, That none are the
true Ministers and Messengers of Christ, but those that are in some measure
guided by his Spirit, and abide in his doctrine. But, secondly, men may think
that they have that Spirit, and yet be led by the lying spirit, as Zedekiah who
smote Michaiah was, 1 King 22. 24. To the second part I say, That the wind
blows where it lists, if it be not stopped; yet are there many false winds
which blow likewise from a deceitful spirit, Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth
be no more Children (mark that James) tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine.

7 Quaery, Whether thou will now own immediate Revelation, yea, or no?

Answ. First, I say, that the Apostle teaches us to pray for the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation in the acknowledgment of God, Ephesians. 1. 17. which also in
a way of faith, obedience, prayer, and perseverance may be obtained: but there
are many false lights and delusions of Satan (who too often transforms himself
into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14.) which are entertained by unwary men for
the Illuminations and Revelations of Gods Spirit, as appears in Zedekiah
aforesaid. See also Ezekiel 13. 6. and 14. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

8 Quaery, What is thy Gospel which thou art a Minister of? And whether thy
Gospel be free and without charge as the Apostles was?

Answ. To the first part of this quaery I say, That my Gospel which I preach is
the same which Christ and his Apostles taught: which is summarily contained in
those 4. verses, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. For the Grace of God which brings
salvation to all men has appeared, Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and justly, and godly in this present
world: Looking for that blessed hope, and the appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ: Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

To the second I say, That the Apostles Gospel was not every way free and
without charge. For he says, 2 Cor. 11. 8. I robbed other Churches, taking
wages of them to do you service. Nor has Christ or any of his Apostles imposed
it upon us, that the Gospel should be altogether without charge; and to them
which have it taught, Rom 15. 27. Gal. 6. 6. Nor is James Parnel's Gospel, be
it right or wrong, without charge; if he do not take more then it is worth,
when duly examined, it is well.

9 Quaery, Whether thou do hold up the first Priesthood which took Tithes, or
the second Priesthood that took no Tithes? which last thou do deny, seeing
thou take Tithes.

Answ. Although it be clear here, that James Parnel understands not which was
the first Priesthood, and which was the last, whatsoever his fellows do; yet I
say, that Melchizedeck whose Priesthood was the first Priesthood, took Tithes,
Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. And the Levitical Priesthood, which was
the second and not the first Priesthood, took Tithes also, as is confessed by
your selves, and also others. So that there is no Priesthood mentioned in the
Scriptures which took not Tithes. How then do I, or any others deny either of
those Priesthoods, by taking that which they took?

10 Quaery, Whether is thy Rule in the Scriptures for the Ministers of the
Gospel to take Tithes?

Answ. Although it be sufficient for me and other Ministers of the Gospel, that
there is no Commandment in the Gospel against the taking of Tithes; which you
must produce ere you can make the thing unlawful: yet we have warrant enough
there, for what we do in this kind.

For first, the Lord has assumed to himself the right and title of all tithes,
Levit. 27. 30, 31, 32. And all the Tithe of the land, whether of the seed of
the land, or of the fruit of the Trees, is the Lords: it is holy to the Lord.
And if a man will at all redeem ought of his Tithes, he shall add thereto the
fifth part thereof. And concerning the tithes of the herd, and of the flock,
even of whatsoever passes under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord.

Secondly, the Lord has bestowed those upon the second Priesthood, to wit, the
Levites, as well as upon the first, Numb. 18. 24. But the Tithes of the
children of Israel, which they offer as an heave offering to the Lord, I have
given to the Levites to inherit. Hence it is that the Lord says he was robbed
as well as the Levites, when these were detained, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob
God? but ye have robbed me: Yet ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes
and offerings. Yea, hence it was, that the whole Land was cursed for thus
withholding of Tithes, verse. 9. as on the contrary a blessing is promised to
the due keeping of this Commandment as well as of others there, verse 10, 11,
12.

Now you will not deny but there is a Priesthood or Ministry in the New
Testament which is to succeed the Priesthood of Melchizedeck as ministering
thereunto, and more spiritual, efficacious, and worthy then the Priesthood of
Levi. We would then have you show us where Christ or his Apostles have taken
away that maintenance which was allowed to both the others: which you can never
do out of clear Scriptures: Nay, does not Christ rather confirm them, then take
them away, though he has fair occasion to do it for the future) where he
says, Matthew. 23. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees; for ye pay tithe of
mint, and dill, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, mercy and faith: These ought ye to have done, and not leave the other
undone? Nor can you gainsay this truth, That Paul himself spends half a
Chapter, 1 Cor. 9. to prove, that the preaching of the Gospel should have a
sufficient maintenance allowed to it, as well as the Levitical Priestood:
although at Corinth, because the adversaries sought occasion to speak against
the Gospel, he did for a short time forbear to take that which was his right
and due. But does not the same Apostle in join more then a tenth or tithe,
where he says, Gal. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him
that teaches in all good things? Finally, when the Princes, Lords and owners
of Lands and Manours did by their Charters and Grants give to the Ministers of
the Gospel in this Nation and elsewhere, and to their Successors for ever the
tenths of all their grounds, and caused the same to be settled by Law, was not
this a lawful and a pious gift, and suitable to what was paid in the Old
Testament, and enjoined in the New? And this is our legal and civil claim also,
and our birthright in this Nation; to which we have as lawful a claim and
title as any Son has to the Inheritance of his Father.

11 Quaery, Whether ever the Ministers of Christ had or stood in need of an
outward Law to compel people to maintain them as thou and such as thou now
has, and does use?

Answ. The righteous, or those that are truly spiritual, need no such
compulsive Law to free them, for they are a law unto themselves: but for as
much as the greatest part of the Professors in the visible Church always were
and yet are, earthlyminded, and neither do, nor can rightly value spiritual and
heavenly things, (such as are holden forth by the true Ministers and Messengers
of God) Thence it is that the Lord themself made an express provision for
them, by manifold commands both in the Old and New Testament. And when the
hearers of the Word were regardlesse of those as well as other injunctions of
the Lord, the Magistrates in the Old Testament were sometimes forced to make
and execute Laws in that behalf also; as first Ezekiah did, 2 Chronicles. 31. 5, 6,
etc. and after him Nehemiah likewise, Chap. 10. 38. and 12. 44, etc. and 13. 5,
etc. And not they only, but wise, pious and devout Princes since the Gospel
was propagated, finding by experience how backward and averse worldly-minded
men were to entertain and maintain the publishers of the same, have piously and
prudently both by endowing Lands upon the Ministers, and investing them with
Tithes also, provided for them a competent, if not a liberal maintenance for
them in most places of this Nation, and added compulsive Laws where people
shall unjustly detain what was piously given at the first, as you called
Quakers every where teach the people to do, contrary to the practice of Christ
and his Apostles.

12 Quaery, Whether ever any Ministers of the Gospel took any necessaries of
the world, as thou and such as thou does your Tithes and maintenance?

Answ. Yea, they have. For first, Paul took such necessaries of the Barbarians,
the Inhabitants of the Isle of Melita, Act. 28. 1, 9. and as Ecclesiastical
Histories and Records do for 14 or 15 hundred years abundantly testify; though
James Parnel and his disaffected brethren to us of the Ministry have read
little to that and many other purposes, or are willingly ignorant of the same;
yet, as was said before, it suffices to us that there is no Law or Commandment
of God to the contrary; nor are examples needful for every thing, as to prove
that Christ called any Shoemaker or Cobbler to be a Prophet.

13 Quaery, Whether ever they had any set maintenance, or so much a year for
preaching as 40l. 60l. 100l. or 200l. a year, and called it their due as thou
and such as thou does?

Answ. The most authentic Records that are to be found in the several parts
of Christendom, or in the Eastern and Western Churches will testify, that
since there were constituted Churches, and fixed or settled Bishops and
Pastors, there has not only been a settled maintenance of that value, but of
a great deal more settled upon them, though you are such a novice therein, who
perhaps with many more of your strain pretend that you have neither read nor
heard thereof. But if you say, Where do we read of this in the Scripture? I
answer, That the story of things transacted in the Primitive Church is short
perhaps not of full fifty years from the death and resurrection of the Lord
Jesus; nor are all things recorded therein that were then acted. But why may
not we call that our due which was so given unto us, especially if we do the
work and service for which does we and it were designed?

14 Quaery, Whether such as thou are not the hirelings which forsake the flock,
Joh. 10. 12?

And are not the greedy dogs against which the Prophet Isaiah declared freely,
Chap. 56?

And make a prey upon the sheep as those did against whom Ezekiel declared,
Chap. 34?

And are not you the Ravenous Wolves against which Christ declared, Matthew. 7.
15?

And such as through covetousness make merchandise of the peoples souls,
against whom Peter speaks, 2 Epist. 2. 3?

And such as go after the error of Balaam for gifts and rewards, against whom
Jude a servant of Christ cries out?

Answ. First, the Spirit of Christ teaches men to apply the complaints which
he makes against wicked men first at home to their own souls, and to say,
Lord, is it I? as the Apostle said to Christ, Matthew. 26. 22. Secondly, I hope
that I and many Ministers more in this Nation, can with a better conscience say
No, to your sixfold demand or Interrogatory, then you can justly impute any one
of them to me or them; though I neither can nor will go about to justify all
of our Calling, let every one answer for himself.

And first, I say, I am none of those hirelings: for he is not an hireling
which takes the wages allotted unto him for his work by God and men, when he
does that work conscionably and faithfully; but he that sets his heart upon the
wages only, and delights not in the work, but is weary of the same, and longs
for the shadow or rest, Job 7. 1, 2, 3. If every one that takes a salary or
support for his work were an hireling* as you import, then Kings and Governors
who take Tribute and Custom must be such: yea, the Apostles themselves, 2 Cor.
11. 8. as before: yea, Christ himself took such support when he was upon earth.
Luke 8. 23. yet he was no hireling.

Secondly, I am no such greedy dog whatsoever some foul-mouthed curs may bark to
the contrary; for I neither lie down, nor love to slumber, but give warning to
the flock against inward and outward dangers and deceits. I content my self
with my legal salary, which yet is not contrary to Evangelical; I do not say,
Let us fill our selves with wine or strong drink, etc.

Thirdly, I am no such Shepherd as scatters the sheep, and drives them from
Mountain to hill in the dark and cloudy day, as the Sectarians themselves do
for the most part as well as others, but endeavor to feed the flock and not my
self, either alone, or in the first place; and with all my might strengthening
that which was diseased, healing that which was sick, binding up that which was
broken, bringing again that which was driven away, and seeking that which was
lost, and not ruling over the flock with force and cruelty, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4.

Fourthly, I am none of those Wolves which rend, tear, and devour the sheep,
whatsoever you do to us the Shepherds.

Fifthly, I make not merchandise of men's souls, by flattering them in their
sins, or false righteousness, crying Peace, peace, where there is no peace. I
sow not pillows under their arm-holes, nor bind kerchiefs about the painted
Statues, etc. Ezekiel. 13.

Sixthly, I go not in the way of Balaam for gifts or rewards, either to weaken
the hands of Gods people, or to curse and defy them; neither do I teach Balak
or others to put a stumblingblock before them, that they should eat things
offered to Idols, or commit fornication as Balaam did, Numb. 22. 23. 24.
Chapters, and Revel. 2. 14. But do not you (and others of your associates)
bewray your selves to be wresters of che Scriptures, (and I pray God it be not
to your own destruction) 2 Pet. 3. 16. very censorious and uncharitable, if not
full of envy, bitterness, strife and confusion also, James 3. 14, 15?

15 Quaery, Whether ever thou labored with thy hands to make the Gospel free
and without charge, as Paul a Minister of the Gospel did.

Answ. Paul did not always and in every place so, though he did so at Corinth,
as was said before. Neither did he think himself bound so to do; as appears, 1
Cor. 9. 6. where he says, Or I only and Barnabas have we not power to forbear
working? Much less did (...) or Christ his Master and ours enjoin us always
so to do, whatsoever you Quakers would do. For Christ says, Luke 10. 7. The
labourer is worthy of his hire. And the Law said, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox which treads out the corn. See 1 Cor. 9. 9. and
verse 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, Is it a great matter if
we shall reap your carnal things? and verse 13, 14. Do ye not know that they
which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? And they
which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord
ordained that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, etc.
Yea, does not Paul himself in some sort prohibit this laboring with our hands
in a Mechanic way, when he says to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who
has chosen him to be a soldier? Sure I am, that the Church in former Ages
has upon this ground in her Councils and Synods ordained, that no Minister or
Clergyman should be employed in Mechanic works, or otherwise be encumbered
with secular Affairs.

16 Quaery, Whether thou do not walk in the steps of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who art called of men Master, or Doctor, and have the chiefest seat
in the Synagogue, and uppermost room at feasts, and greetings in the
Marketplace, contrary to the practice of the Apostles, and so art under the
Woe which Christ pronounced against such?

Answ. What if Christ gave the name of Master to Nicodemus, Joh. 3. 10? and
Luke the name of Doctor to Gamaliel, Acts 5. 34? Is it then the giving or
taking of those names which Christ forbids? or the arrogant seeking of them
out of an high and proud spirit that desires to be idolized? Certain it is, the
word Rabbi, which he speaks of, signifies no more then a Doctor, or Master. And
the word Doctor imports no more but a Teacher; which names were familiarly
given both in the Old and New Testament to those that were worthy of them, as
Ecclesiastes 12. 11. Solomon calls such the Masters of Assemblies: and Paul
reckoning up the several ranks and orders of those Teachers whom Christ first
gifts, and then sends; he names Apostles in the first place, Prophets in the
second, Evangelists in the third, and Doctors, or Teachers in the fourth,
Ephesians. 4. 11. And the like he does again, 1 Cor. 12. 38. which thing he would
not do, if the Titles were unlawful. As for the chief seats in the Synagogues,
the uppermost rooms at feasts, some that are worthy of them were allowed them
by Christ himself, Luke 14. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Mark 5. 22. and by Luke, Act. 13.
15, and Chap. 18. 8, 17. And as for salutations and greetings, they are allowed
as well in the Marketplaces as any where else. It is not then the having or
taking of those, that is condemned, but the ambitious and inordinate desire of
them, and especially by such as are unworthy of them, as the Scribes and
Pharisees were: In whose steps, whether of exalting themselves, or despising
others, who will more frequently be found then some of you called the Quakers?
who take your selves to be the only, or chief illuminated men, Prophets and
Teachers raised of God in these last days, not without contempt and reproach
to others.

17 Quaery, What is the Church? and whether it be not a delusion to the people,
and a dishonor to Christ, to call a house of lime and stone a Church?

Answ. It has been a custom in most Ages to call an Assembly, and the place
where that Assembly is held by one and the same name, yet not without a trope
or figure. So a company of Scholars, and the place where they learn, are both
called a School. The usual meetings of the Jews, and the place where they so
met, were both called Synagogues; as you may read for the first, Act. 6. 9. and
Chap. 9. 2. and for the second use of the word, Luke 4. 16. Act. 13. 14, etc.
So the word Church is first and properly a Congregation of Saints, or of such
as profess so to be, 1. Cor. 1. 2. And then in the second place, this word is
used for the place where such a Congregation use to assemble. The Apostle uses
the word Church for both in one and the same Chapter, 1 Cor. 11. 22. and verse
18. and Chap. 14. 5, 23. compared with ver. 19. and 28. Neither is this any
delusion to the people, nor more dishonor to God then to use this phrase, the
house of God, first for the people in whose heart God dwells, Isai. 60. 7.
and then for the Temple or place where they were gathered together to seek and
serve the Lord, as Psalm. 42. 4. and elsewhere. Therefore here you seek a knot
in a bulrush.

18 Quaery, Whether thon and such as thou be not the creepers into houses, who
would confine all to the steeple houses?

Ans. Indeed Paul speaks of seducers that creep into houses, and lead silly
women captive, who are laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts. Ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
But whether this better suits with your manner of teaching, or ours, judge ye:
For we do not creep into the Churches who have the doors set wide open for us,
and have our Congregations or Assemblies publicly called together by a Bell,
or the like means. None creep into those houses but such as come by stealth
with a purpose to steal something. The houses into which the Apostle affirms
some of the false teachers to creep, were ever taken to be private houses, and
perhaps such as scarce have a man in them besides women and children, till
James Parnel and some of his gang rose up. But why must our houses of lime and
stoue be called steeple houses, more then the Glassiers-Hall, or the Bull and
Mouth near Aldersgate be called a glasse-house, a chimney-house, or a
stairehouse, or a stable-house? for that has both stairs, and chimneys, and
stables belonging to it. Sure I am, first, that those houses were not built for
the steeples, but the steeples for them; nor have all our Churches steeples
belonging unto them. How then will you style those? But where did Christ or his
Apostles reproach the Synagogues with opprobrious names as you do these our
Churches?

19 Quaery, Whether it was the practice of the Apostles to take a Text of the
Prophets words, and from thence to raise Uses, Points, Trial, and Motives as
thou and such as thou do, who make a Trade of their words?

Ans. First, I say, that here you forget our order; we do not first infer Uses,
and then Points; but first Points, Doctrines or Propositions, and then Uses.
Secondly, all that we do in this kind has been the practice of the Church and
her Teachers for many hundreds of years. Thirdly, none will deny but this is a
profitable and useful way of teaching. Fourthly, it may be proved out of the
Scriptures, that all this has been done by Christ and his Apostles: For Christ
preaches to the Jews, Luke 4. 18, etc. out of Isaiah 61. 1, 2, 3, 4. and to
the Sadduces, Matthew. 22. 31. out of Exodus 3. 6. So does Peter with his
fellow-Apostles, Act. 2. 16. out of Joel 2. 28. and Philip to the Eunuch, Act.
8. 35. out of Isaiah 53. As for the Uses which we make of those Points, we have
our rule for them from the Apostles own mouth, Romans 15. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
Nor did Christ leave us without marks of trial, Joh. 8. 31. and 13. 35.
Finally, he uses many motives himself to keep us from the distracting cares of
this world, Matthew. 6. 25, -34.

Yet are we not so in love with this way of ours, but that we would change it
for a better, if any can show it us, and make our hearers believe that it would
be more advantageous for them. Finally, this trade of interpreting the
Scriptures is an old and a good trade, Job 32. 23. Psalm. 78. 2, 3. Prove. 1. 6.
Acts 8. 3. And so often as you speak sense, you do the same thing, though
ignorantly, which you blame in us.

20 Quaery, Whether thou do speak as thou art moved by the Holy Ghost, as
they did who spoke forth the Scriptures?

Answ. I have answered to this already, that I usually do speak at the motion,
or in the assistance of the Holy Ghost, I praise God for it: but dare not say,
that I do it in that degree that the Prophets and Apostles did, who spoke and
wrote the holy Scriptures: nor does it yet appear to me, that James Parnel or
any of his fellow-prophets do speak or write in that high way of spiritual
dictation and instinct in all things: though I shall be ready to acknowledge
Gods gift unto, and working in the meanest of his servants, without envy or
disparagement; yea, with all humility and thankfulness to God for them.

21 Quaery, What Scripture have thou for sprinckling Infants with water in the
face? and whether all are Christians, and in the faith of Christ to whom it is
so done? or what does it profit?

Answ. To the first demand in this quaery, I say, I hold not the Baptism of
Infants absolutely necessary, but lawful only. It is sufficient that I have no
command in Scripture against the sprinckling of Infants in the face with
baptismal water; but I have the commandment of Governors, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical for it; seeing I am commanded to be subject to every Ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors as those that are sent by him, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Yet have we an
universal Promise, that all Nations in the Earth should be blessed in the seed
of promise, Genesis 12. 5. and 18. 18. and 22. 18. which promise is made to us and
our children, Act. 2. 39. If children then be within the Covenant, why may not
they receive the seal of the Coevnant? Christ himself says also, that of such
is the Kingdom of heaven, Mark 10 14. why may not such then receive the badges
of the children of the Kingdom? Yea, the Apostle affirms, That all which came
out of Egypt under Moses, children as well as parents, were baptized in the
cloud and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. which is no contemptible ground for
Infant Baptism. Christ's inviting and encouraging those that brought little
children, his embracing them, and praying for them, discovers his affection to
such; and his rebuking of his Disciples who would have kept them back, makes
not for you and the Antipaedobaptists, but against you all. To the second
demand I say, That actual faith is required only in men and women of some
years and capacity to hear the Word. But Infants may be in Christ, and Christ
in them, if he lightens every one that comes into the world; especially since
some are sanctified from the womb, as John the Baptist was, Luke 1. 13. And if
Christ be in them, then they are Christians indeed, and not in profession
only. To the third and last demand, I say, That the prayers of the Minister
and the Saints in the Congregation (who pray for the regeneration, preservation
and salvation of the child) for the present may profit and benefit the Infant.
The Lord also may with the outward washing even then give his Spirit to the
child. And though he do not yet, that washing may prove as good a document to
the person baptized for the time to come, as Circumcision did in times past to
the Jews, when they were grown up, though administered in their Infancy. To say
nothing that it is a great satisfaction to the Christian parents, that their
children are admitted into the body of the visible Church, and have received a
distinguishing badge and cognizance of Christianity; And the child it self has
from thence no small motive or instigation to be a follower of Christ in his
death and resurrection.

22. Quaery, What is the estate and condition of a Christian?

Answ. As there are 3. ages, steps, and degrees of Christians according to
their interest and progress in the work of regeneration; so their estate is
various and different even in this world; for the Babes in Christ are new
begotten of the Father in the hatred of sin, and love of righteousness, and by
him brought to the knowledge, hope and love of redemption from all iniquity,
and renovation in all righteousness; who also have their sins forgiven them
which they have repented of, and left, 1 John 2. 12. Their estate lies in a
renewed understanding and will especially. The young men in Christ are become
strong in him, and have the Word abiding in them, through whom they overcome
the wicked one, 1 John 2. 13, 14. These differ from the former in stature and
strength. But the old or dayed men which are such in deed and growth, and not
in years only, have attained to much more wisdom, power and righteousness in
the Spirit, and know the Father and his counsels more intimately then either of
the other, 1 John 2. 13, 14. Now it is no small confusion to make these 3. one,
nor less presumption to take the first or second for the last, as I fear many
among you and the other Sectarians do.

23 Quaery, What does the faith which thou professes differ from the faith of
the hypocrite? and what is the faith of the hypocrite?

Answ. My faith which I profess is a trust in the Lord Jesus to be helped up
again from the fall, or to be saved from the hands of mine enemies, or of all
that hate me, and so to be renewed through him; that I may be enabled to serve
him cheerfully, and without slavish fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of my life, Luke 1. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, etc. This
faith works by love, brings forth obedience, purifies the heart, makes us
conformable to Jesus Christ. So that I hope for no benefit by his death,
unless I dye with him to all known sins, Romans 6. 8. and it makes us patiently
wait for the hope of righteousness. But the faith of the hypocrite (for so you
mean, though you write otherwise) seeks always something else by or through
Christ, then what it should seek, to wit, the putting off the old man, and the
putting on the new, which is created after God in righteousness and holiness
of truth, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22, 23. And herein differs my faith from the
hypocrites, and perhaps from James Parnels also.

24 Quaery, Whether all that thou give bread and wine unto which you call a
Sacrament, do discern the Lords Body?

Ans. I hope most of those to whom I give bread and wine have some
understanding of the true body and blood of Christ, whatsoever James Parnel or
his Comerades have; for I have often declared the mystery of both unto them
more distinctly and evidently then any thing that I have yet read in their
writings. And as for calling these a Sacrament, the word imports two things;
first, an holy mystery, which I think you will not here deny; and secondly, a
military oath, wherein the spiritual Soldier is obliged to love, obey, and
follow his General in life and death: which most lively sets forth our duty in
remembering the example of Christ's death, and following him therein. And
therefore do not quarrel with the word or thing which you understand not
clearly.

25 Quaery, Whether thou do not give bread and wine to natural men and women?

Ans. First, I can give nothing but the elements of bread and wine, with the
signification of the same. Secondly, those I give to natural men and women, and
to spiritual ones. Thirdly, I give the same not only to those that are
spiritual, but to a mixed company, as Christ himself did to all the twelve
Disciples, Luke 22. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22. whereof Judas was one; and
as the Apostle for a time gave the same to those that professed repentance,
faith, and new obedience, but fell away afterward, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. 1 John
2. 19.

26 Quaery, Can any be set free from sin while they are upon earth? And when
must they be cleansed if not upon the earth?

Ans. There is an earth, or earthly being, which is sin it self, Colos. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon earth. In this earth there is
not a man that sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. yea, there is not a man upon the
outward earth which has not often sinned, Christ himself excepted. But when I
look upon one main end of Christ's coming, which is to redeem us from all
iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. Ephesians. 5. 24, 25, 26. upon his power to do the work,
Matthew. 28. 18. Heb. 7. 25. and upon the promises to that effect, Amos 9. 8.
Micha 7. 19. Luke 1. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 4. I cannot but
acknowledge that all iniquit* both may and ought to be subdued here. Nor do I
know any other place of purgation after we are out of the body. And these
things have been held forth by my self and others long before we heard any
thing of the Quakers; yet we shall own that or any other Truth that comes from
them.

27 Quaery, What Scripture have thou for thy Rule to give David's conditions to
the world to be sung in meter?

Answ. First, all are not of the world whom you take to be of the world, to
wit, who are no Quakers, or counted and called such. Secondly, Israel in the
general, to whom David gave his Psalms to be sung, were for the greater part
unregenerate, and men of the world as ye call them. Thirdly, he gave them in
meter or measures to be sung, as the learned in the Hebrew tongue know well,
though perhaps none of your new Schools understood so much. Fourthly, what
condition was David in, into which every man may not come in time? Fifthly, are
not David's Psalms part of the holy Scriptures which are permitted to all men,
and are profitable for all men to read? Sixthly, the Jews did read all the Old
Testament in public, with a singing voice, as the Learned know. Seventhly, Did
not the Lord by his servant Moses teach all Israel a song of his own making, to
convince them of his goodness, and their own wickedness for the time to come,
even then when they should depart from the Lord, corrupt themselves, and become
mere men of the world, Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 20, 21, 22? which Song is contained at
large, Deuteronomy. 32. 1, 2, etc. Now you will not deny but David's Psalms may have
the same use and effect even upon the wicked, when they find how far they are
from his godly ways, spiritual frame and growth: His prayers may teach them to
pray; his hymns may reach them to laud the Lord; His afflictions may order,
support and comfort them when they are in the like condition; His prophecies
and promises may be the strengthening of their faith. Finally, his zeal to God,
and his love to righteousness, may provoke many. So that scarce any book in
the whole Bible or Volume of the Scriptures is more universally profitable to
be read, said, or sung, then this will prove for all sorts and estates of men.
So that here you and your friends who are of the same opinion with you,
discover your great ignorance and weakness.

28 Quaery, What is the Word? and whether it is visible to the carnal eye, or
invisible? and where the Scripture* speaks of any other Word of God then one?

Answ. I must for true order sake speak to the last part of your quaery first,
wherein again you lay open your great ignorance. For the Scripture speaks
clearly of a manifold Word of God. As first, there is the eternal, essential,
powerful, and living Word, by which all things were made, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. and
are upheld, Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. and in whom they subsist, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17.
Secondly, there is the ingiven or inspoken Word, which usually came to the
Prophets and Messengers of God, Jer. 2. 1. and 4. 11, 13. Thirdly, there is the
out-spoken Word, Psalm. 68. 11. And lastly, there is the written Word of the
Lord, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

To the former part I say, that none of these save the last named Word, is
visible to the carnal eye, and that in the letter only: All the other are
invisible (and not invisible as you learnedly write) to that eye: but in the
Spirit the first is both visible and audible. The second also is audible, as
all men do or may know in their own hearts where his voice is often heard, but
too little regarded.

29 Quaery, What is the end of Christ's coming? and what is the Redemption?

Answ. Each of them is manifold, though it seems James Parnel knows it not,
who yet pretends to be one of those teachers who is as infallible as those
Prophets and Apostles were who gave forth the holy Scriptures. As for the first
of these, the ends of Christ's coming, they are these among others. One is, to
destroy or abolish the work of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. -- or to redeem us from
all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. A second is, to sive us from our other enemies, even
out of the hands of all that hate us, Luke 1. 71. A third is, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4. A fourth is, to
redeem us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. A fifth is, to deliver them,
who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2.
15. A sixth is, That he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in
that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted, Heb. 2. 17* 18. A seventh was, to set us a perfect example both of
active and passive obedience, 1 Pet. 2. 21. An eighth was, that he might for
our comfort give us an example of victory over the wicked world, and the Prince
of it, even for our encouragement to fight the same battle, Joh. 16. 33. A
ninth was, that he might break down the partition wall betwixt the Jews and
the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. The tenth was, to be the firstbegotten from
the dead, Colos. 1. 18. or the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 20.
The eleventh is, that he might be the Judge of the world, John 5. 22. Acts 17.
31. Lastly, to omit many other, that he might be the Head of the Church, Ephesians.
1. 22, 23. and Lord of the dead and the living, Romans 14. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

Now concerning Christ's Redemption, it is manifold likewise. For first, there
is a spiritual Redemption from sin by his blood and Spirit, Tit. 2. 14. Luke 1.
71. Secondly, a positive Redemption in the same kind, Ephesians. 1. 14. or the
recovering of the divine nature again through him, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Thirdly, there
is a redemption from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. or a saving of us from
the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Fourthly, there is the Redemption of our
body, Rom* 8. 23. Fifthly, there is the Redemption from the guilt of our sins
as well as from the power, Ephesians. 1. 7. Colos. 1. 14. Lastly, there is a
Redemption from all evil, Gen 48. 16.

30 Quaery, Whether thou will own this, That Christ has enlightened every one
that comes into the world? and whether they that know that light need any man
to teach them? And whether thou leadest any man up (under this Ministry) that
they need not thee to teach them?

Answ. First, I own that Christ inlighteneth every man by his coming into the
world; yea, that he inlighteneth every man that comes into the world*; for the
Apostle affirms it, Joh. 1. 9. Secondly, I say, that they which have attained
to the full knowledge of this light need not that any man should teach them,
for they are sufficiently taught of God, Jer. 31. 34. but I deny that you are
so taught, or in such a measure; and your new friends give no full evidence
that they have attained to the fullness and clearness of this day from heaven
as yet; though the Day-dawn may be risen in some of their hearts for ought I
know. But till that full light shine in them or us, we may have other helps and
teachers; as the Apostle shows, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. And those may not only be
convenient, but in some sort necessary for us; otherwise the Lord would not
have caused so many Books of holy Scriptures to be written, nor have sent so
many Prophets, Apostles, and Messengers of his into the world as he has done.
Yea, John who speaks of the sufficiency of this Unction to teach us, 1 John 2.
27. might have spared all his pains in preaching, and writing, (and much more
may James Parnel and his fellows keep silence) if there be no necessity for,
or use of, his, or their teaching. Lastly, I say, that my hearers can witness
for me, that I have often and earnestly stirred them to regard and obey the
light that shines forth and teaches or speaks in them, and to grow up to
that pitch, that they may behold the clear and full light of the day from
heaven, wherein they shall not need mine or any other man's teaching from
thenceforth.

31* Quaery, Whether they be not the deceivers, who cry, Lo here, or lo there?
who draw people to look for a Christ in a heaven without them, and afar off, or
at Jerusalem afar off? whereas they that cannot witness Christ within them
are Reprobates.

Answ. I hope you will not deny, that Christ according to the flesh, was at
Jerusalem, without us, and from us in England: nor that he is in an heaven
without us, and far remote from us, since his presence fills heaven and earth.
Howbeit Christ must also be within us, to inlighten, purge, strengthen and
renew us. And though they that cannot experimentally so witness him to be and
work within them, are for the present in a reprobate condition; yet I dare not
say, that all such are final reprobates. Nor will I say, that all who speak of
a Christ within them shall be saved. For many who prophecy in his Name, do
great works, yet in the end being found workers of iniquity, perish, Matthew. 7.
21, 22, 23. Howbeit, I grant that those teachers which point only to a Christ
without them, or to any other spiritual Kingdom of God then what must be
within them, saying, Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there is his Kingdom, may be
both deceivers, and deceived themselves for the present. And how near you come
to such who say, Lo here among the people called the Quakers Christ alone is to
be found, and no where else, let the impartial judge.

32 Quaery, Whether they be not out of the Faith of Christ that receive honor,
or respect persons?

Answ. Men may receive honor from others for their virtues, graces, or good
services, and yet be in the faith of Christ. So Timothy and Titus did often of
Paul, Phil. 2. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 8. 16, 17. So are the Corinthians commended by
him, 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3. and other Brethren also, 2 Cor. 8. 23. Yea, which of
the Churches is it to whom that Apostle wrote, who are not in some things
commended by him? See Romans 1. 8. and. 15. 14. Gal. 4. 14, 15. Phil. 4. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8. 2 Timothy 1. 3, 4, 5. How many Saints by name receive honor
from him in the 16 Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and in the last
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians? does not the Elect Lady and
her children receive honor from John, in his second Epistle, and both Gains
and* Demetrius in his third Epistle? yea, men may respect persons for their
places, and more especially for their spiritual worth, and be in the faith, as
Paul calls the Governor to whom he spoke, Most noble Festus, Acts 26. 25. And
Elisha honored the face or presence of Jehoshaphat, 2 King. 3. 14. Yea, all
the Saints must honor those that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4* True it is, it is
a great hinderance to the faith, or the believing of the true Word, for men to
seek the honor of men more then the honor that comes from God, Joh. 5. 44.
but by a patient continuance in well-doing, we may both seek honor and glory,
and immortality, and in the end also obtain eternal life, Romans 2. 7. It is also
a blot and blemish to the true believers, to respect the ungodly that are rich
and great in this world, before the true Saints that are poor, James 2. 1, 2,
3, 4. Yea, it is a plain denial of the faith, and of a good conscience also, to
respect persons in doing of Justice whether for favor or reward, Exodus 23. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But to give deserved honor and respect to men, is so far
from being an impediment, or injurious to the true faith, that his faith is
justly to be suspected for unsound, or weak at the least, who does it not; and
much more denies it to be lawful, as your acquaintance does.

33 Quaery, Whether will thou* own Quaking and Trembling, yea or no?

Answ. In some kinds I will, and in others I will not. First, I own trembling
at the Word, and the threatenings* of the same, Isaiah 66. 2. And consequently
a just fear and trembling at our own deserved condemnation wrought by the
sentence and work of the Law, and Gods dreadful appearing therein, Heb. 12. 18,
19, 20, 21.

Secondly, I own the serving of the Lord with fear, and trembling to commit
iniquity, Psalm. 2. 11. the working out of our salvation in that kind, Phil. 2.
12.

Thirdly, I own a fear and trembling in time of temptation and desertion, and
when men are for the present under the sentence of death, or in the spiritual
hell as Jonah was, Jonah 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. And all these may, yea, must
befall the Saints here, ere they can be perfected.

But to tremble and quake in one member of the body alone, be it leg or arm, to
tremble and shake in the whole body without any trouble of the Spirit or Ague,
to be strongly acted, violently tossed and turned, as John Gilpin and others of
yours have been, to lie like the man possessed with the unclean spirit, and to
foam at the mouth, Mark 9. 20. Finally, to be a quaker always, and never to
come to that perfect love which casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. These and the
like kinds of trembling and quaking I disown, as unusual postures and
conditions with the former Saints of God.

34. Quaery, What is the pure Religion? and whether in it thou dwell?

Answ. First I say, that Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father,
is this, to visit the widows and fatherless in their affliction, and to keep
our selves unspotted from the world, Jam. 1. 27.

Or it is that we should serve God in newness of the spirit, and not in the
oldnesse of the letter, Romans 7. 6.

Or it is to serve God cheerfully, and without fear, In holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, after we are delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, first by Christ, Luke 1. 74, 75.

Finally, it is the keeping of the two great Commandments through the grace and
Spirit of Christ, viz. to love the Lord our God with all our heart, mind and
might, and our neighbor as our selves, Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40.

And in this Religion I desire to walk, dwell, and remain for ever without
being shaken, 1 John 4. 16, 17, 18.

35 Quaery, What is the difference between the Jew outwardly, and the Jew
inwardly? and how shall we know the one from the other?

Answ. The outward Jew desires to make a fair show in the flesh or external man
with his outward circumcision or reformation, Gal. 6. 12, 13. in voluntary
worship, and not sparing the boyd, Col. 2. 23. He observes the lesser commands,
and leaves the greater undone, Matthew. 23. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, for ye pay tithe of mint, and dill, and cummin, and have omitted the
weightier matters of the Law, as judgment, mercy, and faith. And in one point
he goes beyond you, He pays tithes exactly. He makes clean the outside of the
cup, and of the platter, but leaves all foul within, Matthew. 23. 25, 26. He is
unblameable for the most part in the outward righteousness of the Law, being
therein of a very strict observation, Phil. 3. 6. Act. 26. 5. Finally, he is so
holy in his own eyes, that he finds matter to praise God for; but no wants to
crave the supply of them, and takes occasion not only to censure others, but
to dispose and rule them as you do to us, Luke 18. 11, 12. The Pharisee stood
and prayed with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publicane. I fast twice in
the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.

But the inward Jew or Israelite trusts in the Lord Christ, and has no
confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 3. He first makes clean the inside of the
cup, and of the platter, that the outside may be clean also, Matthew. 23. 26. His
circumcision is in the heart, in laying away the foreskin of sin, Romans 2. 29.
Col. 2. 11. He delights in nothing more then in the inward cross, or like
patience and sufferings of Christ, wherein with Paul he is crucified to the
world, and the world to him, Gal. 6. 14, 15, 16. Finally, he is upright in
heart, Psalm. 73. 1, 2. or serves God in the newness of the Spirit, and not in
the oldnesse of the letter, Romans 7. 6. In a word, there is as much difference
betwixt the one and the other, as between Saul, and Paul, a persecutor, and an
executor of Christ's doctrine and way.

And for the true means how to know the one from the other, besides what has
been said already, the fruits of the Spirit and of the flesh set forth by Paul,
Gal. 5. 19, 21, 22. will sufficiently discover them. For by their fruits ye
shall know them, Matthew. 7. 16.

36 Quaery, Whether they that profess themselves the Ministers of Christ, and
cannot give an account of their Ministry and faith, but do act contrary to the
Scriptures, and to the doctrine and practice of the Ministers of Christ,
teaching the people also so to do; be not such persons as abide not in the
doctrine of Christ, but bring in another doctrine, and are the Witches,
Magicians, deceivers, Antichrists and false teachers, who are not to be
received, but denied?

Answ. To this long quaery, I give this short solution; That they which are
truly such in doctrine and life as this quaery describes, may be truly termed
spiritual Witches, and Magicians, and must be rejected as false teachers,
deceivers, and Antichrists, were it James Parnel himself, or any other of his
confederacy and crew: yea, though they used no outward sorcery in ribbands,
stones, waters, glasses, powders, charms, and other like enchantments, as many
of you are reported to do.

Thus have I by clear Scriptures and experience answered his bold Quaeries (the
common Interrogatories of his Ringleaders propounded to us of the Ministry) of
him who is known to the world to be but a boy, or stripling, and I think has
proved himself no other in these his quaeries, if rightly examined and looked
into. But I know that Prophecy, Isaiah 35. as well as others must be fulfilled
in these last times, The child shall behave himself proudly against the
Ancients.

And now give me leave, I pray you, to propound some cross Interrogatories, or
Counter-quaeries to you and your Allies, both those called Quakers, and other
Sectarians your foregoers in your new doctrines and practices.

Certain Counter-Quaeries propounded to James Parnel and his Associates the new
and former Sectaries.
Concerning honor and respect to be given to men.
Quaery 1. Whether there be not a civil worship allowed unto men by Christ
himself, seeing he says, Rev. 3. 9. I will make them to come and worship
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee?

Q. 2. Whether there be not an honor due to all sort of men according to their
places, seeing the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2 17. Honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear God, honor the King?

Q. 3. Whether humanity and courtesy be not required in Christians, seeing the
same Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Be* pitiful, be courteous?

Q 4. Whether Abraham the pattern of all true faith and obedience, did not out
of his respect to the children of Heth, among whom he lived, bow himself to
them twice at the least at one meeting, seeing Moses affirms it expressly,
Genesis 23. 7, 12?

Q. 5. Whether Joseph when he was made Governor over the whole Land of Egypt,
did not accept of that honor which Pharaoh enjoined unto his people in that
behalf, saying, Genesis 41. 43. Bow the knee?

Q. 6. Whether Mordecai did not admit of that honor which Abashueresh had
decreed and designed for him by Haman and others, Hester 6. 9, 10, 11?

Q. 7. Whether an outward reverence be not to be given by Gods Commandment to
venerable old men, and that in the fear of God also, seeing Moses faith, Levit.
19. 32. Thou shall rise up before the heary head, and honor the face of the
old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord. And man especially, when he is found
in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16. 31?

Q. 8. Whether those that fear God, of what Age and condition soever they be,
are not to be honored of the Lords true servants, seeing David says of him
that shall dwell in Gods holy hill, Psalm. 15. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned: but he honors them that fear the Lord?

Quaery 9. Whether standing bare, or with the head uncovered before the
Magistrates, whom God himself styles, gods upon earth, as being his
Vicegerents, be not a decent posture, since it is a posture that the Apostle
requires in the behalf of God and his Angels, or Messengers, in the time of
praying and prophesying, 1 Cor. 11. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc?

Q. 10. Whether it be not scandalous, and a just reproach to the Gospel, when
the inseriours who profess obedience to it, deny their superiors the honor
and respect which is due to them, seeing the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. 1. Let as
many servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all
honor, that the Name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed?

Q. 11. Whether in giving honor, we should not strive to out-go one another,
seeing the Apostle says, Romans 12. 10. In honor preferring each other?

Q. 12. Whether the pronoun of the second Person singular may not out of the
Hebrew and Greek be as well rendered You, as Thou, especially since in the
plural number it is always rendered ye, and not thee: And the Dutch tongue
whence we borrow much of our Language, has You?

Q. 13. Whether it has not ever been accounted rude and rustical in this
Nation, for inferior men to speak unto others their superiors by the word
Thou, and not You? as also to stand with their hats on, unless leave were
given them so to do?

Q. 14. Whether ever Christ or his Apostles taught us to alter or violate the
civil speeches and customs of the Nation where we live, by which our reverence
to others is expressed and accordingly expected, if not commanded also,
especially since the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none offense to the
Jew, nor to the Greek, nor to the Church of God?

Concerning salutations at our meetings with others, or departings from others.
Q. 15. Whether such precatory salutations were not at their first meeting
always in use amongst Gods people, seeing Boaz thus salutes his reapers, Ruth
2. 4. saying, The Lord be with you: and they answered him, saying, The Lord
bless thee?

Quaery 16. Whether it were not the custom also in Israel of those that passed
by workmen reaping, or employed in any other necessary and lawful work, to say,
The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we bless you in the Name of the Lord;
though to men engaged in evil works they said not so, Psalm. 129. 8?

Q. 17. Whether the Ministers and Messengers of Christ ought not to salute
every house where they come, unless they expressly know, that the Son of peace
is not there, seeing Christ says, Matthew 10. 12. And when ye come into the
house salute it: and, Luke 10. 5. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first
say, Peace be to this house?

Q. 18. Whether Elisha forbids all salutations by the way, or only enjoynes
Gehazi to make haste at that time to lay his staff upon the face of the dead
child, lest he should by his delay come too late, where he says, 2 Kings 4.
29. Gird up thy loins and take my staff in thine hands, and go thy ways. If
thou meet any man salute him not: and if any salute thee, answer him not again.
And lay my staff upon the face of the child?

Q. 19 Whether the saying unto another, God speed you well, be not lawful to be
used to any that are engaged in a lawful journey or employment, though the
Apostle John inhibits us so to speak to false teachers, and much more to evil
workers, 2 John 10, 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: For he
that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds?

Q. 20. Whether to bless others by wishing them well in the Lord, be not a
practice well becoming the people of God, seeing the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3.
9. But contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye
should inherit the blessing.

Concerning meat, drink and ^^^arel.
Q. 21. Whether any thing without a man, as meat, drink, apparel, being used
soberly and moderately, can defile a man, seeing Christ says* Matthew. 15. 18.
That those things which proceed out of the mouth, they come out of the heart,
and they defile the man?

Quaery 22. Where has God enjoined men to drink water in any part of his Word?

Q. 23. Where has the Lord Jesus forbidden us one kind of meat rather then
another, seeing the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 4. 4. For every creature of God is
good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving?

Q. 24. Whether the Kingdom of God consists in the choice or refusal of some
meats and drinks, seeing Paul says, Romans 14. 17. That the Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost?

Q. 25. Whether Bodily exercise in way of Religion and godliness it self be
not two distinct and different things, seeing it is written, 1 Timothy 4. 8. That
bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable to all things,
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come?

Q. 26. Whether one may not satisfy the flesh (that is, a carnal conceiving,
will, and zeal) even in over-fasting and overwatching the body, seeing the
Apostle says, Colos. 2. 23. Which things have a show of wisdom in voluntary
worship, and neglecting the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the
flesh?

Q. 27. Whether are not the Saints to sanctify their meats and drinks by
prayer and thanksgiving before and after they eat and drink, seeing the Apostle
says, 1 Timothy 4. 5. that the creature is sanctified by the Word and prayer? and
Romans 14. 16. He that eats, eats to the Lord; for he gives God thanks.

Q. 28. Whether the Master of the house, or the chief of the Saints when they
are to eat together, ought not to be the mouth of the rest in those prayers and
thanksgivings, and that with an audible voice, seeing Christ was so usually
among his disciples and guests, Matthew. 15. 36. and Paul among his
fellow-travellers, Acts 27. 35?

Q. 29. Whether the Apostles interdiction be absolute against all ornaments, or
comparative only, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. where he says, Whose adorning let it not be
that outward of plaiting the hair, and wearing of gold, or (...) apparel: But
let it be the hidden man of the heart in that which is incorruptible, even the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great
price?

Quaery 30. Whether may not Princes and great^^^^^^ages wear apparel suitable
to their places and dignities, and distinguishing ornaments also, seeing our
Savior says, that they which wear soft raiment, are in Kings houses, Matthew.
11. 8. and disallowes not of Solomon's great royalty, Matthew. 6. 29. and the
Psalmist compares the glory of Christ's Spouse to Solomon's Queen most richly
adorned, Psalm. 45. 13, 14?

Q. 31. Whether Nobles and men of worth and wealth may not apparel their
beloved and hopeful children accordingly, provided that they disable not
themselves for works of piety and charity thereby, seeing Jacob made his son
Joseph a coat of diverse colors, Genesis 37. 3. and David's daughter Thamar had the
like according to the custom of Princes daughters, who were Virgins, 2 Samuel
13. 18?

Q. 32. May not the daughters of Israel wear rich colors, gold lace, and
embroydered work, if the times and their estates, without let to good works,
will bear it, seeing David says, 2 Samuel 1. 24. Ye daughters of Israel weep
over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights; who did put
ornaments of gold upon your apparel?

Concerning Pride.
Q. 33. Whether pride does lie in apparel, though there may be much vanity,
ostentation, and wastfulnesse committed therein? or inwardly in the heart and
mind of the poor as well as of the rich, seeing our Savior says, Mark 7. 21,
22, 23. From within, out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceits,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: All these evil
things come from within, and defile the man?

Q. 34. Whether one of the greatest things that puffs up the hearts of men be
not knowledge, whether it be true or false, and imagined only, seeing the
Apostle says expressly, 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2. We know that we all have knowledge.
Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth. And if any man think that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know?

Q. 35. Whether another thing that exalts a man in pride, and makes him despise
his brethren, and perhaps those that are better then himself, be not a
conceited and self-chosen holiness, seeing such a proud Saint is brought in,
Isaiah 65. 5. saying, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
then thou* Which thing also is verified in the Pharisee and Publican, Luke 18.
11, 12?

Quaery 36. Whether there be any prouder man to be found then some false
teachers are upon their imagined knowledge, seeing the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.
3, 4. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words, etc?

Q. 37. Whether a young man be not the pronest of all others to be thus seduced
and puffed up, seeing Paul says, 1 Timothy 3. 6. He must not be a novice or newly
come to the faith, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil?

Concerning Oaths.
Q. 38. Whether it be not lawful now in the New Testament to take an oath
before lawful authority to put an end to controversies, seeing the Apostle
says, Heb. 6. 16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for
confirmation is to them an end of ail strife?

Q. 39. Whether the Oaths which our Savior and the Apostle James forbids are
not first, swearing by the creature; secondly, needless oaths; and then,
perjury or false-swearing, Matthew. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37. But I say unto you, Swear
not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne: nor by the earth, for it
is Gods footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King.
Neither shall thou swear by thine head, for thou can not make one hair white
or black. But let your communication be, Yea, yea; and Nay, nay: for whatsoever
is more then these, comes of evil. Jam 5. 12. But above all things, my
brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by earth, nor by any other
oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation?

Q. 39. Whether Paul himself did not swear in those words, 2 Cor. 11. 10. As
the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the
Regions of Achaia?

Concerning outward material Churches, and the public exercises therein.
Quaery 41. Whether any thing be a sin against which there is no Law or command
in the written Word of God, seeing the Apostle thus defines or describes
sin, 1 J^h. 3. 4. Whosoever commits sin transgresses also the Law; for sin
is the transgression of the Law?

Q. 42. What Commandment is there against building of Synagogues in the Old
Testament, or the erecting of material Churches in the new? since the Jews
moved our Lord to do a miracle by that argument, Luke 7. 5. He has built us a
Synaegogue: and he blames not their reasoning?

Q. 43. Is not the coming together into one place for the exercise of Religion,
and edification allowed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 23. If therefore the whole
Church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there
come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say, that ye
are mad? and verse 26. How is it then, Brethren? when ye are come together,
every one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a
revelation, has an interpretation: let all things be done to edifying?

Q* 44. And may not such meetings be mixed Assemblies of learned and unlearned,
of believers and unbelievers, seeing the Apostle said before, verse 23. And
there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers?

Q. 45. May not an house built of purpose for such meetings with all
conveniences, and decently kept as the Synagogues were, and our material
Churches are, be more convenient and useful to those sacred ends, then any
common house, as Glasiers Hall, or the Bull and mouth usually can be, seeing,
as was said before, the religious Jews so thought and spoke, and our blessed
Savior contradicts it not, Luke 7. 5. For he loves our Nation, and has built
us a Synagogue?

Q. 46. Is not this place of assembling as well as the Congregation it self
called a Church by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 17, 18. Now in this that I declare
unto you I praise you not: that you come together not for the better, but for
the worse. For first of all, when ye come together in the Church, I hear that
there be divisions among you, etc. See also, 1 Cor. 14. 19. where the Apostle
says, Yet in the Church had I rather speak five words with mine understanding,
that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousands words in an
unknown tongue?

Q. 47. Whether Christ himself did not frequent the Synagogues to teach
therein, seeing he himself faith to the high Priest, Joh. 18. 20. I spoke
openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither
the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing? See Matthew. 9. 35.

Q. 48. Whether the Apostles did not usually repair to those Synagogues, and
first hear the Scriptures read and expounded, and afterward speak and teach
themselves in the same place, if they had an invitation or fair opportunity for
the same, seeing Luke says, Acts 13. 14, 15. But when they departed from
Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, and sat down. And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets,
the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and Brethren, if ye
have any word of exhortation, say on? See further, Act. 15. 21. and 17. 10. and
18. 19, 26. and 19. 8, etc.

Q. 49. Whether ever Christ or his Apostles did call those Synagogues by any
reproachful names, as you do our Oratories and Churches by the name of
steeple houses, and the like?

Q. 50. Did not the Prophet complain to God against the prophaners and
destroyers of the Synagogues, Psalm. 74. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thine enemies roar in
the midst of the Congregations: they set up their ensigns for signs. A man was
famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees. But now they
break down the carved work thereof at once, with axes and hammers. They have
cast fire into thy Sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling
place of thy Name to the ground. They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them
together: they have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land?

Q. 51. Whether our Savior speaks against public prayer in those places, or
the posture of standing to pray, or only against an affectation of praise by an
hypocritical practice, Matthew. 6. 5. where he says, And when thou prayest thou
shall not be as the hypocrites are: For they love to pray standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men,
seeing our Savior says from the mouth of his Father, Matthew 21. 13. It is
written, My house shall be called an house of prayer: For so it is said, Isaiah
56. 7?

Q. 52. Is it unlawful to call either Baptism or the Supper of the Lord a
Sacrament, or obliging mystery, since that name imports no more; and you cannot
deny, but that both those are mystical things, and obliging mysteries, viz. to
the washing away of sin, and the following of Christ into his like death?

Q. 53. What Scriptures have you that forbid the baptizing of Infants, or the
sprinckling of them with water?

Q. 54. Did not Christ more for them when he took them up in his Arms and
blessed them, saying further, that of such is the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. 13,
14, 15?

Q. 55. Were those Disciples commended by Christ, or reproved, who would have
kept back such Infants, Mark. 10. 13, 14?

Q. 56. Whether did not Christ give the bread and wine to a mixed company, when
he administered those elements to Judas as well as to the other eleven
Disciples, Matthew. 26. 21. compared with Luke 22. 21?

Q. 57. Whether did not the Apostles distribute those holy signs to some who
discerned not the Lords body aright, because they were afterward punished upon
that account who had so received, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eat^th and drinks judgment to himself not discerning the
Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep?

Q. 58. Yea, who is there among you who are called Quakers, or the other
Sectarians your forefathers, that has rightly declared the mystery of Christ's
body and blood in your dissentings from us, since none of you have declared
this according to our Lords intent, Joh. 6. 33, etc?

Q. 59. Did not the Apostles give these mystical signs to those that afterward
proved Schismatics and Apostates, if not Heretics likewise, though for the
present time they professed true faith and repentance, seeing Paul says, 1*
Cor. 11. 18, 19, etc. For first of all when ye come together in the Church, I
hear that there be schisms among you, and I partly believe it; For there must
be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest
among you. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
Supper, etc. And the Apostle John says, 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us,
but they were not of us, etc?

Concerning the present Ministers and Teachers, and their maintenance.
Q. 60. Were there no Ministers in this Nation that held forth the truth
amongst us till you and your associates rose up, since we have our Lords
promise, The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church: and, Behold, I
am with you to the end of the world?

Q. 61. What is become then of all your forefathers, theirs and ours, who dyed
since the Apostles days, till your rising up with the pretended Spirit of
Truth?

Q. 62. If there were some taught of God before you were called, why are not
they owned by any of you?

Q. 63. Did Christ or his Apostles decry the whole Priesthood and Ministry
that was in their days, though many of them were sufficiently blind and
corrupt?

Q. 64. Were not those Priests and Scribes thar either walked in the Truth, or
were well affected toward it, acknowledged by Christ and his Apostles, as
Joses the Levite, afterward called Barnabas, Act. 4. 36. and that Scribe which
asked our Savior concerning the great Commandment, Mark 12. 34. and many
Priests also, Acts 6. 7?

Q. 65. Did not Christ ratify the present Priesthood and their maintenance,
when he sent the Lepers whom he cleansed to them to offer according to the Law,
Matthew. 8. 4 and Luke 17. 14?

Q. 66. Where has Christ or his Apostles forbidden the hearers to pay, or the
Teachers to take Tithes?

Q. 67. Where did Christ or his Apostles deprive any man, and much more so
great a society of men of their birthright by Law, or their civil Inheritance,
as you go about to deprive us the Ministers of this Nation of our legal rights
and dues given by pious Benefactors, and confirmed by many Laws and Acts of
Parliament?

Q. 68. Is the teaching Priesthood to cease till the spiritual Melchizedeck
come unto us to bless us after the slaughter of all our enemies with the
heavenly bread and wine, Genesis 14. 18, 19. Heb. 7. 1, 2, 3. That you say that
Priesthood of Aaron with the Law annexed of Tithes is ceased under the Gospel?

Q. 69. Why then has Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14. given some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Doctors, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the meansure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ?

Q. 70. Is he an hireling that takes the salary and wages allowed by God and
men for his labor which he does faithfully? or he only that affects the wages
alone, and not the work, leaving his charge in time of danger, and longing only
for the shadow and rest, as being weary of the work, seeing our Savior says,
Joh. 10. 13. The hireling flees because he is an hireling, and cares not for
the sheep? See Job 7. 12.

Q. 71. Are the Superior powers hirelings because they take tribute and
custom by Gods allowance for their support? Romans 13. 6. For, for this cause
pay ye tribute also: for they are Gods Ministers attending continually upon
this very thing.

Q. 72. Is it then dishonest gain to take or require that which by the Laws of
God and man is appointed unto us for the work we do?

Q. 73. Do any follow the way of Balaam but those that for gain and reward sake
are ready to curse Gods people, and to give evil counsel against them, that
they may be drawn into whoredom, and commit iniquity and fornication against
the Lord, as be did, Rev. 2. 14. But I have a few things against thee, says
Christ, because thou have them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught
Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication?

Q. 74. Did ever the Church of Rome cast greater reproaches upon the Protestant
Ministers then you do, and are you not Jesuited by some of her Emissaries, that
you would have them all one with another rooted out at once? Yea, what can the
Devil himself desire more in this kind?

Concerning the inward Light.
Q. 75. Is there not a false light within men, as well as a true, seeing the
Apostle says of the false Teachers, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. For such are false
Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light?

Q. 76. Is not that false light the most dangerous darkness, the hardest to be
discerned and driven away, seeing our Savior faith, Matthew. 6. 23. But if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

Q. 77. Are we not therefore to try men's pretended light by the Law and Word of
God, seeing Isaiah says, Chap. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, If they
speak not according to that, it is because there is no light or morning in them?

Q. 78. What may men think of your pretended light, who hate so many of your
Brethren in the Ministry of England, seeing the Apostle says, 1 John 2. 9. He
that says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness even
till now?

Q. 79. Is there not another light to go before the light of Christ, seeing the
Wise men that came from the East were guided unto Christ by a star, Matthew. 2?

Q. 80. Is not the sure Prophetical Word a light that shines in a dark corner,
till the true day light arise in our heart, seeing the Apostle says thus, 2
Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark corner, till the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts?

Q. 81. Whether the life of Christ be not the true light that men are to wait
for, and wherein the true children of light are to walk, seeing the Evangelist
says, Joh. 1. 4. In whom was life, and that life was the light of men. And the
Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 5. 8, 9. Walk as children of the light, for the
fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth?

Concerning Prophets and Prophetesses?
Q. 82. Whether some men may not be acted with a spirit of falsehood and
delusion, even then when they think that they prophecy by the Spirit of God,
as Zedekiah was, 1 King. 22?

Q 83. Whether the Lord did ever send forth Boys or striplings to be his
Prophets and public Teachers, seeing John the Baptist who was born to be a
Prophet of the most high, Luke 1. 76. and was filled with the Holy Ghost from
his mothers womb, Luke 1. 15. was not sent forth to preach and prophecy till
he was thirty years old?

Q. 84. Whether there be the least probability that God will show more favor,
power and wisdom upon any other then he did upon his own Son when he was upon
the earth, who was not sent forth to exercise his Prophetical office publicly,
till he was about thirty years old, Luke 3. 23. that you should be sent out
upon the same employment about half those years?

Q. 85. Whether the Lord will break his own orders and commands expressly set
down in his Word, where he says (as you already heard) by Paul, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
that a Bishop or Elder must not be a stripling or novice, lest he be lifted up
with pride, and fall into the condemnation of the devil?

Q. 86. Where did Christ or his Apostles send forth women to be public
Prophetesses, as you have done many, and some of them not long since infamous
for lewdness of life?

87. If you be extraordinary Prophets immediately inspired, as many of you
pretend to be, where are the miracles which such inspired men wrought in times
past?

Q. 88. What have you foretold by way of prediction which has accordingly come
to pass, as the Prophets, Apostles, and inspired men were wont to do?

Q. 89. Why do you quarrel with us for being called by men Doctors, and
Masters, when both names signify but Teachers; which office you take to your
selves with authority more then enough in your writings?

Q. 90. Is it the receiving such names, or the arrogant seeking of them, and
that in chief place (which was Christ's own privilege) that our Lord prohibits,
Matthew. 23. 8. saying, But be ye not called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even
Christ, and all you are Brethren, seeing the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4. 11. calls
the ordinary Teachers of the Church Pastors and Doctors, or Teachers, as was
said before?

Q. 91. When many of you meet at a feast or repast, do not some of you sit in
the uppermost rooms, as some of necessity must do? why then do you blame us or
others for taking those rooms, when they are assigned unto us by the Master or
Ruler of the place? Is it the taking of those after a modest refusal and offer
of them to others, or an arrogant affecting and seeking of them that Christ
blames in the Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 6. saying, They love the uppermost rooms at
feasts?

Q. 92. Do not many of you stand up even upon tables, stools, forms and seats,
when you speak to a great multitude, as we do in the reading-pues and pulpits
prepared for that end? Is it then the taking and using of such places to a
right end, or the pride and arrogance of the vainglorious Pharisees, in
affecting and striving for the chief seats that our Savior reproves, Matthew.
23. 6. saying, They love the chief seats in the Synagogues?

Q. 93. Do not you receive greetings and salutations from your brethren and
disciples where ever you meet them, and even in the Marketplace? And why do
you blame this thing in us or others which your selves omit? Is it the giving
or receiving of courteous greetings, or a proud Itch after honor and applause
that Christ condemns, Matthew. 23. 7. saying, They love greetings in the
Marketplace?

Q. 94. Whether is a multitude of disciples and followerr a sure sign that his
doctrine is from heaven who is so followed, seeing the way is broad that leads
to destruction, and many there be that find it, Matthew. 7. 13. And the Apostle,
2 Pet. 2. 2. speaking of the false teachers, says, And many shall follow their
pernicious way, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of?

Q. 95. Seeing this Age is earthly-minded, and willing to serve God with that
which costs them nothing, contrary to the pious and noble spirit of David, 2 Samuel 24. 24. is it any great wonder that your doctrine against Tithes should
find so many willing, yea, greedy entertainers of it, as it has done since it
was first broached?

Q. 96. Did ever Christ or the Apostles disturb the Priests and Ministers of
their times while they were teaching the people, as many of you and yours have
done?

Q. 97. Does the Gospel ordinarily call any man from his lawful calling,
whereby he should maintain himself and his family, seeing the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called? and,
Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs.

Q. 98. Were any of the disciples of Christ or his Apostles so strangely and
prodigiously, yea, so phanatically and diabolically acted in their first
conversion, or afterward, as Sir William Spencer, John Gilpin, and others
sometimes; our auditors and followers have been?

Q. 99. Can any man guided by the Spirit of God speak against Jesus of
Nazareth, as Robert Collinson and other of your Adherents have done?

Q. 100. Have so many fallen into distraction and madness in any sect, or
under any doctrine, as there has done among your hearers, especially where the
number of disciples was no greater?

Q. 101. Under what sort of Teachers have so many hearers and followers out of
so small a number laid hands upon themselves, as some of yours have done?

To say nothing of the Sorceries charged upon many of you, nor of the familiar
spirits with which some of yours are reported to deal; can the best of you be
so fully enlightened, and so totally filled with, and acted by the Holy Ghost,
as you pretend to be, that are mistaken in so many things as your own books
discover you to be? But I will conclude with the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
13. 7, 8, 9. Now I pray God that ye do no evil, not that we should appear
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as
reprobates. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. For we
are glad when we are weak, and ye are strong. And this also we wish, even your
perfection.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed in the Year, 1655.


