Murder will out: Or, A Clear and Full DISCOVERY THAT THE EARL OF ESSEX Did not
Feloniously Murder Himself; BUT WAS Barbarously Murdered By OTHERS: Both by
Undeniable Circumstances, and Positive Proofs.

Written by Henry Danvers Esquire in the Year 1684. and now Published for the
general Information of all Protestants.

Numb 35.30 31, 33. You shall take no Satisfaction for the Life of a Murderer
which is Guilty of Death. Whosoever Kills any Person, the Murderer shall be put
to Death. So shall you not pollute the Land, for Blood it defiles the Land,
and the Land cannot be cleansed of the Blood that is shed therein, but by the
Blood of him that shed it. Judge. 19.30. There was no such deed done nor seen
unto this day, etc LONDON: Printed for E. R. and J. R. 1689.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THOU have here a discovery of one of the most Inhumane and Barbarous Murders,
that any Age or Story can Parallel, especially if you consider the Person who,
the Place where, the manner how he was Murdered, and the Consequences of them
all.

1. The Person, it was the Earl of Essex; one of the Greatest Men in the Three
Nations; the Son of the great Capell, who laid down his Life for King Charles
the First, and who himself had sustained so many Honorable and great Offices
and Employments in these Nations, filling up no less then a Vice King-Ship for
many years in the Neighbor Nation; and as he was Great in Eminent Loyalty,
Excellent Qualifications, Large Patrimony, and Honorable Allies, so no less a
sincere lover of his King and Country, and a Zealous Assertor of the
Protestant Religion and Interest, against the Cursed Machinations of the Popish
Party, which was therefore become his Crime, and rendered him so obnoxious.

2. The Place where he was Butchered, which was no other than in His Majesty's
Royal Prison and Palace, where (by d^sign as it appears) he was brought, the
better to fall a Sacrifice to his Enemies. Being first lodged in the
Lieutenants House, then removed to his Slaughterhouse Capt. Hawlys, (and there
killed the day after.) Where being now the Kings Prisoner, and out of his own
desence, and for whom the King and Kingdom were respondent, as Sir Fran. Bacon
observes in Sir Tho. Overberyes Case, in the E. of Somersets Trial, was a thing
that greatly aggravated the Fact, for certainly, says he, Sir Tho. O. was the
first Man that was Murdered in the Tower of London, save the Murder of the Two
young Princes, by the appointment of Richard the Third; this being it seems the
second, with this further aggravation, That it was done at the very instant the
K. himself was there in Person.

3. The manner how, viz. The Popish Conspirators (his Mortal Enemies) having
thus gotten him within their reach, do by hired Cutthroat Villains and
Traitors, most Barbarously and Treacherously Surprise, Assault, and Bloodily
Assassinate this great Worthy in his own Chamber, cutting his Throat, almost to
the cutting off his Neck, and afterward by other Russians (and that against
the K. express Command) inhumanely dragg, shamefully stripped him, and basely
expose his Naked Body to public view. And as tho this was not sufficient to
satiate their Malice, and Blood-thirstiness, thus to Murder his Person, they
proceed (to the out-doing of Cain himself) to Murder his reputation, by
charging their Horrid Guilt upon himself; making him the Fellonious Self
Murderer: And persuing to the utmost Revenge, Slaughter, and Cruelty, any that
should dare to speak the Truth, or contradict the same.

4. And as for the dismal Consequences, (some whereof have direfully appeared)
which being impossible to express, is left to every ones Consideration.

But he who makes Inquisition for Blood, who sees in Secret, and brings to
light the hidden Works of Darkness, has by his Providence greatly detected the
same, both as to Persons and things; some Account whereof you have, for your
Satisfaction, in the following compendious Collections.

Murder will out: Or, A Clear and Full DISCOVERY That the EARL of ESSEX Did not
Feloniously Murder Himself; But was Barbarously Murdered By OTHERS, etc.
The Proofs both Circumstantial and Positive, that the Earl of Essex did not
Feloniously Murder Himself, but was Barbarously Murdered by others.

I. THat he did not Murder Himself you have Evinced.

1. From the Improbabilities that he should do it. 2. From the Impossibilities
that he could SO do it.
II. That he was Murdered by others, you have made good,

1. By Undeniable Circumstances. 2. By Positive Proofs Offered.
1. That the E. of E. did not Murder himself as the Inquest declares: Appears,
1, From the Improbabilities that he should so do. 1. Because of that excellent
Sedate and well-composed Natural temper he was well known to be of, and free
from such Melancholy and Frensical Fits, which might incline and expose him to
such a Mischief, whatever maliciously and falsely had been said to the contrary.
2. Because of that grace and fear of God, he was so eminently endowed with,
which would secure him from such Impiety. 3. Because of that abhorrency by
Principle which he was well known to have of such unnatural practices (whereof
he could not speak without great emotion of Spirit) whatever the better to
color the Murder, and six it upon him, had been most villanously reported, and
spread abroad to the contrary. 4. Because of the careful Provision he made for
his own preservation, after he came into the Tower fearing the worst. 1. By
sending for his own Silver V^ssel to dress his Meat in by his own People, 2. By
that store of all sorts of Wine, he had ordered to be (...) in for his own
drinking, 3. By the direction he had given to his Servant, to take Notes of my
Lord Russel's Trial, that very day for his own use; all ample indications he
designed self-preservation, not self-destruction.
5. Because as his Conscience was clear from any Treasonable Guilt, (whatever
to the contrary has been most wickedly suggested) so was he free from either
legal Witnesses or Conviction, there being no Bill of Indictment found against
him, as against others the day before, which might sufficiently secure him from
needless fears, or any such desperate course, tho had his zeal and affection to
his King, Country and Religion, (whom he might apprehend to have been in
danger) transported him to any irregularity, his Fathers, as well as his own
extraordinary merits from the Crown, might well be supposed (from so grateful
and compassionote a Prince) would plead his Pardon, and free hin from such
Desperation. 6. Because of that entire Love and Friendship he bore to his most
dear friend; the Lord R. which both in Honor and Conscience, would forbid and
deterr from such an Action, which must so necessarily tend to the certain ruin
and destruction of his best Friend, and which fell out accordingly from the
sinister construction they made thereof. 7. Because of the previous notice
given thereof in diverse places, which to be sure he would never have done, had
he designed any such thing.
2. From the Impossibilities that he could so do as the Inquest declares. 1.
Because it was impossible that he at one cut (as the Verdict says) could cut 4
Inches in depth, and 8 in length, because none can manage his hand to guide a
Razor so to do at once, viz. From the left-side of the Neck-boue, to the right.
2. Because it is impossible that with that French Razor, which was but 4 Inches
and a half long, and without a Tongue (necessitating to take 2 Inches and a
half at least in his Hand) that he could with 2 Inches of such an Instrument
cut 4 or 5 Inches in depth and 8 or 9 in length. 3 Because it is impossible in
Nature, that when he had cut the left Jugular and Windpipe to the Neck-bone
(which let out so much of the Blood and Vitals, that he could have either life
or strength, to proceed to cut the other also, as all skilful Chyrurgeons and
Anatomists can demonstrate. 4. Because it was utterly impossible, that after he
had locked himself into the Closet, he could so cut his Throat as it was, and
then opon the Closet door, and fling the Bloody Razor out of the Chamber
Window, at such a distance from the Closet, and then get the Razor up again,
and keep it in his hand (as some) or fling it by him (as others) and all this
after he was Dead, for he instantly dyed says the Inquest, and none but
himself in the Room say their Witnesses, therefore it was impossible he could
with that Razor so Murder himself. And that the Bloody Razor was flung out of
the Chamber Window, is made good by no less then ten Witnesses.



Thus have you some Grounds and Reasons (from the improbability and
impossibility of the thing) to clear his Innocence from the Horrid Fact, so
impudenty charged upon him, and consequently the guilt of others and which may
be sufficient to all wise Men, to detect the Murder, and enforce a review, if
no other evidence could be produced: tenfold less, has done it, in other Cases,
it being so difficult many times to get light, and trace such Secret hidden
works of darkness, as Sir, Fran. Bacon eleganly in Sir Tho. O. case tells us,
That wise men must take upon them in these Secret Cases, Solomon's Spirit, that
when there could be no Witnesses, collected the Act by the affection, viz.
When he used the Stratagem about dividing the Child, but this you will find is
not our case, providence having given us a larger provision as you will further
hear.

Secondly, That he was Barbarously Murdered by others appears. 1. By the
undeniabl Ci^^umstances, arising 1. From the previous Reports. 2. From the
corrupt and partial proceedings of the Coroner and his Inquest. 3. From the
Conspirators Villainous ends. And 4. From the Wicked Methods used to st^fle it.


1. By the undeniable Circumstances, arising

1. From the many previous Reports which they had spread of his Self-Murder (a
method the Papists have heretofore taken (but the Policy thereof never yet
understood) viz. When they stabbed H. the IV. of France, Burnt London,
Assassinated Sir E. B. G. and Murdered Hawly the Warder) of which diverse
undeniable proofs have been and are ready to be produced of such reports, not
only in London, but 50, 60, 80, 90, 100 Miles off; in some places a day, in
some two days, in others (at a great distance) the very day he was Murdered;
and as most Remarkable (as God would have it) all agreeing in the very manner
thereof, viz. Cutting his Throat in the Tower. At Andover 60 Miles off, they
had the report of his Cutting his Throat in the Tower the 11th of July, which
was the first day of his Imprisonment there (for by reason of his late
Commitment the Night before, he lay at the French Lord Fevershams in
White Hall) which sufficiently discovers what they designed beforehand, for if
this Report came from London, it must be before he was a Prisoner, at least in
the Tower, and two days before the thing was done. 2. From the irregular
corrupt partial and unjust Proceedings of the Coronor and his Inquest. 1. That
one Farnham, said to be a Deputy Coroner, which the Law knows nothing of; and
to be be sure a Legal Coroner he was not, Sir Tho. Stringer the Steward of the
Tower being the proper Officer, and accountable for that great trust, but this
is the Tool who must be brought forth to do the Jobb 2. That none of the
Relations were summoned to attend the Inquest, which by known usage ought to
have been. 3. That contrary to the known Custom and Usage, not only of our
own, but other Nations, as well as the Kings special and express Command, the
Body was removed from the place and posture it was said first to be found in,
stripped, and Clothes taken away, and Body and Rooms washed from the Blood, to
prevent the notoriety of the Fact upon view; and as said, by the new Coroners
contrivance or consent, (which m^kes it the more heinous and suspicious) for
had it remained in the place, and posture it was said first to be found in, the
print of the Bloody Foot upon the Stockings, the Cravat or Neck-cloath being
cut into four pieces in the middle; and the contrary witnesses, who speak both
as to place and posture, would have clearly discovered the Murder. The Notched
Razor and Cut Hand, being most pregnant Circumstances, yet little regarded. 4.
That the Jury excepted against the removing of the Body from the posture and
place, and demanded a view of the Clothes which William Fisher did by name, yet
was denied the same by the Coroner, after he had been in the next Room, with
some of the Conspirators, who had called him out upon that Demand, and who upon
his return to the Jury again did declare to them (as ignorantly as wickedly)
that they were to sit upon the Body, not the Clothes. 5. The partial
Examination of Witnesses, that tho there were several in and about the House
when the Fact was done, yet only Bomeny and Russel who they might justly
suspect to be privy to it, must be the principal Witnesses they will examine in
the Case, taking little notice of Peck, Munden, Lloyd, Captain Hawley himself,
or the two Women. 6. The little regard had to the notorious contradictions in
the Witnesses, they did, or might examine; Bomeny telling them, the Razor was
given him (wherewith he cut his Throat) the 12 of July, and Russel the 13;
Bomeny that Russel broke open the Door, but Russel that he easily opened it
with the Key on the outside; Bomeny that he could only through the chink of the
Door, see some Blood and some part of the Razor, but Russel that he could
through the same chink see the whole Body; Bomeny and Russel that the whole
Body lay in the Closet, and none of it to be seen in the Chamber, but Peck and
others, that part of it lay in the Chamber; Bomeny and Russel that they were
absent but a quarter of an hour from my Lord, but to others Bomeny owns he was
absent from him two or three hours, in so much as he was cold and stiff before
he saw him; some that he was found lying, others kneeling. 7. That they unduly
suffered themselves to be hurried into a Verdict, by the Message brought them
by Capt. Hawley in the K. Name, to hasten the same; as though the death of so
great a man, and in that place too, deserved not a serious and due search,
especially when they saw such foul play offered them, by removing Body and
Clothes, and denying a view of the Clothes, and when none of the Relations
present, and so few of the Witnesses Examined, and those in so much
contradiction too. 8. By the unheard of drawing their Verdict, which was done
not by the Coroner, nor by the Jury amongst themselves, as it ought to have
been, but by one of the Conspirators themselves in the next Room, who sent it
to them by Bomeny, and which they signed accordingly. 9. By giving so wicked
and false a Verdict upon their Oaths, which was this, viz. That the E. of Essex
being the 13 of July alone in his Chamber, did with a Razor Voluntarily and
Feloniously cut his Throat, giving unto himself one mortal Wound, cut from one
Jugular to the other, and by the Aspera Arteria, and the Windpipe, to the
Vertebraes of the Neck, both the Jugulars being thoroughly divided, of which
said Wound the Earl instantly died.

This was the Conspirators Diabolical writing, which they imposed upon the
Jury, and they made their Verdict both Coroner and Inquest by Subscribing it.

It falsely says he was alone in the Chamber, whereas by the flinging out the
Bloody Razor, as well as by sufficient Testimony, it will appear that several
went up and came out at that time.

It also fasly says he did give himself with that Razor one mortal wound of
such a length, and such a depth, which are utter impossibilities, as before.

3. From the Villainous ends the Conspirators had to effect and carry on hereby,
viz.

1. To confirm a Protestant Plot, a thing which they had long and often
labored, and as often been disappointed in, and which was so improved by the
Attorney General, as 1000 Witnesses to make it good, as also by the L. Chapter
Justice, as the Finger of God, to convince all the World thereof, the sad
consequence whereof has since been so severely felt. 2. Utterly to stifle the
Popish Plot, witness the Bayling, the Popish Lords Impeached and committed by
Parliament, out of the Tower, and the public prints to ridicule the same ever
since. 3. To destroy the L. Russel, and therefore done at the very instant he
was to come to his Trial, and so improved by the Lawyers to the Jury, which
some of them have owned did more prevail with them to bring him in Guilty, than
any other proof produced against him. 4. That they might remove out of the way
so great a Champion of the Protestant Cause and Interest, who by his great
Employments and Trusts in this and the other Nation, had gained so perfect
knowledge of their Popish horrid Intreagues, the way they have taken of old,
both in this and other Nations; and whereof diverse Instances might be given,
besides that of Sir E. B. Godfry, whose wounds bleed afresh at the mentioning
hereof. 5. That hereby they might carry on a Hellish design against the King
himself, as tho he had been privy hereto, by not only Butchering him in that
his Royal Prison and Palace (whereby the Law he becomes pledge for the safety
and forthcoming of the Prisoner) and at a time when he was there in Person;
where he had not been for diverse years before; and as tho he came purposely to
order the doing thereof, and to Entitle the Government to it. Which the Lord
Chief Justice does so often Inculcate: If he was indeed then Murdered by others
from the K. presence there [in Bradons Tryal] As also by that their horrid
Presumption, in sending in the K. Name to hasten and hurry the Jury into that
corrupt Verdict, and so daringly and contemptuously to remove the Body,
contrary to the K. express Command by a Person of Quality.
4. From the Methods which have been used to stiflle the discovery hereof, and
to deter men from inquiring into the matter.

1. By the Lawyers and Judges, who have declared that whoever went about to
prove the E. of E. murdered, did no other than libel the Government, and bring
the Guilt of his Blood upon it. 2. By the strict Command given by the Officers
of the Guards in the Tower, the day after the Murder, to all the Soldiers, not
to speak one word thereof at their Perils. 3. By the severe Prosecutions, and
Persecutions of those who have appeared herein, both as to their Estates,
Persons, Lives and Liberties. Witness, the turning out of old Edwards from his
place in the Customhouse, wherein he had been 29 years, for only bidding his
Son upon his Blessing speak the truth in the Case; and the many severities to
Mr. Bradon for declaring what others had said about it; and the severe dealing
with Mr. Hugh Speak for the same: as also that late cruel usage of that poor
Soldier in the Tower, because he would not affirm the E of E. murdered
himself; who was first whipped with Cords till the skin was flayed off. 2.
After that Scurged with Rods. And 3. put upon the Wooden-horse with 6 Muskets
at his Heels, Sword broken and cashierd. But especially, the Des^ruction of
Rob. Meak the Sentinel, for telling what he heard and saw that day of the
bloody Tragedy: whose Neck was therefore broke, and f^ung into the Tower-Ditch;
who declared beforehand to his Friends, how his life was threatened for the
same. As also H^wly the Warder, who was served in like manner for blabbing;
whose murdered Body was about a Month after it was missing, taken up near
Rochester, where a great Popish Lord declared several days before he was found,
that he had there drowned himself.

4. By the endeavors which have been used to prevent, the Review, which by 2
Letters to 2 Noble Men, and the Letters to the Lady E. sent openly by a
Messenger to Godman the Bookseller, which he brought to Justice Henton, and he
to the Secretary; all of them purporting a d^^covery upon Indemnity and a
Review, but all in vain.
4. By positive Proofs, attesting the Murder, that of Indemnity may be granted
as was offered in Sir E. B. G's case; and a fresh Legal Enquiry, as, in Sir.
Tho. O. Case, and others, there will then be produced positive Evidence, which
will declare who were the Contrivers and Authors, who the Actors and Abetters
of this Barbarous, detestable Murder, describe the Instrument with which it was
done, and which was made on purpose for the same: The rewards and preferments
to the respective Actors therein, with all the material Circumstances about it.
Which Enquiry was successfully made in Sir Tho. O's case, after the Coroners
Inquest had found it (as said) a natural Death. And by which after more then
two years stisted by a high hand, the then Principal Minister of State and his
Associates, with the Lieutenant of the Tower, and others, were searched into,
found Guilty, and many of them Executed for that horrid Murder, committed upon
that Innocent Gentleman in the Tower.

The Conclusion.
NOw may not this Dismal Tragical Account (which carries so much Demonstration
in it) be well left without a Comment, or any Rhetorical strain of Wit, or
flourish of Eloquence, either to convince or satisfy the Reader of the Truth
hereof, or provoke him to the discharge of that duty incombent upon him in his
Place or Station (which so Barbarous and unheard of Murder calls for at his
hand) the better to deliver himself and the Nation from the Crying Sin of Blood
Guiltiness: And which is therefore left to the Consideration and Conscience of
all that hear thereof in general; and to all the Ministers of Justice and his
Fellow Peers in special, whose Oaths, Honors, and Intrests, may Oblige them to
their duties herein; And who in reason ought to feel the Bleeding smart of this
Bloody Stab, not knowing which of their own turns may be next. And to his
Relations and Kindred in particular, who are more then others called forth in a
peculiar manner, to make a further and better Inquisition after his Blood, then
has yet been made, especially after this full Discovery is offered to them, as
they would vindicate his Innocence, wipe off the stain of Felony, Murder and
Treason, from the Noble Family; deliver themselves from the reproach of being
bribed by the forfeited Estate to hold their Tongues, and suffer others to be
so severely handled as officious for appearing therein, under their silence:
And as they would free themselves from the Guilt of his Blood, and answer the
neglect to God and Man. Lastly to all those (of which there are many) who
either as Accessaries or Actors, have imbrew'd their hands in this Innocent
Blood; whether since they are secretly known, it will not be their wisest and
best course (as some did in Sir Tho. O's case) to come forth and confess, and
give Glory to God, as they may hope for Mercy here, or hereafter, and not to
think to shelter themselves under Gold and Greatness; which will be a covering
(in this case) too short for the greatest themselves, because God who is the
Avenger of Blood, and to whom vengeance belongs; will bring all to the House
top, and recompense them according to their Deeds; There being no Darkness nor
shadow of Death, where the Workers of Iniquity may hide themselves.

FINIS.

