THE Forerunner of ETERNITY, OR Messenger of DEATH; sent to Healthy Sick and
Dying Men by H. DREXELIUS 1643

^NA (...) HIS ^SA: ^NIS MORE ^UND^^ AEGRIS

W. Marshall Sculpsit.
engraved title page

THE FORERUNNER OF ETERNITY, OR MESSENGER OF DEATH: Sent to Healthy, Sick, and
Dying Men, By H. DREXELIUS.

LONDON: Printed by J. N. and are to be sold by John Sweeting at the Angel in
Popes-Head-alley.

Ann. Dom. 1642.

To the worthy and most virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress MARGARET DRAPER, Widow
of Mr. ROBERT DRAPER Esquire.
MADAME,
WOnder not that I presume to thrust this Tractate into your hands, as not
having that Relation to your self, usual in all such Dedications; yet finding
so great an affinity betwixt your Goodness and the Tractate it self, so great
unity betwixt your Meditations daily expressed in your Practice, and these
here imprinted; I thought it not only fit, but necessary to prefix your name
unto it: For it is most just, That in whom these Meditations have been
continually imprinted, she at last should be imprinted in these Meditations.
Take therefore this Book, read it your self, and explain it to others, least
that Gulf in the Title, ETERNITY, catch and involve those at unawares that
might fore-run it. Let the Reader know that it is always to be thought on,
though never to be understood. Let him believe that every moment we travel
unto it, and shall quickly come to our journeys end, that vast place of
entertainment, the Inn of Eternity: Let him look he bespeaks good Lodging,
and good Company; for the next morning, as soon as the Sun of Righteousness
appears, he shall begin a journey that shall never have end; in which he shall
still move on, yet never proceed; for going forward is but as standing still,
in that motion to which no period is allotted. But this you know: in a word
therefore; Take this book, now your own: for though your less skill in the
Latin tongue may deny you to have made the Original, yet the zeal and piety
of your Life is the best Translation. Show it therefore to the world, that its
Meditations whilst you live may be a Pattern for others, and when you are dead
the History of yours.

So I have brought this Book and you together, I know you will quickly be
acquainted, and talk out the rest; therefore now ceasing to trouble you, I
steal away in silence, remaining,

Yours in all humble service, W. CROYDEN.

The several Sections of the three ensuing Books.
The first Book.
1 AN Introduction to the work page 1 2 That the remembrance of Death should be
daily page 3 3 The remembrance of death, a medicine against all sins page 5 4
Of the conclusion of a good life page 8 5 That every man is nothing page 9 6 Of
the short continuance of men page 11 7 The same larglier insisted on page 13 8
The vanity of the desire of long lise page 15 9 That man is dust page 1^ 10
That every man is truly miserable page 21 11 What man is page 24 12 Instruction
to the haters of funerals page 27 13 That our life is nothing but weeping page
29 14 That God comfort those that weep page 30 15 That our death may be as
advantageous as our birth page 33 16 That death is every where page 36 17 Every
man's house is deaths home page 38 18 The inexorablenesse of death page 40 19
The certainty and uncertainty of death page 42 20 The suddenness of death page
44 21 An antidote against sudden death page 54 22 Our days are few and e^ill
page 57 23 How dying young we may be said to be old page 59 24 That any one
that will may live long page 62 25 That we must all die page 63 26 The
remembrance of death ought to be renewed page 66 27 A discourse of Assan Bashaw
page 73 28 That each day is to be regarded page 78 29 The throne of all our
pride is our bier page 80 30 What our life is page 86 31 Our life is a Play
page 89 32 A type of man's life page 91 33 The Prologue, Narration, and Epilogue
of man's life page 93 34 That the longest life is but short page 96 35 Of
procrastination page 98 36 Deaths haunt page 103 37 Of our negligence in
meditating of death page 105 38 That the present is only ours page 108 39 That
we should not rely on to morrow page 110 40 The suddenness and comeliness of
death page 113 41 That we must watch and pray page 116 42 Eight verses out of
the Psalms, used by S. Bernard for the time of death page 119
The second Book.
1 THe remembrance of Death recommended to the sick page 127 2 The sick man's
d^scourse with his friends page 131 3 Pleasant things not always best page 138
4 Christian valor seen in the cont^mpt of death page 139 5 Examples of death
contemned page 141 6 Of a mind ready for death page 144 8 Three things grievous
in sickness page 147 9 Sickness is the school of virtue page 150 10 Sickness
the monitor to eternity page 151 11 Of prayer in sickness page 152 12 What
ought to be our thoughts and actions in sickness page 155 13 The difference of
our thoughts in sickness and health page 158 14 In all our sickness we must
send holy sighs to God page 160 15 Faults of sick men page 161 16 Rules to be
observed by the sick page 166 17 How the sick man should quench his thirst page
168 18 The sick man's napk n page 170 19 The sick man's bed page 172 20 The hope
of a better life asswageth our misery page 175 21 True hope of a most blessed
life page 176 22 Tranquillity flows from true hope page 180 23 Patience the
whole armor of a Christian page 182 24 That we are but guests on earth page
186 25 The term of our life is uncertain page 187 26 A first objection of the
sick man page 191 27 A second objection page 193 28 The sick man's complaints
page 195 29 The sick man's discourse with himself page 199 30 His discourse with
God page 201 31 His sure confidence in God page 207 32 Of constancy in
sickness page 211 33 Several prayers to be used by the sick page 215
The third Book.
1 THe Art of dying page 233 2 How to redeem the time page 237 3 How to make a
short life long page 238 4 An end of all things but eternity page 239 5
Considerations of a dying man page 245 6 We ought to prepare for death page 246
7 Examples of such as buried themselves page 248 8 A consideration of our grave
page 252 9 Nine forms of Wills page 255 10 Nine Epitaphs page 261 11 Nine
reasons to persuade us to die with a resolved mind page 273 12 Death not to be
feared page 282 13 How the Saints of God may desire, ye^ fear death page 285 14
An ill death follows an ill life page 289 15 A good death follows a good life
page 291 16 Like life, like death page 296 17 The desire of a good death page
298 18 Sleep the brother of death page 300 19 The forerunners of death page 302
20 How we must answer the messenger of death page 305 21 A sweet death the
worst death page 307 22 Deaths blessedness page 312 23 A dying man's farewell to
the living page 315 24 What should be the words and meditations of a dying man
page 319 25 Things specially to be observed by a dying man page 321 26 What a
dying man should do page 323 27 Consolation for a sick man page 325 28 Holy
ejaculations for a dying man page 329 29 The dying man's confidence in God page
333 30 The last words of a dying man page 336 31 Of the conforming our will to
Gods will page 338 32 The dying man's emulation of the good thief page 339 33 Of
the Heliotropium page 342 34 Prayers for a dying man page 345
A YE think DEATH sleeps. Take heed, he will wake; ye'll moan.
B Health makes you skip and dance, while sick men groan.
C Quails shower down to please the gluttons tongue.
D Sweet Zephyr strows his Flowers. Alas! how long?
E Yet Phoebus smiles, and walks with goodly grace:
But clouds ere long will mask his radiant face.
F When Virtue moves, Health gives you stubborn backs
Like Rams; when Vice, pliant as Virgin-wax.
G Feast, frolic gallants, feast, drink-swagger, rore and kiss:
But think how on this Point hangs endless we or bliss.


THE FORERUNNER of ETERNITY: Or Messenger of DEATH, sent to healthy, sick,
and dying men. The Remembrance of Death propounded to the Healthy.
. 1. Instructions to the Reader, and an Introduction to the Work.
MAny have written comfortable Antidotes against Diseases, and Death; I
determine the same; and they are so far from discouraging me, that they rather
incite my Pen. Some of them (with leave be it spoken) are too long, so that
they burden a sick man with their too too many precepts. Others not so much
forgetting brevity, as a Methodicall Order, do make it too accurate. They had
not so much offended, had they kept their Pens from paper; (as Apelles desired
in Protogenes. Plin. l. 35 c. 10. post initium.
) Many have discoursed excellently, but (as I may say) not satisfactory for
Practice. Theorie is to be commended; but here we must do, and in stead of
words, set forth action. There are others that propose nothing to sick, and
dying parties; but mere terrors and fears; and so astonish them yet living. I
know (my Reader) that thy desire is to be prepared for Death with small
expenses: I will endeavor to answer thy expectation: and Briefly, Orderly, and
Cheerfully I will lead thee to Deaths door, so as thou shall scarce perceive
it: 1. Briefly
Briefly, for I write not a volume, but a short Treatise, which may be thy
daily companion. 2. Orderly.
I will not observe a strict Order, but rather a mixed; the way that is pleasant
seems straight, though there be many windings. Cheerfully, for I will not only
treat of Religion, 3. Cheerfully.
but will mix with it verses, and fit old Epigrams; so that my style shall not
only be plain, but relishing of sanctified mirth. Thus I thought fitting to
admonish thee, at the entrance into this subject.

. 2. That the Remembrance of Death should be daily.
HAppy is that man that spends every day as if it were his last. Epictetus does
wisely teach, Epictet. Enchir. cap. 28.
Death (says he) and Banishment, and all other evils should be daily before
our eyes, especially Death. So shall our thoughts never be too base, nor too
ambitious.

Wretched men, why possess you such large hopes? why undergo you such a great
weight of disturbances, who to morrow perchance may be dust and ashes? Stand
sure O man, for the sable Goddess Death daily stands over thy head; and when
the little remnant of sand in thy houre-glasse shall be runn'd out with a
vigilant and undrousie eye, expects thy arrival, and can thou but expect
Her? as he sung, Ortum quicquid habet, finem timet. (i. e.) All that a
beginning have,
Do expect and fear a grave.
-- Ibimus omnes. (i. e.) We all must go,
To the earth below.
Nor can any age bribe Death. As soon as we are borne, we pay tribute, and are
Deaths hirelings. Nay, as soon as greedy eyes the first light see, Then do
we even begin to die. Death kills the Empress as well as the Handmaid. As the
Poet well.

Horat. lib. 1. ep. 4.
-- Because we dye so fast,
Think every day thy last.
Say every Evening, This day I stand at the door of Eternity.

. 3. The remembrance of Death is a Medicine against all sins.
THE serious remembrance of Death shakes off all sense of Pleasure, and turns
the sweetest honey to Wormwood. S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in his 5. Sermon
of wickedness repulsed. page 678.
The expectation of Death to come, will scarcely suffer or give admittance to
any carnal delights. And truly what does not the sense of Death work, if but
entered into the fingers or the pores of the Head, much more when it seises upon
the whole body? it spares no age, no dignity; one young man dies, another
Infant, another old man. One dies by the sword, another by poison, a third by a
fall; one departs lingringly, another suddenly, as overtaken with some violent
storm, or thunder clap. Now amongst so many doubtful, changeable, and sudden
events, what security can be expected? What courage can there be to sin
amongst such uncertainties? And why? because we die daily. Think of thy
houre-glasse: though slowly to sense, yet certainly by degrees, the sands do
run from the uppermost to the nethermost Cell. Apply this to thy fleeting
life. Every moment some parcel of our life slides away. Here Is nothing safe,
one hour deceives another, one moment steals somewhat from another. Happy is
he which makes every day his last; more happy he which reckons every hour;
but most happy that man who accounts every moment. He will abstain from sin
that counts this present moment to be his determined time. Oh deceitful Hopes!
how many have you deluded? While you promise to many the end of their journey,
old age; and yet cut them off in the midst of it in their youth. You make men
believe that may happen to them which many have enjoyed, the flourishing of the
Almond tree; what a number have fallen with innocent hands, yet peccant hearts?
How many have been overtaken by Death whilst they have been in meditating of
wickedness? How many sinners and sins has Death cut off in the midst of
their acts? How many have smarted for their endeavors to sin, being examples
of rashness and presumption? Have not many put a period to their lives and
sins together? What if thou should be one of this number? Or why should
thou be privileged beyond others? Oh! Scriban. in Polit. Christ. lib. 1. c. 27.
who would think to find sin in that mind, which expects Death with the sin,
and punishment by that Death? No wise man will play in a storm at sea; who in
such dangerous precipices will or dare meditate transgressions? No man unarmed
can be merry in the midst of an Enemies Army. But much more foolish is he,
who knowing every hour, every moment to be uncertain, and living in a
perpetuated fear of Death, yet dares do those things, which for ever will
make Death to be most miserable. Oh unwise men that we are! why do we plunge
our selves into everlasting punishment? and why obey we not good counsels!
Eccles. 7.40.
In all thy works (says Solomon) remember thy end, and so thou shall no sin.

4. The conclusion of a good life is of great esteem.
TEll me (o Seneca) whom does that great Pliny in his Testimonial worthy to be
envied, Plin. l. 14. c. 4. medio.
call a Prince? Say, what think thou of Death, especially of untimely Death?
Hear o young men, give ear o old men so full of complaints* Seneca. ep st.
77. in the end.
our life is as a tale that is told; it matters not how long it is; but how
well it is performed. It is not of any consequence in what place thou do
end, end where thou will, only let thy conclusion be well. Epictetus in the
same manner says, Euch. c. 23.
Remember that thou art but an Actor of a play as thy Master appoints thee;
if he sets thee a long part, thou must perform it, if a short one, thy duty
is the same to do it well. Varro speaks not in dissonant terms from these
two. They live not best who live longest, but they who do live the uprightest.
Our lives are not valued by the duration of time, but by the qualification of
our actions. Goodness in man's life is a quality, not a quantity. It matters
not therefore either where, or when, or by what means we die, for as God our
Master pleases, so we must depart: Only let us pray that we die well.

5. That every man is nothing.
Heu, heu! nos miseros, quam totus
Homuncio nil est!
(i. e.) What wretches, ah! alas! are we!
All men are nothing verily.


IN truth it is so. But much more wretched are we in that we know it not. Man
is nothing said an ancient Satyrist, but I dare say, we begin then to be
something, when we acknowledge our selves to be nothing. O man know thy self,
know and be wise: for Death crops off Lilies as soon as thorns or thistles.

Oh how vain and wretched are we! what are we? our learning, and Honor is
but smoke; our selves but dust: the one is but a fancy, the other but a
blast. And we which now speak in the present tense, we do live, we are
strong, and do flourish, in a trice all will be changed in the praeter-perfect
tense, viximus, we have lived. Here all have the same way. Our very life in
the increase, decreaseth; and we may divide the present day with Death. There
is a daily diminution in some part of our lives. Our glass may be turned, but
it is always running.

The first sand as well as the last may be said to empty our glass; and the
last hour in which we die does not only make Death, but does really
consummate it.

. 6. All men are but of a short time and continuance.
THe Lily is a flower, whose life and beauty lasts but a day. On the Banks of
Hiparis, Pliny l. 11. c. 36.
a River in Scythia, there is a bird called Hemerobios, which lives not beyond
the compass of one day; but ends her life with the same light she first
received it, at sunne-setting. In the same she has experience of youth and
old age: she springs up in the morning, flourishes at noone; grows old and
dies at night: but that which is most to be admired in that bird, is; she does
in that space provide as much sustenance, as if she should live as long as the
Raven. Man's life is not unlike to this creature. It always is by the flood of
flying time; and more swift then any bird or arrow. And oftentimes has all his
honor and worldly pomp terminated to a day, sometimes to an hour, and often
to a moment. Why do we then so fondly dream of years and ages, when we are
but as the flowers, or their shadows? or what can be reckoned to be more vain
or short then either? He that was thirty years in making curiously the form
of a man in Glass, had in a twinkling of an eye his vain labor dashed to
pieces; with this wise answer, As I have done to this brittle glass, so may
Death do either to you, or my self in as short a space; how vain therefore
are you in your thoughts?

But it is most wonderful, that though this life has by so many learned
Divines in all ages been proved to be so swift and short, and though all
Writers in all times have confirmed the same, yet wretches that we are, we
hear not all these loud voices King Hezekiah cries in the Prophecy of Esaias,
From morning until night thou will make an end of me. Esaias 38.1^.
The Kingly Psalmist cries out; Psalm. 102 17.
My days are past away as a shadow. And that great man in the land of Huz; Job
14.2
Man comes forth as a flower, is wasted and flies away as a shadow. Behold!
Oh man, thou art but a bubble; all thy life is but as the passing of a shadow;
and expectest thou here an abiding place, or a quiet habitation? Why do thou
heap up thick day, oh thou covetous wretch? When as this night they shall
fetch thy soul. Why think thou on carking and caring as though thou
should live Nestors age? When as Death is at thy elbow: thou shall be gone
from hence, before thou think of thy departure: hasten the thought of it
early, Eternity is before thee.

. 7. The same point more largely insisted on, and confirmed.
No man's life but is short, theirs is shortest who forget things past, neglect
things present, fear not things to come. Job says excellently, And they which
have seen him shall say, where is he? like a dream that passes away and
flies hence, Job 2.7.8.
so shall he not be found. A dream is vain, a flight is swift: Yet man shall
pass away as a vision by night. He speaks of himself thus. Job 9, 25.26.
My days are swifter then a post, they are gone and have seen no good; (This
uttered that rich man of the East) They are passed by as ships of burden, and
as an Eagle to the prey. For we be but of yesterday, Job 8.9.
and know nothing; are not our days as a shadow upon earth? truly they are so,
and tarry not. We feast, banquet, and dance, yet they tarry not. We are most
secure, and sleep till high-noone; and yet our days tarry not. We sport away
our time prodigally in trifles, and invent one idle thing after another; yet
our time stays not. Our years do flit, fleet, and fly apace, no man could
ever yet give a ransom to enjoy the next day safely. In our very sleep we
go on either to the Eternity of joy in Heaven, or of pain in Hell. Excellent
was that saying of Suidas. O Mortals of one days continuance, Verbo Ephemerii
botri pa. 358.
cunning for the present, not looking to the future. Consider of Eternity, to
which you hasten.

. 8. That the hopes and wishes for long life are vain.
IT was the speech of that foolish rich man to his soul. What shall I do?
for where shall I lay my fruits? This will I do, Luke 12.18.
I will pull down my barnes and build bigger. Alas vvretched man, twice
vvretched: vvilt thou enlarge thy barns? thou shall this night have a grave, if
not a Hell; this night shall they require thy soul, then whose shall those
things be which thou have provided? Thy Virtues, had thou any, thy Vices of
which thou had too many, shall go with thee. No other train or attendants
shall thou have with thee hence; Much like to this rich man's fall was that of
Senecio reported of in Seneca. Senec. epist. 101. ^^it.
Who recounting the swiftness of our life, which is granted to men by moments
and minutes, said thus. Each day and hour does show that we are nothing, and
does always by some new Argument admonish us that are forgetful of our
frailty, and drives us to look on Eternity through Death. This Senecio
Cornelius a Roman Knight, a frugall man, not only careful of his patrimony,
but also of his body, having sat all day by a friend of his who was very
ill, and almost past hope of recovery, having supped very merrily, was suddenly
taken with the Squinancie in his throat, so that he could scarce draw his
breath: and within a few hours, He, which had gone thorough all offices,
and charges, fit to be executed by an healthy able man; He, which both by sea
and land had gathered wealth; He, which had left no ways untried that seemed
gainful; in the highest pitch of good success, and in the midst of his
wealth, died suddenly.

So often comes it to pass that in the confluence of our hopefullest actions
we are gone, as the vvinde, which when at highest, soon is calm: and
therefore does Job ask of God, and in a sort complain; Job 10.8
And do thou so suddenly destroy me? And learnedly Tertullian, Tertull. lib
de anima.
There is (says he) that force and strength in vessels as they sail by the
Capharean rocks, though they be not assaulted by any great or raging vvindes,
nor violent waves, yet with a gentle gale, a smooth course; all thinking
themselves safe are with deadly privy overthrow suddenly sunk and lost. An
Emblem of the sudden events and unlooked for shipwracks of men's lives.

How foolish therefore is it to dispose of our life, when we know not what
shall be to morrow? Oh what madness is it to lay such large hopes upon such
brittle uncertain beginnings! I will b^y, build, fell, get gains, purchase
honor, and in old age take my ease. When (believe it) even to the most happy
all things are doubtful. Iam. 3.
Our life is but a vapor (says S. James.) We cannot promise any certainty of
future things, and what we enjoy for the present, may be easily taken from us,
or we from it. Yet in the midst of these hazards we propound and resolve
upon long voyages, and large journeyes, by sea, and land. We lay out for
wars, for pleasures at Court, for quietness, and ease, long businesses, an
orderly succession of labors, heaping offices to offices, hoping for Nestors
years, and Metellus good luck; when in the mean time Death stands by us, and
in these thoughts does suddenly prevent us, and suddenly casts us from the
molehill of our hopes, into the depth of Eternity.

. 9. That man is Dust.
Genesis 3.19
REmember this (o man) that dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.
This is a mourning verse which God himself declared to Adam, and does vvisely
admonish us of our Mortality. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 4.
The Eagle when she intends to set upon and overthrow the Stagg, before she
begins her fight, gathers a great deal of dust into her vvings, and sitting
betwixt the horns of the Stagg, with beating her wings upon his face strikes
dust into his eyes, and so drives him upon the Rocks. So the Church by the
wise use of Humiliation and Mortification, stops many a violent and hasty
sinner in his furious course to destruction, and drives his soul upon the Rock
of Salvation JESUS CHRIST; so likewise does the Priest at burialls when the
corpse is laid in the Grave, he utters these words when the earth is thrice
cast on the dead party, Earth to earth. Ashes to ashes, Dust to dust. These
words he speaks not to the dead in the grave, but to those Coffines which have
living souls abiding in them, not for those out of which the soul is departed.

King Philip of Macedon was wise in this point, that every morning had this
sung to him to make him the more mindful of Mortality, O Philip remember thou
art a man.

The very Cranes will in this point serve to be our Tutors, who, when they set
their night Sentinels, do hold a stone in one of their feet, that if they
should chance to sleep, by the fall and sound of that stone they might be
wakened: the same Birds when they fly over the sea betwixt Maeotis and
Tenedos, do carry sand in their bills. Well, let the stone in their foot
remember us of our gravestone, and the sand in their bill, of the earth with
which we shall be covered. The Calfe which the Hebrews worshipped was in deed
of gold, but it was reduced to dust. Nebuchadnezzars Image seemed terrible, but
it was mouldred to dust by the stroke of a stone. The Apples of Gomorrah
indeed outwardly were specious and beautiful, but within dust and
rottenness. Proud men may show their glory and riches, and these may procure
some carnal Israelites to worship them, but they shall end in dust and
corruption: so that it is excellent which Job speaks, I will say to the
worm, thou art my sister; and to corruption, thou art my mother. It is not
wisdom to admire present glory, but seriously to consider the end. Dust man
was, and dust he shall be, and his pomp shall follow him; do therefore what is
best to be done; Eternity is nigh at hand.

. 10. That every man is truly miserable.
WE cannot think enough whether nature has been a true loving mother, Plin.
preoemio in lib. 7. hist. not.
or rather a cruel stepmother to mankind. For among all other living
creatures she clothes man with the wealth of others. She has afforded to the
rest diverse coverings, as shells, harks, skins, prickles, hair, wool,
bristles, feathers, vvings, scales, and fleeces. She defends stocks and trees
sometimes with a double bark from the cold or heat: but she only casts out man
naked into the world in the day of his nativity to cryings, and waylings; but
deals not so with any other creature in the world. After this manner produced
is this creature called MAN; with crying, and his hands and feet swathed, and
yet this vveakling comes to have the sovereignty of all. Oh great Commander!
who begins his life with punishment wretched even in this, that he is
borne! Oh the the madness of those who esteem themselves gotten to pride by
such weak beginnings! The first hope of his strength, and the first gift of
time makes him like to the beasts. How long is it before he can go, or
speak, or eat any solid food? How long is it before his head leaves panting,
the only and infallible sign of weakness? Suddenly how many diseases
assail him? What various medicines are then fought out for his remedy, and
those also subject to alterations upon new advises? We see other creatures
presently to perform actions arguing strength according to their natures. Some
swim, some go, some fly, and others creep; but man, unless he be taught,
can neither speak, nor go, nor eat, nor do any thing of himself, but cry.
Some creatures are addicted to heaviness, some to luxury, others to ambition,
some to covetousness, another to superstition, another to desire of long life:
but to none has nature afforded a more frail life, a greater or greedier
lust, a more confused fear, or sharper cruelty. To conclude, all other
creatures live in quiet with those of their own kind. We see them go in
companies, and Herds lovingly together, and to withstand their enemies. The
fierceness of Lions is not exercised upon their own kind: Serpents bite not
serpents: nay, the fishes do not devour but their adversaries. Only from man
are all evils to man.

. 11. What Man is.
IF we will believe the Ancients, Man is Fortunes Tennis-ball, Aristot. Trism^
Plant. Sophoc. Pindar.
the image of inconstancy, corruptions looking-glass, the spoil of Time, the
prisoner of Death, a moving Sepulcher, a frail shadow, a vain image, the
dream of a shadow, a breathing carcass, or a living death. If you ask Seneca
what man is? he answers, Man is a weak frail body, borne naked, unable to
help himself, standing in need of others help, cast forth to the reproach of
Fortune, fodder for wild beasts, any enemies sacrifice. If we consult with
the sacred Writers, we shall hear them, calling man the bait of worms, an
heap of dung, the laughing stock of calamity, the copy of Infirmity, an hasty
messenger, a ship passing away, a bird taking her flight, vanishing smoke, a
thin froth, the balance of envy, a drop of a bucket, the nothing in a
balance, a drop of the morning deaw, a guest for one day, a flower, grass,
hay; altogether vanity, dust and ashes, an empty Cask, in a word, He is nothing

In the mean time see what names and sirnames men wear to set forth their
glorious and specious titles, if we weigh but with what Hyperbolicall
Ep^thetes they interlace them, we shall perceive what vain proud wretches
they are: they wound our ears, with these and the like; Most magnificent, most
illustrious, happy, pious, most potent, Imperial, most victorious, the best of
men, the greatest of Princes, etc. Let us hear the titles of Sapo^es King of
Persia, which in his letter sent to Constantine the Emperor begins thus. Sapor
King of Kings, Confederate with the Stars, Brother of the Sun and Moon, to
Constantine our brother, much health, etc. or if you will see a Catalogue of
lofty titles, take them from the King of Bisnag; who is saluted thus. Husband
of good fortune, God of the great Provinces, King of mightiest Kings, Lord of
all that ride in Chariots, or on Horses, the Master and Doctor of the Dumb,
the Grand Emperor over three Emperors, the Getter of all he sees, the
Conserver of all he gets, whom eight parts of the World stand in awe off, A
Knight without an equal, the Conqueror of all Valiants, the Hunter of
Elephants, the Emperor of the East, South, North, and West Seas. These
vaunting Titles are recorded by Petrus Jarricus. Are not here terms large
enough? Let us add to these the Titles that the Sultan sent in his letters.
Almighty Salmander set down before Carthage, the Lord of Jordan, Lord of the
East of Bethlehem, and of Paradise, the Ruler of Hell, the mighty Emperor of
Constantinople, Lord of the dry fig, Emperor of all the Sun and Moon passes
through, Protector of Presbyter John, an absolute Emperor, King of Kings, Lord
of Christians, Jews, and Turks, the Cousin of the Gods, etc. And like to this,
was that Letter which Solomon sent to the Emperor, To Charles the fifth
Emperor of Germany, the great Solomon sprung out of the most unconquered and
victorious house of Ottoman, Emperor of the Turks, King of Kings, and Lo^d of
Lords, the Emperor of Trapezund and Constantinople, the Conqueror of the
World, and the Tamer of the earth, etc. What can you hear more? Oh victorious
map of misery! Oh vanity of vanities! It Is the most grossest ignorance for a
man to forget that he is man.

. 12. To the Haters of Funerals, and Burials.
DEpart from hence therefore not men, but ravenous Kites, who though ye be
greedy and hungerstarv'd, yet never snatch any food from the Graves. You as you
are in other things curious, so you like not to touch or taste any thing that
savours of embalming, or of Hears-cloaths, you desire not to be Guests to
Churchyards, you do as much as you can to put off all thought and care of the
Grave. You do not frequent the places of Ew-trees or Cypresse-trees, you
seldom feast under these, these are not places for your delightful bowers;
but see here, how far you are mistaken, and how vainly ye dote: the holy
Scripture admonishes ye otherwise, It is better to go to the house of
mourning, Eccles. c. 7. v. 2.
than to go to the house of feasting, but you had rather do any thing, than
mourn and repent, and remember death, Lectures of this nature please not, but
take heed, Ye Wantons, lest while ye shun mourning here, ye be cast into
eternal mourning hereafter.

. 13. That our life is nothing but tears and weeping.
EVery one (as Saint Cyprian testifies) as soon as he is borne, Cypr. Sermon. of
Patience.
and entertained for a guest into this world, begins his journey in tears;
every man may thus say of himself, In tears I did begin, in tears I end,
I did in nothing else my short days spend.
Our Cradle's full of tears, and soc's our Hearse,
Our life begin^, ends as a mournful verse.
Happic^s that man who here does mourn and weep
Because he shall not when he wakes from sleep. Serar in rebus Mogun. p. 947
Daniel 97 Epis. 57. Archiepisc. 41. Elector. Mogun.



Will you see the sum and epitome of al our life? Daniel Archbishop of Mentz,
Elector of the Sacred Roman Empire, with his own hands writ these following
admonitions, 1 Life is short; 2 Beauty deceitful. 3 Wealth uncertain. 4
Dominion hated. 5 War is pernicious. 6 Victory is doubtful. 7 Leagues are
fraudulent. 8 Old age is miserable. 9 Death is felicity. 10 The fame of true
Wisdom is everlasting.


To wit of that wisdom which descends from above, which establishes
Kingdoms, shall never cease but is eternal.

. 14. That God does comfort those that weep.
Hear the voice of the Comforter and Prom^ser together, Ps. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, Ps. 33.19
and thou shall glorify me? And the Lord is nigh to all them that are of a
troubled spirit, and he will save the humble in heart. Aug. in Tom. 8. in Psalm.
50.
Most excellently Saint Augustine, Fear not (says he) when thou art
troubled, as though the Lord was not with thee, The Lord is near to those that
are of a troubled spirit. Man may prepare a Crown for the Conqueror; but he
knows not how to give him strength to conquer: But GOD when he beholds the
battle, he strengthens his Champions, for that is the voice of the Psalmist,
that valiant warrior, If I said, my foot was moved, thy mercy (O Lord) hel^t
me up. As Soon therefore as thou art troubled, stir up thy faith, and thou
shall know, He will not leave thee comfortless. But thou may perhaps think
thy self forsaken, because thou art not delivered when thou would; He
took the three children out of the fire, but he which took those three, left
he the Machabees? Far be it to think so, He delivered the one, as well as the
other; the one corporally, that his and their enemies might be confounded;
these spiritually, that the faithful might in all ages imitate their valor.
God is high, Every good soul is lowly, if ye would that the high God should
come near unto you, be humble; these are great Mysteries (my Brethren) God is
above all; Do thou lift up thy self? thou come not near him: Do thou
debase thy self? he will come down to thee. Call therefore this faithful
Helper to thy succor by prayer. He will be propitious even at the first sigh,
if it be from the soul. God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, Apoc.
21.4.
neither shall there be any more weeping or mourning, or grief, or sorrow,
because all these are passed away Most truly said the same Father. Aug. in
Psalm. 127 circamed.
How pleasant are the sighs of the soul to God? they are more acceptable than
the laughter of Fools or Theaters.

. 15. That our death may be as advantageous as our Birth.
EPaminondas the Theban being at point of death, said, Val Max. l. 3. c. 2. and
l. 2. c. 6
I^ was not so much to be accounted the period of his life as the beginning.
For now (fellow soldiers) may your Epaminondas be said to be born, because he
so dies. For whether is better to be pampered under grief in this life, or by
death to enter into immortality.

There are a people near Thrace, Herodo^, lib. 5. Hist. Valor. l. 2. c. 1.
Quintil. l. 5. institut.
called the Trausi, which agree with the Thracians, in all customs save in this
particular; That the neighbors when an Infant is born, do with great
lamentations rehearse the great calamity the Infant must suffer on the stage of
his life: And they celebrate the Funerals of their Neighbors with great
rejoicing; in regard they are by death freed from all the miseries incide^t to
this life. This Nation of some in this very respect has bin reputed wise and
discreet, because they celebrate Birth-dayes with tears, and Obits with joy.
The Getes and Causians are said to do the same, Stobaus in Encomio Mortis.
and to speak truth, let but the seeming pleasures which this life promises,
be but exempt, which force and inveigle men to many hazards and inconveniences,
by their allurements, and then our end is to be judged more happy than our
beginning. Death is not to be accounted an evil; Plin. in praf. l. 7. Hist.
but the conclusion of all evils. Plinius Secundus says, There have been some
who have judged it best, not to have been born: and next to that, an carly
Death. So Silenus when he was taken by Midas, being asked what was best for
man, was a good space silent; but at last answered thus, It is the best not be
at all, and next to that, to be but for a moment.

I cannot omit that fare and seldom heard of passage pleasant to be related,
of one Ludovicus Cortusius, a Counselor living in Padua, who in his Will at
his death forbade all mourning for him at his Burial; and willed that all the
Musicians and Minstrels should be present, some to go before, and fifty to
follow the Clergymen and the Corpse, and allowed by Will to each of them for
their attendance half a Ducat, and willed further that his coffin should be
carried by twelve beautiful Virgins clothed in a fresh green habit, and that
they should sing melodiously as they passed along; and gave to all of them such
large Legacies, that they served for their Dowry: and was attended by an
hundred torches, and in this manner was sumptuously interred in the Church of
Saint Sophia, in Padua; with all the Clergy accompanying his burial, (the
Black Friars only excepted) whom he debard by his Testament, lest they by
their fable weeds might move in some persons mourning or heaviness, so that
his Funeral was celebrated with as much mirth as a marriage. This merry
conceited man dyed in the year of our Savior, 1418, July the seventeenth.

De modo been viv. Sermon 70. Idem de transit. mal.
Saint Bernard spoke worth^ly saying, Let those mourn for their dead, which
believe not the Resurrection: those are to be lamented, who after their death
are punished in Hell by Devils, not those who are placed in Heaven with the
blessed spirits. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.
Precious (indeed) as the period of their labors, as the consummation of
victory, as the gate to life, and the entrance into perfect rest and security.
Well spoke that wise Hebrew, Eccles. 7.4.
Better is the day of our death, then the day of our birth.

. 16. That Death is every where.
THose Wretches, who seek by what means they shall die, to whom death is more
welcome then life, may vex and distract themselves with grief and anxious
sollicitudes, and disturbing encumbrances; they may sharpen their swords,
prepare poisons, catch at Gibbets, look out for steep Rocks to fall down
from, as though the loving yoke and society betwixt the soul and body could
not be parted without such exquisite preparation. Death is always laying his
snares in all places to catch us, wheresoever man passes, Death is always
ready, where is he not working? whom does not he meet and strike with his
fatal dart? How many sorts of deaths are there, and all to ruin one poor
wretch'd man? so that it may be said truly, why are so many sorts of deaths
assailing? Lib. d^ honest. vitae. Idem in medit. cap. 3. de dignitat. animae.

When all our lives are bubbles quickly failing?
Hear but Saint Bernard, let the daily meditation of death be thy chief
wisdom: for there are diverse kinds of death always pinching thee, What ever
happens to other men (says he) may also happen to thee, because thou art a
man, thou art made and composed of earth, and art but dust of dust; thou take
thy descent and pedigree from earth, thou live of earth, and shall at one
time or other be reduced to earth, when that last and terrible day shall come,
which shall come suddenly; and perhaps to morrow, or this day. It is ^ertain
that thou shall die, but when, or how, or where, is altogether uncertain.
Seneca says, It is uncertain in what place Death looks for thee, therefore
do thou expect it in every place.

. 17. Every man's House is Death's home.
WE sport, and put Death far, too far away;
And yet it secretly in us does lurk,
Yet from our first breath do our lives decay,
And Death begins even then against us to work.
Each hour does strive to cut our threads in twain,
Each moment Death does something from us gain.
We always dye, and in one moment pass
Unto Deaths darkest Cells, as lights put out.
Death cuts off time, in which our hopes we place,
Frustrates our hopes with time, which wheels about.
So short often times are both our hopes and time
That often Death takes them both even in their prime.
In the Northern Ocean, toward Moscovy, there is a certain fish whose name is
Death, this great devourer of fishes is mightily armed with teeth, Hie. Cardan.
l. 10. de subtilitate, page 336.
(and as Cardanus reports it) sword-hilts are made usually of his teeth. Oh
mortals! our own bodies are ponds in which this great Devourer, Death is
nourished, we need not therefore go far to find it, when it is bred in our
own bowels.

-- In each (...) Home
-- Death keeps a Room.
. 18. That Death is inexorable, not to be entreated.
THough Rocks be deaf and Tigres fell,
And boystrous Seas do rage and swell,
Sometimes these are calm, quiet, pleased;
And all their furies are appeased:
But death nor threats or friendship does regard
But is than Seas, Tygres, or Rocks more hard.
Antiquity feignes the three Ladies of destinies to be all inexorable, to whom
all the power of life and death is only entrusted; to whose distaff, spinning,
thread, and sheares the Gods have transferd humane actions: as it is said, --
When Fates in order come,
-- Then every one must run
-- Without delay to his home.
Those Fates are said not to defer the determined time, but keep it exactly,
Death by Painters is delineated with a Dart in his hand, impartially striking
Kings Scepters, as they that grind at mill; without ears, because he is not
moved with mortals cries; he wants eyes, so that he looks not upon men's
miseries; he wants a forehead and cheeks, so that he cannot blush; he wants
a tongue and lips, lest he might afford to men some little comfortable
syllable, He wants flesh all over, to show that he cannot be touched with any
sense of humanity, only you shall see him with nerves, limbs, muscles and
bones, with his arrows and darts ready to strike down wretched men suddenly;
and if at any time above all the rest, Death showed his cruelty, and
inexorablenesse, it was then, when without all pity or compassion, he struck
the Prince and Author of life, Jesus Christ, with his deadly dart, though at
this attempt of his, the stones rent, the earth shook, the stars hid their
beauties, the Sun was darkened, nay, the very Angels seemed to mourn as not
willing to behold Life it self brought to death. Whosoever thou art, thou
shall find death inexorable, therefore live always mindful of it: the time
flies as a Post, and what I say, may instantly come to pass. Pers. Sat. 5.
Settle every day as it may be thy last; or first leading to Eternity.

19. As nothing is more certain, so nothing more uncertain than Death.
De Conviv. ad Clericos, c. 14.
SAint Bernard learnedly cries out, What is more certain in all humane affairs
than death? and yet what can be found more uncertain than the time of it? It
shows it self in old men, it lays ambushments in yongmen; therefore wisely
said King Solomon, Prove. 27.1.
Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth; so sings that Horace, -- Who knows if Fates will spare us, our next
breath or air? Hor. l. 4. Od. 7.


Saint James the Apostle speaks most truly, Iam. 4.13.14.
Behold you which say to day or to morrow we will go into such a city for a
year, and there we will buy, and sell, and get gains; when as you know not
what may be on the morrow, for what is your life but a v^^our? which now is,
and sudd^nly passes away: whereas you should rather say, if the Lord will, or
if we live, we will do this or that

We all, all of us must pass to the grave; for it is said, We all die, 2
Kings 14.14.
and are like water spilt on the earth, which cannot be gathered up again.
Neither can any man plead ignorance, of the Law which faith, Thou must return
the spirit to him which gave it; and as no man can die, which never did live,
so no man that ever lived, but did die; only the time and date is uncertain.
Therefore Christ has st^rr'd us up by a wise admonition: Watch and pray (says
he) for you know not the day and hour, and so repeating the words again.
Mark. 13 33, 35, 36 37.
Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Lord of the house will come,
whether at the dawning, or at midnight, or at the third watch, or in the
morning, lest when he com^s, he find you sl^eping, therefore what be says,
He says unto all men, VVatch.

20. Death comes suddenly to many, unlooked for almost to all.
WHo will not watch against the assaults of death, who is ready at all hours
for execution? who never acquaints us with the time he intends to invade us:
who sometimes comes creeping, sometimes flying, sometimes furiously in the
twinkling of an eye, hastily arrests us unprovided; without the least giving us
notice, without cause, without caution, in sickness, in health, in danger, in
security, so that there is nothing free or privileged from his talons, or
destroying assaults.

Was not Tarquinius healthy and merry, P^^ l. 7. N^^ Hist. c. 7.
and suddenly choked with the bone of a little fish? Fabius likewise wa^ well
and lusty, when presently a small hair (which he drunk with his milk)
dispatched him. Was not the biting of a Weasell the end of Aristides life? Did
not the Father of Caesar arise well from his bed, and dyed putting on his
shoes? Did not another Caesar breath out his soul going over the threshold
into his Palace? That Ambassador who intended to have spoken with great
admiration the Rhodians affairs in a great Assembly, dyed he not in the
entrance into the Court? If we will believe Lucian, Anacreon the Poet, and
Sophocles were both killed with the stone of a Grape. One little prick of a
Needle killed Lucia the daughter of Marcus Aurelius. Cneus Bebius Pamphilus the
Praetor having desired that Dignity from a youth, dyed the first hour he
enjoyed it. A sudden and violent laughter has killed some, so we read of Chilo
the Lacedemonian, and Rhodias Diagoras, who, when they heard their sons were
Conquerours in the Olympic Games, in one and the same time both suddenly
departed. Death has many passages, and entrances, by which he comes into us,
and ruins us; sometimes he comes in at the windows, sometimes enters into the
Sellars, not seldom by the supporters and pillars, and often by the tiles and
covering of the house, if he fails by these betrayers to overthrow the house,
such I call all the ill Humors, Diseases, Cathars, Plurisies, and other
Causes, which death uses to effect his designs upon us, then he will burst
open the doors with powder, with fire, water, pestilence, poisons, beasts, and
men, with all violence and fury that can be invented. Mephihosheth the son of
King Saul, as he was upon his bed at noone, was slain by hired murderers.
Pul^o King of Jerusalem, as he hunted a Hare, falling from his horse, and being
trodden upon presently was slain. Josias of all the Kings of Judah (David only
excepted) the most renowned for piety, sanctity, and other Princely endowments,
when he met the Army of Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, being suddenly wounded
with an arrow, died in the battle. Egillus King of the Goths, an excellent
Prince, was gored and killed by a mad Bull, which was let loose, by naughty
lawless people. Malcolme the first King of the Scots, after many examples of
justice, on a night as he narrowly viewed his Kingdom, was strangled; many as
they have gone to sleep, have slept their last; it is necessary at all
occasions to be in battle array against this politic enemy. Vzzah a great
man in David's Court, who laid hands upon the Arc when it shaked as it was
bringing to Jerusalem, to stay it from falling, was smitten and died. The
Prophet that eat meat contrary to the Lords command was torn in pieces by a
Lion. Ananias and Saphyra in the Apostles time, at the very word of Saint
Peter, both died suddenly; whose act may serve as a fair warning to all men
not to transgress in the like manner; but I omit these ancient times, and come
to our days.

Jacob. Gord. in Chron. in hunc annum.
In the year 1559. Henry the second King of France, was killed in the midst of
his Sports and Triumphs, in a great confluence of Spectators; for as he
celebrated in great state with justs and tournaments the Marriage of his
Daughter in Paris, was run into his eye, and so through the head with a shiver
of a Lance, that he died forthwith. In the year 1491, Alphonsus the son of
John the second King of Portugal, being 16 years old, and a Prince of an
excellent wit, and great hopes, married Isabel the daughter of Ferdinand King
of Spain, whose dowry was the Inheritance of the large Territories of her
Fathers Kingdoms: The marriage was celebrated with the preparation and
furniture of six hundred several sorts of Triumphs, every where were Plays,
and Tiltings, and Justs, and Banquets, there was such excess and superfluity,
that even Pages, and Kitchen-boyes, shone in their cloth of Gold, and silks
and velvets were accounted of no value; but oh the grief! what a strange
Catastrophe presently followed? scarce were seven months passed, when as this
young Prince sporting himself with his horse by the banks of the River Tagus,
was struck off from the banks to the earth, with his head all bruised fatally,
and so was carried into a poor fishers Cottage, which could scarce hold him,
and two of his servants, and in that poor plight, in that dejected state, upon
a Mattresse of straw, he ended his life. The King and the Queen his Mother
came thither, and saw that deplorable spectacle, and all their pomp and
magnificence was suddenly turned into mourning, and the wedding ended in a
funeral, and all their large hopes of the prosperous successful government
of their sons state were extinguished, and cut off as green flowers by the
cold blasts of a Northern wind; and so all this Princes glory was laid in a
little quantity of earth. Oh the strange and sudden whirle-windes of humane
glory! Oh the unexpected precipices and downfals of the strongest of mortals!

Shall I speak of more? Basilius the Emperor, as he was hunting a Stag, was
wounded with his horn, Hippol. Guar. l. 6. de abominandis gentis hum. 1.20
and in short time after of that wound died. An ancient Monument in Ambrose,
near Oenipont, records that a young unexpert gentleman, more rash than wise, put
his horse with his spurs to take a ditch of twenty feet over, Vide Iusta Hen.
4. regis Gall. a Ludovico Rich^omo. scripta.
he forced the horse to it, but both he and his horse perished alike: the
Knights clothes, and the horses skin kept in that place, speak this true to
posterity.

But this sudden death happens alike to good and bad: unless (as in some
examples) the divine stroke of Justice has wiped out some out of the Land of
the living for some notorious offense in the very act and perpetration, so
Dathan and Abiram for their rebellion were swallowed up of the earth quick with
their consorts. Such was the death of Absolon for his rebellion against his
Father. Such was the death of those fifty, that were sent to Elijah, whom fire
from heaven suddenly devoured. Such was the death likewise of Zimri and Cozhi,
for their transgression, being both run through by Phinees: Whose action in
lust brought them to dust.

So many Pores as are in the body, so many little doors are there for death to
enter; though death does not seem always to be near, yet he is certainly at
hand always ready. Why should that seem strange to be done at this time, which
may be done at any time? The term of our life is fixed, Senet. Epist. 101. Med.
and alters not; but none of us all knows, how near it we are. Let us so
order our selves therefore always, as if we were come to the mark. Let us not
defer. There was a certain man dreamed he was killed by the mouth of a Lion,
He rose, and neglecting his dream, went to the Church with other company, and
by the door as they entered he spied a Lion cut in stone, with his mouth open,
which partly upheld one of the Pillars, Hereupon, he with jesting and laughter
told his dream to his fellows, Behold (says he) this is the Lion that killed
me in my dream; with that saying, He put his hand into the hollow place of
the stone-lions mouth, and said, Oh fierce Lion here is thy enemy, shut thy
mouth if thou be able, and bite off my hand; he had scarce made an end of
speaking, but he received his fatal blow: for in the bottom of that hollow
place lay hid a Scorpion, which feeling his hand, put forth her sting, touched
him, and he forthwith fell down dead. Is it so that stones can sting, and
poison lurk in a Lion of stone? Where may we then not justly fear deaths
stroke? in the like manner did Hylas perish whom a lurking Viper in the chops
of a Bear of stone did kill; which is expressed by Martial in his third Book,
and nineteenth Epigram.

What need I to mention the young man who was killed, as he was going into an
house, by an Icesicle, which fell upon his head, from the House-eaves; Whom
Martial laments in his Epigrams. Lib. 4. Ep. 18.
So that you see, many are the passages that Death has to set upon us, and
usually he is then nearest when we least think of him.

. 21. An Antidote against sudden Death.
GOod Reader, here is annexed a short Prayer that I propose unto thee as a
pattern for thee to use daily to entreat the Lord JESUS CHRIST to preserve thee
from sudden death. It is at thine own liberty whether thou will use that or
some other every day. I made it, that thou might on thy knees beg this great
blessing of thy Savior; and know thus much, such is the danger and so common,
that no man can be too wary or careful over himself.

A Prayer.
O Most loving and bountiful Lord Jesus, my Lord, and my GOD, I most ardently
desire thee by thy most precious blood shedding; by thy last words upon the
Cross, when thou cryedst, My God, my God^, why have thou forsaken me; by
those bl ssed words of thine, when thou said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit; that thou would not take me away by violent death. Thy
hands (oh blessed Redeemer) made me, and fashioned me, oh give me
understanding and I shall live, oh make not so soon a^end of me, give me, I
beseech thee, time of Repentance, grant that I may end in thy favor, that I
may love thee with all my heart, and praise, and bless thy Name for ever, AMEN.

Nevertheless, all things (good Lord) are in thy disposing, neither is there
any that can resist thy will: my life depends upon thy good pleasure, neither
do I will as I please, but resign my will, to thy most godly governance, in
what place, time, or by what sickness thou will strike me, Thy will be done.
I do commend all these to thy fatherly goodness and providence. I except no
place, no time, no disease, though bitter and grievous, because Thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled; only this one thing do I crave
of Thee, not to take me away in my sins, by some hasty Messenger, but how ever
not my will but thine (O Lord) be done, if it seems good to thy heavenly
wisdom quickly to make an end of me, I submit; thy will, Oh God, be done in
all things: For even then I hope through thy tender mercies to depart in peace,
and in thy favor, in which though I do die by the hand of sudden death, yet
nothing shall separate thy love from my soul. The just though taken away by
death, goes but to his rest. Sap. 4.7.
Death is not sudden to him that is always provided.

Which if there be not a longer space and time left to me, in which I may
commend my soul to thee, which is only known to thee, behold then now I do
it, and do ardently and heartily call unto thee (O Lord) Lord, hear my voice,
and let my cry come unto thee. Have mercy upon me (O Lord) according to thy
infinite mercies: Let thy will be done in earth as it is heaven; Into thy
hands, O Lord, do I commend my spirit; for thou have redeemed it, O Lord God
of truth. All things living praise and bless thee, O God. In thee (O Lord)
have I put my trust, let me not be put to confusion.

. 22. That our days are few and evil.
HOw old art thou; Sixty; how many years aged art thou? seventy; tell me
also, oh man, how old art thou? fourscore. Alas! good men where are these
years? where are thy sixty? where have thou left thy threescore and ten, and
where (oh man) will thou find thy fourscore? why number ye those that are
lost and spent? Elegantly said Laelius that wise man to a man that said. I have
sixty years in hold, thou do (said he) reckon that which thou have not;
neither those that are past, nor what is to come is thine, we depend upon a
moment of fleeting time, and even a little time is of great consequence.

Genesis 47.8. and 9.
Pharaoh the Egyptian King, asking the Patriarch Jacob how old he was, old
Jacob answered, The days of the years of thy servants pilgrimage are few and
evil.

Hearken you earthly Tantaluss^s which so eagerly thirst after the extended
years of a perishing life; Know that you are strangers here, not inhabitants,
passengers, not dwellers, travelers, not natives, nor are you travelers in a
long continuing journey, your way as it is evil, so it is short; short it is,
perhaps to be ended before the conclusion of the next hour which you divide
with death; evil any knows it to be, that are in it. It offers more bra^bles
than Roses to go upon. Miserable and vain that we are! what advantage is it
for a stranger to load himself with p^bbles, and fading flowers, and for them
to lose his heavenly inheritance? what hinderance or loss is it to leave
these, if we get immortality and glory? to labor in the way, to provoke to
good works, to sweat in them, to endure any troubles or molestation is to be
counted gain. The more harsh our banishment is, the more welcome will our
Country be.

. 23. That a young man may die old.
AS old men at length become as children, so there may be many young may be
said to be old men. Old Balaam a man of threescore years and ten, answered
Josaphat the King (asking him how old he was) that he was forty and five, and
told the King w^ndring at his wo^ds; that he had been quiet at his study
twenty five years, as for the rest which he had spent upon worldly vanities
he did verily believe all those to be utterly lost; so one Similius, which was
(as it were) buried in Court affairs, and had rather lived for his Emperor,
than for himself, caused this to be engraved upon his Sepulcher, Here lies
buried Similius an old man of seven years of age. 1 Reg. 13.1.
In the sacred Writ it is recorded of King Saul, that he began to reign when
he was one year old, and he reigned two years over Israel. Saul when he
began to reign was as pure from sin as an Infant of a year old: and he kept
this his uprightness and integrity but one complete year, although in all he
ruled twenty years. Many get to old age before they be so. Many never see the
flourishing of that work, but in their old and decrepid age they too often
retain the sins of youth, holy Job does speak it, His bones are filled with
the sins of his youth. Sen. Epist. 49. ad finem. et. l. de tranquil. c. 3.
A life is not counted good for the duration of it, but the use; it may be so,
and has come to pass, that he who has lived a long time, may be said to
have lived but a short moment; there is nothing more gross, than an old man
that has no other argument to prove himself old by, than his age and
multitude of years. Saint Ambrose spoke elegantly of Agnes a Virgin, Sermon. 90.
qui est de S. Agnes.
In years she was a child, but in gravity and sobriety of mind she was an
ancient Matron: the sacred Scriptures proclaim that old age is reverend, and
the hoary head, when they are furnished with wisdom. Wisd. 4, 8, 9.


It is therefore that old men are reverenced, not for their antiquity and
multiplicity of days, but for their holiness of life, and abundance of
wisdom. Whosoever therefore is ancient in wisdom, though young in years, is
as a Daniel, and deserves respect: an upright life is the best seniority.

He has lived long enough, who has lived well. He has fought enough, who
has got the victory.

. 24. A Paradox. That any man that will, may live long.
TVlly says, that a short time is long enough to live well. Lib. 1. Tus^ q^.
He never dies too early that (if he had lived longer) would not have lived
better. That youngling has lived years enough, who has lived to get Virtue,
to get Eternity. Has not he spoke well that persuades his Auditors by one
short sentence, or beckning? Has not he run well, who has gained the prize?
Has not he sailed far enough that is come happily to his desired Haven? Only
have a care that death prevents not our meditations, and then the swifter our
course, the happier it is.

Curt. lib. 9 c. 12. Mod.
Truly, I say (as the King of Macedon said in Cu^tius) He which numbers not my
years but my victorious Conquests, and computes my husband^y of Fortunes gifts
exactly, will find I lived long time; but much more trulier, Hc, who has
consecrated his whole life to God, and has only studied to please and serve
him, may say with confidence and comfort; if my years be not numbered, but my
manifold desires of pleasing God, and Gods great and infinite mercies bestowed
upon me in that time, I have lived long.

. 25. That we must all die.
AVgustus the Emperor having taken the City of Perouse in Hetruria, observed
many, Sn^^on. in Aug. c. 15
how they beg d their pardons, or desired to excuse themselves, he answered
them all in this short sentence, Dio says 400.
We must all die; Thereupon he forthwith commanded three hund^ed of them to be
sacrificed upon the Altar built to Julius Caesar. Just. Man. in Trip. ^ren. l.
5. cont Har^se^.


Justinius Martyr and Ireneus famous writers amongst the Primitive times, have
wittily observed, that after the sentence pronounced of death against our first
parents, there was never any mortal man, according to Gods sacred account,
that did ever live out one whole day complete; For the Prophets and Apostles
bear record, Ps. 90.4. and 2 Pet. 3.8.
That a thousand years in Gods fight are but as one day, and one day as a
thousand years: But yet never was that man found whose life attaind to such a
large extent as to a thousand years, therefore according to Gods reckoning
never did any live a day outright. Thou must die, though thy life goes beyond
the compass of 900. years. All those registered in the word of God, of whom
some lived so many hundred, and others so many hundred years, yet the final
clause of all of them is this, and He dyed. This will appear to be most
certain by the sacred oracles, by reason and experience. Gods word has in the
old and new Testament mentioned this 600. times, Moriendum, We must die. Reason
convinces the same by most evident demonstrations; because man is composed of
contraries, and obnoxious to ruin, and so of consequence at one time or other,
Moriendum est, He must die. Experience the Schoolemistris of wise and unwise,
points as it were with her finger at the imme^se heaps of dead corpses, and
shows by daily examples that yet there was never man that deluded or shifted
off deaths wound, it is as manifest as the sun at noon day, Moriendum est,
that man must go to his long home. This word, Death, sounds in the ears of
all as loud as thunder; no man can in this thing be either blind, or deaf;
will we, nil we, this voice will pierce our ears; Deaths thunder will be
Moriendum est, we must all die. Even divine Justice, and divine mercy herein
agree in one, all men must die.

Aeschilus said of old, Not. 99. l. 6. in fine.
Death only refuses to be bribed by the very deities. The Goddesses with their
gifts could not assuage Death, It admits not the sweetest and fairest hopes,
and therefore Seneca said wisely, let us have that always fixed in our minds,
let us always apply this to our souls, Moriendum est, we must die; when? thou
shall never know better than presently; Death is the Law of Nature, and thou
must pay this ^ribute when death by law requires it; wherefore laying aside all
other things, meditate seriously this one, lest when death comes thou should
fear his approach. Make death by a frequent meditation thy familiar, that when
it shall so fall out that death shall call thou may willingly and readily
salute it with cheerfulness.

26. The remembrance of Death is diverse ways to he renewed.
1. IT is reported that a dead man's scul dried in an oven, and beaten to powder
in a mortar, and so mixed with oil, does speedely heal the Gangrene, and
Canker. To bruise the brain pan, and other the bones of dead men, by an holy
Meditation and Contemplation does perfectly cure the Gangrene of the Soul.

2 Plato is said to outstrip the sages in this respect, S. Hiero. hu ut
meminit in C. 10. Man
in that with vivacity and courage he did contemplate upon death and read
lectures to his Scholars of it. Therefore he gave this as a law to his
Scholars; that being entered on their journey they should never stand still or
stop their cou^s he wisely intimated by this, that there departure out of this
life should be daily considered, and some progress to he made every day more
than other.

3 Nicolaus Christopherus Radzivilius a Prince of Poland affirms, that in
Egypt those which did excel others in age and wisdom, did daily carry about
them dead men's bones set in ebony or some other thing, and did use to show them
to men, and by these they did daily exhort men to remember their ends, the
Egyptians also use at their banquets to bring in a deaths head, and end their
merry meetings with this sad Emblem, to have presented before them the
shoulder blade of a dead man, with this heavy motto, Remember you must die.

4 The Great Cham of Tartarie, in the City of Bagdad, upon a Festival day
which they call Ramadam, showing himself to the people riding upon a Mule,
being richly apparelled investments of gold and silver cloth, his Turbant being
all set with precious jewels, yet all his head and ornaments are hid under a
black veil, by which custom and ceremony he shows, that the greatest glory,
and highest magnificence, will be shaded and obscured with death.

Baron. Tom. 7. An. 567.
5 There was laid over Justinian the Emperor being dead a large Carpet, in
which in Phrygian work there were woven the lively Effigies of all the Cities
that he had conquered, and all the barbarous Kings he had subdued: and in the
midst of all those great Battails, Trophies, and Conquests, there was the Image
of Death. For, for certain, Death does sport it self in Kingdoms; as he said,
Pallida mors aeque pulsat pede etc.
Death only strikes not poor men dead and clowns,
But lofty Turrets, and Imperial Crowns
Martine the fifth Pope of Rome, Aulea Otho Column a dictus.
had this in a Badge or Symbol, In a great fire ready kindled, in which were
thrown a Bishops Mitre, a Cardinals Hat, an Emperors Diadem, the Crowns of
Kings, a Dukes Cap of Maintenance and Sword; with this adnexed Motto, So
passes all worldly glory.

6 A man asked a Mariner upon a time where his Father died? De remed. utriusque
fortunae, l. 1. dial. 121. Fran. Petrarch. Cujus opera hic saepius utendum,
the Mariner replied in the Sea; the other asked him, where his grandfather and
his great grandfather died? the Sailer answered again at Sea; and (quoth the
other) art not thou then afraid to go to Sea? The Sailor wittily replied, and
Sir, I pray you tell me where your Father died? He answered in his bed; but
where died your grandfather, and all other your Ancestors? in their beds
replied the other: then are not you afraid to go into your bed seeing all your
forefathers died there; no, said the other; why, said the Sailor, by your own
relation the bed is the more dangerous in this respect, for there many more
dies in their beds, than there do at sea; and you may die there, as soon as I
may at sea. A witty answer and well applied. Let our daily Meditations be as
Lipsius said when he went sick to bed, ad Lectum, ad Lethum; to the Bed and so
to the Grave: for many have died in their sleep, Death being but the elder
sister of sleep.

7 John Patriarch of Alexandria, Le^^^. ^yp^or. Episc. c. 18. in vita Ioan^^s.
which took his name from hi^ Almesdeeds, in his health he commanded his
sepulcher to be built but it was not fully finished; in so much that upon a
great solemn^ feast day in the presence of all the Clergy, when he had ended
his sacred Charge, One said to him (My Lord) your sepulcher is not yet built
up, nor perfected; command, I pray you, that it may be made speedily up; For
your honor knows not how soon the Thief may overtake you.

8 It was not lawful for any one to speak to the Eastern Emperor, being
newly created, Idem ibid.
before that a Mason had showed him some sorts of Marble, of several colors,
and had asked which of those he liked best to have his Sepulcher made of. What
was this else but to say, Be not high minded, o Emperor, Thou art a man and
shall die as the meanest beggar. Xiphili. in Domit. who in this banquet did not
seek to remember death, but sport and vanity.


Look therefore so to the government of thy Kingdom which thou shall lose, as
that thou losest not the Kingdom which is everlasting.

9 Domitianus the Roman Emperor made a banquet to the chief of his Senators,
and great Knights after this manner: He had all the rooms covered with black
clothes, also the roofes of the Chambers, the walls, and the pavement, the
seats all black, promising mourning; In the chief place was a funeral bed, the
guests were brought in by night, without any attendants, by every one there was
placed a Coffin with every man's name upon it, and there were la^ps added and
set up, as use to be at funerals; the waiters at the table they carried the
colors of the night in their habits and countenances, and compassed the guests
with notes and gestures of Death; all this while supper was celebrated in great
silence, and Domitians discourse was only of burialls and Death at the table, to
the astonishment and affrightment of his guests, who feared what would be the
issue of this his action. What followed think you after all this mournful
carriage and deportment, only Domitianus had provided a wholesome document for
himself and his Senators, but never made use of it, so that it was rather
judged folly than wisdom: The Egyptians do better, who always temper their
feasts with some seasonable lessons of Mortality.

27. A discourse of New shifts made by Assan Bashaw in Grand Cayro for erecting
of a Temple.
IN Grand-Cayro in Egypt there is a Turkish Temple, (which they call a Mosque)
which was builded by this means. Rad^. Epist. 3. Itineris in palastin. page
176.
Assan the Bashaw for the Grand-Seigneur of Turkey, a man of a cunning head, and
a covetous Heart, being desirous his fame should be spread abroad through the
world by some eminent structure, but willing to save his own purse, went this
way to work. He commanded it to be proclaimed in all places, what a mighty
Temple he was intended to build to God; And that this Temple might proceed with
all happy success, he published what large wages all they that would come and
work should have paid them: withal what an huge offering should there be
offered; thereupon the time and place was appointed. This called an innumerable
company of people out of all Egypt, and not only from thence, but a world of
people came from all other parts to Grand-Cayro. Against this great confluence
of peoples coming, Assan the Bashaw had prepared a mighty number of new shirts
and coats: now those which came to the offering, as also they which came to
receive wages, were all commanded to pass through several little doors out of
one great spacious court into another, and at each door as they passed single,
he had set officers to strip off their old garments and shirts, and n^w ones
were put upon them, by force and command. By this his subtle craft, whatsoever
any man had brought with him for his journey (as the manner in those parts is,
to sow, or bind it up in his shirt or Turbant) he got it all in this manner to
himself; Now, it is wonderful to think what a mass of money he gained out
of so many thousan^s of people. And although all the people had rather have
kept their own habit (though it was not so gay and new as the Bashawes were)
yet there were no complaints to be received, but so it was commanded, and so it
was to be performed. Well, all the people lamented and grieved, and desired
their old clothes again; but he as a great politician laughed at them, and
commanded all their clothes presently to be burned in one general fire; And
out of the fire was taken such a mass of Treasure and money, as sufficed
enough and enough to erect that great famous Temple.

Now observe just so does Death deal with us, he takes away from us all our
rich garments, and wraps us all in an empty winding sheet. Now, 2 Cor. 5. v. 4.
(as the blessed Apostle St. Paul says) we sigh being burdened, and are loath
to be found naked, yet not willing to be stripped of our clothing; but we strive
in vain, stern Death (as that greedy Bashaw) is nothing moved with our
complaints, will we, nill we, we must lay aside our old clothing, put off; and
be gone The same condition binds all of us, all that have a birth, must partake
of death, there is a little distance, but no distinction.

But now hear how this covetous man's act was revenged. The Turkish Seigneur
having Intelligence what was done by Assanus the Bashaw, he presently
dispatc'd one Imbraim a Bashaw to him with Letters, and charged him sorthwith
upon the receipt of his Letters, to send his head to him in Constantinople:
These fatal Le^ters the great Turk uses to write with his own hand, and to
seal them himself, and so to role them up in black-silke; The sum always
of these Letters is; Mitte mihi tuum caput. (i. e.) send to me your Head; which
was effected speedily.

Mark now seriously: whosoever thou art, King or Kaesar, when as the Grand
Ruler of heaven and earth sends to thee his black letters by Death his
messenger, thou can not resist nor plead excuse, thou may not: to entreat
will not avail thee, fly or escape thou can not: it is determined above. Do
thus then, and make a virtue of necessity: what thou must do by force, do
willingly, send thy head and thy heart too, not to a Tyrant, but to a Father,
not to a man, but to God. Be not thou only commanded to set thy house in order
and dye, but willingly surrender thy self, for why should it not agree with
thy will, when against thy will it must be, it is of necessity to yield, it is
of virtue and grace to resign willingly.

. 28. That each day is to be regarded, and warily observed.
MVsonius speaks it, that we cannot spend the day as we ought, unless we
determine to use it, as if it were our last: It is wholesome counsel which
Saint Austine affords us: Tom. 10 Lib. 50. Homil. 13 initio.
Our last day we know not, because we should look well to every day. God has
wisely appointed the day of our death to be uncertain, that we should no^ be
at any time secure, and that every one should reckon this present time, his
last; but if you say, it is a melancholy thought to be poring and considering
upon death, and that it is the only way to bring on death, you are mistaken
much; A wise man will think with contentedness of death, no otherwise than an
understanding Mariner will think of winds and waves as his ship sails, as
means to bring him into his Harbor; and yet the very thought does not bring
him thither. This is all our folly and error, we will be tossed amongst waves,
and floods, and yet we fear to go, whither by nature and reason we are led.
Nature dictates this to us: One steers-man guides us all,
At our rising, or our fall.
And for Reason, who, that is endued with it will deny? What tossings,
turmoylings, cares, distractions, miseries, dolors of body and mind, are not
here? Behold an end of them, why fear thou? behold the haven, why entrest
thou not in? but indeed as men in prison would feign come forth, and might but
for the Keeper, who locks them fast in; So might thou, but for thy saylor;
the love of this vain life. He is to be dismissed, and as thou art able, so
must thou often consider of that, which thou must once undergo. And because
thy last day is uncertain and unknown, suspect every one for it: rely upon none
securely, by this course thy spirit will be more full of courage, thy life will
be more conformable, and thy departure more comfortable, for what can
terrify, or disturb him? to whom The Prince of fears,
With joy appears.
A secret sudden wound is most terrible, a meditated death lays us down
gently and joyfully.

. 29. The Seat Royal of all our pride, is our Beer.
Gen c. 13. toti.
ABraham that great Patriarch, when by Gods command, He went traveling up and
down, he desired nothing more, then to find a place to rest in, Heb. 11.
and for the purchasing so much ground as would serve him for a place of
burial. This he desired to have his own, that he might possess it, and
wholly enjoy it. Hence he without any delay paid to the seller all the money
which he asked for it, without any deduction, of good and current money, nor
would it suffice him to have it publicly passed over to him, but withal he
would that all the Inhabitants should be witnesses for his buying it. By which
matter the pious man showed, that a man's grave or Sepulcher is truly his own,
which he might rather than any thing else call his properly. By the example of
Abraham, Every good man will chiefly care for to have a Sepulcher at the time
of his dissolution; other houses and lands, and possessions, want no chapmen,
few men purchase after this manner, however, the grave is a sure and a quiet
possession.

Maximilianus the first Emperor of the Austrian Family, three years before
his death, commanded his Coffin to be made of Oak, and to be put into a great
Chest, which was carried with him, in his Marches and travels, and provided by
his Will, that his dead body wrapped in a linen cloth should be laid
therein, without any embalming, only his nostrils, mouth, and ears, to be
stopped with lime or chalk; what meant this great Monarch? only that having
such a Monument of Mortality before him, he should say; Remember thou must
die; And that he might daily say; Why do thou, oh my soul, so enlarge thy
thoughts? why do thou possess so much? why gapest thou still after more?
whom so many Provinces and Kingdoms could not hold, this little Cabinet must
include? and why think you he desired to have lime and chalk for his
nostrils, mouth and ears? behold the costly Odours and Unguents in which he
would be laid down! Oh Maximilian, great once thou were! and thy actions, and
these very things at thy death speak the same.

Baron. Tom. 3. An. 326. ^. 96.
What shall I speak of the Coffin of Ablavius, which was a Prefect, and a
great Prince amongst other of Constantine the Great his Courtiers, an
insatiable devourer of gold, who meditated more of gold, than his grave, or
heaven. Constantine on a time taking him by the hand spoke thus unto him, How
long, how long, said he, shall we heap together wealth of this kind; And as
he had spoke the words, with a Spear which he held in his hand, he drew the
description of a Coffin on the ground; Had thou (said he) a world full of
such treasure, yet after thy death thou shall not have a greater place than
this, perhaps less then this form which I have drawn out; Constantine in
this proved a Prophet, for this Ablavius was cut in small pieces, so that there
was nothing left of him to put into a Sepulcher.

Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, did imitate Maximilian who^ I named
ere-while, long before his death he sequestered himself from administering the
affairs of the Empire; and having transferred the government and management of
it to his Son, who was able for his years, and of judgment sufficient, he
himself went into Spain with 12. followers only, into the Monastery of St.
Justus, to give himself wholly to Gods service, and forbade any to call him by
any other name or title, then Charles only, putting far off the title of
Caesar Augustus with the Employment, and contemned all honors whatsoever. And
moreover it is registered of him, that before he relinquished the Empire, he
commanded his Tomb to be made, with all furniture belonging to his burial,
and had it carried with him whithersoever he went, but privately. He had this
funebrious accoutrements five years with him, wheresoever he was; I, even when
he went to Millaine against the French, and had it diligently every night
placed in his bedchamber. Some that were about his Person, thought that
therein he kept his treasure, others judged that in it he kept some rare
books, containing some ancient Historys; Others thought there was some great
matter in it: but he himself knowing for what purpose he carried it, would
smiling say; He carried it about for the use of something which was dear unto
him. So did this Charles daily meditate of death, that at every night, he
should say, Vixi, I have lived; and so every morning rise with profit and
comfort.

Many others have piously imitated this Emperor, Zach. Lippol. tom. 3. in vit.
S. Re. 1. October.
that for long time together have carried their Coffins, the monuments of their
death, with them for contemplation. Genebaldus, for seven whole years
together, had his bed made like a Coffine, in which for that space he lived
austerely, and exercised himself in Mortification.

There was one Ida, Idem. tom. 3. in vita. S. Idae. 4 Sept. Hier. Epist. 103.
a woman famous for holiness, which had likewise her Coffin made long before
her death, which she filled twice a day with food and nourishment, and so often
distributed it to the poor liberally: The study of piety, is the preparatory
for death; No death pollutes a virtuous soul, he will easily despise all
earthly things, who has his thoughts fixed upon his dissolution.

30. What our life is?
IT is as a flower, as smoke, as a shadow, and as the shadow of a shadow; It
is a Bubble, Dust, froth: It is as deaw, as a drop, as brittle ice; As the
Rainbow, a blazing Taper, a bag full of holes; A ruinous house, deceitful
ashes, a spring-day, a constant April; as a dash in music, a broken vessel;
As a bucket for a Well, a Spiders web; As a drop to the Ocean, weak stubble; A
Summers herb, a short Fable, a flying sparkle: A dark cloud, a bladder full
of wind; as a little Dove a taking her slight, a brittle Glass, a fading
Leaf, a fine weak thread, a Sodemes Apple, etc. And if a shadow be nothing,
tell me what is the dream of a shadow? we may make six hundred thousand of
such similitudes of frailty and inconstancy, and all like to man's life; Me
thinks of all others he spoke wittily that calls it, a very short dream of a
shadow, in brief, let us see what life is? it is as one has described it in
this distich.

Somnus, umbra, vitrum, glacies, flos, fabula, foenum.
Vmbra, cinis, punctum, vox, sonus, aura, nihil.
(i. e.) Life's like a dream, a bubble, ice, or glass,
Like fading flowers, vain fables, withering grass.
It is a shadow, dust, a point, a voice, a sound,
It Is empty air; well looked too, Nothing found.


Ah wretches! how seem we to heap up wealth, to get honors, to follow and
hunt after pleasures? when all these are as soon vanished as our selves. Any
of these, all of them are but as a dream, and how short and vain is that!
Psalm. 76.5.
true is that saying of the Psalmist, the proud are robbed, they have slept
their sleep, and all the men whose hands are mighty have found nothing, they
dreamt that they were mighty and rich; but what have they retained or kept of
all they gaped after, or hoped for? these are but mere dreams and fancies
indeed: and wakening they shall find their loss, and grieve in their
punishment.

What therefore is life? I will declare it compendiously: the time, and length
of our life, is a point, our nature is inconstancy, our senses are obscurity;
Our whole body is but a rotting Concretion, our mind vagrant; Honors are but
smoke; Riches are thorns; Pleasures are poyson^. And that I may sum up all
in word; All things belonging to the body, are but a passing stream; all the
minds endowments are emptiness; our life is a war; the lo^ging of a
traveller in a strange City, the shop of all miseries, and our fame after
death, is but oblivion: Ausonius delivevers this well unto us; Mieremur
periisse homines? Epigr. 3.
momenta fatiscunt;
Mors etiam saxis, nominibusque venit.
(i. e.) Men being as moments (no wonder) though they are gone;
Death makes our names to fail, and Marble-stone.


It Is a virtue to consummate our life before death knocks at our doors.

. 31. That our life is a play.
OUr life is a Comedy, we the stage players, one acts a King, another a Beggar,
a third a Prince, another a Physician, another a Clown; What part is imposed
upon us we must perform, we get no Plaudite unless we act well: Well said
Epictetus, Euch. c. 23
Thou art called upon the Stage, it makes not what part thou performest, so
thou do it well.

Sueton. in Aug. 99.
Suetonius reports of Augustus Caesar, that at the end of his life, he asked
his friends that were about him, if he had played his part well or not? They
answered him, yes; why do ye not then (said the Emperor) afford me a Plaudite?

Seneca well spoke, of the life of man comp^red to a Play; Epist. 80. in Med.
I will often practice my part, lest for want of use, I grow unskilful, and so
get discredit and shame.

Laertius in Zeno says, that a wise man is l^ke a Player: that whether he acts
Thersi^es or Agamemnon, he should strive to perform both with diligence.

We are therefore to attend not so much what we are, but what we shall be,
when we shall have laid down our persons, and put of our Vizards, nor matters
it when we performed our parts, only if we did them with discretion.

32. The Type of Humane life.
BArlaam, an old man, Johannes Damasceu, Hist, de his, c. 13. ad finem.
declaring to King Iosaphat the deceitful joys of Humane life, described them
to him after this manner; A certain man fled from a Unicern, which is a fierce
cruel beast; in his flight he rushed suddenly into a deep pit, but in his
fall, his hands being stretched forth, he caught hold of a tree, and by that
means stopped his fall, while he was in the tree, he contemned the danger he
was escaped from; but he saw two mice, the one was black, the other white,
these two lay gnawing the root of the tree, and had almost bit it in pieces;
then, he casting his eyes about espied beneath him a wondrous deep ditch, and
in it was a terrible Dragon threatening death to him, if he fell; and while he
was looking about to save himself from dangers, he spyed the heads of four
great venomous Serpents, lying forth out of the sides of the ditch, yet he
neglecting all these dangers, he lift up his eyes, and beheld some Honey
dropping from a tree, wherefore he supposing himself secure, forgetting the
Unicorne that followed him, the Dragon that threatened him, the Mice that gnawed
the roots of the tree, the Serpents that waited him, and the sudden fall of
that tree, he greedily licked in the Honey, and these things (said Barlaam)
do set forth the folly of our lives: and thus he explained it;

The Unicorne resembles Death, which does pursue all mankind eagerly; The Ditch
is this world, which is stored with all sorts of miseries; The Tree which he
caught hold on, is this life terminated within certain bounds; The two Mice
are the night and the day, which eat up the root of the tree by little and
little: The four Serpents are the four Elements, who if they be out of order,
or molested, Death ensues; That great and terrible Dragon, designs the fiery
Serpent the devil, who goes about, seeking whom he may devour; The drops of
Honey, which the man so eagerly desired to taste of, are the enticing pleasures,
and the rotten baits of sins, being once overcome with the alluring
pleasures and deceitful lusts, man neither fears the sudden fall into Hell,
nor ever minds the joys of Heaven, but desires to perish in the gulf of
these sensual delights: this was Barlaams explication to Josaphat. Oh how
true! most true is all this! if we be wise, let us remember our ends, for from
every moment of time depends eternity.

. 33. The Prologue, Narration, and Epilogue of man's life.
THe Prologue of humane life, is to be borne; the Narration, is to grieve; the
Epilogue is to die. The Appendixes of th^se three are groans, and tears, or
joy, which is worse than weeping. Seneca says excellently: Consel. ad Polyb.
c. 23.
go too (says he) look circumspectly upon all men, and you shall have cause
and matter enough to weep; Poverty and exigency, and extreme necessity, calls
one forth to his toylsome labor, another is vainly sweld, and puffed up with
Ambition, another fears in the midst of his wealth, a fourth is vexed with
care, some are weakened with sickness and diseases, others are turmoyling in
great businesses, and are troubled with the confluence of Clyents; this man
grieves that he has children, a second that he has lost them, a third
because he never had them. We shall weep our selves empty of tears, before we
shall want objects for them. See thou not what a life Nature promises us?
whose entrance, progress, and egr^sse, is but a vicissitude of sorrows, and an
intercourse of miseries and tears; in these we begin our life, with these we
go on, and with abundance of tears, and wailings we go out.

A great part of our life is spent in doing evil, a great deal spent and
consumed in doing nothing, and a great part of it wasted in doing other things,
not the maine. Who is he that so prizeth a day, as though he should never have
any more? Hence is it that we carelessly forget things past, neglect things
present, do not foresee things to come. Well, when it is come to the upshot,
then, then shall we with grief and sorrow know and understand, that what time
was spent in sin and idleness, to be utterly lost; Let us therefore walk
circumspectly, and lay hold on all times and opportunities for our betterment.
Let us judge each hour our dying hour. By this means we shall so order our
lives, that we shall not be afraid to die, for while our life seems to be
prolonged, it fleets and passes away.

. 34. That the longest life is but short at the best.
Epist. 77. in fine.
MOst truly said Seneca, no man's life but is short. For if we respect the nature
of things even Nestors and Statilia's were but short, who commanded this t^ be
inscribed on her tomb, tha^ she lived 99. years; behold the vain boasting
of an old woman what would she have been, ha^ she lived an hundred!

As (it is in the Fables) the golden Flour-amour, or the Amaranthus, was
planted next to the Rose, and said to the Rose thus; O^ what a comely flower
the Rose is* O how beautiful! how amiable I do take thee for a blessed
flower, for thy sweetness, color, an^ comeliness: Oh thou Queen o^ Flowers!
To whom the Rose replied; I do indeed, oh Amaranthus, excel in splendour and
sweetness, but my time of flourishing is but short, and though no hand should
offer violence to me, yet I do soon wither of my self: but thou art happy,
for thou always do flourish, never die: I had rather have less beauty,
and longer life. Man's life is emblematiz'd in this Rose, short and fading; and
though no violence be offered to him, yet he falls of his own accord into the
grave. The Prince of Physicians said well, Arts are long and durable, Hippoc.
initio Aphor.
but life is short. We have but a little, and we spend a great deal of that
little in luxury and idleness. O improvident Mortals, the body we carry about
us is not our dwelling, but our June, it must be left, when once the Master is
weary of our company. Therefore, o my good Christian! hasten to live holily,
and think every day an entrance into a new life. Who so fits himself this
way, shall meet death with comfort. That man never died ill, who lived well.

35. That Procrastination is the greatest damage and blemish to our lives.
WE put off any thing but wickedness, that not only takes up the present day,
but is likewise promised the morrow. In sin we are prompt actors, in other
things usual promisers and fair-speakers: then we use to say, to morrow it
shall be done or next week, or next year without delay; so do days, months,
and years slide away; while we only delay, and promise, but perform not.
Seneca speaks admirably in this point. Lib. de Brev. vit. c. 4.
Many shall yo^ hear (says he) who say at fifty (...) will take mine ease,
the sixtieth yeer^ shall discharge me from all encumbran^ces. and what surety
else desire tho^ of a longer life? but who will suffe^ things to go at thy
disposing? Blushest not thou to reserve the refuse, and the dregs of thy rotten
years to God? and to destinate only that time for his service, which thou art
not able to manage in any other manner? It is too late then to begin to live,
when it is time to leave off work. What senslesnesse is it to refuse to follow
good counsel, till a man comes to fifty or sixty years of age? and to resolve
there to begin to live, where most leave off?

Sigismund the second, King of Poland for his delayings and slothfulness in
matters of weighty consequence, was called Rex Crastinus: the delaying King,
such sure are we, though we know not that we shall be to morrow, yet we
hazard the mainer work upon such uncertain probabilities. We put off all;
most willingly would wee^, if we could, put off death too. But death's
business admits of no delay, nor putting off; when Death knocks, the bars must
speedily open. Therefore as the Proverb says, The only way to be long an old
man, is to be such an one betimes. The King of Macedon obtained such glorious
Conquests by being speedy upon his actions. We lose the best, nay, all by
deferring and delaying. Chrysologus said well. Most men put off to do well,
Ser. 125. Med.
until death debar them of time.

We come to death by degrees, as men who sleep walking. The first day we put
off good duties, the second day we do them slightly, the third day we forget
them, on the fourth we are not able to perform them.

O Mortals! to morrows life is too late, learn to live to day; give earnest to
day: grieve to day for your sins. For who (except your own conceits) has
promised you the morrow? that which may be, ought to be done to day, why
should it be procrastinated to tha^ which yet is not? may perhaps not be time?
or if it be perhaps not thine? to defer good actions has always proved
dangerous.

Deferrings are obnoxious to our lives, Iumb. vet.

You seldom see the slothful man that thrives.
Let us make have therefore, and let us but seriously think how speedily we
would foot it, if we were sure there was a destroying Enemy behind us. We
would strive to be foremost that we might be furthermost from our pursuers. It
is so, we are followed close; to hasten is to escape, so shall we enter into
eternal rest: It is the greatest comfort against deaths approach to have done
all our work before he comes to call for us.

To the Sick.
A Winter's at hand: leaves fall: Death 'gins to snatch
His Ax and spies thy Glass spent: Sick man watch.
B What the Press to Grapes, that Sickness is to thee,
If thou be ripe, as Grapes in Autumn be.
C The stouping Hern often gores her towering Foe:
So outward grief often frees from inward woe.
D Sickness lays men along, as hail does corn,
Better fall well then stand with shame an^ scorn.
E Just now 'twas cloudy; now Sol show his face,
Now clouds again. This is the Sick man case.
F To escape the Scorpions sting, and the Archers dart,
Sickness and Death) I know no means, (...) art.
G A Sick man's like an Horse plunging i^ sturdy waves,
Who knows if the one shall escape the flood^ the other the grave?
36. Deaths haunt.
WIlliam the third, Duke of Bavaria, a Patron of the poor, and Protector of
all religious and godly men, being dead; though all men should have held their
peace, yet the cries and tears of the poor lamenting his loss, would have
been sufficient Trumpets to have blazoned his Princely worth: this
prayse-worthy Prince (I say) when he He returned from the Council of Basil,
where he, in the place of the Emperor sat chief; returning to Munchen,
dreamed such a dream, as this following.

He seemed to see a lusty great Stag, which carried upon one horn little
bells, and upon the other diverse wax Tapers and Torches lighted, there was a
nimble Huntsman, and a pack of hounds, who withal swiftness and eagerness
had this Stag in chase, at the last the Stag, having no other way leapt into
the Churchyard, in which there was a Grave made for a Man's burial which was
open, into which the Stag fell, and there was taken and killed: at the sight of
this the Prince wakened, and was wondrous desirous to know what this Dream
should mean, on the next day, he told it to his Lords, and this Dream was
variously interpreted, which, when Duke William had heard; presently replied, I
am (said he) this great Stag, which Death so eagerly hunts, and will shortly
and speedily take me, and end my days, and I will be buried in that Church. All
things were ordered accordingly, and these presages had their events
answerable. For in short space after, this worthy Prince did yield to Death,
and commended his soul to God piously, and was there inter^'d, where he
desired. A good Death is the introduction to a blessed Eternity.

37. Why, though we daily are Spectators of Burials, yet we do not meditate
on Death?
THe Devil being skilful in the perspective art, uses this cunning policy,
that those things which are furthest off, he makes them seem near unto us, and
those which are near unto us, he makes seem a great way distant from us. Thus
he represents Death to us, that though it be so near us, that it is ready to
lay hold on us, yet it appears a great way off, hence in a vain security we
promise to our selves many years, and put the evil day far from us to our
great disadvantage. Hence is it that we look upon other men's Burials, as
though ours were not to be this long time, and though we are decaying daily,
yet for all that; we fancy an eternity to our own souls.

Sir Thomas Moore, our Countriman, lest any age should promise him a long life,
and so work security in him, exercised the thoughts of Death in himself by
this fit similitude: As man (says he) who is led from prison to the place of
execution, though he be led about, and seems to go slowly, yet he fears
Death, and is as sure of it, as he that goes a nearer way; and though his legs
be strong, his eyes quick-sighted, his heart lusty, though his stomach be able
for digestion; yet this one thought turns all into bitterness, that he is in
the way to a certain execution. And what man is not a prisoner in this kind?
we are all going on toward our long home: we are all in the way, and parted
but by small distances, those which are dead have not so much left us, only
they are gone before us, but perhaps thou may say, I am healthy and lusty,
and find not, nor feel any the least sense of sickness, nor apprehension of
Death; well! flatter thy self if thou will, for certain thou art in the way:
and we all are in the way with thee. But thou may say, thou art not yet
thirty years old, what then? thou wast in the way at twenty, at ten, at five,
at three, nay, even at the first year, and in the first hour: go on perhaps
thou may a little further, but thou will shortly come to thy end, but yet
thou will say, thy sleep is sound, thy meat and drink do excellently well
relish and digest. Oh fond man! Death regards not such things. We are in the
way, look to thy self, presently thou will perceive the place of execution,
thou art led on; there is but a little time for thee to breath in; shortly shall
all thy pomp, luxury, and strength expire as well as thy self, all our life
is but the pathway to death.

That Death may happy be, to live learn I:
That life may h^ppy be, I Will learn to die.
38. To day for me, to morrow for thee.
Delrii. adag. Tom. 2. p. 576.
FRancis the first, King of France: being taken by Charles the fifth, coming
to Madrid upon a wall he read the Motto of Charles, which was Plus ultra, Still
further: and writ under it, Hodie mihi cras tibi.
Mine to day, yours to morrow. The Conqueror was not off^nded, nor angry, but
gave notice that he understood the meaning, for he writ this in answer to it,
I am but a Man, and know my self subject to mortality.

Elegantly spoke Greg Nazianzen My head (says he) begins to be an Almond tree
flourishing, and therefore my Summer of Age is near: the Sickle is made sharp
for work, all my fear is, lest that terrible Mower should crop me off, and cut
me down while I sleep securely, and am not ready for his stroke. But thou
may say, Old men indeed may fear, but I am young and green: be not thou
deceived, Death is not limited to any certain age. The same Bier to day may
carry an old carcass, to morrow a young one, to day a strong a^^e ^n an, to
morrow a young Virgin, or (...) Child. Seneca speaks to the purpose: Death
(says he) stands at the door of a young man, as well as at the threshold of an
aged man; for all men are registered and enrolled in Deaths Records: all must
pay their tributes when Death calls forth, all must go out, no exemption from
his Edict. This is the last warning and admonishment that dying men groan
forth, To day for me, too morrow for thee, and this is the Graves sentence. I
fell yesterday, thou may this day. Remember Death! Oh remember Eternity;
which thou may either to day or to morrow begin but never End.

. 28. If to morrow, why not to day?
THere is a Chain, and that a we^ghty one, that holds us bound fast, to wit,
the Love of this Life, which as it is not to be utterly cast off, yet it is
daily to be weakened, and the vigor of it abated: that when it shall be
required at our hands to surrender nothing may withhold us, but that we be
ready presently to do that, which at one time or other must be performed.

Saint Augustine the Bishop of Hippo, went on a time to visit another great
Prelate and Father of the Church, lying very sick, and at the point of Death,
who had been formerly his familiar friend, at Saint Augustines coming, the
sick man lift up his hand and said, that he was departing this world and going
into Heaven; Possidonius in vita Aug. c. 27
Saint Augustine replied that the Church would stand in great want of him and
prayed that God would lend him a longer life. The sick m^n answered again, if
he never could be well spared, but if at any time he should depart, why not now?

The Death of all men is even and alike, but the ways by which it comes, are
diverse, one dies at supper, another in his sleep, a third in the commission of
some sin. One dies by the sword, another is drowned, a third is burned; some
are poisoned and stung to death by Serpents, others are killed by some fall, and
some Consumptions rid away: some are cut off in the flower and beauty of their
age, some are destroyed in their swathling clothes; and some in their decrepit
years: Others only salute the World, and are gone. One man's end is
commendable, another dishonorable; but let Death come never so gently or
favorably, yet it never com^s without some horror and affrightment.

But that which most of all estrangeth us from liking Death, is that we know
the things present and delights in them, but whither we are passing by Death
and what things we shall behold in the bowels of the grave we know not, and
we usually tremble at the report of strange sights; therefore are our minds
to be hardened with the daily exercise and meditation of eternity. Eternity (I
say) is to be thought upon night and day, as he that will learn to endure
hunger, must attain to it by fasting by degrees; so the mind must be transferd
from transitory things, that ever will be expert in the study of Eternity. Let
him every moment salute and embrace the threshold of Eternity, let this one be
the only square of all his actions. I read, I write, I meditate, I watch, I
speak, I work always to Eternity. He that ever intends to triumph eternally,
let his meditation be always fixed, and settled upon it.

40. Death is sudden, yet comely.
AS Palladius the Bishop of Helenople testifies, Cheremon died sitting as he
was at work, Hist. c. 92.
and well: He was found sitting with his work in his hand, only he was
dead. Any kind of Death is credited by a virtuous life.

Philemon, an ancient Writer of Comedies, as he rehearsed his Comedies with
Menander on the Stage, Mad. Philos. in Florid. p 579
and strove with him for the Bays, he was not in any thing reputed inferior to
him, He acted a part of a play, which he lately had made, and being come to the
second Scene of the second Act, thinking in it to stir up more delight and
liking in the people, On a sudden there fell such a violent storm that the
people could not stand to hear him at that time. but he promised the people,
that on the next day they should hear it all finished. So on the next day
there was a mighty company of people assembled, every one strove to place
himself in the fitted seat either for sight or hearing: they that came
something late beckned to their friends to make room for them, they that came
last were mainly straightened for room. The whole Theater was crammed with
Auditors, and there was a wonderful throng: their discourse was diverse, some
talked of what had bin acted the day before, others that knew not the former
action came to behold the sequel. Nothing now was expected, but Philemon; well
the time past on, ye^ no Philemon appeared, some blamed his stay, others
excused it but when as most did think they had stayed longer then was fit, and
yet so no appearance of the actor, they sent some speedy Messengers to call
him, but they that went found all their expectations frustrated, for Philemon
was dead in his bed, and stiff: and lay in his bed as if he had bin
meditating his part, with his hand on his Book; but his soul was fled out, and
so his Auditory failed. The Messengers that entered were struck at first with
astonishment of this sudden alteration, yet wondered much to see how comely he
was laid In his bed. Well, they returned to the people, and told them that
Philemon who should have acted a fained part, had acted at home a true Play:
for he had to all worldly things given his farewell and Plaudite. Whereupon
diverse did grieve amd lament; the shower the day before was now seconded with a
shower of tears, and the Comoedian was now turned Tragoedian.

If we look only on our present life, a then Death will be wished for, and
that man dies well, who dies without the fear of Death; but yet happier by far
is he, that is found of Death so doing, and who dies in his work. So that
Death it self shall find him busy. St. Cyprian the Martyr wished, Hippo. 4.
September. p. 920.
that he might be offered to God by Death, as he was in preaching: he is
worthy of praise whom never the Devil or Death cuts off in their idleness.

41. We must watch and pray.
BEcuse ye know not the time in which the Son of man will come. The Romans
watched in their Arms, though sometimes without their shieid, because they
would have nothing to lean upon, because they would prevent sleep. Thou must
watch oh man! and it is profitable to watch with the armor of God upon thy
soul: the ardent prayers of Christians are their Armor of proof. Hope of long
life is the leaning stock that too many sleep upon. The usual words of the
Romans, when they watched were these. Vigila, vigila; Mars vigila, Marc. 13.33,
35, and 37.
(i. e.) Watch, oh soldier watch. By the usual terms they stirred up one
another to watch. By the same words, (oh my soul) does God incite thee to
wat^hfulnesse. The very heaven it self by his incessant motion, and constant
course night and day advises thee to rouse up thy self. Will thou grow deaf
to such a Lecturer, and give thy self to sleep? hear Christ himself saying,
Watch, and pray, as (Saint Mark testifies.) Christ at the end of one Sermon
did thrice repeat this clause in these words, 1 Go to, watch and pray. 2
Therefore watch and pray, for you know not when the Lord will come: in the
Evening, or at Midnight, or at Cock-crowing, or in the Morning: Lest if when he
should come suddenly, be should find you sleeping. 3 What therefore, I say to
you, I say unto all, watch. S. Matthew often speaks the same, Mat. 24.42, 25.13
c. 26.41.
Watch therefore for ye know not what hour the Lord will come. And repeats it
again, Watch therefore, for ye neither know the day, nor the hour. And our
Savior inculcates the same at the Mount of Olives. Watch, and pray that ye
enter not into tentation. He publishes the same by Saint Luke, Watch,
therefore and continue in prayers, Luke 21.36.
that same very word, Watch, how often is it doubled by Saint Paul? all these
is thunderclaps may serve to rowze up our drowzie souls. We are deaf, nay
dead, if we startle not at all these quickening voices. Who ever thou art, if
thou have bin lulled asleep in thy sins awaken, Awake thou that sleep, arise
and stand up, and Christ shall give thee light. Know thou that fatal blow
of Egypt? in the middle of the night the destroying Angel smote all Egypt.
Remember the Lot of the ten Virgins, There was at midnight a great cry made,
and those Virgins which were ready, were admitted into the Bride-chamber; but
those that slept were excluded: Can thou but remember that gluttonous abusive
serva^t? Did not his Lord come in a time, that he looked not for, and in an
hour that he dreamed not off? Can thou but consider that good Master of the
Family? He watched at all hours, lest at any hour the Thief should enter and
spoil his goods? Can thou, oh can thou but think on thy Savior? Was not
he borne in the middle of the night? The same, as many think, will about the
same time come at the time of the general judgment. Watch therefore, oh watch!
and think every day to be thy Exit from hence.

42. Eight Verses out of the Psalms of David, selected by Saint Bernard, which
he himself used for the time of Death.
COnsider and hear me, (o Lord) my God lighten mine eyes: lest I sleep the
sleep of death.

Lest mine Enemies say, I have prevailed against him. Psalm. 13.3, 4.

Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, o Lord God of
truth. Psalm. 31.5.

Then spoke I with my tongue, Lord make me to know mine End and the measure of
my days,

What it is: that I may know what time I have here. Psalm 39 3, 4.

Show me a token for good, that they which hate me my see it, and be ashamed
because thou Lord, have helped me, and comforted me. Psalm. 86.17.

Thou have loosed my bonds, I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and will call upon the Name of the Lord. Psalm. 116.17.

Refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul.

I cried unto thee, o Lord: I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
land of the living. Psalm. 142.4, 5.

A Prayer for an happy departure out of this life.
O Almigh^y and Everlasting God, who did give unto thy servant King Ezechiah
length of days, when as he in tears besought thy goodness. Grant I beseech
thee to me thy unworthy servant: before my death such a space and time, in
which I may heartily deplore and lament all my sins, and that for them all I
may, by thy infinite mercies, find free pardon and forgiveness, that when I
shall die, I may live with thee in life everlasting. Amen.

Almighty, merciful, and kind Father, I do humbly entreat thee by the death of
thy Son my Savior Jesus Christ, to grant me a quiet and blessed departure out
of this miserable life; whenever thou shall please to call me hence.

Another for the same purpose.
M^st merciful Lord Jesus, knowing how great and grievous the pains of dying
men are, and with what great discomforts the souls of such are in the Agony of
death, Whither should I flee, but to thee, o Lord my God? Deliver thou my soul
that it neither fail, nor faint at that dreadful hour. Deal with me (I entreat
thee o Lord) according to the multitude of thy never failing mercies: and
according to that boundless love which made thee lay down thy life for me,
who art life ^t self, g^ant that I may always have the hour of my dissolution
before me, that I may do that while I am in health, which may give me comfort
in the pangs of death: Let my whole care and study be to learn Mortification,
and to subdue all my passions, and rebellious affections, so that I may live
wit^ thee in glory in thy heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

A Prayer that the Communion of the Body and blood of Jesus Christ may be
effectual to his soul at the hour of Death, taken out of Hugo de S. Victore.
O Most sweet and loving Jesus, grant unto me miserable sinner that my soul
may be refreshed by thy most precious body and blood: that I may always speak
of thy most glorious name. Amen.

G^ant that I may always think off and apply thy sufferings to my sick soul,
that so I may be refreshed in the evil day. Amen.

Grant that I may always have a care to imitate thy holiness, and obedience,
by patience and meekness, that so all my words, thoughts, and works may be
sanctified. Amen.

Grant me likewise, O sweet Jesus, a steadfast hope in thee, that though the
outward man decay, yet the inward man which is created in holiness m y be
strongthened, so that when I shall die thou may be my hope and my portion for
ever. Amen.

The conclusion of the first Book to the Reader.
THus do, thus ^hink, (o Man) and while thou are in health prepare for
sickness, and le^^^^e to die, either of them is of excellent skill, and art;
ignorance of both these may cast thy soul into utter destruction: if thou
failest in the performan^e of these, thou deprivest thy self of that Eternity,
which the Faithful shall enjoy, never can thou amend an error past this
way: this shall be punished whh Eternity.

Wherefo^e always manage thy affairs, so as, if thou were at all times
depar^ing. Dwell most familiarly with thy self, and search daily all the
secret passages of thy conscience, those things which thou have about thee,
esteem of them as a Travelers Cloak-bag, but let them not be thy clog. Thou
must carry no more out then thou broughtest in. Therefore be satisfied with
little, and approve thy self to God. Thou must pass hence. Each moment think
thou stand at the door of Eternity. Thou must be gone. Eternity is always
at hand. Pleasures are short, punishments are without end. The labor is but
little, the reward everlasting.

These are the instructions we have prescribed to healthy and able men. We
admonish them not to fear death, yet never to lay down the thought of it. So
now we proceed to instruct the sick, and weak.

To the Sick.
A Winter's at hand: leaves fall: Death 'gins to snatch,
His Ax and spies thy Glass spent: Sick man watch.
B What the Press: to Grapes, that Sickness is to thee,
If thou be ripe, as Grapes in Autumn be.
C The stouping Hern often gores her towering Foe:
So outward grief often frees from inward woe.
D Sickness lays men along, as hail does corn,
Better fall well then stand with shame and scorn.
E Just now 'twas cloudy; now Sol shows his face,
Now clouds again. This is the Sick man's case.
F To escape the Scorpions sting, and the Archers dart,
Sickness and Death) I know no means, no art.
G A Sick man's like an Horse plunging in sturdy waves,
Who knows if the one shall escape the floods the other the grave?


The second Book.
1. The remembrance of Death is commended to the Sick. Wherein is contained, an
Introduction to the fo^lowing Discourse, and whith^r sickn sse be^ evil or not?
CAunus is a Town in Caria, situated in a pestilent air, and insec^ious to the
inahbitants. Which place when a merry conceited fellow called Stratonicus a
Musician beheld, he presently rehearsed that Verse in Homer. Iliad. 6.


Men like to falling leaves are found,
But green ere-whiles, now fallen to ground.
He taunted their pale and wanne countenances, but when they of that place had
afforded him but course entertainment because he had disparaged their City;
He wittily again told them, Indeed I cannot fitly term your town sickly or
diseased, where I behold so many dead men walking: this was more pleasant and
smart then the former.

But why deny we it, or why are we lift up with pride? when indeed we are but
leaves, Job speaks it plainly; Job 13.25.
Will thou (says he) break a leaf driven to and fro? as if he had said: I
being but a leaf subject to all inconveniences, which fear all storms and
winds, which tremble and am blown with one blast far away. Do not, o do
not (o God speedily make an end of me in thy fury; Thou know that I shall at
once fall of my self. Are not men truly to be compared to leaves, when as their
instability exceeds and out strips them? May they not have this title added
deservingly, seeing that diseases and sicknesses of several sorts do
interchangably drive them to ruin? Thus did Clemens Alexandrinus ju^ge. Go to
(says he) o men of an obscure and frail life, like to the generation of
leaves. Weak, a workmanship as wax, like to shadow. Vain, fleeting, having a
life of a days continuance. Certainly we are leaves, and no better when as one
little fit of a Fever distempers, alters, weakens, endangers us. What said I a
fit of a Fever? nay, a little Cough, a Crum of bread, a Drop of water are able
to effect our ruins. But what is not health good, and sickness evil? no, o
man, if you will credit Epictetus! What then? it is good to use health well: it
is ill if used ill. It is possible by sickness to gather fruits meet for thy
God: nay, is it not to be done like wise by death it self wh^t think thou of
sicknesses? I will show thee his nature, I will grow better by it, I will be
quiet under it, I will think my self well dealt with all, I will not flatter
with my Physician, nor will I wish for death. What would thou more? What is
given to me, I will account it happy, prosperous, honorable, desirerable. But
some may d^ny this, and say, take heed of sickness, it is ill to be under it:
to whom Epictetus answers judiciously. It is all one, as if one should say and
faigne to make three to be four. It is no ill, if I rightly esteem of it, it
cannot then hurt me, but rather profit me. So the like use may be made of
poverty, sickness, war. May not a man gather benefit by any, by all of these?
the same I may say of Death, is it not my appointed Steeresman into rest? is it
not the Mess^nger that opens the ga^e to Eternity? is not Death that which
takes off all our burdens, and eases us from labor, from misery?

Let Truth honor thee Epictetus, how true are all these, and squaring with the
Law of Christianity? This foundation being laid, we shall learn to remember
Deaths Agony, and not to be affrighted at his coming.

But (oh my Reader) I would have thee know that these Documents were not only
written for thy use in the time of thy sickness, but I would have thee read
these in the time of thy health, that they may stand thee in some stead when
thou shall be visited with sickness.

42. The sickman speaks to his friends, to the Diseas^, to the entrance into
Death it self, to Christ our Lord.
DEpart (I pray you) as unseasonable with your vain and fruitless mourning.
Here is no place either for Complaints or Petitions. You may think I go from
you to soon. Too soon? look, that you be not deceived. I was fit for Death's
sicle, as soon as I was born: nay, before I was born. Why should I complain?
I know what I was born. Was I not a weak frail body? Cast forth to contumelies,
the food of Diseases, Deaths object? whosoever thou art take h^pes to thee, or
undergo thy burden, perhaps thou may be dejected to morrow, or if no,
removed from hence.

To the disease.
ANd is Deaths Harbing^r approached? must I now lie under sickness? the time
is now come, I must put my self to the trial: Valor is not only seen in a
storm, or in a bat^aile; Courage may be tried upon a pillow in a bed of
affliction. I must be sick therefore; It cannot be avoided. Well; I shall
either end my Fever, or it me. We cannot be always together. Hitherto I have
only trafficked with health, Homil. 13 in Evang.
now I must exchange some time with my disease. Saint Gregory tells it to me,
piously and truly. The Lord (says he) knocks, when he signifies to us that
death is near us by troublous sicknesses, to whom we readily open, if we
receive with comfort his chastizements.

Some relations may cause me to give admittance to this serious Ambassador.

It is reported of a certain old man; who lay grievous sick, and when as Death
made an approa^h to take him away, the sick old man entreated Death to forbear
his blow a little while, until he could make his Will, and set things in
readiness for so long a journey. To whom Death replied, o crooked old man!
could thou not prepare thy self in so many years? being so often warned by
me? to whom the old man said again, I beseech thee lend me thy faith, for I do
not remember that ever thou did admonish me; but Death answered briefly, then
I perceive that old men will lie; An hundred, six hundred, a thousand warnings
have thou had from me, when I daily in thy sight, to thy grief, not only
took away thy equals (of which for years there are few left) but also before
thy eyes young men, and little infants. Nay, I will appeal to thy own soul
(forgetful old man) did thou want admonishments, when thy eyes grew dim, thy
hairs waxed white, were f^lne off, thy nose lost its smell, thy ears grew
deaf, and all thy other senses and members grew defective in their
performances? and thy whole body languish'd and wasted? these, all these were
Messengers from me, and should have been as so many warning pieces to prepare
thee to march on. These all have knocked at thy doors, though thou would not
acknowledge thy self to be within. Often enough, and long enough have thou bin
admonished, I stay not: Come away and enter the Dance of Death now presently.
He seldom prepares himself well, which prepares so extraordinary late.

To his Death-bringing sickness.
WHen I meditate on my life, and consider the multitude of my sins and the
smalnesse of my good duties. Alas, alas! oh my God how am I straightened? and how
am I beset and encompassed with sorrow? but it is better to fall into the Hands
of the Lord, (for great are his mercies and his compassions fail not) then
that I should add more days to my years, and more sin to my days. What an one
I would have proved thou only (o Lord) know. Perhaps I might have
Apostated, and fallen from life. Since (o death) thou art present, do thy
message unto me, rid me from misery and the malice of men. I am ready and
willing to part wi h life. only let me retain thy Grace (o Lord) or rather
let it preserve me, which I do earnestly with all my heart beg of thee (o
sweet Jesus Christ, and through thee. Amen.

To Death it self.
DEath, why in so long wastings do thou like?
What needs there such great charge? I do yield, strike
What need'st thou empty all thy quivers? when
One blast w ll drive, one puff will stroy most men.
For indeed what is man? but a tossed and leaking ship, which one lusty wave
sends to the bottom. There needs no furious charge of tempests, wheresoever
thou (o Death) placest thy murdering Ram, it will force passage. Man's body is
wove up of weak, and fluid materials; glistering in outward lineaments,
impatient of heat, cold; or travail: of it is own inclination apt to
languishments, gathering corruption even from his sustentation; sometimes hurt
by want, sometimes by excess, his nutriment wants not discommodity, a brittle
piece of mortality preserved and upheld with grief and anxietie: holding his
very spirit and breath at another disposing, which easily departs, full of
innumerable diseases, and though he should want diseases to ruin him, yet of
his own accord he would fall, perish, and descend to Death. Can we wonder to
see that die, in which Death is fed and nourished, and has a thousand places
to enter and possess? and if man does fall, is it any such remarkable loss?
his very smell and taste, his weariness and watching, his humors, and food
without which he cannot live, are all mortifero^s and deadly.

To Jesus Christ.
I Would not Death but life, he seeks it right
(O Christ) who in thy love departs to light.
I am not afraid with them, whom thou speak o in wrath Go, etc. I will
follow thee (o loving Savior) with will, with delight: and what should I do
else, when as thou thy self call me to come and approach nearer? to be
dissolved and to be with Christ is much the better This is the height of my
desires, 1 Phil 1.23.
for Christ is to me both in life and death advantage.

3. Not always sweet things.
IN times past (as Pliny reports) on the Latins solemn days when as they
strove for victory in their Char^ots in the Capitol, Who conquered drunk
Wormwood: be thou willing to take down a cup of this bitter drink that thou
may conquer.

He scarce deserves to taste the sweet.
Who with the sour did never meet.
4. To contemn Death is Christian valor.
NO man rightly governs his ^ife, but he that knows how to leave it, We cannot
be so stupid, but that we must needs know some time or other we must die. Yet
when Death comes, we are frighted, tremble, grieve. But would not he seem to
be a very Idiot, that would weep, because he lived not unt^l a thousand years?
and is not he his equal who would li^e beyond a thousand? Thou wast not, thou
shall not be. Past and future ti^e are both at another Regimen. Wast not thou
born to di^? Di^ no this happen to thy Father? to thy Ancestors? to all that
were before thee? Shall it not be laid upon all that come after thee? why
should thy shoulders be exempted from the common burden? Thou would not
fear to drink, to eat, to play, to sleep with others, why then fear thou to
die with others? Look but upon the long troop of those before thee, of those
that follow thee, and those that go along with thee, in the same hour with
thy self. This is a fair prospective, View the known, and unknown World; and
it is certain, that thousands each moment are born, and die, and by the same
kind of Death. Death perpetually has bin a safe passage to rest. And there is
nothing ill in Death but the fear of Death. If therefore we would be in quiet
hereafter, it is best to have our souls ready. Shall I fear my end, when I
know I am not without end? But you will say it is an hard thing to bring a man's
mind to such an high pass to slight his own soul. It is easy to him: who
knows to live, as he sung well.

A just man's first or last,
Comes not too slow, or fast.
We deny not, but death has some terror in it, but therefore we are to learn
how not to fear it. This is an infallible sign of a truly courageous soul,
not to fear his going out. He truly knows whither he goes with comfort, that
knows from whence he came in tears. Theodosius, of whom Saint Ambrose makes
mention was such an Emperor, who used to say. I love that man who when he is
to die, is grieved more for the Churches hazard, then for his own dissolution.
That therefore thou may never fear Death, always think on it.

. 5. Examples of Death contemned.
NInachetus a great Ruler in Malaca in the Indyes, being commanded to leave off
his office, he took it for so great a disgrace being ignorant of true honor
and virtue, that forthwith, he, of Aloes and other sweet precious wood builded
a great funerall-fire hard by his seat of judgment all covered with rich Arras,
from whence he shining in his Robes of gold, and decked with Jewels discoursed
to the multitude about him, of all the actions and passages of his life, and
having laid open, and declared the benefits which he had done for, and
confer^'d on the Portugals in their extremity: he complained that without any
demeri^ on his ^art, he was deprived of his dignity, then detesting the
Portugalls plots (such Firebrarnds does ambition inject into the souls of men)
he, as a contemner of their injuries, and of his own death) cast himself into
the fire.

Aelian. l. 5. Var. Hist. c. 6.
Aelianus records another example not unlike to this former, (says he) the
end of Calanu^ is not only strange, but to be counted a wonder, which was on
this manner. Calanus an Indian Philosopher, who had bidden adieu to Alexander,
to the Macedonians, and to this life, built him in the large Suburbs of
Babylon, a funera^l Pile of costly sweet wood, as Cedar, Cypress, Myrrh, an^
Laurel, and having fin^shed his daily constant exercise went into the Pile,
and stood there encompassed with the wood; and the Sun shining bright upon him.
Which d^ne he entreated the Macedonians to kindl^ the fire, which burning
Calanus stood still, and fell not until he was dead. It is report^d that
Alexand^r should say of him, That Calanus had overcome stronger enemies than
himself. For Alexander had only w^ged war and conquered Porus, Taxita, and
Darius, but Calanus had overcome, travel and Death. And shall there be such
courage in vain men against Death? and shall Christians assisted by God droop
their s^irits? Let us but examine the mat er narrowly, if we will believe
Seneca, Death is Natures best devise, and the sure remedy of all evils. And
therefore let us make that a virtue that otherwise will be necessity. Certainly
every wise Christian will do nothing unwillingly, he does avoid all necessities
pressures, who is willing to do what he must. Let us therefore with a good
heart expect our end, or rather our beginning. He is always of an upright
heart, who knows how to despise Death.

6. A mind ready for Death
ZEno the Stoic (as Suidas records it) dashed his foot and wounded one of his
toes, as he went out of School, but he supposing that he had been called by
others, struck his hand upon the earth with this word. I am coming; why o
earth do thou call me? and so without any sickness at ninety six years of
age the old man died. Zeno had so accustomed himself to hunger, that he would
say, he would eat but little, that he might ^ie the easier, and sooner. This
did Zeno, that his old age might be the freer from diseases and griefs, He
obtained both, according to his desired wish. We need not wonder that our
lives are so short, and our health so uncertain, when as we wast both health
and life at feasting and drinking Large Suppers may please the appetite, but
they make work for the Physician, a full gluttonous belly is the Emblem of a
swelling, moving grave. O fools: by that way we should prolong, we cut off
and shorten our days. And it proceeds from hence, that we will not be
persuaded of the virtue of a Christian abstinence. Vid. Leon. Less. Hyg.
But experience pronounces that saying to be true, the less thou eatest the
lon^er is ^hy life: but to the purpose, this by the way.

Vrsinus (as Saint Gregory relates it) being comforted with heavenly
Meditations, would often in his sickness cry out, I come, o I come! I give
thanks to thee (o God) and as he related to those that were about him, the
joys of Heaven, and the beauty of those Celestial souls, he reiterated the
same words. Behold I come and so surrendered up his soul, and died.

A mind willing to surrender to Death speaks in the present tense. I do come
without any demurring or delays. It is too late to trifle time here. Nature is
not a st^pdame, but a mother. Can thou accuse her (o my Theophrastus) to be
more unkind to men, then to beasts? Certainly men are her choicest pieces, and
if she could preserve any from death and corruption, men should partake of the
privilege and benefit. For which is better, quickly to suffer, and to cut off
all fear, or slowly to suffer, and still to be subjected to fear and horror?
Nature then quits a man from a lingering torment when she yields him but a
short life.

We all do stay
For the appointed day.
Why therefore art thou affrighted? is thy life taken away? so is then the
fear of death, and many evils, that betide the life of man? there is little
difference (says Plinius Secundus) betwixt suffering misery, and expecting it
daily to come. only this, that there is some mean in grieving, none in
fearing For thou may grieve only for so much as is happened: but thou
may fear for whatsoever may happen.

8. Three things grievous in sickness.
IN every disease almost there are th^se three things incident. The fear of
Death, the pain of the body, and the loss and privation of pleasures. But as
in the rules of Physic, hot diseases are cured by cold medicines, and cold by
ho^, so are these to b^e cured by Ant^dotes. Let the si^k^ b^ware here, that he
mistakes not, or goes not a contrary way: There was a young man who stood in
need of old things to allay his heat, but he, when the Physicians were
departed, by the persuasion of the servants of the house took hot ingredients,
and anointed his breast with Balm, and applied many other hot medicines to his
sickness, which added fire to fire, and almost brought him to Death. To cure
therefore the fear of Death and to remove it, is to love Heaven and the joys
thereof: a li tle of divine love dispels all the smoke of vain fears. Who
loves Christ, will be willing to lay down his life, and shall be beloved of
his Savior.

2 To assuage and mitigate the pain of body is to have peace of conscience. An
upright soul, and an entire conscience does afford mavelous consolation to
the sick bed. A pure conscience purged from dead works is a powerful remedy
against all tormentings. The sick man w^ll bear his sickness the easier and
more comfortably, if he fixes deeply in his mind this one thing. The most
righteous Lord God has imposed this affliction upon me, and therefore I will
bear. It is his good pleasure, let him do as he thinks good.

3 The loss of pleasures will nothing trouble nor grieve him, who thinks upon
heavenly, eternal pleasures. Those which we leave, are light, vain, sh^rt,
and filthy, and commonly before they are left off, they leave their Lovers full
of pain, oftentimes of diseases. But those, which our heavenly Country
promises to us, and will perform, are infinite, firm, eternal, not fading.
He easily dis-esteems earth, whose aim is heaven.

9. Sickness is the School of Virtue and Monitor to Eternity.
THou suffer well (says Bernard) if it works compunction. Sickness is as well
the School of graces: as the scourge of vices. While we are lusty, and strong
we rush into sins (as the horse into the battle) furiously; when we are sick,
we better regulate our passions, curb our affections: being healthy we are
pestered with many hundred several employments, and put God in our last
thoughts. How many are chaste and sober in sickness? Who in time of health have
furiously followed all filthy lusts and pleasures. These men were happier and
safer under the rod, then they can be at liberty. God lays therefore many
down, that they may look up, and confines them with a Fever or Consumption,
or such like that their souls may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Long
sickness makes sober minds. In brief, Sickness seems to macerate the body,
but it meliorizeth the soul, and though as (Saint Paul says) our outward man
decay, 2 Cor. 4.26.
yet our inward man is renewed daily. Hence is it that though sickness do seem
tedious, and burdensome, yet it is then Good, when it works holiness in the
Patient.

10. Sickness is the Monitor to Eternity.
WHat a good thing is it? that the evils of this present life should afford
unto us a taste of everlasting punishments? By these light ones here, let us
learn to keep our selves from those eternal ones. From which no Apothecary, no
Physician, no Medicine, no Critical day, nor Death it self (the Medicine for
all evils and punishments here) can release from. The ways to death are
diverse, but once arrived to Eternity, there is no redemption,

Anaxagoras being very sick, his friends asked him whither he would be carried
into his Country, or not? no such need (said he) and added a reason; for every
Country affords us a way to our grave. This answer of his may be as well
applied to Heaven, for we may go to Heaven from any part of the World. O the
fortunate and happy scar-fire of Fevers! because short: o the fearful fire of
Hell! because everlasting.

13. In sickness we must always pray.
PRayer ought to be the sickmans constant exercise. Neither is it of too much
difficulty for the sick party. It is an exercise that is performed without
toil. For he may do it by his tongue to God: but if his tongue be dulled, or
if grief stops his voice, then his soul in all humble devotion is to be lift
up to God with a quiet composure of body. Sometimes also ardent sighs do
demonstrate secret conference with God. Sometimes the disease is so violent
that it not only depresseth the body, but also the soul and the whole man is
fo^c'd as it were wholly to attend on it. In his case God accepts a patient and
a quiet bearing of these dolours for Prayers. Sickn^sse mixed with patience and
mortification, are accep^able Sacrifices in the presence of God. He prays
well, that suffers patiently. And he does not only pray unto God, but does
prevail with God, who sends two such wise Ambassadors as Compunction, and
Patience. But further though the Sick man be brought to that pass, that he
neither by voice, nor yet by hearty Ejaculations, yea, though his patience be
overcome, yet there is a way to pray left him. Can he look about him, and he
shall see those that stand by him, and those that are about him, ready and
prompt to pray for him: let but him in his sickness speak a word to them, o
my good friend, o my dear brother, you see how I am conquered wi^h pains, I
pr^y you lend me your tongue and your heart; and read such and such a Psalm
for me to entreat God to be merciful unto me. Which of his friends will not
be ready and willing to perform these things for the sick? So though he
cannot by himself in words express himself to God, yet he may, by the
prayers of the faithful. Therefore I repeat it again, In sickness always
pray. We can never be too importunate with God.

12. What we must think and do in dolors and sickness.
A Man that enjoys God, though ^e be pressed with griefs, and full of sorrows,
will not for all this curse God and die. He says not amiss, if he use these
or the like expressions I will hope well while I breath, and I will hope bet er
things drawing nearer toward God and my dissolution. Seneca spoke excellently
well of G i^fe: saying, Sen. ep. 78 ante med. that of the Poet is known It Is
light if long: Its short if strong.
No man's grief can be great and long. So benign our nature ha h bin for us,
that she proportions the grief, either makes it tolerable, or sho^t. For the
intention of the highest grief ha^h found an End. This is one comfort in the
deepest misery that when you have felt it too long, it is customary, and so you
loose the sense of it, by the continuation of it. But what vexes most those,
that are unexpert in bearing grief, is, that they have not accustomed
themselves to be contented in mind, they are too much addicted to carnality.
Wherefore, o my sick friend, learn by degrees to deduct thy soul from thy
body: and be conversant wi^h ^hy nobler and diviner part: and because there is
no grief so violent, but admits of intermissions, therefore, when thou art
sick, and feel pains, do not hastily leave off the exercise of prayer, or
patience. Above all things look, that thy morning Sacrifice, and some
examination of Conscience at the Evening, keep their course. If thy voice
fail, perform it in spirit.

Can thou not frequent divine Duties, or receive the Communion of the Body
and Blood of Christ? then set apart some time precisely, in which thou may
see God present with thee. Never let the night, or sleep pass upon thee,
before thou have discussed and debated with thy Conscience, and quieted it. In
those hours, that either thy grief is less'ned, or is not at all, take some
godly book into thy hands, and read some select sentences fi test for thy
present benefit, and meditate them seriously. Every day select one hour to thy
self for prayer, and begin it, and end that little time in holy sighs,
Ejaculations and Prayers devoutly, humbly, reverently, and this hour will
seem to be spent in Heaven: but if thou can not perfo^me this, which scarce
any pain can hinder thee from, yet at uttermost let some time be allotted, in
which thou may erect thy spirit to thy Creator, and by s^aces lift up thy
thoughts to Heaven. For these courses will mi^igate and diminish the grea^est
anguish and grief.

At the Entrance and End of all thy pray^rs consecrate thy whole self to Gods
divine good w^ll and pleasure. Nor all, nor any of these are so hard, but that
a dying man may perform, much more he whose sickness is not so urgent. Which
yet, if you cannot, or rather will not, do any of these yet however, while the
extremity of the pain is upon, you be quietly, and thankfully patient. Do not,
(I pray you) make your burden weightier then it is of it self: why should you
add to your own affliction? It is but light and e^sie, unless it be made
heavy by your prejudicate opinion. Contrariwise, if you exhort and incou^age
your self, and say, It is nothing, or it is but little, we will bear it, it
will be at an end, th^n will you make it but little, by esteeming i^ so. All
things are censured by opinion, we grieve according to opinion. Every man is so
miserable as he judges himself to be.

13. Our thoughts are diverse in the time of sickn^sse, and health.
LAcides the Philosopher, having omitted many household offices, said, We
dispute one thing in the Schools, and live otherwise at home. So men in health
can administer and suggest comfort to the sick, but what sick man is he, that
in his disease can sufficiently comfort himself? I do much doubt my self in
diverse States. Ah! how glasse-like is our strength! how instantly does one dash
batter it? While we are in health we imagine to our selves bodies of brass,
all our discou^se is lof^y, and we care even provoke sickness; but when they
approach, how do we fly? or how suddenly at the first grapling fall wounded
and weak? We are but men then, by our own confessions, and our dying bodies
have little or no vig^ur in them. I will not, cannot deny, but that our bod^es
are fragile, but not so much, but that with a resolved patience, they might
endure the greatest of calamities were not their spirits as dejected, and
poor, as their bodies are weak. This is our too much faintheartednes that
makes so many desert virtuous actions, while we make every difficult thing, to
be intolerable, impossible to be undergone. Virtue perishes if Difficulty,
which is the matter of it, be removed.

14. In all Sickness we must send holy sighs to God.
O Lord, Thou art my Fortress and strength, and my sure refuge in the time of
my trouble, Jerem. 16.19.

It is the LORD, Let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3.18.

O Father, prove thy servant to the end, and leave not off from the man of
iniquity. Job 34.36

It is good for me that I have been afflicted: for thereby I have learned thy
Statutes. Psalm. 119.71.

I take pleasure in infirmities: in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I
strong 2 Cor. 12.10.

O JESUS, who art my Love and my souls delight, cause me for my love to thy
name to be joyful in suffering and dying. For I am no more mine, but
altogether at thy rule and disposing.

15. Certain faults of Sick men.
F^rst, to be eager and willing to hear curiosities, novelties, and trifles.

2 Not to be willing to hear admonitories and preparations toward Death.

3 To blame and complain of those that take the care of him.

4 To reject those things which are prepared for their good and recovery.

5 To dislike their bed and lodging.

6 To believe that they are not well looked to, and thereupon to murmr, and
repine.

7 Seldom to think of or speak of God or divine things.

8 Not to be given up, and to be resigned and subject to Gods will in all
things.

9 To think some things too grievous and beyond his faults, and not to be born
with any Christian patience.

And what concerns it thee, (o my sick man) what is done in France, Germany,
Italy, or Spain; rather should thou seek what is d^ne in heaven, or how
thou should escape hell and the torments t^ereof. Let others whisper what they
will among themselves; think thou on this. Suffer the dead to bury the dead;
Let this be thy only care, to secure thy soul; th^s is that one thing that is
necessary: what have thou to do with new or curious trifles, for the most part
false and fictitious? these are offensive to others, unprofitable to thy self.
And why turnest thou away from those who tell thee of thy approaching danger?
(I beseech thee) imitate not those old men whom thou knew before abroad, to
whom it was death, to hear Death to be spoken off. I Pray thee, have thou
learned no further yet, but still to fear death? Have thou got so much
knowledge in so many years, to die freely, peaceably, and without vexati^n?
Why tremblest thou? Commit thy self wholly to the will of God, and so thou have
done the hardest piece of thy work Even our whole life is but a punishment.

That wise Roman Seneca will counsel thee. We being (says he) cast into the
deep and troublesome sea of this World, which is always tossing her waves and
billows, now lifting us up with sudden advancements, now again leaving us in
the lurch to our greater loss: Continually tossing us, never are we safely
settled: We are always in suspense, and inconstantly floating; now and then
dashed one against another, sometimes making shipwreck, always fearing; thus
we sail along this boisterous Ocean, exposed to all tempests, and there is no
Port or Haven till we arrive at Death.

Many men's credulity deceives them especially in those things which they love,
being willing to forget the remembrance of death. Daily before our eyes we see
spectacles and objects of Mortality, as well of our friends, as strangers: but
we still are otherways employed, and think that sudden, which might have have
happened every moment of our life. This is not the iniquity of Nature, but the
pravitie of our minds: being insatiable in that which it cannot enjoy; and
altogether disdaining to go out from thence, whither he was admitted to enter
by request. He is unjust, that leaves not the Donor the disposing of his own
gift: He is greedy, who does not account that a benefit which he has
received, but says it is loss to restore it. He is ingrate who calls the end
of pleasure, an injury. He is foolish, which thinks nothing but things present
have pr^fit in them. He too much pens up and straitens his j^y^, who thinks he
enjoys no more then what he has and sees Suddenly does all pleasure leave us,
it flows and passes, and is in a manner taken away, before it come to us.

Let us ^ll therefore contentedly enjoy what is b^stowed, and su^render it when
it shall be demanded. Death snatcheth away all, some one time, some another;
none escapes him: Let our souls then continually watch, never dreading it,
because necessary; lways expecting it, because ^ncertain. It is hard to say
whether it be more folly to be ignorant of, or impudent to stand out against
the Laws of Mortality. All men, yea all creatures whatsoever, look toward
death. Whosoever is born to the World is ordained to die, and to pass to
Eterni^y.

17. Three special Rules to be observed by the sick.
I Concerning God.
IT is grand impiety to murmur any thing against God our h avenly Father, as
though the disease he l yeth upon us were extreme and unreasonable. We ought
rather to say with holy Job, Even as it pleases the Lord, so come things to
pass: Blessed be the name of the Lord: and to cry out with that devout
multitude, He has done all things well. For wheth^r God wound or heal us,
certain it is he ever bears toward us the tender care and affection of a
most loving Father.

II Concerning himself.
In the extremity of sickness there is not so much need of long and continual
prayers, as of constant and unwearied patience: For thereby that which is
heavy and intolerable becomes light and easy. Our chief cordials and
sweetest comforts in our sickness are frequent sighs breathed up to Heaven,
the Remembrance of the patient sufferings of the Saints, holy Prayers and
Ejaculations sent up to Go^, for constant patience, and an happy departure out
of this life.

III Concerning others.
The sick man must be tractable to his Physicians, whether corporal or
spiritual. If any come to visit him, he must show all patience and calmnesse
of spirit: and though his disease gripe him, many things trouble him, some
displease him, others relish ill wi^h him, all things be not done a^ his beck,
yet he must never murmur, but allaying the bitterness of his afflictions with
the sweet expectation of a reward, express Christi^n submissi^n and patience
in all his words and actions.

17. Wherewith the sickman should quench his thirst.
MOst sick folk complain much of th rst, those especially who are sick of
Feve^s. Here therefore we w^ll show them a Fountain, whence they may drink as
much as they please.

An. 1590
In lower Austria, there was a Thief, who had killed ma^y men, being taken, and
brought to the Wheel, only had his legs broken, which was done the more to
torment him with a lingering death and to make him the more terrible spectacle
to all such Malefactors: bu this tormented person proved himself a valiant man,
and a stout Christian in the height of his torments For all his words argued
patience, and penitence He began seriously to supplicate God, to entreat pardon
for his sins, to be a Preacher of Mortification, and to dehort all other men
from the like heinous sins. And the day being almost spent, when as there was a
World of people assembled, there were likewise present some that knew him and
comforted him, being glad to see him so patiently to suffer, for he being laid
flat for his punishment, that he might get another life, he asswag'd his
present suffering with the hope of future happiness: and not only so, but
gave thanks to God, who in his anger had remembered mercy, and had chastened
him, that he might save him. In that space of his punishment, which lasted for
above three days, he requ^sted two things, that he might die maturely and
Christianly, and that it would please God, to send a shower of rain seasonably
to mitigate his heat and thirst. It is recorded that he ob^ained both these
requests for about Evening, there fell a plentiful shower of rain, and
afterward he ended his pains and his life.

Behold here (o my Christian) thou thy self here have also thy wheel, but a
far softer one, thou rollest in thy bed, as on a wheel, and without doubt
though perhaps thy torment may be less, yet thy thirst is as great; that there
may come down into thy soul a comfortable shower, look up to Golgotha, and
behold with the eye of faith thy Savior upon the Cross, from whose body
flows Rivers of saving waters: here drink, here refresh, here satisfy thy
self. The more freely thou drinkest of this, the more healthy will thy soul
be.

.18 The sickmans Napkin or Handkerchief.
CHrotildis Queen of the Franks, (as Gregorius Turonicus relate it) being
cruelly used by Amalaricus her husband, sent to King Childebert her brother a
white linen cloth, all besmeared with her blood in stead of a Letter, and as
though she spoke thus to her Brother: Can Thou (o Childebert) see this, and
suffer it? See thou what thy sister endures, and will thou connive at it?
wilt not thou defend her? wilt not thou vindicate her wrong? Behold here (o
sick man) Thy Savior sends to thee two Handkerchiefs, all be-dyed with blood,
one he garnished in the Mount of Olives most liberally with his blood, in the
other from Golgotha, thou may behold how his face with sweat, with spit, with
blood, tears and blows was abused by sinful men, both these Jesus sends to
thee, all be-purpled with his precious blood, and may speak these words to thy
soul Your sins (o mortals) have caused this sweat; these stripes this blood.
Can ye behold these, and can you but leave of your wicked lives? o would we
were true Childeberts! and that we would take an holy and speedy revenge upon
our selves. Certainly, there is no man does more truly grieve at the sufferings
of Christ, then he which begins to hate those things for which Jesus suffered.

. 19. The sickmans Bed.
THe sickmans Bed torments him, though it be as soft as that of Sardanapalus,
though it be as that of Smindyrides upon Roses the base and effeminatish
Sybarite? a young man given up to all wantonness and luxury. Who when he had
tried how easily he could lie upon the softest feathers, complained that they
made his sides sore: and so made him a Bed of Rosy leaves, but this perfumed
Gallant also complained of them, as too hard for his tender flesh.

Although the sick person have a bed all of Hares Wool or down of Partridges,
yet he will judge it uneasy. Well he must be excused; it is his anguish that
forces these complaints, yet we can show you harder lodgings then these.
Saint Lawrence had a Grid-iron red fire hot to lie on, so Vincentius the Martyr
and many others have been laid in smart lodgings, and yet the love they bore to
their Lord, and the care they had of salvation made them to repute them easy
and honorable.

The Persians in times past exercised a cruel kind of torment upon Christians,
which was called Scaphismus; because the poor Christians which were to be thus
tortured, were laid between two boats, as in an hollow and long straight chest
with their faces upwards, their head, their hands, and feet were left out,
only; for their food it was mingled with honey, which was poured into their
mouth against their wills, only to prolong their life, and augment their
torments. For at certain times they were exposed to the heat of the Sun, and
had their eyes shut down, their head, hands, and feet were all anointed with
milk and honey, so by this means, whole swarms of Flies and Gnats did cover
these parts, so that they seemed as a black cloth, and the drink and liquour
poured into their mouths preserved life, and because it did easily run from
their entrails, it caused a noisome putrefaction in the lower boat, and Worms
were engendered: so that the men that were thus laid, were stung without with
Hornets, Wasps, and Flies; and eaten within, with infinite companies of Worms:
Hence when their bodies came to be opened, they were found most miserably gnawn
with these Worms, and this unheard off and most cruel torment would let the
parties live to fifteen or seventeen days and some more. Consider (my sick
friend) this bed, this miserable lodging so full of torture invented for the
Christians. Oh how favorable are thy sufferings to these! how soft is thy Bed
to this: thy disease is not to be reckoned any thing compared with these
tortures? Be silent therefore, and be patient without murmuring, who partakes
of the Cross shall inherit the Kingdom: and Salvian spoke well, it seems to
me a kind of health, Epist. 5.
not to be always in health.

20. The hope of a better life asswageth our misery.
I Demand of thee, (o my sick friend) with Seneca, why Wondrest thou at thy
miseries? Thou art born to this, to losses, to crosses, to perishings, to
hopes, to fears, to disquietings: to fear, yet to desire death; and what is
worse, not to know thy own condition, and never to be in a durable state.

Ingenuous spirits strike off delays; they desire earnestly to be gone, and
break prison. They accustom their thoughts to sublime objects, and so easily
despise these baser subjects. Therefore Plato cries out, A wise man always sets
death before him, this he wills, this he meditates on; this takes up his
thoughts, how well is that saying of Plato, concerning a better life, I (says
he) esteem him a wise man, whose study is to die in hope and confidence: being
filled with certainty of hope, that he shall be enriched with great rewards
when he is dead. This the Ancients saw in the dark, and can thou choose but
see them in the Sunshine? Why therefore (o my sick friend) do these terrene
things molest thee? When as shortly Heaven shall be thy Mansion, let thy
thoughts be there fixed, and what ever thy misery is: thou will less feel it.

21. The true hope of a most blessed Life.
I Trouble thee not here with Poets or Philosophers, the business is serious,
I will draw most pure waters out of the fountain of holy Writ, let therefore
sorrow be gone, and confidently say it with the Doctor of the Gentiles, I know
whom I have believed, 2 Timothy, 12
and I am sure that he will keep, and is able to keep that for me until that
day. What fear thou o man of short hope? Hear what Syrach's son says
also, He which fears the Lord, shall not need to be daunted, Ecclus 34 16.
usque ad 21.
because the Lord is his hope. The soul of him that fears the Lord is
blessed. For the Lord is his hope, and his strength; The eyes of the Lord are
upon them that fear him, he is their mighty protection and strong stay, a
defense from heat, and a cover from the Sun at noon, a preservation from
stumbling, and a help from fall^ng, he raises up the soul, lightneth the
eyes, he gives heal^h, life and blessing.

The Kingly Prophet even then when he saw his own death, how valiantly and
resolutely did he express himself? Psalm 4, 9.
I will lie down (says he) and take my rest, for it is Thou Lord only, that
make me dwell in safety: now what that was he speaks elsewhere: saying, for
thou have been my hope, and a strong tower against the enemy, Psalm. 61.3, 4.
I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for ever, and my trust shall be under the
shadow of thy wings: but thou will reply, my impatience makes me distrust, take
then with King David another remedy. Psalm. 71.5.
For Thou art mine, o Lord God, even my trust from my youth up. Neither did
King David use this as a medicine for himself, but exhorts others to apply it
to themselves. Psalm. 62.8.
Trust in him always all ye people, pour out your hearts before him, for God
is our hope. Why can not thou follow, Him who has so often said it; Remember
thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust,
It is my comfort in my trouble. and say thou with Jeremiah, the Prophet. But I
have not thrust in my self for a Pastor after thee. Ier. 17.16, 17.
Be not thou terrible unto me, Thou art my hope in the ^ay of adversity. And
also hear him elsewhere. Ier. 31.16, 17.
Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work
shall be rewarded, and there is hope in thine end. Job 13.^5, 17, 12
Job was most confident in this, Though he kill me yet will I trust in him.
And when he was at the threshold of death, he says, I have changed the night
for the day. And in Ecclesiasticus it is said, Ecclus 2.11, 12, 13.
Know ye that none that trust in the Lord has been confounded, for who has
abode in his Commandments, and was forsaken? And who has called upon him, and
has been rejected? Because the Lord is holy and merciful, and will forgive in
the day of affl^ction: He is the protector of all such as seek him in verity.
Osee 12.6
And the Prophet Hosea cries out, Trust in thy God for ever, for they that
trust in him shall not be confounded, seeing the Lord is good to all that fear
him, even to the soul that trusts in him. Lam. 3.26, 27.
It is good both to trust in and to wait for the salvation of the Lord, for
truly the Lord is good, and as a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he
knows all that trust in him. Nahum 1.7.
And we also know that when he shall appear, we shall be l ke him, for we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2, 3.
And every one that has this hope in him purges himself even as he is pure.
Have thou therefore thy hope fixed upon Gods goodness, for he will not forsake
him, Psalm. 116.9
that hopes in him, But as David speaks, We shall see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living.

22. Tranquillity flows from true hope.
Ps. 116.7.
REturn unto thy rest (o my soul) for the Lord has been gracious unto thee.
Why faintest thou in such variety of laborious travels? behold the Lord is
present to put an end to all thy pains; leave off therefore (o my soul) to be
any longer willingly miserable, and to waste thy self with such fruitless
toils; sickness and death are the beginnings of rest to thee, thou may say
perhaps, they are hard beginnings it is true, they are so; but thou know
after stormy weather usually come the greatest calmes: so here, thy ^est thus
purchased, is rest eternal. Now perhaps Good Friday wearies thee, but thou
do know that Easter is nigh, for aye to last. Go on, and partake willingly
some share of labor and sorrow, thou expects an Haven to arrive in, not only
out of this troublesome World, but into that which is eternal in Heaven.
Though thy labors be but (in thy apprehension) now begun, yet they are
sufficiently done; when, he to whom thou have labored, accounts them so. Thou
therefore (o my soul) leave off vanity, and turn thee to thy God, who has
done great things for thee. Count if thou can all his benefits, thou may
sooner reckon the sands on the shore, by which his favors he has laid open
away to thy eternal felicity. Saint Bernard commended that chiefly to his
before his death; That they would firmly fix the Anchor of their hopes, in the
safe bosom of Gods mercy. Let us have therefore that Verse of that sweet
Singer daily in our mouths. In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me
never be confounded, deliver me in thy righteousness.

23. Patience is the whole armor of a Christian.
DEmosthenes being asked what was the chief ornament and grace of Eloquence
answered, Action, being asked what was next to that, answered, Action, being
asked the third time replied, Action: so that as he gave the prime grace and
credit to Action, so he made it the only grace of Rhetoric. If I should be
asked, what is the chiefest thing requisite for a sick man, I would say, and
rightly too, Patience, if it should be asked what is the most profitable for
him, I would answer again Patience, If again the third time, what is the most
decent thing for a sick man, I would repeat the same, and say, Patience. This
deserves all the credit, she should not only wear the first, but also the
second and third Bays. Let us see what repute the divine Oracles bestow upon
Pat^ence, our Savior says, Luke 2^ 19.
By patience possess your souls, nor does S. Paul say little less, Ye have
need of Patience that when ye have done the work, Heb. 10.36.
you might receive the promise. And Saint James, Let Patience have her perfect
work. Would you any more o impatient man! Acts 14.27.
By many tribulations we must enter i^ t^ the Kingdom of God. Where the
thorn p^icks thee will grow a Rose to crown thee. Truth it self proclaymes
it, Whosoever shall not take up his cross and come after, Lu. 14.25
he cannot be my Disciple. Admi^ the^efo^e the Council of Saint Augustine,
Suffer, what thou would not, Aug. in Psalm. 6.
that thou may enjoy that which thou would. Solomon beats upon the same,
Prove. 3.11, 12.
Despise not the correction of the Lord, and faint not, when thou art chastened
of him. For whom the Lord loves he corrects, and takes pleasure in him as in a
son.

God delights not in destruction, but after a storm brings a calm, and
for tears rejoicing; the Name of the God of Israel be praised for ever.
Therefore blessed are ye that weep, Lu. 6.21.
for ye shall be comforted The furnace tryes the vessels of the potter, and so
does the tentation of tribulation righ eous men. Wherefore (o my sick man)
compose thy self to all patience. Patience is chiefly necessary for thee
before any other thing. Thy meat (perhaps) rellisheth ntowith thee, Patience
will digest all. It is common, and one of the first things that befall sickmen
to lose their palates, their sleep may be short and interrupted, Patience will
give ease and rest. Do sick men sl^epe so well as healthy? do pains
torment? patience does mitiga^e. ^re thy attendants negligent in their duties?
useful then is Patience. To satisfy a sickman in all things is very
difficult. Perhaps there may want apt Comforters. Oh then embrace patience. Thy
Lord Christ is the only Comforter: though many things be wanting which may
seem necessary, possess but thy self with this one rich cordial, and all
will be well; all will be quiet. Ioachim Elector of Brandenburgh, coming to
visit Charles the fifth Emperor, being troubled with the Gout, did admonish the
Emperor to use the help of Physicians, to whom Charles the Emperor replied;
The best remedy for this sore is Patience: and so truly the only remedy, and
the whole Armor of the sick, is Patience: being guarded with this, he will
not much fear pains, diseases, nor death it self. He may encounter with all
these Enemies, and come off a Victor. For Patience overcommeth all evils.

24. We are but guests, at length we must be gone.
OUr life is but a wayfaring, and pilgrimage. We are in a strange place, and
at another disposing. We are often dismissed, before we be well entertained,
and our remembrance departs with us. We are but of yesterday, as a Post that
passes away and is gone, most richly Saint Augustine in this kind. All of us
are Pilgrims and strangers. He is a Christian which at home does acknowledge
himself a Pilgrim, our Country is above, there we shall not be strangers.
For here every one at home is but a guest. Will he, nill he, he is but a
stranger. Bu^ he leaves his house to his children. What then? as one guest his
lodging to the next commer. Thy Father left room for thee, thou must leave it
to the next generation. Neither while thou would stay, do thou, nor while
thou would stay, shall thou If we must all be gone, let us do something here
that may abide hereafter. That when we shall pass away, and shall come
thither from whence we shall not depart, we may find some good treasured up.
Seeing therefore that we are but guests, let it not trouble us to set onward
to our travel. A traveller goes no way so merrily, as when he goes homeward.

25. The term of life is certain.
THe number of his months is with thee, Job 14.5.
Thou have appointed him his bounds, which he cannot pass. Whatsoever thou
do (o man) whatsoever thou endevourest, the days of thy life are numbered
unto thee. Summon and convocate all the Physicians to thee, about thee,
Podalyrians, Machaonists, Aesculapians, Hippocratists, and command all the
Galens to revive, not all these can put one part of a short minute to thy
years, beyond Gods appointed time. Empty all the Apothecaries shops, swallow
up Gold, and Pearls, to extend thy life. Yet thou shall not promote the
terms, which thou can not exceed, be thou never so wary: decline from all
dangers thou can suppose, hinder the growth of diseases, yet thou shall not
increase the number of thy months. Thou may wish, vow, desire, it is
nothing: the limits are appointed, and (what stir soever thou make) thou
can not enlarge them. Thou think perhaps the sand of the sea to be
innumerable; but he has that numbered, which has thy years, months, days,
hours, minutes reckoned from Eternity. Whatsoever thy skill, or industry may
promise thee, they cannot enlarge thy space of time not a moment. Let there be
provided for thee, the choice and most excellent diet, and let it be never so
rarely dressed, drink the Cream of wine; never labor but for health; sleep
just so long as thy Doctor prescribes thee, and as thy health invites thee. Be
cold and hot to a just proportion, notwithstanding all these things thou shall
prove mortal, and when thou art come to the mark, (which God has set up, and
foreseen from all Eternity) Then thou may bid Adieu to all humane things,
and all worldly affairs: and prepare thy self to give in account, for the
Tribunal calls thee to Appearance. Seek no delay here, no truce, no putting
off, thou must go, slinke not backwards. The account must be given, do not
excuse thy self, all delay is cut off, request not lingering. (o God) the
number of all men's months is with thee, his bounds are set which cannot,
cannot (I say) be past.

Seneca was not ignorant of this (who said) No man died too soon, Consol. ad
Marciam. c. 20.
who was never intended to live longer then he did.

He has arrived at his set mark,
And now must lie alas in the dark.
Every man has his prefixed stint: he shall remain for ever in his Stanza.
Let an hundred Physicians, six hundred friends, a thousand Kinsmen attend or
hedge in thy bed; yet not one of them can help thee; One only God can do the
deed.

It is concluded (o man) it is fully concluded concerning thee, (o if God be
thine Enemy) it is concluded upon thee for ever. Thou per^shest for ever, if in
this moment of death, thou be not received into grace and favor, the last
moment of thy life pronounces sentence of thee: as thy death, as thy fall is,
so shall thy resurrection, so shall thy life be to all Eternity. ah! begin to
be wise, and live to God, and whatever thou do, remember Eternity.

26. The first Objection of the sick man.
I Could easily have comforted my self when I was healthy and lusty, I then
provoked these evils when they were absent, behold now the sorrow, that so
often I have pronounced tolerable: behold the death! against which I have
spoken many great words!

I thought otherwise while I stood healthy and strong, I think not so now being
cast down upon my bed of sickness. It is no hing to provoke an absent Enemy,
but it is a matter of difficulty to retain stou nesse of spirit to his face.
We usually contemn death, but it is when we think and believe our selves free
from his reaching darts: It is one thing to fight in thought, another thing to
fight really. The Coward may perform the first, ^ut none but Christian
Champions the latter.

What say thou (o my sick man) why do thou complain against thy self? why
changest thou thy yesterdays mind, though it was good? what? as though it were
the part of a Champion to be wise and valorous in the dark only? but when he
enters the lists to be sottish and cowardly? A good Fencer will not reject
counsel when he is entered the Theater, though before he wanted it Stand (o
man) and be bold, thou have overcome, if thou will; only despair not. Behold
Jesus Christ thy rewarder, looking on thee, he is not only a Spectatour, but
an Helper. And he reaches to thy hands all the weapons which thou need use,
but perhaps they are to thee as Saul's were to David, not fit, thou refusest the
scourge, the thorns, and the Cross: yet take the shield of Patience, under
this thou may fight safe, secure. Commit the rest to thy good GOD. Thou
know that of Abraham to his son. God will provide.

27. Another Objection.
BEhold I die, which might have lived longer. Truly thou could not. For if
thou could, why do thou not? but ^his thou may say, I hoped, or desired
to live longer. And in this I b lieve ^hee; What if thou had lived longer,
thou had but then lived awhile? the spaces of this life are unequal and
uncertain, yet they are all short. Some men have lived 80 years, what have they
now more then he that lived eight? Unless you put cares, and labors, and
griefs, and toy^ings, as advantages into he b^rgaine? and what more had he,
had he^ lived eight hundred, unless we can reckon his virtues as we l as his
years. Unless in this kind reckond what were Methusalems 969 years, Iam.
4.15.
but a mere vapor which appears for a while, No man ever lived either so
long or so much, but he seemed to himself to have lived but a while: and in
plain truth, woe live but a modicum at the longest here. He that delights to
live long, let him seek after that life, where he lives for ever: which is
only to be sought here, is not to be had here, but thou will say, I am taken
away and die, while I was thinking to do good. Why did thou only think it,
and not act it, not perform it? perhaps this would always have been thy
thought, never thy performance.

Many are there which refer all to thought, but set no^ foot to begin, nor
would do should life be longer granted: believe thy self to be one of these.
For if thou had begun to do well, thou can not doubt, though death may
prevent thy further progress, yet the estimate of thy labor shall not be
subtracted in the Registry of that Infallible Computist. Thy reward is entire,
not only of thy acts, but of thy wishes. Be of good comfort. The direct and
shortest cut to eternal reward: is to die, well.

28. Against other complaints of the sick party.
MAnifold are the complaints of sick folk, they f^arce speak without
complaynings, without grudings. How often are these usual phrases heard in the
mouths of ^he diseased? alas! wretch that I am, so afflicted, so oppressed
wi^h Dolours! how often does he sigh out, ah! and alas! but bring the
business to the balance, and let it be well and strictly examined, and he
will then change his terms of Grief, into these speeches. It is well; I am
well, it pleases God, it seems good in my Creatours eyes. Oh how happy! how
blessed am I, though under the Rod! yet not of a Tyrant, but of a loving
Father. God be praised, God be glorified. Heaven is the reward of all that do
the will of God. Oh! it is well, oh sick man! this is as it should be. Seneca
admonishes well in this case, Noli (ait) etc. Do not (says he) make thy
evils heavier then they are, for why will thou desire to burden thy self? it
is better to withdraw these groanings, and repining words It was never worse
with any man. What torments, what evils have I suffered, no man ever thought I
should ever have recovered again. How often have I been given for lost by
Physicians? Though all these were true, yet they are past. What helps it thee
to take up thy past ^riefs, and to be miserable, because thou have been? I am
wret^hed thou say, ^ea, rather blessed, Blessed is the m^n whom the Lord
chasteneth; Pro. 3.12
for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and del^ghts in him, as in a son.
He sco^rgeth every son whom he r^ceiveth. Despise not therefore the
chastening of the Lord, because he wounds and heals: he strike down, and
raises up again. Know thou not that the Chyrurgeons Lances are but for
Medicaments, and Initiations of recovery? Look not thou so much upon thy
wound, as to the hand that gave it. And then thou will confess that this wound
makes thee whole: bu^ you will say, My g^ief is great an^ heavy, It is as thou
feel it in thy apprehension, heavy if undergone with a feminine spirit. The
enemy does us most mischief when we fly from him: Every evil is most urgent
to them that yield to it: flee from it. Think of those, as I may say) so many
hundred thousand stout Martyrs, and not only those, but also others which have
vanquished dangerous evils. Ibid.
Seneca does report of one, who while his legs were cutting off, did constantly
and undauntedly read on a book. Do thou but behold the Martyrs Lamed, cut,
torn, burnt, stabbed, fried, roasted, broyled, dying lingringly, with all manner
of torments. Rub up thy memory on them, and then wonder that thy self so like
them in other things, yet so unlike them in thy impatience. But you will say
the disease will not give you leave to do any thing. Is it so indeed? Look I
pray: thy sickness holds thy body, not thy mind: so thou art a runner in a
R^ce, yet thy feet are bound, if thou can use thy mind, and exercise thy
spirit: thou will persuade, teach, hear, lear^, seek, remember even in thy
sickness. Furt^ermore, do thou think thou do nothing, if in thy
sickness thou be, tem^orate, and quiet? If thou can demonstrate that thy
disease is vanquished, or undergone, thou have then (believe me) done a great
exercise in thy sick bed, and thy work is welnigh finished.

29. The sick man to himself, against himself.
WHat shall I do? do I die before I am gray headed? is it not granted to me
which others enjoy, Old age? Behold we are all too expert in this Error; to
think that none but old men are for the Grave: a Biere is as well acquainted
with young and strong men, as decrepit folks? Sap. 4.9.
The crown of old men is an upright life, the beautifullest old age is
honesty. It is better to have the man then his hairs to plead reverence. He
is wondrous rich in the endowments of old age, who has worshipped God, who
has exerci^ed wisdom, and lived well.

It is more glorious to be a senior in Virtue, then years. Whosoever comes to
his appointed period, has lived long, and died old: We have our Landmarks,
and to touch them is to go far enough: but such is our covetousness after
long life, that when we are to die we would seem but young folks, and unripe
to the ha^vest, th^ugh we can number even then 80 years. But why do we stand
still thinking upon the paucitie of our years? when as in vain? God has
registered thy time in the Book of Eternity, which nor thou, nor any other can
alter, or cancel. This is the sentence of God upon all flesh, and they that
shall live after thee, are in the pleasure of the Almighty, whither thy time
extends to 10, to an 100, or more years, there is no complaining of life in
Hell, and in the other World, none shall accuse God, because he gave them not a
longer life: they shall condemn themselves in that they managed their life no
better. Do thou thus, and think in thy mind of those eternal, that is a
profi^able loss, to lose a point of time, and to gain Eternity. Most
generously said the King of Macedon, I meet not my self by time, Curt^b. 9.12.
but by Eternity. Do thou also consider thy self not as a bubble of time,
but as created for Eternity, which has no limits.

30. The sick man to God.
OH my God! the desire of my heart. I a most wretched man, a most vile
contemptible worm, lie here fastened in my sick bed, without either the use or
strength of hands or feet, an idle, empty, slothful, unprofitable servant, a
lump and mass of unfruitful earth, which have done no work for thee. Yet I
desire (o God) I desire to work in thy Vineyard; to endure cold, heat,
weariness, vexation, the Cross, I desire to suffer hunger o^ thirst, or any
molestation, any heavines, or misery for thy sake.

I have learnt this by the Example of an holy man, who when he was visited with
more sorrow and sickness then was usual, he was admonished by another friend of
his to ent^eat God to deal more favorably, with him, to whom he answered (as
it were in anger) but that I perceive your simplicity, I should have put you
from my company, for saying such words. And p^esently he cast himself upon
the Earth, I give thee thanks (o God) for these things which thou have sent me
to suffer, Enlarge my sorrows, multiply my pains, send me an hundred diseases?
I know for certain, thou will with all these g^ve me patience.

What can I say but this thing only, It is too little that I suffer. (o God)
add (if it be thy good pleasure) more and more to them. I have deserved far
more bitter stripes, then thou (o merciful God) have yet inflicted. Here (o
Lord) spare me not, burn me, cut me, tear me in pieces, only save me
hereafter. If I had an hundred bodies, I would adorn so many crosses wi^h them
for thy sake; that I may please thee, (o kind Father) that I may be but
numbered with thy Saints in Glory Everlasting, I weigh not what pains and
miseries, I here undergo and suffer, a thousand without any exception, so I may
gain thee. Let thy will (o God) be fully done. For I know that thy service is
perfect freedom, to whom both the will and the deed are acceptable, and how
often do accept the will for the deed, and rewardest it equally.

I am now by thy appointment, o Lord, called to rest, my night comes in which I
cannot work. Yet although this my disease takes away from me the power of
working, yet it deprives me not of the will, I will (o Lord) I will and while
breath or life continue, for thy love I am ready and willing to do or suffer
as the holy Martyrs and pious Christians, have done and suffered before me. Say
only (o Lord) what will thou me have do? What must I suffer? for I offer a
whole World full of good desires to thee, I will go to the utmost parts of the
Earth, nay, with read^nesse and willingness to the Indies, the tops of
Mountains shall not let me, the great Valleys shall not deter me. I will
climb these, travel through those; the vast heaps of snow shall not stop me,
nor the lofty waves, I will pass through both. Nor rocks, nor fire, scornings,
reproaches, disgraces, shame, accusations all these, none of these shall be
able to deter my course for suffering in thy cause, nor will I for thy love
(o Eternal Wisdom) think much to be counted a fool, I will glory in the title,
it is not blows nor death which I will decline for thy sake. Nothing shall be
too hard, nothing too bitter, nothing unpleasant, nothing impossible where the
cords of thy love do draw my soul. I shall go through with all encumbrances,
with all oppositions, by thy aid and assistance: and what I cannot do by
strength, I will perform in desires, wherein my hands or feet shall fail,
thither will I go in desire, in affection.

But all these wishes and willings if ^hey be brought to action, will they
unlock and open Heaven gates? If I shall bring forth all these specious fruits,
shall I then be worthy to be in the presence of God? Ah! o my Lord God! though
I suffer and do whatsoever thy holy Saints have done and suffered, or what
they would have done or suffered, yet shall I not be worthy to abide in thy
sight one moment: how much less then, when as I do but offer up to thee these
small and empty desires. By what means, then shall I make my way ready for
heaven? (oh! infinite Goodness, if thou shall not have mercy upon me I am
undone for ever. I shall never be admitted into Heaven, if thy mercy excludes
me. There is therefore this one sanctuary, and this one refuge remaining to me
to save me from thy anger and just indignation. Thy mercy (o Lord) is that vast
Ocean, and immense Sea, into this I will throw my self, whenever death shall
cast me from the little Hillock of this world, and also while I do possess
this little Tabernacle I will freely and wholly cast my self into that
bottomless Sea of thy infinite mercies: being fully assured, that herein I
shall be safe from all the flames and flashes of Hell fire. I cry out therefore
with King David.

Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness, according to the
multiude of thy tender mercies, blot out all mine off^nces.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

So also in my greatest extremity, in my last and uttermost hour of my life,
when my soul must go forth from her old decayed house, with all my ardentest
and earnestenst desires I will and wish that one thing: yea, while I live and
am well in health, deliberately and affectionately, I thirst after those
pleasant Rivers of waters, yea, at my gasp I desire tha^ my sigh may signify
so much to men an^ Angels that I only cry and sigh for this one favor al ^hy
hands.

Have mercy upon me (o GOD) after thine own goodness, according to the
multitude of thy tender compassions, etc.

31. The sick man's sure and true confidence in God.
IT is a serious business, and no childish art, to die, and well may the sick
man be asked, will thou wholly commit thy self to the hazard of Eternity?
thou entrest into an unknown way, and whither will thou come? to which the
sick may answer, (...) not to mutter as those wretches who say, I am compeld, I
must, but rather in an upright course, let him say, I do willingly and wholly
give my soul, so I commit my self to Eternity, so I depart hence joyfully.

So, even so, let healthy men say and think, but especially such as are ready
to die: both these may truly say hitherto I have begun to die only, now I do
so. Now I begin my journey to Eternity: and because Gods mercy knows no end,
and exceeds all measure, I go on without dread. In thee (o Lord) have I put my
trust, let me never be put to confusion. I hope, never, never (o Lord) and
though there be a thousand witnesses out of the sacred Writ to confirm my
hope in this point, yet let me not despise the excellent Council which that
Roman wise man affords, That we should think of Death, and the return from
Death. Thus the Ancients have delivered their minds.

When that day shall come which shall separate my soul from my body, I shall
leave this body, where I found it: but I my self shall be restored to God.
Neither am I now without him, only I am detained by this heavy earthy body of
flesh: by these delays we make a preparation for that Eternal and better life.
For as the womb of our mother holds us nine months, and prepares us not for
her self, but for that place into which we are sent, being now fit to take
breath, and to live abroad: so from the space of our infancy, to our old age,
we are fitting for another birth, another spring expects us, we expect
another state. We are not here fit for Heaven but by distance, yet here we
are fitted for it. Wherefore undauntedly look for that decretory hour: though
last to the body, yet not to the soul. Whatsoever things thou do here
behold, look upon them as bundels of trumperies not worth transportation. We
must pass. The day which thou so mightily fear as thy last, is but the
birthday of Eternity. The day will come that shall reveal thee: and will
bring thee out of thy rotten, and flitting tent. Meditate now on diviner
matters. Natures secrets shall once be disclosed to thee: this darkness shall
vanish, and light shall shine bright for ever. No cloud shall dim or obscure
the serenity of that day, Heaven shall then perfectly be seen: day and night
are the courses of this lower Region, thou will then say, thou have but lived
in darkness, when thou shall clearly behold that light, which now thou have but
a glimpse off: and yet admirest at, though afar off. What will that ^ivine
Light seem to thee, when thou shall behold it in its own place? the thought of
this will permit no base or sordid, no abjected or inhumane thing to reside in
thy mind.

What can be more holy (o Christians) let us always think on, and medi^ate
these things, no good man dies ill, no ill man, well. Death is the nearest way
to Eternity.

32. Constantly.
COnstantly (I beseech you) constantly, there is no patience, where there is no
constancy: but some may say, this is the second, third, fourth, or fifth, or
ninth week, in which I have layn sick. Anoth^r may say, this is the second
third, fourth, ^ifth, or ninth month since I fell sick. There will not want
others to object, that this is the second, third, four h, fifth, or ninth
year, or more, that he has been visited. Oh good men! it is not the sign of
a patient man, to call, to mind, and calculate so exactly his days, monet^s,
and years of visitation. Endure I pray you. Endure and loose not the
recompense of reward for a little suffering, res rve your selves for better
thing. That Is but a point of time in which I suffer. If I look upon Eternity.
All our travail is short, our rest is everlasting. There have been those who
have been sick all their life long.

Saint Gregory commends one Servulus, who from his childhood to his dying day
was troubled grievously with a Palsy, so that he could not lift up his hands
to his mouth, or turn in his bed, and yet he got all the Bible by heart, by
hearing it read to him, what was his life but a ling^ing death? and as he was
daily dying, so he usually had this speech ready, God be thanked. All his
years though so full of misery and pains, yet he held them as nothing to
Eternity.

There was a Virgin at Scheedam, called Lydwina, who for 38 years together,
was afflicted with diverse diseases, even as that Beggar was at the fish-poole:
thou might trulyer have said, this Maid to have been dead then alive, who
spent so many years in and amongst so many sorts of troubles and diseases.
Diversity of torments seemed to have jointly set upon her: scarce for those 30
years did she eat so much bread as one able man would have done in three days,
and she was not only troubled with extreme sickness, but also with great
poverty and exigencie: Yet in her sickness this Lydwine cried out constan^ly,
Oh! good Jesus have mercy upon me. She was wont to say that these 38 years of
sickness we nothing reckoned to Eternity.

But I will record another that past Servulus, or Lydwina, in the number of to
ments and sicknesses. One Coleta a Vi^gin of Corbe^a, who endured an incredible
measure of pains for the space of 50 years, without intermission patiently, and
scarce slept one hour in eight d^ys toge^he^: she was tormented in her mind
as well as in her body: and that, which she reckoned amongst the kindnesses
and favors of the Lord was, that her torments were answerable to those of the
blessed Martyrs. One being still sent upon another, she would usually say, o
could I at once, patiently suffer the fury of all Fevers together! This
fearful continuation of diseases for above 50 years did this female creatu^e
patiently go under, and bore comfort^bly, and to her they seemed nothing to
Eternity. This blessed Maid said, as once, Saint Bernard, ^y work is but for
one hour, or if a little longer I count it ^s nothing for the love I bear to
my Savior.

That as well the sound as the sick may determine holiness in their minds, and
bring it forth in thoir works and actions, and from good words proceed to good
deeds we have added ^hese prayers following, for the confirming and
establishing them in those holy duties.

A Prayer to be said continually of the sound, sick, and dying men.
MOst sweet Lord Jesus Christ in the union of that love, by which thou
offeredst thy self up to thy Father, do I offer up my heart and soul to
thee, that thy good will and pleasure may be done of me and by me. Sweet Jesus
I desire and choose thy will to be done: let my sufferings be never so great,
let sickness and death approach, yet I commit my self wholly to thy faithful
providence, and divine will. For I hope, and entreat, that thou would direct
me, and all that belong unto me to thy glory and everlasting salvation. Amen.

2 A Prayer to conform our selves to Gods will.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which for thy own glory and our salvation minglest j^y
with heaviness, and for our progress in grace do suffer us to partake of
adversity and prosperity, I give thanks unto thee, that thou of thy goodness
have caused me to be troubled, and to bear this affliction. I desire thy
favor (o Savior) to let such fruit and benefit grow from it, as thou
approvest and desire, and that it may not be hindered by my impatience or
unthankfulness. Strech forth thy hand (o Lord) and come and help me ^hy
sick servant; as once thou did stretch it forth and saved Peter thy Apostle
from drowning in the waves. So let (I beseech thee) thy arm of power save me
from sinking under this present cross and sickness: according to thy power, so
let thy will be (o Lord) I entreat thee to let this present bitter Cup, so
troublesome to flesh and blood to pass away from me: as thou did hear and
deliver Ezekias, when he cried unto thee: Notwithstanding not my will, but
thine (which is always righteous and holy) be done. Thou only have the power
of judging and ^iscerning, and thou know best the medicines to cure our
diseases. Oh my most loving Savior! reprove, correct, and chastize me, burn
me, cut me in pieces, only save me everlastingly Let not the flames of hell
lay hold upon me. I know thy rod comforts as well as thy staff, thou do I
know chastize thy beloved sons, and by chastizements do purge, exercise and
provest them, before thou put upon them the crown of glory. My heart, my
heart (o Lord) is ready, how, and when thou will be pleased to prove my
patience, and subject me under the rod. My trust is in thee, let me not be
confounded for ever. I submit my self, and wholly resign my self to thy
heavenly will and pleasure, though thou kill, yet will I trust in thee. My lot
is in thy hands, to dispose, let it fall to me in a good ground. Amen.

3 A Prayer to obtain patience.
O Almighty GOD, Thou kn^w^st what a weak, frail, and vile piece of earth I
am, yet the work of thy hands, who was framed of ^he dust, who am blown and
withered by every blast of wind, and shall at last again return to dust,
there is nothing that I have wherein I can trust, for I have within me the
spirit striving against the flesh, and about me the flesh against the spirit. I
find motions of Anger, Impatience, Fearfulnes, Dissidence, and diverse other
perturbati^ns to rise within me, if thou only do but touch me with thy
hand. I desire therefore thy help (o heavenly Physician) and that heavenly
medicine of thine (called Patience) to be communicated to me: o! Patience it is
the easement of all diseases.

Give me (o Lord) in all estates to carry my self orderly, submissively, and
to bear prosperity without pride, adversity without repining, whither thou
sendest health, or sickness, I may entertain them as proceeding from thy
fatherly hands, and so being assured they are good, because they come from
thee, and thou make all things work for the best to them that fear thee.
Amen.

Let thy holy Spirit teach and instruct me. And so much the rather, O Lord
help, because there is none fights for me but only thou (o God) and tha^
thy strength may be perfected in my weakness. So that I may truly say, Thy rod
and thy staff have comforted me, and thy good grace assisting me, I may look
upon thy Son and my Savior Jesus with comfort, which showed himself a pattern
of all patience, to all patient men grant this I beseech for t^y mercy sake in
Jesus Christ. Amen.

4 A Prayer for the increase of Patience.
OUr life (o Lord) is a pilgrimage from Exile and Ba^ishment to our Country,
and lest the pleasantness of the way should detain or keep us back, from
coming speedily and comf^rtably to thee (o God) thou stirrest us up by Goads,
and have ns us by pricks in our sides, that so we may the more eagerly desire
rest, and to be at our journeys end: therefore diseases, griefs, tears,
mournings, sorrows are as so many spurs to haste^ our dull natures, and to
encourage them to make speed to their quiet repose. Cause us (o Lord) to forget
the tediousness of the way, and to remember our Country, and if thou please
to lay on load upon our shoulders, lay on strength l^kewise and patience to
carry it quietly and cheerfully, having all our intentions and hopes fixed upon
thee, but seeing all things are at thy disposing. Make all things (o Lord)
work together in thy unsearchable wisdom, that I may never prove an enemy to
thee. Amen.

5 A Prayer containing a full resignment of the sickman into Gods hand and will.
O Most comfortable and sweet Lord God, be mindful I pr^y thee, and mercifully
consider me thy poor creature: but thou, Lord, art my creator, behold (o
Lord) I do wholly give and resign my self unto thy disposing, and ordering, I
am ready and prepared (o Lord) to endure what thy fatherly hand shall lay upon
me. Deal with me as thou please in time, and for Eternity: Whatsoever thou
(o heavenly Father) have determined upon me, and of me with all Humility I am
resolved to bear. I will take all things well at thy hands, whither Good or
Evil, sweet or sour joy, or heaviness: and will for all give thanks unto
thee. Keep me (o Lord) from all sin, and so I will neither fear death nor
hell. Because thou will not destroy the work of thine own hands, nor blot me
out of the book of life: no tribulation shall be grievous unto me: be present
(o sweet Jesus) with me at all times, in all places, and let me comfort my
self in this, that thou only art my comfort and consolation, and if at any
time thou shall be pleased to withdraw thy comfortable presence from me, yet
then I will be comforted in thy trial of me, because it is for my good. Thy
holy Name be now and ever, above all things (o Savior) magnified and blessed.
Amen.

6 Another sh^rt Prayer to the same purpose.
O Love ineffable, o sweet Jesu, my God, if thou would give me my desire,
and would promise to give what I should request, I would not desire any
thing, but what I suffer. This, this I would desire and request a thousand time
that thy most gracious will according to thy good pleasure may be always done
in me, of me, by me for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for conformity of our wills to the divine will.
O Sweet Jesu! I neither desire Life nor Death, but only thy will be done. I
wait upon thee. If it be thy good pleasure (sweet Jesu) that I shall die, I do
humbly entreat thee to receive my spirit, and though I come in at Evening, one
of the last amongst the Workmen, grant yet that I may be with thee, and receive
everlasting rest in and through thee, but, if thou so please (o sweet Jesu)
that my life shall be prolonged, I purpose then, and resolve, and for this I do
entreat thy suffrage and the assistance of thy grace, that the residue of my
life may be amended, and be offered up to thee wholly as a pleasing sacrifice,
to thy glory, and according to thy good will. Amen.

Another Prayer to obtain the same thing as only necessary.
O Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee by thy love, which invited thee so
willingly to take all our burdens upon thee, that thou would make me to take
my visitation patiently, and thankfully, as coming by thy Fatherly providence,
and according to thy good will, and proceeding out of thy love and affection
toward me; give me assistance to take it quietly, to bear it patiently, to
resign my self to thy goodness, and well liking, and give me that strengh
and growth in grace, that I may not offend thee in the least: nor ever depart
from, or dislike thy godly will: and (o Savior) unite my will with thy most
holy B^neplacite, that what I wish may please thee. Amen.

A Prayer to obtain Patience.
O Lord my God, I confess I have not lived as I ought to have done, and as by
grace I might have done. I am sorry at my heart, and it grieves me that I
cannot grieve more. I humbly beseech thee (o Lord) that thou would not deal
with me after my sins, but according to thy great mercies: thou o God, which
have laid stripes on the outward man, give the inward man indeficient Patience.
So that thy praise may never depart from my mouth, Have mercy upon me, (o
Lord) have mercy upon me, and help me: for thou know what is good for my
soul, and body: thou know all things thou can do all things, to thee be
praise for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer after receiving of the holy communion to Jesus Christ.
GLory and praise be given to thee (o Christ) who in thy gracious goodness
would vouchsafe to visit and cherish up my poor soul. Lord, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. Now I hold thee (o
sweet Love) I will not let thee go. I willingly bid Adieu to the whole World,
and with joy I come to thee, o my God. Nothing at all, nothing shall separate
me from thee (o good Jesus) for I am joined to thee, in thee I will live, in
thee I will die, and in thee, if thou will, I will remayn for ever. I live, but
not I, but Christ lives in me. My soul now is weary of my life. I desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ. For he is to me in life and death
advantage. Now though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I
fear none evil, because thou art with me (o Lord). And as the Heart desires
the Fountains of waters, even so longs my soul aft^r thee (o God.) My soul
has thirsted after God the fountain of living waters. When shall I come and
appear before the presence of God?

Bless me, most loving Jesus, and now dismiss me in peace, because I am truly
thine, and I will never for all time part with thee O could this happy union be
now made! Oh! might I be wholly in thee. Oh! that my soul might f^r aye rest in
thy imbracings, and partake always of thy presence. What have I any longer to
do or to be pestered with the World, (o most loving Jesus?) Behold, whom have
I in heaven but thee, an^ whom have I desired on earth in comparison of thee.
Into thy hands (o LORD) do I comm^nd my soul, receive me (oh sweet Love)
that I may ever be with thee, and that in thee I may lie down and take my
rest; for thou only make me dwell in safety. Amen.

The conclusion of the second Book, To the Reader.
We have said thus much hitherto to the sound, and sick, partly to recreate
them, that they may live, to excite them, that they may watch, to strengthen
them to overcome, that they might always be ready for Deaths assaults. It is
better to try any course then to dye ill: An ill death is not only the worst
of all errors, but it is irrecoverable, inexpiable.

Now we come to dying men, and prescribe documents for them, not only that
they should read them when they are dying, but specially in health to profit
them against Death.

To dying Men.
A Death strikes, and with his Ax fels burly Oaks
There Is not a Tree that stands his single strokes.
B Fly hence: Your House begins to crack it falls
Get under ground: there yee'll find safer walls.
C Beast, Fish, and Foul, we catch with wiles and snares:
But Death hurls darts at us, and no Man spares.
D Be not d^smay'd, though Sculs from Heaven drop:
From mortal seed springs an immortal crop.
E As Waters from Aquarius pitcher drill;
So runs Man's life; Lib. a tryes, Well or Ill?
F The Sun goes down, but it is to bring now day:
So man does dye, that he may live for ay.
G The game's our own: The Deer's pent up:
No way to fly.
Dogs, Huntsmen, Darts, Nets, Toyls, all tell him, He must die.


THE Remembrance of DEATH is presented to dying Men. The third Book.
1. The Art of dying compendiously handled.
NOt to know how to die is the most wretched folly: that therefore we may
learn that, which through all our lives we ought to learn, five things are
specially considerable, which may make Death good.

First, a free and undaunted mind: this is a thing of great value, on which do
depend the rest. An offering of a free heart will I give thee. Ps. 54.6.
Nothing does more please God, nothing more benefits man, then an undaunted,
willing, ready soul, and a generous confidence in God. Tergiversation, and
giving back, argues a will nothing conformable to Gods. Therefore if at some
time to be done, why not now? to get such a prompt mind for death is, to love
and meditate on seriously the passion of our Lord, which every day is to be
considered on with Prayers.

The second, a speedy and expedite dispatch and disposing of our debts, and
goods by will. It is an error not to think of making our wills until Death be
entered over the threshold.

Discharge thy debts, dispose thy goods, before
Pale grimfac'd death does come to knock at door.
Saint Ambrose has given us an excellent rule and method for the disposing of
our own goods. Let there be (says he) sincerity of faith, quick sighted
providence: or let charity be joined with prudence, and prudence linked to
charity: and let him that gives an Alms, or takes care that it be given, let
him do, that God may accept of the gift and the person giving.

The third is a special care of our salvation, let that be reckoned of in the
first place One thing is necessary. Luke 10.42.
Bl ssed Saint Augustine (the pattern of well dying men) ten days before his
Death, admitted no Visitants, only at a set hour his Physician, and a servant
which brought in his diet: and he himself was poured out in prayers, tears,
and sighs, he conversed with GOD, concerning his life, and l^ft admonishments
to us in these words, Nullus Christianorum, etc. Let no Christian depart hence
until he have fully and worthily repented him of his sins.

The fourth is the receiving of the Communion; and to this the sick party
should be ready and prepared, this great work stould not be too long put
off, nor deferred till Death have possessed him, it is dangerous to neglect
this: many die ill, because they seem to desire, not to die so soon; he that
will earnestly repent him of his sins, let him do it early, and contrition of
spirit is excellent to a sick man's salvation

The fifth is a pious and entire oblation of himself to Gods good will. Every
man p^rhaps cannot exhibit a mind undaunted in sickness, but every man ough^
to show a mind conformable to the will of God. Let therefore the sick party
often in the time of his visitation repeat these words of our Savior. Mat.
11.26.
Even so Father, because it seemed good in their eyes. So (o Father) even so,
etc. There is no fear of that man's perishing, who so effectually can reconcile
himself with the Judge.

2. How to recover time ill spent and lost.
WHosoever desires earnestly to redeem lost time, let him turn away himself
from all vanities, and seriously meditate upon Eternity, in which he shall see
God: and in Him all things are to be f^und, and recovered that are lost: here
let him fix his thoughts and express himself to God in these or the like
terms.

O my eternal God! I do heartily wish, that from the day of my birth to the
day of my dea h; I had lived before thee in puren^sse, obedience, and
holiness: o would to God! I had lived as all those men did, who by following
the practice of grace and virtue, did please God in all their trials and
troubles. o! that I could for thy love weep my self into tears, and be always
helpful to the poor and needy; o! that I could afford comfort to the
comfortless! and love thee with that ardencie that all thy blessed Saints and
Angels do! for it is fit and due that all praises should be given to thee. And
now o my God have mercy upon me according to thy infinite wisdom and good
pleasure. Of such the Psalmist has pronounced, that they shall die full of days,
now (as Gregory says) They die in a full age, who do that work in this
passing and fleeting time, which will never fade or pass away, He has
recovered and repaired time that was lost, who has truly sorrowed, that he
has lost it.

3. How a short life is to be made long.
A Well minded man must look, not how long he can live, but how long he ought
to live: the Wise man says, Wisd. 4.13.
He being made perfect in a short time fulfilled a long time. Well may he
say, he has lived long, which comprehends all perfection: for he has
finished his course, which passes to Eternity? he lives long who has lived
religiously; we are not to reckon long life by the number of years, but by the
number of virtues: he may worthily be said to have finished his time, which at
no time would lose or leave his piety, his goodness: therefore an unwearied
care and study of profiting and going on in goodn sse; and a daily endeavor to
perfection, is reputed and esteemed perfection it self.

4. There is an end of all things, bu^ Eterni^y is endless.
WHy may we not be cheerful and sing some Elegies to, or before a sick man,
especially if it be the custom of the place? Iacoponus an holy man of life,
wri^ certain merry Verses, in which very pleasantly he has described the
vanities of the world, and the precipices of Death, and I have here Englished
them.

1
Cur Mundus militat sub vana glori^
Cujus prosperitas est transi^oria?
Tam cito labitur ejus potentia,
Quam v^sa figuli, quae sunt fragilia.
Englished.
Why wars and strives the World for such vain glory
Whose great prosperity is transitory?
So soon and sooner does her power decay
Then Potters vessels or frail things of clay.
2
Dic ubi Solomon olim tam nobilis
Vel ubi Sampson dux invincibilis,
Vel pulcher Absalon, vultu mirabilis
Vel dulcis, Jonathan multum amabilis.
Englished.
Tell me where is Solomon that King so wise,
Or where now that stout Champion Sampson lies,
Or where is Absalon so fair to the sight,
Or where is Jonathan so lovely bright?
3
Quo Caesar ab^it Celsus Imperio,
Vel Dives Epulo totus in prandio,
Dic ubi Tullius claus el^quio,
Vel Aristoteles summus ingenio?
Englished.
Where is that lofty royal Caesar gone,
Or where that purpled, rich, high fed Glutton,
Where Is Tully who in Eloquence did abound,
Or Aristotle for his wit renowned.
4
Tot clari Proceres, tot rerum spatia,
Tot ora Praesulum, tot Regna fortia,
Tot mundi Principes, tanta potentia,
In ictu oculi clauduntur omnia.
Englished.
So many high born Nobles, so great things,
So many Clergiemen, so many Kings,
So many Princes, so great Powers so high,
Are all shut up in th'twinckling of an eye?
5
Quam breve festum est haec mundi gloria,
Vt umbra hominis sunt ejus gaudia,
Quae semper subtrahunt aeterna praemia,
In ictu oculi clauduntur omnia.
Englished.
How short's the Feast of worldly glory found;
Our joys are but as shadows on the ground,
They do substract from our reward on high.
And are shut up in the twinkling of an eye.
All these are true, and most true is that, that they are all so soon
concluded, and shut up. It is the saying of Saint Gregory, All the length of
the time of this present life is but a point, being it is terminated with an
end. And he confirms it again, saying, Whatsoever has a period is but little
and short. For that cannot seem to us to be long, that goes on with the course
of time, till it be not: which, while it goes on by minutes, is driven on by
them to its end: and may be decern'd from whence it may be h^ld, but is driven
thither, where it cannot be held. Saint Augustine most clearly, All the time (I
speak not of this present unto the end of the World), but even of that from
Adam to the end of the World, is but as a little drop compared to Eternity. All
things have an Ex t, but Eternity has none, none a^ all. In the World there is
no h^ng whose end is not near? Banquets and Dances end, all sports and
laughters end, but never Eternity. In a moment Vessels and Ships where they
were but even now becalmed and safe at Anchor, presently after are sunk and
perish. The swarming Theaters for pastimes do suddenly fall. In a trice all
pleasures have their vanishings. In a minute all things shall have a grave. Why
do we therefore follow, and pursue such short vanities? That cannot delight a
noble spirit, which is not durable: all things are concluded in the twinkling
of an eye. Whatsoever had beginning shall have end. Only Ete^ni^y is void of a
period.

5. The consideration of a dying Man.
JOb that M^ster of patience says, The waters wear the stones, Job ^4.19, ^0.
and as the earth is washed away by the floods, so shall thou destroy man, Thou
strengthenest him by little and little, and so he passes away for ever, Thou
changest his beauty, and sendest him away. What a few Ceremonies does God use,
when he sends men out of this World into another? He does but change his
beauty, and so he is commanded to be gone elsewhere. Then, certainly when Death
calls, the beauty is wholly changed; and as Hippocrates in his book of
Prenotations observes, Man is altered, as it were clean contrary to what he
was, his Nose is sharp, his Eyes are hollow, and sunk into his Head, his
Temples are fallen, his Ears are drawn together, the ends of them turned
backwards, the skin of his forehead hard and rough with wrinkles, his
countenance is wanne and pale, with some yellows, sometimes like lead, black,
blew, h^s lips are loosed, hanging with weakness whitish, his teeth are
black, his neck is consumed and grown lean, all things are changed; so that
he seems (as it were) to be another person; so when God has changed a man's
countenance, he sends him to his long home. Pass on (o man) pass on to thy
house of eternity from such a little-little point of time, so many Volumes of
Ages depend, which are not to be reckoned up by any date of time.

6. We ought to prepare for Death before it comes.
IT was a wise man saying, Moriendum esse, antequam mori cogaris, (i. e) that
thou should die before thou be compelled to die. S. Paul did ^ot only do so
once, or often, but daily: affirming that of himself, I die daily. 1 Cor. 15 3.


Gregory the Great, the higher he gained preferment in the Church, the more
glorious beams of Sanctity did he send forth; this most vigilant Pastor did
seem to be dead before death, for not long before his Obit, he himself
described his own condition. Such bitterness of spirit, such an assiduous
grievance, such molestation of the Gout do afflict me, that my body is as
even dried up already in the grave, so that I cannot rise up from my bed.

Cosmus Med^ces being at the p^int of death, when as he was asked of his wife,
why he shut his eyes before he was dead, Answered, I do accustom them to that,
that when they shall be shut up by death they may bear it well. This is an
excellent kind of death, then to shut our eyes especially, when any deadly
pleasure does entice them: be sure thou do die, lest thou should die, o
shut them betimes. Wisely did Seneca advise Lucilius, Do that before the day
of thy death, let thy sins be dead before thy self.

7. Those that buried themselves.
PAcuvius being Governor in Syria for Tiberius Caesar, did daily so give
himself to wine and feastings, that as he was carried to his bed from Supper,
his servants wi^h great applause sung these words to him, Vixit, vixit, (i. e.)
He has lived, he has lived. What was this, but every day to be carried about
to his burial? Seneca said well of him, That (says he) which he did daily
out of an ill conscience, let us do by a good one, that when we are gone to
bed, and about to sleep, with comfort and rejoicing we may say: We have lived:
if God shall lend us the next morning, let us entertain it with cheerfulnessee.
His a blessed and secure Possessor of himself, who expects the next morning
without distrust or distraction.

Labienus the Historian for his inveighing writings termed Rabienus, was so
hated that all his Books were burnt, Labienus not enduring this, and not
willing to outlive his wit, did desire to be carried out, and buried in the
Sepulcher of his Ancestors where he did end and bury himself, and what is
wonderful, lived when he was buried, and was buried while he lived

Storax a Ne^politan not long since, a very rich man, delicate, and a prou^,
Governor or Overseer for the yearly p^ovision of Corn, having got this office
by base and indirect means, the common people hated him exceedingly, so that
being overcome with hunger, they fell violently upon the man: he seeking to
es^ape their fury and rage, did hide himself in a Sepulcher in a Church, but at
last being found, and beaten with stones, was cut into small Gobbets, and his
very blood was lickt up of many, so that his bones wanted a Grave. He had this
Epitaph made upon him.

Storax qui vivus subjit sepulchrum,
Mirum, defunctus caruit sepulchro.
(i.e.)

Storax who living went into his grave
Strange, that being dead, no sepulcher could have
Albertus the Great leaving Rati^bon^, came to Collen, where though strictly
being devoted to Mortification and Contempt of this World, so that he forgot
all worldly delights, yet would he continually visit the place of his intended
burial.

Severus President of Ravenna, while he was healthy went into his Tomb, and
placing himself in the middle betwixt his wife which he had, had and his
daughter, there died.

Philo^omus of Galata is said to dwell six years amongst the graves of the dead,
Palladius c. 13.
that by this means he might overcome the fear of death.

Polemon of Laodicea, Suidas V. Pole.
(as Suidas witnesses) the Scholar of Timocrates the Philosopher, the Master
of Aristides the Orator, being 56 years of age cast himself into a deep
Sepulcher being urged thereunto by the bitter pains of the Gout, and there
died of hunger: and before his death his friends, and neighbors lamenting his
case, desired him to come forth by their help, it is reported of him that he
answered them thus, Provide me a more healthy body, and I will come up.

We may wonder at these but not imitate them, unless in this manner, Colos 3.
as (Saint Paul speaks) ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
That Philosophers counsel is good. Vive latens, (i.e.) live hid. For as
another said, He lives well, that lives retiredly. This man may be said to be
profitably dead and buried, the private life is freest from encumbrances and
inconveniences. Whose life is to public, often dies unknown to himself. The
private life is fullest of quietness.

8. A consideration of our Sepulcher.
Phthia pro sepulchro,
TErtia me Phthiae tempestas laeta locabit: Englished.

The third great sickness shall
Give me a glad funeral.
Thus said Socrates presaging of his own death, this word Phthia, is meant for
nothing else but the Coffin or the grave, to which all must come.

No house may so truly be said to be ours, as our graves. This Iacoponus a
religious man and pleasant taught by a witty Act of his, A Cit^zen of Todi in
Vmbria, had bought two young Chickens being about to send them home, by chance
he espied Iacoponus in the Market, to whom he turning said, I pray you do me
that favor and kindness as to car y ^hese two Chickens home to my house, and
be sure you leave them there and do not deceive me, Trust me (says he) I will
do as you have bidden me, and I w^ll carry them indeed unto the house, and so
forthwith taking them, went directly to his Parish Church, and came to his
Sepulcher which was reserved for him, and in that (as well as he could) he
hid the two Chickens. Well the Citizen coming home to his house, presently
asked for his two Chickens, his servants all deni d flatly, that they saw no
such thing brought thither; so the Citizen going again into the Market, met
Jacoponus again, And said to him, I thought indeed that thou would not do as
thou should, and that thou woul^st deceive me, but tell me in earnest where
are my Chickens? to whom Iacoponus replied, I carried them to your house as you
commanded me, but said the other all my servants and household know n^ s ch
matter: Come along with me (good man) replied Iacoponus, and I will make it
appear to be true before your own eyes. So he forthwith brought him into the
Church, and to his own Sepulcher, and having removed a little stone (he said)
and friend is not this your house? so the Citizen was struck with the Action
and received his Chickens, with this witty admonition. Job spoke most truly, I
know thou will deliver me to death, where every man living finds his house.

9. Nine forms of wills, or Testaments
PLinius Junior said true, that what was commonly reported for truth was false,
that every man's will was the looking glass of his life and manners.

1 Ziska a Bohemian Leader, a great Soldier, and a resolu^e Commander, by his
Will bequeathed his body to Birds or Beasts, and he wished his Soldiers to
make a Drum head of his skin, and wished them not to spare the Couents or
Monasteries, which they did accordingly. He died in the year 1424.

2 A certain foolish woman gave by Will to her Cat five hundred Crowns, that
her Cat might have means to feed upon. Oh the madness! oh the folly of diverse
folks! It was Caesar Augustus that said of Herod, It was better to be Herod.
Hog then his Son: and who may not as well say of this foolish woman, It is
better to be her Cat, then her Servant.

3 A great Usurer being about to die, having called the Scrivener, and witnesses,
was desirous to make his last Will, which he did in form following. Let my
^o^y be laid into the earth from whence it was taken, and let my soul be given
to the Devils, at the hearing of which words his friends and all that were
about him bebegan to wonder, and began to admonish and to chide him, but he
repeated i^ again and again. Let my soul (said he) be given to Devils,
because I have gotten my Goods by unjust means as by oppression, extortion and
the like: and let the Devils likewise take the souls of my wife and children,
because they forced me to take so much usury to maintain their pride and
clothing, and banketting, and luxury, and he said it and dyed. o wretched man,
thou made these thy heirs, fearful to think of thy estate.

4 Saint Hierome does stop the greedy covetousness of heirs with this
Apology. A little Hog seemed to grunt and repine at his Sires death, but when
he had heard the Will read, and perceived that he had a great heap of
Acorns, and certain measures of Corn bequeathed to him, he was still; being
asked why he did so suddenly refrain his tears and grief? Answered, the
Acorns and the Corn had stopped his Cry. Truly here is the Weeping of many
Heirs even to this day, but when they hear what portions, what household
stuff, what moneys and other legacies are bequeathed to them, they are
presently glad, and care not much for the life of the Testator.

5 Hieron a Martyr the fourth day before he was brought out to suffer,
bequeathed all his goods to his mother and sister; and his hand which was to be
cut off, to Rusticius of Ancyra.

6 Hilarion at the age of 80 years appointed by Will to be his Heir, Hesychius
(who was absent) in this manner following. All my wealth, to wi^, my Bible, my
Coat, and my Hood, I bequeath to my loving friend Hesychius, this was the
catalogue of all his housholdstuffe.

7 Anthony the Great made his will in this manner, No man knows the place of my
Tomb, but your hearty love, but for my vestments let them be thus divided; my
Hood and my worn Coat I give to Athanasius, which he gave to me new, S. Athan.
in vit. A^^. ^. 58
let Serapion have my other Hood, and you my Goats hair garment: and so
farewell o ye my bowels, for Anthony is going from hence: He had scarce ended
these words, and his Scholars embraced him, stretching out his feet a little
he embraced death with a cheerful countenance.

8 John Patriarch of Alexandria, called the Elemosynary, writ his last Will in
Tables in these words I thank thee (o my God,) that thou would not let me
have of all my treasure but only one piece left, when I was named Patriarch of
Alexandria, I found 80 hundred of Gold, and to them my friends added almost an
innumerable sum of money, which all, because they were Gods, I did give them to
God, for I bestowed them on the poor, and so shall even that one piece that's
left be likewise given to them. Here that is most true. That the most expedite
and quickest way to make a Will, is to give all the rest to the poor.

9 Here shall be added the form of a Will for any Christian, only let the
name, year and day be only altered, all things else will suit and fit to all
sorts of men.

I Achatius Victor do make spend to Eternity, from the year 1581, from the 15
day of the month of August, I have had my mind fix^d on Eternity. Now I
commend my spirit to God, and because I cannot but commit my substance to the
World, I do commit my body to worms and corruption; of all worldly goods none
are mine, only ^y good will, which I carry with me to the Tribunal of Go^, my
other things I thus dispose.

1 I forgive all mine Enemies with all my heart.

2 I am heartily sorry for all my sins and offenses.

3 I believe in Jesus Christ my most loving Redeemer, and I desire to die in
the faith of h^s Church.

4 I do hope to have eve^lasting life by the infinite goodness of God.

5 I do love God with all my heart, and above all things, and I do wholly
resign my self into the most holy will of God.

6 I am fully prepared to be well or sick, to live or die, whenever it shall
seem good to God, Let Gods will be done.

Unless every Christian do so dispose of his life and death, he may be
censured to die worse, then he ha h lived, The last hour perfects and
consummates, but it makes not, death

10. Nine Epitaphs.
AVlus Gellius propounds to be read, the proud Epitaph of Naevius, the most
vain one of Plautus, A. Gellius l. 1. c. 24.
the modest one of Pacuvius, but we pass to others.

1 In one of the prime Cities of Germany, there are two Tombs near to one
another, one of an old man, another of a young man, many would think at the
first reading their Epitaphs to be the same. The old man's Tomb bears this
Inscription, Et mortuus est. (i.e.) And he is dead. which is the Epitaph of
Adam, and diverse others: and the same words are upon the Tomb of the young
man, Et mortuus est? And is he dead? Now the Reader in the Latin must observe
that the old man's is with a period, but the young man's with an Interrogation.
So that a wise man will expound the old man's thus. This old man saw many
Summers and Winters, and ^eath seemed because it deferd so long as though it
would have spared him, for he had experienced many things, he had gone through
ma^y miseries and changes of this life: but yet at length through all these
years he is brought to his Coffin and dust, Et mortuus est. And is dead.

Now he that will wisely understand the young man's Epitaph, must read it
Interrogatorily, thus. This young man was eminent for wealth, for beauty, for
strength of body, beloved of the Muses and Apollo, the White Chicken both of
the graces and fortune, not yet 20 years old, secure from the Grimface of pale
Death, he looked as if he would have proved immortal, and as though he
would have deceived all the Fates, and is he dead? That that old decrepit man
should be dead few grieve, none do wonder, but that this flourishing young man
should be taken away all men wonder, most men sorrow: and could such a
beautiful, gracious, active young man dies and is he dead? all men seek and
blame the destinies for being so impartial.

To his I do add another, not to be numbered amongst the rest, but only place
it to exercise the wi^s of some, as well as it has tired the wits of others,
it is to be seen in Bononia, the words of the Epitaph are these.

A M. PP. D.

Alia, Laelia, Crispis, nor man, nor woman, nor Hermaphrodite, not a maid, not
a young man, not an old woman, not shamefast, nor shameless, but all things
not taken away by famine, not by sword, nor by poison, but by all things, nor
is buried in the air, nor in the water nor earth, but every where.

Lucius Agatho Priscius, nor an husband, nor a lover; nor a servant, nor
sorrowing, nor rejoicing, nor weeping, who knows and knows not, nor this heap,
nor this Pyramid, nor this Sepulcher, but all things, that are placed.

This is a Sepulcher having nobody within it, this is a carcass not having any
Sepulcher without it, but the carcass and the Sepulcher are the same to
themselves.

Some have taken this Enigmaticall Epitaph, to mean the soul of man, some the
water of the clouds, others Niobe turned into a Stone, others have imagined
otherwise. Some have written Commentaries on it, as Ioannes Turius of Brudges,
and Richard White of Basingstoke in England, a Lawyer, whose book was printed
at Dordrecht, by John Leo Berewout, Anno 1618

But to let these shadows and clouds pass, we will put our wit to exercise in
more plainer paths, and the reason why we interlace our discourse with these,
is (...) because we would not too deeply affright or terrify our studious
Reader, and that we may keep him from disdain or disliking when he is weary;
that we may therefore behold the customs, and the wholesome admonitions of the
dead look upon another Epitaph, which is to be seen at Naples, in these words.

2 This Marble memory is here placed for me, yea, Reader for thee also,
whosoever thou art, watch whilst thou wakest, and make seasonable have to thy
work, no man knows the set time. Farewell.

3 The stone of Cajeta, exhibits this short Inscription.

Fui, non sum ^estis non eritis;
Silvius Palladius
Vt moriens viveret,
Vixit at moriturus.
I was, am no^:
You are; shall not be.
Silvius Palladius
Who that He might live dead,
Did live as always dying.
I will not omit that most short yet pleasant one of M. Posthumous a Knight.

M. Posthumous a Knight
Whither I go, I know not,
I die of necessity,
Farewell all, that are behind.
5 To learn us in the first place wisdom, and to make us despise vanity, this
Epitaph following bestowed on a religious and nobly descended Gentleman will
serve fitly.

Ah Traveller! stay and read, I desire a word with thee. In my life I placed
this stone here against the time of my death, who lie here in a narrow space,
and here in the dust and darkness do expect thee (o my Guest) and the last
Trumpet of the Angel at the day of judgment: but perhaps thou may ask my
offspring; I am one of the latter sons of Red Earth. So thou may enquire my
Country; It was the World. My learning, it was a shadow; my reputation; It was
smoke my Age, Alas! a point, or if a little more produced, a minute. Would
thou know my wealth? 'Twas poverty, My Honors? 'twas contempt. My liberty? it
was flattery. My desire? 'twas death, and true life after death, which I hope
I, and thou shall enjoy. Be gone, and remember death.

6 I will annex that sad and truly lamentable one, an Epitaph of a Brother who
was killed by his brother.

Alas! alas! Here I am laid a young man, before my time Deaths scorn, a
Brothers Funeral, a Fathers grief, a Mothers tears, the Muses lamentation, an
example to young men, a sigh for old men, rottenesse, ashes, nothing to my
self, but what to God? Ah! Traveller why inquire thou? alas, now shall I
hear what I fear, what I hope for, to morrow thou may know, travel on oh
curious Citizen.

Richardus de Marisco, Bishop of Durham, writ his own Epitaph, an holy one, and
in those times witty and pleasant: It bears this inscription.

Culmina qui cupitis, lauds pompasque sititis,
Est sedata sitis, si me pensare velitis;
Qui populos regitis, memores super omnia si is:
Quod more immitis non parcit honor potitis.
Vobis praepositis similis fueram; been scitis.
Quod sum vos eritis, ad me currendo ven^tis.
Englished.

You who preferments do desire
Who for high praise are set on fire,
Your Thirst would quickly quenched be
If that you would consider me.
You, by whom people stout are checked
Be mindful always, never neglect:
That cruel death no whit regards
Your Honors or your rich reward.
For I have been like you in grace,
(Grave Prelates) and as chief in place;
For you shall be even as I am
You run and have unto the same.
This in those times was of singular wit and learning, and savours still of
mortification; now I add the Monument of a learned man.

Iustus Lipsius known by his writings, speaks thus from his sepulcher to the
living.

Seek thou, who lies here buried? I my self will rehearse it to thee. I was
one who of late spoke with style and tongue, now it shall be lawful for
another. I am Lipsius whom learning and thy favor may cause to live. But I
dying am gone, so shall this also; and this world possesses nothing that is
everlasting. Will thou that I speak in a higher voice to thee? All humane
things are but smoke, shadows, vanity, the Image of a Play, and to speak in a
word, nothing: this is my last conference with thee, I would have thee hope, I
am in glory. Iustus Lipsius lived 59 years, he dyed in the year of Christ
1606, on the passion day of our Savior.

So then both learned, and unlearned, rich and poor at length have all one
Epitaph, which Moses has writ for them. Genesis 5. sapius.
Et mortuus est, (i. e.) he is dead. Emperors at their first Inauguration
were asked, what kind of stone they would have their sepulcher made off? The
same thing almost do I (o Reader) enquire of thee. Choose, what form of
Epitaph pleases thee best? Will thou, nilt thou, some or other will do this
for thee, though against thy will, and will speak of thee when thou art dead,
though living thou had rather be silent, then write Funeral Elegies or
Epitaphs. I will here exhibit a form of a sepulchrall Inscription which I do
think profitable for me, for thee o Reader, and for most Christians, at least
for meditation, only change but a few things, and this it is.

Whosoever thou art (o Reader) I have something to seek out of thee. 9 Know
thou who may dwell in this narrow prison under ground? I am the son of
corruption, and the brother of worms: This is my stock, ask not after my
name, that is vanished with my life, which I spent after many tears and weak
endeavors in books, which almost I shut up with my life (o Guest) would I had
now given my self more to virtue, less to vices, o would I had before my
death dyed more in my affections, now thou may, I cannot perform it.
Whosoever thou art, for I cannot see in this darkness; whilst thou can, be
ripe for death, before thy death, by this means thy life will be more
comfortable, by how oftener thou art in this exercise. Farewell (Reader) till
the Trumpet shall sound from Heaven, at which time I do expect a joyful
resurrection.

But least we should be ignorant, that it is not purple adornments, funeral
pomp, nor the silken covering, nor the long train of mourning friends, nor
the brave Coats of Arms, nor the greatness of Kindred, nor the praises of the
vulgar, not the wives lamentations, nor the funeral Sermon, nor the title of
the dead, though seeming to live in Marble (for they have their Obit^ too) nor
all these make an happy death, but grace and virtue, and a mind, not broken
nor terrified withal the threatenings of death, to have lived well and
uprightly, is the fairest Epitaph of all others.

11. Nine Reasons to prswade us to die with a resolved mind.
ABove all things meditate and seriously think on the death of thy Savior, 1
Reas.
and thou will then bear thine comfortably. Compare, I beseech, thy Bed to his
Cross, thy Couches with his Crown of thorns, thy meat with his gall, thy
drink to his Vinegar, thy griefs with his torments, Thou art amongst thy
Friends and Kindred, he in the midst of his enemies, thou art among all the
hands for help, but he was left of all, land so died: for the recovery of thy
health, what medicines, and helps are not used? but he had nothing to quench
his thirst. Yet he was Lord and chief, thou but a servant, the lowest, the
vilest: all things that were laid upon him, he was guiltless off, and deserved
them not; All things that thou suffer, thou stand guilty off, and more.
Wherefore thou have no just cause to complain.

2 Cause.
2 The chiefest favor of the greatest King, is a good death, but to die well is
to avoid the danger of living ill. Now he dies well, who dies willingly. Who
would not willingly rise from a rough hard bed? only they refuse it who are
laid warm in a soft Feather-bed: if thy life here had been full of grievances,
evils and miseries, how willing would thou be to pass to a better? if thy
life has bin prosperous and rich, it is high time that thou should end, for
fear prosperity, which has destroyed so many, should also ruin thee: Death is
the most unwelcome to ri^h men. Croesus had not come to the fire, but for his
wealthy old age. Many slaves (had they died) in their youth, had died
freeborn. Ah! how many and how great men who are condemned in eternal flames!
whom, if death had taken from hence in their infancy or youth, had enjoyed
glory and immortality.

3 It is the joy of all the Angels and Saints to have us with them: but say
you, then must we leave all our friends and associats here. O improvidently!
Thou art going to them. Thy parents where are they? Hopest thou not that they
are in Heaven? And that thou shall also come thither. Do thou not also
believe that many of thy Kindred and acquaintance are in joy Celestial? And
do not thou live here in ho^e to pass from hence to them? but these things
are not certain, they are only in hope; it is true, neither does any man hope
for what he fecth or possesses; and therefore God has afforded thee matter to
exercise this Virtue. He has commanded thee to hope for Heaven, never did he
will thee or promise thee security, but thou may certainly know thy self to
be carried thither in hope, whereinto yet thou can not see. The Creditor has
no reason to distrust a faithful debtor. I say it affirmatively, that God has
made himself the debtor to thee. Consider seriously whose Creditor thou art,
did not he speak it with joy, who said, I know whom I have trusted. 2 Timothy 12


4 Think also, o man whose spirit droops or fails! that admirable alacrity,
and ardent study and prompt willingness of the holy Martyrs for death, who
lightly despised all the great preparations to death, who underwent the most
cruellest torments even with smiling, and rejoicing countenances. Surely nor
death nor the pain of it is terrible, only the fear of both makes both
dreadful. Wherefore we praise him who said, Death is not an evil, but it is
evil to die naughtily. Children are afraid of Vizards and Spirits, because of
their unskilfulness^; is Death a Vizard? turn the inside outward, and thou
shall know it to be so. Yet neither Infants, nor Children, nor distracted folks
fear Death. It is most absurd that reason cannot perform that resolvednesse in
us, which folly and childishness leads us too. Death is a Tribute and Custom
that all men must pay. Why therefore art thou sad and disconsolate, when as
thou payest no more then thou owe? and do no more then every man else
performs? No man here can plead exemption, or privilege. No man hitherto has
gone scot-free, none ever shall: this is that hard Battle where none, none (I
say) escape. The World (says Saint Basil) is mortal, In Ps. 115
and the Region of dying creatures.

5. What is the continuation of the fear of Death, but the prolongation and
extent of torment? Do thou live long? Thou art long under pain, but (say
you) I cannot but fear the danger that is imminent, although it comes on but
with a slow pace. Then therefore cease to fear, when as there is in it, that
good, that may remove, and will for certain take away all fear. Tertullian
spoke admirably, That is not to be feared, that frees us from every thing that
is fearful, But thou will say, it is a most fearful thing in a disease to see
death creeping upon us by degrees. Oh thou worm! what would thou? Did not
thy Savior for thirty three years and more foresee his death? And art thou
better then he? but because thou do not fear death, but the fore-running
incommodities of it. Hear Epictetus, who says; Thou go not out with a good
courage, but trembling, because of thy riches, silver vessels, and great
friends: Oh unhappy man! Have thou so hitherto lost all thy time? What if thou
be sick? thou shall learn to be virtuous by thy sickness. But who shall care
for thee, will thou say? God and thy friends: but I shall lie hard, thou shall
but lie as a man; but I shall not have a commodious house; then know thou
not how to be sick in inconveniences: but who shall prepare my diet for me?
They who provide it for others, but what will be the issue of my sickn^sse?
What should be, but dea h? thou therefore can not but know, that it is the
sign of a degenerate spirit, and of a fearful heart to fear not death, but
the fear of death. Exercise thy self therefore against this: to this mark let
all thy ^isputatio^s tend, and all which thou hear, or read: then thou
shall know, that death is the only way to plant men into liberty.

6. How many evils does death free thee from? to die is but to shut up the shop
of al miseries. So that Pliny spoke well, Such is the condition of humane life,
that death to the best men is the best Harbor: and the chiefest good for
nature. Caesar speaks in Salust, In all miseries, death is the Rest; not the
augmentation of them, and that it concludes all the mischiefs that Mortals
suffer. Therefore a wiseman esteems his life by the quality, not by the extent
of it. For nature has afforded us an Inn to lodge in, not to dwell in, and
the usury of life is like that of money, to be always paid at the set time.
Why, how can thou complain, if money be taken in when the Creditor pleases,
if he limited not the time? It was but the condition upon which thou receivedst
it, to repay it at the pleasure of the lender.

7 In the passage to death the prison is set open, why fear thou to go out?
rather be glad, and be gone. Hitherto thou have been a Captive, now thou shall
be free; the prison is now open, have out. Why have thou so long studied
Philosophy? if yet thou fear this Philosophy, to die? therefore receivedst
thou this body, that thou should restore it. And therefore shall thou restore
it, that thou may again receive it with great advantage. Oh how foolish is
that man's hope, not to endeavor for that happiness! to depart with joy from
hence, to that which always remayns. The prison is open, fly aloft to better
felicity.

8 Death is the rode way, yea, it is the gate by which we are admitted into
our Country* to eternal life, to immortal joy. Death is not so much the end
of life, as it is the passage to life. Saint Bernard spoke true and elegantly,
It Is true indeed the righteous man dies, but securely: because his death as it
is the Exit of the present, so it is the Introite to a better life.

9 But the cause of causes is the divine will of God, whom it has pleased from
all Eterni^y, that thou should dye at such a time, such a place, such a
disease. What would thou more? so it pleased God, so it seemed good in his
sight. This is that will which cannot, will not will, that which is ill.
Therefore as the son of Syrach said, Ecclus 18 21.
Humble thy self before thou be sick, and in the time of sins show repentance.
Therefore I briefly reckon up all the Reasons thus, 1 Christ's death 2 The favor
of God. 3 the joy of Angels and Sain^s. 4 The examples of those that have gone
before us. 5 It is the end of all things to be feared. 6 It is the end of all
evils. 7 It is going out of prison. 8 It is an ingresse into paradise 9 It is
the will of God.

12. Death is not to be feared.
Perform therefore (o Christian) that with willingness which must be done
though against thy will. Those actions (though difficult) if done willingly
seem easy and feazable, and where the will concurs, there it leaves to be
necessity. A wise man instructs thee ^hus. Agree: to what thou can not
withstand, go on securely without fear. Nature is a bountiful parent, and
makes not any thing dreadful, nor delights in it. It is the error of men, not
provident Nature that makes Death seem terrible. We fear death not for that
it is evil, but because we are not acquainted with it: but if thou have any
generous thoughts, or any noble or high resolutions, slight those vulgar and
base conceits, and look upon high, and imitate those religious spirits, whose
footsteps have been settled in the rode-way to Glory. We have innumerable
examples and patterns of men whose deaths have bin cheerful and happy. Be not
daunted with the words of them which affirm death to be near at hand: Rather
fol^ow him amongst the Ancients who gave this reply to Deaths Monitor, without
any the least show of anger. Morieris, Thou shall dye. It is the nature not the
punishment of man, Thou shall dye. I entered upon this condition that I should
go out. Thou shall dye. It is the Law of Nations, that what thou have lent
thee, that thou must restore. Thou shall dye Thy whole life is but a
pilgrimage, It is but comfortable when thou have walked long abroad, that then
thou should return home. Thou shall dye. I thought thou would have told
me some new or strange thing, but as for this, I came for the same purpose
hither, every days travel invites me hither. Nature laid me out this stint at
my birth. Why should I be angry? I am sworn to this. Thou shall die. It Is folly
to fear what thou can not avoid. Thou shall die. Nor the first nor the last
Many are gone before me, some go with me, all shall follow. Thou shall die.
This is the conclusion of all our work. Whither the Universe shall pass,
thither must I. All things are begot^en to this state. What has had a bad
beginning, must come to an end. Thou shall dye. That is not so grievous, which
is but once suffered. It is Eternal that vex us. Certainly death is to be
less feared now, then heretofore. For then the way to Heaven was blocked up;
and all men grieved and sorrowed at this, that Noctes atque dies patet atri
janua ditis. Hell gates are never shut nor night nor day.

But we may sing this with joy, that, Noctes atque, dies patet alti janua
Coeli. At all times unto Heaven's a ready way.

Death therefore is to be entertained with an undaunted spirit, Whither it sets
upon us violently, or easily; A virtuous life never thought ill of death, and
that man loses nothing who gets all things.

13. How the Saints of God may desire, yet fear Death.
LEt us behold Saint Paul, (says Saint Gregory) how he loves that, which he
avoyds, and how he avoids that which he loves. Behold, he desires to die and
fears to put off the tabernacle of flesh. Why so? Because although the victory
makes his heart to rejoice, yet the pain does trouble him for the present. As
a valiant man who is to fight a Combat, though he be armed, yet he pants and
trembles, and by his palenes discovers fear, yet he is mainly pricked forward
by valor and courage: So a godly and holy man being near to his death and
passion, is struck with the infirmity of his nature, yet is he strengthened
with the firmness of his hope, and does rejoice that by dying he shall live
for ever. For he cannot enter into that Kingdom, but by the interposition of
death: and yet he doubts and hopes and rejoicing fears, and fearing is glad,
because he knows he cannot attain to the prize, unless he passes this
midway obstacle. Hence it is that even the holiest men have in some measure
feared deaths encounter. King Hezekiah in the increase of his sickness does yet
in tears lament, Esaias 38.10
That in the midst of his days he shall go to the gates of Hell. What? did not
the fear of death cause David to utter that speech, Psalm. 102 25.
Take me not away in the midst of mine age? What shall we say of Abraham
Jacob, Elias? Who as we are instructed by holy Writ, did something fear
death. Elias flying from death, 3. Reg. 19.
yet did entreat for it under the Juniper tree.

Arsenius a man of an hundred and twenty years old, never assaulted with any
disease, having served God fifty five years in a most austere life, being now
at his d^parting, began to fear and we^p. Those that were present wondering at
it, said; And do you (o Father) l^kewise fear death, to whom he answered, ever
since I entered into the state of Religion, I have always f^ared.

Seneca spoke excellently, often is it seen, that even the stoutest man though
armed, yet at the first entrance into the Combat fears: so the resolutest
Soldier at the signal of Battle, his knees and joints tremble: so it is with
the grea^est Commander, as also wi^h the famousest Orator at the composing
himself to speak. This was observed in Charles the fifth Emperor, who, though
he was courageous in all warlike Expeditions, though he was not overcome with
the greatest dangers, nor frighted with the furiousness of warlike Chariots,
nor ever shrunk his head out of the maynest hazards, yet for all that, at the
putting on of his Armor he would something quake and shiver, and show signs
of some fear, but when once his head piece was on, his sword girded to his
thigh, his Coat of Maile upon him, he was as a Lion, and like a mighty man of
valor would set upon the Enemy.

Even so the best of men do desire and fear death, they would be gone out, but
they tremble at it. But it is better to die with Cato, then to live with
Anthony. He is Deaths conqueror, who quietly gives up his Spirit when he is
c^ld from hence.

. 14. An ill death follows an ill life.
EVen as a tree falls that way, when it is cut down as it leaned, when it
stood: so for the most part as we have liv^d and bent our courses, so do we
depart. As we begun to go, so we continue a commendable death seldom shuts
up a dishonest life. What things were pleasurable to us in the course of our
lives, ee seldom dislike at the time of our deaths. A great Courtier of King
Cenreds, who studied more to please his Sovereigne then his Savior, being at
point to die, he did not only seem to neglect the care of his soul, but also
to put off the time of his death, but he saw before him a great many wicked
Spirits, expressing the Catalogue of all his heinous sins before him, at which
sight in horror for them in despair he dyed While wicked Chrysaorius called
out for a space, even for time but till the next morning, he departed. Herod
Agrippa as his life was full of all impieties, so his death was miserable. So
Herodias, a^ History reports, who by dancing g t off John Baptists head, had
her own head cut off by the ice. So Iezabel and Athaliah Queens, so ^ing
Benhadad, Balihazar, and Antiochus, with 600 more, as their lives were naught
and wicked, so were their ends w etched and odious.

The death of wise men is to be lamented, but much more the lives of the
foolish, Psalm 34.22.
the death of sinners is the worst It being an irrevocable ingresse of a most
woeful eternity of torments. Foolishly does he fear death, who neglects life.
He who lives to luxury and rio, is dead while alive.

15. A good death follows a good life.
MOst truly said Saint Augustine, That cannot be reputed for a bad death, when
as a good life has always preceded. For nothing but the sequel of death
proves it ill. A good crop of Corn does seldom or never fail a plentiful
sowing. A good life is the Kings high way to a good Death. That is the
beginning, middle, and end. I may compare life and death to a Syllogism. The
conclusion is the end of the Syllogism, so death of life: but the conclusion
is either true, or false; according to the nature of the Antecedents. So is
Death always either good or bad, according to the quality of our precedent
lives. So Saint Paul does most severely pronounce it. Whose end (says he)
shall be according to their works. 2 Cor. 1.^ 15.


It is reported of a certain man of a most devout life who was found dead in
his study, with his body so seated, that his finger was upon the holy Bible,
and upon that place, where it is said, if the just man shall be taken away by
Death, he shall be in his refreshing: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Saints, whither it be slow or sudden.

The mellifluous Saint Bernard, being now near to his dissolution, Thus spoke
to his Scholars, because (quoth he) I leave you no great examples of Religion,
yet three things I do seriously commend to you, which I have specially at all
times observed,

1 To trust my own senses less then others.

2 That being hurt or injured by any, I never fought after revenge.

3 I never did willingly offend any man, whatsoever fell out cross and thwart,
I pacified, as I could. Now being nere Death, He w^it a Let^er to Arnaldus of
Good-dale, to this effect, The spirit is ready, but the flesh is we k. P^ay you
to our Lord Jesus, not to defer my exit, but keep me when I shall go; have a
care to preserve with prayers your very footsteps, that when the betrayer shall
come, he may find every part so well guarded, that he may have no place to
fasten in you to wound you. Gerardus, both by nature and Religion, the brother
of S. Bernard did publicly demo^strate the same which we here affirm, that a
good death is always joined to a pious life, but let us hear Bernard himself in
this point, whom si^knesse made wise. Would to God I had not lost thee, but
only had sent thee before Would to God at last though slowly I might follow
thee wheresoever thou art gone; for no doubt but thou art gone after them, whom
about the midst of thy last night thou did invite to praises, as well in
words as countenance of gladness, and did presently break out into that of
the Prophet David, to the wonder of those that stood about thee. Praise the
Lord from Heaven, praise him in the highest, o my brother, thy day sprung forth
in the midst of thy night, that night was a time of illumination, and indeed
thy night was turned to day I was called to behold that wonder, to see a man
rejoicing in death, and triumphing over death; O Death where is thy victory?
Death where is thy sting? Now thy sting is turned into a Jubilee of mirth. Now
there was a man, who dyed singing, and sung dying, Thou art now o daughter of
sorrow turned into gladness. Thou enemy of Glory art used for glory, and the
gate to Hell and the pit to destruction are made the inlet into the Kingdom of
Glory, and to the finding out of salvation, and that of a sinner and justly
too; for that thou rashly did use thy power against an innocent and just man;
o Death thou art dead, and caught with the same hook thou so greedi^y
swallowedst down, which voice is to be found in the Prophet. (O death I will be
thy death, and will be thy destruction) struck through (I say) with that hook,
the faithful p^ssing through thy loins, there is opened through thy sides an
happy and joyful way to life. Gerard my bro her fears thee not, thou meagre
Effigies; Gerard my brother passes through thee to hi^ heavenly Country: not
only securely but joyfully and cheerfully with praises. When as I was come,
and he had come to the end of that Psalm with a loud voice, lifting up his
eyes unto Heaven said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and often
repeating the same word, Father, Father, and so turning himself with a
cheerful countenance to me: what a dignation is it of God to vouchsafe to be
our Father? What a glory is it to man to be the sons and heirs of God? He
so sung that he turned my weeping into mirth, and beholding his comfortable joy,
it made me almost forget my own misery. He cannot die ill who has lived well.

17. Like life, like death.
WHen as the weary Huntsman's laid to sleep,
Yet does he dream how is chase and game to keep.
To wit, what things we have been busied about all day, those usually we dream
on at night: in like manner to what we have accustomed our selves to through
our lives, those like us best in death. Hence is it that for the most part as
we have acted our parts here, so we go off from this stage of mortality.

There is an History of a Goldsmith, who was so excessively covetous, that
lying upon his deathbed he dreamt still of gold, insomuch that he neglected
the advice of Divines and other his Friends concerning his salvation, and
hourly had his heart fixed upon his money. O wretched man, had thou but one
point of an hour to work out thy salvation, and yet could thou not think
upon it? as our days have been employed, so will even our last of time:
therefore those who have made Gold their God, or pleasures or other vanities,
their last end are sel^ome pious or comfortable.

How much better did Socrates who even at last gasp could not forget himself
nor virtue.

Antiochus King of Syria did most miserably vex the Jews, and Maximinus the
Emperor with cruel Edicts, and most bitter tormen s resolved to put out the
name of Christianity; but both of them by the divine Justice fell into a most
lamentable and grievous disease, and when as neither of them had any hopes of
life left them, the one besought the Jews, the other, the Christians; that they
would pray for them unto their God. Both of them like to Asops Crow, which when
she was very ill, spoke to her Mother not o lament for her, but by her prayers
to the Gods, she entreated her to pray for her health, to whom the other
answered, which of the Gods is it, from whom thou hopest to be recovered, when
as there is none from whose Altars thou have not stole some part of a Sacrifice.

Hence even as we live so we die: and so we shall be judged at last, either
to punishment in hell, or to everlasting happiness in Heaven.

17. The wish for a good death.
Number. 23.10.
LEt me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end, be like to his,
Calls out the Prophet Balaam. How much righter had he spoken, had he said, Let
me live the life of the righteous, that my death may then be like his. It is
ridiculous to desire to have a good death, and yet to shun a pious life; to
live well is laborious, to die well happiness; but the latter depends on the
former. He which refus^th to pass through the Red Sea, shall never eat Manna,
He which loves Egypts slavery, shall never enter into the Land of the living
Piously and elegantly in this respect does S. Bernard speak, Vtinam (inquit)
hac morte frequenter cadam, God grant I may often fall by that death, that so I
may escape the s^ares of death, that I may not be entangled in the mortiferous
flatteries of a luxurious life, that I may avoid the sense and deceitful
pleasures of lust; that I be not overcome with covetousness: that I be not
stirred and moved to anger, to impatience; that I be not overwhelmed with the
vexings and distraction of worldly cares and sollicitudes That death is good,
which takes not life away, but changes it only into a better.

This for certain is that death, that he expects and waits for with all his
desires who eagerly pursues that life which shall never know death. To be dead
to sins before death comes, is the best death of all.

18. Sleep is the brother of death.
PAusanias relates that in the City Olympia, he saw a Statue, called Night, in
the form and habit of a woman, This held in her right hand a white youth a
sleep, and in her l^ft hand a black youth as if he were sleeping, the one of
these she called sleep, the other death, both of them were counted the sons of
Night: hence Virgill makes sleep to be Deaths Kinsman.

Gorgias Leontinus, being very old, and expecting that he was come to the mark
of his life, was suddenly snatched away by a contrary sickness: before his
death one of his friends gave him a Visit, and found the good old man fallen
into a sleep. When he wakened he asked him how he did find himself? to whom
Gorg^as replied, this sleep begins to deliver me up to his brother, (meaning
death.)

Whosoever is a good Christian will never permit sleep to pass upon him,
before he has convented his own conscience, and ha^h washed away his offenses
by a godly sorrow: many have begun to sleep and to die at once, and have ended
their lives with their sleep, and therefore we are to look well to sleep which
is deaths brother, and as strictly as we can, not to go to it warily only, but
also chastely. He which sleeps not in chastity, shall not rise in chastity.

19. The Forerunners of Death.
DEath is the forerunner of Eternity, dolours and diseases are the most known
Harbingers of death If we will credit Pliny, one manifest sign of death is in
the height of sickness to laugh; in some diseases, an unequal and prickling;
striking of the veins, and the eyes and the nose afford to us certain signs of
death, according to Plinies experience, these are Indexes of approaching death,
when the sick party discourses of journeys, when he will not abide in his
bed, when he folds the coverlid, or when he pulls hairs out of it. There are
beside these many other signs of death not counted vain, or false.

Augustus the Emperor a little before he died, complained that he was taken
away by forty young men, That was rather a presage as Suetonius reports of
death then of a distracted mind, for when he was dead, he was brought forth by
forty Pretorian Soldiers.

When Alexander the Great was about to sail to Babylon, there was a great
wind which took away the ornament of his head, and the Dia em bound to it; the
tire fell into the water, and the Diadem hung unto a Fen-cane, one of the
Saylors went to fetch this, and because he would not have it wet, put it upon
his head, and so brought it to Alexander; the Saylor had a Talent given him for
a reward: but presently after, by the advice of the Chaldees, his head was
struck off, nor did Alexander long escape death, which the Diadem taken from
his head portended.

In the year of Christ 1185, when that great and last overthrow was near to
Andronicus Cominaeus the Emperor, the Image of S. Paul placed by the Emperor
in a Temple in Constantinople, wept abundantly; nor were those tears false
presages for presently after the Emperors blood was shed.

Moreover, Princes and great men have had strange presages of their deaths, as
the howlings of Dogs unusual, the roaring of Lions, the strangeness of the
striking of Clocks, Nightly noyses in Towers, and many other infallible signs
of ensuing death. How innumerable are the signs of death (says Pliny) and
certain, but not one of security, or health? What do al they teach us, but this
one thing, let us remember that we are but men. Think on Eternity whi her
thou art poasting, thou must be gone shortly, thou art but a guest. Enquire the
way. Look thou be ready: fit hy self for to appear before the Lords
Tribunal. How thou have lived, so even so shall thou be judged.

20. What we must answer to Deaths Messenger.
BLessed Saint Ambrose, having received the Ambassador of death, when as his
friends wept and sorrowed, and desired him to pray to God to spare him a longer
life, he answered them. I have not so lived as that it shames me to live
longer, nor do I fear to die because we have such a Good Lord.

Saint Augustine did much regard this wise saying, and commended them to his
Scholars as pure and savoury words, And S. Augustine himself was nothing
troubled at the hearing of death, but said what great man can conceit any proud
or great thing? when as men do die well as trees do fall, and other creatures.

That golden-mouthed Father Saint Chrysostom a little before his death, when
he was in banishment, writ thus to Innocentius, this now is the third year
that we have endured banishment, being exposed to p^stilence, famine, war, to
continual incursions, to unspeakable solitariness: to daily death to the
Heathens swords, and being about to die, he fairly pronounced these words,
Glory be to thee (o Lord) for all things.

Saint Cyprian being condemned to death for Christian Religion with a noble
spirit said thus, Thanks be given to God, who vouchsafes to take me out of the
bonds of this bo^y.

Let the dying man imitate these holy Fathers, and let him often say this, God
be thanked, Glory be to God for all things, I have watched long enough amongst
thorns, I have fought enough with beasts, I have toild enough in tempests. Now
because I see an end of my wat^hings, of my fightings, and of my labor, God be
thanked, Glory be to God for all things. For certain Death is an advantage to
the wise, and a gain to them whose lives are irksome.

21. A sweet death but the worst death of all.
GEorge Duke of Clarence, was by his brother Edward the fourth King of England,
for suspicion of a^e^ting the Crown commanded to die: yet he had liberty given
to choose his own death: and he chose a most sweet death, for he caused a
Butt of Malmsey, to be filled, and so placed himself in it, and others softly
and leasurely let him blood, and he all the while ^ucking in leasurely the
sweet liquour: So he left this life being at last drowned in this swe^t but
fatal ba h.

If we look but upon the manners of men, alas! how many by ingurgitating
themselves with pleasures intemperately, by drinking and gluttony do even drown
themselves, but while they so do suck in with eagerness, while they give
their whole souls to draw in these vain, short, filthy, irksome delights:
alas! wretches as they are, they do by little and little drink down their
own destruction, making themselves slaves to their bellies and filthy lusts;
and by how much the more greedily they do swallow down these sugared baits,
the sooner go they to the land of darkness, a^ Job has it, They spend their
days in mirth, and in a moment go down to Hell. Most elegantly S. Augustine,
all things (says he) are utterly uncertain, but death; a child is co^ceived,
perhaps it is born, perhaps not, but perishes an abortive: if it be borne,
perchance it grows perchance not, it may be old, perhaps not, it may be rich,
it may be poor, it may be honored, it may be an abject It may marry, perhaps
not, it may have children, perchance none, it may be sick, it may be devoured
by beasts, it may escape. But amongst all these perhaps and perchances, ^in we
truly say, perhaps or perchance it shall die?

It is recorded in the Machabees of Alexander, 1 Mac. 1 6.
and his fate is thus there described: and after all these things he fell down
on his bed, and knew that he should die. Oh what force and energie is there in
the words, post haec. After all these things, and in this, decidt. he fell, and
specially in those and morre^tur, that he should die. Alexander had in hopes
conquered a World already, nay, worlds. He thought he had done things worthy of
everlasting Annals: and yet after all these so many so great Trophies, he fell
down not only into his bed, but to his grave, he must be content with a small
Coffin. Petius Alphonsus relates i^, that Alexander being dead, Many
Philosophers met to speak some thing to be engraven on his Monument. One he
utterd this. En modo quatuor ulnarum spacium ei satis est, cui spatiosissimus
terrarum orbis non suffecerat (i.e.) behold now four cubits is room enough for
h m who^ while ere the whole World would not suffice: ano her added, yesterday
Alexander could have freed any from death, now no^ himself. One beholding his
golden Ch^st spoke thus, Yesterday (sai^ he) Alexander of Gold made treasure,
now change turns and gold makes treasure of Alexander. Se^ the wise men expressed
themselves, but they all concluded with that of the Machabees. Afterward, he
fell down into his bed, and dyed. Juvenal sings thus of him.

Vnus pellaeo Iuveni non sufficit orbis.... (i.e.)

The whole World though it be was
Will not content Philips great son.
But mark the largnesse of our thoughts, while we prove forgetful of our own
condition: oh! did we meditate on heavenly immortal things, while we vainly
dispose these transitory ones to our Nephews, and Kindred. Alas all this, this
while we are extending our thoughts, death oppresses us, and this thing which
is called old age, is but a short circuit of a few y^ers. Why should we
therefore trust death? Consider but for what small matters we lose our lives.
It is not our meat, nor drink nor watching, nor sleep used intemperately, but
prove deadly: our foot hurt a little, the grief of the ears, a rotten tooth,
meat offending the stomach, a drop of an ill Humor, any of these may open the
gate to death Is it a matter of any great consequence or profit, whither we
live or die? Ill sents, savours, tastings, weariness, nay, nourishment it
self without which we cannot live, may bring in and usher in death. The body
of man is weak, fluid, rotten, diseased, wheresoever it moves, it is conscious
of it is own infirmity. It endures not every Climate, the Sea alters it, the
change of air infects it, the least cause hurts it. Let us believe him
therefore who said: Therefore, o men, death is better then a bitter life, and
eternal rest, then continued travel. Therefore I say, It is better to dwell
in heaven, then to travel on earth.

22. Death's Blessedness.
WRite, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit,
that they rest from their labors, and their works follow them: to die in the
Lord, is to die the servant of the Lord, as the holy Scriptures speak of
Moses, Moses my servant is dead, as if the Lord should say, although he sinned
sometime, and by sin made himself not my servant: yet he died my servant. He
died in my service. Whatsoever he was, whatsoever he did it was mine: for all
the servants work is the Lords: and such a joyful Verse in that Song, wa^ that
of old Symeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy Word, In peace altogether: at whose entrance all the wars of the righteous
men are ended: never for all eternity to be begun again. Such servants of God
do all die in the Lord, which dying do as it were rest in his bosom: and so
resting sweetly are said to sleep in death. So blessed Stephen in the midst of
that storm and shower of stones in such a great tumult and fury of those that
stoned him, slept in the Lord. Acts 7.60. Ioh 11.11.
So our Lord spoke of Lazarus, that h e did but sleep. So Moses the servant of
the Lord died when God bade him, or as some expound it, at the Lords speech, as
if the Lord had kissed him, in this sense, as a Mother takes her Infant in her
Arms, and kisseth him being a sleep, and so lays him into bed smilingly; no
otherwise did God with Moses, but by sweet embraces, and smiles did lay him
being fallen asleep into Abraham's bosom. Where h^e shall give his children
peace, says the Psalmist. Blessed, yea for ever blessed are all they that so
die, because they shall never be miserable (as Saint Bernard says) The death
of the righteous is good for the rest. Secondly, for the newness of it.
Thirdly, for the security of it. Blessed, yea thrice blessed are all such, for
their works follow them: they shall follow them, as servants their Lord, as
sons their father: as Scholars their Master, as Soldiers their General; as
Nobles do their Sovereigne. They shall follow us to Gods Tribunal. They shall
be brought into the highest Courts of the Great King, and there shall be
admitted for noble Courtiers. And as every one which is able for wealth and
Nobility, is known by the number and adornment of his followers: so who desires
to appear before the King of Glory, let him be well and richly furnished with
such servants: And let him set them before him, and look that they be many and
richly apparelled, and though our good works go before us in some kind, yet
they follow us in reward. The labor which we spend on them, and in them goes
before: The reward which we have from them follows: He never can want comfort,
that is well stored with such followers.

23. A Dying man's farewell to the living, who must follow him the same way.
MAny are the things, for which I am sorry; Especially the neglect of grace,
and the time that I have ill spent. Oh how should I, how ought I to have been
more patient, more submisse, more mindful of my death! o how few and small
sparkles of divine love have had irradiations in my soul! Have mercy upon me, o
God, have mercy upon me, according to the multitude of thy great mercies, o
infinite goodness, by the precious blood of thy dear Son, be merciful to me
a sinner: and o you, whomsoever I have offended in words or deeds, Forgive and
pardon me. You have me now heartily confessing my self guilty, and
sorrowful, and deny not to me before I go hence this viaticum, even the free
forgiveness of all my offenses toward you. Do not (I pray you) let your
courage fall in the time of sickness, by my example, because I am weak. Set
your eyes upon the actions of holier men, and conform your selves to them,
Emulate with ardency their patience, humility, obedience. And I cannot but give
you hearty thanks for all the good offices you have performed toward ^ee,
either by your hand, and work, care or council, love and prayers. God, I
beseech who art the fountain of all goodness, and the deep Sea of love,
requite your love into your bosoms. God has always used to be kind and good
to them who do comm^t themselves wholly to his fatherly providence. Obedience
is a singular virtue, and indeed such an one as all others have resplendency
from it. Patience is that one thing that is necessary for sick men. Humility is
an excellent jewel, and con^empt of a man's own self. Poverty is acceptable to
Christ: but the Queen of graces is Charity. Yet amongst all these (me thinks) a
sure confidence in God is of singular efficacy, and a plenary resignation of a
man's self unto the Divine Providence: which Gods Word so highly commends, which
the Kingly Prophet so often speaks of, which last of all, Christ himself by so
many arguments taken from the Flowers and the Fowls does endeavor to persuade
to. None can ever know the streng h of this confidence, nor that tranquillity
which follows, no, nor can believe it, but he, who at all times in everything
little, or great, fully has believed in and trusted himself into Gods hand.
And I am persuaded that never was there man who did so refer himself wholly
to God, who has not found singular and secret comfort within himself by it.
Let us trust to and rely on God. And give our selves wholly to be disposed of
by his infinite wisdom, He will provide for us, he will take care for us.

You see now, how I am cited to appear at Gods Tribunal: and must now give an
account for 60 years carriage: All mine, deeds, words, thoughts are manifest
and open to that Judge. Nothing ah! nothing can be hid from him, all the Acts
of my passed life shall now be sentenced. O how I tremble! For it is a fearful
thing to stand before his Tribunal. Yet in this great straight I have
something to comfort me, although I be an unjust and naughty servant, yet I
have a good Lord, nay, infinitely good, which though I have bin sinful, yet I
am his servant: so commending my self in^o his hands, and my soul to his
mercy, I bid adieu to you all, wishing you al to have a care to your lives
here, that we may once again meet in the Kingdom of Glory. Farewell.

24. What a dying man should always speak and meditate in his heart.
IN thy sickness, o good Christian being asked how thou do, how thou
feel thy self, etc. take heed to thy answers, that thou utterest, let them
be such as these. As God pleases, as it seems good to the Lord so is come to
pass, according to Gods good will and pleasure, I am well, that is best, so
God sees it good, Let his will be done in earth as it is in heaven, and that o
sick man and dying man that thou may have this familiarly in thy mouth and
heart, use these three short Prayers.

1 The Lord be blessed for ever and ever.

2 Have mercy upon me, o Lord after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies, though I be less then the least of all thy mercies.

3 O my Lord, and my God, I offer my self to thy good will and pleasure. Thy
will, (...) Lord, be done. Amen.

Some in the time of their sickness have had these prayers set before their
faces in great Characters lying in their beds, that night and day they might
the more readily remember and use them.

Our Prayers are our Forerunners to God, let us our selves learn of our
Harbingers the right way, that so we may follow read^ly whenever the Lord
Eternal shall call us hence.

25. Things to be specially observed by a dying man.
1 LEt him not rely upon, but renounce his own merits, let him cast himself
and all his sins into the boundless Ocean of Gods infinite mercy and
compassion.

2 Let him be sure to stand fast in the bosom of the holy Catholic Church,
and let him receive the blessed Sacrament seasonably, it being his viaticum,
and the food of his soul.

3 Let him withdraw all his affections and love from fading and transitory
things, and let his heart be united to God his heavenly Father. Let him long
for the promised Canaan, that there he may for ever offer praise to God his
Creator.

4 Let him offer up himself a lively sacrifice to the glory of God, for his
most blessed will; to bear out of true love all the bitterness and
anguishment, and all the pangs of death, though for a long time, and though he
might live longer, yet for the love of God, he refers himself to his wise
disposing, either for life or death.

5 Let him never forget the bitter passion and death of Jesus Christ. Let him
not rest till he be united to Christ in his death, and let him in the depth of
all his sufferings imitate our Savior, to commend his soul into his fathers
hands, that so as he is made conformable to Christ in his death, he may be
likewise in his Resurrection.

But above all it is most safe for the dying man, that what he would have to
be his last words and actions, that he begin to do them in the state of his
health.

26. What a dying man must do.
LVdovicus Blosius, a man of a most holy life, who refused an Archbishopric
when it was offered him by Charles the fi^th Emperor, whose life may be seen
by his works, amongst many other worthy pieces, he gives a dying man these
Instructions following.

Being asked what a dying man should do, if he had lived long in grievous
sins, answered: though I should have lived forty years in my sins, and now
my death approaching, if I shall truly acknowledge them, and be heartily sorry
for them from the bottom of my heart, and resolve against them all for time to
come, if I have but so much time, to put my self into Gods hands, and truly
turn to him without all hypocrisy and dissembling, I shall depart hence holy
and innocent, and shall find God a merciful Father unto me, and adds a short
sweet Prayer for a sick man.

O Lord, I am that miserable wretch, whom Thou of thy Fatherly goodness have
created, and by the most shameful death of thy only begotten Son have
redeemed from the power of the Enemy. Thou Lord, Thou only shall rule in me,
save me therefore, o Lord, for thy infinite mercy throu^h Jesus Christ, in whom
I do believe to have immortality and glory. Amen.

These are Abridgments to die well, he who knows how to be ready for death
comprizeth all.

27. Refreshments for a sick man.
GO my people enter in^o your chambers, shut the doors to you, hide your selves
for a while, for a moment, until my indignation be passed over, Isa. 26.20.

In my anger have I hid my face from you for a moment, but in everlasting
mercies will I have compassion on you says the Lord your Redeemer, Isay 54.8.

Why art thou so heavy o my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?
still trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks, who is the light of my
countenance and my God, Psalm. 42.6, 7.

We are the children of his Saints, and we do expect that life which God will
give to those that keep the faith.

It is not the will of your heavenly Father, that one of these little ones
should perish, Matthew. 18.14.

So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16

Now if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2 1.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever hears my Word, and believes on
him that sent me has life eternal, and shall not come into judgment, but
shall pass from death, to life. John 5.24.

All that my Father has given to me shall come unto me, and he that comes
to me I cast not out of doors. Verily, verily, I say unto you, who so believes
in me has eternal life, John 6 37. and 47.

I am the resurrection and the life, Whosoever believes in me, yea though he
were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in me shall not
die eternally, John 11.15. and 26. In my Fathers house are many Mansions, John
14 2.

If God be for us, who can be against us, who also spared not his own Son,
but gave him for us, how then shall he not give us all things with him? Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God who justifies. Who
shall condemn? It is Jesus Christ which is dead, yea rather which is risen
again, and sits at the right hand of his Father, making intercession for us,
Rom 8 31. usque ad 35.

None of us live unto our selves, nor none die unto our selves, whether we
live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord, whither
therefore we live or die, we are the Lords, Romans 14 7 and 8.

We know that if this earthly house of our dwelling be dissolved, we have a
building from God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens: and
for this we sigh, desiring to be put on with our house which is from heaven,
that if we be clothed we shall not be found naked, 2 Co 5.1, 2, 3

Now shall Christ be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death,
for Christ is to me both in life and death, advantage. But to be with Christ is
much better, Phil. 1.20, 21, and 23

Our conversation is in heaven from whence we look for a Savior, even our Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.20, 21.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief 1 Timothy 1.15.

Whosoever endures to the end, shall be saved, Matthew 24 13.

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life, Apoc.
2.10.

These are pure and cool streams and fountains to assuage the heat of sin and
fear of death. He swims safely, who baths himself in these waters of comfort

28. Holy Ejaculations and Prayers of a dying man.
HOly Eligius, a little before his death, embracing his friends with tears,
spoke thus unto them, Farewell all ye, and suffer me from henceforth to rest.
Earth must return to earth, the Spirit will find the way to God that gave it.
So holding up his hands and eyes to heaven, prayed so a good while, and at last
burst forth into these words. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace according to thy word. Remember Lord, that thou have made me as earth.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh
living be justified. O remember me thou Redeemer of the World who only art
without sin, and bringing me from the body of this death, place me in thy
Kingdom. I know I do not deserve to see thy face, and taste thy favor, but
thou know that all my hopes have bin in thy all-saving mercies: and now (o
Christ) dying in the confession of thy holy Name, I do render my last breath,
my soul into thy safe keeping. Receive me (o Lord) according to thy great
mercies, and let me not be confounded in my hope, open to me the gate of
life, and let not the powers of darkness hold me, Let thy right hand bring me
into thy resting place, and let me enjoy one of those Mansions, which thou have
prepared for those tha love and fear thee. And having thus prayed, he
departed, Oh could we follow the example of this holy man, let us therefore
call upon Christ in these or the like words.

Enlighten mine eyes (o Jesus) that I sleep not in death, lest that mine enemy
say unto me, I have prevailed against him. Psalm. 13 4.

O Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, put I pray thee thy Passion,
Cross, and meritorious death, betwixt thy judgment and my poor soul. O
Remember not (Lord) our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon, for
we are come to great misery. Psalm. 77.8.

Oh m st sweet Jesus Christ our Lord, for the honor and virtue of thy most
blessed Passion, make me to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

Enter not into judgment (o sweet Jesus) with thy servant, for in thy sigh^
shall no flesh living be justified, and then let him utter these words.

I worship thee (o Lord Jesus Christ) and bless thy name, for thou by thy holy
Cross and Passion have redeemed the World O thou Savior of the World save
me, which by thy bitter Cross and precious blood have redeemed me.

Draw me unto thee, o Jesus who did say, When I am lifted up from the earth,
I shall draw all men unto me.

O most me^cifull Jesus, I pray thee by thy precious blood which thou sheddest
for sinners, to blot out all my offenses. O let thy blood purify me, let thy
body (o Christ save me) wash me in thy blood, and let thy passion confirm my
soul, o good Jesus hear me, hide me in thy wounds, suffer me not to be
separated from thee, in the hour of death call me, bid me to come unto thee,
that I with all the rest of the glorious Saints may praise thee. O my gracious
Redeemer, I do wholly give up my self unto thee, Cast me not out from thy
presence. I come unto thee, reject me not. Cast me not out of thy sight, and
take not thy holy Spirit from me. Oh let not my iniquity cast me away, whom
thy goodness did create.

As death approaches nearer, so let the dying man pray thus.

O God according to thy will, so let thy mercy come unto me, bid o God, that my
spirit may ever dwell with thee. Oh let that voice sound in my ears, To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, Lord, Now let thou thy servant depart in
peace according to thy word, For mine eye^ have seen thy salvation. Oh loving
Jesus what is thine own, I beseech thee to take. O Lord Jesus! Make me to be
numbered with thine Elect. O Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy upon me.
Lord, be thou my helper. Make haste, o Lord Jesus, to come and help me. O Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. Amen.

29. The dying man's confidence in GOD.
HEre I do confidently with S. Bernard, confess and say, let others pretend
their Merits, and others that they can, and have borne the heat of the day, yet
I hold it good to keep close to the mercy of God, and to put my confidence in
the Lord.

And though I am conscious to my self, that my former life has been full of
sin, so that I deserve to be cast off by Gods justice, yet will I never leave
off to trust in his infinite goodness, and that as hitherto his all-sufficient
Grace has administered strength ^o my weakness, so the same will ^et give me
strength and power to ^eare all things patiently and wil^ingly: And this my
patience though small and little, helped by ^he assistance of his Grace (which
does infinitely exceed my thoughts) will mitigate my pains, and will bestow
that eternal reward upon me in Heaven. This one thing (o God) will I desire of
thee, that thou would never suffer me to fall from relying upon thy
goodness: although I know my self to be weak, and undeserving. Yea, though I
should come to that casting down, and terrors, that I did seem even to be
utterly lost and left, yet I would call to mind that Apostle of thine Saint
Peter, that was ready to sink at the first blast of wind, and to fall from his
faith, and I would then even do, as he did, call upon thee and say, Lord save
me, and even then would I hope that thou would stretch forth thy hand; and
help me, but yet if thou should permit me to be harder beset then Peter,
(which I pray thee not to suffer, o Lord) yet I, nevertheless do hope, that
thou would look upon me with the eyes of thy mercy, and that thou would
turn and behold me as thou did Peter, when he had denied thee, and that
thou would not suffer thy whole displeasure to arise, but that thou would
help me and deliver my soul. This I know assuredly, that God will not forsake
me without my fault. I know that of Saint Augustine to be most true. God can
free and has done for many great things without any desert of theirs, because
he is Good: but yet he never condemned one without great demerits, because he
is just. Therefore in great trust and confidence, I do wholly rely upon him; if
for my sins he suffers me to perish, yet his justice shall be glorified, but I
hope, and certainly do hope that his merciful goodness will keep my soul,
that so rather his mercy may be praised then his justice, nothing can fall upon
me but what God will. Now whatsoever he wills, though it may seem harsh and
evil, yet is truly good. Whatever (o God thou will, I will the same
altogether, I will, o God, I will,

30. The last words of a Dying man.
AVgustus the Emperor when he dyed dedicated his last words to his Empress
Livia. Livia, said he, be all thy life long, mindful of our Marriage,
farewell. How much trulier may Christians dedicate their last speeches to their
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, saying, O Lord, Remember the time since my soul
was espoused to thee in holy wedlock.

Dionysius the Areopagite an holy man of life, being condemned to lose his
head, ^earing the sentence of death with a generous resolution, contemning the
scoff^ of the multitude repeated the last words of our Savior. Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit.

Saint Basil the Great, at the close of his life, when as he had furnishd all
them about him with excellent admonitions, spoke the same words unto Christ, as
the former Martyr had done

Saint Bernard as if he should show to the sick man Christ Jesus, Oh thou
Christian, says he, despair not of thy sickness. Christ has told thee what
thou art to say in all the hazards of death, to whom to fly to, to whom to
call on: In whom to hope, even in God the Father, which cannot despise the
prayers of them that trust in him, do thou therefore such works in the time of
thy sickness, that thou may truly say, In thee (o Lord) have I put my
trust, let me not be confounded.

Therefore let the last words of the dying man be directed to God, to him our
prayers, to him let go all our desires Let all our hopes terminate in him, let
him receive our last sighs, let the dying man say thus from his heart. To thee
(o Lord) do I look up, to thee I lift up my eyes, to thee I direct my prayers.

32. The conforming of our wills to Gods will, is of great value, especially at
the end of our lives.
LVdovicus Blosius gives this advice for the conforming our wills to the will of
God.

There is no exercise at our death can be more profitable th^n that every one
should fully resign himself into ^he hands of his C eatou^, humbly, lovingly,
wholly trusting and relying in his infinite mercy and goodness. For it cannot
but he, that whosoever does thus place his confidence in God before his
departure hence, but that he shall partake of joy in the Caelestiall Kingdom.
For those that shall be for ever with the Lord shall be freed from punishm^nt.
In this mind died that good ^^ief on the Cross, which did no desire our
Savior to save his body, but wholly desired Christ to forgive his sins, and to
give him the Kingdom of Heaven so fully did he resign himself into Gods hands,
so wholly did he offer himself to Christ, that he should do with him as he
pleased. And if it so fall out that when death is at hand, thy sickness is
grievous and painful, cast that also upon God, For the death of Christ will
yield us consolation in death, He is gone before, innumerable others are gone
before, why should it irk thee to follow?

33. The dying man emulates the good Thief in Golgotha.
LOrd, Remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Oh happy Thief! which
did profit more in the school of Christ in 3 hours space, then the Iscariot
did in three years, thou go before me in words, and for a form of prayer,
who wast to Christ in his greatest extremity, a Patron, and an Advocate. Good
God! how deep are thy judgments! his friends and kindred are silent, his
Disciples forsake him, The Angels appear not, neither is his mother suffered to
defend his inno^en^e, and where are those eleven thousand and more fed by this
crucified Lord? What one out of so great a multitude does open his mouth in his
cause? The mayntenance of Christ's Cause is therefore devolved to the defense of
this Thief. One Thief pl^ads against another for Christ's innocence, he
mayntains it, takes of the others scandals, reproves the infinite multitude of
pa^ricide. Did not the Son of God blush to have his Cause defended by a Thief?
No! he was so far from being ashamed at his Oratory, that he praised him in
public, nor was his Rhetoric defective in Gods Cause; And we ind^e justly;
therefore we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man has done
nothing amiss. Lu. 23.4


O how justly may I say the same of my self? And I do justly die for my
offenses, for I do but receive the wages of my works, but my Savior, What had
he done? nothing at all worthy of death, nor of such torments. Let me
therefore, o God, be heard when I use this form of prayer. Lord, remember me,
for now thou art come into thy Kingdom, and because thou art in thy Kingdom
look upon m^e now languishing and decaying, and adm^t me to thy self when I
depart. I beg this of thee (o Jesus) by thy scourging, Thorns and Cross, by
all thy ^orments, and by thy precious ^eath.

What therefore remaynes, but that I should for ever cast my soul unto his
bosom, whose dolor and ^ains he only weighs and consi^ers? He knows what
conduces ^o the health of our souls: and ^ee from all eternity ha h deter^ined
by what way we shall return to him. (O Lord) I have waited for thy salvation.

34. The Heliotropium, or Turn sole against all diseases and death the only
Medicine.
THis Herb (as experience shows it) turns with the Sun both at his rising and
setting nay, even in cloudy weather he shows his love to the Sun, by night, as
it were for grief, he shuts up himself: for want of her beautiful Lover. Oh
could man's will always so follow and attend upon Gods will, that at all times
it should be conformable to it, and and follow it through all afflictions and
adversities, and not to turn aside in that great cloudy day of death. Upon this
set day let the dying man imitate this flower, and let him f^x the eyes of his
faith upon that glorious Sun of righteousness especially then. This do our
Saviors own words teach us.

Even so Father, Math. 11.26.
for so it seemed good in thy sight: so even so my ^ying friend speak you, In
all things that ever you do, in all evils to be endured or suffered by the
example of our Lord, say always. So Father, even so good Father, so be i^ o my
Father, with often ingeminations, and specially when the pangs of death do
rage most violently, then even then subject thy will in all things to his,
pronounce these watching, in health, in sickness, but at the pinch of death
never forget them. Lord, thou know my heart, command it Lord: I have hoped
in thee, I have said thou art my God, thou shall mayntaine my lot, my he^lth,
my disease, prosperity, and adversity, my life and my death are in thy hands,
as thou will, so let all things be. It shall be pleasant to me either to live
or die according to thy good will because thou art my Father. Therefore, o
Father, as thou will, order, dispose, permit all things to be done in me, and
of me, as may be pleasing to thee, let not any thing in me cross or thwart
thy heavenly disposing. So, even so, good Father, let thy will be done from
henceforth and for ever.

This herb is of wonderful virtue to all sickness, evils and death. He is
far^e from fear of destruction, that is in will so united to his God.

FINIS.
Prayers to be said of, or to be read to a man dying.
OH holy Jesus! my strength, my ^efreshing, my defender, and my deliverer, in
whom I have hoped, on whom I have believed, whom always I have loved, who art
my chief pleasure: the fortress of my strength, and my hope even from my
youth up. Lead me forth, o ^hou that art the leader of my life, and I will
follow thee; stretch forth thy right hand of mercy to the work of thine own
hands, which thou the Creator of all things did make of the dust of the
e^rth, and strengthenedst with bones and sinews, to whom thou by death gave
life; The time is at hand, that dust must return to dust, and my spirit to thee
my Savior and blessed Redeemer who gave it me. Open (good Lord) to me the
gate of life, for for me wretch did thou the Lord of life hang on the tree,
and wast reckon^d amongst transgressors: receive me, o merciful God according
to the multitude of hy tender mercies, thou did kindly and speedily entertain
the penitent thief upon the Cross begging of thee. I am sick and sore
smitten, to whom should I run for cure, but t^ thee o gracious Physician, heal
thou m^e, o Lord, and I shall be whole, and those that put their trust in thee,
shall not be confounded: in thee, o Savior have I trusted, let me no:
therefore be put to confusion; But who, or what am I (most glorious God) that I
should with such bold^esse speak to thee? I am a sinner borne, nay, and
conceived in transgression, a rotten carcass, an unclean vessel, food for
worms. Spare me, forgive me (good God) what conquest would thou have to
contend, or s^t thy self against me who ^m weaker and lighter then the stubble
before the wind, then the dust or the chaff driven too and fro with every
blast? Pass by (o Lord) all my transgressions, and raise up thy poor dejected
servant from the Dunghill Stand up (o Lord) and for my defense raise up thy
self, and reject not the supplication of thy poor weak servant. Let my prayers
enter into thy presence, and stretch forth thy hand, and com^ and help. I am
the man that traveling from Jerusalem, am taken and wounded of thieves, and
left half dead, be thou, thou o my Savior the good Samaritan, and c mfort me I
have grievously sinned in the whole course of my life, and my sins are ever
before thee. From the crown of my head to the sole of my foot there is not one
sound or clean member. O if thou by thy precious death on the Cross had not
helped my soul, I should have for my sins deserved eternal perdition; I, even
I am partaker, o sweet Jesus, of that inestimable Redemption; thou did shed
that most precious blood for my sake, o thou preserver of men, and therefore
put me not away from thee. I am that sheep which wandered and lost it self,
seek me (o thou great Shepherd) and take me and conduct me into thy fold,
that thou may be true in all thy sayings. Thou that have promised that
whenever a sinner shall repent and return, thou will have mercy upon him.
Truly Lord I am not worthy to be called thy son, because I have sinned against
heaven and before thee: but good Father, restore the voice of joy and gladness
to me again, Comfort me now after the time that thou have afflicted me, and
for the years wherein I have suffered adversity. Turn thy face away from my
sins, and blot cut all mine offenses, according to thy great mercies. Cast me
not away from thy presence, nor deal with me after my iniquities: but help me,
o thou that art the helper of all that cry to thee for relief, deliver me for
the glory of thy name: Grant in mercy, that I may dwell in thy house all the
days of my life, to sing praises to thee in Heaven with all thy glorious Saints
and Servants for evermore. Amen.

The second Prayer to Jesus Christ the Savior of the world.
O Sweet comf^rtable Jesus, the fountain an^ w^lsp^ing of mercy and tender
compassion, show and extend to me thy poor servant and weak creature, the
riches of thy infinite mercies, help and succor me in this my great need and
necessity, my great Creator and loving Redeemer Jesus Christ: put thy Passion,
Cross, and precious death betwixt thy judgment and my sick soul. I wholly
give up my self to thy favor, Cast me not away good Savior in thy fury, I
willingly come to thee for h^lp, o reject not, o despise not, o refuse not to
admit thy humble Petitioner into thy grace and favorable protection. Now! now
o Lord, according to thy good pleasu e and will, deal with me in mercy, and
receive my soul into thy hands in peace and love, thou have redeemed me, o
Lord, thou God of truth. O let the sound of those comfortable words enter into
^y soul (sweet Savior) This day thou shall be with me in Parad se.

O Jesus, who was crucified for me receive me into thy arms of love and
mercy, into those arms which were stretched so wide to embrace poor grieved
sinners, unto those arms which I with the eye of faith see opened wide for
transgressors. Draw my soul after thee, comfort it (o thou Lamb of God) with
thy al saving favor receive me in thy savor, and let my soul ever live in
thy glorious courts in the highest Heavens. Amen.

The third Prayer of thanksgiving in any sickness.
GLory be to thee o Lord Jesus Christ, the Author and giver of life, who have
vouchsafed to call me to the knowledge of true faith in thee, Glory be to thee
who h^st always been so full of plenteous redemption and mercy toward me so
grievously laden with all sorts of sins: which through all my life have heaped
blessings and kindnesses upon me. I give thanks to thee (n y most loving God)
that according to thy good will and wisdom I am called out of this miserable
and wretched life to appear before thee How, o how willing am I to tread thy
Courts, and to behold the light of thy countenance, I do wholly commit my
self to thy divine shelterage, and bless thy glorious name for giving me such
a ready mind to depart. I do (o most loving Lord) in all humility beg and
desire thee to bind up my soul in the bundle of peace, and embrace my soul
in thy everlasting favor and mercy, t^ke my soul into thy protection
henceforth and for ever, to thee, to thee only do I commend my spirit, which
art the God of spirits, I entreat thee (the everliving God) to give me an
inheritance among those that be sanctified, Count me in the number of thy
Saints, and let my name o heavenly Father be registered in the book of life.
Free me and deliver me from all the power of my enemies. Deliver me from all
my trouble and adve sity, because thou only art the God which can help those
that are in misery and grief, thou have said it (o b^essed Lord God) that we
should call upon thee in the time of trouble, and thou have graciously promised
to hear and deliver us, and taught us in thy wisdom to give glory to thy name.
To thee therefore be duly given all praise and glory world without end.

The fourth prayer, to be s^id of those about the sick party.
O Jesus Christ, who did die upon the Cross for our Redemption, in the depth
of thy infinite love, even of that gracious love, which made thee lay down thy
life, who wast the life of all; that they might be restored to life. We do
heartily desire and humbly crave of thee that thou would pass by, and blot
out all the sins and transgressions which this thy sick servant our Brother N.
has committed, and that by thy most holy life, and merits of thy most bitter
Cross and Passion, thou would be pleased to help all his infirmities, and to
make his bed in the time of his sickness, and make him to feel and relish
thy infinite love and boundless mercies and let him apply them to h^s s^ule,
and disspose graciously of us all, and especially of this thy weak creature,
whom thou art calling out of this miserable life, that thou would prepare his
soul quietly and peaceably to seek thee, and that he may give up his soul
into thy hands with all patience, and contentedness, in a full assurance of
the pardon of all his sins, being grounded in hope, rooted in charity, in a
perfect state of mind, so that for ever thou may hold him in the arms of thy
never fading love and favor.

O Lord Jesus Christ, we beseech thee, take not thy helping hand and saving
assistance from this our sick brother, who is now in the depth of sickness,
and even at the point of death, who by weakness and defect of spirit is not
able to lift up his voice unto thee. Think upon him (o Lord) in thy love and
mercy, and give him, o give the spirit of comfort and consolation, Deliver him
from all evil, and grant hough he does at this time depart, yet let it be in
peace, and sure confidence of thy love: defend him from the danger of the
Enemy, at the time of his yielding up his spirit into thy hand, give him sure
confidence in thee, and keep him i^ perpetual peace and safety, and lead him
into the land of everlast^ng rest and quietness. Amen.

The fifth Prayer containing the Acts of Faith, Hope, and Chari^y daily to be
used.
O Lord Jesus Christ, I believe that thou art my God and my Redeemer, I do
b^lieve that for my salvation thou wast born of the Virgin Mary, and was
crucified, I do believe what the holy Catholic Church does enjoyne me, and I
protest that I will l^ve and am willing to die in that faith. (Lord Jesus) I
do heartily grieve that I have so grievously offend^d thy goodn^sse, and I am
sor^y, that I can be no more sorry so those great and many offenses which I
have committed against thee my Cr^atour and Redeemer. I do humbly ^ray thee,
that thou would by thy precious bloudshedding pardon and forgive all my sins:
and I do purpose if thou shall enlarge my life to abstain from them ^ll, and
to settle my self in a new cou se of holiness of life, and if I have forgotten
any of my sins, or if I do not know them all severally, I implore thy
goodness to disclose them to me, that I may speedily and sincerely repent me
of them all, and above all forgive, o Lord, forgive and forget them all.

I do f^eely and willingly forgive all men that have offended me (o my God)
all their offenses for thy sake, and I entreat whomsoever I have injured to do
the like by me. If I have by wrong detained any man's goods, so far as I am
bound and according to my ability, I desire that they should be fully
sati^fied: I do trust in thy eternal mercy, and in thy precious blood
abundantly shed for me, that although I be altog^ther unworthy of my self, and
no ways deserving thy gracious favor, that yet thou would ransom me out of
all mine enemies hands, and that thou would lift up thy countenance upon me,
and fill my soul with everlasting comforts. I do heart ly desire this of thee
by thy bitt^r death and passion. Strength^n me (o Lo d Jesus) against all the
snares of Satan, and defend me with the shield of thy mercy, because all my
hope and confidence is in thy great goodness only. I can plead no merits or
deserts that can bind thee, but I find in my self too too much sin and
vileness: but thy mercy (o God) is over all thy works, and so in hope to
partake of it, I do rest my self in hope: because thou art a God of hope to
thee be all praise and honor ascribed from this time forth and for evermore.
Amen.

The Epilogue, or conclusion of all being a Monition to the Reader.
THese prayers (my good Reader) made for the souls of men, I counsel thee if
thou be wise in the time of thy health, with a li tle alteration to muse on for
thine own good. There is not any thing of more efficacy in my judgment, to set
us forward in a godly life, then to meditate of the f^ailty and miserablenes of
our lives. That Prophetic speech of our Lord spoken to Jerusalem, may fitly be
applied to all dying men. The days will come that thine enemies shall cast a
trench about th^e, and keep thee in on every si^e, and lay thee level with the
ground, and shall not leave one stone upon another, All ^hese things may be
seen easily in a man dying For do not great anxieties environ him? Do not
solicitous cares weaken him? Do not griefs lay him low? Do not wicked spirits
encomp^sse him? Do not the terrors of sins past unrepented of cast him down?
Do not future punishments astonish him? Do not all worldly things suddenly
forsake him? And though the m st expert Physicians compass his bed, Can any
afford help, bu^ o^^ly that one Master Physician from Heaven? It is the decree
laid upon all that are born to die, to spring up and soon decay, and that Great
Disposer of all humane things knows nothing firm but himself, all things pass
away in a Circle of rising, and falling. Some thing may be longliv'd in this
frame, but there is nothing e ern^ll, or everlasting. I desire thee therefore
(o my Reader) for Christ's sake, and thy own happiness to think of eternity: our
life is but a moment, alas! it is no ^o^e, and yet upon this moment depends
^ither everlasting good, or everlasting evil. Our trav^l is short, all
pleasures do quickly fade, only Eternity knows no period; therefore remember
Et^rnity.

FINIS.

