A True RELATION Of the Progress of the Parlaments Forces in SCOTLAND: Together
with the KING'S Wholly abandoning Scotland, and, in despair, with what Forces
were left them, marching into England: with part of our Forces in his Van: and
my LORD GENERAL following in his Rear. By an Express Messenger to the Council
of State. blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed by William Du-Gard, by the appointment of the Council of
State, Anno Dom. 1651.

A Letter to the Honorable Council of State relating the Progress of the
Parlaments Forces in Scotland, together with the King's marching into England,
etc.
Truly Honorable!
HAving taken in Brunteland, and the enemy still continuing within their
Trenches at Sterling, it was unanimously concluded a necessary and a quick
work to endeavor the reduction of St Johnstone, which, as I hinted in my last,
is a place of great importance lying in the Center of that part of Scotland,
which is on the other side Forth. The enemy had put in a Regiment of foot into
the Town, not above two hours ere our Van came up, who were boated from the
other side of the water into the Town, which made them very high and
peremptory: but our men having broken down the sluices and let out the water
out of their graff, their courage failed, and the Lord's Day morning last the
Town was surrendered to us upon Brunteland Articles: My Lord went in and viewed
it: and we find the place every way answering our thoughts of it: and that
night the whole Army marched back toward Brunteland, eleven miles: On Monday
last we came to Brunteland, and that night shipped over our whole foot to Leith,
and some of our Horse: and the residue were transporting with all expedition.
Lieutenant General Munk is left in Scotland, Commander in chief, and marched
from us directly to Sterling the same day we came to Brunteland: and we are
confident he was the next day possessed of Sterling Town, and doubt not of the
hearing a speedy account of the Castle. We have left with him of Foot and
Horse a field-force of 7 or 8000. Col. Overton is made Governor of St
Johnstouns: he has with him Colonel Daniel's Regiment of Foot, Col. Aldridges
Regiment of Horse, and 500 Dragoons. Tuesdaie in the Afternoon, Major General
Lambert, with about 3000 Horse and Dragoons, marched toward the Enemy, who will
with all expedition, get into the Rear of them: and my Lord has now sent me
with Orders to Maj. Genesis Harrison to get into the Van of them, to stop them
what he can, and do what further he think's fit in the Counties as he
marche's: I am to keep with him till the Army com up. Both Maj. Generals will
march night and day till they get to them: Yesterday morning, my Lord General,
with the Foot, and Residue of the Horse, marched from Leith: he will eas
himself so of his Train as may expedite his Marches: he bring's out of
Scotland 8 Regiments of Horse, besides Dragoons; and 8 or 9 (if Col. West com
with him) Regiments of Foot. Truly, the Lord has don wonderfully for his poor
servants, with you, and here, beyond what we could have thought; and now the
whole hopes of the Enemy is cooped up in this party that marched by Carlisle
yesterdaie. Thursday the Enemy removed from Sterling: Friday we had
intelligence thereof, but however we resolved to go on with our work: after
that their marches were in such traverses, that we knew not well what to
conjecture: however we resolved after them, as soon as the business of St
Johnstouns was over. After their march, they first resolved Middleton should
return to keep the North: then that Robert Montgomery (who was on the other
side Forth) should go: and this a little put us to thoughts what they will do:
but, in conclusion, Robert Mountgomery and all were ordered to follow them.
They are not above 11000 men at most; they have very little provision with
them; through all the country in Scotland we find their run-awaies: in a
word, nothing was left them but a desperate cure, or a desperate ruin, with my
heart is filled in the confident exspectation of. I suppose rational men will
put a wide difference between their condition now, and it 2 or 3 months ago,
when their Army was in it is strength, Fife, and all the side of that side the
water theirs. They have not left in Scotland the face of any Authority or
force, or Town garrisoned. The Lord keep his servants humble, but believing
himself, and let every one bestirr himself, and play the man (or rather the
Christian) in this hour. I must beg pardon for not writing to any others,
being weary, and the messenger taking horse. My humble and hearty remembrance
to Mr Roe.

I am, Sir! Your Honor's most cordial and humble Servant, G. Downing.
Newcastle, Aug. 7. 1651. Postscript.
The generality of the Scots were against the present attempt for England; but
the KING told them, he would march with such as would follow him: he look's
very despondingly, but must adventure all.



A Letter from the Council of State to the Lord Major of London.
My Lord!
THis letter coming to the Council by a Messenger Express, showing the progress
that our forces have made in Scotland; so, as the Scottish Army, which would
never be brought to fight in their own Country, have now left the same for
lost; and are marched into England. By it you will also see in what posture our
forces are in order to them; you will find St Iohnstones surrendered to us, and
Sterling town before this time in our possession: by all which we hope that
whole work is near a good and happy end; which we thought good to give your
Lordship notice of; and desire you it may be published in the Congregation
where your Lordship is, that the people might be thereby stirred up to give
God thanks for the great progress made in Scotland, and for the hopeful
Condition our affairs are in for a speedy and good issue.

White Hall August the 10. 1651. Signed etc.


