POEMS, BY That most Famous Wit, WILLIAM DRUMMOND OF HAWTHORNDEN.

Aetas prima canit
Veneris postrema Triumphos.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible near Pye-Corner,
1656.

Guilelmus Drummond de Havthornden*


To the Right Honorable, Sir John Scot of Scots-Tarvet, Knight, Late Director
of his Majesty's Chancellary, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Prvy Council, Sessions, and Exchequer.
Sir,
HAving received these ingenious Poems from your Honor, I could not more fitly
have presented them to any than to your self, it being most just that the
noblest Wit of Scotland should fly to the patronage of the greatest Mecoenas of
Wit and Learning that the Nation affords, be pleased therefore to accept the
humble endeavors to serve you of

T. R.

To the Reader.
Ingenious Reader,
TO say that these Poems are the effects of a Genius, the most polite and
verdant that ever the Scottish Nation produced, although it be a commendation
not to be rejected, (for it is well known, that that Country has afforded many
rare and admirable wits) yet it is not the highest that may be given him; for
should I affirm that neither Tasso, nor Guarini, nor any of the most neat and
refined spirits of Italy, nor even the choicest of our English Poets, can
challenge to themselves any advantages above him, it could not be judged any
attribute superior to what he deserves; nor shall I think it any arrogance to
maintain, that among all the several fancies, that in these times have
exercised the most nice and curious judgments, there has not come forth any
thing that deserves to be welcomed into the world with greater estimation and
applause: And though he has not had the fortune to be so generally famed
abroad, as many others, perhaps, of less esteem, yet this is a consideration
that cannot at all diminish, but rather advance his credit; For by breaking
forth of obscurity he will attract the higher admiration, and like the Sun
emerging from a Cloud appear at length with so much the more forcible Rays.
Had there been nothing extant of him but his History of Scotland, consider but
the Language, how florid and ornate it is; consider the order, and the prudent
conduct of his Story, and you will rank him in the number of the best writers,
and compare him even with Thuanus himself. Neither is he less happy in his
Verse than Prose: for here ar^ all those graces met together that conduce any
thing toward the making up of a complete and perfect Poet, a decent and
becoming Majesty, a brave and admirable height, and a wit so flowing, that
Jove himself never drank Nectar that sparkled with a more spritly luster;
should I dwell any longer (ingenuous Reader) upon the commendation of this
incomparable Author, I should injure, thee by forestalling the freedom of thy
own judgment, and him by attempting a vain design, since there is nothing
can so well set him forth as his own works; besides the loss of time which is
but trifled away so long as thou art detained from perusing the Poems
themselves.

E. P.

Upon the incomparable Poems of Mr William Drummond.
TO praise these Poems well, there does require
The selfsame spirit, and that sacred fire
That first inspired them; yet I cannot choose
But pay an admiration to a Muse
That sings such handsome things; never brake forth,
From Climes so near the Bear, so bright a worth;
And I believe the Caledonian Bowers
Are full as pleasant, and as rich in flowers
As Tempe e're was famed, since they have nourished
A wit the most sublime that ever flourished;
There Is nothing cold, or frozen, here contained,
Nothing that is harsh, unpolished, or constrained,
But such an ardour as creates the spring,
And throws a cheerfulness on every thing;
Such a sweet calmnesse runs through every verse
As shows how he delighted to converse
With silence, and his Muse, among those shades
Which care, nor busy tumult, e're invades;
There would he often, the adventures of his loves
Relate unto the Fountains, and the groves,
In such a strain as Laura had admired
Her Petrarch more, had he been so inspired.
Some, Phoebus gives, a smooth and streaming vein,
A great and happy fancy some attain,
Others unto a soaring height he lifts;
But here he has so crowded all his gifts,
As if he had designed in one to try,
To what a pitch he could bring Poetry;
For every grace should he receive a Crown,
There were not Bays enough in Helicon:
Fame courts his Verse, and with immortal wings
Hovers about his Monument, and brings
A deathlesse trophy to his memory;
Who, for such honor, would not wish to dye?
Never could any times afford a Story
Of one so matched unto great Sidney's glory;
Or Fame so well divided, as between
Penshurst's renowned shades, and Hawthornden.
Edw:. Phillips.

Joanni Scoto, Scoto-Tarvatio Equiti praelustri de Literatura optime merito.
TArvati immensos recolens labores
Jure queis parts potiore primas
Asseram; haud vanis dubie Laborant
Pectora cu^is;
Sive quod divae Cathedra renidens
Ultimae, terras habitantis annos,
Ter quater ternos veluti sacer fons
Juris, and aequi;
Sive quod Caecos patriae recessus
Ut stilo pingat mage qui polito
Tesqua and incultas salebras recenti
Inserat Orbi?
Sive quod vates patriae minores
(Forte noscendi serius nec ipsis
Civibus) toto celebrentur Orb
Vindice Scoto?
Blandiores qu^d memorem Camaenas,
Oris antiqua prope sede pulsas,
Sedibus priscis prope restitutas,
Auspice Scoto?
Orphanos sanis quod and instruendos
Artibus curae tibi, censibus, quos
Ambitu pravo repulere Musis
Gymnasiarchae.
Sit licet rarum putatis horum
Quodlibet curae specimen, fatiscunt
Dum frui postliminio recordor,
Te duce fratrem;
Nempe sic olim studio and Labor
Torvus Alcides stygiis ab undis
Reddidit terris domito Trifauci
Thesea monstro.
Sic eat; clari haec monumenta vatis,
Nesciant aevi imperium severi
Regia; ast spernant Phlege^onta, and Orci
Jura superbi.
D. F.

De Gulielmo Drummondo.
QUaesivit Latio Buchananus carmine Laudem,
Et patrios dura respuit aure modos
Cum possit Latiis Buchananum vincere Musis
Drummondus, patrio maluit ore loqui,
Major ut est, primas hinc defert Scotia, vates,
Vix inter Latios, ille secundus erat.
To W. D.
SOme will not leave that Trust to Friend, nor Heir,
But their own Winding Sheet themselves prepare;
Fearing, perhaps some courser Cloth might shroud
The worms descended from their noble Blood:
And shall not thou (that justlier may suspect
Far courser stuff, in such a dull neglect
Of all the Arts, and dearth of Poetry)
Compose before hand thine own Elegy?
Who but thy self is capable to write
A Verse, or, if they can, to fashion it
Unto thy Praises? None can draw a Line
Of thy perfections, but a hand divine.
If thou will needs impose this Task on us,
(A greater Work than best Wits can discuss)
We will but only so far Emblem Thee,
As in a circle, men, the Deity.
A wreath of Bays we'll lay upon thy Hearse;
For that shall speak Thee better than our Verse:
That art in number of those Things, whose end,
Nor whose beginning we can comprehend.
A Star, which did the other Day appear,
T'enlighten up our dark'ned Hemispheare:
Nor can we tell nor how, nor whence it came,
Yet feel the heat of thy admired flame.
'Twas thou that thawed our North, 'twas thou did clear
The eternal mists which had beset us here,
Till by thy golden Beams and powerful Ray
Thou chased hence Darkness, and brought out the Day.
But as the Sun, though he bestow all Light
On us, yet hinders by the same our sight
To gaze on him; So thou, though thou dispense
Far more on us by thy bright influence,
Yet such is thy transcendent brightness, we
Thereby are dazzled, and cannot reach thee;
Then art thou less'ned, should we bound thy Praise
TO our narrow dull conceit, which cannot raise
Themselves beyond a vulgar Theme, nor fly
A pitch like unto thine in Poesy;
Yet (as the greatest Kings have sometimes dain'd
The smallest Presents from a poor man's hand;
When pure devotion gave them) it may be
Your Genius will accept a mite from me:
It speaks my Love, although it reach not you;
And you are praised, when I would so do.
John Spotswood.

To William Drummond of Hawthornden.
I Never rested on the Muses bed,
Nor dipped my Quill in the Thessalian Fountain,
My rustic Muse was rudely fostered,
And flies too low to reach the double mountain.
Then do not sparks with your bright Suns compare,
Perfection in a Woman's work is rare;
From an untroubled mind should Verses flow;
My discontents makes mine too muddy show;
And hoarse encumbrances of household care
Where these remain, the Muses never repair.
If thou do extol her Hair,
Or her Ivory Forehead fair,
Or those Stars whose bright reflection
Thrals thy heart in sweet subjection:
Or when to display thou seeks
The snow-mixt Roses on her Cheeks,
Or those Rubies soft and sweet,
Over those pretty Rows that meet.
The Chian Painter as ashamed
Hides his Picture so far famed;
And the Queen he carved it by.
With a blush her face does dye,
Since those Lines do limne a Creature
That so far surpast her Feature.
When thou show how fairest Flora
Prankt with pride the banks of Ora,
So thy Verse her streams does honor,
Strangers grow enamoured on her,
All the Swans that swim in Po
Would their native brooks forgo,
And as loathing Phoebus beams,
Long to bath in cooler streamos.
Tree-turn'd Daphne would be seen
In her Groves to flourish green,
And her Boughs would gladly spare
To frame a garland for thy hair,
That fairest Nymphs with finest fingers
May thee crown the best of singers.
But when thy Muse dissolved in showers,
Wailes that peerlesse Prince of ours,
Cropped by too untimely Fate,
Her mourning does exasperate
Senseless things to see thee moan,
Stones do weep, and Trees do groan,
Birds in air, Fishes in flood,
Beasts in field forsake their food;
The Nymphs forgoing all their Bowers
Tear their Chaplets decked with Flowers;
Sol himself with misty vapor
Hides from earth his glorious Tapor,
And as moved to hear thee plain
Shows his grief in showers of rain.
Mary Oxlie of Morpet.

POEMS.
The First Part.
IN my first Prime, when childish Humors fed
My wanton Wit, ere I did know the Bliss
Lies in a loving Eye, or amorous Kiss,
Or with what Sighs a Lover warmes his Bed;
By the sweet Thespian Sisters Error led,
I had more mind to read, than loved to write,
And so to praise a perfect Red and White;
But [God wote] knew not what was in my Head,
Love smiled to see me take so great Delight,
To turn those Antiques of the Age of Gold,
And that I might more Mysteries behold,
He set so fair a Volume to my Sight,
That I Ephemerides laid aside,
Glad on this blushing Book my Death to read*
SON.
I Know that all beneath the Moon decaies,
And what by Mortals in this World is brought,
In Times great Periods shall return to naught;
That fairest States have fatal Nights and Days.
I know that all the Muses heavenly Lays,
With Toil of Spright, which are so dearly bought,
As idle sounds, of few, or none are sought,
That there is nothing lighter than vain Praise.
I know frail Beauty like the purple Flower,
To which one Morn often Birth and Death affords,
That Love a jarring is of Minds Accords,
Where Sense and Will bring under Reasons Power:
Know what I list, this all can not me move,
But that ( alas) I both must write, and love.
SON.
YE who so curiously do paint your Thoughts,
Enlightening every Line in such a guise,
That they seem rather to have fallen from Skies,
Than of a humane Hand by mortal Draughts.
In one Part Sorrow so tormented lies,
As if his Life at every Sigh would part;
Love Here blindfolded stands with Bow and Dart,
^here Hope looks pale, Despair with flaming Eyes:
Of my rude Pensill look not for such Art,
My Wit I find too little to devise
So high Conceptions to express my smart,
And some say Love is faign'd that is too too wise.
These troubled Words and Lines-confus'd you find,
Are like unto their Model, my sick Mind.
SON.
Aye me, and I am now the Man whose M^se
In happier Times was wont to laugh at Love,
And those who suff'red that blind Boy abuse
The noble Gifts were given them from above.
What Metamorphose strange is this I prove?
My self now scarce I find my self to be,
And think no Fable Circes Tyranny,
And all the Tales are told of changed Jove;
Virtue has taught with her Philosophy
My mind unto a better Course to move;
Reason may chide her full, and often reprove
Affections Power, but what is that to me?
Who ever think, and never think on Ought
But that bright Cherubine which thra^ls my Thought.
SON.
HOw that vaste Heaven intitl'd First is rol'd,
If any glancing Towers beyond it be,
And People living in Eternity,
Or Essence pure that does this All uphold:
What motion have those fixed Sparks of Gold,
The wandering Carbuncles which shine from high,
By Sprights, or Bodies crosse-waies in the Sky,
If they be turned, and mortal Things behold.
How Sun posts Heaven about, how Nights pale Queen*
With borrowed Beams looks on this hanging Round,
What cause fair Iris has, and Monsters seen
In Aires large Fields of light, and Seas profound,
Did hold my wandering Thoughts; when thy sweet Eye
Bade me leave all, and only think on Thee.
SON.
Fair is my Yoke, though grievous be my Pains,
Sweet are my Wounds, although they deeply smart,
My Bit is Gold, though shortened be the Reins,
My Bondage brave, though I may not depart,
Although I burn, the Fire which does impart
Those Flames, so sweet reviving Force contains,
That like Arabia's Bird my wasted Heart
Made quick by Death, more lively still remains.
I joy though often my waking Eyes spend Tears,
I never want Delight, even when I groan,
Best companied when most I am alone,
A Heaven of Hopes I have midst Hells of Fears:
Thus every way Contentment strange I find,
But most in Her rare Beauty, my rare Mind.
SON.
VAunt not, fair Heavens, of your two glorious Lights,
Which though ^ost bright, yet see not when they shine,
And shining, cannot show their Beams divine
Both in one Place, but part by Days and Nights;
Earth vaunt not of those Treasures ye enshrine,
Held only dear, because hid from our Sights,
Your pure and burnished Gold, your Diamonds fine,
Snow-passing Ivory that the Eye delights.
Nor Seas of those dear Wares are in you found
Vaunt not, rich Pearl, red Corrall which do stir
A fond desire in Fools to plunge your Ground;
These all more fair are to be had in Her:
Pearl, Ivory, Corrall, Diamond, Suns, Gold,
Teeth, Neck, Lips, Heart, Eyes, Hair are to behold.
SON.
WHen Nature now had wonderfully wrought
All Auristellas Parts, except her Eyes,
To make those Twins two Lamps in Beauties Skies,
She Counsel of her Starry Se^a^e sought.
Mars and Apollo first did her advise,
To wrap in Color Black, those Comets bright,
That Love him so might soberly disguise,
And unperceived Wound at every Sight.
Chaste Phoebe spoke for purest azure dies;
But Jove and Venus green about the Light,
To frame thought best, as bringing most Delight,
That to pined Hearts Hope might for aye arise:
Nature [all said] a Paradise of green
There placed, to make all love which have them seen.
SON.
NOw while the Night her ^able Veil has spread,
And silently her resty Coach does roll,
Rowsing with Her from Tethis azure Bed,
Those starry Nymphs which dance about the Pole,
While Cynthia in purest Cipres cled,
The La^mian Shepherd in a ^rance descries,
And looking pale from height of all the Skies,
She dies her Beauties in a blushing Red,
While Sleep (in Triumph) closed has all Eyes,
And Birds, and Beasts a Silence sweet do keep,
And Proteus monstrous People in the Deep,
The Winds and Waves (hushed up) to rest entise,
I wake, I turn, I weep oppressed with Pain,
Perplexed in the Meanders of my Brain.
SON.
SLeep, Silence Child, sweet Father of soft Rest,
Prince whose Approach Peace to all Mortals brings,
Indifferent Host to Shepherds and to Kings,
Sole Comforter of Minds which are oppressed.
Lo, by thy Charming Rod all breathing Things
Lie slumbring, with Forgetfulness possessed,
And yet over me to spread thy drowsy Wings
Thou spar'st (alas) who cannot be thy Guest.
Since I am thine, O come, but with that Face
To inward Light which thou art wont to show*
With fained Solace ease a true felt Woe;
Or if deaf God thou do deny that Grace,
Come as thou will, and what thou will bequeath,
I long to kiss the Image of my Death.
SON.
Fair Moon who with thy cold and silver Shine,
Makes sweet the Horror of the dreadful Night,
Delighting the weak Eye with smiles divine,
Which Phoebus dazels with his too much Light,
Bright Queen of the first Heaven, if in thy Shrine
By turning often, and Heavens eternal Might,
Thou have not yet that once sweet Fire of thine
Endemion, forgot, and Lovers Plight:
If Cause like thine may Pity breed in thee,
And Pity somewhat else to it obtain,
Since thou have Power of Dreams as well as He
That holds the golden Rod, and Moral Chain:
Now while She sleeps in doleful Guise her Show,
These Tears, and the black Map of all my Woe.
SON.
Lamp of Heavens Crystal Hall that brings the Hours,
Eye-dazeler, who makes the ugly Night
At thy Approach fly to her slumbry Bowres,
And fills the World with Wonder and Delight.
Life of all lives, Death-giver by thy flight
To the south Pole from these six Signs of ours,
Goldsmiths of all the Stars, with Silver bright
Who Moon enamells, Apelles of the Flowers.
Ah from those watery Plains thy golden Head
Raise up, and bring the so long lingering Morn,
A Grave, nay Hell, I find become this Bed,
This Bed so grievously where I am torn:
But woe is me though thou now brought the Day,
Day shall but serve more Sorrows to display.
SONG.
IT was the time when to our Northern Pole
The brightest Lamp of Heaven begins to roll,
When Earth more wanton in new Robes appears,
And scorning Skies her Flowers in Rain-bows bears,
On which the Air moist Diamonds does bequeath,
Which quake to feel the kissing Zephires breath:
When Birds from shady Groves their Love forth warble,
And Sea-like Heaven, Heaven looks like smoothest Marble,
When I in simple course free from all Cares,
Far from the muddy Worlds inslaving snares.
By Oras flowery Banks alone did wander:
Ora that sports her like to old Meander,
A Flood more worthy Fame and lasting praise
Then that so high which Phaetons fall did raise:
By whose pure moving Glass the Milke-white Lillies
Do dress their tresses and the Daffad^llies.
Where Ora with a Wood is crowned about
And (seems) forgets the way how to come out,
A place there is, where a delicious Fountain
Springs from the swelling breast of a proud Mountain,
Whose falling Streams the quiet Cavernes wound,
And make the Echoes shrill resound that sound.
The Laur^ll there the shing Channel graces,
The Palm her Love with long-stretch'd Arms embraces,
The Poplar spreads her Branches to the Sky,
And hides from sight that azure Canopy.
The Streams the Trees, the Trees their leaves still nourish,
That Place grave Winter finds ^ot without flourish.
If living Eyes Elysian fields could see
This little Arden might Elysium be.
Often did Diana there her self repose,
And Ma^s the Acidalia^ Queen enclose.
The Nymphs often here their baskets bring with Flowers,
And Anadems weave for their Paramours,
The Satyrs in those shades are heard to languish,
And make the Shepherds partners of their anguish,
The Shepherds who in Barks of tender Trees
Do grave their Loves, Disdaines, and Jealousies:
Which Phillis when there by Her Flocks she feeds,
With Pity now, anon, with laughter reads.
Near to this place when Sun in midst of Day
In highest top of Heaven his Coach did stay,
And (as advising) on his Career glanced
As all along, that morn he had advanced
His panting Steeds along those Fields of light,
Most princely looking from that glorious height:
When most the Grasshoppers are heard in Meadows,
And loftiest Pines or small, or have no shadows:
It was my hap, O woeful hap! to bide
Where thickest shades me from all Rays did hide,
In a fair Arbor, 'twas some Sylvans Chamber,
Whose Seeling spread was with the Locks of Amber
Of new bloomed Sicamors, Floor wrought with Flowers,
More sweet and rich than those in Princes Bowers.
Here Adon blush't, and Clitia all amazed
Looked pale, with Him who in the Fountain gazed,
The Amaranthus smyl'd, and that sweet Boy
Which sometime was the God of Delos joy:
The brave Carnation, speckled Pinke here shined,
The Uiolet her fainting Head declined
Beneath a sleepy Chasbow, all of Gold
The Marigold her leaves did here unfold.
Now while that ravished with delight and wonder,
Half in a trance I lay those Arches under,
The season, silence, place, began to entise,
Eyes drowsy lids to bring Night on their Skies,
Which softly having stolen themselves together
(Like evening Clouds) me placed I wot not whether.
As Cowards leave the Fort which they should keep,
My senses one by one gave place to Sleep,
Who followed with a troop of golden Slumbers
Thrust from my quiet Brain all base encumbers,
And thrice me touching with his Rod of Gold,
A Heaven of Visions in my Temples rolled,
To countervaile those Pleasures were bereft me,
Thus in his silent Prison closed he left me.
Me thought through all the neighbor Woods a noise
Of Quiristers, more sweet than Lute or voice,
(For those harmonious sounds to Jove are given
By the swift touches of the nine-string'd Heaven,
Such aires, and nothing else) did wound mine Ear,
No Soul but would become all Ear to hear:
And whilst I listening lay, O lovely wonder!
I saw a pleasant Myrtle cleave asunder;
A Myrtle great with birth, from whose rent womb
Three naked Nymphs more white than Snow forth come.
For Nymphs they seemed, about their heavenly faces
In Waves of Gold floted their curling Tresses,
About their arms, their Arms more white than milk,
They blushing Armlets wore of crimson Silk.
The Goddesses were such that by Scamander,
Appeared to the Phrygian Alexander:
Aglaia and her Sisters such perchance
Be when about some sacred Spring they dance.
But scarce the Grove their naked Beauties graced,
And on the Verdure had each other traced,
When to the Flood they ran, the Flood in Robes
Of curling Crystal their breasts Ivory Globes
Did all about incircle, yet took pleasure
To show white Snows throughout her liquid Azure.
Look how Prometheus Man when heavenly fire
First gave him Breath, Days Brandon did admire,
And wondered at this Worlds Amphitheater:
So gazed I on those new guests of the Water.
All three were fair, yet one excelled as far
The rest as Phoebus does the Cyprian Star,
Or Diamonds, small Gems, or Gems do other,
Or Pearls that shining shell is called their Mother.
Her Hair more bright than are the Mornings Beams
Hung in a golden shower above the Streams,
And dangling sought her forehead for to cover,
Which seen did straight a Sky of Milk discover,
With two fair Brows, Loves Bows which never bend
But that a golden Arrow forth they send.
Beneath the which two burning Planets glancing
Flasht flames of Love, for Love there still is dancing.
Her either Cheek resembled blushing Morn,
Or Roses Gueles in field of Lillies borne*
'Twixt which an Ivory Wall so fair is rais^d,
That it is but abased when it is praised.
Her Lips like Rows of Corrall soft did swell,
And the one like the other only does excel:
The Tyrian Fish looks pale, pale look the Roses,
The Rubies pale, when mouth sweet Cherry closes.
Her Chin like silver Phoebe did appear
Dark in the midst to make the rest more clear:
Her Neck seemed framed by curious Phidias Master,
Most smooth, most white, a piece of Alabaster.
Two foaming Billows flowed upon her breast,
Which did their tops with Corrall red encrest:
There all about as Brooks them sport at leisure,
With Circling Branches veins did swell in azure:
Within those crookes are only found those Isles
Which Fortunate the dreaming old World styles.
The rest the Streams did hide, but as a Lilly
Sunk in a Christals fair transparent Belly.
I who yet humane weakness did not know,
(For yet I had not felt that Archers Bow,
Nor could I think that from the coldest Water
The w^nged Yongling burning Flames could scatter)
On every part my vagabonding sight
Did cast, and drown mine Eyes in sweet Delight,
O wondrous thing (said I) that Beauty is named!
Now I perceive I heretofore have dreamed,
And never found in all my flying Days
Joy unto this, which only merits praise.
My pleasures have been pains, my comforts crosses,
My treasure poverty, my gains but losses.
O precious sight! which none does else descry
Except the burning Sun, and quivering I.
And yet O deare-bought Sight! O would for ever
I might enjoy you, or had joy'd you never!
O happy Flood! if so ye might abide,
Yet ever glory of this Moments Pride,
Adjure your Rillets all for to behold Her,
And in their Crystal Arms to come and fold Her;
And since ye may not long this Bless embrace,
Draw thousand Pourtraits of Her on your Face,
Pourtraits which in my Heart be more apparent,
If like to yours my Breast but were transparent.
O that I were while She does in you play,
A Daulphine to transport Her to the Sea!
To none of all those Gods I would Her render,
From Thule to Inde though I should with Her wander.
Oh! what is this? the more I fix mine Eye,
Mine Eye the more new Wonders does epsy,
The more I spy, the more in uncouth fashion
My Soul is ravished in a pleasant passion.
But look not Eyes, (as more I would have said)
A sound of rattling Wheels me all dismayed,
And with the sound forth from the trembling Bushes,
With storme-like course a sumptuous Chariot rushes,
A Chariot all of Gold, the Wheels were Gold,
The Nails and Axel Gold on which it rolled:
The upmost part a Scarlet Veil did cover,
More rich than Danaes Lap spread with her Lover.
In midst of it in a triumphing Chair,
A Lady sat miraculously fair,
Whose pensive Countenance, and looks of Honor,
Do more allure the mind that thinks on Her,
Than the most wanton Face, and amorous Eyes,
That Amathus or flowery Paphos sees,
A Crew of Virgins made a Ring about Her,
The Diamond she they seem the Gold without Her.
Such Thetis is when to the Billows rore
With Mermaids nice she danceth on the Shore:
So in a sable Night the Suns bright Sister
Among the lesser twinkling Lights does glister
Fair Yoakes of Ermelines whose Color pass
The whitest Snows on aged Grampius Face,
More swift than Venus Birds this Chariot guided
To the astonished Bank, where as it bided:
But long it did not bide, when poor those Streams
Aye me it made, transporting those rich Gemmes,
And by that Burden lighter, swiftly drived
Till (as me thought) it at a Tower arrived:
Upon a Rock of Crystal shining clear
With Diamonds wrought this Castle did appear,
Who rising spires of Gold so high them reared
That Atlas like it seemed the Heaven they beared.
Amidst which Hights on Arches did arise
(Arches which guilt Flames brandish to the Skies)
Of sparking Topaces, Proud, Gorgeous, Ample,
(Like to a little Heaven) a sacred Temple.
The Walls no Windows have, nay all the Wall
Is but one Window, Night there does not fall
More when the Sun to Western Worlds declineth,
Than in our Zenith when at Noone He shines.
Two flaming Hills the passage strait defend
Which to this radiant Building does ascend,
Upon whose Arching tops on a Pilastre
A Port stands open, raised in Loves Disastre
For none that narrow Bridge and gate can pass,
Who have their Faces seen in Venus Glass.
If those within, but to come forth do venture,
That stately Place again they never enter.
The Precinct's strengthened with a Ditch of Fears,
In which does swell a Lake of Inky Tears
Of madding Lovers, who abide their moaning,
And thicken even the Air with pitious groaning.
This Hold to brave the Skies the Destines framed,
And then the Fort of Chastity is named.
The Queen of the third Heaven once to appall it,
The God of Thrace Here brought who could not thrall it;
For which he vowed never Arms more to put on,
And on Riphean Hills was heard to groan.
Here Psyches Lover hurles his Darts at randon,
Which all for naught him serve, as does his Brandon.
What grievous Agony did invade my Mind?
When in that Place my Hope I saw confined,
Where with high-towring Thoughts I only reached her,
Which did burn up their Wings when they approacht her.
Me thought I set me by a Cypress shade,
And Night and Day the Hyacinthe there read:
And that bewailing Nightingales did borrow
Plaints of my Plaint, and sorrows of my Sorrow.
My food was Wormwood, mine own Tears my drink,
My rest, on Death and sad Mishaps to think.
And for such Thoughts to have my Heart enlarged,
And ease mine Eyes with brinie Tribute charged,
Over a Brook I laid my pining Face:
But then the Brook as grieved at my Disgrace,
A Face Me showed so pined, sad, over-clouded,
That at the Sight afray'd mine Eyes them shrouded.
This is the guerdon Love, this is the Game,
In end which to thy Servants does remain.
More would I say; when Fear made Sleep to leave me,
And of those fatal Shadows did bereave me.
But ah alas! instead to dream of Love,
And Woes, I now them in effect did prove:
For what into my troubled Brain was painted,
Awaked I found that Time and Place presented.
SONNETS.
AH burning Thoughts now let me take some Rest,
And your tumultuous Broils a while appease:
Is It not enough, Stars, Fortune, Love molest
Me all at once, but ye must too displease?
Let Hope (though false) yet lodge within my breast,
My high Attempt (though dangerous) yet praise:
What though I trace not right Heavens steppy ways,
It does suffice my Fall shall make me blessed.
I do not dote on Days, I fear not Death,
So that my Life be good, I wished not long;
Let me Renowned live from the Worldly Throng,
And when Heaven lists, recall this borrowed Breath.
Men but like Visions are, Time all does claim,
He lives who dies to win a lasting Name.
SON.
THat learned Grecian who did so excel
In Knowledge passing Sense, that he is named
Of all the after Worlds Divine, does tell
That all the Time when first our Souls are framed,
Ere in these Mansions blind they come to dwell,
They live bright Rays of that Eternal light,
And others see, know, love, in Heavens great height,
Not toyld with ought to Reason do rebel.
It is most true, for straight at the first sight
My Mind me told that in some other place
It elsewhere saw the Idea of that face,
And loved a love of Heavenly pure delight.
What wonder now I feel so fair a flame,
Since I her loved ere on this Earth She came?
SON.
NOr Arne, nor Mincius, nor stately Tiber,
Sebethus, nor the Flood into whose streams
He fell who burnt the world with borrowed beams,
Gold-rolling Tagus, Munda, famous Iber,
Sorgue, Rosne, Loire, Garron, nor proud-banked Sein^,
Peneus, Phasis Xanthus, humble Ladon,
Nor She whose Nymphs excel her loved Adon
Fair Tamesis, nor Ister large, nor Rheine,
Euphrates, Tigr^s, Indus, Hermus, Gange,
Pearly Hydaspes, Serpent-like Meander,
The Flood which robbed Hero of Leander,
Nile that far far his hidden Head does range,
Have ever had so rare a cause of praise,
As Ora where this Northern Phoenix stays.
SON.
TO hear my plaints fair River Christalline
Thou in a silent slumber seems to stay,
Delicious Flowers Lilly and Columbine,
Ye bow your Heads when I my Woes display.
Forests in you the Myrtle, Palm and Bay,
Have had compassion listening to my groans,
The Winds with sighs have solemnized my moanes
Among leaves, which whispered what they could not say,
The Caves, the Rocks, the Hills, the Sylvans Thrones,
(As if even pity did in them appear,)
Have at my sorrow rent their ruthlesse stones,
Each thing I find has sense except my Dear,
Who does not think I love, or will not know
My Grief, perchance delighting in my woe.
SON.
SWeet Brook, in whose clear Crystal I my eyes
Have often seen great in labor of their tears,
Enameled Bank whose shining gravel bears
These sad Characters of my miseries;
High Woods, whose mounting tops menace the Spears,
Wild Citizens, Amphions of the Trees,
You gloomy Groves at hottest Noons which freeze,
Elysian shades which Phoebus never cleares;
Vaste solitary Mountains, pleasant Plains,
Embroydred Meads that Ocean-waies you reach;
Hills, Dales, Springs, All whom my sad cry constraines
To take part of my plaints, and learn woes speech,
Will that remorselesse fair e're pity show?
Of grace now answer if ye ought know: No.
SON.
WIth flaming Horns the Bull now brings the year,
Melt do the Mountains rouling floods of Snow,
The silver Rivers in smooth Channels flow,
The Late-bare Woods green Anadeams do wear.
The Nightingall forgetting Winters woe,
Calls up the lazy Morn her notes to hear,
Spread are those Flowers which names of Princes bear,
Some red, some azure, white, and golden grow.
Here lowes a Heifer, there be-wailing strayes
A harmless Lamb, not far a Stag rebounds;
The Shepherds sing to grazing flocks sweet Lays,
And all about the Ecchoing Air resounds.
Hills, Dales, Woods, Floods, and every thing does change,
But She in rigor, I in Love am strange.
SON.
THat I so slenderly set forth my Mind,
Writing I wot not what in ragged Rimes,
Orecharg'd with brass in these so golden Times
When other^ tower so high, am left behind:
I crave not Phoebus leave his sacred Cell
To bind my Brows with fresh Aonian Baies;
But leave't to those who tuning Sweetest Lays
By Tempe sit, or Aganippes Well;
Nor yet to Venus Tree do I aspire,
Since She for whom I might affect that praise,
My best attempts with cruel words gainsaies,
And I seek not that others me admire.
Of weeping Myrrh the Crown is which I crave,
With a sad Cypress to adorn my Grave.
MADRIGALL.
WHen as She smiles I find
More light before mine Eyes,
Than when the Sun from Inde
Brings to our World a flowery Paradise:
But when She gently weeps,
And poures forth pearly showers,
On cheeks fair blushing flowers,
A sweet melancholy my senses keeps.
Both feed so my disease,
So much both do me please,
That often I doubt, which more my heart does burn,
Love to behold her smile, or Pity mourn.
SON.
MY Tears may well Numidian Lions tame,
And Pity breed into the hardest heart
That ever Pyrrha did to Maid impart,
When She them first of blushing Rocks did frame.
Ah Eyes which only serve to wail my smart,
How long will you my inward Woes proclaim,
May 't not suffice you bear a weeping Part
All Night, at day but you must do the same?
Cease idle Sighs to spend your Storms in vain,
And these sweet silent thickets to molest,
Contain you in the Prison of my Breast,
You do not ease but aggravate my Pain;
Or if burst forth you must, that Tempest move
In sight of her whom I so dearly love.
SON.
YOu restless Seas appease your roaring Waves,
And you who raise huge Mountains in that Plain
Aires Trumpeters, your hideous sounds contain,
And listen to the plaints my grief does cause.
Eternal Lights! though adamantine Laws
Of Destinies to move still you ordain,
Turn hither all your Eyes, your Axels pause,
And wonder at the Torments I sustain.
^ad Earth, if thou made dull by my disgrace
Be not as senseless, ask those Powers above
Why they so crossed a Wretch brought on thy Face,
Framed for mishap, the Anachorit of Love,
And bid them (that no more Etnaes may burn)
To Erimanth' or Rhod^pe me turn.
SON.
IF crossed with all mishaps be my poor Life,
If one short day I never spent in mirth,
If my Sp'rit with it self holds lasting strife,
If sorrows death is but new sorrows birth;
If this vain World be but a mournful Stage,
Where slave-borne Man plays to the laughing Stars,
If Youth be tossed with Love, with Weakness Age,
If Knowledge serves to hold our Thoughts in Wars,
If Time can close the hundred Mouths of Fame,
And make what is long since past, like that is to be,
If Virtue only be an Idle Name,
If being borne I was but borne to dye;
Why seek I to prolong these loathsome days?
The fairest Rose in shortest time decaies.
SON.
ALl other Beauties howsoever they shine
In Hairs more bright than is the golden Ore,
Or cheeks more fair than fairest Eglantine,
Or hands like hers that comes the Sun before:
Matched with that Heavenly Hew, and shape divine,
With those dear Stars which my weak thoughts adore,
Look but as shaddows, or if they be more,
It is in this, that they are like to thine.
Who sees those Eyes, their force that does not prove?
Who gazeth on the dimple of that chin,
And finds not Venus Son entrenched therein,
Or has not sense, or knows not what is Love?
To see thee had Narcissus had the grace,
He would have died with wondering on thy Face.
SEXTAIN.
THe Heaven does not contain so many Stars,
Nor levelled lie so many leaves in Woods,
When Autumn and cold Boreas sound their Wars,
So many Waves have not the Ocean Floods,
As my torn Mind has torments all the Night,
And Heart spends Sighs, when Phoebus brings the Light*
Why was I made a Partner of the Light,
Who crossed in birth, by bad aspect of Stars,
Have never since had happy Day nor Night?
Why was not I a liver in the Woods,
Or Citizen of Thetis crystal Floods,
But framed a Man for Love and Fortunes Wars?
I look each Day when Death should end the Wars,
Uncivil Wars 'twixt Sense and Reasons Light:
My Pains I count to Mountains, Meads and Floods,
And of my sorrow Partners make the Stars,
All Desolate I haunt the fearful Woods,
When I should give my self to rest at Night*
With watchful Eyes I never behold the Night
Mother of Peace, but ah to me of Wars,
And Cynthia Queen-like shining through the Woods,
But straight those Lamps come in my thought whose Light
My Judgment dazel'd, passing brightest Stars,
And then my Eyes in-isle themselves with Floods.
Turn to their Springs again first shall the Floods,
Clear shall the Sun the sad and gloomy Night,
To dance about the Pole cease shall the Stars,
The Elements renew their ancient Wars
Shall first, and be deprived of Place and Light,
Ere I find rest in City, Fields, or Woods.
End these my days you Inmates of the Woods,
Take this my Life ye deep and raging Floods,
Sun never rise to clear me with thy Light,
Horror and Darkness keep a lasting Night,
Consume me Care with thy intestine Wars,
And stay your Influence over me bright Stars.
In vain the Stars, the Inhabitants of the Woods,
Care, Horror, Wars I call and raging Floods,
For all have sworn no Night shall dim my Sight.
SON.
O Sacred Blush enpurpling Cheeks, pure skies
With crimson Wings which spread thee like the Morn,
O bashful look sent from those shining eyes,
Which though slid down on Earth does Heaven adorn.
O Tongue in which most lushious Nectar lies,
That can at once both bless and make forlorn,
Dear corrall Lip which Beauty beautifies,
That trembling stood before her words were borne.
And you her Words, Words no, but golden Chains
Which did inslave my ears, ensnare my soul,
Wise Image of her Mind, Mind that contains
A power all Power of Senses for to control:
So sweetly you from Love dissuade do me,
That I love more, if more my Love can be.
SON.
SOund hoarse sad Lute, true witness of my woe,
And strive no more to ease self chosen pain
With soule-enchanting sounds, your accents strain
Unto these tears incessantly which flow.
Sad Treeble weep, and you dull Basses show
Your Masters sorrow in a doleful strain;
Let never joyful Hand upon you go,
Nor Consort keep but when you do complain.
Fly Phoebus Rays, abhor the irksome Light,
Woods solitary shades for thee are best,
Or the black horrors of the blackest Night,
When all the World save Thou and I do rest:
Then sound sad Lute and bear a mourning part,
Thou Hell can move, though not a Woman's Heart.
SON.
IN vain I haunt the cold and Silver Springs,
To quench the Fever burning in my veins,
In vain (Loves pilgrim) Mountains, Da^es and Plains
I overrun, vain help long absence brings.
In vain my Friends your Counsel me constraines
To fly, and place my Thoughts on other things;
Ah like the Bird that fired has her Wings,
The more I move the greater are my pains.
Desire (alas) Desire a Zeuxis new,
From the Orient borrowing Gold, from Western skies
Heavenly Cinabre, sets before my Eyes
In every place, her Hair, sweet look, and Hue:
That fly, run, rest I, all does prove but vain,
My life lies in those Eyes which have me slain.
SON.
SLide soft fair Forth, and make a Crystal Plain,
Cut your white Locks, and on your foamy Face
Let not a wrinkle be, when you embrace
The Boat that Earths Perfections does contain.
Winds wonder, and through wondering hold your pace;
Or if that ye your hearts cannot restrain
From sending sighs, feeling a Lovers Case,
Sigh, and in her fair hair your selves enchaine,
Or take these sighs which absence makes arise
From my oppressed breast, and fill the sails,
Or some sweet breath new brought from Paradise:
The floods do smile, Love over the winds prevails;
And yet huge Waves arise, the cause is this,
The Ocean strives with Forth the Boat to kiss.
SON.
TRust not sweet soul those curled waves of Gold
With gentle Tides that on your Temples flow,
Nor Temples spread with Flakes of Virgin snow,
Nor snow of Cheeks with Tyrian grain enrold.
Trust not those shining Lights which wrought my woe,
When first I did their azure Rays behold,
Nor voice, whose sounds more strange effects do show
Than of the Thracian Harper have been told:
Look to this dying Lilly, fading Rose,
Dark Hyacinthe, of late whose blushing Beams
Made all the neighboring herbs and grass rejoice,
And think how little is 'twixt Life's extremes;
The cruel Tyrant that did kill those Flowers
Shall once, aye me, not spare that Spring of yours.
SON.
IN Minds pure Glass when I my self behold,
And lively see how my best days are spent,
What clouds of care above my head are rold,
What coming ill, which I cannot prevent:
My course begun I wearied do repent,
And would embrace what Reason often has told,
But scarce thus think I, when Love has controld
All the best reasons Reason could invent.
Though sure I know my labors end is grief,
The more I strive that I the more shall pine,
That only death shall be my last relief:
Yet when I think upon that face divine,
Like one with Arrow shot, in laughters place,
Maugre my Heart, I joy in my disgrace.
SON.
Dear Quirister, who from those shadows sends
Ere that the blushing Morn dare show her Light,
Such sad lamenting strains, that Night attends
(Become all Ear) Stars stay to hear thy plight.
If one whose grief even reach of thought transcends,
Who never [not in a Dreame] did taste Delight,
May thee importune who like case pretends,
And seems to joy in woe, in Woes despite.
Tell me (so may thou Fortune milder try,
And long long sing) for what thou thus complains,
Since Winter's gone, and Sun in dapled sky
Enamored smiles on Woods and flowery Plains?
The Bird, as if my questions did her move,
With trembling wings sighed forth I love, I love.
SON.
O Cruel Beauty, sweetness inhumane,
That night and day contends with my desire,
And seeks my hope to kill, not quench my fire,
By Death, not Baulme to ease my pleasant pain.
Though ye my thoughts tread down which would aspire
And bound my bliss, do not alas disdain
That I your matchless worth and grace admire,
And for their cause these torments sharp sustain.
Let great Empedocles vaunt of his death
Found in the midst of those Sicilian flames,
And Phaeton that Heaven him rest of breath,
And Daedals Son who named the Samian streams:
Their haps I not envy, my praise shall be
That the most fair that lives moved me to ^ye.
SON.
THe Hyperborean Hills, Ceraunus Snow,
Or Arimaspus (cruel) first thee bred,
The Caspian Tigers with their milk thee fed.
And Faunes did humane blood on thee bestow.
Fierce Orithyas lover in thy bed
Thee lulled asleep, where he enraged does blow,
Thou did not drink the Floods which here do flow,
But tears, or those by ycie Tanais Head.
Since thou disdaines my love, neglects my grief,
Laughs at my groans, and still affects my death:
Of thee, nor Heaven I Will seek no more relief,
Nor longer entertain this loathsome breath;
But yield unto my Stars, that thou may prove,
What loss thou had in losing such a Love,
SONG.
PHOEBUS arise,
And paint the sable Skies
With azure, white, and red:
Rowse Memmons Mother from her Tythons bed,
That she thy Careere may with Roses spread,
The Nightingales thy coming each where sing,
Make an eternal spring.
Give life to this dark World which l^eth dead.
Spread forth thy golden hair
In larger locks than thou wast wont before,
And Emperour-like decore
With Diadem of Pearl thy Temples fair:
Chase hence the ugly Night
Which serves but to make dear thy glorious Light.
This is that happy Morn,
That day, long-wished day,
Of all my life so dark,
(If cruel Stars have not my ruin sworn,
And Fates my hopes betray)
Which (purely white) deserves
An everlasting Diamond should it mark.
This is the Morn should bring unto this Grove
My Love, to hear, and recompense my love.
Fair King, who all preserves,
But show thy blushing Beams,
And thou two sweeter Eyes
Shall see then those which by Peneus Streams
Did once thy heart surprise:
Nay, Suns which shine as clear
As thou when two thou did to Rome appear.
Now Flora deck thy self in fairest guise,
If that ye Winds would hear
A voice surpassing far Amphions lyre,
Your furious chiding stay,
Let Zephire only breathe,
And with her Tresses play,
Kissing sometimes those purple ports of Death,
The Winds all silent are,
And Phoebus in his chair
Ensaffraning Sea and Air,
Makes vanish every Star:
Night like a drunkard reeles
Beyond the Hills to shun his flaming Wheels.
The Fields with flowers are decked in every hue,
The Clouds with Orient Gold spangle their blew:
Here is the pleasant place,
And nothing wanting is save She alas.
SON.
WHo has not seen into her saffran Bed
The Mornings Goddess mildly her repose,
Or her of whose pure blood first sprang the Rose
Lulled in a slumber by a Myrtle shade?
Who has not seen that sleeping white and red
Makes Phoebe look so pale, which she did close
In that Jonian Hill, to ease her woes,
Which only lives by her dear kisses fed?
Come but and see my Lady sweetly sleep,
The sighing Rubies of those heavenly lips,
The Cupids which breasts golden Apples keep,
Those Eyes which shine in midst of their Eclipse:
And he them all shall see, perhaps and prove
She waking but persuades, now forces Love.
SON.
SEe Cithereas Birds, that milk-white pair
On yonder leavie Myrtle Tree which groan,
And waken with their kisses in the Air
The enamored Zephires murmuring one by one;
If thou but sense had like Pigmalions Stone,
Or had not seen Medusas snaky hair,
Loves lessons thou might learn: and learn sweet fair,
To Summers heat ere that thy Spring be grown.
And if those kissing lovers seem but Cold,
Look how that Elm this Ivy does embrace,
And binds, and claspes with many a wanton fold,
And courting Sleep, o'reshadows all the place;
Nay, seems to say, dear Tree we shall not part,
In sign whereof lo in each leaf a Heart.
SON.
THe Sun is fair when he with crimson Crown,
And flaming Rubies leaves his Eastern bed,
Fair is Thaumantias in her Crystal gown
When clouds engemm'd show azure, green, and red.
To Western Worlds when wearied Day goes down,
And from heavens windows each Star shows her head,
Earths silent daughter, Night, is fair though brown,
Fair is the Moon though in Loves livery cled.
The Spring is fair when it does paint April,
Fair are the Meads, the Woods, the Floods are fair,
Fair looks Ceres with her yellow hair,
And Apples-Queene when Rose-cheekt she does smile.
That Heaven and Earth, and Seas are fair is true,
Yet true that all not please so much as you.
MADRIGALL.
LIke the Idalian Queen
Her hair about her Eyne,
And neck, on breasts ripe Apples to be seen,
At first glance of the Morn
In Cyprus Gardens gathering those farie flowers
Which of her blood were borne,
I saw, but fainting saw my Paramours.
The Graces naked danced about the place,
The Winds and Trees amazed
With silence on her gazed,
The flowers did smile like those upon her face,
And as their Aspin stalks those fingers bind,
That she might read my case
I wished to be a Hyacinth in her hand.
SON.
THen is she gone? O fool and coward I!
O good occasion lost, never to be found!
What fatal chains have my dull senses bound,
When best they might, that did not Fortune try?
Here is the fainting Grass where she did lie,
With Roses here she stellified the Ground,
She fixed her eyes on this yet smiling Pond,
Nor time, nor place seemed ought for to deny.
Too long, too long Respect I do embrace,
Your Counsel full of threats and sharp disdain.
Disdain in her sweet Heart can have no place,
And though come there, must straight retire again:
Henceforth Respect farewell, I Have heard it told
Who lives in love can never be too bold.
SON.
WHat cruel Star into this World me brought?
What gloomy day did dawn to give me light?
What unkind hand to nurse me (Orphane) sought,
And would not leave me in eternal night?
What thing so dear as I has essence bought?
The Elements dry, humid, heavy, light,
The smallest living things which Nature wrought
Be freed of woe if they have small delight.
Ah only I abandoned to Despair,
Nailed to my torments in pale Horrors shade,
Like wandering Clouds see all my comforts fled,
And Ill on Ill with Hours my life impair:
The Heavens and Fortune which were wont to turn,
Stay in one Mansion fixed to cause me mourn.
SON.
Dear Eye which daign'st on this sad Monument,
The sable Scroule of my mishaps to view,
Though it with mourning Muses tears be spent,
And darkely drawn, which is not feigned, but true;
If thou not dazell'd with a Heavenly Hue,
And comely Feature, did not yet lament,
But happy lives unto thy self content,
O let not Love thee to his Laws subdue.
Look on the woeful shipwreck of my Youth,
And let my ruins thee for Beacon serve,
To shun this Rock Capharean of untruth,
And serve no God which does his Churchmen sterve:
His Kingdom's but of plaints, his guerdon tears,
What he gives more is Jealousies and Fears.
MAD.
TO the delightful Green
Of you, fair radiant Eine,
Let each black yield beneath the starry Arch.
Eyes burnisht Heavens of Love,
Sinople Lamps of Jove,
Save all those hearts which with your flames you parch
Two burning Suns you prove;
All other Eyes compared with you dear lights
Are Hells, or if not Hells, yet dumpish Nights.
The Heavens [if we their Glass
The Sea beleeve] are green not perfect blew,
They all make fair what ever fair yet was,
And they are fair because they look like you.
SON.
NYmphs, Sister Nymphs which haunt this crystal Brook,
And happy in these floting Bowers abide,
Where trembling Roofes of Trees from Sun you hide,
Which make Idaean woods in every Crook;
Whether ye garlands for your locks provide,
Or pearly letters seek in sandy Book,
Or count your Loves when Thetis was a Bride,
Lift up your golden heads and on me look.
Read in mine Eyes my agonizing Cares,
And what ye read, recount to her again:
Fair Nymphs say all these streams are but my Tears,
And if she ask you how they sweet remain,
Tell that the bitt'rest tears which Eyes can pour,
When shed for her can be no longer sour.
SON.
SHe whose fair flowers no Autumn makes decay,
Whose Hue Celestial, earthly hues does stain,
Into a pleasant odoriferous Plain
Did walk alone, to brave the pride of May.
And whilst through flowery Lists she made her way,
That proudly smiled her sight to entertain,
Lo, unawares where Love did hid remain
She spied, and sought to make of him her prey:
For which of golden locks a fairest hair
To bind the Boy she took, but he afraid
At her approach sprang swiftly in the Air,
And mounting far from reach, looked back and said,
Why should thou [sweet] me seek in chains to bind,
Since in thy eyes I daily am confind?
MAD.
SWeet Rose whence is this hue
Which does all hues excel?
Whence this most fragrant smell?
And whence this form and gracing grace in you?
In fair Paestanas fields perhaps you grew,
Or Hyblas Hills you bred,
Or odoriferous Ennas Plains you fed,
Or Tmolus, or where Bore young Adon slew;
Or has the Queen of Love you died of new
In that dear Blood, which makes you look so red?
No, none of those, but Cause more high you blist,
My Ladies Breast you bore, her Lips you Kissed.
MADRIGALL.
ON this cold World of ours,
Flower of the Seasons, Season of the Flowers,
Sun of the Sun, sweet Spring,
Such hot and burning days why do thou bring?
Is it because those high Eternal Powers
Flash down that Fire this World environing?
Or that now Phoebus keeps his Sisters sphere?
Or does some Phaeton
Inflame the Sea and Air?
Or rather is it not usher of the Year,
Or that last day among the Flowers alone
Unmasked thou saw my Fair?
And whilst thou on her gazed she did thee burn,
And to thy Brother Summer does thee turn.
SON.
Dear Wood, and you sweet solitary Place,
Where I estranged from the vulgar live,
Contented more with what your shades me give,
Than if I had what Thetis does embrace:
What snaky Eye grown jealous of my pace,
Now from your silent Horrors would me drive?
When Sun advancing in his glorious race
Beyond the Twins, does near our Pole arrive.
What sweet delight a quiet life affords,
And what it is to be from bondage free,
Far from the madding Worldlings hoarse discords,
Sweet flowery place I first did learn of thee:
Ah if I were mine own, your dear resorts
I would not change with Princes stateliest Courts.
SON.
AH who can see those fruits of Paradise,
Celestial Cherries which so sweetly swell,
That Sweetness self confind there seems to dwell,
And all those sweetest Parts about despise?
Ah who can see and feel no Flame surprise
His hardened heart? For me alas too well
I know their Force, and how they do excel,
Now through desire I burn, and now I freeze,
I dye (dear Life) unless to me be given
As many kisses as the Spring has Flowers,
Or there be silver drops in Iris Showers,
Or stars there be in all-embracing (...);
And if displeased ye of the (...) complain,
Ye shall have leave to take them back again.
SON.
Is It not enough (ay me) me thus to see
Like some Heaven-banish'd Ghost still wailing go,
A Shadow which your Rays do only show;
To vex me more, unless ye bid me die;
What could ye worse allot unto your Foe?
But die will I, so ye will not deny
That grace to me which mortal Foes even try,
To choose what sort of Death shall end my woe.
Once did I find that whiles you did me kiss,
Ye gave my panting soul so sweet a touch,
That half I sownd in midst of all my Bl^sse*
I do but crave my Deaths-wound may be such:
For though by Grief I die not and annoy,
Is It not enough to die through too much joy?
MAD.
Unhappy Light
Do not approach to bring the woeful Day,
When I must bid for aye
Farewell to her, and live in endless plight.
Fair Moon with gentle Beams
The sight who never mars,
Clear long-Heavens sable Vault, and you bright Stars
Your golden Locks long view in Earths pure streams;
Let Phoebus never rise
To dim your watchful Eyes.
Prolong (alas) (...) my short delight,
And if ye can (...) Eternal Night.
SON.
WIth grief in Heart, and tears in swelling Eyes,
When I to her had given a sad Farewell,
Close sealed with a Kiss, and Dew which fell
On my else-moistned Face from Beauties Skies;
So strange Amazement did my Mind surprise,
That at each Pace I fainting turned again,
Like one whom a Torpedo stupifies,
Not feeling Honors Bit, nor Reasons Rain:
But when fierce Stars to part me did constrain,
With back-cast Looks, I both envied and blessed
The happy Walls and Place did her contain,
Until my eyes that flying Object missed;
So Wailing* parted Ganymede the fair,
When Eagles Talents bore him through the Air.
SEXTAIN.
Since gone is my Delight and only Pleasure,
The last of all my Hopes, the cheerful Sun
That cleared my life's dark Sphere, Natures sweet Treasure,
More dear to me than all beneath the Moon,
What rests now but that upon this Mountain
I weep, till Heaven transform me to a Fountain?
Fresh, fair, delicious, crystal, pearly Fountain,
On whose smooth face to look she often took Pleasure,
Tell me (so may thy streams long cheer this Mountain,
So Serpent never thee stain, nor scorch thee Sun,
So may with watery beams thee kiss the Moon)
Do thou not mourn to want so fair a Treasure?
While she here gazed on thee, rich Tagus Treasure,
Thou neededst not envy, nor yet the Fountain,
In which that Hunter saw the naked Moon,
Absence has robbed thee of thy Wealth and Pleasure,
And I remain like Marigold of Sun
Deprived, that dies by shadow of some Mountain.
Nymphs of the Forests, Nymphs who on this Mountain
Are wont to dance, showing your Beauties Treasure
To Goat-feet Sylvans, and the wondering Sun,
When as you gather flowers about this Fountain,
Bid her farewell who placed here her Pleasure,
And sing her praises to the Stars and Moon.
Among the lesser lights as is the Moon,
Blushing through muffl^ng clouds on Latmos Mountain,
Or when she views her silver Locks for Pleasure
In Thetis streams, proud of so gay a Treasure,
Such was my Fair when She sat by this Fountain
With other Nymphs to shun the amorous Sun.
As is our Earth in absence of the Sun,
Or when of Sun deprived is the Moon,
As is without a verdant shade a Fountain,
Or wanting grass, a Mead, a Vale, a Mountain;
Such is my state, bereft of my dear Treasure,
To know whose only worth was all my Pleasure.
Never think of Pleasure Heart, Eyes shun the Sun,
Tears be your Treasure, which the wandering Moon
Shall see you shed by Mountain, Veil, and Fountain.
SON.
WIndow sometime which served for a Sphere
To that dear Planet of my heart, whose light
Made often blush the glorious Queen of Night,
While She in thee more beauteous did appear,
What mourning weeds ( alas) do thou now wear?
How loathsome to my eyes is thy sad sight?
How poorly look thou, with what heavy cheer,
Since sets that Sun which made thee shine so bright?
Unhappy now thee close, for as of late
To wondering Eyes thou were a Paradise,
Bereft of her who made thee fortunate,
A gulf thou art whence clouds of sighs arise:
But unto none so noisome as to me,
Who hourly sees my murdered joys in thee.
SON.
HOw many times Nights silent Queen her face
Has hid, how often with Stars in silver Mask,
In Heavens great Hall, she has begun her Task,
And cheered the waking Eye in lower Place?
How often the Sun has made by Heavens swift race
The happy Lover to forsake the Breast
Of his dear Lady, wishing in the West
His Golden Coach to run had larger space?
I ever count and tell since I alas
Did bid Farewell to my Hearts dearest Guest,
The Miles I number, and in mind I chase,
The floods and Mountains hold me from my rest.
But woe is me, long count and count may I,
Ere I see her whose absence makes me die.
SON.
OF Death some tell, some of the cruel Pain
Which that bad Crafts-man in his Work did try,
When [a new Monster] flames once did constrain
A humane Corpse to yield a bellowing Cry.
Some tell of those in burning Beds who lie,
Because they durst in the Phlegrean Plain
The mighty Ruler of the Skies defy,
And siege those crystal Towers which all contain,
An other counts of Phlegethons hot floods,
The Souls which drink Ixions endless smart,
And his who feeds a Vulture with his heart,
One tells of Spectars in enchanted Woods:
Of all those Pains the extremest who would prove,
Let him be absent and but burn in Love.
SON.
Hair, precious hair, which Midas hand did strain,
Part of the Wreath of gold that crowns those brows
Which Winters whitest white in whitenes stain,
And lilly by Eridans bank that grows.
Hair [fatall present] which first caused my woes,
When loose ye hang like Danaes golden rain,
Sweet Nets which sweetly do all hearts enchaine,
Strings, deadly strings, with which Love bends his bows.
How are ye hither come, tell me O hair?
Dear Armelet, for what thus were ye given?
I know, a badge of bondage I you wear,
Yet hair for you O that I were a Heaven!
Like Bereni^^s Locks, that ye might shine,
(But brighter far) about this Arm of mine.
SON.
ARe these the flowery banks? Is this the Mead
Where she was wont to pass the pleasant hours?
Was It here her Eyes exhaled mine eyes salt showers,
And on her lap did lay my wearied Head?
Is this the goodly Elm did us o'respread,
Whose tender Rine, cut forth in curious flowers
By that white hand, contains those flames of Ours?
Is this the murmuring Spring us music made?
Deflourisht Mead, where is your heavenly hue?
And Bank, that Arras did you late adorn?
How look thou Elm all withered and forlorn?
Only sweet Spring naught altered seems in you.
But while here changed each other thing appears,
To salt your streams take of mine Eyes these tears.
SON.
ALexis here she stayed, among these Pines*
Sweet Hermitresse she did all alone repair;
Here did she spread the Treasure of her Hair,
More rich than that brought from the Colchian Mines.
Here sat she by these musket Eglantines,
The happy flowers seem yet the print to bear,
Her voice did sweeten here thy sugared lines,
To which Winds, Trees, Beasts, Birds, did lend an Ear.
She here me first perceived, and here a Morn
Of bright Carnations did o'respread her Face;
Here did she sigh, here first my Hopes were borne,
Here first I got a Pledge of promised Grace:
But ah what serves't to have been made happy so?
Since passed Pleasures double but new woe.
SON.
PLace me where angry Titan burns the More,
And thirsty Africa fiery Monsters brings,
Or where the newborn Phoenix spreads her Wings,
And troops of wondering Birds her flight adore.
Place me by Gange or Indes enammell'd shore,
Where smiling Heavens on Earth cause double Springs*
Place me where Neptunes Quire of Sirens sings,
Or where made hoarse through Cold he leaves to roar:
Place me where Fortune does her Darlings crown,
A Wonder or a spark in Envies Eye,
Or you outrageous Fates upon me frown,
Till Pity wailing fee disastred Me;
Affections print my mind so deep does prove,
I may forget my Self; but not my Love.
MADRIGALL.
THe Ivory, Corrall, Gold,
Of breast, of lip, of hair,
So lively Sleep does show to inward sight,
That wake I think I hold
No Shadow, but my Fair:
My self so to deceive
With long-shut Eyes I shun the irksome Light.
Such pleasure here I have
Delighting in false gleames,
If Death Sleeps Brother be,
And Souls bereft of sense have so sweet Dreams,
How could I wish thus still to dream and dye.
SON.
FAme, who with golden wings abroad does range
Where Phoebus leaves the Night or brings the Day,
Fame, in one place who restless do not stay
Till thou have flown from Atlas unto Gange;
Fame, Enemy to Time, that still does change,
And in his changing Course would make decay
What here below he finds in his way,
Even making Virtue to her self look strange:
Daughter of Heaven; Now all thy Trumpets sound,
Raise up thy Head unto the highest Sky,
With wonder blaze the gifts in her are found,
And when she from this mortal Globe shall fly,
In thy wide Mouth keep long, keep long her Name;
So thou by her, she by thee live shall Fame.
POEMS.
The Second Part.
OF mortal Glory O soon dark'ned Ray!
O winged Joys of Man, more swift than Wind!
O fond Desires which in our Fancies stray!
O traitrous Hopes which do our Judgments blind!
Lo, in a Flash that Light is gone away,
Which dazell did each Eye, delight each Mind,
And with that Sun, from whence it came, combind,
Now makes more radiant Heavens eternal Day.
Let Beauty now bedew her Cheeks with Tears,
Let widowed Music only roar and groan,
Poor Virtue get thee Wings and mount the Spheres,
For dwelling place on Earth for thee is none:
Death has thy Temple razed, Loves Empire foiled,
The World of Honor, Worth, and Sweetness spoiled.
SON.
THose Eyes, those sparkling Saphires of Delight,
Which thousand thousand Hearts did set on Fire,
Of which that Eye of Heaven which brings the light
Often Jealous, stayed amazed them to admire.
That living Snow, those crimson Roses bright,
Those Pearls, those Rubies which enflamed Desire,
Those Locks of Gold, that Purple fair of Tire,
Are wrapped [aye me!] up in eternal Night.
What have thou more to vaunt of wretched World,
Since she who caused all thy bliss is gone?
Thy ever-burning Lamps, Rounds ever-whorld
Can not unto thee model such a One:
Or if they would such Beauty bring on Earth,
They should be forced again to give her birth.
SON.
O Fate, conjured to pour your worst on me!
O rigorous Rigor which does all confound!
With cruel Hands ye have cut down the Tree,
And fruit with leaves have scattered on the Ground.
A little space of Earth my Love does bound,
That Beauty which did raise it to the Sky,
Turned in disdained Dust, now low does lie,
Deaf to my plaints, and senseless of my wound.
Ah! did I live for this? ah! did I love?
And was it for this (fierce powers) she did excel,
That ere she well the Sweets of life did prove,
She should (too dear a guest) with Darkness dwell?
Weak influence of Heaven! what fair is wrought,
Falls in the prime, and passes like a Thought.
SON.
O Woeful life! life, no, but living Death,
Frail Boat of Crystal in a rocky Sea,
A Gem exposed to Fortunes stormy breath,
Which kept with pain with Terror does decay:
The false Delights, true Woes thou do bequeath
My all-appalled Mind so do affray,
That I those envy who are laid in Earth,
And pity those who run thy dreadful way.
When did mine Eyes behold one cheerful Morn?
When had my tossed Soul one night of Rest?
When did not angry Stars my Designs scorn?
O! now I find what is for Mortals best:
Even, since our voyage shameful is, and short,
Soon to strike Sail, and perish in the Port.
SON.
DIssolve my Eyes your Globes in briny Streams,
And with a cloud of Sorrow dim your sight,
The Suns bright Sun is set, of late whose Beams
Gave luster to your Day, Day to your Night.
My Voice now cleave the Earth with Anathemes,
Roar forth a challenge in the Worlds despite,
Till that disguised Grief is her delight,
That Life a Slumber is of fearful Dreams;
And woeful Mind abhor to think of Joy,
My Senses all from comforts all you hide,
Accept no object but of black Annoy,
Tears, Plaints, Sighs, mourning Weeds, Graves gaping wide:
I have naught left to wish; My Hopes are dead,
And all with her beneath a Marble laid,
SON.
SWeet Soul, which in the April of thy years,
For to enrich the Heaven made poor this Round,
And now with flaming Rays of Glory crowned
Most blessed abides above the Sphere of Spheres;
If Heavenly Laws alas have not thee bound
From looking to this Globe that all up-beares,
If ruth and pity there-above be found,
O daigne to lend a look unto these Tears.
Do not disdain (dear Ghost) this sacrifice,
And though I raise not pillars to thy Praise,
My offerings take, let this for me suffice,
My Heart a living Pyramide I Will raise:
And whilst Kings Tombs with Laurells flourish green,
Thine shall with Mirtles and these flowers be seen.
SON.
SWeet Spring, thou turn'st with all thy goodly train,
Thy head with flames, thy Mantle bright with flowers,
The Zephires curle the green Locks of the Plain,
The Clouds for joy in Pearls weep down their showers.
Do return sweet Youth? but ah my pleasant hours,
And happy days with thee come not again,
The sad Memorials only of my pain
Do with thee turn, which turn my Sweets to Sow'r^
Thou art the same which still thou were before,
Delicious, lusty, amiable, fair,
But she whose Breath embaulm'd thy wholesome Air
Is gone; Nor Gold, nor Gems can her restore.
Neglected Virtue, Seasons go and come,
When thine forgot lie closed in a Tomb.
SON.
WHat does it serve to see the Suns bright Face?
And Skies enameled with the Indian Gold?
Or the Moon in a fierce Chariot rold,
And all the Glory of that starry Place?
What does it serve Earths Beauty to behold?
The Mountains pride, the Meadows flowery grace,
The stately comeliness of Forests old,
The Sport of Floods which would themselves embrace?
What does it serve to hear the Sylvans Songs,
The cheerful Thrush, the Nightingales sad strains,
Which in dark shades seems to deplore my Wrongs?
For what does serve all that this World contains?
Since she, for whom those once to me were dear,
Can have no part of them now with me here.
MAD.
THis Life, which seems so fair.
Is like a Bubble blown up in the Air,
By sporting childrens Breath,
Who chase it every where,
And strive who can most motion it bequeath.
And though it sometime seem of its own might
Like to an Eye of gold to be fixed there,
And firm to hover in that empty height,
That only is because it is so Light.
But in that Pomp it does not long appear*
For when it is most admired, in a thought,
Because it erst was naught, it turns to naught.
SON.
MY Lute, be as thou were when thou did grow
With thy green Mother in some shady Grove,
When immelodious Winds but made thee move,
And Birds their ramage did on thee bestow.
Since that dear voice which did thy sounds approve,
Which wont in such harmonious Strains to ^low,
Is re^t from Earth to tune those spheres above,
What art thou but a Harbinger of woe?
Thy pleasing Notes he pleasing Notes no more,
But Orphans wailings to the fainting Ear,
Each Stroke a sigh, each Sound draws forth a Tear,
For which be silent as in woods before:
Or if that any hand to touch thee daigne,
Like widowed Turtle still her loss complain.
SON.
AH Handkercher, sad present of my Dear,
Gift miserable, which does now remain
The only Guerdon of my helpless Pain,
When I thee got thou shewst my state too clear.
I never since have ceased to complain,
I since the Badge of Grief did ever wear,
Joy in my Face durst never since appear,
Care was the Food which did me entertain.
But since that thou art mine, O do not grieve,
That I this Tribute pay thee for mine Eine,
And that I (this short Time I am to live)
Laundre thy silken Figures in this Brine:
No, I must yet even beg of thee the Grace,
That in my Grave thou daigne to shroud my Face.
MAD.
TRees happier far than I,
Which have the grace to heave your Heads so high,
And overlook those Plains:
Grow till your Branches kiss that lofty Sky
Which her (sweet self) contains.
There make her know mine endless Love, and Pains,
And how these Tears which from mine Eyes do fall,
Helped you to rise so Tall:
Tell her, as once I for her sake loved Breath,
So for her sake I now court lingering Death.
SONG.
SAd Damon being come,
To that for-ever Lamentable Tomb,
Which those eternal Powers that all control,
Unto his living Soul
A melancholy prison had prescribed:
Of Color, Heat, and motion deprived,
In Arms weak, Fainting, Cold,
A Marble, he the Marble did infold:
And having warm it made with many a shower
Which dimmed Eyes did pour,
When Grief had given him leave, and sighs them stayed,
Thus with a sad alas at last he said.
Who would have thought to me
The place where thou did lie could grievous be?
And that (dear body) long thee having sought,
(O me!) who would have thought
Thee once to find it should my Soul confound,
And give my Heart then death a deeper wound?
Thou did disdain my Tears,
But grieve not that this ruthful Stone them bears,
Mine Eyes for nothing serve, but thee to weep,
And let that course them keep,
Although thou never would them comfort show,
Do not repine, they have part of thy woe.
Ah wretch! too late I find
How Virtues glorious Titles prove but wind;
For if that Virtue could release from Death,
Thou yet enjoyed had Breath:
For if she ere appeared to mortal Eine,
It was in thy fair shape that she was seen.
But O! if I was made
For thee, with thee why too am I not dead?
Why do outrageous Fates which dimmed thy sight,
Let me see hateful light?
They without me made Death thee surprise,
Tyrants ( no doubt) that they might kill me twice.
O Grief! And could one Day
Have force such excellence to take away?
Could a swift-flying Moment ah deface,
Those matchless gifts, that Grace,
Which Art, and Nature had in thee combined
To make thy Body paragon thy Mind?
Has all passed like a cloud,
And does eternal silence now them shroud?
Is that, so much admired, now naught but Dust,
Of which a Stone has Trust?
O change! O cruel change thou to our sight
Show'st the Fates Rigor equal to their Might!
When thou from earth di^'st pass
(Sweet Nymph) Perfections Mirror broken was,
And this of late so glorious World of ours,
L^ke Medows without Flowers,
Or Ring of a rich Gem which blind appear*d,
Or Starless night, or Cynthia nothing cleared.
Love when he saw thee dye
Entombed him in the lid of either Eye,
And left his Torch within thy sacred Vrne
There for a Lamp to burn:
Worth, Honor, Pleasure, with thy life expired,
Death since grown sweet begins to be desired.
Whilst thou to us were given,
The Earth her Venus had as well as Heaven:
Nay, and her Suns which burnt as many Hearts,
As he the eastern parts;
Bright Suns which forced to leave these Hemispheares,
Benighted set into a Sea of Tears.
Ah Death, who shall thee fly,
Since the most mighty are overthrown by thee?
Thou spar'st the Crow, and Nightingall do kill,
And triumphst at thy will*
But give thou cannot such another Blow,
Because Earth cannot such another show.
O bitter sweets of Love!
How better is it at all you not to prove,
Nor when we do your pleasures must possess,
To find them thus made less?
O! That the cause which does consume our joy
Would the remembrance of it too destroy!
What does this life bestow,
But Flowers on Thorns which grow?
Which though they sometime blandish soft delight,
Yet afterward us smite:
And if the rising Sun them fair does see,
That Planet setting, does behold them die.
This world is made a Hell,
Deprived of all that in it did excel.
O Pan, Pan, Winter is fallen in May,
Turned is to night our Day.
Forsake thy Pipe, a Scepter take to thee,
Thy locks disgarland, thou black Jove shall be.
The Flocks do leave the Meads,
And, loathing three leaved Grass, hold up their Heads,
The Streams not glide now with a glentle Rore,
Nor Birds sing as before,
Hills stands with clouds like Mourners veiled in black,
And Owls upon our Roofes foretell our wrack.
That Zephire every year
So soon was heard to sigh in Forests here,
It was for her that wrapped in Gowns of Green,
Meads were so early seen;
That in the saddest Months often sang the Mearles,
It was for Her: for her Trees dropped forth pearls.
That proud, and stately Courts
Did envy these our Shades and calm Resorts,
It was for Her: and she is gone, O woe!
Woods cut again do grow,
But does the Rose, and Dazy, winter done,
But we once dead do no more see the Sun.
Whose Name shall now make ring
The Echoes? of whom shall the Nymphets sing?
Whose heavenly voice, whose Soule-invading Strains,
Shall fill with Joy the plains?
What Hair, what Eyes, can make the Morn in East,
Weep that a fairer rises in the West?
Fair Sun post still away,
No Music here is left thy Course to stay.
Sweet Hybla Swarms, with Wormwood fill your Bow'r^.
Gone is the flower of Flowers:
Blush no more Rose, nor Lilly pale remain,
Dead is that Beauty which yours late did stain.
Aye me to wail my Plight
Why have not I as many Eyes as Night?
Or as that Shepherds which Joves love did keep,
That I still, still may weep?
But though I had, my Tears unto my cross
Were not yet equal, nor grief to my loss.
Yet of you briny Showers,
Which I ^ere pour, may spring as many flowers,
As come of those which fell from Helens Eyes;
And when ye do arise,
May every Leaf in sable letters bear
The Doleful Cause for which ye spring up here.
MAD.
THe Beauty and the Life
Of Life's, and Beauties fairest Paragon,
(O Tears! O Grief!) hung at a feeble Thread,
To which pale Atropos had set her Knife.
The Soul with many a groan
Had left each outward Part,
And now did take his last Leave of the Heart;
Naught else did want save Death for to be dead:
When the sad company about her Bed
Seeing Death invade her lips, her cheeks, her eyes,
Cried ah! and can Death enter Paradise?
SON.
O! It is not to me bright Lamp of Day,
That in the East thou show'sts thy golden Face,
O! it is not to me thou leave that sea,
And in those azure Lists began'st thy Race.
Thou shinest not to the Dead in any Place,
And I dead from this World am past away*
Or if I seem (a Shadow) yet to stay,
It is a while but to bewail my Case.
My Mirth is lost, my Comforts are dismayed,
And unto sad Mishaps their Place do yield;
My Knowledge represents a bloody Field,
Where I my Hopes and helps see prostrate laid.
So plaintfull is Life's Course which I have run,
That I do wish it never had begun.
MADRIGALL.
Dear Night, the ease of Care,
Untroubled Seat of Peace,
Times eldest Child, which often the blind do see,
On this our Hemispheare
What makes thee now so sadly dark to be?
Come thou in funeral Pomp Her Grave to grace?
Or do those Stars which should thy horror clear,
In Joves high Hall advise,
In what Part of the skies,
With them, or Cynthia she shall appear?
Or (ah alas) because those matchless eyes,
Which shone so fair, below thou do not find,
Striv'st thou to make all others Eyes look blind?
SON.
SInce it has pleased that First and supreme Fair
To take that Beauty to himself again,
Which in this world of Sense not to remain,
But to amaze was sent, and home repair;
The Love which to that Beauty I did bear,
Made Pure of mortal spots which did it stain,
And endless, which even Death cannot impair,
I place on him who will it not disdain.
No shining Eyes, no Locks of curling gold,
No blushing Roses on a virgin Face,
No outward show, no, nor no inward Grace,
Shall power have my thoughts henceforth to hold:
Love here on Earth huge storms of care does toss,
But placed above exempted is from loss
SONG.
IT Autumn was, and on our Hemispheare
Fair Ericine began bright to appear,
Night Westward did her gemmy World decline,
And hide her Lights, that greater Light might shine:
The crested Bird has given Alarm twice
To lazy Mortals to unlock their Eyes,
The Owl had left to plain, and from each Throne
The winged Musicians did salute the Morn,
Who (while she dressed her Locks in Ganges streams)
Set open wide the crystal Port of Dreams:
When I, whose Eyes no drousie Night could close,
In Sleeps soft arms did quietly repose,
And, for that Heavens to die did me deny,
Deaths Image kissed, and as dead did lie.
I lay as dead, but scarce cha^m'd were my Cares,
And slaked scarce my Sighs, scarce dried my Tears,
Sleep scarce the ugly Figures of the Day
Had with his sable Pencill put away,
And left me in a still and calmy Mood,
When by my Bed (me thought) a Virgin stood,
A Virgin in the blooming of her Prime,
If such rare Beauty measured be by Time.
Her Head a Garland wore of Opalls bright*
About her flowed a Gown like purest Light,
Pure Amber Locks gave Umbrage to her Face,
Where Modesty high Majesty did grace;
Her Eyes such Beams sent forth, that but with pain
Her weaker Sights their sparklings could sustain.
No feigned D^ity which haunts the Woods
Is like to Her, nor Syrene of the Floods:
Such is the Golden Planet of the Year,
When bl^shing in the East he does appear.
Her Grace did beauty, Voice yet Grace did pass,
Which thus through Pearls and Rubies broken was.
How long will thou (said she) estranged from Joy,
Paint Shadows to thy self of false Annoy?
How long thy Mind with horrid Shapes affright,
And in imaginary Evils delight?
Esteem that Loss which (well when viewed) is Gain,
Or if a Loss, yet not a Loss too plain?
O leave thy plain^full Soul more to molest,
And think that woe when shortest then is best.
If She for whom thou thus do deaf the Sky
Be dead? What then? Was she not borne to die?
Was She not mortal borne? If thou do grieve
That Times should be in which She should not live,
Ere e're she was weep that Days wheel was rolled,
Weep that she lived not in the Age of Gold.
For that she was not then thou may deplore,
As well as that she now can be no more.
If only she had died, thou sure had Cause
To blame the Fates, and their too iron Laws.
But look how many Millions her advance,
What numbers with her enter in this Dance,
With those which are to come: shall Heavens them stay,
And the Universe dissolve thee to obey?
As Birth, Death, which so much thee does apall,
A Piece is of the Life of this great All.
Strong Cities die, die do high palmy Reigns,
And fondling thou thus to be used complains.
If she be dead, then she of loathsome Days
Has passed the Line* whose Length but Loss bewraies,
Then she has left this filthy Stage of Care,
Where Pleasure seldom, Woe does still repair.
For all the Pleasures which it does contain
Not countervaile the smallest Minutes pain.
And tell me, thou who do so much admire
This little Vapor, this poor Spark of F^re,
Which Life is called, what does it thee bequeath
But some few years which Birth draws out to Death?
Which if thou parallel with Lustres run,
Or those whose courses are but now begun,
In da^es great Numbers they shall less appear,
Than with the Sea when matched is a Tear.
But why should thou here longer wish to be?
One Year does serve all Natures Pomp to see,
Nay, even one Day, and Night: this Moon, that Sun,
Those lesser Fires about this Round which Run,
Be but the same which under Saturnes Reign.
Did the serpenting Seasons interchaine.
How often does Life grow less by living long?
And what excels but what dies young?
For Age which all abhor (yet would embrace)
Does make the Mind as wrinckled as the Face.
Then leave Laments, and think thou did not live
Laws to that first eternal Cause to give,
But to obey those Laws which he has given,
And bow unto the just decrees of Heaven,
Which cannot ^r^e, whatever foggy Mists
Do blind men in these sublunary Lists.
But what if she for whom thou sp^nd'st those Groans,
And wastes thy Life's dear Torch in ruthful Moanes,
She for whose sake thou hat'st the joyful Light,
Courts solitary Shades and irksome Night,
Does live? ah! (if thou can) through Tears, a space,
Lift thy dimmed Lights, and look upon this Face,
Look if those Eyes which (fool) thou did adore,
Shine not more bright than they were wont before.
Look if those Roses Death could ought impair
Those Roses which thou once said were so fair;
And if these Locks have lost ought of that Gol^,
Which once they had when thou them did behold*
I live, and happy live, but thou art dead,
And still shall be, t^ll t^ou be l^ke me ma^e.
Alas while we are wrapped in Gowns of Earth,
And blind here suck the Air of Woe beneath,
Each thing in Senses Balances we weigh,
And but with toil, and Pain the truth descry.
Above this vast and admirable Frame,
This Temple visible, which World we name,
Within whose Walls so many Lamps do burn,
So many Arches with cross motions turn,
Where the Elementall Brothers nurse their strife,
And by intestine Wars maintain their Life:
There is a World, a World of perfect Bliss,
Pure, immateriall, as brighter far from this,
As that high Circle which the rest enspheares
Is from this dull, ignoble Vale of Tears.
A World where all is found, that here is found,
But further discrepant than Heaven and Ground:
It has an Earth, as has this World of yours,
With Creatures peopled, and adorned with Flowr's;
It has a Sea, like Sapphire Girdle cast
Which decks of the harmonious Shores the Waste;
It has pure Fire, it has delicious Air,
Moon, Sun, and Stars, Heavens wonderfully fair:
Flowers never there do fade, Trees grow not old,
No Creature dies there through heat or cold;
Sea there not tossed is, nor Air made black,
F^re does not greedy feed on others Wrack:
There Heavens be not constrained about to range,
For this World has no need of any Change:
Minutes mount not to Hours, nor Hours to Days,
Days make no Months, but ever-blooming Maies.
Here I remain, and hitherward do tend,
All who their Span of Days in Virtue spend;
What ever Pleasant this low Place contains,
Is but a Glance of what above remains.
Those who (perchance) there can nothing be
Beyond this wide Expansion which they see,
And that naught else mounts Stars Circumference,
For that naught else is subject to their sense,
Feel such a Case, as one whom some Abisme
In the deep Ocean kept had all his Time:
Who borne, and nourished there, cannot believe
That elsewhere ought without those waves can live:
Cannot believe that there be Temples, Towers,
Which go beyond his Caves and dampish Bowr's:
Or there be other People, Manners, Laws,
Than what he finds within the churlish Waves:
That sweeter Flowers do spring than grow on Rocks,
Or Beasts there are excel the skaly Flocks,
That other Elements are to be found,
Than is the Water and this Ball of Ground.
But think that man from this Abisme being brought,
Did see what curious Nature here has wrought,
Did view the Meads, the tall and shady Woods,
And marked the hills, and the clear rolling floods;
And all the Beasts which Nature forth does bring,
The feathered Troops that fly, and sweetly sing:
Observed the Palaces, and Cities fair,
Men's Fashion of Life, the Fire, the Air,
The brightness of the Sun that dims his Sight,
The Moon, and splendors of the painted Night:
What sudden rapture would his mind surprise?
How would he his late-deare Resort despise?
How would he muse how foolish he had been,
To think all nothing but what there was seen?
Why do we get this high and vast Desire,
Unto immortal things still to aspire?
Why does our Mind extend it beyond Time,
And to that highest happiness even clime?
For we are more than what to Sense we seem,
And more than Dust us Worldlings do esteem?
We be not made for Earth, though here we come,
More than the Em^ryon for the Mothers Womb:
It weeps to be made free, and we complain
To leave this loathsome Jaile of Care and Pain.
But thou who vulgar footsteps do not trace,
Learn to rowse up thy mind to view this place,
And what Earth-creeping Mortals most affect,
If not at all to scorn, yet not to neglect:
Seek not vain shadows, which when once obtained
Are better los'd than with such travel gained.
Think that on Earth what worldlings Greatness call,
Is but a glorious title to live thrall:
That Scepters, Diadems, and Chaires of State,
Not in themselves, but to small Minds are great:
That those who loftiest mount do hardest light,
And deepest Falls be from the highest Height:
That Fame an Echo is, and all Renown
Like to a blasted Rose, ere Night falls down:
And though it something were, think how this Round
Is but a little Point, which does it bound.
O leave that Love which reaches but to Dust,
And in that Love Eternal only trust,
And Beauty, which when once it is possessed
Can only fill the Soul and make it blessed.
Pale Envy, jealous Emulations, Fears,
Sighs, Plaints, Remorse, here have no place nor Tears,
False Joys, vain Hopes, here be not, Hate nor Wrath,
What ends all Love here most augments it Death.
If such force had the dim Glance of an Eye,
Which but some few days afterward did die,
That it could make thee leave all other things,
And like a Taper-fly there burn thy Wings?
And if a voice, of late which could but wail,
Such Power had as through Ears thy Soul to steal?
If once thou on that poorly Fair could gaze,
What Flames of Love would this within thee raise?
In what amusing Maze would it thee bring,
To ^eare but once that Quire celestial sing?
The fairest shapes on which thy Love did sease,
Which erst did breed Delight, then would displease;
But Discords hoarse were Earths entising Sounds,
All Music but a Noise, which Sense confounds.
This great and burning Glass which cleares all Eyes,
And musters with such Glory in the Skies,
That silver Star which with her purer Light
Makes Day oft-Envy the eye pleasing Night,
Those golden letters which so brightly shine
In Heavens great Volume gorgeously divine;
All wonders in the Sea, the Earth, the Air,
Be but dark Pictures of that Sovereign Fair,
And Tongues, which still thus cry into your Ear
(Could ye amidst Worlds Cataracts them hear)
From fading things (fond Men) lift your Desire,
And in our Beauty his us made admire:
If we seem fair? O think how fair is he,
Of whose great Fairness, Shadows, Steps we be.
No Shadow can compare unto the Face,
No Step with that dear foot which did it trace,
Your Souls immortal are, then place them hence,
And do not drown them in the Mist of Sense:
Do not, O do not by false Pleasures Might
Deprive them of that true and sole Delight.
That Happiness ye seek is not below,
Earths sweetest Joy is but disguised Woe.
Here did she pause, and with a mild Aspect*
Did toward me those lamping Twins direct.
The wonted Rays I knew, and thrice essayed
To Answer make* thrice faul^ring Tongue it stayed.
And while upon that Face I fed my Sight,
Me thought she vanished up to Titans Light;
Who guilding with his Rays each Hill, and Plain,
Seemed to have brought the Golden World again.
URANIA.
Triumphing, Chariots, Statues, Crowns of Bays,
Skie-threatning Arches, the rewards of worth,
Books heavenly-wise in sweet harmonious lays,
Which men divine unto the World set forth:
States which Ambitious Minds, in blood, do raise,
From frozen Tanais unto sunburned Gange,
Gigantall Frames held wonders rarely strange,
Like Spiders webs are made the sport of Days.
Nothing is constant but in constant change,
What Is done still is undone, and when undone
Into some other Fashion does it range;
Thus goes the floting World beneath the Moon:
Wherefore my Mind above Time, Motion, Place,
Rise up, and steps unknown to Nature trace.
TOo long I followed have my fond Desire,
And too long painted on the Ocean Streams,
Too long refreshment sought amidst the fire,
Pursued those joys which to my Soul are Blames.
Ah when I had what most I did admire,
And seen of Life's Delights the last extremes,
I found all but a Rose hedged with a Bryer,
A Naught, a Thought, a Mascarade of Dreams.
Henceforth on Thee, my only Good, I Will think,
For only thou can grant what I do crave;
Thy Nail my Pen shall be, thy Blood mine Ink,
Thy Winding Sheet my Paper, Study Grave:
And till my Soul forth of this body fly,
No Hope I Will have but only only thee.
TO spread the Azure Canopy of Heaven,
And spangle it all with Sparks of burning Gold,
To place this pondrous Globe of Earth so even,
That it should all and naught should it uphold;
With motions strange to indue the Planets seven,
And Jove to make so mild, and Mars so bold,
To temper what is moist, dry, hot, and cold,
Of all their Jars that sweet Accords are given.
Lord to thy Wisdome's naught, naught to thy Might,
But that thou should, thy Glory laid aside,
Come basely in Mortality to bide,
And die for those deserved an endless night;
A Wonder is so far above our wit,
That Angels stand amazed to think on it.
WHat hapless Hap had I for to be borne
In these unhappy Times, and dying Days
Of this now doting World, when Good decays,
Love's quite extinct, and Virtue's held a scorn!
When such are only pris'd by wretched ways,
Who with a golden Fleece them can adorn;
When Avarice and Lust are counted praise,
And bravest Minds live Orphane-like forlorn!
Why was not I borne in that golden Age,
When Gold yet was not known? and those black Arts
By which Base Worldlings vilely play their parts,
With Horrid Acts staining Earths stately Stage?
To have been then, O heaven, 't had been my bliss,
But bless me now, and take me soon from this.
On the Pourtrait of the Countess of Perthe.
SON.
THe Goddess that in Amathus does reign,
With silver Tramells, and Saphir-colour'd Eyes,
When naked from her Mothers Crystal Plain,
She first appeared unto the wondering Skies:
Or when the golden-Apple to obtain,
Her blushing Snow amazed Idas Trees,
Did never look in half so fair a guise,
As She here drawn all other Ages Stain.
O God what Beauties to inflame the Soul,
And hold the hardest Hearts in Chains of Gold!
Fair Locks, sweet Face, Loves stately Capitole,
Pure Neck which does that heavenly Frame uphold,
If Virtue would to mortal Eyes appear,
To ravish sense She would your Beauty wear.
SON.
IF Heaven, the Stars, and Nature did her grace
With all Perfections found the Moon above,
And what excels in this lower Place,
Found place in her to breed a World of Love:
If Angels Gleames shine on her fairest Face,
Which makes Heavens Joy, on Earth, the gazer prove,
And her bright Eyes (the Orbs which Beauty move)
As Phoebus dazell in his glorious Race.
What Pencill paint what Color to the sight
So sweet a Shape can show? the blushing Morn,
The red must lend, the Milkie-way the white,
And Night the Stars which her rich Crown adorn;
To draw her right then, and make all agree,
The Heaven the Table, Zeuxis Jove must be.
On that same drawn with a Pencill.
SON.
WHen with brave Art the curious Painter drew
This Heavenly Shape, the hand why made he bear
With golden Veins that Flower of purple hue,
Which follows on the Planet of the year?
Was it to show how in our Hemispheare,
Like him She shines, nay that effects more true
Of Power, and Wonder do in her appear,
While He but Flowers, and She does Minds subdue.
Or would he else to Virtues glorious light
Her constant Course make known, or is it that He
Does parallel her bliss with Clitias plight:
Right so, and thus, He reading in Her Eye
Some Lovers end, to grace what he did grave,
For Cypres Tree, this mourning Flower her gave.
MADRIGALL.
IF sight be not beguiled,
And eyes right play their part,
This Flower is not of Art,
But's fairest Natures Child,
And though when Titan^s from our World exiled,
She does not lock her leaves his loss to moan,
No wonder, Earth finds now more Suns than one.
To the Author.
Parthenius.
WHile thou do praise the Roses, Lillies, Gold,
Which in a dangling Tresse, and Face appear,
Still stands the Sun in Skies thy Songs to hear,
A Silence sweet each whispering Wind does hold:
Sleep in Pasithea's Lap his Eyes does fold,
The Sword falls from the God of the fifth Sphere,
The Herds to feed, the Birds to sing forbear,
Each Plant breaths Love, each Flood and Fountain cold.
And hence it is, that that once Nymph, now Tree,
Who did the Amphrisian Shepherds Sighs disdain,
And scorned his Lays, moved by a sweeter Vain,
Is become pitiful, and follows Thee,
Thee loves, and van^eth that she has the Grace,
A Garland for thy Locks to enterlace.
Alexis.
THe Love Alexis did to Damon bear,
Shall witnessed be to all the Woods and Plains,
As singular renowned by neighboring Swains,
That to our Relicts Time may Trophies rear.
Those Madrigals we sung amidst our Flocks,
With Garlands guarded from Apollos Beams,
On Ochelles, whiles near Bodottias Streams,
The Echoes did resound them from the Rocks:
Of foreign Shepherds bent to try the States
Though I (Worlds Guest) a Vagabond do stray,
Thou may that Store which I esteem Survey,
As best acquainted with my Souls Conceits.
What ever Fate Heavens have for me designed,
I trust thee with the Treasure of my Mind.
Clorus.
SWan which so sweetly sings,
By Aska's Banks, and pitifully plains,
That old Meander never heard such Strains,
Eternal Fame, thou to thy Country brings:
And now our Calidon
Is by thy Songs made a new Helicon.
Her Mountains, Woods, and Springs,
While Mountains, Woods, Springs be, shall sound thy praise,
And though fierce Boreas often make pale her Bays,
And kill those Mirtills with enraged Breath,
Which should thy Brows enwreath;
Her Floods have Pearls, Seas Amber do send forth,
Her Heaven has golden Stars to crown thy Worth.
Moeris.
THe sister Nymphs which haunt the Thespian springs,
More liberally their Gifts never did bequeath
To them who on their Hills sucked sacred Breath,
Then unto thee, by which thou sweetly sings.
Never did Apollo raise on Pegase Wings
A Muse more near Himself, more far from Earth,
Than thine; whether thou weep thy Ladies Death,
Or sing those sweet-sowre Pangs that Passion brings.
To write our Thoughts in Verse does merit Praise,
But thus the Verse to gild in Fictions Ore,
Bright, rich, delightful, does deserve much more,
As thou have done these thy melodious Lays:
No doubt thy Muses fair Morn does bewray
The swift Approach of a more glistring Day.
TEARS ON THE DEATH OF MOELIADES. BY WILLIAM DRUMMOND OF HAVVTHORNEDEN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1656.

To the Author.
IN Waves of Woe thy Sighs my Soul do toss,
And make run out the floud-gates of my tears,
Whose rankling Wound no smoothing Baume long bears,
But freely bleeds when ought upbraids my Loss.
It Is thou so sweetly Sorrow make to sing,
And troubled Passions do so well accord,
That more Delight Thy Anguish does afford,
Than others Joys can Satisfaction bring.
What sacred Wits (when ravished) do affect,
To force Affections, Metamorphose Minds,
Whilst numbrous Power the Soul in secret binds,
Thou have performed, transforming in Effect.
For never Plaints did greater Pity move,
The best Applause that can such Notes approve.
Sr W. ALEXANDER.

Tears on the Death of MOELIADES.
O Heavens! then is it true that Thou art gone,
And left this woeful Isle her Loss to moan,
Moeliades, bright Day Star of the West,
A (...) blazing Terror to the East:
And neither that thy Spirit so heavenly wise,
Nor Body (though of Earth) more pure than Skies,
Nor royal S^em, nor thy sweet tender Age,
Of cruel Destinies could quench the Rage?
O fading Hopes! O short-while lasting Joy,
Of Earth-borne man, that one Hour can destroy!
Then even of Virtues Spoils Death Trophies reares,
As if he gloried most in many Tears.
Forced by hard Fates, do Heavens neglect our Cries?
Are Stars set only to act Tragedies?
Then let them do their Worst since thou art gone,
Raise whom thou list to Thrones, enthroned dethrone,
Stain Princely Bowers with Blood and even to Gange,
In Cypress sad, glad Hymen's Torches change.
Ah thou have left to live, and in the Time,
When scarce thou blossom'd'st in thy pleasant Prime,
So falls by Northern Blast a virgin Rose,
At half that does her bashful Bosom close:
So a sweet Flower languishing decaies,
That late did blush when kissed by Phoebus Rays.
So Phoebus mounting the Meridians height,
Choked by pale Phoebe, faints unto our sight,
Astonished Nature sullen stands to see,
The Life of all this All so changed to be,
In gloomy Gowns the Stars this loss deplore,
The Sea with murmuring Mountains beats the Shore,
Black Darkness reeles over all, in thousand Showers
The weeping Air on Earth her sorrow poures,
That, in a Palsy, quakes to see so soon
Her Lover set, and Night burst forth ere Noone.
If Heaven (alas) ordained thee young to die,
Why was it not where thou might thy Valor try?
And to the wondering World at least set forth
Some little Spark of thy expected Worth?
Moeliades, O that by Ister^ Streams,
Among sounding Trumpets, fiery twinkling Gleames
Of warm vermilion Swords, and Cannons Roar,
Balls thick as Rain poured on the Caspian Shore,
Amongst broken Spears, amongst ringing Helms and shields,
Huge heaps of slaughtred Bodies long the Fields,
In Turkish blood made red like Marses Star,
Thou endedst had thy Life, and Christian War:
Or as brave Burbon thou had made old Rome,
Queen of the World, thy Triumph, and thy Tomb.
So Heavens fair Face, to th'unborne World, which reads,
A Book had been of thy illustrious Deeds.
So to their Nephews aged Syres had told
The high Exploits performed by thee of old;
Towns razed, and raised, victorious, vanquished Bands,
Fierce Tyrants flying, foiled, killed by thy Hands.
And in rich Arras, Virgins fair had wrought
The Bays and Trophies to thy Country brought:
While some New Homer imping Wings to Fame,
Deaf Nilus dwellers had made hear thy Name.
That thou did not attain these Honors Spheres,
Through want of Worth it was not, but of Years.
A Youth more brave pale Troy with trembling Walls
D^d never see, nor She whose Name appalls
Both Titans golden Bowers, in bloody Fights,
Mustring on Mars his Field, such Mars-like Knights.
The Heavens had brought thee to the highest Hight
Of Wit and Courage, showing all their Might
When they thee framed. Aye me that what is brave
On Earth, they as their own so soon should crave.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thale to Hydaspes pearly shore.
When Forth thy Nurse, Forth where thou first did pass
Thy tender Days (who smiled often on her Glass;
To see thee gaze) Meandring with her Streams,
Heard thou had left this Round, from Phoebus Beams,
She sought to fly, but forced to return
By Neighboring Brooks, She set her self to mourn:
And as she rushed her Cyclades among.
She seemed too plain, that Heaven had done her wrong.
With a hoarse plaint, Cleyd down her steepy rocks,
And Tweid through her green Mountains clad with flocks,
Did wound the Ocean murmuring thy death,
The Ocean it roared about the Earth,
And to the Mauritanian Atlas told,
Who shrunk through grief, and down his white hairs rold
Huge Streams of tears, which changed were to floods,
Wherewith he drowned the neighbor plains and woods.
The lesser Brooks as they did bubling go,
Did keep a Consort to the public Woe.
The Shepherds left their Flocks with down-cast eyes,
'Sdaining to look up to the angry Skies:
Some brake their Pipes, and some in sweet-sad Lays,
Made senseless things amazed at thy Praise.
His Reed Alexis hung upon a Tree,
And with his Tears made Doven great to be.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore
From Thule to Hydaspes pearely shore.
Chaste Maids which haunt fair Aganippes Well,
And you in Tempes sacred Shade who dwell,
Let fall your Harps, cease Tunes of Joy to sing,
Dissheveled make all Parnassus ring
With Anth^ames ^ad, thy Music Phoebus turn
To doleful plaints, whilst Joy it self does mourn*
Dead is thy Darling who adorned thy Bays,
Who often was wont to cherish thy sweet Lays,
And to a Trumpet raise thy amorous Style,
That floting Delos envy might this Isle.
You Acidalian Archers break your Bows,
Your Torches quench, with tears blot Beauties Snows,
And bid your weeping Mother yet again
A second Ado^s death, nay Mars his plain.
His Eyes once were your Darts, nay, even his Name,
Where ever heard, did every Heart inflame.
Tagus did court his Love with Golden Streams,
Rhein with his Towns, fair Seine with all she claims.
But ah (poor Lovers) Death them did betray,
And not suspected made their Hopes his Prey!
Tagus bewailes his Loss in Golden Streams,
Rhein with his Towns, fair Seine with all she claims.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thule to Hydaspes pearly shore.
Eye-pleasing Meads, whose painted Plain forth brings
White, golden, azure Flowers, which once were Kings,
To mourning Black, their shining*Colours dye,
Bow down their Heads, while sighing Zephires fly.
Queen of the fields, whose Blush makes blush the Morn,
Sweet Rose, a Princes Death in Purple mourn.
O Hyacinths for aye your aye keep still,
Nay, with more marks of Woe your Leaves now fill.
And you O Flower of Helens tears that is borne,
Into these liquid Pearls again you turn.
Your green Locks, Forests cut, to weeping Mirres,
To deadly Cypres, and Inke-dropping Firres,
Your Palms and Mirtles change, from shadows dark
Winged Sirens wa^le, and you sad Echoes mark
The lamentable Accents of their Moan,
And plain that brave Moeliades is gone.
Stay Sky thy turning Course, and now become
A stately Arch, unto the Earth his Tomb:
And over it still watery Iris keep,
And sad Electras Sisters which still weep:
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore,
From Thule to Hydaspes pearly shore.
Dear Ghost forgive these our untimely Tears,
By which our loving Mind, though weak appears,
Our Loss not Thine (when we complain) we weep,
For, Thee the glistring Walls of Heaven do keep,
Beyond the Planets Wheels, 'bove highest Source
Of Spheres; that turns the lower in his Course.
Where Sun does never set, nor ugly Night
Ever appears in mourning Garments dight:
Where Boreas stormy Trumpet does not sound,
Nor Clouds, in Lightnings bursting, Minds astound.
From Cares cold Climates far, and hot Desire,
Where Time's exiled, and Ages never expire:
Among purest Spirits environed with Beams,
Thou think all things below, to have been but dreams;
And joy'st to look down to the azur'd Bars
Of Heaven powd'red with Troops of streaming Stars:
And in their turning Temples to behold,
In silver Robe the Moon, the Sun in Gold;
Like young Eye-speaking Lovers in a Dance,
With Majesty by Turns, retire, advance.
Thou wondrest Earth to see hang like a Ball,
Closed in the mighty Cloister of this All:
And that poor Men should prove so madly fond,
To toss themselves for a small spot of Ground.
Nay, that they even dare brave the Powers above*
From this base Stage of Change, that cannot move.
All worldly Pomp, and Pride thou see arise
Like Smoke that is scatt'red in the empty Skies.
Other high Hills and Forests other Towers,
Amazed thou findst excelling our poor Bowers,
Courts void of Flattery, of Malice Minds,
Pleasure which lasts, not such as Reason blinds.
Thou sweeter Songs do hear, and Carrollings*
Whilst Heavens do dance, and Quires of Angels sings,
Then muddy Minds could feign, even our Annoy
(If it approach that Place) is changed to Joy.
Rest blessed soul, rest satiate with the sight
Of him whose Beams (though dazzling) do delight,
Life of all lives, Cause of each other cause,
The Sphere and Center where the Mind does pause:
Narcissus of himself, himself the Well,
Lover, and Beauty that does all excel.
Rest happy Soul, and wonder in that Glass,
Where seen is all that shall be, is, or was,
While shall be, is, or was, do pass away,
And nothing be, but an Eternal Day.
For ever rest, thy Praise Fame will enroule
In golden Annals, while about the Pole
The slow Boots turns, or Sun does rise
With scarlet Scarce to cheer the mourning Skies.
The Virgins to thy Tomb will Garlands bear
Of Flowers, and with each Flower let fall a Tear.
Moeliades sweet courtly Nymphs deplore
From Thule to Hydaspes pearly shore.
William Drummond.

OF JET,
Or PORPHYRIE,
Or that white Stone
PAROS affords alone,
Or these in AZURE dye,
Which seem to scorn the SKY;
Here Memphis Wonders do not set,
Nor ARTEMISIA'S huge Frame,
That keeps so long her Lovers Name:
Make no great marble Atlas stoop with Gold
To please the Vulgar EYE shall it behold.
The Muses, Phoebus, Love, have raised of their tears
A Crystal Tomb to him, through which his worth appears.
STay Passenger, see where enclosed lies,
The Paragon of Princes, fairest Frame,
Time, Nature, Place, could show to mortal Eyes
In Worth, Wit, Virtue, Miracle of Fame:
At least that Part the Earth of him could clame,
This Marble holds ( hard like the Destinies)
For as to his brave Spirit, and glorious Name,
The One the World, the other fills the Skies.
The Immortal Amaranthus, princely Rose,
Sad Violet, and that sweet Flower that bears,
In Sanguine Spots the Tenor of our Woes,
Spread on this Stone, and wash it with your Tears
Then go and tell from Gades unto Inde,
You saw where Earths Perfections were confined.
SON.
A Passing Glance, a Lightning long the skies
Which ush'ring Thunder, dies straight to our sight,
A Spark that does from jarring mixtures rise,
Thus drowned is in the huge Depths of Day and Night:
Is this small trifle, Life, held in such Price,
Of blinded Wights, who never judge Ought aright?
Of Parthian shaft so swift is not the Flight,
As Life, that wastes it self, and living dies.
Ah, what is humane Greatness, Valor, Wit?
What fading Beauty, Riches, Honor, Praise?
To what does serve in golden Thrones to sit,
Thrall Earths vaste Round, triumphall Arches raise?
That Is all a Dream learn in this Princes Fall,
In whom save Death, naught mortal was at all.
William Drummond.

To the Reader.
THe Name, which in these Verses is given unto Prince Henry, is that which he
Himself in the Challenges of his Martial Sports, and Mascarads, was wont to
use, MOELIADES Prince of the Isles: which in Anagram makes a Word most worthy
of such a Knight as He was, a Knight (if Time had suffered his Actions answer
the Worlds expectation) only worthy of such a Word, Miles A Deo.

MADRIGALS AND EPIGRAMS.
Madrigals and Epigrams*
The Statue of Medusa.
OF that Medusa strange,
Who those that did her see in Rocks did change,
No Image carved is this;
Medusa's self it is:
For while at heat of Day
To quench her Thirst She by this Spring did stay,
Her hideous Head beholding in this Glass,
Her Senses failed, and thus transformed she was.
The Pourtrait of Mars and Venus.
Fair Paphos wanton Queen
(Not drawn in White and Red)
Is truly here, as when in Vulcans Bed
She was of all Heavens laughing Senate seen.
Gaze on her Hair, and Eine,
Her Brows, the Bows of Love,
Her back with Lillies spread:
Ye also might perceive her turn and move,
But that She neither so will do, nor dare,
For fear to wake the angry God of War.
Narcissus.
Floods cannot quench my Flames, ah! in this Well
I burn, not drown, for what I cannot tell.
Dameta's Dream.
DAmetas dreamed he saw his Wife at Sport,
And found that sight was through the horny Port.
Cherries.
MY Wanton weep no more
The losing of your Cherries,
Those, and far sweeter Berries,
Your Sister in good store
Has in her Lips and Face,
Be glad, kiss her with me, and hold your peace.
Icarus.
WHile with audacious Wings
I cleav'd th^se airy Ways,
And filled (a Monster new) with Dread and Fears,
The feathered People and their Eagle Kings:
Dazell'd with Phoebus Rays,
And charmed with the Music of the Spheres,
When Quills could move no more and force did fail,
Though down I fell from Heavens high azure bounds:
Yet does Renown my Losses countervaile,
For still the Shore my brave attempt resounds.
A Sea an Element does bear my Name,
What Mortals Tombe's so great in Place or Fame.
On his Lady, beholding her self in a Marble.
WOrld wonder not, that I
Keep in my breast engraven
That Angels face has me of Rest bereaven.
See Dead and Senseless things cannot deny
To lodge so dear a Guest:
Even this hard Marble Stone
Receives the same, and loves, but cannot groan.
To sleep.
HOw comes it Sleep, that thou
Even kisses me affords
Of her (dear her) so far who is absent now?
How did I hear those Words,
Which Rocks might move, and move the Pines to Bow?
Aye me, before half day
Why did thou steal away?
Return, I thine for ever will remain,
If thou will bring with thee that Guest again.
A pleasant deceit.
OVer a crystal Source
Iolas laid his face,
Of purling Streams to see the restless Course.
But scarce he had o'reshadowed the Place,
When in the water he a Child espies,
So like himself in stature, Face, and Eyes,
That glad he rose, and cried,
Dear Mates approach, see whom I have descried,
The Boy of whom strange stories Shepherds tell,
Oft-called Hylas, dwells in this Well.
The Canon.
WHen first the Canon from her gaping Throat
Against the Heaven her roaring Sulphur shot,
Jove wakened with the noise did ask with wonder,
What Mortal Wight had stolen from him his Thunder:
His crystal Towers he feared, but Fire and Air
So high did stay the Ball from mounting there.
Thais Metamorphosis.
INto Briareus huge
Thais wished she might change
Her Man, and prayed him not thereat to grudge,
Nor fondly think it strange;
For if (said she) I might the parts dispose,
I wish you not a hundred Arms nor Hands,
But hundred things like those
With which Priapus in our Garden stands.
The quality of a Kiss.
THe kiss with so much strife
Which I late got (sweet Heart)
Was it a sign of Death, or was it Life?
Of Life it could not be,
For I by it did sigh my Soul in thee:
Ne was it Death, Death does no joy impart.
Thou silent stand'st, ah! what did thou bequeath,
A dying Life to me, or living Death?
His Ladies Dog.
WHen Her dear Bosom clips
That little Cur, which fawnes to touch her Lips,
Or when it is his hap
To lie lap'd in her Lap,
O it grows Noon with me,
With hotter-pointed Beams
I burn, then those are which the Sun forth streams,
When piercing lightning his Rays called may be:
And as I muse how I to shose extremes
Am brought, I find no Cause, except that She
In Loves bright Zodiac having traced each Room,
To the hot Dog Star now at last is come.
An Almanac.
THis strange Eclipse one says
Strange Wonders does foretell;
But you whose Wives excel,
And love to count their Praise,
Shut all your gates, your Hedges plant with Thorns,
The Sun did threat the World this time with Horns.
The Silk-Worme of Love.
A Daedale of my Death
Now I resemble that sly worm on Earth*
Which prone to its own harm does take no rest:
For Day and Night oppressed,
I feed on fading Leaves
Of Hope which me deceives,
And thousand Webs do warpe within my Breast,
And thus in end unto my self I weave
A fast-shut Prison, or a closer Grave.
Deep impression of Love to his Mistress.
WHom a mad Dog does bite,
He does in Water still
That mad Dogs Image see:
Love mad (perhaps) when he my Heart did smite
(More to dissemble his Ill)
Transformed himself to thee:
For thou art present ever since to me.
No Spring there is, no Flood, nor other Place,
Where I (alas) not see thy Heavenly Face.
A Chain of Gold.
ARe not those Locks of Gold
Sufficient Chains the wildest Hearts to hold?
Is not that Ivory Hand
A Diamantine Band,
Most sure to keep the most untamed Mind,
But ye must others find?
O yes* why is that Golden One then wo^ne?
Thus free in Chains (perhaps) Loves Chains to scorn.
On the Death of a Linnet.
IF cruel Death had Ears,
Or could be pleased by Songs,
This winged Musician had l^v'd many years,
And Nisa mine had never w^pt these Wrongs:
For when it first took Breath,
The Heavens their Notes did unto it bequeath:
And if that Samians sentences be true,
Amphion in this Body lived anew.
But Death, who nothing spares, and nothing hears,
As he does Kings, killed it, O Grief! O Tears!
Lillas Prayer.
LOve if thou will once more
That I to thee return,
(Sweet God) make me not burn
For quivering Age, that does spent Days deplore.
Nor do thou wound my Heart
For some unconstant Boy
Who joys to love, yet makes of Love a Toy.
But ( ah!) if I must prove thy golden Dart,
Of grace, O let me find
A sweet young Lover with an aged Mind.
Thus Lilla prayed, and Idas did reply,
(Who heard) Dear have thy wish, for such am I.
Armelins Epitaph.
Near to this Eglantine
Enclosed lies the milke-white Armeline;
Once Cloris only joy,
Now only her annoy,
Who envied was of the most happy Swains
That keep their Flocks in Mountains, Dales, or Plains:
For often she bore the wanton in her Arm,
And often her Bed, and Bosom did he warm;
Now when unkinder Fates did him destroy,
Blessed Dog he had the Grace,
That Cloris for him wet with tears her Face.
Epitaph.
THe Bawd of Justice, he who Laws controlled,
And made them fawn, and frown as he got gold,
That Proteus of our State, whose Heart and Mouth
Were farther distant than is North from South,
That Cormorant who made himself so gross
On Peoples Ruin, and the Princes Loss,
Is gone to Hell, and though he here did evil,
He there perchance may prove an honest Devil.
A Translation.
FIerce Robbers were of old
Exiled the Champian Ground,
From Hamlets chased, in Cities killed, or bound*
And only Woods, Caves, Mountains, did them hold:
But now (when all is sold)
Woods, Mountains, Caves, to good Men be refuge,
And do the Guiltless lodge,
And clad in Purple Gowns
The greatest Thieves command within the Towns.
Epitaph.
THen Death thee has beguiled
Alectos first borne Child;
Then thou who thrall'd all Laws
Now against Worms cannot maintain thy Cause:
Yet Worms (more just than thou) now do no Wrong,
Since all do wonder they thee spared so long;
For though from Life thou did but lately pass,
Twelve Springs are gone since thou corrupted was.
Come Citizens, erect to death an Altar,
Who keeps you from Axe, Fuel Timber, Halter.
A Jest.
IN a most holy Church, a holy man,
Unto a holy Saint with Visage wan,
And Eyes like Fountains, mumbled forth a Prayer,
And with strange Words and Sighs made black the Air.
And having long so stayed, and long long prayed,
A thousand crosses on himself he laid,
And with some sacred Beads hung on his Arm^
His Eyes, his Mouth, his Temples, Breast did charm.
Thus not content (strange Worship has no end)
To kiss the Earth at last he did pretend,
And bowing down besought with humble grace,
An aged Woman near to give some place:
She turned, and turning up her Hole beneath,
Said, Sir kiss here, for it is all but Earth.
Proteus of Marble.
THis is no work of Stone,
Though it seems breathless, cold, and sense has non^;
But that (...) God which keeps
The monstro^^ people of the raging Deeps:
Now that he does not change his shape this while,
It is thus constant more you to beguile.
Pamphilus.
SOme Ladies wed, some love, and some adore them,
I like their wanton sport, then care not for them.
Apelles enamored of Campaspe, Alexanders Mistress.
Poor Painter while I sought
To counterfeit by Art
The fairest Frame which Nature ever wrought,
And having limm'd each Part
Except her matchless Eyes:
Scarce on those Suns I gazed,
As Lightning falls from Skies,
When straight my Hand grew weak, my Mind amazd,
And ere that Pencill half them had expressed*
Love had them drawn, no, engraved them in my Breast.
Campaspe.
ON Stars shall I exclaim,
Which thus my Fortune change,
Or shall I else revenge
Upon my self this shame,
Inconstant Monarch, or shall I thee blame
Who lets Apelles prove
The sweet Delights of Alexanders Love?
No, Stars, my self, and thee, I all forgive,
And Joys, that thus I live;
Of thee, blind King, my Beauty was despised,
Thou did not know it, now being known it is prized.
Cornucopia.
IF for one only Horn,
Which Nature to him gave,
So famous is the noble Unicorne?
What praise should that Man have,
Whose Head a Lady brave
Does with a goodly pair at once adorn?
Love suffers no Parasol.
THose Eyes, dear Eyes, be Spheres
Where two bright Suns are rolled,
That fair Hand to behold
Of whitest Snow appears:
Then while ye coyly stand
To hide from me those Eyes,
Sweet I would you advise
To choose some other fan than that white Hand:
For if ye do, for truth most true this know,
Those Suns ere long must needs consume warm Snow.
Unpleasant Music.
IN fields Ribaldo strayed
Mayes Tapestry to see,
And hearing on a Tree
A Cuckoo sing, sighed to himself and said,
Lo how alas even Birds sit mocking me.
Sleeping Beauty.
O Sight too dearly bought!
She sleeps, and though those Eyes
Which lighten Cupids Skies
Be closed, yet such a grace
Environeth that Place,
That I through Wonder to grow faint am brought:
Suns if eclipsed you have such power divine,
What power have I to endure you when you shine?
Alcons Kiss.
WHat others at their Ear,
Two Pearls, Camilla at her Nose did wear,
Which Alcon who naught saw
(For Love is blind) robbed with a pretty Kiss;
But having known his miss,
And felt what Ore he from that Mine did draw,
When she to come again did him desire,
He fled, and said, foul Water quenched Fire.
The Statue of Venus sleeping.
PAssenger vex not thy Mind
To make me mine Eyes unfold;
For if thou should them behold,
Thine perhaps they will make blind.
Laura to Petrarch.
I Rather love a Youth and childish Rhyme,
Than thee whose Verse and Head are wise through Time.
The Rose.
Flower which of Adons Blood
Sprang, when of that clear Flood
Which Venus wept, another white was borne:
The sweet Cynarean Youth thou lively shows,
But this sharpe-pointed Thorn
So proud about thy Crimsin Folds that grows,
What does it represent?
Boares Teeth (perhaps) his milk-white Flank which rent.
O show in one of unesteemed Worth
That both the killed, and killer sets forth!
A Lovers Prayer.
Near to a Crystal Spring,
With Thirst and Heat oppressed,
Narcissa fair does rest,
Trees, pleasant Trees which those green plains forth bring
Now interlace your trembling Tops above,
And make a Canopy unto my Love;
So in Heavens highest House when Sun appears,
Aurora may you cherish with her Tears.
Iolas Epitaph.
HEre dear Iolas lies,
Who whilst he lived in Beauty did surpass
That Boy, whose heavenly Eyes
Brought Cypris from above,
Or him to death who looked in watery Glass,
Even Judge the God of Love.
And if the Nymph once held of him so dear
Dorine the fair, would here but shed one Tear,
Thou should in Natures scorn
A Purple Flower see of this Marble borne.
The Trojan Horse.
A Horse I am, who bit,
Reine, rod, Spur do not fear,
When I my Riders bear,
Within my Womb, not on my Back they sit.
No streams I drink, nor care for Grass or Corn;
Art me a Monster wrought
All Natures works to scorn;
A Mother I was without Mother borne,
In end all armed my Father I forth brought:
What thousand Ships, and Champions of renown
Could not do free, captived I razed Troy's Town.
For Dorus.
WHy Nais stand ye nice
Like to a well wrought Stone,
When Dorus would you kiss?
Deny him not that bliss,
He Is but a Child (old Men be Children twice)
And even a Toothlesse one:
And when his Lips yours touch in that delight
Ye need not fear he will those Cherries bite.
Love vagabonding.
SWeet Nymphs, if as ye stray
Ye find the froth-borne Goddess of the Sea,
All blubb'red, pale, undone,
Who seeks her giddy Son,
That little God of Love,
Whose golden shafts your chastests Bosoms prove;
Who leaving all the Heavens has run away:
If ought to him that finds him she will impart
Tell her he nightly lodges in my Heart.
To a River.
Since She will not that I
She to the World my Joy,
Thou who often mine annoy
Have heard dear Flood, tell Thetis if thou can
That not a happier Man
Does breathe beneath the Sky.
More sweet, more white, more fair,
Lips, Hands, and Amber Hair,
Tell none did ever touch,
A smaller daintier Waste
Tell never was embraced
But peace, since she forbids thee tell too much.
Lida.
SVch Lida is, that who her sees,
Through Envy, or through Love, straight dies.
Phraene.
A Onian Sisters help my Phraenes Praise to tell,
Phraene heart of my heart, with whom the Graces dwell,
For I surcharged am so sore that I not know
What first to praise of (...) Breast, or Neck of Snow,
Her Cheeks with Roses spread, or her two Sun-like Eyes,
Her teeth of brightest pearl, her lips where Sweetness lies:
But those so praise themselves, being to all Eyes set forth,
That Muses ye need not to say ought of their Worth,
Then her white swelling Paps essay for to make known,
But her white swelling paps through smallest vail are shown;
Yet She has something else more worthy than the rest
Not seen go sing of that which lies beneath her breast,
And mounts like fair Parnasse, where Pegasse well does run;
Here Phraene stayed my Muse ere she had well begun.
Kisses desired.
THough I with strange Desire
To kiss those rosy Lips am set on fire,
Yet will I cease to crave
Sweet kisses in such store,
As he who long before
In thousands them from Lesbia did receive:
Sweet heart but once me kiss,
And I by that sweet bliss
Even swear to cease you to importune more;
Poor one no number is.
Another Word of me ye shall not hear
After one Kiss but still one Kiss my Dear*
Desired Death.
Dear Life while I do touch
These Corrall Ports of bliss,
Which still themselves do kiss,
And sweetly me invite to do as much.
All panting in my Lips,
My Heart my life does leave,
No sense my Senses have,
And inward Powers do find a (...) Eclipse:
This Death so heavenly well
Does so me please, that I
Would never longer seek in sense to dwell,
If that even thus I only could but dye.
Phoebe.
IF for to be alone, and all the Night to wander,
Maids can prove chaste, then chaste is Phoebe without slander.
Answer.
Fool, still to be alone, all Night in Heaven to wander,
Would make the wanton chaste, then she is chaste without slander.
The cruelty of Rora.
WHilst sighing forth his Wrongs,
In sweet, though doleful Songs,
Alexis sought to charm his Roras Ears,
The Hills were heard to moan,
To sigh each Spring appeared,
Trees, hardest Trees through Rine distilled their Tears,
And soft grew every Stone:
But Tears, nor Sighs, nor Songs could Rora move,
For she rejoiced at his plaint and love.
A Kiss.
Hark, happy Lovers, hark,
This first and last of Joys,
This sweetner of Annoyes,
This Nectar of the Gods,
You call a Kiss, is with it self at ods:
And half so sweet is not
In equal Measure got,
At light of Sun, as it is in the dark,
Hark, happy Lovers, hark.
Kalas Complaint.
KAla old Mopsus Wife,
Kala with fairest Face,
For whom the Neighbor Swains often were at strife,
As she to milk her snowy Flock did tend,
Sighed with a heavy Grace,
And said: What wretch like me does lead her life?
I see not how my Task shall have an end:
All Day I draw these streaming Dugs in Fold,
All Night mine empty Husband soft and cold.
Phillis.
IN Peticoat of green,
Her Hair about her Eine,
Phillis beneath an Oak
Sat milking her fair flock:
Amongst that sweet-strained moisture (rare delight)
Her hand seemed milk, in milk it was so white.
A Wish.
TO forge to mighty Jove
The thunderbolts above,
Nor on this Round below
Rich Midas skill to know,
And make all Gold I touch,
Do I desire, it is for me too much;
Of all the Arts practiced beneath the Sky,
I would but Phillis Lapidarie be.
Nisa.
NIsa, Palemons Wife, him weeping told
He kept not Grammar rules now being old;
For why (quoth she) position false make ye,
Putting a short thing where a long should be.
A Lovers Heaven.
THose Stars, nay Suns, which turn
So stately in their Spheres,
And dazeling do not burn,
The Beauty of the Morn
Which on these cheek^ appears,
The Harmony which to that voice is given,
Makes me think you are Heaven.
If Heaven you be, O that by powerful Charms,
I A^las were enfolded in your arms?
Epitaph.
THis dear, though not-respected Earth, does hold
One for his worth whose Tomb should be of gold.
Beauties Idea.
WHo would Perfections fair Idea see,
On pretty Cloris let him look with me;
White is her hair, her Teeth white, white her Skin,
Black be her Eyes, her Eyebrows Cupids Inn:
Her Locks, her Body, hands do long appear,
But Teeth short, short her Womb, and either Ear;
The space 'twixt Shoulders, Eyes are wide, Brow wide,
Strait Waste, the Mouth strait, and her virgin Pride.
Thick are her Lips, Thighs, with Banks swelling there,
Her Nose is small, small Fingers, and her Hair:
Her sugared Mouth, her Cheeks, her Nails be red,
Little her Foot, Breast little, and her Head.
Such Venus was, such was that Flame of Troy,
Such Cloris is, mine Hope, and only Joy.
Lalus Death.
AMidst the Waves profound,
Far, far from all Relief,
The honest Fisher Lalus, ah! is drowned,
Shut this little Skiffe:
The Boards of which did serve him for a Biere,
So that when he to the black World came near
Of him no Silver greedy Charon got,
For he in his own Boat
Did pass that Flood, by which the Gods do swear.
FLOWERS of SION: OR SPIRITUAL POEMS,
By W. D.
TRiumphant Arches, Statues crowned with Bays,
Proud Obeliskes, Tombs of the vastest Frame,
Brazen Colosses Atlases of Fame,
And Temples builded to vain Deities praise:
States which unsatiate Minds in blood do raise,
From Southern Pole unto the Artick Teame,
And even what we write to keep our Name,
Like Spiders Caules are made the sport of Days;
All only constant is in constant Change:
What done is, is undone, and when undone,
Into some other figure does it range,
Thus rolls the restless World beneath the Moon:
Wherefore (my Mind) above Time, Motion, Place,
Aspire, and Steps, not reached by Nature, trace.
A Good that never satisfies the Mind,
A Beauty fading like the April flowers,
A Sweet with floods of Gall that runs combined,
A Pleasure passing ere in thought made ours,
A Honor that more fickle is than wind,
A Glory at Opinions frown that low'rs,
A Treasury which bankrupt Time devoures,
A Knowledge than grave Ignorance more blind:
A vain Delight our equals to command,
A Style of greatness, in effect a Dream,
A swelling Thought of holding Sea and Land,
A servile Lot, decked with a pompous Name:
Are the strange Ends we toil for here below,
Till wisest Death make us our errors know,
LIfe a right shadow is,
For if it long appear,
Then is it spent, and Deaths long Night draws near;
Shadows are moving, light,
And is there ought so moving as is this?
When it is most in Sight,
It steals away, and none knows how or where,
So near our Cradles to our Coffins are.
LOok as the Flower which lingringly does fade,
The Mornings Darling late, the Summers Queen,
Spoiled of that Juice which kept it fresh and green,
As high as it did raise, bows low the head:
Right so the pleasures of my Life being dead,
Or in their Contraries but only seen,
With swifter speed declines than erst it spread,
And (blasted) scarce now shows what it has been.
Therefore, as does the Pilgrim, whom the Night
Have darkly to imprison on his way,
Think on thy Home (my Soul) and think aright,
Of what is yet left thee of Life's wasting Day;
Thy Sun posts Westward, passed is thy Morn,
And twice it is not given thee to be borne.
THe weary Mariner so far not flies
An howling Tempest, Harbor to attain,
Nor Shepherd hasts (when frayes of Wolves arise
So fast to Fold to save his bleating train,
As I (winged with Contempt and just Disdain)
Now fly the World, and what it most does prize,
And Sanctuary seek free to remain
From wounds of abject Times, and Envies eyes;
To me this World did once seem sweet and fair,
While Senses light, Minds Perspective kept blind;
Now like imagined Landscape in the Air,
And weeping Raine-bows her best Joys I find:
Or if ought here is had that praise should have,
It is an obscure Life, and silent Grave.
OF this fair Volume which we World do name,
If we the sheets and leaves could turn with care,
Of him who it corrects, and did it frame,
We clear might read the Art and Wisdom rare,
Find out his Power which wildest Powers does tame,
His Providence extending everywhere,
His Justice which proud Rebels does not spare,
In every Page, no, Period of the same:
But silly we like foolish Children rest,
Well pleased with colored Velum, Leaves of Gold,
Fair dangling Ribbands, leaving what is best,
On the great Writers sense never taking hold;
Or if by chance we stay our Minds on ought,
It is some Picture on the Margin wrought.
THe Grief was common, common were the cries,
Tears, Sobs, and Groans of that afflicted Train,
Which of Gods chosen did the Sum contain,
And Earth rebounded with them, pierced were Skies;
All good had left the World, each Vice did reign
In the most monstrous sorts Hell could devise,
And all Degrees, and each Estate did stain,
Nor further had to go whom to surprise;
The World beneath, the Prince of Darkness lay,
And in each Temple had himself installed,
Was sacrificed unto, by Prayers called,
Responses gave, which (fools) they did obey:
When (pitying Man) God of a Virgins womb
Was borne, and those false Deities struck dumb.
RUn (Shepherds) run, where Bethlem blessed appears,
We bring the best of News, be not dismayed,
A Savior there is borne, more old than years,
Amidst the rolling Heaven this Earth who stayed;
In a poor Cottage Inn'd, a Virgin Maid,
A weakling did him bear who all upbeares,
There he in Clothes is wrapped, in Manger laid,
To whom too narrow Swadlings are our Spheres.
Run (Shepherds) run, and solemnize his Birth,
This is that Night, no, Day grown great with Bliss,
In which the Power of Satan broken is,
In Heaven be Glory, Peace unto the Earth;
Thus singing through the Air the Angels swame,
And all the Stars re-ecchoed the same.
O Than the fairest day, thrice fairer night,
Night to best Days, in which a Sun does rise,
Of which the golden Eye which cleares the Skies,
Is but a sparkling Ray, a Shadow light;
And blessed ye (in silly Pastors sight)
Mild Creatures in whose warm Crib now lies,
That Heaven-sent Youngling, holy-Maid-born Wight,
'Midst, end, beginning of our Prophesies:
Blessed Cottage that has Flowers in Winter spread,
Though withered blessed Grass, that has the grace
To deck and be a Carpet to that Place.
Thus singing to the sounds of oaten Reed
Before the Babe, the Shepherds bowed their knees,
And Springs ran Nectar, Honey dropped from Trees.
TO spread the azure Canopy of Heaven,
And make it twinkle with those spangs of Gold,
To stay the pondrous Globe of Earth so even,
That it should all, and naught should it uphold;
To give strange motions to the Planets seven,
Or Jove to make so meek, or Mars so bold,
To temper what is moist, dry, hot, and cold,
Of all their Jars that sweet accords are given:
Lord, to thy Wisdom's naught; naught to thy Might,
But that thou should (thy Glory laid aside)
Come meanly in mortality to 'bide,
And die for those deserved eternal plight,
A wonder is so far above our wit,
That Angels stand amazed to muse on it.
THe last and greatest Herald of Heavens King,
Girt with rough Skins, hies to the Deserts wild,
Among that savage brood the Woods forth bring,
Which he more harmless found than man, and mild;
His food was Locusts, and what there does spring,
With Honey that from Virgin Hives distilled,
Parcht Body, hollow Eyes, some uncouth thing
Made him appear, long since from Earth exiled,
There burst he forth, all ye whose Hopes rely
On God, with me amidst these Deserts mourn,
Repent, repent, and from old errors turn.
Who list'ned to his voice, obeyed his cry;
Only the Echoes, which he made relent,
Rung from their flinty Caves, repent, repent.
THese Eyes (dear Lord) once Tapers of Desire,
Frail Scouts betraying what they had to keep,
Which their own heart, then others set on fire,
Their traitorous black before thee here out-weep;
These Locks of blushing deeds, the gilt attire,
Waves curling, wrackfull shelves to shadow deep,
Rings wedding Souls to Sins lethargick sleep,
To touch thy sacred Feet do now aspire.
In Seas of care behold a sinking Bark,
By winds of sharp remorse unto thee driven,
O let me not be Ruins aimed at mark,
My faults confessed (Lord) say they are forgiven.
Thus sighed to Jesus the Bethanian fair,
His teare-wet Feet still drying with her Hair.
I changed Countries new delights to find,
But ah! for pleasure I did find new pain,
Enchanting Pleasure so did Reason blind,
That Fathers love and words I scorned as vain:
For Tables rich, for bed, for following train
Of careful servants to observe my Mind,
These Herds I keep my fellows are assigned,
My Bed's a Rock, and Herbs my Life sustain.
Now while I famine feel, fear worser harms,
Father and Lord I turn, thy Love (yet great)
My faults will pardon, pity mine estate,
This where an aged Oak had spread its Arms
Thought the lost Child, while as the Herds he led,
And pined with hunger on wild Acorns fed.
IF that the World does in amaze remain,
To hear in what a sad deploring mood,
The Pelican poures from her breast her Blood,
To bring to life her younglings back again?
How should we wonder at that sovereign Good,
Who from that Serpents sting (that had us slain)
To save our lives, shed his Life's purple flood,
And turned to endless Joy our endless Pain?
Ungrateful Soul, that charmed with false Delight,
Have long long wandered in Sins flowery Path,
And did not think at all, or thoughtst not right
On this thy Pelicans great Love and Death,
Here pause, and let (though Earth it scorn) heaven se^
Thee pour forth tears to him poured Blood for thee.
IF in the East when you do there behold
Forth from his Crystal Bed the Sun to rise,
With rosy Robes and Crown of flaming Gold;
If gazing on that Empress of the Skies
That takes so many forms, and those fair Brands
Which blaze in Heavens high Vault, Nights watchful eyes;
If seeing how the Seas tumultuous Bands
Of bellowing Billows have their course confined,
How unsustain'd the Earth still steadfast stands;
Poor mortal Wights, you e're found in your Mind
A thought, that some great King did sit above,
Who had such Laws and Rites to them assigned?
A King who fixed the Poles, made Spheres to move,
All Wisdom, Pureness, Excellency, Might,
All Goodness, Greatness, Justice, Beauty, Love;
With fear and wonder hither turn your Sight,
See, see (alas) him now, not in that State
Thought could forecast Him into Reasons light.
Now Eyes with tears, now Hearts with grief make great,
Bemoane this cruel Death and ruthful case,
If ever Plaints just Woe could aggravate?
From Sin and Hell to save us humane Race,
See this great King nailed to an abject Tree,
An object of reproach and sad disgrace.
O unheard Pity! Love in strange degree!
He his own Life does give, his Blood does shed,
For Wormelings base such Worthiness to see.
Poor Wights, behold his Visage pale as Lead,
His Head bowed to His Breast, Locks sadly rent,
Like a cropped Rose that languishing does fade.
Weak Nature weep, astonished World lament,
Lament, you Winds, you Heaven that all contains,
And thou (my Soul) let naught thy Griefs relent.
Those Hands, those sacred Hands which hold the reins
Of this great All, and kept from mutual wars
The Elements, bear rent for thee their Veins:
Those Feet which once must trade on golden Stars,
For thee with Nails would be pierced through and torn,
For thee Heavens King from Heaven himself debars:
This great heart-quaking Dolor wail and mourn*
Ye that long since Him saw by might of Faith,
Ye now that are, and ye yet to be borne.
Not to behold his great Creators Death,
The Sun from sinful eyes has veiled his light,
And faintly journies up Heavens saphyre Path:
And cutting from her Brows her Tresses bright,
The Moon does keep her Lords sad Obsequ^es,
Impearling with her Tears her Robe of Night.
All staggering and lazy lowre the Skies,
The Earth and elementall Stages quake,
The long-since dead from bursted Graves arise.
And can things wanting sense yet sorrow take,
And bear a part with him who all them wrought?
And Man (though borne with cries) shall pity lack?
Think what had been your state, had he not brought
To these sharp Pangs himself, and prized so high
Your souls, that with his Life them life he bought*
What woes do you attend? if still ye lie
Plunged in your wonted ordures? wretched Brood,
Shall for your sake again God ever die?
O leave deluding shows, embrace true good,
He on you calls, forgo Sins shameful trade,
With Prayers now seek Heaven, and not with Blood.
Let not the Lambs more from their Dams be had,
Nor Altars blush for sin, live every thing,
That long time longed for sacrifice is made.
All that is from you craved by this great King
Is to believe, a pure Heart Incense is,
What gift (alas) can we him meaner bring?
Haste sin-sick Souls, this season do not miss,
Now while remorselesse Time does grant you space,
And God invites you to your only Bliss:
He who you calls will not deny you Grace,
But low-deep bury faults, so ye repent,
His Arms (lo) stretched are you to embrace.
When Days are done, and Life's small spark is spent,
So you accept what freely here is given,
Like brood of Angels deathlesse, all-content,
Ye shall for ever live with him in Heaven.
COme forth, come forth, ye blessed triumphing Bands,
Fair Citizens of that immortal Town,
Come see that King which all this All commands,
Now (overcharged with Love) die for his own;
Look on those Nails which pierce his Feet and Hands,
What a sharp Diadem his Brows does crown?
Behold his pallid Face, his heavy frown,
And what a throng of Thieves him mocking stands,
Come forth ye Empyrean Troops, come forth,
Preserve this sacred Blood that Earth adornes,
Gather those liquid Roses off his Thorns,
O! to be lost they be of too much worth:
For Streams1, Juice2, Balm3 they are, which quench1, kills2, charms3
Of God1, Death2, Hell3, the wrath1, the life2, the harms3.
Soul, whom Hell did once inthrall,
He, He for thine offense,
Did suffer Death, who could not die at all.
O sovereign Excellence,
O life of all that lives,
Eternal Bounty which each good thing gives,
How could Death mount so high?
No wit this Point can reach,
Faith only does us teach,
He died for us at all who could not dye.
LIfe to give life, deprived is of Life,
And Death displayed has Ensign against Death;
So violent the Rigor was of Death,
That naught could daunt it but the Life of Life:
No Power had Power to thrall Life's Powers to Death,
But willingly Life down has laid Life,
Love gave the wound which wrought this work of Death,
His Bow and Shafts were of the Tree of Life.
Now quakes the Author of eternal Death,
To find that they whom late he rest of Life,
Shall fill his Room above the lists of Death,
Now all rejoice in Death who hope for Life.
Dead Jesus lies, who Death has killed by Death,
No Tomb his Tomb is, but new Source of Life.
RIse from those fragrant Climes, thee now embrace,
Unto this World of Ours O haste thy Race,
Fair Sun, and though contrary ways all year
Thou hold thy course, now with the highest Sheare,
Join thy blew Wheels to hasten Time that low'rs,
And lazy Minutes turn to perfect Hours;
The Night and Death too long a league have made,
To stow the World in Horrors ugly shade:
Shake from thy Locks a Day with Safron rays
So fair, that it outshine all other days,
And yet do not presum^ (great Eye of Light)*
To be that which this Day must make so bright,
See, an Eternal Sun hasts to arise,
Not from the Eastern blushing Seas or Skies*
Or any stranger Worlds Heavens Concaves have,
But from the Darkness of an hollow Grave*
And this is that all-powerfull Sun above,
That crowned thy Brows with Rays, first made thee mo^
Lights Trumpeters, ye need not from your Bowers
Proclaim this Day, this the angelick Powers
Have done for you; But now an opall hew
Bepaints Heavens Crystal, to the longing view
Earths late hid Colors shine, Light does adorn
The World, and (weeping Joy) forth comes the Morn;
And with her, as from a Lethargick Trance
The breath returned that Bodies does advance,
Which two sad Nights in Rock lay coffined dead,
And with an iron Guard environed:
Life out of Death, Light out of Darkness springs,
From a base Jaile forth comes the King of Kings;
What late was mortal, thrall'd to every woe,
That lackeys life, or upon sense does grow,
Immortal is, of an eternal Stamp,
Far brighter beaming than the morning Lamp.
So from a black Eclipse out-peares the Sun:
Such [when her course of Days have on her run,
In a far Forest in the pearly East,
And she her self has burnt and spicie Nest]
The lovely Bird with youthful Pens and Comb,
Does sore from out her Cradle and her Tomb:
So a small seed that in the Earth lies hid
And dies, reviving bursts her cloddy Side,
Adorned with yellow Locks, of new is borne,
And does become a Mother great with Corn,
Of Grains brings hundreds with it, which when old,
Enrich the Furrows which do float with Gold.
Hail holy Victor; greatest Victor hail,
That Hell does ransake, against Death prevail,
O how thou longed for come! with joyful cries,
The all-triumphing Palatines of Skies
Salute thy rising, Earth would Joys no more
Bear, if thou rising did them not restore:
A silly Tomb should not his Flesh enclose*
Who did Heavens trembling Tarasses dispose;
No Monument should such a Jewel hold,
No Rock, though Ruby, Diamond, and Gold.
Thou did lament and pity humane Race,
Bestowing on us of thy free-given Grace
More than we forfeited and losed first,
In Eden Rebels when we were accursed.
Then Earth our portion was, Earths Joys but given,
Earth and Earths Bliss thou have exchanged with heaven.
O what a hight of good upon us streams
From the great splendour of thy Bounties Beams?
When we deserved shame, horror, flames of wrath,
Thou bledst our wounds, and suffer did our Death,
But Fathers Justice pleased, Hell, Death overcome,
In triumph now thou risest from thy Tomb,
With Glories which past Sorrows countervaile,
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail.
Hence humble sense, and hence ye Guides of sense,
We now reach Heaven, your weak intelligence
And searching Powers were in a flash made (...),
To learn from all Eternity, that him
The Father bred, then that he here did come
(His Bearers Parent) in a Virgins Womb;
But then when sold, betrayed, crowned, scourged with Thorn,
Nailed to a Tree, all breathless, bloudlesse, torn,
Entombed, him risen from a Grave to find,
Confounds your Cunning, turns, like Moles, you blind.
Death, thou that heretofore still barren wast,
Nay, did each other B^rth eat up and waste,
Imperious, hateful, pitiless, unjust,
Unpartiall equaller of all with dust*
Stern Executioner of heavenly doom,
Made fruitful, now Life's Mother art become,
A sweet relief of Cares the Soul molest,
An Harbinger to Glory, Peace and Rest,
Put off thy mourning Weeds, yield all thy Gall
To daily sinning Life, proud of thy fall,
Assemble all thy Captives, haste to rise,
And every Coarse in Earthquakes where it lies,
Sound from each flowery Grave, and rocky Jaile,
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail.
The World that wanning late and faint did lie,
Applauding to our Joys, thy Victory,
To a young Prime Essays to turn again,
And as ere soyl'd with Sin yet to remain,
Her chilling Agues she begins to miss,
All Bliss returning with the Lord of Bliss.
With greater light Heavens Temples opened shine,
Morns smiling rise, Evens blushing do decline,
Clouds dappled glister, boisterous Winds are calm,
Soft Zephyres do the Fields with sighs embalme,
In silent calmes the Sea has hushed his Roares,
And with enamored Curles does kiss the Shoares:
All-bearing Earth like a new-married Queen,
Her Beauties hightens, in a Gown of Green
Perfumes the Air, her Meads are wrought with flowers,
In colors various* figures, smelling, powers,
Trees wanton in the Groves with leavy Locks,
Her H^lls enameled stand, the Vales, the Rocks
Ring peales of Joy, her Floods and prattling Brooks,
(Stars liquid Mirrors) with serpenting Crooks,
And whispering murmures, sound unto the Maine,
The Golden Age returned is again.
The honey People leave their golden Bowers,
And innocently prey on budding Flowers,
In gloomy Shades percht on the tender Sprayes
The painted Singers fill the Air with Lays:
Seas, Floods, Earth, Air, all diversely do sound,
Yet all their diverse Notes has but one ground,
Re-eccho'd here-down from Heavens azure Veil,
Hail holy Victor, greatest Victor hail.
O Day on which Deaths Adamantine Chain
The Lord did break, did ransack Satan's Reign,
And in triumphing Pomp his Trophies reared,
Be thou blessed ever, henceforth still endeared
With Name of his own Day, the Law to Grace,
Types to their substance yield, to thee give place
The old New Mons, with all festival Days,
And what above the rest deserves praise
The reverend Sabbath, what could else they be
Than golden Heralds, telling what by thee
We should enjoy? Shades past, now shine thou clear,
And henceforth be thou Empress of the year,
This Glory of thy Sisters Sex to win,
From work on thee, as other Days from Sin,
That Mankind shall forbear, in every place
The Prince of Planets warmeth in his race;
And far beyond his paths in frozen Climes;
And may thou be so blessed to out-date Times,
That when Heavens Quire shall blaze in Accents loud
The many Mercies of their sovereign Good,
How he on thee did Sin, Death, Hell destroy,
It may be still the Burden of their Joy.
BEneath a sable veil, and Shadows deep,
Of unaccessible and dimming light,
In silence Ebon clouds more black than Night,
The Worlds great Mind his secrets hid does keep:
Through those thick Mists when any mortal Wight
Aspires, with halting pace, and Eyes that weep
To pry, and in his Mysteries to creep,
With Thunders he and Lightnings blasts their Sight.
O Sun invisible, that do abide
Within thy bright abysmes, most fair, most dark,
Where with thy proper Rays thou do thee hide,
O ever-shining, never full-seene mark,
To guide me in Life's Night, thy light me show,
The more I search of thee, the less I know.
IF with such passing Beauty, choice Delights,
The Architect of this great Round did frame,
This Palace visible, short lists of Fame,
And silly Mansion but of dying Wights;
How many Wonders, what amazing lights
Must that triumphing Seat of Glory claim,
That does transcend all this Alls vaste hights,
Of whose bright Sun ours here is but a beam?
O blessed abode! O happy dewlling place!
Where visibly the Invisible does reign,
Blessed People which do see true Beauties Face,
With whose far Shadows scarce he Earth does daigne:
All Joy is but Annoy, all Concord Strife,
Ma^ch'd with your endless Bliss and happy life.
LOve which is here a care,
That Wit and Will does mar,
Uncertain Truce, and a most certain War,
A shrill tempestuous Wind,
Which does disturb the Mind,
And like wild Waves all our designs commove;
Among those Powers above,
Which see their Makers Face,
It a contentment is, a quiet Peace,
A Pleasure void of Grief, a constant rest,
Eternal Joy, which nothing can molest.
THat space where curled Waves do now divide
From the great Continent our happy Isle,
Was sometime Land, and now where Ships do glide,
Once with laborious Art the Plough did toil:
Once those fair Bounds stretched out so far and wide,
Where Towns, no Shires enwall'd, endeare each mile,
Were all ignoble Sea and marish vile,
Where Proteus Flocks danced measures to the Tide
So Age transforming all still forward runs,
No wonder though the Earth does change her Face,
New Manners, Pleasures new, turn with new Suns,
Locks now like Gold grow to an hoary grace;
Nay, Minds rare shape does change, that lies despised
Which was so dear of late and highly prized.
THis World a Hunting is,
The Prey poor Man, the Nimrod fierce is Death,
His speedy Grayhounds are,
Lust, Sickness, Envy, Care,
Strife that never falls amiss,
With all those ills which haunt us while we breath.
Now, if by chance we fly
Of these the eager chase,
Old Age with stealing pace
Casts on his Nets, and there we panting die.
WHy (Worldlings) do ye trust frail Honors dreams?
And lean to guilted Glories which decay?
Why do ye toil to registrate your Names
On Ycie Pillars, which soon melt away?
True Honor is not here, that place it claims
Where black-brow'd Night does not exile the Day,
Nor no far-shining lamp dives in the Sea,
But an eternal Sun spreads lasting Beams;
There, it attends you, where spotless Bands
Of Spirits stand gazing on their sovereign Bliss,
Where years not hold it in their cank'ring hands,
But who once noble, ever noble is.
Look home, lest he your weakened Wit make thrall,
Who Edens foolish Gardener erst made fall.
AS are those Apples, pleasant to the Eye,
But full of smoke within, which use to grow
Near that strange Lake where God powered from the Sky
Huge showers of flames, worse flames to overthrow:
Such are their works that with a glaring Show
Of humble holiness, in Virtues dye
Would color mischief, while within they glow
With coals of Sin* though none the Smoke descry.
Bad is that Angel that erst fell from Heaven,
But not so bad as he, nor in worse case
Who hides a traitorous mind with smiling face,
And with a Doves white feathers clothes a Raven:
Each Sin some color has it to adorn,
Hypocrisy All-mighty God does scorn.
NEw does the Sun appear,
The Mountains Snows decay,
Crowned with frail flowers forth comes the Infant year;
My Soul, Time posts away,
And thou yet in that frost
Which Flower and fruit has lost,
As if all here immortal were do stay:
For shame thy Powers awake,
Look to that Heaven which never Night makes black,
And there at that immortal Suns bright Rays,
Deck thee with Flowers which fear not rage of Days.
THrice happy he who by some shady Grove,
Far from the clamorous World, does live his own,
Though solitary, who is not alone,
But does converse with that eternal Love:
O how more sweet is Birds harmonious Moan,
Or the hoarse Sobbings of the widowed Dove,
Than those smooth whisperings near a Princes Throne,
Which Good make doubtful do the evil approve?
O how more sweet is Zephyres wholesome Breath,
And Sighs embalmed, which newborn Flowers unfold,
Than that applause vain Honor does bequeath?
How sweet are Streams to poison drank in Gold?
The World is full of Horrors, Troubles, Slights,
Woods harmless Shades have only true Delights*
SWeet Bird, that sing'st away the early Hours,
Of Winters past, or coming void of Care,
Well pleased with Delights which present are,
Fair Seasons, budding Spraies, sweet smelling Flowers:
To Rocks, to Springs, to Rills, from leavy Bowers
Thou thy Creators Goodness do declare,
And what dear Gifts on thee he did not spare,
A stain to humane sense in Sin that low'rs.
What Soul can be so sick, which by thy Songs
(Attired in sweetness) sweetly is not driven
Quite to forget Earths turmoiles, spights, and Wrongs,
And lift a reverend Eye and Thought to Heaven?
Sweet Artlesse Songster, thou my Mind do raise
To Airs of Spheres, yes, and to Angels Lays.
AS when it happens that some lovely Town
Unto a barbarous Besieger falls,
Who both by Sword and Flame himself enstalls,
And (shameless) it in Tears and Blood does drown;
Her Beauty spoiled, her Citizens made Thralls,
His spite yet cannot so her all throw down,
But that some Statue, Pillar of renown,
Yet lurkes unmaim'd within her weeping walls:
So after all the Spoil, Disgrace and Wrack,
That Time, the World, and Death could bring combined,
Amidst that Mass of Ruins they did make,
Safe and all scarlesse yet remains my Mind:
From this so high transcendent Rapture springs,
That I, all else defaced, not envy Kings.
LEt us each day enure our selves to dye,
If this (and not our fears) be truly Death,
Above the Circles both of Hope and Faith
With fair immortal Pinnions to fly;
If this be Death, our best Part to untye
(By ruining the Jaile) from Lust and Wrath,
And every drowsy languor here beneath,
To be made deniz'd Citizen of Sky:
To have more knowledge than all Books contain,
All Pleasures even surmounting wishing Power,
The fellowship of Gods immortal Train,
And these that Time nor force shall e're devour?
If this be Death, What Joy, what golden care
Of Life, can with Deaths ouglinesse compare?
AMidst the azure clear
Of Jordans sacred Streams,
Jordan of Libanon the offspring dear,
When Zephires flowers unclose,
And Sun shines with new Bea^es,
With grave and stately grace a Nymph arose.
Upon her Head she ware
Of Amaranthes a Crown,
Her left hand Palms, her right a Torch did bear,
Unvailed Skins whiteness lay,
Gold hairs in Curles hang down,
Eyes sparkled Joy, more bright than Star of Day.
The Flood a Throne her reared
Of Waves most like that Heaven
Where beaming Stars in Glory turn ensphear'd:
The Air stood calm and clear,
No Sigh by Winds was given,
Birds left to sing, Herds feed, her voice to hear.
World-wandring sorry Wights,
Whom nothing can content
Within these varying lists of Days and Nights,
Whose life (ere known amiss)
In glittering Griefs is spent,
Come learn (said she) what is your choicest Bliss.
From Toil and pressing Cares
How ye may respit find,
A Sanctuary from Soule-thralling Snares,
A Port to harbor sure
In spite of waves and wind,
Which shall when Times swift Glass is run endure.
Not happy is that Life
Which you as happy hold,
No, but a Sea of fears, a Field of strife,
Charged on a Throne to sit
With Diadems of Gold,
Preserved by Force, and still observed by Wit;
Huge Treasures to enjoy,
Of all her Gems spoil Inde,
All Seres silk in Garments to employ,
Deliciously to feed,
The Phoenix plumes to find
To rest upon, or deck your purple Bed.
Frail Beauty to abuse,
And (wanton Sybarites)
On past or present touch of sense to muse;
Never to hear of Noise
But what the Ear delights,
Sweet Musicks charms, or charming flatterers voice.
Nor can it Bliss you bring,
Hid Natures Depths to know,
Why matter changes, whence each form does spring,
Nor that your Fame should range,
And after-Worlds it blow
From Tanais to Nile, from Nile to Gange.
All these have not the Power
To free the Mind from fears,
Nor hideous horror can allay one hour,
When Death in stealth does glance;
In Sickness lurks or years,
And wakes the Soul from out her mortal Tran^e.
No, but blessed life is this,
With chaste and pure Desire
To turn unto the load-star of all Bliss,
On God the Mind to rest,
Burnt up with sacred Fire,
Possessing him to be by him possessed.
When to the ba^lmy East
Sun does his light impart,
Or when he diveth in the lowly West,
And ravisheth the Day,
With spotless Hands and Heart,
Him cheerfully to praise and to him pray.
To heed each action so,
As ever in his sight,
More fearing doing Ill than passive woe;
Not to seem other thing
Than what ye are aright,
Never to do what may Repentance bring:
Not to be blown with Pride,
Nor moved at Glories breath,
Which Shadow-like on wings of Time does glide;
So Malice to disarme,
And conquer hasty Wrath,
As to do good to those that work your harm:
To hatch no base Desires,
Or Gold or Land to gain,
Well pleased with that which Virtue fair acquires,
To have the Wit and Will
Consorting in one Strain,
Than what is good to have no higher skill.
Never on Neighbors Goods,
With Cocatrices Eye
To look, nor make another Heaven your Hell;
Nor to be Beauties Thrall,
All fruitless Love to fly,
Yet loving still a Love transcendent all:
A Love which while it burns
The Soul with fairest Beams,
To that increa^ed Sun the Soul it turns,
And makes such Beauty prove,
That (if Sense saw her Gleames,)
All lookers on would pine and die for love.
Who such a life does live,
You happy even may call
Ere ruthlesse Death a wished end him give,
And after then when given,
More happy by his fall,
For humanes, Earth, enjoying Angels, Heaven.
Swift is your mortal Race,
And glassie is the Field,
Vaste are Desires not limited by Grace,
Life a weak Taper is,
Then while it light does yield
Leave flying Joys, embrace this lasting Bliss.
This when the Nymph had said,
Sh^e dived within the Flood,
Whose Face with smyling Curles long after staid,
Then Sighs did Zephyres press,
Birds sang from every Wood,
And Echoes rang, this was true Happiness.
An Hymn on the Fairest Fair.
I Feel my Bosom glow with wontlesse Fires,
Raised from the vulgar press my Mind aspires
(Winged with high Thoughts) unto his praise to clime,
From deep Eternity who called forth Time,
That Essence which not moved makes each thing move,
Uncreate Beauty all-creating Love;
But by so great an object, radiant light,
My Heart appalled, enfeebled rests my Sight,
Thick Clouds benight my laboring Ingine*
And at my high attempts my Wits repine:
If thou in me this sacred heat have wrought,
My Knowledge sharpen, Sarcells lend my Thought:
Grant me (Times Father, world-containing King)
A Power of thee in powerful Lays to sing,
That as thy Beauty in Earth lives, Heaven shines,
It dawning may or shadow in my Lines.
As far beyond the starry walls of Heaven,
As is the loftiest of the Planets seven
Sequestered from this Earth, in purest light
Out-shining ours, as ours does sable Night,
Thou all-sufficient, Omnipotent,
Thou ever-glorious, most excellent,
God various in Names, in Essence one,
High art enstalled on a golden Throne,
Out-stretching Heavens, wide bespangled vault,
Transcending all the Circles of our Thought,
With diamantine Scepter in thy Hand,
There thou giv'st Laws, and do this World command,
This World of Concords raised unlikely sweet,
Which like a Ball lies prostrate at thy Feet.
If so we may well say (and what we say
Here wrapped in flesh, led by dim Reasons ray,
To show by earthly Beauties which we see
That spiritual Excellence that shines in thee,
Good Lord forgive) not far from thy right Side,
With curled Locks Youth ever does abide,
Rose-cheeked Youth who ga^landed with Flowers,
Still blooming, ceaselessely unto thee powers
Immortal Nectar in a cup of Gold,
That by no darts of Ages thou grow old;
And as ends and beginnings thee not claim,
Successionlesse that thou be still the same.
Near to thy other side resistlesse Might,
From Head to Foot in burnisht Armor dight,
That rings about him, with a waving Brand,
And watchful Eye, great Sentinel does stand;
That neither Time nor force in ought impair
Thy Workmanship, nor harm thine Empire fair,
Soon to give Death to all again that would
Stern Discord raise which thou destroyed of old,
Discord that foe to order, Nurse of War,
By which the noblest things demolisht are,
But (caitife) she no Treason does devise,
When Might to naught does bring her enterprise;
Thy all-upholding Might her Malice raines,
And her to Hell throws bound in iron Chains.
With Locks in waves of Gold that ebb and flow
On Ivory neck, in Robes more white than Snow,
Truth steadfastly before thee holds a Glass,
Indent'd with Gems, where shines all that was,
That is, or shall be, here ere ought was wrought.
Thou knew all that thy Power with time forth brought,
And more, things numberless which thou could make,
That actually shall never being take,
Here thou beholdst thy self, and (strange) do prove
At once the Beauty, Lover and the Love.
With Faces two (like Sisters) sweetly fair;
Whose Blossoms no rough Autumn can impair,
Stands Providence, and does her looks disperse,
Through every Corner of this Universe,
Thy Providence, at once which general things
And singular does rule, as Empires Kings,
Without whose care this world (lost) would remain,
As Ship withou a Master in the Maine,
As Chariot alone, as Bodies prove
Deprived of Souls, whereby they be* live, move.
But who are they which shine thy Throne so near?
With sacred countenance, and look sever^,
This in one hand a pondrous Sword does hold,
Her left stays charged with Balances of Gold,
That with, Brows girt with ^ays, sweet-smiling Face,
Does bear a Brandon, with a babish grace
Two milke-white Wings him easily do move,
O she thy Justice is, and this thy Love!
By this thou brought this Engine great to light,
By that it framed in Number, Measure, Weight,
That destine does reward to ill and good;
But Sway of Justice is by Love withstood,
Which did it not relent and mildly stay,
This World ere now had found its funeral Day.
What Bands (en^^^ctred) near to th^se abide,
Which into vaste Infinity them hide?
Infinity that neither does admi^,
Place, Time, nor Number to (...) on it:
Here Bounty sparkleth, here does Beauty shine,
Simplicity, more white than Gelsomine,
Mercy with open wings, aye-varied Bliss,
Glory, and Joy, that Blisses darling is.
Ineffable, all-pow'rfull God, all free,
Thou only liv'st, and each thing lives by thee,
No Joy, no, nor Perfection to thee came
By the contriving of this Worlds great Frame,
Ere Sun, Moon, Stars began their restless race,
Ere painted was with light Heavens p^re Face,
Ere Air had Cl^u^s, ere Clouds wept down their showers;
Ere Sea embraced Earth, ere Earth bare Flowers,
Thou happy liv'dst; World naught to thee supplied,
All in thy self thy self thou satisfied:
Of Good no slender Shadow does appear,
No age-worne t^a^ke, which shined in thee not clear,
Perfections Sum, prime-cause of every Cause,
Midst, end, beginning where all good does pause:
Hence of thy Substance, differing in naught
Thou in E^ernity thy Son forth brought,
The only Birth of thy unchanging Mind*
Thine Image, Pattern-like that ever shined,
Light out of Light begotten not by Will
But Nature, all and that same Essence still
Which thou thy self, for thou do naught possess
Which he has not, in ought nor is he less
Th^^ Thee his great Beg^tt^^; of this Light,
Eternal, Double kindled was thy Spright
Eternally, who is with Thee the same*
All-holy Gift, Ambassador, Knot, Flame:
Most sacred Triad, O most holy One,
Unprocreate Father, ^ver-procreate Son,
Ghost breathed from both, you were, are still, shall be,
(Most blessed) Three in One, and One in Three,
Uncomprehensible by reachlesse Hight,
And unperceived by excessive Light.
So in our Souls three and yet one are still,
The Understanding, Memory, and Will;
So (though unlike) the Planet of the Days
So soon as he was made begat his Rays,
Which are his Offspring, and from both was hurld,
The rosy Light which consolates the World,
And none fore-went another: so the spring,
The Wellhead, and the Stream which they forth bring,
Are but one selfsame Essence, not in ought
Do differ, save in order, and our Thought
No chime of Time discernes in them to fall,
But Three distinctly, ^ide one Essence all.
But these express not Thee, who can declare
Thy being? Men and Angels dazel'd are.
Who would this Eden force with wit or sense,
A Cherubin shall find to bar him thence.
Great Architect, Lord of this Universe,
That light is blinded would thy Greatness pierce,
Ah! as a Pilgrim who the Alps does pass,
Or Atlas Temples crowned with winter glass,
The ayry Caucasus, the Apennine,
Pyrenes clifts where Sun does never shine,
When he some craggy Hills has ever-went,
Begins to think ^n rest, his Journey spent,
Till mounting some tall Mountain^ he do find,
More hights before him than he left behind:
With halting pace so while I would me raise
To the unbounded limits of thy Praise,
Some part of way I thought to have o're-run,
But now I see how scarce I have begun,
With Wonders new my Spirits range possessed,
And wandering waylesse in a maze them rest.
In these vaste Fields of Light, etheriall Plains,
Thou art attended by immortal Trains
Of Intellectual Powers, which thou broughtst forth
To praise thy Goodness, and admire thy Worth,
In numbers passing others Creatures far,
Since Creatures most noble maniest are*
Which do in knowledge us not less outrun:
Than Moon in light does Stars, or Moon the Sun,
Unlike, in Orders ranged and many a Band,
(If Beauty in Disparity does stand)
Archangels, Angels, Cherubs, Seraphines,
And what with name of Thrones amongst them shines,
Large-ruling Princes* Dominations, Powers,
All-acting Virtues of those flaming Towers;
These freed of Umbrage, these of Labor free,
Rest ravished with still beholding Thee,
Inflamed with Beams which sparkle from thy Face,
They can no more desire, far less embrace.
Low under them, with slow and staggering pace
Thy Handmaid Nature thy great Steps does trace,
The Source of second Causes golden Chain
That links this Frame as thou it does ordain;
Nature gazed on with such a curious Eye,
That Earthlings often her deemed a Deity.
By Nature led those Bodies fair and great,
Which faint not in their Course, nor change their State,
Unintermixt, which no disorder prove,
Though aye and contrary they always move,
The Organs of thy Providence divine.
Books ever open, Sign^s that clearly shine,
Times purpled Maskers, then do them advance,
As by sweet Music in a measured dance,
Stars, Host of Heaven, ye Firmaments bright Flowers,
Clear Lamps which overhang this Stage of ours,
Ye turn not there to deck the Weeds of Night,
Nor Pageant-like to please the vulgar Sight;
Great Causes sure ye must bring great Effects,
But who can descant right your grave Aspects?
He only who Yo^ made decipher can
Your Notes, Heavens Eyes ye blind the Eyes of Man.
Amidst these Saphir far-extending Hights,
The never-twinkling, ever-wandring Lights
Their fixed Motions keep, one dry and cold,
Deep-Leaden colored, slowly there is rolled,
With Rule and Line for Times steps meting even
In twice three Lustres he but turns his Heaven.
With temperate qualities and Countenance fair,
Still mildly smiling sweetly debonaire,
Another cheares the World, and way does make
In twice six Autumnes through the Zodiac.
But hot and dry with flaming Locks and Brows
Enraged, this in his red Pavillion glows:
Together running with like speed, ^f space,
Two equally in hands atchieve their race,
With blushing Face this often does bring the Day,
And ushers often to stately Stars the way,
That various in virtue, changing, light,
With his small flame impearles the veil of Night.
Prince of this Court, the Sun in triumph rides,
With the Year Snake-like in her self that glides,
Times Dispensator, fair life-giving Source,
Through Skies twelve Posts as he does run his course,
Heart of this All, of what is known to sense,
The likest to his Makers excellence,
In whose diurnall motion does appear
A Shadow, no true pourtrait of the Year.
The Moon moves lowest, silver Sun of Night,
Dispersing through the World her borrowed light,
Who in three forms her head abroad does range,
And only constant is in constant Change.
Sad Queen of Silence, I never see thy Face,
To wax, or waine, or shine with a full grace,
But straight (amazed) on Man I think, each Day
His state who changes, or if he find Stay,
It is in doleful anguish, cares, and pains,
And of his Labors Death is all the Gains?
Immortal Monarch can so fond a Thought
Lodge in my Breast? as to trust thou first brought
Here in Earths shady Cloister wretched Man,
To suck the Air of Woe, to spend Life's span
'Midst Sighs and Plaints, a Stranger unto Mirth,
To give himself his Death rebucking Birth?
By sense and wit of Creatures made King,
By sense and wit to live their Underling?
And what is worst, have Eaglets eyes to see
His own disgrace, and know an high degree
Of Bl^sse, the Place, if he might thereto clime,
And not live thralled to imperious Time?
Or (dotard) shall I so from Reason swerve,
To dim those Lights which to our use do serve,
(For thou do not them need) more nobly framed
Than us, that know their course, and have them named?
No, I never think but we did them surpass
As far as they do Asterismes of Glass,
When thou us made, by Treason high defiled,
Thrust from our first estate we live exiled,
Wandering this Earth, which is of Death the Lot,
Where he does use the Power which he has got,
Indifferent Umpire unto Clowns and Kings,
The supreme Monarch of all mo^tall things*
When first this flowery O^be was to us given,
I but in place disvalu'd was to Heaven;
These Creatures which now our Sovereigns are,
And as to Rebels do denounce us war,
Then were our Vassals, no tumultuous Storm,
No Thunders, Earthquakes, did her Form deforme,
The Seas in tumbling Mountains did not roar,
But like moist Crystal whispered on the Shore,
No Snake did trace her Meads, nor ambusht lowre
In azure Curles beneath the sweet-Spring Flower;
The Night shade, Henbane, Napell, Aconite,
Her Bowels then not bare, with Death to smite
Her guiltless Brood; thy Messengers of Grace,
As their high Rounds did haunt this lower Place;
O Joy of Joys! with our first Parents Thou
To commune then did daig^e, as Friends do now:
Against thee we rebelled, and justly thus
Each Creature rebelled against us,
Earth, rest of what did chief in her excel,
To all became a Jaile, to most a Hell
In Times full Term until thy Son was given,
Who Man with Thee, Earth reconciled with Heaven.
Whole and entire all in thy Self thou art,
All-where diffused, yet of this All no part,
For infinite, in making this fair Frame
(Great without Quantity) in all thou came,
And filling all, how can thy State admit,
Or Place or Substance to be void of it?
Were Worlds as many, as the Rays which stream
From Days bright lamp, on madding Wits do dream,
They would not reele in ought, nor wandering stray,
But draw to Thee, who could their Centers stay;
Were but one hours this World disjoined from thee,
It in one hour to naught reduced should be,
For it thy Shadow is, and can they last
If severed from the Substances them cast?
O only blessed, and Author of all Bliss,
No, Bliss it self, that all where wished is,
Efficient, exemplary final Good,
Of thine own Self but only understood;
Light is thy Curtain, thou art Light of Light,
An ever-waking Eye still shining bright,
In-looking all, exempt of passive Power,
And change, in change since Deaths pale shade does lower:
All Times to thee are one, that which has run,
And that which is not brought yet by the Sun,
To thee are present, who do always see
In present act, what past is, or to be;
Day-livers we rememberance do lose
Of Ages worn, so Miseries us toss
(Blind and letha^gick of thy heavenly Grace,
Which Sin in our first Parents did deface,
And even while Embrions cursed by justest doom)
That we neglect what gone is, or to come,
But thou in thy great Archives scrolled have
In parts and whole, what ever yet has past,
Since first the marble Wheels of Time were rolled,
As ever living, never waxing old,
Still is the same thy Day and Yesterday,
An undivided Now, a constant Ay.
O King whose Greatness none can comprehend,
Whose boundless Goodness does to all extend,
Light of all Beauty Ocean without ground,
That standing flowest, giving do abound,
Rich Palace, and Endweller ever blessed,
Never not working ever yet in Rest;
What wit cannot conceive, words say of Thee,
Here where we as but in a Mirror see,
Shadows of shadows, Atoms of thy Might,
Still owly-eyed when staring on thy Light;
Grant that released from this earthly Jaile,
And freed from Clouds which here our Knowledge veil,
In Heavens high Temples where thy Praises ring,
In sweeter Notes I may hear Angels sing.
GReat God, whom we with humbled Thoughts adore,
Eternal, Infinite, Almighty King,
Whose Dwellings Heaven transcend, whose Throne before
Archangels serve, and Seraphines do sing;
Of naught who wrought all that with wondering Eyes
We do behold within this various Round,
Who makes the Rocks to rock, to stand the Skies,
At whose command Clouds peales of Thunder sound*
Ah! spare us Worms, weigh not how we alas
(Evil to our selves) against thy Laws rebel,
Wash off those spots which still in Conscience Glass
(Though we be loath to look) we see too well.
Deserved Revenge, oh do not do not take,
If thou revenge who shall abide thy Blow?
Pass shall this World, this World which thou did make,
Which should not perish till thy Trumpet blow:
What Soul is found whom Parents Crime not stains?
Or what with its own Sins defiled is not?
Though Justice Rigor threaten, yet her Raines
Let Mercy guide, and never be forgot.
Less are our Faults far far than is thy Love,
O what can better seem thy Grace divine,
Than they who plagues deserve, thy Bounty prove,
And where thou shower may Vengeance, there to shine?
Then look and pity, pitying forgive
Us guilty Slaves, or Servants now in thrall;
Slaves, if alas thou look how we do live,
Or doing ill, or doing naught at all?
Of an ungrateful Mind a foul Effect;
But if thy Gifts which largely heretofore
Thou have upon us poured thou do respect,
We are thy Servants nay, than Servants more,
Thy Children, yes, and Children dearly bought,
But what strange Chance us of this Lot bereaves?
Poor worthless Wights how lowly are we brought,
Whom Grace once Children made, Sin has made Slaves?
Sin has made Slaves, but let those Bands Grace break,
That in our Wrongs thy Mercies may appear,
Thy Wisdom not so mean is, Power so weak,
But thousand ways they can make Worlds thee fear.
O Wisdom boundless! O miraculous Grace!
Grace, Wisdom which make wink dim Reasons Eye,
And could Heavens King bring from his placeless Place,
On this ignoble Stage of Care to dye:
To dye our Death, and with the sacred Stream
Of Blood and Water gushing from his Side,
To make us clean of that contagious Blame,
First on us brought by our first Parents Pride.
Thus thy great Love and Pity (heavenly King)
Love, Pity which so well our Loss prevent,
Of Evil it self (lo) could all Goodness bring,
And sad beginning cheer with glad event.
O Love and Pity! ill known of these Times,
O Love and Pity! careful of our need,
O Bounties! which our horrid Acts and Crimes
(Grown numberless) contend near to exceed.
Make this excessive ardour of thy love,
So warm our Coldness, so our Life's renew,
That we from Sin, Sin may from us remove.
Wisdom our Will, Faith may our Wit subdue.
Let thy pure Love burn up all worldly Lust,
Hells candid Poison killing our best part,
Which makes us joy in Toys, adore frail Dust
Instead of Thee, in Temple of our Heart.
Grant when at last our Souls these Bodies leave,
Their loathsome Shops of sin and Mansions blind,
And Doom before thy Royal Seat receive*
A Savior more than Judge they thee may find.
THE WANDERING MUSES: OR, The River of FORTH FEASTING: IT BEING A Panegyric to
the High and Mighty Prince, James, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland. BY WILLIAM DRUMMOND Of HAVVTHORNDEN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1656.

To His Sacred Majesty.
IF in this Storm of joy and pompous Throng,
This Nymph (great King) does come to Thee so near
That thy harmonious Ears Her accents hear,
Give Pardon to Her hoarse and lowly Song:
Feign would she Trophies to Thy Virtues rear;
But for this stately task She is not strong,
And her Defects Her high Attempts do wrong,
Yet as she could She makes thy Worth appear.
So in a Map is shown this flowery Place;
So wrought in Arras by a Virgins Hand
With Heaven and blazing Stars does Atlas stand,
So drawn by Char-coale is Narcissus Face:
She like the Morn may be to some bright Sun,
The Day to perfect that is by her begun.
The River of FORTH FEASTING: A Panegyric to the High and Mighty Prince,
James, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
WHat blustering Noise now interrups my Sleeps?
What ecchoing Shouts thus cleave my crystal Deeps?
And seems to call me from my watery Court?
What Melody, what sounds of Joy and Sport,
Are conveyed hither from each Night-borne Spring?
With what loud Rumors do the Mountains ring?
Which in unusual Pomp on tip-toes stand,
And (full of Wonder) overlook the Land?
Whence come these glittering Throngs, these Meteors bright,
This golden People glancing in my sight?
Whence does this Praise, Applause, and Love, arise?
What Load-star Eastward draws thus all Eyes?
Am I awake? Or have some Dreams conspired
To mock my Sense with what I most desired?
View I that living Face, see I those Looks,
Which with Delight were wont t'amaze my Brooks?
Do I behold that Worth, that Man divine,
This Ages Glory, by these Banks of mine?
Then find I true what long I wished in vain;
My much beloved Prince is come again;
So unto them whose Zenith is the Pole,
When six black Months are past, the Sun does roll:
So after Tempest to Sea-tossed Wights
Fair Helens Brothers show their clearing Lights:
So comes Arabias wonder from her Woods,
And far far off is seen by Memphis Floods,
The feathered Sylvans; Cloud-like by her fly,
And with triumphing plaudits beat the Sky,
Nyle marvels, Seraps Priests (entranced) rave,
And in Mygdonian stone her Shape ingrave;
In lasting Cedars they do mark the Time
In which Apollos Bird came to their Clime.
Let Mother Earth now decked with Flowers be seen,
And sweet-breathed Zephyres curle the Meadows green:
Let Heaven weep Rubies in a Crimson shower,
Such as on Indies Shores they use to pour:
Or with that golden Storm the Fields adorn,
Which Jove rained when his Blew-ey'd Maid was born.
May never Hours the Web of Day out-weave,
May never Night rise from her sable Cave.
Swell proud my Billows, faint not to declare
Your Joys as ample as their Causes are:
For Murmurs hoarse, sound like Arions Harp,
Now delicately flat, now sweetly sharp;
And you my Nymphs, rise from your moist Repair,
Strew all your Springs and Grots with Lillies fair:
Some swiftest-footed, get them hence, and pray
Our Floods and Lakes come keep this Holy Day;
What e're beneath Albanias Hills do run,
Which see the rising, or the setting Sun,
Which drink stern Grampius Mists, or Ochels Snows:
Stone-rowling Tay, Tine Tortoise-like that flows,
The pearly Don, the Deas, the fertile Spay,
Wild Neve^ne, which does see our longest Day;
Nesse smoaking-Sulphur, Leave with Mountains crowned*
Strange Loumond for his floating Isles renowned:
The Irish Rian, Ken, the silver Air,
The snaky Dun, the Ore with rushy Hair,
The christall-streaming Nid, loud-bellowing Clyde,
Tweed which no more our Kingdoms shall divide:
Ranke-swelling Annan, Lid with curled streams,
The Eskes, the Solway where they lose their Names,
To every one proclaim our Joys, and Feasts,
Our Triumphs; bid all come and be our Guests:
And as they meet in Neptunes azure Hall,
Bid them bid Sea-Gods keep this Festival;
This Day shall by our Currents be renowned,
Our Hills about shall still this Day resound:
Nay, that our Love more to this Day appear,
Let us with it henceforth begin our year.
To Virgins, Flowers, to Sunburned Earth, the Rain,
To Mariners, fair Winds amidst the Maine,
Cool Shades to Pilgrims, which hot Glances burn,
Are not so pleasing as thy blessed Return.
That Day (dear Prince) which robbed us of thy sight,
[Day, no, but Darkness, and a dusky Night]
Did fill our Breasts with Sighs, our Eyes with Tears,
Turned Minutes to sad Months, sad Months to Years:
Trees left to flourish, Meadows to bear Flowers,
Brooks hid their Heads within their sedgie Bowers,
Fair Ceres cursed our Fields with barren Frost,
As if again she had her Daughter lost:
The Muses left our Groves, and for sweet Songs
Sat sadly silent, or did weep their wrongs;
You know it Meads, you murmuring Woods it know,
Hills, Dales, and Caves, Copartners of their Woe;
And you it know, my Streams, which from their Eine
Often on your Glass received their pearly Brine;
O Naids dear (said they) Napaeas fair,
O Nymphs of Trees, Nymphs which on Hills repair,
Gone are those maiden Glories, gone that State,
Which made all Eyes admire our Bliss of late.
As looks the Heaven when never Star appears,
But slow and weary shroud them in their Spheres,
While Tithons wife embosom'd by Him lies,
And World does languish in a mournful Guise:
As looks a Garden of its Beauty spoiled,
As Woods in Winter by rough Bore'as foiled,
As Pourtraits razed of Colors use to be:
So looked these abject Bounds deprived of Thee.
While as my Rills enjoyed Thy royal Gleames,
They did not envy Tibers haughty Streams,
Nor wealthy Tagus with his golden Ore,
Nor clear Hydaspes which on Pearls does roar,
Nor golden Gange that sees the Sun newborn,
Nor Achelous with his flowery Horn,
Nor Floods which near ^lisian Fields do fall:
For why? Thy sight did serve to them for all.
No Place there is so desert, so alone,
Even from the frozen to the Torrid Zone,
From flaming Hecla to great Quinceys Lake,
Which Thy abode could not most happy make;
All those Perfections which by bounteous Heaven
To diverse Worlds in diverse Times were given,
The starry Senate powered at once on Thee,
That thou Exemplar might to others be.
Thy Life was kept till the three Sisters spun
Their threads of Gold, and then it was begun.
With checkered Clouds when Skies do look most fair,
And no disord'red Blasts disturb the Air,
When Lillies do them deck in azure Gowns;
And newborn Roses blush with golden Crowns,
To prove how calm we under Thee should live,
What Halcyonean Days Thy Reign should give,
And to two flowery Diadems Thy right;
The Heavens Thee made a Partner of the Light.
Scarce wast Thou borne, when joined in friendly Bands
Two mortal Foes with other clasped Hands,
With Virtue Fortune strove, which most should grace
Thy Place for Thee, Thee for so high a Place,
One vowed Thy sacred Breast not to forsake,
The other on Thee not to turn her Back;
And that thou more her loves Effects might feel,
For Thee she left her Globe, and broke her Wheel.
When years Thee Vigor gave, O then how clear
Did smothered Sparkles in bright Flames appear!
Amongst the Woods to force the flying Heart,
To pierce the Mountaine-Wolfe with feathered Dart;
See Faulcons climb the Clouds, the Fox ensnare,
Outrun the wind-out-running Daedale Hare
To breath thy fiery Steed on every Plain,
And in meandring ^yres him bring again,
The Prease Thee making Place, and vulgar Things,
In Admirations Air, on Glories Wings;
O! Thou far from the common Pitch did rise,
With thy designs to dazell Envies Eyes:
Thou soughtst to know this Alls eternal Source,
Of ever-turning Heavens the restless Course,
Their fixed Lamps, their Lights which wandering run,
Whence Moon her Silver has, his Gold the Sun,
If Fate there be or no, if Planets can
By fierce Aspects force the free will of Man:
The light aspiring Fire, the liquid Air,
The flaming Dragons, Comets with red Hair,
Heavens tilting Lances, Artillery, and Bow,
Loud-sounding Trumpets, Darts of Hail, and Snow,
The roaring Element, with People dumb,
The Earth with what conceived is in her Womb,
What on her moves, were set unto thy Sight,
Till Thou did find their Causes, Essence, Might:
But unto naught Thou so thy Mind did strain,
As to be read in Man, and learn to reign;
To know the Weight and Atlas of a Crown,
To spare the Humble, Proud ones tumble down.
When from those piercing Cares which Thrones invest,
As Thorns the Rose, thou weari'd would thee rest,
With Lute in Hand, full of Celestial Fire,
To the Pierian Groves thou did retire:
There, ga^landed with all Uranias Flowers,
In sweeter Lays than builded Thebes Towers,
Or them which charmed the Dolphines in the Maine,
Or which did call Euridice again,
Thou sung'st away the Hours, till from their Sphere
Stars seemed to shoot, thy Melody to hear.
The God with golden Hair, the Sister Maids,
Did leave their Helicon, and Temp's shades,
To see thine Isle, here lost their native Tongue,
And in thy world-divided Language sung.
Who of thine af^^r-age can count the Deeds,
With all that Fame in Times huge Annals reads,
How by Example more than any Law,
This People fierce thou did to goodness draw;
How while the Neighbor Worlds (tossed by the Fates)
So many Phaetons had in their States,
Which turned to heedlesse Flames their burnished Thrones,
Thou (as ensphear'd) keptst temperate thy Zones;
In Afric Shoares the Sands that ebb and flow,
The shady Leaves on Ardens Trees that grow,
He sure may cou^^, with all ^he waves that meet
To wash the Mauritanian Atlas feet.
Though crowned thou went not, nor a King by Birth,
Thy Worth deserves the richest Crown on Earth.
Search this halfe-Spheare, and the Antartick Ground,
Where is such Wit and Bounty to be found?
As into silent Night, when near the Bear
The Virgin Hunt^esse ski^nes at full most clear,
And strives to match her Brothers golden Light,
The Host of stars does vanish in her sight,
Arcturus dies; cooled is the Lions ire,
Po burns no more with Phaetontall Fire;
Orion faints to see his Arms grow black,
And that his flaming Sword he now does lack:
So Europes Lights, all bright in their Degree,
Lose all their Luster paralleled with Thee.
By just Descent Thou from more Kings do shine,
Than many can name Men in all their Line:
What most they toil to find, and finding hold,
Thou scornest, orient Gems, and flattering Gold?
Esteeming Treasure surer in Men's Breasts,
Than when immured with Marble, closed in Chests;
No stormy Passions do disturb thy Mind,
No mists of Greatness ever could thee blind:
Who yet has been so meek? Thou life did give
To them who did repine to see Thee live;
What Prince by Goodness has such Kingdoms gained?
Who has so long his Peoples Peace maintained?
Their Swords are turned to Sythes, to Culters Spears,
Some Giant Post their antic Armor bears:
Now, where the wounded Knight his Life did bleed,
The wanton Swain sits piping on a Reed.
And where the Canon did Joves Thunder scorn,
The gaudy Hunts-man winds his shrill-tun'd Horn:
Her green Locks Ceres does to yellow die,
The Pilgrim safely in the shade does lie,
Both Pan and Pales (careless keep their Flocks,
Seas have no Dangers save the Winds and Rocks:
Thou art this Isles Palladium, neither can
[Whiles thou do live] it be o're-thrown by Man.
Let others boast of Blood and Spoils of Foes,
Fierce Rapines, Murders, Iliads of Woes,
Of hated Pomp, and Trophies reared fair,
Gore-spangled Ensigns streaming in the Air,
Count how they make the Scythian them adore,
The Gaditan, and Soldier of Aurore,
Unhappy Boasting! to enlarge their Bounds,
That charge themselves with cares, their friends with Wounds,
Who have no Law to their ambitious Will,
But (Man-plagues) borne are humane Blood to spill:
Thou a true Victor art, sent from above
What others strain by Force, to gain by Love,
World-wandring Fame this Praise to thee imparts,
To be the only Monarch of all Hearts,
They many fear, who are of many feared,
And Kingdoms got by Wrongs, by Wrongs are tear'd,
Such Thrones as Blood does raise, Blood throws down,
No Guard so sure as Love unto a Crown.
Eye of our western World, Mars-daunting King,
With whose Renown the Earths seven Climates ring,
Thy Deeds not only claim these Diadems,
To which Them, Litty, Taye, subject their Streams:
But to thy Virtues rare, and Gifts, is due
All that the Planet of the Year does view;
Sure if the world above did want a Prince
The world above to it would take Thee hence.
That Murder, Rapine, Lust, are fled to Hell,
And in their Rooms with us the Graces dwell,
That Honor more than Riches Men respect,
That Worthiness than Gold does more effect,
That Piety unmasked shows her Face,
That Innocence keeps with Power her Place,
That long-exil'd Astrea leaves the Heaven,
And turns right her Sword, her Weights holds even;
That the Saturnian world is come again,
Are wished effects of Thy most happy Reign.
That daily Peace, Love, Truth, Delights increase,
And Discord, Hate, Fraud, with Incumbers, cease,
That Men use strength not to shed others Blood,
But use their strength now to do others Good;
That Fury is enchain'd, disarmed Wrath,
That (save by Natures Hand) there is no Death,
That late grim Foes, like Brothers, other love,
That Vultures prey not on the harmless Dove,
That Wolves with Lambs do friendship entertain,
Are wished effects of thy most happy Reign.
That Towns increase, That ruined Temples rise,
That their wind-moving Vanes do kiss the Skies,
That Ignorance and Sloth hence run away,
That buried Arts now rowse them to the Day,
That Hyperion far beyond his Bed,
Does see, our Lions rampe, our Roses spread,
That Iber courts us, Tyber not us charms;
That Rhein with hence-brought Beams his bosom warmes;
That Ill does fear, and Good does us maintain,
Are wished Effects of thy most happy Reign.
O Virtues Pattern, Glory of our Times,
Sent of past Days to expiate the Crimes,
Great King, but better far than thou art great,
Whom State not honors, but who honors State,
By VVonder borne, by VVonder first installed,
By VVonder after to new Kingdoms called;
Young kept by VVonder from homebred Alarmes,
Old saved by Wonder from pale Traitors Harms,
To be for this Thy Reign which Wonders brings,
A King of VVonder, VVonder unto Kings.
If Pict, Dane, Normane, Thy smooth Yoke had seen,
Pict, Dane, and Norman had thy Subjects been:
If Brutus knew the Bliss Thy Rule does give,
Even Brutus joy would under Thee to live:
For Thou Thy People do so dearly love,
That they a Father, more than Prince, Thee prove.
O Days to be desired! Age happy thrice!
If you your Heaven-sent-Good could duly prize,
But we (halfe-palsie-sick) think never right
Of what we hold, till it be from our sight,
Prize only Summers sweet and musked Breath,
When armed VVinters threaten us with Death,
In pallid Sickness do esteem of Health,
And by sad Poverty discern of Wealth:
I see an Age when after some few years,
And Revolutions of the slow-paced Spheres,
These days shall be 'bove other far esteemed,
And like Augustus palmy Reign be deemed.
The Names of Arthur, fabulous Paladines,
Grav'n in Times surly Brows in wrinckled Lines,
Of Henry's, Edwards, famous for their Fights,
Their Neighbor Conquests, Orders new of Knights,
Shall by this Princes Name be past as far
As Meteors are by the Idalian Star.
If Gray-hair'd Proteus Songs the Truth not miss,
There is a Land hence-distant many Miles,
Out-reaching Fiction and Atlantic Isles,
Which (Homelings) from this little World we name,
That shall imblazon with strange Rites his Fame,
Shall rear him Statues all of purest Gold,
Such as Men gave unto the Gods of old,
Name by him Temples, Palaces, and Towns,
With some great River, which their Fields renowns.
This is that King who should make right each wrong,
Of whom the Bards and mystic Sybills sung,
The Man long promised, by whose glorious Reign,
This Isle should yet her ancient Name regaine,
And more of Fortunate deserve the Style,
Than those where Heavens with double Su^mers smile.
Run on (Great Prince) Thy Course in Glories way,
The end the Life, the Evening crowns the Day;
Heap worth on worth, and strongly soar above
Those heights which made the World Thee first to love;
Surmount thy self, and make thine Actions past
Be but as Gleames or Lightnings of thy last,
Let them exceed those of thy younger Time,
As far as Autumn does the flowery Prime.
Through this thy Empire range, like worlds bright Eye,
That once each year surveyes all Earth, and sky,
Now glaunces on the slow and resty Bears,
Then turns to dry the weeping Austers tears,
Hurries to both the Poles, and moves even
In the infigur'd Circle of the Heaven.
O long long haunt these Bounds, which by thy sight
Have now regained their former Heat and Light.
Here grow green Woods, here silver Brooks do glide,
Here Meadows stretch them out with painted Pride,
Embroyd'ring all the Banks, here Hills aspire
To crown their Heads with the aethereall Fire:
Hills, Bulwarks of our Freedom, giant walls,
Which never friends did slight nor Sword made thralls;
Each circling Flood to Thetis Tribute paies,
Men here (in Health) outlive old Nestors days:
Grim Saturn yet amongst our Rocks remains,
Bound in our Caves, with many Mettal'd Chains:
Bulls haunt our shades like Ledas Lover white,
Which yet might breed Pasiphae delight,
Our Flocks fair Fleeces bear, with which for sport
Endimion of old the Moon did court,
High-palmed Hearts amidst our Forests run,
And, not impall'd, the deep-mouthed Hounds do shun;
The rough-foot Hare safe in our Bushes shrowds,
And long-wing'd Hawks do perch amidst our clouds.
The wanton wood-Nymphs of the verdant Spring,
Blew, Golden, Purple Flowers shall to thee bring,
Pomonas Fruits the Panisks, Thetis Gyrles,
Thy Thulys Amber, with the Ocean Pearls;
The Tritons, Heardsmen of the glassie Field,
Shall give thee what far-distant shoares can yield,
The Serean Fleeces, Erythrean Gems,
Waste Platas Silver, Gold of Peru Streams,
Antartick Parrots, Ethiopian Plumes,
Sabaean Odours, Myrrh, and sweet Perfumes:
And I my self, wrapped in a watchet Gown
Of Reeds and Lillies, on mine Head a Crown,
Shall Incense to thee Burn, green Altars raise,
And yearly sing due Paeans to Thy Praise.
Ah why should Isis only see Thee shine?
Is not thy Forth, as well as Isis Thine?
Though Isis vaunt she has more Wealth in store,
Let it suffice Thy Forth does love Thee more:
Though she for Beauty may compare with Seine,
For Swans and Sea-Nymphs with imperial Rheine,
Yet for the Title may be claimed in Thee,
Nor She, nor all the World can match with me.
Now when (by Honor drawn) Thou shall away
To Her already jealous of Thy Stay,
When in Her amorous Arms She does Thee fold,
And dries thy Dewy Hairs with Hers of Gold,
Much asking of Thy Fare, much of Thy Sport,
Much of Thine Absence, Long, how e're so short,
And chides (perhaps) Thy coming to the North,
Loath not to think on Thy much-loving Forth:
O love these Bounds, whereof Thy Royal Stem
More than an hundred wore a Diadem.
So ever Gold and Baies Thy Brows adorn,
So never Time may see Thy Race out-worne,
So of Thine Own still may Thou be desired,
Of Strangers feared, redoubted, and admired;
So Memory Thee Praise, so precious Hours
May character Thy Name in starry Flowers;
So may Thy high Exploits at last make even,
With Earth Thy Empire, Glory with the Heaven.
SPEECHES TO THE HIGH AND EXCELLENT PRINCE, CHARLES, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, at His Entering His City of EDINBURGH: Delivered from the
Pageants the 15th of June, 1633.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1656.

An intended Speech at the West Gate.
SIR, if Nature could suffer Rocks to move, and abandon their natural places,
this Town founded on the strength of Rocks (now by the all-cheering Rays of
Your Majesty's Presence, taking not only Motion, but Life) had with her
Castle, Temples, and Houses moved toward you, and besought you to acknowledge
Her yours, and Her Inhabitants your most humble and affectionate Subjects, and
to believe how ^any souls are within Her Circuits, so many Lives are devoted
to your sacred Person and Crown; And here, Sir, She offers by me, to the Altar
of your Glory, whole Hecatombs of most happy desires, praying all things may
prove prosperous unto you, that every Virtue and Heroic Grace, which make a
Prince eminent, may with a long and ^lessed Government attend you; Your
Kingdoms flourishing abroad with Bays, at home with Olives. Presenting you
Sir, (who are the Strong Key of this little World of Great Britain) with
these Keys, which cast up the Gates of Her affection, and design you Power to
open all the Springs of the Hearts of these Her most loyal Citizens. Yet this
almost not necessary; for as the Rose at the far appearing of the Morning Sun
displayeth and spreads her purples, so at the very Report of your happy
return to this your native Country, their Hearts (as might be apparent, if
they could have shined through their Breasts) were with joy and fair hopes
made spacious, nor did they ever in all parts feel a more comfortable heat,
than the Glory of your Presence at this time darteth upon them.

The Old forget their Age, and look fresh and young at the sight of so gracious
a Prince: The Young bear a Part in your Welcome, desiring many years of Life,
that they may serve you long, all have more joys than Tongues; for as the
words of other Nations far go beyond and surpass the affection of their
hearts: So in this Nation the affection of their hearts is far above all they
can express by words. Daigne then, Sir, from the highest of Majesty, to look
down on their lowness, and embrace it, accept the homage of their humble
minds, accept their grateful zeal, and for deeds, accept that great good will
which they have ever carried to the high deserts of your Ancestors, and shall
ever to your Own, and your Royal Race, whilst these Rocks shall be
overshadowed with Buildings, these Buildings inhabited by men, and while men
shall be endued either with counsel or courage, or enjoy any piece of Reason,
Sense, or Life.

The Speech of Caledonia, representing the Kingdom.
THe Heavens have heard our vows, our just desires
Obtained are, no higher now aspires
Our wishing thought, since to his native Clime
The Flower of Princes, honor of his Time,
Encheering all our Dales, Hills, Forests, Streams,
(As Phoebus does the Summer with his beams)
Is come, and radiant to us in his train
The golden Age and virtues brings again;
Prince so much longed for, how thou becalm'st
Minds easelesse anguish, every care embalm'st
With the sweet odours of thy Presence: Now
In swelling Tides Joys every where do flow
By thine approach, and that the World may see
What unthought wonders do attend on Thee,
This Kingdoms Angel I, who since that day
That ruthlesse Fate thy Parent rest away,
And made a Star, appeared not any where
To gratulate thy coming, come am here.
Hail Princes Phoenix, Monarch of all Hearts,
Sovereign of Love and Justice, who imparts
More than thou can receive; To thee this Crown
Is due by birth; but more, it is thine own
By just desert; and ere another brow
Than thine should reach the same, my floods should flow
With hot Vermilian gore, and every Plain
Level the hills with Carcasses of slain,
This Isle become a red Sea: Now how sweet
Is it to me, when Love and Laws thus meet
To girt thy Temples with this Diadem,
My Nurselings sacred fear, and dearest Gem,
Nor Roman, Saxon, Pict, by sad alarmes
Could this acquire and keep; the Heavens in arms
From us repel all perils, nor by wars
Ought here was won or gaping wounds and scars,
Our Lions Clymacterick now is past,
And crowned with Bays, he rampeth free at last.
Here are no Serean Fleeces, Peru Gold,
Auroras Gems, nor Wares by Tyrians sold;
Towns swell not here with Babylonian Walls,
Nor Nero's sky-resembling gold-seel'd Halls,
Nor Memphis Spires, nor Quinzayes arched Frames,
Captiving Seas, and giving Lands their names:
Faith (milke-white Faith) of old beloved so well,
Yet in this corner of the world does dwell
With her pure Sisters, Truth, Simplicity;
Here banished Honor bears them company,
A Mars-adoring Brood is here, their wealth,
Sound minds, and bodies of as sound a health;
Walls here are Men, who fence their Cities more
Than Neptune when he does in Mountains roar,
Does guard this Isle, or all those Forts and Towers
Amphions Harp raised about Thebes bowers,
Heavens Arch is often their roof, the pleasant shed
Of Oak and Plain often serves them for a Bed.
To suffer want, soft pleasure to despise,
Run over panting Mountains crowned with Ice,
R^vers overcome, the wastest Lakes appall,
(Being to themselves, Oars, Steerers, Ship and all)
Is their renown; a brave all-doring Race,
Courageous, prudent, does this Climate grace;
Yet the firm Base on which their glory stands,
In peace true hearts, in wars is valiant hands,
Which here (great King) they offer up to thee,
Thy worth respecting as thy pedigree:
Though it be much to come of Princely stem,
More is it to deserve a Diadem.
Vouchsafe blessed People, ravished here with me,
To think my thoughts, and see what I do see,
A Prince all gracious, affable, divine,
Meek, wise, just, valiant, whose radiant shine,
Of Virtues (like the Stars about the Pole
Guilding the Night) enlightneth every Soul
Your Scepter swaies; a Prince borne in this Age
To guard the Innocents from Tyrants rage,
To make Peace prosper, Justice to reflow'r,
In desert hamlet, as in Lordly Bower;
A Prince, that though of none he stands in awe,
Yet first subjects himself to his own Law,
Who joys in good, and still as right directs*
His greatness measures by his good effects,
His Peoples pedestall, who rising high,
To grace this Throne, makes Scotlands name to fly
On Halcyons wings (her glory which restores)
Beyond the Ocean to Columbus shores:
Gods sacred Picture in this man adore,
Honor his Valor, Zeal, his Piety more,
High value what you hold, him deep engrave
In your hearts Heart, from whom all good ye have:
For as Moons splendour from her Brother springs,
The Peoples welfare streameth from their Kings.
Since your loves Object does immortal prove,
O love this Prince with an eternal love.
Pray that those Crowns his Ancestors did wear,
His temples long (more orient) may bear,
That good he reach by sweetness of his sway,
That even his shadow may the bad affray;
That Heaven on him what he desires bestow,
That still the glory of his greatness grow,
That your begun felicities may last,
That no Orion do with storms them blast,
That Victory his brave exploits attend,
East, West, or South, where he his Force shall bend,
Till his great Deeds all former Deeds surmount,
And quail the Nimrod of the Hellespont;
That when his well-spent care all care becalmes,
He may in Peace sleep in a shade of Palms;
And rearing up fair Trophies, that heavens may
Extend his life to worlds extremest day.
The Song of the Muses at Parnassus.
AT length we see those Eyes,
Which cheer both Earth and Skies;
Now, ancient Caledon,
Thy Beauties heighten, richest Robes put on,
And let young joys to all thy parts arise.
Here could thy Prince still stay,
Each Month should turn to May;
We need nor Star, nor Sun,
Save him, to lengthen Days and Joys begun:
Sorrow and Night to far Climes haste away.
Now Majesty and Love
Combined are from above,
Prince never Scepter swayed,
Loved Subjects more, of Subjects more obeyed,
Which may endure whilst Heavens great Orbs do move:
Joys did you always last,
Life's spark you soon would waste;
Grief follows sweet Delight,
As Day is shadowed by sable Night,
Yet shall Remembrance keep you still* when past.
The Speeches at the Horoscopall Pageant by the Planets.
Endymion.
Roused from the Latmian Cave, where many years
That Empress of the lowest of the Spheres,
Who cheers the Night, did keep me hid, apart
From mortal Wights, to ease her lovesick heart,
As young as when she did me first enclose,
As fresh in beauty as the morning Rose,
Endymion; that whilome kept my Flocks
Upon Ionias flowery Hills and Rocks,
And sweet Lays warbling to my Cynthias beams,
Out-sang the Cignets of Meanders streams:
To whom (for Guerdon) she Heavens secret bars
Made open, taught the Paths and Powers of Stars;
By this dear Ladies strict commandment
To celebrate this day I here am sent.
But whether is this heaven, which stars do crown,
Or are heavens flaming splendors here come down
To beautify this nether World with me?
Such state and glory did e're Shepherd see?
My wits my sense mistrust, and stay amazed,
No eye on fairer Objects ever gazed;
Sure this is Heaven, for every wandering star,
Forsaking those great Orbs where whirl^d they are,
All dismal sad aspects abandoning,
Are here met to salute some gracious King;
Nor is it strange if they Heavens height neglect,
It of undoubted worth is the effect:
Then this it is, thy presence (royal Youth)
Has brought them here within an Azymuth,
To tell by me (their Herald) coming things,
And what each Fate to her stern Dista^^e sings:
Heavens Volume to unclaspe, vast Pages spread,
Mysterious golden Ciphers clear to read:
Hear then the Augur of thy future days,
And what the starry Senate of thee says;
For, what is firm decreed in heaven above,
In vain on earth strive Mortals to improve.
Saturn.
TO fair hopes to give reins now is it time,
And soar as high as just desires may climb;
O Halcyonian, clear, and happy Day,
From sorry Wights let sorrow fly away,
And vex Antartick Climes, great Britains woes
Vanish, for joy now in her Zenith glows;
The old Lucadian Syth-bearing Sire
(Though cold) for thee feels flames of sweet desire;
And many lustres at a perfect height,
Shall keep thy Scepters Majesty as bright
And strong in power and glory every way,
As when thy peerless Parent did it sway,
Never turning wrinkled in times endless length,
But one in her first beauty, youthful strength,
Like thy rare mind, which steadfast as the Pole
Still fixed stands, however Spheres do role;
More, to inhaunce with favors this thy Reign,
His age of gold he shall restore again,
Love, Justice, Honor, Innocence renew,
Men's sprights with white simplicity indue,
Make all to live in plenties ceaselesse store
With equal shares, none wishing to have more;
No more shall cold the Plough-mens hopes beguile,
Skies shall on Earth with lovely glances smile;
Which shall untilled each flower and herb bring forth,
And Lands to Gardens turn of equal worth,
Life (long) shall not be thrall'd to mortal dates,
Thus heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
Jove.
DElight of heaven, sole honor of the earth,
Jove (courting thine Ascendant) at thy birth
Proclaimed thee a King, and made it true,
That to thy worth great Monarchies are due;
He gave thee what was good, and what was great,
What did belong to love, and what to state,
Rare gifts whose ardors burn the hearts of all,
Like tinder when flints atoms on it fall.
The Tramontane which thy fair course directs,
Thy Counsels shall approve by their effects;
Justice kept low by Giants, wrongs, and jars,
Thou shall relieve, and crown with glistering stars,
Whom naught save Law of force could keep in awe,
Thou shall turn Clients to the force of Law,
Thou Arms shall brandish for thine own defense,
Wrongs to repel, and guard weak innocence,
Which to thy last effort thou shall uphold,
As Oak the Ivy which it does enfold;
All overcome, at last thy self overcome,
Thou shall make passion yield to reasons doom:
For smiles of fortune shall not raise thy mind,
Nor shall disasters make it ere declined,
True shonour shall reside within thy Court,
Sobriety and Truth there still resort;
Keep promised faith, thou shall all treacheries
Detest, and fawning Parasites despise,
Thou, others to make rich, shall not make poor
Thy self, but give, that thou may still give more;
Thou shall no Paranymph raise to high Place,
For frizl'd locks, quaint pace, or painted face;
On gorgeous rayments, womanizing toys,
The works of worms, and what a Moth destroys.
The Maze of fools, thou shall no treasure spend,
Thy charge to immortality shall tend,
Raise Palaces, and Temples vaulted high,
Rivers over arch, of Hospitality
And Sciences the ruined Innes restore,
With Walls and Ports incircle Neptunes shore,
To newfound worlds thy Fleets make hold their course,
And find of Canada the unknown Sourse,
People those Lands which pass Arabian fields
In fragrant Woods and Musk which Zephire yields;
Thou feared of none, shall not thy People fear,
Thy Peoples love thy Greatness shall up-reare,
Still rigor shall not shine, and mercy lower,
What Love can do thou shall not do by Power;
New and vast Taxes thou shall not extort,
Load heavy those thy bounty should support,
Thou shall not strike the Hinge nor Master Beam
Of thine Estate, but errors in the same
By harmless Justice graciously reform,
Delighting more in calm than roaring storm;
Thou shall govern in Peace as did thy Sire,
Keep, save thine own, and Kingdoms new acquire,
Beyond Alcides Pillars, and those bounds
Where Alexander gained the Eastern Crowns,
Till thou the greatest be amongst the Greats;
Thus Heavens ordain, so have decreed the Fates.
Mars.
SOn of the Lion, thou of loathsome Bands
Shall free the Earth, and what e're thee withstands
Thy noble paws shall tear, the God of Thrace
Shall be thy second, and before thy face,
To Truth and Justice, whilst thou Trophies reares,
Armies shall fall dismayed with Panick fears.
As when Aurora in skies azure-lists
Makes shadows vanish, does disperse the mists,
And in a twinkling with her opall light,
Nights horrors checketh, putting stars to flight;
More to inflame thee to this noble task,
To thee he here resigns his Sword and Caske,
A Wall of flying Castles, armed Pines
Shall bridge thy Sea, like heaven with steel that shines,
To aid earths tenants by foul yoaks oppressed,
And fill with fears the great King of the West:
To thee already Victory displaies
Her garlands twined, with Olive, Oak, and Bays,
Thy triumphs finish shall all old debates;
Thus Heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
Sun.
WEalth, Wisdom, Glory, Pleasure, stoutest hearts
Religion, Laws, Hyperion imparts
To thy just Reign, which shall far, far surpass
Of Emperors, Kings, the best that ever was;
Look how he dims the stars; thy Glories rays
So darken shall the luster of these days:
For, in fair Virtues Zodiac thou shall run,
And in the Heaven of Worthies be the Sun.
No more contemned shall hapless Learning lie;
The maids of Pindus shall be raised high;
For Bay and Ivy which their brows enrolled
Thou shall them deck with Gems and shining gold;
Thou open shall Parnassus Crystal gates:
Thus Heavens ordain, so do decree the Fates.
Venus.
THe Acidalian Queen amidst thy Bays
Shall twine her Mirtles, grant thee pleasant days;
She did make clear thy house, and with her light
Of churlish stars put back the dismal spite;
The Hymenean bed fair brood shall grace,
Which on the earth continue shall their race,
While Floras treasure shall the Meads endeare,
While sweet Pomona Rose-cheek'd fruits shall bear,
While Phaebes beams her brothers emulates:
Thus Heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
Mercury.
GReat Atlas Nephew, shall the works of Peace,
(The Springs of plenty) Tillage, Trades increase,
And Arts in times gulfes lost again restore,
To their Perfection; nay, find many more,
More perfect Artists, Cyclops in their forge
Shall mould those brazen Typhons, which disgorge
From their hard Bowels metal, flame and smoke,
Mufling the air up in a sable cloak.
Geryons, Harpyes, Dragons, Sphinges strange
Wheel, where in spacious gires the Fume does range,
The Sea shrinkes at the blow, shake does the ground,
The Worlds vast Chambers does the sound rebound;
The Stygian Porter leaves off to bark,
Black Jove appalled does shroud him in the dark;
Many a Typhis in adventures tossed
By newfound skill shall many a maiden coast,
With thy sayle-winged Argoses find out,
Which like the Sun shall run the Earth about;
And far beyond his paths score wavy ways,
To Cathaies Lands by Hyperborean Seas;
He shall endue thee both in peace and war,
With wisdom, which than Strength is better far,
Wealth, Honor, Arms, and Arts shall grace thy States;
Thus Heavens ordain, so do decree the Fates.
The Moon.
O How the fair Queen with the golden maids,
The Sun of Night, thy happy fortunes aids;
Though turban'd Princes for a Badge her wear,
To them she waine, to thee would full appear;
Her Handmaid Thetis daily walks the round
About thy Delos that no force it wound,
Than when thou leftst it, and abroad did stray,
(Dear Pilgrim) she did straw with flowers thy way,
And turning foreign force and counsel vain,
Thy Guard and Guide returned thee home again;
To thee she Kingdoms, Years, Bliss did divine,
Quailing Medusas grim Snakes with her shine,
Beneath thy reign Discord, (fell mischiefs forge,
The bane of Peoples, State, and Kingdom Scourge)
Pale Envy (with the Cocatrices eye,
Which seeing kills, but seen does forthwith dye:)
Malice, Deceit, Rebellion, Impudence,
Beyond the Garamants shall pack them hence,
With every Monster that thy Glory hates,
Thus Heavens decree, so have ordained the Fates.
Endymion.
THat heretofore to thy heroic mind
Hopes did not answer as they were designed:
O do not think it strange, Times were not come,
And these fair stars had not pronounced their doom:
The Destinies did on that day attend,
When to this Northern Region thou should lend
Thy cheerful presence, and charged with Renown,
Set on thy brows the Caledonian Crown;
Thy virtues now thy just desire shall grace,
Stern Chance shall change, and to Desert give place;
Let this be known to all the Fates, admit
To their grave Counsel, and to every wit
That courts Heavens inside; this let Sibills know,
And those mad Corybants who dance and glow
On Dindimus high tops with frantic fire:
Let this be known to all Apollo's Quire,
And People let it not be hid from you,
What Mountains noise, and floods proclaim as true:
Wherever Fame abroad his praise shall ring,
All shall observe, and serve this blessed King.
The End of King Charles his Entertainment at Edenborough, 1633.
A Pastoral Elegy on the Death of S. W. A.
IN sweetest prime, and blooming of his Age,
Dear Alcon ravished from this mortal Stage,
The Shepherds mourned, as they him loved before;
Among the Rout him Edmon did deplore.
Idmon, who whether Sun in East did rise,
Or dive in West, poured Torrents from his Eyes
Of liquid Crystal, under Hawthorne shade,
At last to Trees and Rocks this plaint he made.
Alcon, delight of Heaven, desire of Earth,
Offspring of Phoebus, and the Muses birth,
The Graces Darling, Adon of our Plains,
Flame of the fairest Nymphs the Earth sustaines,
What Power of thee has us bereft? What Fate
By thy untimely fall would ruinate
Our hopes? O Death! what treasure in one hour
Have thou dispersed? How do thou devour
What we on earth hold dearest? All things good,
Too envious Heavens, how blast ye in the Bud?
The Corn the greedy Reapers cut not down
Before the Fields with golden Ears it crown;
Nor does the verdant Fruits the Gardener pull:
But thou art cropped before thy years were full.
With thee (sweet youth) the Glories of our Fields
Vanish away, and what contentments yields.
The Lakes their silver look, the woods their shades,
The Springs their Crystal want, their Verdure Meads,
The years their early seasons, cheerful Days,
Hills gloomy stand now desolate of Rays:
Their amorous whispers Zephires not us bring,
Nor do Aires Quiresters salute the Spring;
The freezing winds our Gardens do defloure.
Ah Destinies! and you whom Skies embow'r,
To his fair Spoils his Spright again yet give,
And like another Phoenix make him live.
The Herbs, though cut, sprout fragrant from their stems,
And make with Crimson blush our Anadem^:
The Sun when in the West he does decline,
Heavens brightest Tapers at his Funerals shine;
His Face, when washed in the Atlantic Seas,
Revives, and cheeres the Welkin with new Rays:
Why should not he, since of more pure a Frame,
Return to us again, and be the same?
But wretch what wish I? To the winds I send
These Plaints and Prayers, Destines cannot lend
Thee more of Time, nor Heavens consent will thus,
Thou leave their starry World to dwell with us;
Yet shall they not thee keep amidst their Spheres
Without these lamentations and Tears.
Thou wast all Virtue, Courtesy, and Worth,
And as Suns light is in the Moon set forth;
Worlds supreme Excellence in thee did shine:
Nor, though eclipsed now, shall thou decline,
But in our Memories live, while Dolphins streams
Shall haunt, whilst Eaglets stare on Titans beams,
Whilst Swans upon their Crystal Tombs shall sing,
Whilst Violets with Purple paint the Spring.
A gentler Shepherd Flocks did never feed
On Albions Hills, nor sung to oaten Reed:
While what she found in Thee my Muse would blaze,
Grief does distract Her, and cut short thy Praise.
How often have we, environed by the Throng
Of tedious Swains, the cooler shades among,
Contemned Earths glow-worme Greatness, and the Ch^ce
Of Fortune scorned, deeming it disgrace
To court unconstancy? How often have we
Some Chloris Name graven in each Virgin Tree,
And, finding Favors fading, the next Day
What we had carved we did deface away?
Woeful Remembrance! Nor Time nor Place
Of thy abodement shadows any Trace,
But there to me Thou shin'st: late glad Desires,
And ye once Roses, how are ye turned Briars?
Contentments passed, and of Pleasures Chief,
Now are ye frightfull Horrors, Hells of Grief?
When from thy native Soil Love had Thee driven,
(Thy safe return Prefigurating) a Heaven
Of flattering Hopes did in my Fancy move,
Then little dreaming it should Atoms prove.
These Groves preserve will I, these loved Woods,
These Orchards rich with Fruits, with Fish these floods*
My Alcon will return, and once again
His chosen Exiles he will entertain;
The populous City holds him, amongst Harms
Of some fierce Cyclops, Circe's stronger Charms.
These Banks (said I) he visit will and Streams,
These silent shades never kissed by courting Beams.
Far, far off I will meet him, and I first
Shall him approaching know, and first be blessed
With his Aspect, I first shall hear his voice,
Him find the same he parted, and rejoice
To learn his passed Perils, know the Sports
Of foreign Shepherds, Fawns, and Fairy Courts.
No pleasure to the Fields, an happy State
The Swains enjoy, secure from what they hate:
Free of proud Cares they innocently spend
The Day, nor do black Thoughts their ease offend;
Wise Natures Darlings they live in the World,
Perplexing not themselves how it is hurld.
These Hillocks Phoebus loves, Ceres these Plains,
Th^se Shades the Sylvans, and here Pales strains
Milk in the Pailes; the Maids which haunt the Springs
Dance on these Pastures, here Amyntas sings:
Hesperian Gardens, Tempe's shades are here,
Or what the Eastern Inde and West hold dear.
Come then, dear Youth, the Wood-nymphs twine thee Boughs
With Rose and Lilly, to impale thy Brows.
Thus ignorant, I mused, not conscious yet
Of what by Death was done, and ruthlesse Fate:
Amidst these Trances Fame thy loss does sound,
And through my Ears gives to my Heart a wound;
With stretched-out Arms I sought thee to embrace,
But clasped (amazed) a Coffin in thy Place.
A Coffin! of our Joys which had the Trust,
Which told that thou were come; but changed to Dust:
Scarce, even when felt, could I believe this wrack,
Nor that thy Time and Glory Heavens would break.
Now since I cannot see my Alcons Face,
And find nor Vows, nor Prayers to have place
With guilty Stars, this Mountain shall become
To me a sacred Altar, and a Tomb
To famous Alcon: here, as Days, Month^, Years
Do circling glide, I sacrifice will tears:
Here spend my remnant Time, exiled from Mirth,
Till Death at last turn Monarch of my Earth.
Shepherds on Forth, and you by Doven Rocks,
Which use to sing and sport, and keep your Flocks,
Pay Tribute here of Tears, ye never had
To aggravate your Moanes a cause more sad;
And to their sorrows hither bring your Mands,
Charged with sweetest flowers, and with pure Hands;
(Fair Nymphs) the blushing Hyacinth and Rose
Spread on the Place his Relicts do enclose,
Weave Garlands to his Memory, and put
Over his Hearse a Verse in Cypres cut:
Virtue did dye, Goodness but harm did give,
After the noble Alcon ceased to live,
Friendship an Earthquake suffered; losing Him;
Loves brightest Constellation turned Dim.
Hymn.
Savior of Mankind, Man Emanuel,
Who sinlesse died for Sin, who vanquished Hell,
The first fruits of the Grave, whose life did give
Light to our Darkness, in whose death we live.
O strengthen thou my faith, correct my will,
That mine may thine obey: protect me still,
So that the latter death may not devour
My soul sealed with thy Seal; so in the hour
When thou whose body sanctified thy Tomb
(Unjustly judged) a glorious Judge shall come
To judge the World with Justice; by that sign
I may be known and entertained for thine.
A Translation Of S. John Scot his verses, beginning Quod vite sectabor iter.
WHat course of life should wretched Mortals take?
In Books hard Questions large contention make;
Care dwells in Houses, Labor in the Field,
Tumultuous Seas affrighting dangers yield.
In Foreign Lands thou never can be blessed;
If rich, thou art in fear; if poor, distressed.
In Wedlock frequent discontentments swell;
Unmarried persons as in Deserts dwell.
How many troubles are with Children borne?
Yet he that wants them, counts himself Forlorn.
Young men are wanton, and of wisdom void:
Gray hairs are cold, unfit to be employed.
Who would not one of those two offers try,
Not to be borne: or, being borne, to dye?
MISCELLANIES.
ALL good has left this Age, all tracks of sh^me,
Mercy is banished, and pity dead,
Justice, from whence it came, to heaven is fled;
Religion maimed, it thought an idle Name.
Faith to distrust* and Malice has given place,
Envy with poisoned Teeth has friendship torn,
Renowned Knowledge is a despised scorn,
Now evil it is, all evil not to embrace.
There is no life save under servile Bands,
To make Desert a Vassal to their crimes,
Ambition with Avarice join hands;
O ever-shamefull, O most shameless Times!
Save that Suns light we see, of good here tell,
This Earth we court so much, were very Hell.
Does then the world go thus, does all thus move?
Is this the Justice which on Earth we find?
Is this that firm Decree which all does bind?
Are these your Influences Powers above?
Those Souls which vices moody Mists most blind,
Blind Fortune blindly most their friend does prove:
And they who thee (poor Idol) Virtue love
Ply like a feather tossed by storm and wind.
Ah! (if a Providence does sway this All.)
Why should best Minds groan under most distress,
Or why should Pride Humility make thrall,
And injuries the Innocent oppress?
Heavens ^inder, stop this Fate, or grant a Time
When Good may have as well as Bad their Prime.
A Reply.
WHo do in Good delight
That sovereign Justice ever does reward,
And though sometime it smite,
Yet it does them regard;
For even amidst their Grief
They find a strong relief*
And Death it self can work them no despite.
Again, in evil who joy,
And do in it grow old,
In midst of Mirth are charged with sins annoy,
Which is in Conscience scrol'd,
And when their Life's frail thread is cut by Time,
They punishment find equal to each Crime.
LOok how in May the Rose
At Sulphures azure fumes,
In a short space her crimson blush does lose*
And all amazed a pallid white assumes.
So time our best consumes,
Makes Youth and Beauty pass,
And what was pride turns horror in our Glass.
To a Swallow building near the Statue of Medea.
FOnd Progne, chattering wretch,
That is Medea, there,
Will thou thy Younglings hatch?
Will she keep thine, her own who could not spare?
Learn from her frantic face
To seek some fitter place.
What other may thou hope for, what desire,
Save Stygian spells, wounds, poison, iron, fire?
Venus armed.
TO practice new alarmes
In Joves great Court above,
The wanton Queen of Love
Of sleeping Mars put on the horrid Arms;
Where gazing in a Glass
To see what thing she was,
To mock and scoff the blew-eyed Maid did move;
Who said, sweet Queen, thus should you have been ^ight
When Vulcan took you napping with your Knight.
The Boares Head.
AMidst a pleasant Green
Which Sun did seldom see,
Where played Anchises with the Cyprian Queen,
The head of a wild Boar hung on a Tree:
And driven by Zephyres breath
Did fall, and wound the lovely Youth beneath,
On whom yet scarce appears
So much of blood as Venus eyes shed tears.
But ever as she wept her Antheme was,
Change, cruel, change, alas,
My Ado^ whilst thou lived was by thee slain,
Now dead, this Lover must thou kill again!
To an Owl.
AScalaphus tell me,
So may Nights Curtain long Time cover Thee,
So Ivy ever may
From irksome light keep thy Chamber and Bed,
And in Moons Liv'ry cled;
So may thou scorn the Quiresters of Day,
When playning thou do stay
Near to the sacred window of my dear,
Do ever thou her hear
To wake, and steal swift hours from drowsy sleep?
And when she wakes, does ere a stolen sigh creep
Into thy listening ear?
If that deaf God does yet her careless keep,
In louder notes my Grief with thine express,
Till by thy shriekes she think on my distress.
Daphnis.
NOw Daphnis arms did grow
In slender branches, and her braided Hair,
Which like gold wa^^s did flow,
In leavy Twigs were stretched in the Air,
The grace of either foot
Transformed was to a root,
A tender Bark enwraps her Body fair.
He who did cause her ill
Sore-wailing stood, and from his blubbered ey^e
Did showers of tears upon the rine distill,
Which watered thus did bud and turn more green.
O deep despaire^ O Heart-appalling Grief,
When that does woe increase should bring relief.
The Bear of Love.
IN woods and desert Bounds
A Beast abroad does Roame,
So loving Sweetness and the honey Comb,
It does despise the arms of Bees and wounds*
I by like pleasure led*
To prove what Heavens did place
Of sweet on you^ fair face,
Whilst there with I am fed,
Rest careless (Bear of Love) of hellish smart,
And how those Eyes afflict and wound my Heart.
Five Sonnets for Galatea.
STrephone in vain thou brings thy rimes and songs*
Decked with grave Pindars old and withered flowers
In vain thou count'st the fair (...) wrongs,
And her whom Jove deceived in golden showers.
Thou have slept never under Mirtles shed,
Or if that passion has thy soul oppressed,
It is but for some Grecian Mistress dead.
Of such old sighs thou do discharge thy breast*
How can true Love with ^ables hold a place?
Thou who with ^ables do set forth thy love,
Thy love a pretty ^able needs must prove,
Thou suest for grace, in scorn more to disgrace;
I cannot think thou were charmed by my looks,
O no, thou learn'dst thy love in Lovers books.
II.
NO more with Candid words infect mine ears,
Tell me no more how that ye pine in anguish
When ^ound ye sleep: no more say that ye languish,
No more in sweet despite say you spend tears.
Who has such hollow eyes as not to see;
How those that are haire-brain'd boast of Apollo,
And bold give out the Mu^es do them follow,
Though in loves Library yet no Lover's he.
If we poor souls least favor but them show,
That straight in wanton Lines abroad is blazed,
Their names does soar on our fames overthrow,
Marked is our lightness whilst their wits are praised;
In silent thoughts who can no secret cover,
He may, say we, but not well, be a Lover.
III.
YE* who with curious numbers, sweetest art,
Frame Dedall Nets our beauty to surprise,
Telling strange Castles builded in the Skies,
And tales of C^pids ^ow, and Cupids Dart;
Well, howsoever ye act your fained smart,
Molesting quiet ears with tragic cries,
When you accuse our chastities best part,
Named cruelty, ye seem not half too wise,
Yea, ye your selves it deem most worthy praise;
Beauties best guard; that Dragon which does keep
Hesperian fruit, the spur in you does raise;
That Delion wit that other ways* may sleep,
To cruel Nymphs your Lines do fame afford,
Often many pitiful, not one poor word.
IV.
IF it be love to wake out all the night,
And watchful eyes drive out in dewie moanes*
And when the Sun brings to the world his light
To waste the Day in tears, and bitter groans.
If it be love to dim weak reasons beam
With clouds of strange desire, and make the mind
In hellish agonies a heaven to dream,
Still seeking Comforts where but griefs we find;
If it be love to stain with wanton thought
A spotless chastity, and make it try
More furious flames than his whose cunning wrought
That brazen Bull, where he entombed did fry.
Then sure is Love the causer of such woes,
Be ye our Lovers, or our mortal foes.
V.
ANd would you then shake off Loves golden chain,
With which it is best freedom to be bound?
And Cruel do ye seek to heal the Wound
Of Love, which has such sweet and pleasant pain?
All that is subject unto natures reign
In Skies above, or on this lower round,
When it is long and far sought, and has found*
Does in D^cade^s fall and slack remain;
Behold the Moon how gay her face does grow
Till she kiss all the Sun, then does decay;
See how the Seas tumultuously do flow
Till they embrace loved banks, then ^ost away:
So is it with love, unless you love me still;
O, do not think I Will yield unto your will.
CAres charming sleep, son of the ^able night,
Brother to death, in silent darkness borne,
Destroy my languish e're the day be light,
With dark forgetting of my cares return*
And let the day be long enough to mourn
The shipwreck of my ill adventured Youth;
Let watery eyes suffice to wail their scorn
Without the troubles of the nights untruth;
Cease dreams, fond image of my fond desir^^
To model forth the passions of to morrow;
Let never rising Sun approve your tears
To add more grief to aggravate my sorrow:
Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain,
And never wake to feel the days disdain.
An Epitaph of one named Margaret.
IN shells, and gold, Pearls are not kept alone,
A Margaret here lies beneath a stone;
A Margaret that did excel in worth
All those rich Gems the Indies both send forth*
Who had she lived when good was loved of men,
Had made the Graces four, the Muses ten,
And forced those happy times her days that claimed
From her to be the age of Pearl still named;
She was the richest Jewel of her kind,
Graced with more luster than she left behind,
All Goodness, virtue, Bounty, and could cheer
The saddest minds, now Nature knowing here
How things but shown, then hidden are loved best,
This Margaret 'shrin'd in this marble Chest.
Another Epitaph on a Lady.
THis Beauty fair which death in dust did turn,
And closed so soon within a Coffin sad,
Did pass like Lightning, like the thunder burn,
So little like so much true virtue had;
Heavens but to show their might here made it shine,
And when admired then in the worlds disdain,
(O tears, O grief!) did call it back again,
Lest earth should vaunt she kept what was divine,
On a Drunkard.
NOr Aramanthes, nor Roses do (...)
Unto this Hearse, but (...) and Wine,
For that same thirst, though dead, y^^ does him pi^e,
Which made him so carrouse while he drew breath.
Aretinus Epitaph.
HEre Aretine lies most bitter gall*
Who whilst he lived spoke evil of all,
Only of God the Arran^ Scot
Naught said, ^ut that he knew him not.
Comparison of his thoughts to Pearls.
WIth open shells in seas, on heavenly dew,
A shining Oyster lusciously does feed,
And then the birth of that aethereall seed
Shows when conceived if Skies look dark or blew:
So do my thoughts (Celestial twins) of you,
At whose aspect they first begin and breed,
When they came forth to light, demonstrate true
If ye then smiled: or lowr'd in mourning weed
Pearls then are orient framed, and fair in form
If heavens in their conceptions do look clear:
But if they thunder, or do threat a storm.
They sadly dark and cloudy do appear;
Right so my thoughts, and so my notes do change,
Sweet if ye smile, and hoarse if ye look strange.
All changes.
THe angry Winds not aye
Do cuff the roaring Deep;
And though heavens often weep,
Yet do they smile for joy when comes dismay;
Frosts do not ever kill the pleasant flowers,
And Love has sweets when gone are all the soures.
This said, a shepherd closing in his arms
His dear; who blushed to feel Loves new alarmes.
Sile^^s to King Midas.
THe greatest gift that from their lofty thrones
The all-governing powers to man can give,
Is, that he never breath, or breathing once
A suckling end his days, and leave to live,
For then he neither knows the woe nor joy
Of life, nor fears the Stygian Lakes annoy.
To his amorous thought.
SWeet wanton thought, who art of beauty borne,
And who on beauty feedst, and sweet desire,
Like Taper flee, still circling, and still turn
About that flame; that all so much admire
That heavenly fair, which does out-blush the morn,
Those Ivory hands, those threads of golden wire
Thou still surroundest yet dare not aspire;
Sure thou do well that place not to come near,
Nor see the Majesty of that fair Court;
For if thou saw what wonders there resort,
The poor intelligence that moves that sphere
Like souls ascending to those Joys above;
Back never would thou turn, nor thence remove.
What can we hope for more? what more enjoy?
Since fairest things thus soonest have their end,
And as on bodies shadows do attend,
Soon all our bliss is followed with annoy,
Yet she is not dead, she lives where she did love,
Her memory on earth, her soul above.
Verses on the late William Earl of Pembrook.
I.
THe doubtful fears of Change so fright my Mind,
Though raised to the highest joy in Love,
As in this slippery state more grief I find,
Than they who never such a bliss did prove;
But fed with lingering hopes of ^uture Gain,
Dream not what it is to doubt a Losers Pain.
II.
Desire a safer Harbor is than Fear,
And not to rise less danger than to fall;
The want of Jewels we far better bear,
Than so possessed at once to lose them all:
Unsatisfied Hopes Time may repair,
When ruined Faith must finish in despair.
III.
Alas! Ye look but up the Hill on me,
Which shows to you a fair and smooth ascent,
The Precipice behind ye cannot see,
On which high Fortunes are too pronely bent:
If there I slip, what former joy or bliss
Can heal the bruise of such a fall as this?
A Reply.
I.
WHo love enjoyes, and placed has his Mind
Where fairer Virtues fairest beauties grace,
Than in himself such store of worth does find,
That he deserves to hold so good a Place;
To chilling fears how can he be set forth,
Whose fears condemn his own, doubts others worth?
II.
Desire, as flames of Zeal, Fear, Horrors meets,
They rise who fall o^ falling never proved.
Who is so dainty satiate with swee^s
To murmur when the Banquet is removed?
The fairest hopes Time in the Bud destroys,
When sweet are memories of ruined Joys.
III.
It is no Hill but Heaven where you remain,
And whom Desert advanced has so high
To reach the Guerdon of his burning Pain,
Must not repine to fall, and falling dye,
His Hopes are crowned; what years of tedious breath
Can them compare with such a happy Death?
W. D.

A Translation.
AH! silly Soul, what will thou ^ay
When he whom earth and Heavens obey
Comes Man to judge in the last Day*
II.
When He a reason asks, why Grace
And Goodness thou would not embrace,
But steps of Vanity did trace?
III.
That Day of Terror, Vengeance, Ire,
Now to prevent thou should desire,
And to thy God in haste retire.
IV.
With watery Eyes, and Sigh-swollen Heart,
O beg, beg in his Love a part*
Whilst Conscience with remorse does smart.
V.
That dreaded Day of wrath and shame
In flames shall turn this Worlds huge Frame,
As sacred Prophets do proclaim.
VI.
O! with what Grief shall Earthlings groan
When that great Judge set on his Throne
Examines strictly every One.
VII.
Shrill-sounding Trumpets through the Air
Shall from dark Sepulchers each where
Force wretched Mortals to appear.
VIII.
Nature and Death amazed remain
To find their dead arise again,
And Process with their Judge maintain.
IX.
Displayed then open Books shall lie
Which all those secret crimes descry,
For which the guilty World must dye.
X.
The Judge enthroned (whom Bribes not gain)
The closest crimes appear shall plain,
And none unpunished remain.
XI.
O who then pity shall poor me!
Or who mi^e Advocate shall be?
When scarce the justest pass shall free*
XII.
All wholly holy dreadful King,
Who freely life to thine do bring,
Of Mercy save me Mercies spring.
XIII.
Then (sweet Jesu) call to mind
How of thy Pains I was the End,
And favor let me that day find.
XIV.
In search of me Thou full of pain
Did sweat blood, Death on Cross sustain,
Let not these suff'rages be in vain.
XV.
Thou supreme Judge, most just and wise,
Purge me from guilt which on me lies
Before that day of thine Assize.
XVI.
Charged with remorse (lo) here I groan,
Sin makes my face a blush take on;
Ah! spare me prostrate at thy Throne.
XVII.
Who Mary Magdalen did spare,
And lend'st the Thief on Cross thine Ear,
Show me fair hopes I should not fear.
XVIII.
My prayers imperfect are and weak,
But worthy of thy grace them make,
And save me from Hells burning Lake.
XIX.
On that great Day at thy right hand
Grant I amongst thy Sheep may stand,
Sequestered from the Goatish Band.
XX.
When that the Reprobates are all
To everlasting flames made thrall,
O to thy Chosen (Lord) me call;
XXI.
That I one of thy Company,
With those whom thou do justify,
May live blessed in Eternity.
Upon John Earl of Laderdale his Death.
OF those rare Worthies, who adorned our North
And shined like Constellations, Thou alone
Remaindst last (great Maitland) charged with worth,
Second in Virtues Theater to none.
But finding all eccentrick in our times,
Religion into superstition turned,
Justice silenced, exiled, or inurn'd;
Truth, Faith, and Charity reputed Crimes.
The young man destinate by sword to fall,
And Trophies of their Countries spoils to rear;
Strange Laws the Aged, and prudent to appale,
And forced sad yoakes of Tyranny to bear*
And for nor great, nor virtues minds a room,
Disdaining life, thou should into thy Tomb.
II.
WHen misdevotion every where shall take place,
And lofty Orators in thundering terms
Shall move you (people) to arise in arms,
And Churches hallowed policy deface;
When you shall but one general sepulcher
(As Averroes did one general Soul)
On high, on low, on good, on bad confer,
And your dull Predecessors rites control*
Ah spare this Monument, great Guests it keeps,
Three grave Justiciars, whom true worth did raise,
The Muses Darlings, whose loss Phoebus weeps:
Best men's delight, the glory of their days.
More we would say, but fear, and stand in aw
To turn Idolaters, and break your Law.
III.
DO not repine (blessed soul) that humble wits
Do make thy worth the matter of their Verse:
No high strained Muse our times and sorrows fits:
And we do sigh, not sing, to crown thy Hearse.
Thy wisest Prince, e're managed Britains State
Did not disdain in numbers clear and brave,
The virtues of thy Sire to celebrate,
And fix a rich memorial on his Grave.
Thou did deserve no less; and here in Jet,
Gold, Touch, Brass, Porphyrie, or Parian Stone,
That by a Princes hand no lines are set
For thee: the cause is now this Land has none.
Such Giant Moods our parity forth brings,
We all will nothing be, or all be Kings.
EPITAPHS. TO The Obsequies of the blessed Prince, JAMES, King of Great
Britain.
LEt holy David, Solomon the Wise,
That King, whose Breast Aegeria did inflame;
Augustus, Helens Son, Great in all Eyes,
Do Homage low to thy Mausolean Frame;
And bow before thy Laurels Anadem.
Let all those sacred Swans, which to the Skies
By never-dying Lays have raised their Name,
From North to South, where Sun does set and rise.
Religion, Orphan'd, waileth over thy Urne,
Justice weeps out her Eyes, now truly blind,
To Niobes the remnant Virtues turn:
Fame, but to blaze thy Glories, stays behind
In The World, which late was golden by thy Breath,
Is Iron turned, and horrid by thy Death.
On the Death of a young Lady.
THis Beauty which pale Death in Dust did turn,
And closed so soon within a Coffin sad,
Did pass like Lightning, like to Thunder burn;
So little Life, so much of Worth it had!
Heavens but to show their Might here made it shine,
And when admired, then in the Worlds disdain
(O Tears, O Grief!) did call it back again,
Lest Earth should vaunt she kept what was Divine,
What can we hope for more? what more enjoy?
Since fairest things thus soonest have their End;
And, as on Bodies shadows do attend,
Since all our Bliss is followed with Annoy?
She is not dead, she lives where she did love,
Her Memory on Earth, her sou^e above.
FOnd Wight, who dream'st of Greatness, Glory, State,
And Worlds of Pleasures, Honors do devise,
Awake, Learn how that here thou art not Great,
Nor glorious, By this Monument turn wise.
One it enshrineth sprung of ancient stemm,
And (if that Blood Nobility can make,)
From which some Kings have not disdained to take
Their proud Descent, a rare and matchless Gemm.
A Beauty here it holds by full assurance,
Than which no blooming Rose was more refined,
Nor Mornings Blush more radiant ever shin^d,
Ah! too too like to Morn and Rose at last.
It holds her who in Wits ascendant far
Did Years and Sex transcend, To whom the Heaven
More Virtue than to all this Age had given,
For Virtue Meteor turned, when she a star.
Fair Mirth, sweet Conversation, Modesty,
And what those Kings of Numbers did conceive
By Muses Nine, and Graces more than Three,
Lie closed within the Compass of this Grave.
Thus Death all Earthly glories does confound,
Lo! how much Worth a little Dust does bound.
FAr from these Banks exiled be all Joys,
Contentments, Pleasures, Music (cares relief)
Tears, Sighs, Plaints, Horrors, Frightments, sad Annoies
Invest these Mountains, fill all Hearts with Grief.
Here Nightingals and Turtles vent your moanes;
Amphrisian Shepherd here come feed thy Flock,
And read thy Hyacinth amidst our Groans,
Plain Echo thy Narcissus from our Rocks.
Lost have our Meads their Beauty, Hills their Gemms,
Our Brooks their Crystal, Groves their pleasant shade,
The fairest Flower of all our Anademms
Death cropped has, the Lesbia chaste is dead.
Thus sighed the Tyne then shrunk beneath his Urne,
And Meads, Brooks, Rivers, Hills about did mourn.
THe Flower of Virgins in her Prime of years
By ruthlesse Destinies is taken away,
And raped from Earth, poor Earth, before this Day,
Which never was rightly named a Vale of Tears.
Beauty to Heaven is fled, sweet Modesty
No more appears; She whose harmonious sounds
Did ravish Sense, and charm Minds deepest wounds,
Embaulm'd with many a Tear now low does lie.
Fair Hopes now vanished are; She should have graced
A Princes Marriage Bed; but (lo!) in Heaven
Blessed Paramours to her were to be given!
She lived an Angel, now is with them placed.
Virtue is but a Name abstractly trimmed,
Interpreting what she was in effect,
A shadow from her Frame which did reflect,
A Pourtrait by her Excellencies limm'd.
Thou whom free will or chance has hither brought,
And read'st; Here lies a Branch of Maitlands stemm,
And S^ytons Offspring; know that either Name
Designs all worth yet reached by humane Thought.
Tombs (elsewhere) use Life to their Guests to give,
These Ashes can frail Monuments make live.
Another on the same subject.
LIke to the Gardens Eye, the Flower of Flowers
With purple Pomp that dazzle does the Sight;
Or as among the lesser Gems of Night,
The Usher of the Planet of the Hours:
Sweet Maid, thou shinedst on this World of ours,
Of all Perfecti^ns having traced the hight,
Thine outward frame was fair, fair inward Powers,
A Sapphire Lantern, and an incense light.
Hence, the enamored Heaven as too too good
On Earths all-thorny soil long to abide,
Transplanted to their Fields so rare a Bud,
Where from thy Sun no cloud thee now can hide.
Earth moan'd her loss, and wished she had the grace
Not to have known, or known thee longer space.
HArd Laws of mortal Life!
To which made Thrales we come without consent,
Like Tapers, lighted to be early spent,
Our Griefs are always rife,
When joys but halting march, and swiftly fly
Like shadows in the Eye:
The shadow does not yield unto the Sun,
But Joys and Life do waste even when begun.
On the Death of a Nobleman in Scotland, buried at Aithen.
AIthen, thy Pearly Coronet let fall,
Clad in sad Robes upon thy Temples set,
The weeping Cypress, or the sable Jet.
Mourn this thy Nurslings loss, a loss which all
Apollos Quire bemoanes, which many years
Cannot repair, nor Influence of Spheres.
Ah! when shall thou find Shepherd like to him,
Who made thy Banks more famous by his worth,
Then all those Gems thy Rocks and Streams send forth.
His splendour others Glowworm light did dim,
Sprung of an ancient and a virtuous Race,
He Virtue more than many did embrace.
He framed to mildness thy halfe-barbarous swains,
The Good-mans Refuge, of the bad the fright,
Unparaleld in friendship, worlds Delight.
For Hospitality along thy Plains
Far-fam'd, a Patron, and a Pattern fair,
Of Piety, the Muses chief repair.
Most debonaire in Courtesy supreme,
Loved of the mean, and honored by the Great,
Never dashed by Fortune, nor cast down by Fate,
To present, and to after Times a Theme.
Aithen, thy Tears pour on this silent Grave,
And drop them in thy Alabaster cave,
And Ni^bes Imagery become;
And when thou have distilled here a Tomb,
E^chace in it thy Pearls, and let it bear,
Aithens best Gem and honor shrin'd lies here.
FAme Register of Time
Write in thy Scrowle, that I
Of Wisdom Lover, and sweet Poesy,
Was cropped in my Prime:
And ripe in worth, though green in years, did dye.
Justice, Truth, Peace, and Hospitality,
Friendship, and Love, being resolved to dye
In these lewd Times, have chosen here to have
With just true pious -- their Grave;
Them cherished he so much, so much did grace,
That they on Earth would choose none other Place.
WHen Death to deck his Trophies stop thy breath,
Rare Ornament and Glory of these Parts:
All with moist Eyes might say, and ruthful hearts,
That things immortal vassal'd were to Death.
What Good in Parts on many shared we see
From Nature, gracious Heaven, or Fortune flow,
To make a Masterpiece of worth below,
Heaven, Nature, Fortune gave in gross to Thee.
In Honor, Bounty, Rich, in Valor, Wit,
In Courtesy, Borne of an ancient Race,
With Bays in war, with Olives crowned in Peace,
Matched great, with Offspring for great Actions fit.
No Rust of Times, nor Change, thy Virtue wan
With Times to change, when Truth, Faith, Love decayed,
In this new Age (like Fate) thou fixed stayed
Of the first World an all-substantiall Man.
As erst this Kingdom given was to thy Sire,
The Prince his Daughter trusted to thy Care,
And well the credit of a Gem so rare
Thy loyalty and merit did require.
Years cannot wrong thy Worth, that now appears
By others set as Diamonds among Pearls,
A Queens dear Foster, Father to three Earls,
Enough on Earth to triumph are over years.
Life a Sea-voyage is, Death is the Haven,
And fraught with honor there thou have arrived,
Which Thousands seeking have on Rocks been driven,
That Good adornes thy Grave which with thee lived:
For a frail Life which here thou did enjoy,
Thou now a lasting have ^reed of Annoy.
WIthin the Closure of thi^ Narrow Grave
Lie all those Graces a Good-wife could have:
But on this Marble they shall not be read,
For then the Living envy would the Dead.
THe Daughter of a King of Princely Parts,
In Beauty eminent, in Virtues chief,
Loadstar of Love, and Loadstone of all hearts,
Her Friends, and Husbands only Joy, now Grief*
Is here pent up within a Marble Frame,
Whose Parallel no Times, no Climates claim.
VErses frail Records are to keep a Name,
Or raise from Dust Men to a Life of Fame,
The sport and spoil of Ignorance; but far
More frail the Frames of Touch and Marble are,
Which envy, Avarice, Time e're long confound,
Or mis-devotion equals with the Ground.
Virtue alone does last, frees man from Death,
And, though despised and scorned here beneath,
Stands grav'n in Angels Diamantine Roles,
And blazed in the Courts above the Poles.
Thou wast fair Virtues Temple, they did dwell,
And live adored in thee, naught did excel
But what thou either did possess or love,
The Oraces Darling, and the maids of Jove,
Courted by Fame for Bounties which the Heaven
Gave thee in great, which if in Parcels given
Too many, such we happy sure might call,
How happy then wast thou who enjoyedst them all?
A whiter Soul never body did invest,
And now (sequestered) cannot be but blessed,
Inro^^'d in Glory, 'midst those Hierarchies
Of that immortal People of the Skies,
Bright Saints and Angels, there from cares made free
Naught does becloud thy sovereign Good from Thee.
Thou smil'st at Earths Confusions and Jars,
And how for Centaures Children we wage wars:
Like honey Flies, whose rage whole swarms consumes
Till D^st thrown on them makes them veil their plumes.
Thy friends to thee a Monument would raise,
And ^imne thy Virtues; but dull grief thy Praise
Breaks in the Entrance, and our Task proves vain,
What duty writes that woe blot^ out again:
Yet Love a Pyramid of Sighs thee reares,
And does embaulme thee with Fare-wells and Tears.
Rose.
THough Marble Porphyry, and mourning Touch --
May praise these spoils, yet can they not too much*
For Beauty last, and this Stone does close,
Once Earths Delight, Heavens care, a purest Rose.
And (Reader) should thou but let fall a Tear
Upon it, other flowers shall here appear,
Sad Violets and Hyacinths which grow
With marks of grief: a public loss to show.
II.
Relenting Eye, which d^ignest to this Stone
To lend a look, behold, here he laid one.
The Living and the Dead interred, for Dead
The Turtle in its Mate is; and she fled
From Earth, her choos'd this Place of Grief
To bound Thoughts, a small and sad Relief.
His is this Monument, for hers no Art
Could frame, a Pyramide raised of his Heart.
III.
Instead of Epitaphs and airy praise
This Monument a Lady chaste did raise
To her Lords living fame, and after Death
Her Body does unto this Place bequeath,
To rest with his, till Gods shrill Trumpet sound,
Though time her Life, no time her lo^^ could bound.
To Sir W. A.
THough I have twice been at the Doors of Death,
And twice found shut those Gates which ever mourn,
This but a Lightning is, Truce taken to Breath,
For late borne sorrows augure fleet return.
Amidst thy sacred Cares, and Courtly Toils,
Alexis, when thou shall hear wandering Fame
Tell, Death has triumphed over my mortal Spoils,
And that on Earth I am but a sad Name;
If thou e're held me dear, by all our Love,
By all that Bliss, those Joys Heaven here us gave,
I conjure thee, and by the Maids of Jove,
To grave this short remembrance on my Grave*
Here Damon lies, whose Songs did sometime grace
The murmuring Esk, may Roses shade the place.
FINIS.

