A Spiritual REPOSITORY, containing Godly Meditations, Demonstrated by 12.
Signs of our Adoption to Eternal Glory.

By H. Drexelius.

And now Translated into English by R. W. of Trinity College Cambridge.

Psalm. 119.97, 95. O how I love thy Law! It Is my Meditation all the day. The
wicked have waited for me to destroy me, but I will consider thy Testimonies.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. to be sold by most Booksellers, 1676.

ZODIACVS CHRISTIANVS locupletatus Seu Signa XII. Divinae PRAEDESTINA TIONIS
Totidem Symbolis explicata Ab Hierem: Drexelio e Societate Insv.

COL: AGRIPPINAE Apud Cornel^ab Egmond. M.DC.XXXII.

engraved border

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THe multitude of Books that have already to too much plenared the World with a
variety of notions, has been an Argument of no little prevalency, to regulate
my undertakings; and more particularly, when Employed about a Concern of so
great, and of so good Importance, by presenting unto the world a president for
meditations: but before I did proceed in my undertakings, I thought it
absolutely requisite to consult with grave, Learned, and worthy persons; not
only with a particular respect to the Author of this Ensuing Treatise: (that
most Heroic, and renowned person H. Drexelius) but with a particular relation
to this Treatise; to whom when I had Imparted my Resolution, they continued no
longer my Incouragers, but presently became my strict obligers, and soon
refuted my former objection, and further demonstrated that this divine
Treatise, would he rather a Uniter, then a discomposer of pious Meditations.
And now Christian Reader, give me leave additionally to speak a word or two
concerning the Author. He was a person not only Epedemically Renowned in
Learning, but did Illustrate it in the three Theological graces, Faith, Hope,
and Charity, and did continually endeavor to suppress that most crying sin of
unsatiable Voluptuousness, so that you see his whole pilgrimage upon this
earthly Tabernacle, was an Optic of Virtue and Piety. And he that desires to
know more of the worth of this Author, Let him but read that most Excellent
piece of his, entitled Confiderations upon Eternity, and whosoever does so, I
question not but he will be fully Convinced of the truth of what I assert, and
that it may be as seed sowed in good ground, God out of his Abundant plentitude
water it with the due from Heaven.

R. W.

Approbatio R. P. Provincialis.
ZOdiacum Christianum locupletatum, quem P. Hieremias Drexelius, Societatis
nostrae presbyter, de duodecim Praedestinationis signis conscripsit, atiquot
ejusdem Societatis Theologis censum probatumque; Ego Christophorus Grenzing,
Societatis Jesus per superiorem Germaniam Praepositus Provincialis, facta mihi
potestate, ab admodum R. P. N. Generali, Mutio Vitellesco, in lucem dari
permitto: fidemque mea manu facio, and more Societatis consigno. Monachii III.
Idus Septembres. Anno M.DC.XXI.

Christophorus Grenzing.

candle Emblem. 1.

Inward Light

Thy word is a Candle unto my feet and a light unto my paths. psalm. 119. v.
106



The first Sign.
Internal Illumination OR, Enlightening of the Understanding.
Set out by the Author, by a burning Taper. Under it these words of the
PSALMIST.
Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119.
BY that burning Taper is denoted, that inward light, which so clearly
discovers unto us the benefits of God, the vanity of the world, the shortness
of life, the filthiness of sin, and the fading shadows of all worldly
pleasures, so that he, who begins to apprehend them with the eye of reason,
cannot but earnestly gasp after Heavens joys, and cry out with the Kingly
Prophet. Psalm. 42.
My soul is a-thirst for God, even for the living God. When shall J come and
appear before the presence of God? There be many that say, who will show us
any good? Psalm. 4.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: and in thy light we
shall see light.

First, Not to do that to another, which we would not have done to our
selves. For whatsoever we do to another, foe, or friend, we must expect the
like from him: with what measure ye meet withal, it shall be measurd to you
again: Luke 6.38.
For this cause ought we neither by force nor fraud to injure another, either
by robbing him of his goods or staining his reputation.

Sdly, again, same God is all justice, whose magnitude, form or fashion far
transcends the best humane expression; to whom nothing in the world may be
likened, neither he can by any thing we see here be truly represented. In
comparison of whose Excellency all the beauties and fairest things in this
world are mere darkness, a shadow, which is a thing without substance and
reality. To this most lovely and excellent beauty (I mean God Almighty)
nothing is more acceptable, then to be repaid for all his benefits with the
Tribute of our Love and Charity.

Thirdly, This light set up within us discovers unto us the works of God our
Maker, such as are without us, viz. the vicissitude of times, of night and day,
the glorious greatness of the spangled Heaven, the long journeys of the Sun
and Moon, which they dispatch daily with a speedy motion, the beauty of the
earth decked with variety of flowers: The spacious windings and turnings of
Rivers, the vast widenes and furious raging of the Sea, the diverse kinds of
beasts, the great increase and store of fruits, all which God made not with
hands, nor any labor, the only cause they were made in that order and
Excellency as they are, was Gods will and pleasure.

Fourthly, Moreover this light of reason enlightened by a clear and lively
faith, discovers by an undeniable demonstration, that man's felicity consists in
this; that he attain as much as is possible here, to the likeness of God his
Maker, which is the only means to purchase Gods love and favor; for similitude
or likeness is the cause of love, and that picture is best that comes nearest
^its pattern. This happiness one day shall befall us, when we shall be made
more like unto God, when we shall partake of the beatificall vision in the
other world, the land of he living. It does not yet appear ( says St. John)
what we shall be, but we know, 1 Ioh. 3.^.
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. From this sanctified light of knowledge in the understanding, from this
thought, or full persuasion of seeing one day God face to face, springs joy, in
the will, hereby our Hope is raised and takes its flight from Earth to Heaven,
and by this too our hearts are enflamed with an ardent affection toward God,
the Author of our happiness, and the fountain of all good. For what can be
imagined more sweet or comfortable to a glorified soul then to behold it self
invested with the glorious Image of an infinite beauty to know for a certain,
that he is dear and precious in the esteem of God, who is the pattern,
according to whose likeness our souls were framd and wrought? But because this
light of faith shines not alike to all, holy David (having found by experience,
that every man partakes, not of this joy and happiness) rejoices with
thanksgiving to God for this special grace and benefit. Psalm. 4.
Thou have (says he) put gladness in my heart, not every man's heart, but in
mine and those who are predestined by thee O goodness, to everlasting life,
therefore (so he in another Psalm) we will walk in the light of thy
countenance, and in thy name will we triumph with gladness all our days,
rejoicing and glad for this, that we are plucked out of the darkness of sin
and ignorance, that we may be instructed more and more in the knowledge of
thy most holy will, by our Obedience to which we (as Abraham once) shall enter
with thee into a secret bond of friendship, and be called thy friends. O Israel
happy are we, Baruc. 4.4.
for things that are pleasing to God, are made known unto us. Job when he
felt the weight of Gods displeasure, and and burden of man's contempt, when he
was beset with the darkness of Adversity on every side, then he solac'd
himself with the remembrance of this spiritual light; Job 29.3.
His light (says he) shined upon my head, and by his light I walked through
darkness. Therefore (says Eccles. Eccl. 2. Isaiah 58.
) Ye that fear the Lord, love him, and your hearts shall be enlightened. Your
light shall rise in obscurity, and the Lord shall always give you rest, and
shall fill your souls with the splender off his Grace; but if you turn from
God, Eccl. 11.16
you shall be involved with Egyptian darkness: For error and darkness had
their beginning together with sinners. Wisd. 5.


These words (says the spirit of God) sinners in hell utterd; and what are
they may some demand. This Quere is not to be branded with the note of an idle
and fruitless curiosity. We greedily listen to the report of those things
which among other Nations have been practiced in Kings Palaces and Princes
Courts: to know what is done to the damned in Hell, if it be not unpleasant to
be heard, much less will it be unprofitable to be understood, especially
seeing this narration is not, as the story many times of Novelties, doubtful
and uncertain. What then is the speech or language of the damned in Hell? Wisd.
5.6.
We have erred from the way of Truth, and the light of Righteousness has not
shined unto us. Therefore we have erred. This indeed is the consequence but
where is the Antecedent? Come and let us enjoy the good things that are
present, Chapter 2.6.7.8.
let us fill our selves with costly Wine and Ointment, and let not the flower
of the spring pass by us: Let us crown our selves with Rose-budds before they
be withered, and let us leave tokens of our joyfulnesse in every place. Behold
this is the Antecedent made by them, an Antecedent of joy, they surfeited
themselves on earth, the consequent or conclusion, a consequent of Eternal woe
is made in hell. Silly Logicians, for when they had framed to themselves the
Antecedent, they ought then to have subjoined the consequent. Come and let us
enjoy the good that are present (This the Antecedent) the consequent or
conclusion should presently have been added: Therefore we erred; for we must
either repent in this life or burn in the other. We must break off our sins
by Repentance, and not sin without ceasing. Here we must expect to bear the
Cross, not hope to wear the Crown. Here we must fight, strive against the
world, the devil and our own lusts, hereafter triumph, therefore we have erred
(It is a good and true conclusion, but framed too late) and the light of
Righttousnesse has not shined unto us. And what (may one demand) is this light
of righteousness or justice: If it be the property of Justice to give to
every man his due, (as the law declares it) then this cannot be denied that it
is the Office of justice to give to all things that estimation is due unto
them. Therefore, that light of the soul which sets a true estimation upon each
thing may fitly be termed the light of justice or understanding. And this is
that the damned in hell complained they wanted here on earth. To judge then
which were the richest and strongest Wines, to deck their heads with Garlands,
and to provide delicates for their bellies: All these things they knew full
well; but that these fading vanities were not to be preferred before the
everlasting delights, this they were ignorant of, and delighted in that stupid
ignorance, which lul'd them in security whilst they took their fill in
shameful and short delights, which yet they prized so highly, that in
comparison of them, they lowly esteemed all the joys of Heaven, set at naught
those everlasting delights, while they resolved not to forsake their surfeiting
and drunkenness, their venerous wantonness, and other sinful pleasures of
the flesh. So dear and precious to them, the liberty they took in sinning,
that eternity was of no account with them; they lightly regarded or indeed
never thought of the life everlasting. But this is a most unjust estimation of
things. The light of the understanding illuminated, with the knowledge of
divine truths suggests a quite contrary lesson, teaching us that eternity alone
is highly to be esteemed, all other things little or nothing to be regarded.
Therefore have we erred, this the voice of the damned in hell and that they have
erred, it is plain and evident to themselves, who feel the sharp punishment of
their short pleasures, and to those who hear and read of their bitter
complaints.

Therefore the light of Righteousness has not shined unto us. This is a truth
most free from all doubting and exception. There be many that will not
understand, because they are minded to do evil and no good. They flatter and
deceave themselves with a voluntary and pleasing ignorance, they love to walk
in crooked and by paths. Such of this rank, and number were ye, O you
Inhabitants of hell: Ye would not understand that ye might do well; therefore
now you may tire your selves with howlings and bitter cries to all Eternity.
Ergo erravimus, therefore we have erred, and the light of Righteousness has
not shind unto us. This is the Psalm, and these the doleful notes which shall
be for ever chanted by those spirits in the infernal pit.

Attend then O ye Christians, and lift up the eyes of your souls, and delude
not out of a wilful blindness those rays of Truth which God in his word has
manifested unto us. ^^rue. 12.
The Lord give us strength and enlighten our eyes. By the virtue of this light,
it will be apparent to us, that men are not to be more esteemd then God, nor
riches more than Conscience, neither man's favor, more than Gods. It will
moreover direct our judgments in the choice of what is best for us, teaching
us that no pleasure, be it never so delightful, is to be preferred before
heavens joys, no temporary things before those that be Eternal, and not
subject to Natures law And truly (says Chris.) there is not the thing in this
world on which a man can fasten his affection, who has had a taste of heavens
sweet delights, wherewith he shall be filled, when he partakes of the
beatificall Vision.

This light of the understanding, our good and Gracious God was pleased to
infuse in a full measure into the mind of Saint Austine: l. 1. Conf. clo.
I being advertised (says he) by Gods privy Monitor the Holy spirit, to
return (after my long wandering) home to my self, I entered into the closet of
my heart: where I beheld with the eye (such as then it was) of my soul, the
incommutable or unchangeable light of the Lord: he that knows it, or has had
a sight of it, that man has had a glimpse of eternity. By that light (so the
Father goes on) I found that I was far remote from thee O God, even in a
Region of darkness, far unlike to thee, who art all light and most glorious.
From this light of the understanding and Justice little differs that light of
devotion, of which Saint Bernard thus,

Entreat the Lord (says he) to give thee the light of Devotion, a clear day
in thy understanding, and that spiritual Sabbath of the soul, by means
whereof (as a Soldier discharged by reason of Age) in all thy labors thou
may live without sense or feeling of thy labor and pains taken in Gods
service, whilst thou do run cheerfully, Sermon. 3. de Circ.
(thy heart being enlarged with joy) in the way of his Commandments. And pray,
that what thou did before with anguish or bitterness of heart, and restraint
of thy will, thou may ever after perform with delight and alacrity of
spirit. To this light of Devotion, the Kingly Prophet David invites us; Come,
says he, and be enlightened, Psalm. 33.
taste and see how Gracious the Lord is. This inward light of the soul is
pleasant and lovely; it is a slame full of comfort and delight, which discovers
unto man daily more and more the nature of the Deity. As this light set up by
God in man's breast grows greater and greater. So (what may seem wonderful to
relate) he who is not capable of Augmentation, may find growth in our
understandings, he may increase, even God who is immense, without bounds and
limitation, our eternal and merciful Creator.

candle SYMBOLVM. I.

Lux interna.

Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum, et lumen semitis meis. Psalm. 118.



skull Emblem. II.

A preparation to death

I am in a straight betwixt -- two haueing a desire to depart and to be with
Christ. phis. i. v. 23.



The second Sign. A promptness or readiness to die. Set out by a Scull, the
Motto that of St Paul to the
PHIL. 1.23. J am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ.


BY the scull is set out unto us a mind prepared, and ever ready for what death
soever. And be ye, says Christ, like unto men, that expect their Masters
return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, ye may open
presently unto him. The Lord then knocks (so Saint Gregory) when, Hom. 13. in
Evang.
afflicting thee with some sore disease, he denounces the near access of
death, to whom we presently open, if we entertain him thus coming unto us by
sickness, with love. That man does not willingly open to the Judge thus
knocking, who trembles to think of his exit from the body, when he shall be
haled by his executioner, into the presence of that God, whom he remembers to
have contemned whilst he lived; the thoughts of standing one day before him as
his Judge, this fills the sinners conscience with horror and dread. But
contrariwise, he whose mind is settled with the Anchor of a firm Hope, and
secured with the Conscience of his good works to man, and piety to God, that
man opens without delay at Gods first knock, he rejoices that he is now
called to his desired Haven of rest, and for the glory of the future reward,
even the everlasting joys of the heavenly Paradise, he rejoices even in the
midst of sorrow, when his eyes are watered with tears. Why do we not desire
then to be dissolved, Phil. 1. Aug. de doctrina Christiana
and to be with Christ? This no doubt is far better, then that the time of
our sad sojourning here be prolonged. He cannot die ill, that has lived well,
neither he dye well, who has lived ill, whose life has been a continued
practice of impiety and profaneness. And what is that we so much fear should
be taken and snatched from us? What is our life but a Scene of mockeries and
follies, a sea of miseries? Be the ship what it will wherein thou art
carried, be it made of Gold or of Silver, of precious stones, or Wood, thou
can not avoid the fury of the waves which will beat against it, many rocks
shall thou meet with, on many a shallow or shelfe will thou stick. Blessed and
happy is the man who has sailed over this Sea; Blessed is he who is escaped
the danger of it, and is now in the heaven of security and rest. If there be
any (as there are many) who in the middle or prime of their days are snatched
out of this life by an unexpected death, they ought no more to complain of
this, then he that has soon and safely passed over the Sea. Why then do we
fear death which is the end of our labors, and the beginning of our rewards:
The sentence of death is passed upon all flesh, by him who is the Judge of
Heaven and Earth. None escaped it in the former ages, and none shall avoid it
in those that are to come. Many are gone the way before us, and we must all
follow their steps We were borne with this condition, and are bound by this
Law to go whether all men go, to the Grave. Death is the end of all men, the
bound which no man shall pass. It is a remedy to many who are afflicted with
misery; in that it cures them of their grief, and translates them to glory. It
is the Godly man's wish, desired by those who are predestined to everlasting
life, to these death gives a release from sorrows, and sets a period to
grief, and beyond which their calamities and misfortunes shall not pass. It
would be extreme folly, and madness to resist the decree of a most
bountiful and gracious Lord, to deny the payment of that Tribute which all do
pay, to covet that freedom which is granted to none. The Christians Divinity
is of a higher strain, which teaches us to have death in our desires, and to
enjoy our life with patience.

The Swan (if we may believe Solinus) in her life time is sadd and makes a
lamentable noise, Lib de mirabil: mun.
but at her death is joyful and sings. The Elect do the same, while they live,
they sigh and mourn, they rejoice in their death, being assured, that they
shall for ever rejoice and sing with the Saints and Angels in the Quire of
Heaven.

We read of a Swan-like song chanted by old Simeon not long before his death.
Lord, Luke 2.
now let thou thy servant depart in peace. And why do we lament and mourn,
when the cottages of our bodies are ruined and pulled down? For we know that
if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.
we have a building with God, an house not made with hand, Eternal in the
heavens.

First, Who will not rise with have and speed from an hard bed? They only
loyter and delay, who being delicately entertaind with the softness of their
warm Feathers, cannot easily forsake their downy nest. What? art thou sick of
this life? art thou afflicted in it? I suppose then to pass to a better, thou will be contented. Art thou in a good condition, and do thou flourish with
health and happiness? It will not be hurtful to thee, then, if death put a
sudden period to thy life, least thy prosperity prove thy ruin, and procure
to thee, as it has to many, a grievous though late destruction. Therefore (as
Tertullian rightly says) we ought not to fear that, which delivers us from
all our fears, and that is death.

God is merciful to a man, releases him from a long torment, when he shortens
his life, and makes it as it were but a half a spanne. Therefore that Generous
and N^ble Martyr, Cyprian hearing of Valerians decree against him ( Thascium
Cyprianum gladio animadverti placet, It is my will that Cyprian dye by the
sword) he hearing this, lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, said; Thanks
be to God who is pleased in mercy to quit me from the bonds and fetters of
this body. Lib. de bono Mor.
Saint Ambrose wonders at some men, who when they were to dye, would rather be
thrust by force out of their prison, then led out of it by fair entreaty. And
what is there (says he) in this life but a continual fight and strife with
Anger, Lust, and Gluttony? Chrysostom. is of the same mind with him, what plea have
thou for thy self O man? Jn c. 1. ad col.
Thou art invited to a kingdom, to the kingdom of the Son of God, and yet
thou altogether delayest to come, and as idle persons use to do, thou do
scratch thy head and yawne. What? if thou were bound every day to meet a
thousand deaths, would thou refuse to under go them All, so that at length
thou might by them enter into Heavens joys? And what would thou not do,
what pain so grievous, which thou would not willingly sustain for Princely
honor, for a Diadem or a Crown? Now seeing thou shall one day reign with
Christ, as a King, wilt not thou, then fly from it, court death, expose thy
self naked to the peril of a thousand swords, and leap cheerfully into the
scorching flames? Nay, contrariwise thou mournest, because thou art to leave
this vale of misery, and tears, and can be content to set up thy Tabernacle
to dwell here, so that in the mean time thou may pamper thy flesh with
delicacies and good cheer. Good God! what a madness possesses thy vain
thoughts, and yet in the mean time thou supposest death to be the most
terrible of all terribles. That which causes this folly, this vanity in our
desires, are the delights of the flesh and earthly pleasures: for on the
contrary he that groans under the burden of poverty, and grief, such a man
with the Prophet David, desires the wings of a Dove, that so he may flee away
and be at rest, being freed from all his miseries and distresses. It is with
us Christians as with young Birds newly fledged, we are loath to forsake their
warm nests, but the longer they stay in it, the weaker they commonly prove,
and more unable for flight. Now this present life is as it were a nest
compacted of mud and moss; brag never so much of thy stately buildings, and
pride thy self in thy Palaces embossed with Gold, and shining most gloriously
with precious stones, thy phancie may swell thee to a high conceit of thy self
for these, my reason tells me, they differ nothing from the Swallows nests,
winter defaces these, time and death thy pleasures. The truth of this is
confirmed by that Golden mouthed Father Chrysostom. All things (says he) do fade
and fall, and we with them, and for the most part the safer is our condition,
how much our fall and dissosolution is more sudden. So the wise man, the just
man is taken away, least wickedness seasing upon his soul change it, being
subject to alteration and decay. He believes not the resurrection of his body,
who hastens not in his desires to pass to the Heavenly joys from earths
sorrows and miseries. If a house totter in a storm, and threatens every hour
to quash us with his fall do not we speedily forsake i^? and if the ship we
are in be in danger of being sunk, in a tempest, what is more thought of, and
more desird, then a secure and quiet Haven? This world and all things in it are
subject to ruin and decay: we are tossed here with the waves of affliction,
and storms of grief; even as if we were riding upon the maine sea: Shall we
not then think of an Haven of repose and rest? Why do we not greedily desire
to go to our heavenly Father? even to the place of bliss, where our company
is desired by them that are near and dear unto us, those glorious and happy
Saints, who are secure and certain of their own welfare, only careful and
sollicitous for ours. O how happy and blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord? Apoc. c. 1 19.
because they rest (as it were) in the bosom of the Lord, and they thus
resting their death to them is, but a sleep. Acts 7.
So we read of Stephen when he was assaild with a storm of stones, even in
the midst of so great a tumult and noise of his enraged enemies, the Text says
that He fell a sleep, he slep't in the Lord. So Our Lord and Savior speaking
of his beloved Lazarus uses these comfortable words. Jo. 11.11.
Our friend Lazaras steepeth. Deuteronomy. 34:
So Moses the servant of the Lord breathed out his last breath where and when
his Lord commanded. And as a loving Mother kisses her tender infant sleeping in
her bosom, and afterward says it down softly in it is Cradle to take its
rest; so there be some who holding close to the Scripture phraise, stick not
to say, that Moses was dandled (as it were) by the hands of the Almighty, was
(if we may so speak) with a kiss and embrace laid to sleep in Abraham's
breast. The Psalmist in a manner insinuates thus much, 1 27. Psa. 3.
so he gives his beloved sleep. And this gift is an inheritance which comes
from the Lord, a blessing which he bestows only on his Elect. Thrice happy
are these souls who thus sleep in death, Yea from henceforth (says the
spirit) that they may rest from their labors, for their works do follow
them, as servants do their Master, sons their Father, and Nobles their Prince;
they follow them to Gods Tribunal, they attend them to the high Court of
Heaven, where will be admittance only for so noble a train. Whosoever
therefore is predestined to life, he will commend death as the only remedy
to ease and sweetten Natures grief, because he knows there is no other way to
pass to heavenly joys; and for that such a man is always prepared for death,
he thus reasons with himself.

Why do I tremble at the name of Death? necessity commonly brings with it,
finds no room. Neither have I any just cause to decline or shrink at Death,
since by the means of it I cease to be that which I unwillingly am, and that is
mortal and subject to corruption, I receivd this flesh, wherewith my soul is
clad upon these terms of restoring it (when it was demanded) to its Lord, and
I will therefore restore it cheerfully, knowing that I shall at the
Resurrection receave it again with an addition and increase of glory. As yet I
am detaind from the sight of my God by means of those delays which Mortality
does enforce, and which are but a praeludium to a better life. For that last
hour which most men so dread and fear, is the beginning of that day which
shall last for ever. When a man then is upon his death bed, and feels the
night of death approaching: Let him solace himself with these words There will
come a day which will redeem me from the darksome prison of the Grave, and
reduce me to the comforts of everlasting life. I will therefore cheerfully and
most willingly go out of this world in assurance that I shall be admitted
into a better, with what great joy shall I entertain that gladsome day,
wherein I shall be assigned to my proper home, (here I am but a stranger) and
wherein I shall be snatched from the fetters of my body, and snares of the
flesh to an everlasting inheritance in the heavenly Paradise? I confess, O
Lord, the guflt of many and great sins wherewith my Conscience is stained,
yet this is my comfort, that thy Mercy is like the great Ocean, wherewith the
earth is bounded. Into this Ocean will I throw my self with bosdnesse and
confidence, when I find my thoughts dejected, and feel deaths approach, being
assaulted by its forerunner, a mortal sickness: Thus casting my self into
the bosom of the Almighty, and throwing my soul into the Arms of his Mercy;
I shall quit my self of all the bands of this life's sinful misery: And in an
holy subjection to Gods will, I wish that death would hasten his approach;
whenever he comes and knockes at my door, he shall find me willing and
prepared to entertain his message, and so to rest from my labors. I am no
^uch an enemy to quiet and case, as to refuse after the toylesome working days
of this life to keep Holy Day, and to solemnize an eternal Sabbath with God
and his holy Angels in heaven. And why should I not then rejoice with gladness
when I shall close the days of this sorrowful life, which is nothing else but
an Egypt of Calamities, and shop of miseries? when I shall cut off that Yoke
the world calls fortune being no more subject to casualties and vexations, and
troubles, and begin a day which shall not be shut up with night but be freed
from all gloomy just and darkness.

Most welcome will that Messenger be whom the King of glory shall send unto me
to summon me out of this world, and to releaseme out of this dark prison to
enjoy everlasting felicity, being loosn'd from the fettars of mortality, I then
shall be enabled to perform those holy duties, which I could never do so long
as I was clogged with the burden of my flesh. The Bird needs no ejectment, but
speedily flies out, so soon as ever the Cage is opened; even so I being long
since cloid with the toils of this life, most willingly (when God shall call
me) will take my slight to those large and pleasant fields of immortal glory:
I am solicitous about the place and manner of my death, but of the time
alrogether careless: whether I dye to day or to morrow, this week or the next
I ^are not. His will be done, who made me and all things of nothing. The will
of God is my rule, according to which I square my desires and proportion my
thoughts both for life, and death. No ill can be feared, or expected from him,
who is goodness it self, and the Author of our life and salvation. And may
not the Potter do what he lists with an earthen Pitcher, may he not break it
if he will, or polish it upon the wheel? I am an earthen Vessel made by the
hand^^ that great Celestial Potter (be it spoken with Reverence) shall I then
complain and whimper when he that framed and fashioned me, shall crumble me
into dust, that he may cast me into a new mould, and turn my misery into joy,
making me for ever blessed and happy? Is it his will I should spin a songer
thread of life? I am content to do it, so long as he is pleass'd to will it: Is
God willing I should dye and be gathered to my Fathers? my will joyfully meets
with his, and I desire that death may arrest my bedy without all delays. I
would not live a moment longer then God pleases.

My beginning is from God, and he is my end, the end of my Hope, and whatsoever
he shall send and think fitting for me, I will entertain and receave it with
a cheerful alacrity, Phil. 1.
imitating herein Saint Paul who thus says of-himselfe, Christ is to me an
advantage both in life and death. My heart is enflamed with the love of thee O
my God, and I desire to be more enflamed: Let my heart be melted with this
fire of love. No creature (O my most dear God) besides thee can make me
blessed, or any way happy: And when shall I appear in thy presence? when (O my
God) shall my winged Soul fly away from hence to thee, and be at rest. I
follow thee, Blessed Savior, I follow thee in my desires, which then are most
earnest, when I come nearer to thee in any bodily grief or Sickness. Neither
ought these desires to seem strange in a good Christian; for as a Physician
(says Theophylact) when he sees his patient loath that diet be prescribed, and
refuse to drink his potions he first tastes of them himself, that by his
example he may induce the sick man to admit of his Physic, so Christ our
blessed Savior, himself first drank of Death's bitter cup, that we his
Servants, his redeemed, his followers might not be afraid to pledge him but
look death in the face with that undaunted cherfulness which becomes those
who have God for their Father and Christ for their Redeemer. And now Christian
Brother, although thou art of a fearful nature, strive to excite and raise
thy fainting Spirits with these or such like Divine expressions. Be speak God
in the words of the Prophet David, and say with an emboldened confidence, and
with a spirit unappal'd with the fear of Death, I will receive the Cup of
salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. The Cup indeed is bitter, Psalm.
116.12.
it has Wormwood in it, but my Savior has sweetened it, having first drank to
me of it when he suffered upon the Cross for my sins. That Cup is Deaths
fatal potion which Christ tasted willingly to purchase our salvation, and all
must drink of it without exception. All men must, why then should J alone
refuse it? who ever he be whether Prince or Peasant, Bond or free, that has
entered upon the Stage of mortality, and has begun to act his part in this
life's sinful Tragedy, he must necessarily have his Catastrophe, he must have
an end that he may begin to Act a better part in the Theater of heaven, and
begin a new life which nver shall have end. Hence then all vain and idle
fears, A way all vexing grief and tormenting sadness. The Cup which my
Heavenly Father puts into my hand, which Christ has temperd with his
sweetness, and drank deep of it, shall I not drink off that; I who am,
mortal, whose composirion tends to ruin, shall not I make it my study and a
part of my daily business to learn to die? we read that when Alexander and
the Madonian lay sick of a desperate disease, and some of his friends who were
too scrupulous had suggested to him that his Physician by name Philip intended
to give him poison in his Physic, The King when he beheld Philip coming with
his potion, he raised himself upon his Pillow, and thus entertained his
Physician, with one hand he gave him his friends letters to read, with the
other he took the potion from Philip, And putting it to his mouth he fixed
his Eye; upon the Physicians face, knowing that if guilt were in his
Conscience, it would discover it self by the speaking blushes of his
countenance, and when he was fully satisfied, that no mischief was intended by
his Physician, whose face spoke him not guilty, in that it was not stained with
a blushing confusion, the King with great confidence drank up the potion. Thus
by Gods grace will I do in this life's pilgrimage, my Jesus, my Physician, and
my sweet Savior has prepared and temperd for me a Cup, which will cast me
into a long and sweet sleep: whilst I drink of it, I will fasten my eyes upon
his, and fix my look upon the gracious countenance of my Crucified Lord: In
the which I may read written in the bloody Characters of his passion his
excessive love to me, and then with a Martyr like and cheerful spirit, I
will drink off the potion, which the more bitter it is, is better for us and
the more wholesome.

By this means dear Christian Brother, may the sting of Death be blunted, the
force of his blow weakened, and Death it self may be conquered, if we arm our
selves against it by holy meditations, if it be often thought on, and never
feared;

skull SYMBOLVM. II.

Promptitudo ad mortem.

Coarctor autem e duobus: desiderium habens dissolui, et esse cum Christo. ad
Philipp. Cap. 1.



communion altar Emblem. 3.

Frequenting of the Sacrament

This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that he which eats of it
should not die, John. 6.56.



The third Sign. A frequent use, or receiving of the Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Lord: Set out by a golden Cup with these words taken out of the.
6. JOHN 56. This is the bread which comes down from Heaven, that be which
eatch of it should not die.


WE read in the 2. Acts 42. that the primitive Christians, who were converted
to the Faith by Christ and his Appostles, were not daunted by the fury of their
Enemies, not discouraged in their profession by their persecutors malice but
continued (as the Text speaks) in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship and
breaking of Bread and Prayers.

And it is observed by some that when the religious custom of frequenting the
communion flagg'd and ceased. Then that fervency of Spirit and ardor of love
grew could, Then that Sanctity or holiness began to decay which before shined
in the lives and Actions of those Christians, who were burning and shining
lights in their example and practice of all holy performances, here the Devil
bends all the force of his endeavors, in this one thing he labors with all
his art and cunning to hinder as many as he can from the frequent use of the
Eucharist or holy Communion. And good God how many obstacles, how many lets and
impediments has he invented, how many rubbs has he laid in our way to
retardate our intentions and stop the progress of our devotion, sometimes he
shaks our Faith with the blasts of doubting fears, when this suggestion
succeeds not and takes no effect, then he colors his Tentation and suggests to
our souls that great reverence wherewith we should come to these reverend and
holy mysteries, and that the seldomer we come, we shall taste and find a greater
sweetness in them. At other times he proposes to us the example of others who
seldom communicate, and yet are thought good Christians Again sometimes he
stires up his Instruments to vex and disquiet us with opprobrious speeches,
that so he may prevent and hinder ^s, sometime he presses our thoughts with
the lumber of worldly business, or troubles our heads with vain and wandering
thoughts and afflicts our hearts with the anguishes and terrors of a guilty
Conscience, if all these will not do, then he stirs up in us strife and
hatred against our friends and Neighbors, by all which means he detaines our
souls from all love and affections to Go^ and holy duties, and makes our
prepararion to the Sacrament hard and difficult, and full of pain and
vexation. Some he deceives thus, he persuades out of a pretense or show of
Religion to defer that which they know ought not to be omitted. Thus this
Grand Impostor being of a Serpentine nature, winds and turns himseife into
diverse shapes and tricks, sets upon us with his cunning wilds and delusions.
And hence it is that delay follows upon delay, and one good purpose and
resolution upon the neck of another, whilst we defer from day to day, from
week to week, nay from year to year to come to Christ in this heavenly
Supper, nay which argues our wickedness and sinful corruption, we seldom
come to this banquet but when we are driven and forced to it by the Laws
compultion.

We find Recorded Luk 14. that a certain man made a great Supper and bad many,
his Servant to say to them that were bidden Come for all things now are ready.
And they all with one mind began to make excuse.

One said he, had bought a farm, another Oxen, a third replied that he had
married a Wife. No man is at leisure when he is to come to Christ, who is lively
represented in the supper of the Eucharist. To pretend the care of Wife and
Family is an excuse that carries with it some plausibility, yet indeed it is
attenced with great folly, shall we not for one hour lay aside all worldly
thoughts and distempering cares, the care of our Farms, Oxen, and Wives, and
what else is dear and precious to us, that so we may the better employ our
selves in the study and performance of those things which concern the eternal
good and welfare of our souls.

If we were called to plow or to some such toylesome work, there would be
some reason for it, if we should choose rather to sleep then dig: but being
invited to sit down at a feast with Christ, where we have none other food but
his own body and blood, to withdraw our selves from this banquet, to shun
this Feast is certainly a sign of an impudent madness.

If we did fly from an angry God we should show that we descend from Adams
race and lineage, Genesis 3.
but to fly from an appeased and merciful God, from a God that invites us
with all love and sweetness to his Table adornd with heavenly dainties, to
turn from so good a God, is the property not of men but beasts. But that our
excuses may not want their varnish and colors we do not palliate and cover
our faulty Idleness with filthy and illegal pretenses, we pretend not our
Thefts nor the foulness of our Adulteries, to be the cause of our abstaining
from this heavenly Feast: but our excuse is framed and built upon colorable
and honest things. For it is no sin to marry nor to take care for ones
Family, to buy Cattle and purchase Land is a point of good Husbandry: But I
pray tell me, what good will all these things do thee, what profit will thou
reap by them, if in cleaving to these thou loosest God thy chiefest good, and
endangerest thy salvation? We must take care when we pamper the body that we
starve not the soul, and he that purchases a Farm or buys a field with the
loss of heaven is a worse fool, then he was of whom we read in the Gospel,
who cared more for a full Barn then he did for God.

When we are Invited to dine or sup with some great man, we lay aside all
business for that time, and whilst we converse with God the King of Heaven
and Lord of the Angels at this supper of the holy Eucharist, Farms, and Oxen,
and Wife are to be neglected, all business and worldly cares are to be
silenced and suppressed: yet we often times proceed to that impudent
boldness, that we fear not to say we cannot come, we should speak more
truly in saying, we will not, so long as we persever in this bold Impudence,
can we hope to purchase Gods favor, or taste the sweet of his goodness? Ah
wretched souls! miserable men that we are, hurtful to none more then our
selves, we freeze with could and yet shun the fire, sick we are and contemn
him that can cure us, and the more need we have of a Physician, by so much the
less we feel and are sensible of our malady and sickness.

We loath svveet Manna and hunt after stinking Onyons. Exodus 16.
God in times past commanded the Israelits, to gather Manna every day, but to
rest on the Sabbath: And we (God be praised) have our Manna far more precious
then that of the Israelites, We have the word and his Sacraments; this Manna
we may freely use so long as we have breath in our Nostrills before death
surprise us, and our souls be translated to enjoy an eternal Sabbath with
God and his holy Angels. But poor deceived Wretches we follow our first
Fathers steps; Adam [sayes Gerson] would not, when he might eat of the Tree
of life, justly therefore was he punished, afterward he could not when he
would; even so we whilst we may, will not accept of mercies: and herein we
betray our proud and contumatious Arrogance, we post and fly with all have to
rich men's Feasts, but we are hardly drawn and that seldom to the Table of
Christ, we are not more drousie and less active in any one thing, then in
that which is the maine, even our souls salvation.

In other matters we show an active agility, in this only a senseles and dull
stupidity which that God Almighty may correct and amend in us, he sends us to
the Ant, an example of Industry and diligence; Prove. 6.
Go to the Ant thou stuggard, Behold her ways and be wise. She by the very
guidance and Instinct of Nature, knowing that food is not to be got in Winter,
gathers her food in Harvest and prepares her meat in Summer.

Thus ought we to do with more care and circumspection of thoughts out of a
religious providence and prospection to our souls good, should provide in the
Summer of our flourishing youth, in the Harvest of this life, that v^^t cum,
that spiritual food which may bestead and comfort us in the Autumn of our old
Age, and in the could winter of Death.

Christ Commends unto us this Immortal food, Jo. 6.51.
where he says; He that eats of this Bread shall live for ever.

This bread is his body crucified upon the Cross. He that feeds on this bread
by the mouth of Faith, applying to his soul for pardon of his sins, the
merit of his Saviors death and passion, that man shall never see death, shall
escape damnation. And they that are predestined to Eternal life do labor
for this heavenly and soul quickening food, more then the Glutton does for
delicacyes, whose Belly is his God.

Christ when he gave us this vital bread, this precious morsel, charging us
to communicate often, when he said Do this etc. intended not it should be
slighted with a profane neglect. Our ordinary food, our daily repast, keeps
the body in life and strength, which otherwise by means of our natural heat
would be impay'rd and presently consumed. No less but rather greater virtue is
in this blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, by means of it, the life
of our soul is preserved, which otherwise would be wasted by that devouring
heat of our impure lust and concupisence which rages in the best; Therefore
Innocentius his Counsel may here take place. We must beware (says he) least
by d^^e ring too long to receive the blessed Sacrament, the food of life, we
incur the hazard of eternal Death, St. Hilary gives us the same advice; Let
us fear seast being abstracted or separated from the body of Christ (i e.
never communicating with the faithful in the holy Eucharist) we be hereafter
severd and banishd from God our Savior we that never cease to sin should never
cease to partake of the holy Communion: But this is our malady, this one thing
is our chief let and impediment, Rather then we will cease to sin, we
forbear to come to the blessed Communion; We had rather desert this heavenly
Table then shake hands and bid adieu to our petulant wickedness. we are
unwilling to be led sweetly, as it were by the hand from our pollutions and
impurity, to an holy conversation and practice of piety. We believed once the
lying Serpent persuading us that we shall be Gods, but we give no credence, no
belief to God, assuring us that if we frequent this caelestiall banquet.

We shall be converted and changed into his divine nature, through the
Sanctification of his blessed Spirit. Consider what Christ promises He that
eateh my flesh and drinks my blood, Joh. 6.56.
dwells in me and J in him: We hear Christ promising, but we do not
readily believe him.

Christ commands us to do this in memory, of his death and Passion upon the
Cross, And no doubt his will is that we often do this: We conceive that his
praecept is equal and just, but we contrary to what Christ intended, will not
persuade our selves, that this Commemoration is often to be celebrated. All the
ancient holy Fathers advise us in their writings to come often to this feast.
Their Counsel does not displease us but our Corrupt and vicious custom
prevail with us. All the holy Martyrs and Confessors in the Primitive times
have shind before us in their Godly example, inviting us to the practice of
those Saint-like and Religious duties.

The light of their piety shines in our eyes, but we will not conform our
selves to them by a Godly imitation of their virtues.

But to discover farther the corrupt perverseness of our natures, let us put
case, That as often as A man received the Communion, he were to receive withal a
thousand Crowns: If this condition were annexed to his duty, there were no
need of any Rhethoricall expressions to allure him, those Arguments dressed in
Gold would command his obedience by a sweet force and unresistable violence.

On these terms of conjuring, we should rather want a staff to keep the rude
multitude off, then a goade to prick them on. Oh the blindness of man, we
cannot see Gold but our affections are inflamed with a love and desire of it,
because we consider not that mine that rich treasure which is wrapped up and
onteinedhidden in the blessed Sacrament, therefore it is by us entertaind with
neglect, and vilified, That vast mass of Gold in both Indies compard with this
unvaluable Jewel, is but dirt and mudde.

It is beyond the pitch of the sublimest understanding to set upon it a true
value and estimation. For by virtue of this holy Eucharist (or Christ's body and
blood crucified, represented to us in it) our sins past of what nature or
degree so ever are blotted out of Gods book, sins to come are prevented, the
strength of our imbred vicious corruptions is weakened, our understanding is
enlightened; Our will and affections stirred up and incited to the desire and
love of God and goodness, our conscience is cleard being disburthened of its
heavy load: And by means of it we are furnished with spiritual Armature
against the Devil. It corroborates our Spirits, that we faint not in
adversity; It sustaines and supports our natures that we fall not in
prosperity. It confirms us in the way of Godliness with constancy and
patience, Lastly by the holy Eucharist we receive a pledge of future glory, and
by it we get a rich purchase, the contempt of death, and desire of heaven, the
moderation of affections, and loathing of our vices, and a love of virtues, the
victory over our selves, and perseverance in good works. But one may object, I
dare not come by reason of my great pollution, my thoughts are vain, my heart
is unclean, and not w^rmd with the love of God, therefore I dare not come to
the holy Communion.

This excuse is either bad or to no purpose, for the more wicked thou art the
less is thy access to it to be deferred. Art thou unclean, come first
bewailing thy sins.) The ^ucharist is a pure and living fountain, it will wash
away thy stains, Art thou sick, come, for it is the only medicine and Antidote
whereby the maladies and diseases of thy soul may be cured.

Art thou pinched with an holy hunger after righteousness. Come for the
Eucharist is the bread of Angels. Is thy Soul benumbed with a deadly
chillnesse, with a Lethargy of sin? defer not to come for the Eucharist is such
a fire, such an heavenly flame, that will warm thy spirit and inflame it with
devotion.

Do thy spiritual Enemies, the Devil or the Flesh molest and vex thee,
distrust not but come, for here is an Armory, out of which thou may fetch
weapons to wound and subdue any of thy Ghostly Adversaries. Art thou sad and
consumd with wasting grief? Here is Wine that makes glad the heart of man.
Desire thou delicacies? certainly there are not better then these which are
exhibited in this banquet, and cheares the heart of Kings. Art thou in love
with thy heavenly Country, do thou long after it in thy desires, and art thou
moving to it? Behold here is thy Viaticum, thy provision for the way, more
costly then that was which Elias had in his passage to mount Horeb. If Christ's
Garment had such virtue in it, that being only to touched, it could stop an
Issue of blood, what efficacy, what power may we conceive, to be in his body,
when it is received and applied by the hand of faith.

But you may say I am unworthy to partake of that divine food, neither can I
afford or give that reverence unto it, which is meet. I beseech you dear
Brother let us not cover and cloak our sloathfullnesse with a colorable
pretense 'of Reverence.

It is better (says Aquinas) to approach to this banquet out of love then out
of a fond fear wholly to abstain from it. Part. 3.2.80. Art. 10 and 3.
St. Amb. expounds that Petition of the Lords Prayer; Give us this day our
daily Bread, lib. 5 de Sac. c. 4.
to be meant of the Supper of our Lord: If it be daily Bread, why receivest
thou it but once a year? Receive that daily which being received will profit
thee. So live that thou may be fitted to receive it daily, for he that is not
fitted to receive it every day, is unworthy to receive it after a years space,
when he has taken a surfeit in sin and wickedness. lib 4. de Sac. c. 6.
For as St. Amb. in another place, if as often as the blood of Christ is poured
out (he means the Wine in the chalice, which is a sign of his blood) it is
poured out for the remission of sins, It concerns me to accept it ever, with
joy and thankfulness, and that my sins may be wiped out and pardond. I that
always wound my soul with sin, ought always to apply to those wounds a
medicine: Gemmadius Massi liensis determines this point well.

I neither praise nor discommend the Art of those who receive every day the
holy Eucharist, yet I exhort and persuade all Christians, having first subdued
their affections, and repented heartily of their sins, to communicate each
Lords Day: He that comes with a mind not infected with the love of sin, that
man comes prepared.

And who so casts off all affections to his former sins, that man ceases to
hate and begins to love God. Surely he is most ungrateful to his maker, who
for his sake, and in obedience to his Command, will not throw away and cast out
the poison of every pestilent and foul affection, that so he may come prepared
to the holy Communion, with those that will not do this, God is highly and
deservedly displeased; as appears by that parable of the great man that made a
Feast and invited Guests who would not come, Luk 14.16.
I say unto you, (said that Mr. of the Family) that none of these men shall
taste of my supper, what Lord? not taste of thy Supper? why they are those that
will not come and taste of it, and do thou Judge this to be a fit punishment
for their obstinate Rebellion? so it is. Their doom proceeded out of their own
mouths, They said, they will not, and God says they shall not. Thus by their
ungodly and rebellious will they shall be punished. When the City of Samaria
was straightened with a sore famine, which threatened a general destruction, And
Elisha promised, that within a few days, there should be great store and
plenty of corn and other provision one of the lords of that City scoffing at
his prediction, answered. Though the Lord would make windows in heaven, could
this thing come to pass? to whom E^isha replied, Behold, thou shall see it
with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof. It happend to that proud Lord, as
the Prophet foretold And thus at this day are many pu^ished, They see abundance
or good store of this holy bread in the Eucharist, but they eat not of it. And
thou, cold Christian, whose heart is frozen with hatred and malice' thou who
now contemnest Gods Ordinance, thou shall see the bread upon the Table, and the
Wine stand by it, but God will not give thee grace to drink of this or taste of
that. Thou shall see and hear of many who have been refreshd by this heavenly
banquet, whilst thou in the mean time art starved and famished. Because thou
have excluded thy self, thou art debarred from coming to Gods Table, by which
thou might have been plentifully fed and satisfied. However it be thus with
the ungodly and wicked, yet those that are predestined to eternal life, that
are the genuine and true sons of God, count it as a mark of Gods high
displeasure to want this heavenly bread, and therefore they neglect no
opportunity, omit no occasion, whereby they may obtain and purchase it, for
they are not Ignorant, that the most provident Creator has allotted its
proper food to every creature, as to Eagles birds, to Lions wild beasts* to the
Horse Oats, to an Ox Hay, to sheep Grass, to the Whale fishes, to man bread
that comes out of the Earth, but to those that are his Sons by the grace of
Adoption, he has appointed better food, that is bread from Heaven.

This heavenly bread, this bread of Sons, this bread of Angels, Gods adopted
Saints for the most part receive with an ardent desire, with most submissive
reverence, and with that affection which becomes Gods beloved Children, who had
rather show themselves to be Gods sons by immodest piety, then appear to be
his Enemies by an impious modesty.

If to any ones conscience, who is in the number of the praedestinate, Christ
should thus speak by the still voice of his spirit, whilst he is receiving the
holy Sacrament.

Consider seriously with thy most collected thoughts, what and how great things
I have done and suffered of my mere love to thee, to exp^ate thy sins. Lift
up the Eyes of thy so^^e, and behold with good attention the thorns that
peirced my head and the many Sorrows that rent my heart. My body was wounded
with whips and nails, but my soul received its wounds from many great and
unsufferable Injuries. For thy sake I had almost in the garden selt deaths
stroke, There the lashes of my inward griefs did anticipate the whipping of
Herod's Soldiers. Think not with thy self what, I suffered from my foes, when
such heavy strokes were laid on me by my friends. Thou Know upon how hard a
bed I dyed for thee. If thou hads't not find I had not suffered. My love (that
thou may understand the greatness of it) moved me to undergo the most
bit^er and Ignominious death, but none could he sound more bitter and
Ignominious then that I did sustain for thee the death of the cross. Behold
I, I, who am the son of God have died for thee, poor sinful man, and if that
death had not been sufficient, I would not have refused to dye a thousand
times more to have redeemed thee from the power of death and Hell. But what
will thou do for me if thou defirest my love should continue and abide in
thee, answer it with the like affection, and as I loved thee so love me
again. I loved thee to death, my love nailed me to thee cross, but tell me
how sar shall thy love carry thee? when Christ our loving redeemer shall thus
bespeake the conscience, what man, that is predestinate, will not return this
answer, drowning first his cheeks with a flood of tears; O my dear Saviovr,
my most loving Lord, I will love thee even to death, yea to the death of the
Cross, if thou shall be ^se pleased to call me to it. And O my Jesus, my most
sweet Jesus, would to God I might be so honored as to die for thee but what am
I that I should think my self worthy to die for thy sake to set forth thy
praise, and to advance thy Glory; And how great is thy love, oh my life and
joy, which moved thee to suffer so much alone and to dye for me?

Such heavenly dialogues, such holy sighs and groans are wont to be the
Colloquies that pass between Christ and the souls of Communicants, who are
his elect ones, his Sons and Servants. And by such inward and familiar
discourses, is God united Intimately to their souls. And for this cause we
make a frequent receiving of the holy Eucharist, a sure and Infalsible sign of
praedestination. If we come to that sacred banquet with due preparation, with
hearts purgd from all rantour and malice, and adorned with faith and godly
purposes of new obedience, But for all that is taught us in Books and out of
the Pulpits, the greatest part of Christians are so lulled asleep and besotted
with an evil custom that neitherexamples of the godly, nor admonitions of Gods
Saints can stir them up and mould them to a more frequent use of the Sacrament.
Poor souls such men are to be lamented withteares, whose hearts are so
flinty, whose breasts are so chilled and frozen as it were with Infidelity,
that they shun this bright shining and most glorious Sun, not considering that
they are deluded by the craft and subtilty of Satan who labors by all means
possible to extinguish the fire of divine love in us, that we being as it were
stiff with could with the want of love to God, may live like dead men, and dye
in our sins, and never come to the land of the living, but he that loves
Christ with an ardent affection, desires nothing more then to be where Christ
is so says Cassidorus. We may laugh at him for folly and Ignorance, who says
he loves his friend, yet desires not his presence.

communion cup SYMBOLVM. III.

Frequens Sacramentorum confessionis et co^munionis usus.

Hic est panis de caelo descendens, ut si quis ex ipso manducauerit, non
moriatur. Joan. 6.



empty chair Emblem. IV.

Renouncing All Worldly things.

What things were gain to me those I counted loss for Christ Philip. 3. v 7



The fourth Sign. The Renouncing and leaving all things, for Chirst: set out
by this Symboll. An Altar naked and uncoverd. The words taken out of the
3. PHIL. 7. But the things which were vantage (or a gain) to me those I
counted loss for Christ's sake.


OUR blessed Savior proclaims by his holy Apostle; He that forsakes not all
things that he possesses, he cannot be my Disciple. He has commanded us to
renounce all, he has persuaded us to renounce all, he has persuaded us to
leave all (to wit, in our affections) and to follow the example of his holy
life, adhering to his Heavenly Doctrine. So let every one wh^ose high-borne
soul speaks him to be of a more noble stock then to cleave and stick fast in
his love to things of the Earth Let every-Christian say out of a settled
Resolution, I had rather be most sharply pinched with poverty, then in the
least manner show my self to be Gods enemy. I had rather be spoild of all my
Goods, then want his soul saving grace, poverty has been the cause that many
have turned rich Merchants. not of fine silk, nor of sweet and costly spices;
but of Heaven and happiness. The Kingdom of heaven (says our dear Savior)
is like unto a Merchant man, seeking precious Jewels, and when he had found
one, he went and sold all that he had and bought it.

That Merchant thought it not a loss but a great gain, to loose all his
wealth and substance. Indeed he was no sooser but only a seller, because by
parting with his money he purchased a gemme of great price and value. He gave
to Christ in his poor members a little earthly trash, and for this Christ gave
him an Acquittance under his hand to repay him in mercy with the reward of
heaven. He contemned his Gold, and had eternal glory in pawn for it.

He was ready, if God had been so pleased, to have forsaken all his Lands and
possessions, and for this willing readiness and subjection to the will of God,
he has gotten a Kingdom which has no bounds, being Insinite and without all
extent and limitation.

He that has a Jewel in his possession (says Chrysostom very well) knows
himself to be rich, although it be unknown to others, by reason that his
Jewel is hid or shut up in a bag. So it is with a faithful Christian, he
knows himself to be in a happy state, although the men of the world think
otherwise from whose eyes his faith and inward virtues are hid. To speak
truly, we were sent by God into this world, to negotiate, not to spend our time
in florh and riot; and there is none so poor and indigent, but may do as that
Merchant did, he may make a purchase of Jewelss which are inestimable, not to
be prizd or valued.

He that has gotten Christ has all things, he has God for his friend who is
all in all; A God of mercy and bounty who seeks us when we are lost, and
desires not our goods but only to save us (as St. Aug. sweetly meditates) to
bestow upon us the riches of his mercy and goodness.

Neither is there any that so abounds in wealth and large possessions, but that
he may without fear of loss throw away and disesteeme all those, to procure
these unions, these gemmes of Gods grace. Yet this Merchandise, this trading
for Grace, exacts not of us, that actually we leave and forsake our riches,
but that we be in a preparation or readiness of mind, if need be, to part with
them. The manner of this Negotiation is not to expend all our money, to give
away our means in a lavish and prodigal profusnesse, but to be ever resolved
with full purpose of our hearts rather to have mercy or our souls saved, then
by sparing our money to bring them to eternal woe and misery.

A good and faithful Christian had rather be a beggar then Gods enemy. We
must not lay down our soul for our money, but our money for our souls,
either by a voluntary or free contribution of it, or by our patient suffering,
when we are forced to leave or loose, our Mammon. And he that can do this
resign up his will to his heavenly Father, and rely upon Christ for the
pardon of his sins, that man is praedestinated, and is in the number of those
that shall be saved. And not only the Doctrine of the Apostles but even reason
it self moves and invites us to this. The Story relates of one Stilpon,
Stilton.
to whom when his Country was destroyed, his Children slain, his Wife taken
from him, and he only had escapt the hands of his enemies, his friend
Demetrius put this question, asking him whether he had lost all? I have lost
nothing, replied he, for I carry all my goods all my treasure about me: So said
that Philosopher Bias, Bias.
whose soul was planted above the world, and admired not riches. Both these
carried in their breasts and magazin of Virtues, not to be seen with mortal
eyes, and far above all eatthly treasures.

To do as the former did, in an Idolater or Heathen man may be a note or mark
of a generous mind but in a Christian it is a sign that he is praedestinate to
eternal Salvation, when he can forsake all and follow Christ, and count him
the chiefest gain, That man is a true servant of Christ, who being stripped of
all his outward goods, yet dares say in truth and sincerity; I bear all my
treasure about me. All is within me, for I have God, and so have all things,
inward joy and comforts, which are a pledge of my future happiness.

We read of a holy man by name Francis Assisinas who spent many nights with
great delight in meditating and often repeating these four words Deus meus et
omnia i. e. my God is all in all unto me, let us imitate the example of this
good man, and in all our extremity and want, let each of us glory and rejoice
in God saying with him, Deus meus et omnia, Having God I have all things, let
other men seek after this or that, let them in a greedy persuite of their
souls desires hunt after pleasing vanities, I seek. God and him alone, him I
desire, and in him I will delight. O my God thou art all in all unto me: I
leave riches and honors and pleasures to others, let me have God, and I shall
have all things: Let other men enjoy their worldly treasures, let them be Lords
of this world, I envy not, their stately piles nor their golden Mountains, I
covet not their curious and exquisite delights, God is all in all to me. There
is nothing so good, nothing so comely and pleasant which is not far
outstrip'd by that chief and supreme Good, which is beauty and excellency it
self, O my God thou art all in all to me, what a variety of lusts burn in
me? how many fires glow in my breast? how am I scorchd with the heat of diverse
wanton desires? I am so pestered with them that I may say with that lunatike
man; Sometime I am cast into the fire, Mat. 17.
sometime into the water; but what are those things I pursue with so eager a
greedines; Alas they are vain, fading, and filthy, and besides this,
momentary, they never last long but either forsake their owners or lovers
before their death or desert them when they are dying, My God, my love, my joy,
my all things, what is it I can desire with my greedy Appetite, which out of
thy self, who art a rich storehouse of blessings, thou can not afford unto
me? O my God thou art all things, in thee are all perfections and
excellencyes. Thou art meat and drink, joy and rest to me. Thou art my only
delight and comfort, my chiefest honor and glory, thou art all these and more
then all this to me; for although I find and feel a satisfaction of my
desires in a large supply of my wants, and help in my necessities; although I
am replenished and refieshed with meats and drinks, and enjoy those pleasures
my soul desires, yet this enjoyment, and those replenishings, and all other
refreshments without God, would turn to discomforts. My God thou art all in
all to mee^ to enjoy thee, to be refreshed and recreated by thee, is to enjoy
all good things that conduce to man's felicity. But O my God, whilst I thus
challenge a share in thee; I am oppressed with labor, afflicted with Grief,
and cares distract me, my substance is diminished, I am out of favor with the
world, my friends trouble me, and I am vexed by my enemies.

Thus may a good Christian appeal to God, yet withal will he say with St.
Paul, I fear none of these things, Acts 20.24.
neither count I my life precious unto me, so that I may finish my course with
joy. For all those calamities rushing on me at once are not evils so long as I
have Gods aid, and assistance who is our chiefest Good. Deus meus et omnia, So
long as I have God, I have all things, and care for nothing else. Thou O my
God, O Goodness it self, thou art my rest in labors, my delight in griefs,
my security in the midst of my cares, Thou art wealth to me in poverty, thou
art a Castle of defense to shield me from the invasion and violence of my foes;
a refuge in the time of trouble, when I am straightened by any calamities, Thou
art all things to me, even whatsoever my heart can desire or wish. Riches and
plenty to me, without God is poverty. But why do poor mortal men thirst
after impure and muddy streams, whilst they pretermit and neglect the foun
tame? we have a most clear and soule-refreshing Spring, of which if we taste
with the mouth of faith we shall feel how good it is.

This spring or fountain is God, having him, we have al things, that can fall
within the compass of our desires.

If our souls stand in this posture with God, if we esteem him our only and
chief Good, when poverty whips us, when fortune frowns on us, although our
joy may be a little Ecclipsed, yet our sorrow shall be much abated, no
casualty shall hurt us, and death shall not affright us, being out of the reach
of both these, the only bug-beares of proud distrustful worldlings.

There is a second sort of Christians not inferior to the former in content
and happiness. These with Lot and Abraham' have large possessions but adhere
not unto them in their love and affections; They have Gold in their Chest, but
God in their heart. And therefore greive not immoderately, when having lost
all, they are brought to extreme want and poverty for indeed, that is lost
without grief, which is possessed without love. But those things which we love
ardently, whilst they are in our possession, we bewail the loss of them with
bitter lamentation. So says St. Greg: That good which makes us truly good and
happy, we gladly receive, and part with it not easily: for that cannot be
termed our proper and true Good, which may be taken from us by the hand of
violence. Go to now, Satan, Act thy malice to thy height, do what thou
please, use all thy subtle shifts and devices; Act the part of a Messenger,
feign thy self to be a post, or Carrier (Thou shall find to thy grief, that
the whole race of Jobs family is not quite extinct, yet there lives those who
with a cheerful willingness can bid adieu to all their lost possessions) Run
therefore and tell such an one, cry aloud in his Ear, and say, Thy money and
all thou had, is wasted and consumed by fire: Hear now what he will retort
by way of Answer to thy Message, I had bin an undone man if I had not lost my
money. Now that I am disburdned of this thick clay, I shall walk more nimbly,
and and move with more Agility to heaven, which is my Country, a place of Rest
and everlasting Glory. God has eased me of a dear, yet a dangerous burden,
and has put me into a more happy condition. And what God intended for a Remedy
to prevent sin in me, I shall not account that a loss, but a great gain.
Why then should I afflict my self in vain with grief and sadness for the
loss of those things, which I ever enjoyed with a mind willing to lose, and
leave them, whenever it pleased God to strip me of these outward Comforts,
and repay me with spiritual and Inward consolations? Now I am more mine own,
whilst those things are no longer mine.

Hear this O ye muck-wormes, ye Foxes of the World, that have nested your
selves and your souls in earth, and have drowned your thoughts in voluptuous
delights, scarce ever thinking of Heaven, or future happiness. Hear and
consider what is the language and opinion of those who are predestinate to be
Heirs of the cesestiall paradise, who cannot sustain so great a less, but
that they will break out into this joyful expression. It is no loss but
usury, when for a small damage we find a profitable return, with great
advantage, and whenby parting with a small pittance of earth, we obtain Heaven.

empty chair SYMBOLVM. IV.

Renunciatio omnium.

Quae mihi fuerunt, lucra, haec arbitratus sum propter Christum detrimenta: ad
Philipp. 3.



plant Emblem. V.

Patience in Tribulation

Blesed are ye that weep now for ye shall laugh-Luke 6. v. 21



The fifth Sign. IS Perpetual Tribulation attended with patience, Set out
unto us by a Rose-Tree, which is full of Prickles, with this Motto.
LVK 6.21. Blessed are ye that weep now (...) for ye shall laugh.


WE read in the Gospel of St. Luk, c. 16.25.
that when the rich Glutton lay scorching in his deserved flames, Abraham
objected this to his afflicted conscience.

Son, remember thou in thy lifetime receavd'st thy good things, but Lazarus
evil things, thou enjoyd'st pleasures, but he suffered pains, now therefore
he is comforted, but thou art tormented.

Thus men have their changes by a special and infallible decree of God. Suffer
we must either here, or hereafter in that other world which shall succeed this.
Choose we may which we will, either to suffer here or there, none shall
escape, every man must and shall be a sufferer. When thou see a man Orat.
3. de Lazaro.
(says St. Chrysostom.) that loves virtue and goodness, yet groaning under the
cross and pressed with many troubles; think such a man happy, who for his sins
in this life is chastis'd, that in the other he may receive an everlasting
reward.

It is impossible for a man who has bid defiance to the world and to the
Devil, and wages War with his lusts, to be at quiet and ease. God allows
not his Champion, (such is a daring Christian) to pamper his flesh with
delights and wanton pleasures. He that has entered the lists to wrestle with
his corruptions, must not feed his carnal desires with dainty and costly
dishes.

This present life is nothing else but a continual strife, a wrastlingplace, a
race, or war, combating with sin and grief: The life to come is a time of
rest: this is deputed to labor and toylings, with daily discontentments and
sorrows.

There is no man who having stripped or anointed his body to wrestle, or to run
a race, that will seek or desire rest, for if thou desire to sit still upon
a soft ^ushion why did thou put off thy clothes and make that preparation?
why did thou denounce war against the lusts of thy corrupt nature, Chrysostom.
Ep. 2 ad ti T.
if thou never intended'st to take up Arms to subdue the rebellious motions of
thy flesh. c. 3.


Let not this trouble thee, that such and such men live at ease, and thou thy
self subject to diverse tentations and layly miseries; otherwise you must
charge St. James with a great error who says, My Brethren count it exceeding
joy when ye fall into diverse tentations: Truly (said Seneca) that man of all
men is most unhappy, who never tasted of the gall of adversity. It is an
argument that such a man is contemned by God, as one that is weak and unworthy
to suffer persecution. No greater honor can befall a Christian, then to be
brought upon the Stage by God to grapple with affliction;

It is a certain mark and badge of blessedness, when one rejoices in his
sufferings, and when he is beset with evils and begirt with sorrows, to lift
up his soul to God with joy and cheerfullnesse, whilst tears run down in
abundance upon his Cheeks.

Indeed Christ knew full well if we poor mortals loaded with an heap of
daily crosses have no other comfort besides the hope of our future reward, yet
he as if we were blessed and happy, says thus unto us: Be glad and rejoice.
Notwithstanding this exhortation, Mat. 5.
how do we break our own hearts, and trouble others ears with vain
lamentations and cries, when we are afflicted? how do we whimper and complain
like Children, how do we tremble and quake at every stroke of fortune? Never
acknowledging with love and thankfulness, the fatherly and gentle hand of
God, who does not punish according to our deservings, whose hand too is an
healing hand, for he wounds that he may cure us. We scarce have so much
knowledge as is in little boys, who know and are persuaded, that a wound made
in the body by a Surgeon is an Introduction to, and the beginning of health,
so that to many it often time proves a medicine.

God wounds to heal, not to kill and destroy us.

The blessed Apostle Peter does witness this. If you (says be) suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye, for this is thanks wor^hy if a man for
conscience sake 1 Pet. 3.14
toward God suffer griese wrongfully: for what praise is it, if when ye be
buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently; but and if when ye do well ye
suffer wrong, and take it patiently, this is acceptable to God.

To this purpose Saint Greg. speaks thus: It happens for the most part, that
every one who is ordained to eternal salvation, is cast down and depressed
with continual adversity; is despised by all men, and thought unworthy of that
Grace and favor which the world dispenses to those men who have no bliffe, and
delight in any thing more then Riches and honor.

However the elect be contemned here on earth, yet they are precious in the
esteem of God, for that they shine inwardly with the luster of grace and
piety. They fear to be honored, and think not much to be dispis'd: Their
bodies may be pined with fasting and abstinence, yet their souls are fat and
replenishd with love and other virtues. Their minds are always prepared for
suffering. And being refolv'd to live and dye in their uprightness and
integrity, they rejoice with exultation when they are loaded with scorn and
Ignominy.

Truly the eternal and most provident Lord God, uses not to pamper his
servants with worldly pleasures and delights: he tryes them by extremities, he
hardens them by crosses, and so fits and prepares them for himself, yet so,
that in the mean time he sustaines and upholds them with his promise.

When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and the floods
shall not overwhelme thee, when thou walk in the fire thou shall not be
burnt, the flame shall not hurt thee.

Indeed, God does oft-tymes cast us into the water and fire, he permits us to
be dipped in the one, and scorched in the other; he makes a trial of us by the
summer heat of prosperity and the winter frost of adversity; but yet those whom
he has predestined to life eternal, he will not suffer to be drowned in the
water or consumd in the fire. God is faithful who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor 10.
but will even give the issue with the tentation that you may be able to bear
it.

Concerning this fifth note of predestination: Ludov. Blosius in his book of
spiritual Institution says excellently thus. There is not one more certain
sign of Gods election, then when one suffers affliction, and whatsoever God
shall inflict on him, not with reluctance, but with patience and humility,
seeing that nothing can happen more profitable unto man, then to be afflicted
with any calamity.

This is that ring of inestimable price and value, which God bestows upon a
soul betrothd unto him in a spiritual bond of Matrymony. And it is a thing of
so great worth to suffer the least trouble or persecution for God, that St.
Cries. is bold to aver it for an undeniable truth, that there is nothing
better in the world then to suffer for the Glory of God. Hom. 8. in c. 4. ad
Ephesians.


The Elect shall in this life drink of the Brook in the way, therefore shall
they lift up their head with joy: Now they are depressed and trod upon with
scorn, that hereafter they may be advanced to Glory in heaven, like palm
Trees, which shoot up the higher in groth, the more they are kept under and
oppressed: God would have us understand with a clear and settled knowledge,
that the good we seek, and for which we take such pains, is not easily
obtained, but is hard and Infinite. So that Marcus the Anchoret said not
amiss: God Almighty being conscious of our Imbecility, and knowing well the
finfull infirmityes of our nature, how that we are prone to sloth and subject
to fainting humors, never bestows any great blessing upon any, unless he
first sustaines the burden of some calamity. When Moses had obeyed Gods call
and forsaken Pharaohs Court, he presently was assaulted as it were by Troops,
with poverty, contempt, and treacheries from the King, with the fear of death,
and therefore forced to fly for his life.

We see (says St. Greg) how that Gods elect live virtuously, and honestly, and
yet are persecuted, they do well and suffer ill: from whence we may collect,
with what severity the severe Judge of Heaven and earth, will punish the
ungodly and reprobate, seeing that those whom he loves are by him so sharply
correcttd. Thou art much mistaken, (O Christian man) if thou think to go to
Heaven whole and sound without a bruise, and not having a bone broken: Look
about thee with an Eye of attentive observation, and thou shall perceive and
find that those who are rich in virtues, abound for the most part in
afflictions, and those who abound in vices are stored with riches, and other
worldly Commodities.

It Is true, that those Beasts which are destined to the Shambles, sport and
tumble in fat-pastures whilst others are sweating under the yoke, and toyling
in other labors, even so men who are assigned by an eternal decree to heaven,
they sport not with wanton worldlings in the fair and pleasant medows of
earthly delights, but they lie here and there in corners, bewailing their sins
with sighs and groans.

Most true is that of Ludov. Blcsius, whom God has decreed to translate to a
better life, and to crown with glory and honor, he uses not to wash with a
soft and gentle hand, but to plunge over head and ears in the salt Sea of
Tribulation.

Galen and Hippocrates have taught us how to preserve life and maintain it in
health and strength, Christ has taught us to hate and lose it for his sake; so
that what Themistocles once said of himself, all the the Saints and Martyrs
in heaven will hereafter confess with joyful and thankful acclamation;
unless we had lost our selves we had been lost and undone. By loosing their
lives for Christ, many have obtaind salvation. And undoubtedly many of those
who are now at Gods right hand in Glory had for ever perishd and been
tormented in everlasting misery, if God had not happily destroyed them here,
that they might be happy for ever and ever; Hence it is that Paul when he
seemed lost to others, found that he had made a great gain by his loss: I
delight (says he) in my infirmities, in reproaches, 2. Cor. 12.
in necessities, in persecution and in my distresses for Christ, for when I am
weak then I am strong: Saint Bern. being as it were tired in his search and
seeking for God, at last brake forth into this expression.

I may O Lord with an unwearied diligence compass heaven and earth, the Sea
and the dryland, yet I shall find thee no where but on the Cross, there thou
sleep, there thou feedest, there thou reposest thy self at noonday. Let
us therefore follow Christ our Lord as servants do their Masters with
constancy, and patience, in a holy Imitation of his heavenly virtues, and we
shall find to our everlasting joy and comfort, that our light afflictions which
we suffer here for a moment shall work for us an eternal weight of Glory. When
Athanasius was commanded by Julian the Apostate to leave his Country, he being
ready to depart, behoding his friends and fellow Christians, to lament his
banishment with bitter cries and tears, did solace them in these words.

Be of Good comfort, my friends, this is but a cloud which will soon vanish:
Indeed whatsoever horror or grief we sustain in this life, it is a cloud that
darkens all our contents; and it is but a Cloud, which shall be scattered and
driven away by the serenity and shining luster of that everlasting day, wherein
all tears shall be wiped from our eyes.

Among the Ancients, those that were most laborious, would let no day pass
without a line (as their manner of phrase was) i.e. no day slipped in which no
good was done, so careful were they to make a Progress in their study and
improve their profession. But Christians being as Active as those were in the
business of their calling, desire that no day may pass over their head
without a cloud, that so they may have an occasion to express by suffering
their love to their Lord God.

The Heavens says Tert.) were to Job. Tert. Li. de. pat. c. 13
not only clouded, but also turned as it were into Brass, and Iron; and yet
that holy man out of his quiver of graces did draw a shaft, which subdued the
Devil, and put him to flight and that was patience, whereby he overcame all
Satan's temptations. So that neither the driving away of his flocks, nor the
death of his sons by the fall of the house, nor all the pains and torments
which he sufferd in his flesh, could drive him from his patient resolution, to
endure all this and an heavier burden if God should please to lay it upon him.
How did God (as it were) erect in this holy man, a pageant whereon he triumphd
over Satan? what a glorious banner did he set up in sign of the Devils foil,
when that holy man at the report of each Messenger utterd nothing out of his
mouth, but God be thanked; This did torment the Devil, but was most pleasing
to God. By this means Job recovered all his losses with a double gain and
advantage: whilst we are suffering for the truth of Christ with a good
conscience, we are on our march to heaven and happiness.

There be diverse ways that lead to heaven, the safest and most sure of all is
the high way of the cross: for through many Tribulations must we enter into
the Kingdom of God. Act 14.
And as the Potters Vessels are tried in the Furnace, so Tribulation is the
trial of the Just. Only the chafe is wasted and consumed in the Furnace, so
the wicked are the worse for their afflictions.

The Gold is purified in the fire and the Godly are bettered by their misery.

This world is a furnace, the Righteous are Gold, Tribulation the fire, And God
(be it spoken with reverence) the Artificer. I^ the Gold which is under the
hand of the Smith could speak, if it had so much sense to understand and know
what the Goldsmith did purpose to do with it, which is perhaps to make a
Vessel of it for a Kings Table, or a Princes Cupboord; if the Gold understood
so much, if it had a voice, it would resign up it self to the will of the
artificer, it would say:

Let him do with me as he thinks fit, Aug. in Psalm. 60.
cast me into what shape or fashion he pleases, throw me into what place hec
will, therewith I must and will be contented: The Straw and stubble which the
Workman uses to kindle that fire wherein I am melted, that is wasted and wholly
consumed, whilst I am only purgd and purified.

Consider this all ye that represent Chafe and Stubble; ponder this all ye
that are Gods Gold. In that fire wherein Straw and Stubbl is turned into a black
smoke Gold shines and is made the brighter.

In the very same affliction, the wicked blaspheme and accuse God of Injustice,
in the which the righteous patiently bearing their Cross praise God for his
mercy and loving kindness, and withal gather strength from their adversity,
as the fire whose flame is beaten back with the Bellows, grows hotter, and is
increasd by that very means whereby one would think it should be extinguished.

Virtue best shows it self in extremity, and flourishes when it is most
tossed with the waves of misery.

If we run back in our thoughts, and take account of all those who from the
very first Infancy of the world were dear to God, we shall assuredly find that
they were all stamped with this mark, that they all sufferd affliction, which we
make a certain sign of Gods love and affection: God tried them, (says the
wiseman) and found them worthy of himself, Wisd. 3.
deserving his favor and to have with him an habitation.

If we look into the Scriptures, there we shall find Abraham diversely
exercised and chastised: Joseph sold by his Brethren, and David persecuted by
his ungrateful Son. We read that Efay was saw'n asunder, Ezechiels brains
dashed out against the stones, Jeremy stond, Michah stain with the sword, Amos
murderd by a nail struck into his Temples, Daniel. exposed to the Lions,
M^aboth [as Jeremy] was stoned to death, Elisha mocked and had in derision, Job
full of uscers sitting upon the Dunghill and spit at by those who should have
comforted him. Tobie stricken with blindness, Innocent Susanna condemned.

Many more examples might be alleged to confirm this truth. In what an Ocean
of miseries was St. Paul plungd? of the other Apostles some were whipped, some
crucified, some slain with the sword. None of Gods sons were ever spared. For
whom the Lord loves he chastises and scourges every one (none excepted) whom
he receives. Heb. 12.6.
For all those who will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

Yet let every one who does serve and worship thee (O Lord) know for a certain,
that if in this life, he be tried by the Cross, he shall be crowned in the
other with glory and Salvation. Because that after a storm thou ever do send
a calm, and after tears and weeping thou fillest our hearts with joy and
exultation. Therefore blessed is the man who is chastisd by God for his
correction and amendment. For if we suffer we shall Reign with him. 1 Timothy
2.12.
Let then no man be afraid to be scourgd but rather least he be disinherited.

We are fitted and prepared for our eternal inheritance by losses and Crosses,
by stripes and whippings, with which God does exercise us in the way to heaven,
least our thoughts being taken up with deceiving vanities, and so we delighting
too much in fading pleasures here below, forget our heavenly Country which is
above, and whither we wish all to go.

If thou be exempted from the lash of Sorrows (says Aug.) thou have no place
in the list of Gods sons.

Throw away then all childish thoughts and vain expressions, say not, my
Father is better affected to my Brother, whom he suffers to do what he list, he
loves him better then me, because, if I stir but one foot contrary to his
command, I am presently whipped and corrected for it; Rejoice rather when thou
art chastised, because for thee, there is an inheritance reserved, a full, and
everlasting possession of all happiness. God spares them in this life for a
time, whom he intends to damn to eternal pains. That man passes to a Prison
through fair and pleasant Meadows who posts to destruction, and makes have to
ruin, living all his life long in pleasure at ease. Some observe that Roses
growing next to a bed of Onions send forth a more fragant and delitious sent.

And even God that heavenly Gardener, he has his Roses which smell most
sweetly. Such are men destined to Salvation, whose life and Actions savor of
God and Goodness.

These Roses God Almighty does so plant in the Garden of the Church, that for
the most part they are beset and begirt with weeds; for the more honest and
Religious a man is, he shall find the more enemies, even wicked and ungodly
wretches, who will boldly assault him with diverse injuries: and the Godly are
ever subject to most Calamities. Thus the fragrancy of of Roses is increased by
the proximity of stinking Garlic or Onions.

Moreover it is affirmed by others versed in the skill of Herbs, and Plants,
that a Rose which by A^t grows without pricks has no smell Even so our virtues
(chiefly patience) would loose their fragrancy, would not be so glorious, if
they did want the sharp pricks of adversity, which is the best Mistrisse
whereby we learn and know how much we have profited in the School of Christ.

That man as yet has not begun to know himself who has not beheld the face of
his Soul in the glass of misery and distress.

He that has tasted of Christ's bitter Cup, has gotten a good degree of
knowledge.

Those stars shine by night which are not seen by day in the suns bright
eye-dazling light. Just so, True virtue which appears not in the noone-tide of
prosperity, shows its luster in the dark night of Adversity. And to speak the
truth, God our caelestiall Lord and Master is not so well pleased with those
servants who do with fidelity and carefullnesse what he commands, as with those
who suffer Adversity with patience, And a cheereful reliance upon his Fatherly
Goodness.

The Eagle to make trial of her young Ones brings them to the Sun and
concludes they are of a right stamp and breed, if they can endure his scorching
beams.

The Refiner of Silver tryes his metal by a touchstone, and Christ tries his
Servants in the furnace of Affliction. We may then upon better ground (then
the Ancient Romans did) cry out and say; To do and to suffer hard and difficult
things is the duty and property of good Christians. Christ our head did go
before us in this way of suffering, and we his members must follow him in the
same way, with alacrity and Patience.

plant SYMBOLVM. V.

Tribulatio perpetua cum patientia.

Beati qui nunc fletis, quia ridebitis. Luc. 5.



plant Emblem. VI.

Frequenting Sermons

The wise man shall increase his wisdom by hearing, pro: 1 v. 5.



The Sixth Sign. IS The faithful hearing of Gods Word, exemplifyed by a
Fig Tree with this Subscription.
PROVE. 15. A wise man will hear and encreaso in wisdom.


THe Fig Tree which Christ so often named in his Sermons, at Christ's command
flaggd, and withered in a moment, we may therefore rightly term
itadutifulhearer of the heavenly word. And for this cause by it is denoted the
hearing of the word of God, which we may prove out of the very mouth of Christ
to be a certain sign that we are predestined to heaven and happiness.

He that is of God hears Gods word, Ioh. 8.47.
(says our Savior.) Saint Amb. upon the 1^8. Psalm says well to this
purpose.

How can the Word of God be sweet to thy palate and pleasant to thy taste,
which is corrupted with bitter wickedness. That which we hear willingly, Isid.
we do without difficulty; But those are the only true hearers of Gods Word
whom our Savior pronounced happy when he said, Blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. In vain or to little purpose is that kept in our
memories, which is not likewise kept in our lives. There are who retain what
they hear: So that they never forget, and yet their life and conversation is
no whit amended. Like as the Heart desires the water-brookes so does the Soul
of one, that is predestined, pant after heavenly things, and desire to
partake of Gods Ordinances, his word and Sacraments, he lays aside all
business, breaks off his sports and omitssometime to provide for his body its
ordinary sustenance, he has no thought of feasting, he is urgent with his
Servants to go to Church to hear the Sermon, admits of no excuses, but forces
them to their duties. He is not scared with a storm or tempest, neither cares
he for fair weather, and prefers the Churches roof before all the pleasures
which the fields can afford, and when he is come to Gods house, he is most
attentive in hearing, but never weary, nor satiated with the word

A dutiful ear will attend to wisdom with all care and diligence So says
the son of Syrach. Eccle. 3.
And certainly there can be no better nor no surer Wisdom had, then that which
may be gathred out of the word of God. The devout soul says St. Ber. seeks
after the word by which (if it consents to it) its errors may be corrected. The
understanding enlightened with the knowledge of God, out of which too, as it were
a rich Mine, The Treasures of Virtue and Wisdom may be acquired, the will may
be reformed, the affections made conformable to the strait rule of Gods
commandments, and the heart filled with unspeakable delight and comforts. The
soul that is replenished with this heavenly food, how does it cry out with
the Prophet Jeremy. Jerem. 15.16.
Thy words were found by me and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the
joy and rejoicing of my heart.

St. Chrysostom. says well and truly to this purpose. As to be hungry is a sign
that the body is in health so to love the divine Oracles of the word of God is
an infallible argument of an healthful soul. And who can believe that his
mind is in a good temper, Hom. 14. in Genesis
not sick of a frenzy, who stops his ears from hearing the truth, and opens
them vvide to fables the delight of fools? who vvil not say that he is sick of
madness; Who whilst the Preacher is declaiming against sin in the Church is
acting the same at home without all remorse of conscience, and instead of
hearing a godly exhortation to repentance is either carovvsing with his
companions, or playing at Dice, or wasting precious hours in vain talk and
idle walks, and if he does neither of these, yet whilst the preacher is
sweating in the Pulpit, he is either hunting in the Woods, or sleeping at home
upon a soft downy Bed; neither does this drowsy Dormouse blush to be surprizd
even at Noone-tide in his feathery nest.

This is the constant practice of many voluptuous worldlings. I am ashamed to
think that this can be writ or said of Christians, who rather should be ashamd
to Act what we blush to speak on write. Such like practices are signs and
notes of those whom God has ordained to destruction; They do otherwise who are
predestinate to life and salvation.

Witness that of St. Luke. And it came to pass (says he) that when the
people pressed upon him to hear the word of God, Cap. 5.1.
etc. It seems that this religious thirst, this holy hunger of hearing the word
could not be pent nor kept in the Synagogues or Temple alone, nor yet within
the Walls of the City. It brake forth into the vvide and open fields, there
Christ found Auditors. Neither did the men and Women of those times fear the
solitary corners of the dark deserts, for they ventured to go any where, and
follow their teachers with the hazard of their lives. Many amongst us who dwell
nere the Church will not do so little as step over their Thresholds not move a
foot out of doors to hear those from whose Godly instruction they might
reap benefit to their souls and consciences. They loath nothing more then the
heavenly food, and being so near to the Temple, if they refuse now to go to
it, can we hope, that they ever will do as the primitive Christians did, who
many times would loose their Dinners and Suppers to go into a Wilderness or
some solitary place, that so they might gain the heavenly repast and food for
their souls.

In this sinful Age of ours there is not such a want of Preachers as hearers,
these are scarce, the other abound with us. We have an hundred excuses to
palliate our absence from the Church, we bolster our neglect of Gods service
with worldly pleasures, and some are not wanting among us, who therefore refuse
to come to Gods house, the Church, fearing least by the loud voice of the
Minister thundering out Gods Judgments against men's sins, their consciences
should be awaked out of the deep sleep of Security, in which for a long time
they have been lulled, for he that is conscious to himself of any foul sin and
wickedness, fears even himself who is his own Accuser, Judge, and
executioner. The tribunal of his own conscience is as terrible unto him, as the
Bench and Judge upon it is to a guilty Prisoner.

Hieremy once made great lamentation for the sins of Hierusatem, and said;
That even the ways that lead to Sion lamented, because the solemn Feast was
neglected. The ways to our Churches may as well now mourn because the Bypaths
that lead to Taverns are worn with throngs of Drunkards, who sit laughing and
quaffing there when they should be singing in Gods house with the Congregation.
We see not that concourse of people pressing to hear Gods Law read and
preached, they come not with that alacrity to this as they do to see a Play, or
show, or to gaze at a Wedding passing through the street. If there be a fair
at the next Market Town they flock together and run to it, But Gods Messengers
and Ministers, if they be not mocked and flouted, their words are slighted,
their Doctrine little esteemed, for which God complains in his word. 2. Chr. 36.
It is not to be denied That there be many who come to Church and hear Sermons,
but this with grief we may say and must confess, that there be few who desire
from their heart to go away betterd from the Sermon and reformed in their
conversation. They have ears but want hands, they hear and do not. They go
home not one jot the better for what they have heard. There be some that come
to hear to satisfy their curiosity, some to wear away the time, others to
obey custom.

A sort of men there is who frequent the Church to inform their understanding,
not to reform their lives, to get learning and knowledge, not piety and
Religion. There be others that come to see, to feed their eyes with the aspect
of those beauties which they cannot find in other places.

Another sort come to be seen, and with fleshly enticements to allure men's
eyes to gaze upon them. There are that entertain the words of the Preacher with
detraction and derision, others come to pratle, some to sleep, or if they keep
their eyes open, their ears are shut and dulled with the press of worldly
thoughts and cares. There be a few and those good hearers who come with a mind
prepared to receive wholesome admonitions, and draw near to the Preacher for no
other end but only that they may return better by his Sermon. The end of their
hearing is not to wrangle or dispute as they do in the Schools but to win
others to Christ by a Godly example in their lives. They hear with both ears
fast tied to the Preacher, and slak not in their attention til the Sermon be
done, at which time they find in themselves ever some change and alteration.
They are more enflamed with the love of God, and moved to an hatred of sin.

There is none of so feirce a nature and disposition who will not be tamed and
brought to a gentle and mild temper, if he refuse not instruction, but lend
patiently an ear to the Counsel of a Wise monitour. And Christ's sheep, as
they may be discernd many ways and by diverse marks from the Goats, so they
are discernable by this, they have an eare-mark which discovers them, they
hear the word of God with greediness, and practice it in their lives, with a
constant and universal obedience.

Those that are predestinate to salvation know fulwell what St. Aug. truly
averreth. That he is no less guilty that hears the word of God negligently,
then he that should take the consecrated Bread in the Sacrament, and in a
scornful disdain trample it under his feet.

Therefore he that speaks to us out of the puspit is not so much to be
respected as he who dictates to the Minister, and suggests what he shall speak.

What am I (says St. Aug.) but the basket of that heavenly Sower who poures
into me what I sow or deliver unto you.

Attend not the vileness of the Basket but the excellency of the seed, and the
power of the sower from whom the seed has its efficacy and virtue, to spring up
in your hearts and to show it self in your Godly and Religious practices.

A Christian is ever learning and never stands still, but goes on from one
degree of knowledge and grace to another, he delights to fit at the feet of his
Lord and Master, and with Mary to hear his word with that attentive heed, so
that neither household employments, not a Brother nor Sisters murmuring nor any
entreaty of his friends shall be able to draw him from the presence of Christ
speaking unto him by the voice of his Ministers.

Lastly we must consider, that it is a note of our Election not only to hear
the word, but to remember and practice what we have heard. What good will a
man's meat do him if he casts it up, so soon as ever it is sent to his stomach?
The Mother of our Lord, the Virgin Mary, is highly commended as for many other
virtues so chiefly for this; Luke 2.19.
that she kept all the words of the Angel in her heart, J have hid thy word
within my heart that I might not sin against thee, says David. They are
compard in the Gospel to good ground, who hearing the word of God retain it
in a good and, Luk 8.
honest heart and bring forth fruit with patience, for indeed as to read and
not understand, so to hear and not retain in memory what we hear is vain
and fruitless and savours of great negligence: We ascribe folly and madness
to that Painter who having drawn with great pains and much cost a curious
Picture in Colors shall afterward dash it and wipe it out with his sponge:
So unseemly is it for a Christian to hear and bury what he has heard in the
grave of Oblivion. Therefore let every one of us endeavor so to remember, that
our memory be not dull and drowsy but Active and strong in its commands to do
that which we have lok'd up in our memory the treasury of the head.

If ye know these things happy shall ye be if ye do them. Ioh. 13.
No man went to heaven ever for his knowledge, but for practice. And he that
refuses to know what he ought to do, will never execute or perform his duty.
The holy Scriptures are the pure and living fountain of saving knowledge; And
although diverse draw Waters out of this fountain not once or twice but many
times, without intermission, yet it can never be drawn dry, there will be Water
still, even Water of Comfort to refresh every thirsty Soul.

Such is the quality and condition of this rich Mine, that the deeper you dig
and dive into it, it vvil afford the more profound mysteries concerning God and
our salvation. The holy Scriptures are a spring of ever-living Water affording
to the weary Soul inward refreshings, and heavenly consolations. Now as the
Ant gathers her food in summer, to sustain her in the hard Winter, so a good
Christian whose heart burns with the fire of devotion in the time of peace gets
a stock out of Gods Word, on which h^e feeds in the days of Tribulation. It is
manifest by daily experience, that the contemners of the Word have been, and
are so punishd by God, that they themselves and others seeing and feeling Gods
heavy Judgment, for this sin have accknovvledged and confessed his Justice.

It is Gods will and pleasure we should submit our selves so far as to be
willing to be taught one by another. King David was a most wise Prince, in
many things the holy Ghost was his instructor, he knevv full well that
Adultery and murder were forbidden in the word yet he never repented of these
sins until he was quickened and stirred up by Nnthans instructions. Christ had
prcached to Paul out of heaven when he repressed his raging cruelty with this
reprehension; Saul Saul, why persccutest thou me, Notwitstanding this Christ
sent Ananias to instruct him in the way to heaven. Act: 8.
The Angel told Cornelius that God had accopted his Prayers and Alms, and
with all sent Peter from Joppa to inform his understanding, when the Eunuch
was sitting in his Chariot, and reading the Prophet Jsaiah, An Angel was not
sent from God to be his Master but Philip. Moses whom a man may justly term
Gods Secretary, who was privy to his secret Counsels, yet as if he had been a
Child without knowledge, he was taught, and that with sharp and bitter
speeches, by his Father in Law, a stranger, how to Govern the people in peace,
and without all danger. Christ himself who is the eternal Wisdom of his
Father, did sit in the midst of the Doctors, Learning, and asking them
Questions. There is no Sex, on State, no condition or calling exempted by God
from hearing of Sermons.

But thirdly, thou may object and say, I am one of the learned, I shall hear
no new thing, I know before hand what the Preacher will deliver in his Sermon.
Here we may discover the pride of humane nature which is skillful and witty to
deceive it self. But let me move to such a man this question, who was ever so
old and learned, who was not ignorant of many things, and might be further in
structed? But suppose thy self to be a man furnished with all kind of knowledge,
and to excel all men so far in understanding, that thou can not come home
more learned from a Sermon: But what say you to the will and memory, may not it
be moved, this stirred up and quickened? Does not that sometimes need to be
reformed, this to be confirmed and strengthened; Nothing so easy as for the
memory to be deceav'd, and for the will to run into mistakes and errors
(embracing evil for good, and shunning good for evil) unless both memory and
will be supported by daily helps, whereby the former may be made firm, and
the other freed from erroneous conceits, that so we may serve God, sincerely
in all holiness and righteousness. Therefore it is not only profitable, but
also necessary for all men to frequent the Church and to hear Sermons; The
wicked have need of preaching that they may be corrected, and their lives
amended; The good and Godly that they be not corrupted, the Ignorant that they
may be taught, the learned that they may be admonished, that they may learn
some new thing, or recollect in their memories old things which they have
formerly learnd. A wise man will hear and increase in Wisdom, and the ear of
the wise seeks learning. That Herod who was so famous for his wicked impiety,
yet he was not so barbarous and foolish, but that he would hear John Baptist
his Court Chaplain joyfully and willingly, and when he had heard him, do many
things gladly. In this Herod there was not only a willingness to hear, but
also a long and unwearied patience, for he could not have done many things
according to Saint John's praescriptions, unless he had heard him oftentimes
concerning diverse, and many particulars. Neither are we to imagine that John
the Baptist did only repeat, or set down in a Catalogue, and rebuke the Kings
vices, but to have dealt with him by Reason and Argumentation, that so he might
not only point at the Tyrants faults, but also dissuade him from them. The
adultery of that King, and many other heinous crimes, such stains could not be
wiped out by one or two Sermons, each crime required one or more for its
purgation. A Soul that is hardened in wickedness (such was Herod's) is to be
assaulted and shaken with diverse batteries. Thus did John the Baptist, and
notwithstanding all this Herod heard him gladly. And although John did
publicly cast this in his teeth, and openly affirm to his face, that it was
not lawful for him to have his Brothers Wife, and undoubtedly proved this by a
continued and long discourse, yet Herod heard him willingly. Such and so great
was Herod's desire to hear the Baptist who did not spare the Tyrant, did not
cover his other sins with the Mantle of Silence. Saint Luke witnesses as
much, where he says. When Herod the Tetrarch was rebuked by him for Herodias
his Brother Philips Wife, Luk 3.19.
and for all the evils which he had done.

Hence we may infer that Saint John did freely inveigh against Herod's
tyranny, his many murders, and Tributes which he had coveteously collected and
prodigally wasted upon his ungodly Lust, yet for all this Herod heard him
willingly. So great was Herod's patience at the rebukes of this Preacher, that
he was neither offended at his first Sermon which was more vehement, neither at
the second, nor at the third, nor at many others that followed, but still heard
him willingly. Saint John never seemd to Herod to have preached too often or
too long, neither was he condemned for his plain expressions, or blamed for
his sharpness in his bitter Invectives, but Herod heard him gladly, and did
many things according to the Baptists instructions, and if he had but
persevered, he should have had no cause to complain of his unhappiness; for
the Truth was fully revealed unto him, which stood him in no stead for want of
perseverance. Seneca once lamented the want of freedom in declaring the truth
in his times. Lib. 6. de Ben.
I will tell you what great men stand in need of (says he) and what is wanting
to those who abound in all worldly pleasures and contents. They want a man to
tell them the truth. See you not (says he there) how a desire of regaining
their lost liberty, hurries some men into ruin, whilst there is no^ a man to
be found, who by his disswasions will divert them from posting to destruction
But now as^ that friends [so call'd] do frequently practice, is to flatter and
deceiv^ others by their soothing speeches, and all for their own ends and
advantage. Saint John did not so by Herod, but showed himself to be a Monitor
of so candid a breast, and of so free an expression, that to conceal the Truth,
and to tell a lie, was all one to him. He therefore daily and hourly sounded
this in the Kings ears, Herod, it is not lawful for thee, it is not lawful
for thee, etc. where are now those delicate ones, men of Itching ears, who if
they suppose themselves to be struck at, but with one little word and that too
wrested or not well understood, they are ready to fly in the Preachers face,
and avoid the Pulpit, They are worse in this respect then Herod the parricide
and Adusterer, who did shun many a sin at the Baptists preaching, which ^hey do
not, but contemn their mi^^isters Doctrine, and shun their Sermons which might
be a medi^ine to heal their vices: thus did ^ot Herod by John Baptist. That
man joins hand with the Devil who is so proud, that he thinks he ^as no need
of the hand of an hel^er. And he commends a Scholar ^o be taught by a fool who
acknowledges none but himself for (...) Teacher. But whoever he be that ^s so
wise in his own conceit, as that he scorns to be taught by any ^ut himself,
that man shows that ^he has more pride then wit. Neither can there be in him
the love of ^ertue, in whom there is settled an ungodly hatred and neglect of
that ^eavenly Doctrine, which, if heard with faith and good Attention, is able
to translate our souls to that ^lace from whence they came. Aloa^hing to hear
the word preached ^s the beginning or first step of our ^eparting from God.
Neither can ^e be said or thought to love God, who rejects those wholesome
precepts contained in his word. The touchstone tryes Gold, and the thoughts of
men's hearts are revealed by the Gospel of Christ. I^ discovers unto us that we
shall be judged not only by our works, bu^ also by our thoughts, which if
sinful are breaches of Gods holy Commandments.

Delight therefore in Gods word hear, and keep it, Treasure it up in thy
memory, and practice it in the life.

plant SYMBOLVM. VI.

Auditio verbi Dei.

Audiens sapiens sapientior erit. Proverb. 15.



plant Emblem. VII

Almes-deedes

And he gave every man comande: meant concerning his neighbor Eccle: 17. v.
14.



The seventh sign That a man is in the number of the elect is a bountiful and
free heart, showing it self in Almsdeeds, and mercy to the afflited.
This the Author sets out by a Plant which is called Tabaccus: under it these
words out of
ECCLESIASTICVS. 17.12. God has given every man a Commandment concerning his
Neighbor.


THis Plant has many sovereign virtues: it is famous for it is cure of wounds
and Ulcers. Poverty is the bodies Ulcer, sore and grievous: Sin is the Ulcer of
the soul far more dangerous.

Almsdeeds joynd with faith in Christ's merits conduce much to the curing both
of our Bodies and Souls. Put on (says Saint Paul) as the elect of God bowels
of mercy: Col. 3.
in which words he requires not only the hand of the giver; but also the
affection. Psalm. 41.
Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble. This is ratifyed and confirmed by a Syllogism
taken out of Gods word, it is this. He that borrows is servant to the Lender:
but the rich and allsufficient Lord of Heaven and Earth, in and by the poor
borrows of man. The conclusion is evident: The minor proposition is proved by
Solomon. Prove. 18.
He that has mercy on the poor lends unto the Lord: which is the same with
this, the Lord borrows of him that takes pity of a poor man, Saint Aug. in
one of his Homilies presents Christ unto us thus begging an Alms. Give me of
that which I have bestowed on thee, I desire only mine own. Give and restore.
I have bin thy benefactor, now make me thy debtor, and let me find thee an
Usurer. Thou give to me of thy temporal Goods, I will restore to thee
eternal. I will restore thee to thy self, when I shall give my self to thee in
glorifying thee hereafter, both in soul and body. Greg. Naz. Soars as high in
a lofty expression. Show thy self a God to the distressed, imitating Gods
mercy. for a man resembles the deity in nothing more then in being pitiful to
the poor, whom God has left and bequeathed to thy care, that thou should be
to him as a God, i. e. Job. 29.
an help and comforter. I was a Father to the poor, and when I knew not the
cause, I sought it out diligently, I was an Eye to the blind, and Feet to the
lame. So the holy man Job commends to us his charity for our imitation. Tobit,
who was most dear to God, says thus in his exhortation to his Son. Alms does
deliver from death and suffers not to come into darkness, Tob. 4.10.11.
for Alms is a good gift before the most high to all them that use it.

Saint Chrysostom. professes that it is far better to be skilled in this art of Alms
giving, Hom. 33. and 6. ad Ant.
then to know how to sway the Scepter of a King. It is alms that builds us in
heaven everlasting mansions. It is that which makes us resemble God, being like
to him in bounty and goodness. A merciful man is in Gods esteem very precious.
Prove. 22.
He that is prone to mercy shall be blessed, because he has distributed his
bread to those that were in need. So lays the wise man. And Saint Chrysostom. again
tells us, That bountifullness makes us not only like unto God, but that it is
the Mother of Charity, and next to Faith, the only badg and cognizance of a
Christian: for by it the disciples of Christ may be distinguished and known
from men of the world, who have their portion in this life, and make meney
their God: not considering what Christ enjoined his Disciples Mat. 6. Lay up
for your selves treasures in Heaven. Hear this, ye rich worldlings, whose only
trade and practice is to get and increase riches. Here is a new mart, a new way
(and that taught us from heaven) to gather treasures and heap up wealth, which
is the main of most men's desires, It is to scatter our money among Christ's poor
Members. Ye have hitherto bin mistaken in the true and right trade of getting.
The way to be rich is to give, not to scrape and save, He lays up treasure in
the world which is above, that distributs freely to the poor here below.
Neither is it necessary that we give handfulls of Gold and Silver; give but
halfepennies or farthings, give little morsels of bread with a bountiful heart
and good affection, and you shall find a larg recompense, a full increase in
Gods blessing upon your fields, your Barnes and all your storehouses. The
Roman censors used to visit and search in the dwellings of the Citizens if
there were any Moths in their Garments, any Maggots in their meat, if there
were any mould in their bread, or if it had bin eaten with Mice, into these
abuses they searched; Neither was their labor fruitless. The mulct set upon
each default made them look more carefully to their Provisions of Victual and
other necessaries. But now in these our days, if the same course were taken,
many would be found, who had rather feed the Mice then the poor Members of
Christ. But let me tell them and all men: That there is now discovered a place
to which there is an open and easy passage, in which neither Mice nor Moths,
nor Worms have access.

It is revealed to us by Christ in that 6th. of Mat. where he says: Lay up for
your selves treasurs in Heaven where neither Moth nor canker corrupts, and
where Thieves neither break through nor steal. None of the Manna was corrupted
but that which was reserved and kept till the next day. And no money is lost but
that which we will not throw away. Neither can any be with more safety kept then
that which is committed to the hand of those that be in want or need. The
bellies of the poor are the rich man's best Barnes. Whatsoever is laid up, there
shall be received again with usury, neither is it in danger of fire. If Absalom
had in time cut his golden locks, his hair had not proved to him an Halter: and
if the great ones of the world would but cut out a portion of their money to the
relief of the poor and helpless, they should purchase as many friends as they
have pounds or shillings in their Chests, or Purses: by hoording and keeping
their Gold, they do to themselves this mischief, they hoord up baits for
Thieves, and so multiply to themselves enemies, and increase their dangers.
This they do in not making the poor their friends.

The Son of Syrachs Counsel is excellent to this purpose. Loose thy money for
thy Brothers, or Neighbors sakes, and let it not rust under a stone to thy
destruction; Christ's advice is, Luk 6.
give and it shall be given to you again.

The faithful are liberal, they believe Christ's promise and obey his
admonition. A well grows muddy if it be not often drawn: by taking up water
out of it, it proves more pure and clean, and for that water you take out, the
more comes in; So it is with a liberal and bountiful soul, much he receives
for a little which he gives. Christ is a magnificent rewarder of Beneficence.
The elect Sons of God when they give a Dole o^ Alms, if it were possible, they
would give their heart with it, so free and bountiful are they to the poor and
indigent. Hence it is, Christ pronounces the merciful blessed, not those only
who can and do give much, but those also who would have mercy upon all, would
relieve their wants if they had a competent store of wealth and Riches.

Pythagoras once taught his Scholars this dark sentence, Like comprehends its
like; It is true in the common traffic and Merchandise of the world. One good
turn requires the like, and commands the same: have thou then a mind to find
and purchase mercy? fish in the poores waters, cast in the Hook of thy
beneficence, baited with good works, and thou shall not fail to meet with that
mercy which will pour into thy bosom a full reward for thy charity. But thou
may object: by being thus bountiful to others, I shall want my self. O
faithless and poor spirited wretch who had rather give way to thy diffidence
then rely upon Christ's word and promise. How many has Avarice brought to
extreme want? Never did Charity go unrewarded. God in a manner contends with
our liberality, neither will he be outstrip'd and overcome in bounty. Give and
it shall be given unto you, 1 King. 17.
sull measure, pressed down and running over The Widow of Zarephtah was not at
much cost in providing a small dinner for the Prophet Eliah, it was no more
then a little dry cake and the Text tells us how much she, gained by it. So the
Shunamite that entertained Elisha in her house, received more then she
expended. So gainful a virtue is Charity: and so liberal a God we deal with,
who is a God of justice and mercy, he is just and merciful in the performance
of his promises. But there be some and those not predestined to salvation,
who never give to the poor but with a froward and Malignant heart: Those give
with a malignant heart, who only part with those things they cannot eat nor use
themselves. If they have in their houses any stinking meat, moldy bread or
sour drink, any rotten or corrupted scraps, which one would scarce throw to
Dogs, that they bountifully bestow upon Christ's poor Members, wretched Souls!
how do they out of a fond persuasion fool and deceive themselves? This is not
to offer Oil, but (what Baruch by way of exprobration alleadges against the
Jews) Olive stones to God; who did not respect Cain nor his oblations, because
he offered the vilest and meanest of all the fruits of the earth, whereas he
ought to have tendered to God the best. Art thou so straightened in thy means that
thou can do but little? it will suffice if thou would do more. God accepts
the will for the deed. Have thou store of wealth, that thou can do much?
Beware that thy will move thee not to give a little. If thou can not for the
present help the poor with money, feed him with hope of receiving good from
thee, or sustain his family with comfortable and sweet words: if thou do
neither of these, afford him the pity of thy heart, by commiserating his
fortune and distressed estate. 'God rejected not those Israelites who having no
better sacrifice offered fine flower or Goats hair; but if they had Gold and
offered those, they had deserved (says St. Chrysostom.) to be cursed for their
wicked and deceitful doings.

Again, some others there be who give not with a wicked mind, but infect and
corrupt the oil of their mercy, with the filth of their luxury, being as well
prone to satisfy the desires of their lust, as they are ready to relieve the
wants and hear the cries of the needy. A people in Cilicia called the
Anazarbaei, commit the charg and care of their Olive grounds to the custody of
their Virgins, renowned for their chaste behavior, who only there plant the
Trees and gather the Olives. And let us who be Christians persuade our selves
that this Olive Tree of mercy, and the Myrtle Tree of Venus are of so different
a nature that they will not grow together.

That Alms is not allowed of by God which is attended with the filthy pleasure
of the flesh. A bountiful hand and a libidinous heart, both those joined
together cannot please God. There be others who are not drowned as the former
in the mud of carnal lusts, but pour out their Oil fruitlesly with this
intent, that they may be seen and commended. But let me ask such men this
question, what they mean by not following our Saviors Injunction? Why does the
left hand know what the right hand does? Job 15.33.
Holy Job compares such men to an Olive that does cast her flowers And his
comparison is very fit, for (as St. Gregory observes) The Olive Tree though it
bring forth abundance of blossoms, yet if it be shaken with a strong and
violent wind brings forth no fruit. So he that is then only merciful to the
needy when he has beholders, or does it to be seen, he looses the fruit of his
good work by means of the blast of men's praise, at which he aimed in bestowing
his Alines. The elect servant of God, when he helps those that want, respects
and cares for no other beholder but God only, whose eye is spread over Heaven
and Earth. Neither does he expect commendation or praise, but from God alone
who will be his reward and salvation. Our charity to the poor (as St. Chrysostom.
does express it) has Golden wings, but not Peacocks Feathers. It has admirers
here on earth, but its rewarder is in heaven, whether it mounts with its golden
wings and there finds Christ an advocate to cover its defects, who relieved him
in his poor members.

Charity is so far from desiring to be known, that if it were possible it would
hide and conceal its doings from the eyes of the al seeing God; indeed a man
truly merciful is not so careful that others may know how much he gives, as
he is that God may know it, who alone can make him a just requital and full
satisfaction. Therefore St. Cyprian said well, when he termed this bountiful
mind to the poor and needy, a certain pledge of our future safety, for that by
it we make God our debtor, and engage Christ unto us who one day will be our
Judge and Savior.

At that great Assizes of the world the day of Judgment there will be a strict
enquiry made concerning our Almesdeeds and mercy. Those whose hearts have been
edgd with cruelty, being hard and unmercifull to the poor, Mat. 25.
those shall hear to their endless woe and horror. Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. But those whom God by an eternal decree, has assigned to be
of the number of the Saints and to the company of Angels; They relying upon the
promise of God and merits of Christ, may boldly challeng the reward of their
service. They may stand with cheerfullness in the presence of their Judge, And
thus bespeak God with confidence. Give O Lord, because we have given to those
that belonged to thee, and have had compassion on others, therefore O Lord have
mercy upon us. We have in some measure done what thou have commanded, therefore
we beseech thee repay what thou have promised. The Judge he cannot, he will nor
reject these demands, but will readily confess that he is a debtor to those his
Creditors. Then the elect shall behold in Christ's side that gaping and bloody
wound, and in this written as it were with Golden letters these words; Come ye
blessed, inherit a Kingdom. Whatsoever ye demanded, ye shall obtain: I
acknowledge my promise which I will now make good by a real performance: I
commend you for your mercy showed to my poor distressed members: well have you
done my good and faithful servants, receive now your wages, the reward of your
service, a reward which is beyond all price and estimation: Whatsoever you have
done to any of mine you have done it to me. Your commiseration and pity has
refreshed my body oft-times with meat and drink I was clothed with your
Garments, I was received as a stranger into your houses, your love brok through
the prison Bars, that you might visit me in my distress. I lived by your
mercy, Therefore come ye blessed; you broke your bread to the hungry; Behold
therefore an everlasting rich banquet is now provided for you; you shut not
strangers out of your doors, my will is therefore that ye be Fellow-Citizens,
with my Angels in my celestial Palace; you have covered the naked bodies of my
poor Servants and warmed them with your fleece, come therefore and I will cloth
you with the purple Garment of Immortality; Come ye blessed. O consider this
all ye Servants of the Lord, what a Merchandise, how great a change will this
be, for Rags, for Farthings, for scraps of Bread, to receive a Robe of Glory,
the treasures of Heaven, and delightful pleasures that shall never be ended.
Ecele. 16.14.
God (says the Son of Syrach) will give place to all good deeds, and every one
shall find according to his works. These things as they are most true, so if
men would persuade themselves, and believe, they shall enjoy so in estimable
rich blessings, certainly there would none be so stupid and sottish, as not to
be willing to purchase Heaven at so easy a condition, and so cheap a rate.
Most true is that of Saint Austin; If thou desire to play the good Merchant,
give what thou can not keep, that so thou may receive what thou shall never
loose. Give a modicum, a little that thou may receive an hundred fold. Give to
a poor man a piece of money, that thou may receive from Christ a Kingdom;
give a morsel of bread, that thou may obtain remission of thy sins at the
hands of God, give thy Coat or Cloak, that thou may be clothd with Glory.
Give that which is vile and of no estimation that so thou may enjoy with God
an eternity of all good things in Heaven What a madness and folly is it (says
St. In Mat. c. 6.
Chrysostom.] to leave thy goods there from whence thou must depart and not to send
them before hand thither, where thou and all men must go. Therefore by thy
charity and bounty to the poor, lay up thy treasurs in Heaven which is thy
better Country.

plant SYMBOLVM. VII.

Eleemosyna cum benigno affectu.

Vnicuique mandauit Deus de proximo suo. Eccli. 17.



tree Emblem. VIII.

Selfe-Contempt

Except ye become as little Childeren, you shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven mat: 18. v. 3



The eighth Sign. OF Our being predestined to Salvation is a vile
estimation, or mean esteem of our selves symboliz'd by a Cypress Tree under
which is this motto.
MAT. 18. Unless ye become like little Children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.


THe Cypress Tree is always green and of a pleasant smell, it admits of no
rottenness, and keeps all other things sweet and free from all corrupt
stenches. Therefore sitly is this mean esteem of our selves set out unto us and
signified by it; for that an humble conceit of our unworthiness kills the worm
of pride (which lurks in us and cleaves close to our natures) neither does it
suffer a man so to rot and be so corrupted as to please himself and glory in
any work of his, or ability. Self love is the rottenness of the Soul, and the
bain of Christianity. Psalm. 101.5
The high looks and high stomach, I abhor says God by his Prophet David. And
he that behaves himself proudly shall not dwell in my house. Men use to say it
is a rare potion in which there is neither Sugar nor Poison, and certainly
there is no vice nor sin which can be imagined, in which the Poison of pride is
not mixed and tempered. This will be found true if the nature and quality of
most sins be surveyd. Ec. 10.14.
Pride (says Ecclesiasticus) is the beginning of all sin, and he that has it
shall be cursed in all he does, until at last he be overthrown. Pride the
companion and nurse of a wicked disposition, discovers it self diverse ways in
a multitude of vices, as hatred and carnal love, but above all it is obnoxious
to the rack of Envy, for a proud man is ever envious. Neither are there more
anxious and stirring motions in the minds of any then of those men who seek not
so much their own praise, as conceive it to be due unto them. Upon the least
seeming neglect or disrespect, they entertain a suspicion that they are
contemned, and this contumatious humor (as they judge it) in others they
reveng by tormenting cares, and disquiet thoughts in and upon themselves. They
are such as are ignorant of their own vices, and take no notice of other men's
virtues. By men thus blown up with the tympany of pride, piety and says, and
whatsoever is among men accounted holy, all are esteemed as things of naught;
they are placed under fame, and their ambitious desire of honor. These are
highly prized while the other with Religion is trampled upon and scornd. pride
a base though an aspiring sin many times is the cause of other sins and vlces,
because it dares ^^^e with an envious tooth, and detract from other men's famous
acts, their learning, their virtues, their sanctity or holiness, and in so
doing, they are like to those wornes, which ever ^at into the best Pears and
Apples. None personates the Devil better then a proud man, he labourd to be
like the most high, to be like him in honor, equal in Majesty; this man
endeavors always not to be so much equalto his Neighbors, as to be preferred
before them in reputation and dignity. Iam. 4.
But God evermore resists the pro^d. As a Soldier that stands on the
battlements of a walled Town, beats down with his sword as many as ascend to
scale it; So and worse often times God deals with the proud who are sometimes
overthrown by God without any great force or resistance, even with the same
facility as a Gardener crops the slowers that peep above their fellows: So God
can summon a fit of an Ague, the Fever, or small Pox to be his executioner and
to take reveng of the proud ones who admit of no Superiors.

Saul in his humility was ad^anced to the Throne, but being poisoned with
pride, he was immediately cast down.

There be some men who out of a natural Antipathy, hate Cats and Spiders and
other small creatures: we are assured out of the word that God hates the proud:
Every arrogant man is an abomination to the Lord. Prove. 16. Prove. 10.
And he that exalts himself is unclean before God. But as the murrain or some
other poisonous humor, breaks forth not in one only, but in diverse parts of the
body: So pride contents not it self with one part or member alone, but has set
up in diverse of them its seat and mansion, It possesses some men's eye, the
Tongue of others, it has thrust it self into Ladies hands, for some there be
that pride themselves in their Rings and fine white fingers. It sets upon most
men's garments, there is its manor house, there chiefly it reigns. It sticks
to some men's and Women's bands, so fast and Immovable, that an hundred
Preachers, though never so powerful in their expressions, cannot stir it from
that place of Residence.

There is another sort of Men, who one would take to be sworn Enemies to
pride, if they did not in a secret way teach by decking of them sumptuously,
their Feasts, their houses, their Children, their Family and household stuff to
be proud. Thus pride mingles it self variously in all our doings. Sometimes we
deject our selves even below the degree of baseness, we speak Honey and Roses,
smooth deceiving words, we sprinkle our hearers with court holy water, we creep
at great ones knees that we may ride upon others heads, and when we are
advanced to the throne of honor, a superior or equal, is odious to us, and
displeasing. Why art thou proud O dust and Ashes! Death with the least puff of
his killing breath can scatter thee from thy dwelling, and blow thee into thy
Grave. Why do thou thus ( Suffenus-like) please and flatter thy self in
wickedness? Thou stinkest in the nostrills of God and men, and art most
distasteful to the blessed Angels. Thou art made up of Dust and Clay, thou Son
of Adam, thou art compounded of corruption, and yet thou castest forth the
stench of Lucifers pride, which will bring thee to speedy destruction. If not
only the sweet smell of the Cypress, but also its height and tallness be
pleasing to thee, if thou desire to climb upon the stairs of fortune; Go,
Ascend, but when thou art mounted on high, let me give thee this caveat;
Despise none but thy self the subject of sin, and the object of misery. It
argues a brave and noble spirit to be on high, yet not to be advanced with an
overweening conceit of that felicity. He is the only brave one worthy of
Admiration, who when he is lift up can depress himself by an humble demeanor
in his life: and reaching Heaven with his faith and other heavenly virtues, in
his self estimation and lowly opinion of his own parts, creeps as low as
earth, and would fall lower to do God or his friend any service.

Saint Bern. says that Humility is an individual companion of Gods Grace:
which Humility has in it a kind of Sublimity, it will not stoop to the bait of
honor and preferment, and never grows insolent by any acquired glory. It is
no great matter to be humble in an abject or mean condition. Humility in honor
is a great and rare virtue, proper only to a Saint Hear ye this O ye Kings
and. Princes, and Potentates of the Earth, and hear this all ye that are
^earn'd and proud, ye that have riches and despise others. Humility in honor
is a great Virtue. And this is the property of true humility, by how much
holier a man is even in the judgment of God, to seem more vile in his own
eyes, and to judge himself the more wicked. Abraham the friend of God most
commended for his faith and holiness, Genesis 18.
yet seems to himself but Dust and Ashes. St. Peter who was eminent in
graces, confesses himself to be a finfull man, nay the greatest of sinners. St
Paul a chosen vessel, and the prince of the Apostles, terms he not himself
an Abortive, a thing borne out of due time and unworthy to be called an
Apostle? To speak truly, there is no better and easier way to be exalted, then
first to be cast down and in a mean estimation of himself to be humbled.
Pride is the ruin and death of all virtues, the downfall of men and Angels. O
God what a change once was there between Heaven and Earth. The most beautiful
Angel of all was thrown down from Heaven, and a poor most miserable Beggar
was carried by the Angels thither. For from whence proud Lucifer fell, thither
did Lazarus, poor humble Lazarus ascend, whom we believe to have rather
numbered his ulcers, to have counted his boiles and botches, rather this, then
to have cast up or made any Account of his virtues. And I doubt not but that
out of a Genuine contempt of himself, his patience seemed more glorious in
others eyes then his own. Wittily and well said he who affirmd that little was
his strength, who thought he was strong at all; And no strength at all has he
who thinks he has much to this purpose says St. Bern. thus, 'All things are
wanting to him who conceives that he wants nothing. We may add, that those men
have no little or right to Heaven, and belong not unto God who are pleased with
nothing but their own gifts, who are most proud Censors of other men's lives,
and partial Judges of their own, they are deceived in other men's matters and
bleare-ey'd in their own, assuming a voluntary and pleasing blindness. Woe be
to these self flatteries. They will hear one day that heavy sentence, Go ye
Cursed, etc Heaven admits of no such Peacocks, who have long Tails, but
shorter Crests, great and swelling conceits of their own doings, but a bad
opinion of other men's Those that are predestinate to eternal life censure no
men's lives, so rigidly as their own, and condemn themselves more often then
they do others: They are indulgent to all men, never to themselves, and are
most severe in correcting their own manners. Wretched men that we are, we are
but Dust and as it were a shadow that departs, passing every moment to the
region of darkness, the Grave, the mansion of the dead, yet out of a vain
ostentation, we run over our pedigrees, we number up the names of our
Progenitors, as if they are the better men who reckon up most Ancestors. Man is
like to vanity, says the Prophet David His days pass like a shadow, etc.
Wheresoever we turn our eyes, there we may behold matter of Grief and tears;
if we look upward to Heaven there we shall see our Country afar off, but our
selves driven and banished from it. Look we downward to the earth, there we
shall see a Pit which the Earth threatns unto us when we are dead, and though
we now tread upon it with our feet, yet after a little while, our lofty heads
shall be laid low in it. Look we upon our selves, we may behold a fair and red
Apple, like that of Sodom, in which notwithstanding its beauty, there lurks a
worm which in time will eat and consume that Apple at the heart: filth and
rottenness and Death it self harbors even in our very bowels. Look we into
our hearts, do we unbowell our consciences; there we shall find Cages of
Uncleanness, and dunghills of Impurity, a nest of Snakes, Toads, and Vipers.
Alas we abound in sin and infirmities, and yet we are not vile to our selves.
We are overwhelmed with miseries, beset with folly and ignorance, and yet we
desire to seem happy, wise, and searn'd, and to be pointed at with the finger
as if we were most eminent; These considerations of our sinful frailty beget
in the elect, a mean esteem of themselves, and the more they consider their
miseries the more humble are they and vile in their own eyes. And all things
appear unto them, (as they did to St. Paul) Dross and Dung, because they
themselves are so and worse in their own opinion. They easily despise all
earthly things, who have learned above all things to contemn themselves. And
whosoever desires to be happy, let him inure himself to be contemned, and
learn to contemn all things but God and goodness which only is to be prizd
and esteemed in Gods Saints, who have studied and practiced that excellent
saying of St. Chrysostom. It is as great a thing to think the most meanly of thy
self, Hom. 3. in Mat.
as to do and Act the greatest things that may be. Gods elect Children obey his
voice that said, He that will be great among you shall be less in the Kingdom
of heaven, and whether he shall come there it is a question (it is a place only
for the humble and meek.) The way of humility they likewise know to be rough
and ruggy, and not easy at the first entrance, but within a little while after
it will prove more plain, more passable and commodious. They are not ignorant
they must climb up a little hill to obtain their desired roast, this they do
with all their best endeavors, they jove to be contemned, and snatch at such
occasions as may cause a just or an unjust contempt from others, and when they
see themselves despised, they are glad and rejoice, and insult more over
themselves then any of their Enemies: they threaten not when they are despised
to reveng their quarrel with the sword: they reveng not themselves no not with
a word. None of them lifts up his hand against him by whom he was contem'nd, he
draws not his Dagger at him but acknowledges with a cheerful thankfulness,
that he is benefitted by contempt and disgrace. In a word, Gods elect Children
have thoroughly learned this lesson in Christ's School, that the scoffs of men
cannot make them less in Gods esteem, In whose opinion we are greater when we
are little in the worlds favor. So great, and no greater is every man, as he
is in the eyes of God who judges not according to man's Judgment. We are little
in Gods account if we be great in our own, and contrariwise if little in our
own esteem, we are great in his. The deeper the Well is, the purer is the
Water; And the estimation we have of our selves is more pleasing to God, by
how much the more vile and mean it is. God brings down the high loocks of the
proud: and men of great aspiring thoughts shall be brought to shame and
confusion. The way to prevent which shame is to depre^s our selves, and to
bury all our proud conceits with the consideration of that heap of miseries, a
mass of corruption, Ignorance and defects which cleave fast and close to our
natures. They say that Mush evvill recover its lost savor, if you lay it in
such places as are stinch'd with noisome sents. Thus if we seriously ponder our
filthy vileness, or the vile filthiness of our sins, if we hate and loath
them, and if we humble our selves before God, desiring his Grace to further
our amendment, let us not doubt to obtain what we request, and let us
persuade our selves, that by his Grace assisting us, we shall send forth the
svveet savor of amendment of our lives.

A Religious man being once asked what way he had found as most Compendious
for a Christian to attain Heaven, replied, The best way is for a man alvvayes
to accuse himself. I^de. virg.
This is the only discipline, the chief practice of Good Christians: So says
St. Aug. St. Ambrose affirms that it is a certain sign of our Election to
think not well of our felves, and to acknowledge our wound. Greg. says, It is
the property of the Reprobate, always to do ill, ever more to sin, and never
to retract what they have don: for whatsoever they do, they do it (as it were)
hoodwinked, without any care or regard, and never acknowledge their fact till
they be quickn'd to it by their punishment.

The daily practice of the Elect is to make a privy search into their own
ways, and to discuss all their Actions, driving them to the very fountain,
even their thoughts, which pass not without examination, and when they have don
all they can, they are not secure, because they know God sees in them what they
cannot descerne.

The Son of Syrach his Counsel is good. The greater thou ar^ (says he) humble
thy self in all things, Eclus 3.19.
and thou shall find savor before the Lord, for God is great in power, and is
honored only by the meek and lowly. To speak truly, the greatest perfection
that can be imagind is this for a man to know and acknowledge his
imperfections. And he is more to be commended to whom his infirmities are
known, then he that has traveled through all the parts of the World, studied
the course of the Stars; the virtue of all Herbs, and descended into the very
bowels of the Earth by his search and enquiry into the mysteries of Natures
excellencyes, after this scaled the Heavens in contemplation of their
greatnels, and yet for all this knows not his own weakness. Such a man may be
pitied and reckond among the foolish.

Do thou intend to build a house of a great height, i. e. do thou desire to
attain to some eminency, be sure that thou lay for thy foundation, humility.
Every man is delighted with honor, desires to be mounted on high, to be
eminent above his fellows, Aug. de verbis doc.
but the way to this is to climb up upon Humilities short Ladder, and to Ascend
by her steps. Our Country is above, but our way to it lies below.

He that seeks after this heavenly Country with a full bent of his soul and
firm resolution, will not refuse to walk in that way wherein all Gods
Saints have gone to Heaven. But we may safely take up Saint Hierom's
complaint: Hiere p. 27.
many follovv the shadovv, but fevv embrace the substance and truth of
humility. There are a fevv and they most happy being predestined to heaven,
who the more they see and know themselves, are the more displeasing to
themselves; and the more vile they are in their own eyes, the more precious
are they to God. They please themselves most, who know themselves least.
Greg: l. 35. Mor. c. 5.
Many know much but know not their own wants, and so much the less are they
in Gods eyes, by how much they are the greater in their own. An humble
acknowledgement of our own vileness is a Causye or safe high way that leads
to happiness. By descending into our selves, and humbly confessing our sins, We
may ascend to Heaven, so said Cassiodorus. in Psalm. 6.
Humility is the first step to Glory.

tree SYMBOLVM. VIII.

Vilis sui aes timatio.

Nisi efficiamini sicut parvuli, non intrabitis in regnum caelorum. Matthew. 18.



two axes Emblem IX Love of our enemies Be not overcome of evil but overcome
evil with good. Romans 12v. 21.



The Ninth Sign. IS The love of our Enemies: represented by two Javelins
conjoynd or tied together by an Olive branch. Under which these words out of
St. Paul to the
ROMANS c. 12. Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with Good.


AN Olive branch was used by the Ancients for a sign or emblem of peace: and
here an Olive bovv tvvisted and made into a Wreath binds these two Weapons
together, and hinders them from meeting by way of hostility: as love
conciliates and conjoynes those in a fast band, who before Isved in hatred or
enmity. Christ seriously exhorts us to the duty of love where he says; Mat. 5.
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, and pray
for them that despitefully use you, that persecute and revile you, so shall you
be the Sons of your heavenly Father. Aug. En. c.
One may object and say that this work is hard, and the task difficult. But
know, says St. Aug. that the harder the work is the more grateful will it be
to God and profitable to us. There be many kinds of Alms which God in mercy
and for Christ's merits is pleased to accept, Act. 10.
as he did those of Cornelius, but no Alms more acceptable, no sacrifice so
pleasing to him as when from the very ground of our hearts, we forgive them
that offend and trespass against us. Christ when he hung fast nailed to the
Cross, had his Tongue only free from the wounds of nails and lash of Whips,
and he thus hanging upon that cursed and shameful Tree used that his sacred
Tongue in prayer and supplication for those who had crucified him with their
hands and revild him with their reproachful Tongues. So eloquent and potent an
advocate was he even for the Jews and other his adversaries: Neither did
Christ ^n this want Disciples or followers though they were but a few that
conformed themselves to this his most godly practice. When Stephen prayed for
those that stond him, heaven presently opend as if the Saints and Angels in
heaven were delighted with so rare a spectacle or sight, to wit, a man praying
for those by whom he was murderd.

This protomartyr Stephen stood when he commended his own cause to God, but
prayed kneeling for his enemies; and withal, Act. 7.
Saw heaven opend and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. If it be lawful
(O Lord Almighty) for sinful flesh and blood to pry into thy Actions by a
curious enquiry, Give me leave blessed God, to put this bold question unto thee.

Lord, what is it that thou now do? how hasty is thy mercy and goodness? how
do thou make have to help and save us? how different is the method of thy
proceedings from ours: with us the fight goes, before the reward or triumph:
but behold now a Saint rewarded before he had fully conquered. Before Stephens
mouth was opened, Heavens Gates were unlocked and opend, so that he presently,
Saw the Glory of God. What man is there that lives, that whilst he lives can
see God and shall not see Death? This holy Martyr Stephen was yet alive in the
flesh, when he did partake of the beatificall vision. O vvonderfull mercy
worthy of all Admiration. God never openly shows himself to his Servants, but
in Heaven, which is his dwelling place; why was it then that happiness broke
(as I may so say) out of Heaven Gates and ran to meet Stephen in the mid way
of his race? This Champion was as yet in the field, he was yet wrestling upon
the stage of this world, and in this conflict between life and Death, the flesh
and the spirit, he prayed, and that for his enemies: O happy and powerful
Prayer, that could open Heaven! But let us weigh the cause why his reward was
so hastily bestowd? It is this. Our remission and pardoning of Injuries, our
earnest deprecation and interceding for our Enemies is so grateful and
pleasing to God, that now when Stephen was upon his knees, this most merciful
Lord lays aside his dreadful Majesty, dispences with his royal law of
crowning after victory, prevents this first Martyr with a rare and
extraordinary mercy, and commands the most beautiful Queen of Heaven,
Happiness, to step out of those celestial doors, to embrace this blessed
Champion in her Arms at the Threshold before those doors, that so he that
rewarded his deadly Enemies, his persecutors with love, and poured out prayers
and tears to God in their behalf, might (contrary to the statute law of
Heaven) be called to triumph, before Death was fully conquered. And this is a
royal privilege indulged only to those who can and do forget and forgive
Injuries. Hence we may infer, that to do an ill turn, not to suffer one is
hurtful to a man, and full of danger, for that thereby, he makes God his
adversary and loses his favor who is pleased with: and delights only in those
that can suffer patiently, and readily forgive an Injury. David a man of
meekness and after Gods own heart, who had fought with Lions, and Bears, and
often got the conquest, yet he being so valiant, as that no fear or terror
could abate his courageous valor, when his raging and most cruel enemy Saul
oftentimes fell into his hands, and was at his mercy yet he chose rather to
spare then kill him, and bore as it were before him, this motto in his
triumphant Banner. Jf I have rewarded evil to those that repaid my good will
with discourtesies; Psalm. 6.
then let me be overthrown and fall before mine enemies. So St. Paul, although
he was of that brave and stout spirit, that he challengd an Army of Spiritual
adversaries with Death and Hell into the field, and bid them open defiance, yet
he was merciful and gentle to his enemies, 1 Cor. 4.
that he said, Being cursed, we bless, being persecuted, we suffer, being
defamed, we beseech, etc. his example may be to us a Pattern of meek patience.
It is the most noble and generous kind of reveng to pardon, when thou have
power to punish. And it is a more glorious Act to overcome an Enemy by silence,
then by a multitude of words. Prove. 20.
It is an honor for a man to abstain from strife.

Ambr. says, that to revenge, is not an Act of fortitude or courage but of an
abject mind and base cowardice. He that revenges himself, overcomes not, but
is overcome by his enemies. And of this opinion is the Prince of Philosophers
who says thus.

As it argues a weak stomach not to be able to digest hard meat that is put
into it so it is an argument of a pusillanimous spirit, Arist. l. 4. E. h. c. 3.
not to be able to bear with an angry word. A man can not give a clearer
testimony or demonstration that he is a true Christian, then by loving his
enemy. For the exercise of our virtues, our piety and patience, we have need
either of a most sincere friend, or most sharp enemy, who is more Injurious to
himself then thou or any man can be. Chrysostom said truly, that a desire of
Reveng in the heart is more hurtful then a Viper whose poison is incurable.
Hom. 41. in Act.
Neither is it a less evil to repay an injury then to offer it. He that
strikes his Enemy, gives himself his deadly wound, and he that wounds himself,
we count him a madman or a fool. This is to take coals out of the fire, but
first to burn out own fingers, and then throw them upon another.

Thus is the Author of any evil at first or last punished by it, when he
against whom it was intended, escapes oftentimes unhurt, or unpunished.
Whosoever hates another man wounds his own soul, and he that loves not,
Lact deira dei To 3.
bideth in death. But what soever may be said to the contrary; It is an hard
thing for flesh and blood to love an enemy. To him that should make this
objection, we may retort thus. But it will be a more hard and difficult matter
to burn in the midst of Gods enemies in everlasting fire. It may be hard to
love him, whom you think worthy of hatred, but it will be an harder and more
Irksome thing to hear the voice of him, who one day shall pronounce from his
seat of Judgment this heavy and souleiklling sentence, go yecursed, and ^ ^et
then no man any more pretend difficulty and say, It is a thing intolerable to
flesh and blood not to hurt him by whom ofttimes I have been hurr.

Let such a man remember what one did say. He that will take no pains, will
never climb a Mountain, and whosoever hates his enemy shall never go to
Heaven. The superstitious Papists go in pilgrimage from place to place, and for
the most part return the worse. They offer large gifts at their Altars, and in
the mean time harbor hearts in their breasts as hard as their Altar stones,
being full of hatred and malice: they put themselves to great cost and pains
to procure a Jubilee for the pardon of their own sins, and yet they will not
cast out their desire of Reveng, God, Christian, has appointed for thee a
Iubile which thou may solemnize within thy self, and within the walls of thy
house. This is done by saying but one word from thy heart; I forgive: say this
cordially, and God will forgive thee all thy offenses which thou have committed
against his Justice. Forgive and it shall be forgiven thee; Lu. 6.
for if thou should give thy body to be burnt, and have not Charity, in that
thou hate thine enemies, it would presit the nothing; God would not be pleased
with thee, we count him rich who has many debtors; our enemies that heap upon
us miseries, owe us much, for that they ought to suffer much by, and from us.
It is in our power now whether we will enrich our selves by them in pardoning
and passing by their offenses. But let me advise thee O man, that art apt to
reveng, cast up thy account, and see what thou thy self owe, and what others
to thee. Consider how much it is which thou owe to thy God. Thy score is so
great that I believe thou art not able to di^charge it, but by this only
means, Eccl. 28.2.
by relying upon Christ's satisfaction to his Fathers Justice for thy sins.
Forgive thy Neighbor the hurt he has done unto thee; so shall thy sins be
f^rgiven when thou prayest. Great are thy debts which God has forgiven thee:
if thou should be backward and unwilling to cancel a small debt due to thee
from another, might not one justly suspect thee as guilty of great Iniquity?
That saying of St. Hier. is common and well known: Oh fearful sentence (says
he) if we remit not small things to our Brother, God will not remit great
things to us. A man may expect the like measure, or that pardon from God which
he affords to his Brother. Forgive not, and thou shall not be forgiven.
Therefore O man, take pity on thy s^ule, and if so be thou hate not thy
self, see, that thou extend thy love unto thine enemy. The ple sure or defight
that is taken in Reveng, is not long, but that which follows upon our mercy to
others, is everlasting. Be not I beseech you, overcome with evil, but overcome
evil with Good. Romans 12.
If thine enemy be hungry, give him meat, if thirsty, give him Drink, So shall
thou: heap cuales of fire upon his head, and the Lord will recompense thee
again; Overcome evil with good. St. Chrysostom. speaks excellently of this
Victory.

In the Olympic Games consecrated to the Devil, this Law was of force, to
overcome by doing ill, by giving blow for blow, but in the School of Christ,
we are taught a quite contrary lesson, to do good for evil, for here not he
that strikes, but he that is stricken, and bears it with patience is commended
by Christ, there he was crowned that shed most blood, here only he that is most
patient.

Humility and meekness would so guard us in our lives, that if we did but use
either of them in our actions, no mischief should foil us, no hurt befall us,
and no injury reach unto our persons, being fenced with these two virtues.
Prove. 20.22.24.29.
Say not then, I will recompense evil, but wait upon the Lord, and he will
save thee. Neither say thou as he has done to me, so will I do to him. It is a
madness by hurting another to procure thy own hurt and damage. And he that
bites at the stone when he should look to the hand that sent it discovers too
much in himself of the nature of the Dog.

Nay for blindness of understanding and for want of Judgment he that rages
against his adversary, may be compard to an Owl or Buzzard, 2 Samuel 16.
Therefore when thy enemy* does curse thee, let him curse, for God has bid
him curse thee. with this consideration David comforted himself, when he was
reviled by Shimei. He that is condemned to dye, is not offended or angry with
the Hangman, but rather with the Judge. And why poor wretched man, do thou
storm in a passion against thy executioner? Rather look up to the Judge, even
to God Almighty, who sent this Antagonist to try thy faith and patience, and to
chastise thee for thy sins.

The Devil without Gods permission could not have taken one small Sheep from
Job. Job. 1.
The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away: the Lord, not the Devil; this
was Jobs note. John 19.
Christ in like manner replied to Pilate. Thou should not have had any power
against me at all, unless it had been given thee from above. The same Answer
may thou make to thy Adversary; most men have been more benefited by their
enemies, then by their most loving friends. Take away tyrants, and there will
be no Martyrs, and take away all enemies and men thereby will loose the reward
of their patience. Dioclesian did not less amplify and enlarge the Church by
the Sword and barbarous Cruelty, then Constantine did with Gold and liberality.
That Lord of the family in the Gospel would have the Wheat and the Tares grow
together; Mat. 13.
Let both grow till the Harvest. But we are of another temper, of a forward and
hasty disposition, although it be to our hurt and destruction, so soon as we
see a weed grow amongst our Corn, we cry presently it is a Thistle or Nettle,
away with it to the fire, tares to the Furnace, our enemies we wish to helf. O
my dear brethren bridle this unruly passion, be more gentle and moderate. It
is not fit for you before the Harvest comes, to vent your hasty fury upon the
fields at the time of Harvest it shall be said to the reapers: Gather first the
Tares, bind them in bundles, and cast them into the Furnace. Let us not then
provoke Gods patience to wrath against us, by being to hasty in the prosecution
of the ruin of our enemies: Let us wait for the Harvest. Let us refer them
and our cause to the Bar of Gods Justice. This kind of weeds, this cockle
these Tares shall not escape the cutting Hook, they shall be thrown into the
fire, but the Harvest is not yet, therefore Gods leisure must be waited on, his
time expected. Christ when he taught his Disciples to pray and offer up their
souls to God in the 7. Petitions of the Lords Prayer, not without great cause
he repeated, and explained that which concerns the forgiving of our enemies
which Injure us, and what did he give us to understand by that explication, but
that this Doctrine of forgiveness was often to be inculcated and the duty ever
practiced. And truly we cannot too often repeat, 'that which is never
sufficiently, never well enough learned. David commending to us the excellency
of Gods Law, speaks thus of it. Psalm. 119.
Thy commandment is exceeding broad: indeed it is of a large and vast extent,
in that it commands us to love not only those of our acquaintance, but also
strangers, our enemies as well as benefactours, our foes as well as our
friends, and those that are unworthy of our favor, as well as those that
deserve our love and honor.

A man can give no such certain argument that he is rich, by wearing about his
neck a Chain of Gold, as he that loves his enemies, demonstrates, and clearly
proves that he is the Son of God. Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Ep ad Phil.
But where is the man that has such a command over his passions, that when the
waves of Anger rage and swell, does not curse his enemy with bitter
execrations, even to the Pit of Hell? But this becomes not Christians who have
given up their names to Christ, promising to be his Disciples, in imitating
hivertues. It beseemes such to bridle their Anger, and to allay their unruly
passions. Good counsel is that of St. Ser. 3. Inter. 17. Hom.
Aug.

Have thou heard a reproach? it is but wind. Art thou angry, here rises a
wave, when then the wind blows, and the Waves rise, the ship is in danger: So
is thy heart if thou give way to the 'passion of Anger. Having heard thy
self reproached, if thou studies^ to be revenged, thou have made shipwreck of
thy patience. And why so? because Christ is asleep in thee upon a Pillow (as he
was in the ship with his Disciples) Thou have shut Christ out of thy thoughts,
thou have quite forgotten that when he was hanging between the two Thieves, he
ent^eated God with tears to pardon, not to imprison or hang his persecutors.
Thou see then how Christ sleeps in thee (as he did in the ship, when the
storm rose) he sleeps in thee, who has left thee by his example a lesson, from
which thou may learn, not only to watch for thy enemies good, but to die for
him if there be need.

Therefore by an active remembrance of his virtues, stir up Christ in thy
heart, and say to thy self, what am I poor worm that I should desire to be
revenged upon any that has done me some harm? I will resolve rather to
undergo the stroke of death, then my enemy shall sustain by me any the least
harm. The soul that burns hot with an eager desire of revenge, when it
departs out of the body and takes its flight to Heaven, will certainly be
repeld by Christ, who by his precept and practice taught us meekness, not
raging malice; being a Teacher of submission, not of persecution; the Master of
Charity, (who did instruct us to pardon our enemies,) not of Hatred and
Revenge; those that practice these are none of his Disciples, they belong not
unto Christ. But the revengfull soul wants both eyes and ears, it is deaf
and blind, and carried wheresoever the violence of passion draws it; of this
constitution and humor were those of whom we find mention made in " Plautus,
In paen. Act. 3. Scen.
who says that the rich cormorants of those days were such, that if you did
them a good turn, it was blown out of their memories like a feather, but if
you did them any the least displeasure, their implacable wrath would lie as
heavy upon you as Lead. Indeed most men are of a leaden, obtuse, and earthy
mind, sleepy, and drowsy in all things excepting injuries; they are watchful
in these and will be sure to repay them; upon the least blast of any offense or
displeasure conceived to come from another, all courtesy and love flies away,
and vanishes out of their thoughts, but a contumelious word or any disgraceful
Act sinks deep, as it were lead, into their hearts, and sticks there as fast
and unmovable, as malice and hatred can make it. Give me leave, my Christian
Brethren, to speak what is true, and what I repeat with grief. The very
Idolatrous Gentiles overcome us with Goodness and pity to their enemies. Their
testimonies and examples so convince our Consciences, that at the great day of
Judgment there will be no manner of excuse left for us.

Pompey the Great, Pompey.
was not more renowned for being Mr. of 3. parts of the World then for this (as
Pater culus does witness) that he was constant to his friends, easily entreated
to forgive when he was offended, and most ready to accept of any satisfaction
that was offered when Augustus the Emperor pardoned Cinna who plotted his
death, he bespoke him in these words. O Cinna once again J will give thee thy
life: First I gave it thee as an enemy, but now as to a traitor and parricide,
and forthwith he also-conferrd upon him the Consulship. See now the event of
this his Goodness; by this means he tied Cinna to him fast in a bond of
friendship, so that when he dyed he made him his Heir.

Phocion the Emperor, Phocion.
a most Innocent man being condemnd to die, when the Sergeant came to him and
presented a poisoned Cup to drink; his Kins-men and acquaintance askd him what
message they should carry from him to his Son: My will and command is (said he)
that my Son bury this Cup in oblivion, which the Athenians have now forced me
to drink. To these may be added the example of Julius Caesar, Jul. C.
who is reported by Historians never to have forgot any thing, but Injuries.
But which of us in this case either will seem, or will really be guilty of
forgetfulness.

The benefits we receive, we write in the Dust, which is blown away with every
blast, but our ill turns in Marble, which is lasting and durable, these we
never forget. No man will give place to Anger and self Revenge, although God
urge ^im with his command to it. God ^id ever severely punish this desire of
Revenge, and has said expressly ^n his word: Revenge is mine, I will repay it,
when I think it sit. Deuteronomy. 32.
Notwithstanding this Edict from God, what man is there who is not ready to
retort and say. To me belongs revenge, and I will repay it. God opposes this
bold reply once again in the Scriptures. Romans ^2.
Vengance is mine and I will repay it. Here flesh and blood dares once more
oppose its maker, and say, nay Lord, Vengence I will challenge; it is mine, and
I will repay it. Thou art too easy to be entreated, thy Revenge comes slowly,
and oftentimes too late. Thus out of a rash and wicked boldness we dare
challenge Gods prerogative, and invade his royal privilege. Out of his hand
we snatch the Sword, which he only should draw to cut off our enemies, and
being, the party offended, contrary to all equity, we take upon us the property
of a Judge.

Rufsinus Aquiliensis, Ruff. l. 3. n 77. Pelag. lib. n. 10.
and many other Greek Interpreters tell us, that a certain man having sustaind
a great Injury, made his complaint to one Sisojus, a most Religious old man, a
Magistrate in that place, so also he described with bitter and sharp invectives
the manner of his Injury (being so me words of disgrace,) and withal beseechd
him, saying, "Suffer me to show my self a man, and to revenge my self on my
adversary. But the good old man did earnestly request him, that he would not by
showing himself a man, turn Devil: and also advised him to leave all Revenge
to God, who is a strong and unresistable revenger of the wicked, who for the
Injuries they do to Gods servants shall not escape, but be certainly punished.
But I am resolved said the other, not to pardon my enemy, and never to desist,
till I have done to him, as he has done to me. To whom the old man once again
replied thus. I beseech you so prove your self to be a man, that withal you
forfeit not the name of Christian, and attend to what reason dictates to you,
not to that which is enjoynd by the violent command of passion.

To this the other answers, yes, but reason tells us that he is not to be spard
who would not forbear others.

To whom Sisoius thus once again. But my friend, this thing thou speak of
is not in thy power to will or do.

The right and power of the sword in this cause belongs only to God. The God to
whom Vengeance belongs, is the Lord of Heaven, and has power to do what he will
with his Creature.: this liberty is denied to us. And I suppose thou know
what Christ has said, not by way of Counsel, but precept and command; That we
owe to our enemies not only pardon, but also prayers, love and courtesies. [My
Father,] retorted the other to this my mind is like the troubled Sea and will
never rest, or be at quiet till I be avenged on my Adversary. Seeing therefore
replied Sisoius, thou art resolved to take revenge; Let me advise thee not to
be too hasty: Let us I beseech you first present our requests to God in Prayer:
upon this both fell upon their knees, and the old man Sisoius conceived a prayer
in these words. O God we present not our selves before thy Majesty, to desire
thy help or assistance, for that at this time we have no need of it neither do
we entreat thee to take any care for us; for we will look to and provide for
our selves. Vengeance belongs to us, and we will repay it, and we now are fully
resolved to subdue our enemies, and to bring them under our feet, for the many
injuries they have done us.

When the good old man had finished his prayer, the other was so astonished with
a confused amazement and shame, that instantly he fell down at the old man's
feet: and being thus prostrate, he wept bitterly, and promised that he would
forgive his enemy, and not revenge himself, no not in word. And indeed this is
the Command of our just God; this is the mark of Gods Sons, willingly and
readily to pardon those that offend them; and when they have an opportunity, to
requite the offense with a beneficial courtesy. See (says St. Paul) that no
man render evil for evil, These. 5.
but always follow that which is good, both toward your selves and toward
all men. Thus Paul; but Christ our Savior, has left us a more strict
Injunction, when he says more plainly. But I say unto you that hear me, Love
your Enemies, Lu. 6.
do good to them that hate you, bless them that curse you. And as ye would that
men should do unto you so do ye unto them. And if you love those that love you,
what thanks, have you for sinners do the same. And if you do good to those that
do good to you, what thanks have you for Sinners do the same. But I say unto
you, love your enemies, and your reward shall be great: and you shall be called
the Sons of the most high, because he is bountiful, even to the ungrateful,
and to the wicked.

These duties (good God) thou command, and largely do thou promise; but O
Lord how many be there that will not lend to thee an ear: how many are there
in the World who prefer their lust and hatred before thy word, and therefore
they most audaciously profess, they will not leave their malice, nor by any
threats, be Esseminated into a facility of pardoning an offense. Nothing is
more pleasant to them, then to pay their enemies with their own Coin; to
requite wound for wound, and words for words. And if God should do by them, as
he did by Solomon, offer to give them what they did wish, 1. K. 3.
I believe they would not as he did desire wisdom, rather Revenge. They
undoubtedly would cry to God, and say; Lord give us the lives of our enemies,
and it shall suffice us. Behold here a lively picture of the spirit of Revenge
which uses to contemn Gods Law, to esteem little or nothing of his threats:
and not only not to suffer, but to return an Injury, to be ragingly angry but
for a small word, to follow the violent motion of an unruly passion, and to
load an enemy with curses and execrations.

This desire of Revenge (says Tertullian) proceeds either from vainglory or
malice. Lib de pat. c. 8.9.10.11.
The former is every where by all wise men contemned: The latter is most odious
to God, especially in this case, because it doubles and repeats an evil, which
was but once committed. For what difference is there between him that provokes
a man by an Injury, and him that is provoked, if he revenges himself, but only
this, that the one is in the first place found guilty, the other in the second,
both of wickedness and wronging God; in that they disobey his word, wherein we
are taught, if a man smite us on one cheek to turn the other, and to tire our
enemies in piety by our patience; for by our patient bearing with their wicked
doings; we torment and vex them as it were with scourges and whips. Tell me, I
pray you, whether or no we do not derogate from Gods honor, when we arrogate
to our selves the power of revenging and defending our selves; God is the
Arbitrator or Proctour of patience, and if you commit the managing and care of
your abuse to him, he will be in thy behalf: Revenger; commend your loss to
his providence, and you will fine him a Restorer: trust him with the cure of
thy Grief, and he will be thy Physician, or healer: At the hour of death
commend thy spirit into his hands, and at the last great day he will be thy
Rayser, and reuniting thy body to thy soul; he will glorify both of them
together in his heavenly Kingdom. But an impatient and froward man may object
and say with him in the Poet: What? shall I always be a silent Auditor: being
so often provoked, shall I never repay the wrong that is done unto me? so it is,
(my Christian Brother) never think thou of requiting an Injury, although thou
be an hundred, nay a thousand times abused; if thou desire to be reckoned
amongst Gods Sons, commit thy self, and thy cause to thy heavenly Fathers
hands, and with a patient silence, suffer and bear with thy Adversaries
malice. My Children suffer patiently the wrath that is to come upon you from
God: Barue. 4.15.
for thine enemy has persecuted thee, but shortly thou shall see his
destruction, and shall tread upon his neck. Thus did God once comfort his
people by his servant Barue. And by St. Paul he says, He that has done wrong,
Col. 3.25.
shall receive for the wrong which he has done. But perhaps thou will farther
say. well Sir, I will forgive but never forget the injury. Is it so indeed? do
ye think that God will be mocked! do you think this kind of liberality is
pleasing to God? if it be so that you are resolved to do no otherwise, then
expect the same measure of bounty at the hands of the Lord. Should a man, says
Ecclesiasticus, bear hat^ed against a man, Eeclus. 28.3, 4.
and desire forgiveness of God, he will show no mercy to a man that is like
himself, and will he ask forgiveness of his own sins: if he that is but flesh
n^^^ish hatred and ask^ pardon of God, who will entreat for that man? I suppose
none. It is a vain pretense of clemency and pity to say I will not revenge
such an Injury, and yet never forget it Whatsoever thou give, and forgivest,
give and forgive it entirely, or else for ever despair of mercy from God. you
know what Christ threatens in the Gospel, So shall my heavenly Father do unto
you, Mat. 81.^
if ye forgive not every one his Brother from your hearts. To this some great
one may object: All this I believe to be true, and I would readily without
much ado forgive and pardon my enemy, but I am a man of public Authority. No
man shall think to abuse me, and go unpunished. I must and will defend my
honor which is Eclipsed, and my reputation which is stained. Such answers
have fallen from some men's lips: but I beseech you, (Christian Brethren,) let
us not play the Sophisters, and dispute the case in so serious a point that
concerns our salvation: say aside all painted phrases, and all expressions
gilded with a pretense of colorable excuses.

Saint Stephen was one that bare a public office, yet he threw not back a
stone against those that stoned him: neither would he defend his honor, so, as
to forfeit his Religion, but cried out with a loud voice: Lord lay not this sin
to their charge.

In like manner our crucified Lord and Savior Christ Jesus did (not as the Son
of man only, but also as the Son of God) utter these words with devout tears
to his Heavenly Father. Father forgive them. There is no mortal man of so
great Majesty and worth, but that he may without any the least blot to his
reputation forgive an injury offered to his person, Thou shall not seek
revenge, Levit. 19.
nor be mindful of an injury from any of the Children of thy people. So God by
his servant Moses exhorts all Magistrates. But thou will say, I never gave that
knave any cause of offense. It may be so, and I must tell thee, if a cause had
bin ministered, that which thou sustainest could not be termed an Injury, but it
would be said, that thou had hurt him, and he wounded thee. But what do you
mean by talking of a Cause? wherein did Joseph trespass against his Brethren
when he told them his Dream! And yet even Joseph, the Viceroy of Egypt;
though so abused, in a generous and brave silence, buried all his injuries, and
rewarded them with great benefits, which his Brethren who had sold him,
received at his hands. But you will object and say. But Sir, the Injury is no
small nor light one. But now, why do you exaggerate the greatness of your
Ingury? if the offenses which thou forgivest be small, thy praise will not be
great. And unless thou be exercisd with great crosses and Jujuries, never
expect to be famous for thy great virtues.

'Heare what St. Hier. c. 5. in Mat. 9.
Hierome says God is (be it spoken with reverence) a Smith: his enemies are
his Files and Hammers, by which he purges and takes off our dross from us: and
being thus purged, and polished, he stampes upon our souls the Image of
holliness. But let me ask thee (whosoever thou be that complainest of thy
sufferings) have thou been stoned with Paul? have thou ever been scourged, and
crucified with Christ? No, let this then teach thee humility and patience; In
that thou art not in so bad a case as thy betters. But I am of a Noble, he of a
base parentage; why should he not then feel the smart of my revenge; poor
mistaken man, you are both of the earth, earthy, yours may be of the better
meld, yet dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return, as well as thy poorer
Adversary. If a desire of revenge overcome thee, thou art not of the Son of the
nobles, but a servant of sin and wickedness. Ecclus. 28.
Remember therefore thy latter end, and cease to live in enmity, in debate and
strife. Thou may say after, all this. Although I Revenge not my self upon
mine enemy, although I forbear to do this, yet I cannot so Command my passion,
as not to have a will and great desire to it. Thou may, if thou will, command
thy affections; But so long as thou do minister to thy mind matter for thy
hatred to feed on, thy thoughts before God are as bitter as Wormwood: thou
bear in thy breast nettles, Thorns, Thistles, with which thy conscience is
miserably wracked and tortured Again, Thou will say, I burn with the flame of
revengfull thoughts. Let me tell thee, unless thou put out, and extinguish this
fire betimes, thou will cause God to shut thee out of Heaven, to lock the gate
of it upon thee, and to doom thee to that place of torment, where thou shall
burn in everlasting flames with the Devil and his cursed Angels. A patient
suffering of Injuries, is a Gate through which we enter into the heavenly
joys. But he that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance of the Lord, Ecclus:
20. 1. Number. 12.19. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
and he will surely keep his sins. Lastly thou may object and say. I can take
no rest night nor day, my meat and my drink are uncomfortable to me, so long
as I see Mordochey my enemy sitting and untouched, free from all misfortunes
and grief, and plotting against me this or that mischief. O fond man, foelish
to thine own destruction, Ezekiel reports of certain valiant men, Ez. 32 27.
who went down ^o the grave with their weapons of War, and laid their Swords
under their heads. See here a new and unheard kind of pillow, a sword. On such
a pillow do all those that are greedy of revenge lay their heads to sleep, who
never cease from wickedness, and take no rest or quietness in any thing, but in
calumniating and fighting, in brawling with those whom they conceive to be
their enemies. Thus Cain the first Scholar in the Devils School (as Basil
calls him) he slew Abell with his bloody hand, to the intent that his Brothers
glory being ecclipsed and darkened, his own might shine the brighter, and be
more firmly established. But he found a quite contrary event. Esau, Saul, and
Antiochus, implored Gods mercy, begged his pardon for their sins, and that not
without tears, and yet were not heard God rejected their Prayers. Esau found no
place for repentance, Heb. 12.
though he sought it with tears. In like manner Said and Antiochus, though
they endeavored to take hold on the horns of the Altar, even that of mercy,
they were repulsed and beaten off, and not undeservedly; for that they refused
to spare, and to be pitiful to those from whom they had received any the least
indignities. Eccl. 28.
He shall have judgment without mercy, who, showed no mercy, to others.

King David's fall was foul and deadly when he committed 2. sins at once,
Murder, and Adultery: but so soon as he had showed but the least sign of
Repentance, and uttered scarce two words when he said to Nathan, I have sinned
against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.13:
The prophet Immediately replied. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not
die. How often did Antiochus confess that he had sinned and not without bitter
lamentation and howling, cry to the Lord for mercy and pardon; no doubt he made
great vows, and offered great gifts to God in his Temple, and promised if God
would pardon, to amend his life for the future. Notwithstanding al these
protestations he suffered a repulse: God did not incline his ears to this
Tyrants prayers; and no wonder, For this tyranical King did differ much from
King David. They behaved themselves diversely and in a diffeferent manner
toward their enemies. David was inferior to none in War and conquest, his
success and victories were great and many: he likewise overcame all in mercy
and pity, in sparing those who did injure him either by opprobrious words or
open hostility. He used his power in nothing less then in taking revenge
against any; more gentle and mild was he to his foes, then Antiochus was to
his own people and Citizens; against whom he breathed nothing but swords and
fire, blood and revenge, and being thus unmercifull and full of cruelty, he
found no mercy. The Physicians use not to desert their sick patients, until
they plainly perceive that their disease or malady is passed all hope of
recovery, yet there is a certain kind of disease, which when they discover in
their patients, they presently bid them prepare for death, it being impossible
for them to be cured. Even so it is in the soul: Although we are to despair
of no man's salvation (be he never so wicked) so long as he has life and being,
yet when his bowels do swim in the gall of bitterness, when his soul is
inflamed with masice, burns with hatred and a desire of revenge, of this kind
of sickness, St. John spends his Crisis, he tells us it is deadly. 1 Io. 5
There is a sin (says he) unto Death: I say not that a man should pray for it.
These men seldom repent that are obstinatly resolved, and bent to revenge
their private quarrels and distasts against their enemies. And in whom there
is this bitterness of spirit, in them there is no sense or feeling of Gods
Judgments, Ecc. 21.
they are by them no whit terrified. Although all the learned and wise men in
the world thunder against this sin with their pens, although all Gods Prophets,
and Ministers pronounce heavy threats against it, and withal entreat and
persuade the men of the World to cover all their injuries with the mantle of
forgetfullness, to bury them in the Grave of forgiveness, and to embrace one
another in the Arms of love and tender affections; notwithstanding, all these
exhortations, threats, and precepts, the ungodly ones, who are fitted to
destruction, shun and decline all the ways of amity and reconciliation, they
(not fearing the wrath of God, not regarding his Ministers) go on boldly in
their revengfull purposes, and labor to repay to their enemies for bad turns
the like requitalls.

When neither the Prophets, wisemen, nor any of Gods Messengers could be heard,
but still men went on in their malice, at last the wisest and the fairest among
the sons of men, the Prophets instructour, the King of Angels came with great
power and Authority from his heavenly Father, not so much to persuade, as to
command us to this union, a peaceable agreement among our selves, he came also
not to counsel us, but to imprint this law of love in our hearts: and yet
miserable wretches we are, we kick and rebel against our Saviors Doctrine, we
reject his law. He in his Fathers name commands us thus. But I say unto you,
Mat. 5.
love your enemies; we his rebellious Subjects retort and cry unto him. O
Christ you speak in vain to us, your commands are to no purpose; although we
be Christians, yet we in this will show our selves worse then Heathens, we will
take revenge and not attend to thy words. This is the blasphemous answer of
proud worldlings to Christ, who exhorts us to love our enemies, but none will
obey his voice. But I say unto ye, resist not evil: Thus Christ. what? Resist
not evilf? Then we shall be branded for Cowards; thus we out of an impudent
boldness. Pray for them that persecute, and revile you that ye may be the Sons
of your Father which is in Heaven. This is Christ's advise, but we count this a
Jejune and frigid Prayer, and are loath to purchase that royal Title at so
dear a rate as we esteem it. Do good to those that hate you: So Christ
enjoins, but we are ready to reply: Thou command Lord, that which is against
the very grain of nature, impose upon us a task which may be done with more
facility, Forgive and ye shall be forgiven. Thus Christ again. Our Answer is
this, we cannot, and that you may know we cannot, know that we will not bridle
our Anger with the curb of Reason; we will not hold in our Teeth, nor contain
our hand. And who can command his thoughts? we are therefore resolved to
meditate and practice revenge. If you forgive men their sins, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you your trespasses.

This is Christ's loving and sweet admonition to us, but we ungodly miscreants
make answer to this, we would willingly dye, so that we might first see our
enemies perish. O my Christian Brethren do you hate Heaven so, that you will
with a speedy course post to Hell? have you banished that Petition in the
Lords Prayer out of your thoughts? Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us? From this you may infer that either your enemies
are to be loved, or that you cast a snare upon your selves, as often as you put
up this request to God. As we forgive others, so Lord do thou forgive us. But
we forgive nothing, out of an implacable hatred to men's persons, we are ever
forvvard to punish and revenge the least affront, or hurt we receive from
them; Therefore O Lord forgive us nothing, but punish so often as we offend.

This is the language of our Esawes, the Reprobate, not of Gods elect ones,
who although they receive never so great hurt and damage from their enemies,
yet they are ready to call to God and say with their Savior, Father forgive
them, etc. And Lord lay not this sin to their charge. I forgive all, I remit
all, and will revenge none; This is the voice of Jacob, of one ordained to
life and salvation. But before I put a period to this discourse I must entreat
all those who shall peruse this, and not love their enemies, to tell me
ingeniously, whether they beseeve these things to be true: Certainly they will
answer, affirmatively, unless they can imagine that Christ will deceive us,
or that Truth it self can lie. If then these things be true, nay most true,
what wicked contumacy then are they guilty of, who out of an obstinate spirit
make a mock at Gods word and contemn his commands? Christ calls, and commands,
Love not only your friends, but also your very enemies; if they have vvrong'd
you, pardon and remit al their injuries. Christ may command, yet you are stiffly
resolved, to hate and persecute, not to pardon your enemies, and detractors.
What is God and Christ? is Heaven and happiness of so little vvorth in your
esteem, that the promise of so great a revvard, cannot wrest and extort from
your tongues, and hearts this one word, I forgive, I remit, and the Lord
pardon that man his sin, whosoever he be that has done me any wrong? What? for
all this which has bin delivered, do ye stand yet as stocks without sense, and
voice without any motion or inclination, to forgive and pardon? Does your Iron
breast yet breath Reveng? Do ye yet cry, the Devil, or the Gallows take him,
that has wronged me? Do ye still wish mischief to him, do you still hate your
enemy? And will not ye hearken to Christ, listen to what he commands? If you
are fully minded not to cast out this poison, enjoy your malice, but let me
tell you for a certain, do what you will, take what course you please, you
are in the road way to hell, and out of that which leads to Heaven. Faith and
loye lead to this; malice and hatred to that. For most true is that saying of a
learned and devout Author. He that ceases not to hate his enemy, cannot love
God.

two axes SYMBOLVM. IX.

Dilectio inimicorum.

Noli vinci a malo, sed vince in bono malum. ad Romans 12.



man Emblem. X.

Detestation of Sins past

I will come unto thee quickly and remove thy candlestick out of his place
except thou repent Rou: 2. v. 5



The tenth sign, IS A detestation, and loathing of our former sins. The emblem
of which, he makes Whips and scourges, to show, that when we truly hate our
sins, we subdue them and our lust, by chastising our selves; Ps. 69.10.
(as David did) with fasting and religious duties. Under that Emblem we have
these words.
APOC. 2. I Will come quickly, and unless thou repentest, I will remove thy
Candlestick from thee.


ST. Augustine covnts it an abominable wickedness for a man to record his
former sins, and to glory in them with a certain joy and delight, when as he
should rather greive for them, and use the best means to release his soul
from their power, and his conscience from the guilt of them. Lib. 5. de lib.
arb.
For as the same St. Aug. truly affirms: He that beats his breast, out of a
seeming sorrow for his offense, and does not correct his ill life and manners,
that man rather hardens his heart, then removes his sins. David mourning for
his transgressions says thus of himself. Psalm. 51.
My sins is ever before me: and therefore he entreats God so earnestly to
create in him a clean heart, and to renew a right spirit within him. Happy and
blessed are those men who so lament, and with a generous hatred, so detest
their sins, that they grieve for this, because they can grieve no more, nor so
much as they should, and are therefore sorrovvfull for that they sorrovv less,
then they ought or would. And truly this sorrow which is according to God, 2
Cor. 7.
or Godly sorrow, works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of, i.
e. stable and firm; which is to be noted with an attentive consideration. For
many recover and obtain salvation by their Repentance, but not a firm and
stable salvation. They relapss into sin again and so lose their former joy and
comfort. Therefore Christ expressly commands us in St. Luke, Lu. 13
not to let our Repentance slip, when we have attained to it, but to keep and
preserve it, unless ye have repentance ye shall all likewise perish. For we
must not do with our repentance as we do with money, which is borrowed for a
set, and certain time; this we must return, but that we must not part with,
when once we have gotten it into our possession. Not unfitly said Aquinas. True
and serious repentance, Part. 3. c. Que. 48. Art. 8.
does not only expiate and blot out our sins past, but also preserves us from
sin to come. That man has not repentance, who has not a firm purpose never
to commit his former impieties. Christ when he had cured the man sick of a
Palsy, commanded him to take up his Bed and walk; Io 5. Mar. 2
which the poor man did. Thus ought we to do, we must take up our Beds, remove
out of our souls all vicious habits, so shall we walk more nimbly and with
freer spirits in the path of Gods commandments. Every occasion of sin must be
avoided and shunned, that we may run with more safety to the mark that is
proposed to us, and that is everlasting happiness. The prodigal. Son in the
Gospel being almost pined to death with hunger, and pinched with extreme want
concluded presently of a course which was safe for him. I will arise (said he)
and go to my Father. Here most of us voluntarily lose the use of our hands and
feet, we are active and operative in our Tongues, but slow in our performances:
we talk much, but do little, being like to those that bend a Bow, but never
shoot. We propose to our selves many things, but do nothing at all: We sigh and
mourn, when we have acted some foul and gross offenses, but take no care at
all to prevent the like sins from being committed by us: We desire to have our
wounds closed up, but we stench not first the blood: we apply a remedy to our
sins, but correct not our affections, which if let alone, will hurry us to the
practice of our former evil courses: We grow old in deferring and posting off
Repentance. So whilst we are proposing to our selves good courses, and
promising our amendment, our life wastes and vanishes, and at last death
surprising us, laughs at our folly, who for so many years have been a willing
and purposing holy duties, but never performed any. Such was St. Augustine
before his conversion, but he continued not in this lazy temper. He maturely
did [and that before he was old] what he saw and knew must be don. L. 8.
confess. 11.
I said [so he in his confessions] within my self, See that it be done now, now
let it be done; [he means Repentance] And when I had spoken this to my self, a
resolution and purpose followed my words. Presently upon this, I suspended my
Actions, so that I neither did, nor did not: yet I relapsed not into my former
vices, but drew very near to the brinke of my old corruptions, and then I made
a stop, taking as it were breath.

Those wanton toies, and foolish vanities, my ancient loves, with which I
formerly too often dallied, these seized upon my thoughts, and spoke as it were
thus within me in silent, whispering to the ear of my flesh. What will you now
leave us? The Good man left them, and shook off the yoke of their tempting
instigations, so detesting with hatred his former practices, that he became a
new man, leading a life in all holy conversation and Godliness. It cannot be
denied, but that many of us do oftentimes begin to lead a better life, but we
only begin, we spin not out this thread: we continue not our resolutions to
the end; we proceed not in our beginnings, and first undertakings of Religious
courses, but fall back and return to our old vomit and uncleaness. And I doubt
not but that in many Christians there might be found (if we would pierce into
their secret intentions) pious endeavors, holy thoughts and good purposes, but
most of us are like to the old Athenians; we (as they did) make good decrees,
but fail for want of constancy in our executions, or if we begin to execute,
we persist not in our undertakings, We prescribe to our selves very honest and
wholesome ways of living, but we are discouraged, and falter in those ways,
by reason of any the least trouble or molestation. We propound great matters to
our selves, and things that are holy and virtuous, but being entis'd by the
alurements of our Rebellious flesh, solicited by the invitations of our loose
companions, or moved by the least temptation from the Devil, we presently
yield our selves captives; and without any the least reluctance, we suffer our
selves to be draw'n back to our former pollutions, discovering hereby both our
unsettlednesse and impatiency. Perhaps (my good Christian brother) thou have
decreed with thy self to live for the time to come a more chaste and sober
life, to avoid every occasion which may lead thee to sin, as bad company,
naughty houses, or the like; It may be too thou have put on a resolution to
shut the casements of thy soul, thine eyes from gazing on beauties, the
provocations of lustful affections, and to subdue the petulant humor of thy
unruly flesh. It is well, and perhaps thou have set forward one foot in the way
of virtue, thou have begun to speak modestly, and to lay aside al wanton and
Idle books, which are full of obscene discourses. All this is well. Thou have
happily too resolved to bridle thy hasty passion, to keep down thy choler, to
refrain from anger, to cast out of thy mind all hatred and envy, and malice
against thy neighbor; very Good. Thou have also begun to rule thy Tongue, to
be silent, when thy companions calumniate and slander others, to forbear when
they mock and scoff at men's infirmities. All this is very good and agreeable to
the rules of true repentance. But how far better is it to persevere in those
good courses? How many be there now, who yesterday contained themselves within
the bounds of moderation; repulsed the violent rage of Tongue and lust, brake
the stomach of their Anger; had the victory over themselves; who to day rush,
(as an horse into the battle) into their former looseness, put their necks
under the yoke of their lusts, give the Reins to their unbridled tongues,
boil in Anger, and serve their vices as they did before; But let such and all
men know, That is not a true Repentance, which is not constant and firmly set
upon good purposes. That which is otherwise is rather an inconstant, desultory
levity of the mind. Oh what brave swordmen, what fine sencers are we! we show
much Art, dexterity in our skirmishes; we make great flourishes before hand,
but when we are to fight in earnest at sharps, when we are to encounter with
our adversaries, and to show our skill and cunning in guarding our selves from
their blows, then we slinch and run away like cowards, and those wounds which
we should avoid undauntedly in the field standing, those we receive in our
backs, and flying the faces of our Antagonists. Again, what brave Racers are
we! At our first setting forth we spread our Arms, and move our feet with
Agillity, till we sweat by means of our labor and pain, and anon before we
are half way, we faint and falter and give over running. Alas thus do we poor
silly mortals. How often do we venture upon many brave undertakings, how many
things do we begin with praise and commendation, and sometimes go on in acourse
of godliness, to the joy and comfort of our friends that love us, yet we
languish by degrees, at length we fall, and finally lie in our accustomed sins.
In vain does the Tree flourish and triumph in its blossoms, promising much
fruit, unless it bring it forth. The Masterbuilder lays the foundation to no
purpose, unless he erect upon it walls and roof, all which complete and make a
perfect house. What does it profit the Mr. of a ship to set up the Mast, to fit
the tackling, open the Sails, and order the men that use the Oars, all this
care and industry will not advantage him, if he launch not the ship into the
deep from the shore, or make a short return so soon as it is launched? And
truly we are most of us like to those builders, who lay a foundation, but erect
not an house upon it. With some unskilful Orators, we begin with a plausible
exordium, but seldom come to a good conclusion. We often set up our sails with
the foolish Mariners, but so soon as ever a storm begins to rise, we return
to the Haven from whence we came. This saying is much and frequent in our
mouths, I will do this or that, I will amend my evil courses, and yet we do
just nothing, and mend too late when our Glass is run, and our time quite
spent. when we receive worthily the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus, then we have in a manner begun our race, then we have set footing in a
new course, but how often is it seen (may it be spoken with grief) that we run
but halfe-way, and then either stand still or lie down panting, and weary of
well-doing.

And thus fainting in the midst of our course, we spend the remainder of our
days, not like those who had made a solemn promise to God of forsaking their
evil ways. This promise we make when we partake of that heavenly banquet, I
mean, the holy Eucharist. Man is counted the most prudent of all creatures,
but Polybius once said, he thought him the most foolish; for other creatures
observe, where, and from whom they receive any hurt, and shun them.

Therefore having escaped the gin never ventures himself in that place again.
The Wolf will never rest himself in that hoie, where he has been hunted; the
Dog remembers the Cudgel, wherewith he has been beaten; But man (as if he were
made up of oblivion) forgets the dangers he has escaped and will lay his hand
upon the hole of that Aspe which stung him; he will unadvisedly put his foot
into that snare out of which he is escaped, and which he knows will be his
ruin. God complains by his Prophet Jsay of his peoples forgetfullness, where
he says, Thou have not laid these things to thy heart, neither have thou
remembered thy latter end. Yet I said when my people had don all this against
me, Return, and they would not convert nor be turned. Contrition and sorrow
for sin without correction and amendment of our lives, Bern. 3. de vig. not.
dom.
will do us no good, says St. Bern. when one man builds and another pulls
down, they get nothing but their labor for their pains; And he that having
touched the dead is washed from his pollution, and touches the same corpse
again, receives no benefit at all by his Washing. Amendment is the companion of
true contrition in the penitent, and it discovers it sefe by these effects: by
the restrayning of our disorderly apetites mortyfying our luxuriousness,
depressing our pride, and forcing our bodies to serve God in all purity and
holiness, which before served the Devil in a constant practice of profaneness*
we promise many times to perform all these good duties, but before the day
goes about, nay sometimes e're an hour be passed, we forget our promises, and
lick up our vomit by returning to the mud and filth of our former sins, and
from a godly sorrow and mourning for impieties. We pass to our former madness
and Iovialties, saying with them in Isay, c. 56. ult.
Come let us take wine, and fill our selves with strong drink, Ex. 9.
and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. We are almost of
the same disposition with Pharaoh, who so soon as the Rain, and Hail, and
Thunder had ceased, hardened his heart and multiplied his sins. Even after we
have obtained pardon, oftentimes we grow worse then we were before that God had
forgiven us.

How often does it come to pass, that by reason of sins strange
metamorphosis, in the morning we are like sheep for our mild and welltemper'd
meekness, but in the evening, we appear to be Lions and Tigers for our cruesty
and sierceness? How often are we Angels in the morning, in the evening scarce
found to be men, but incarnat Devils. Thus we assume shape after shape, and
change one vizard with another, and that we use more frequently, which is most
deformed and ugly. Thus from vessels of honor, we turn our selves into
vessels of shame, like changlings, we lose our name, and alter our condition;
we were borne to be sons of God, but we make our selves the sons and servants
of Satan. But as sick men [sayes St. Chrysostom.] unless they always live orderly
and observe a diet, receive no good by their Physic: No although for three or
four days they observe the rules and precepts of their Physicians, even so
sinners, unless they be always sober and watchful in prayer, will reap no
benefit by two or three hours correction and amendment. I have seen young
Chickens lately hatched and fledged, running about a Yard, and catching at
flies and worms, which to them are great delicacies: whilst they were thus
busied in hunting after their prey, a Kite hoverd over the place, hoping to
make them his; And thus that winged pyrat hanging in the Air, and playing in
an uncertain motion upon the wing, watched narrowly, and observed the careless
behavior of those little creatures, and at last when an opportunity was
offered, fell down into the Yard with that swiftness, as if he had been shot
from heaven, and seizing upon one of them with great violence, did fly
speedily away with it trembling and quaking at the approach of death. The
orher Chickins beholding this, betook themselves with all speed and celerity,
[vvhich was caused by feare] to their common sanctuary in distress, and that
is the shelter of the Hens vvings: but there they lurked not long, for
presently all danger being forgotten, and all fear laid aside, they refusing
to be any longer hid, fly out from under their seather'd shield, and as they
did before, run up and down the Yard, hunting after their food; Anon comes
the thief [I mean the Kite] again, and forthwith snatcheth another up in his
bill, The rest terrified with this, betook themselves again to their known
Asylum, their mothers wings; but with them the fear of danger lasts not long.
They came out the second and third time, thus sporting with their destruction,
and offering themselves a prey, until that ravenous bird had carried all of
them away.

No otherwise does death sport and play with us. Here he snatches a Neighbor,
there A kins-man, now a friend or brother. we grieve and sigh for our loss, and
because we conceive (and that not without just reason) the danger to be
imminent, and near at hand, we sometime tremble too, and promise amendment of
our lives and manners.

But how long I pray you does this trembling last? How soon are our sighs
spent and our tears dried up? when a day or two is passed, we betake our
selves to our old follies, we hunt after flies, and now having forgotten our
sighs and tears, we begin again to quaffe and sing, we practice a fresh our
bribery and extortion, we burn anew with our old lusts, we move again in the
circle of our former vices, running a round from sin to sin; we fly once more
to our ancient custom of viti ous living, thus lulling our selves asleep upon
the bed of security, till at length we be forced to shed our last tears, when
death shall fix his ugly talons in our bodies, and our souls are posting to
eternal torments; then it is to late to will or do. Then our only comfort will
be this, if we have done any good in our lives; and what we suffered with
tormenting pain, we shall then remember with a delightful pleasure and
content to our great consolation. Although this be a most certain truth, yet
few there be that will believe it we detest our vices to day, and repeat our
sins to morrow, whereof we repented before, or worse. Thus do we play with God,
and dally with our salvation: we have no sooner bewailed our sinfullness, but
presently Act those foul enormities which we had bewailed with bitter cries,
and lamentations. Thus we draw sin as it were with a Chain, of which Esaias
complains in these words, Woe unto them that draw Iniquity with coards of
vanity, and sin as with Cart-ropes. This is our custom, this our daily
practice, to heap sin upon sin, and still to grow worse and worse. As it was
said of Antiochus Epiphanes, that he was good in his childhood, naught in his
youth, but in his manhood, and old age vvorst of all. By these degrees, and
steps, do we sink into the bottomless pit of Hells everlasting torments. For
when we have wiped out the stains of our most grievous sins, with the
spung of Repentance, and cast this poison out of our souls and consciences by
an humble confession to God [vvhich is called by one the souls vomit,] for one
week we are vvarme, perhaps in our devotion, but flag the second, and are
quite cold the third. So at length Gods holy spirit deserting us, we fall
again into the grave of our sins and vices. And in so doing we resemble the
Moon, each month, each week, nay every day we are decreasing or increasing,
we are either at the full or in the vvane, never at a stand, but always
changing. Euripus that ebbs and flovves so often in 24. hours, is not fo
floating and uncertain as we are in our lives. How often, and how many of us
do change into the vvild from good Olives? O the volubillity, and inconstancy
of mortal men, uncertain as fortune the feigned deity of the heathen, which
when it once ceased to be good, grew by degrees, to be [as they observ'd] stark
naught. The wicked works a deceitful work. [sayes Salomon] the vulgar
translation reads opus instabile, Pro. 11.18. Pro. 4.18.
an unstable and unsettled work, intimating the wickeds inconstancy in their
doings But the way of the righteous shines as the light that en creaseth, and
shines more and more unto a perfect day. And Gods elect Children who are
predestinate to salvation, do so turn from their sins by hatred and disdain,
that they never return to them again. They think it not safe so to sport with
the great God, as to lament their sins past to day, and commit the same which
they bewailed, to morrow. They never forget the frowns of an offended God, and
never but with sighs remember the great offense which he pardoned. And for
this cause they are in Gods special favor and grace, who in mercy forgets
that he was offended by us, if with grief of heart, we remember that we have
offended him, and so shun and avoid all sin, for the time to come.

cross SYMBOLVM. X.

Detestatio praeteritorum peccatorum.

Veniam tibi cito, et mouebo candelabrum tuum de loco suo, nisi poenitentiam
egeris. Apoc. 2.



anchor Emblem XI

Propension of our Will to good

I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always even unto the end psalm.
119. v. 112



The 11 Sign. IS A propensity of the will to Good, set out by an Anchor with
these words of the Psalmist.
PSALM. 119. I have inclined my heart to keep thy testimonies, even to the end.


THis propensity of the will to good, then exerts and shows ^t self when a
man is fully resolved, and firmly purposes in his soul, not to offend God by
committing any grievous sin, although for his resolution, he be forced to lose
all his goods and his life, before which he preferrs obedience to Gods
Commandments. Psalm: 119.
I have sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments.
This was holy David's, and this is a good man's purpose. Ludovic us Granatensis
determinatly says thus. It is a certain sign of reprobation, when a man
sins with facillity, without any sense of his danger, without any remorse
of conscience or grief, that he has displeased his gracious God.

That man is wicked in an high degree, who does not seriously desire to will
that is good. To will to be good is a great part of goodness. He that has this
will, has made a good entrance into Religion.

Those that are predestinate to Heaven and happiness, as they never will any
thing that is evil, So they will only that which God almighty wills.
Every hour, nay every moment they cry out with Saint Paul. Lord, what will thou have me to do. There is not any thing that I will refuse to suffer for
thee. I will not esteem any thing too bitter, too sharp, or hard, nothing too
difficult and unsufferable, so long as I may advance thy Glory; I will overcome
and master all by enduring and suffering whilst I have God for my defender and
guide: and what I cannot obtain by force and might, that I shall accomplish,
and get by my earnest desires and prayers. Whither my feet cannot carry me,
thither shall my thoughts flee. And as the Marigold to the Sun, so to thee, O
my God, will I turn, Psalm. 39.
by subjecting always my will to thine. In the volume of the book, it is
written of me, that I should do thy will, O my God: Thy law I have placed
within my heart, it is settled in my memory, fixed in my understanding, and
planted in my will.

St. Bernard being ever most ready and prompt to obey Gods will, Ser. 3. de
qua. deb.
says in a certain place; I a poor and miserable man have but one mite, that
is my will; and shall not I devote it to his will, give that to him, Who by
giving himself for me, restored me to my self who was lost? It is just and
meet that the divine will should be the rule and Anchor by which our wills ought
(...) be regulated and fixed. Excel (...) is that saying of Epictetus an
heathen man. I have (says he) so framed my will that in all things it is
conformable to the will of God. Is it his will to scorch me with a burning
fever? I presently submitt, and say, so will I; would he have me attempt any
difficulty? I will. would he have me enjoy the goods of this world? I will. Not
enjoy them but to be poor. I will. Is it his will I should die? I will. And
seeing now my will is changed into Gods, so that what he wills, I will, no man
may will or hinder me from doing that which is Good. Oh! how may this brave
spirit in an heathen put us to the blush? what a shame is it for Gospel not
to discern those things which are seen by those who were wrapped up in the
dark night of blindness and Ignorance. Let us then as we outstrip them in
knowledge, so exceed them in Devotion and say, Thy will be done. Thine O our
God, thine (not ours) be ^^ne by us in earth as it is in heaven. wherefore a me
your selves, 1 Mac. 3.58.
and be valiant men, and be ready to fight against the Nations (your sins and
vices) and encourage your selves in the fight, and in all your distresses, with
the words of Judas to his brethren. As the will of God is in heaven, so be it.
v. 60.
The Town clock or that which belongs to the Church is a president for all the
rest in the Town to go by, by it they are set. And why should not the wills of
men, like so many little Clocks, move according to the direction of that great
one in heaven? Why should they not follow only the will of God? It is beyond
all thought and expression. It cannot be said or Imagined how pleasing and
grateful a thing it is to God Almighty when a man renounces his own will, and
makes Gods will the rule of all his Actions. Acts 13.22.
J have found (says God) David the Son of Iesse, a man after mine own heart,
who will do all things that I will. It seems by this Text that God had been
long a seeking, and that now he seeks to find a man of that will and affection
who only loves that which God likes, and wills and nills that which God wills
and forbids. Having found such a man: God is much delighted and pleased with
him, and expresses his joy in that joyful exclamation, oh, I have found a man,
After my long search, I have a man which will do all things that I will and
command. And hence it was that Christ the only begotten Son of God subjected
his whole will to his Fathers, Ioh. 6.
for so he says of himself. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own
will, but the will of him that sent me. That man is far from ordering and
squaring his life and Actions by the rule of Gods will revealed in his word who
will neither come when God calls, nor obey when he commands.

A wise man fears and departs from evil, Pro. 14. Pro. 30.
but a fool goes on, and is confident. He eats and wipes his mouth and then
says I have done no evil. He that is thus desperately perverse and foolish,
has pawned his foul to the Devil, and yet laughs and is merry, he has lost
heaven, and is not sensible of his misery, he spends his days in a wanton
jollity, as if he had lost nothing. Thus like a fool that is going to the
Stocks or house of Correction, he plays and sports while he is posting to
damnation.

But on the contrary those that are destined to eternal glory, have their
minds so confirmed and established in good and the love of it, that they dread
even the very show of evil, and the shadovv of sin. That which displeases
God shall in no wise please them. The bent of their souls is so carried to
that which is pleasing to him, that they neither think nor speak of any thing
else. It is the subject of their discourse, and object of their thoughts, and
though they displease all men by their performance of any good duty, they will
do it so long as they be certain and sure it is pleasing to God. And with out
all doubt their wills are so enflamed with divine love, that they can upon
better grounds cry out with Epictetus. My God, my love, be it far from me
not to will that, that thou vvillest, or to nill that which thou would
not have me to do. Thy will is my will, nay my will is no more mine, but now
begins to be thine, and therefore thy will is now to be followed, because it
has begun to be mine. It is my duty to will that which thou willest, and O my
God I do will it. vvilt thou have me sick? I will, or poor? I will. Afflicted
with tormenting pain and grief? I will. Or loaded with Injuries and
contumelious speeches? This also O Lord I am willing to bear. Is it thy will I
should be contemned and despised? This too willingly I Will suffer, although this
is grievous to flesh and blood. Will thou have me left like a Cottage in a
Garden of Cucumbers, destitute of all helps and comforts? In this likewise I
will subscribe to thy good will and pleasure, for I know that I am in the
hands of a merciful and indulgent Father. will thou have me suffer the pangs
of a troubled mind, which are to the wicked the previous flashes of Hell
torments? These dear God will I endure patiently, and would undergo this
burden cheerfully even till the day of Judgment, if thou Lord do think it
fit and convenient for me, vvilt thou have me spoiled and bereaved of those
things I love next unto thee? my God I confess it is an hard task to relinquish
in our affections, and to sustain the loss of those things on which we have
set our hearts, yet even this I will endure, because it is thy will I should
suffer. Will thou have me die? All difficulties we know strike sail and stoop
to this, at which Nature shrinks, yet I refuse not to die an hundred deaths on
this condition, that I may breath out my last breath in the arms of thy divine
will, and be compassed with the embraces of thy mercy. Will thou have me die
before my time, before the thread of life be spun out? This I will too, though
nature be not willing to it? Will thou have me go to Heaven and shake off the
fetters of mortallity, vvherevvith I am clogged, and held fast in affliction? I
will, O my Lord, I will. Will thou send me to Hell? Ah good Jesus! that thou
should will this* I have deserved it by my wicked deeds whereby I served the
De vill with that willingness as if, I had a will to go to his place, but O my
sweet Jesus! when thou did shed thy most precious blood for me, thou plainly
shewd'st that thou were unwilling I should be sentenced to that place of
torments, and by virtue of thy merit, my nature was sanctified, my will
changed. But if it were so (as indeed it cannot be) that I must choose one of
these two either to be happy that thy just will should be frustrated, or damned
that it might be executed and fullfil'd, I proclaim and pronounce to the
praise of thy Justice, that it were better for me to be damned, that so thy
will, o God, may be in me ratified. But o eternal goodness, I know and am
persuaded that thou willest not my death, because thou therefore would have
thy Son die upon the Cross that I might not dye an eternal death which is a
perpetual banishment from thee the fountain of all bliss: Wherefore I beseech
thee dear Father by the merits of the bitter death of thy Son, preserve me
from the bands of eternal death. Behold the wounds, behold that blood, that
precious blood which was shed for me, and by which thy Justice was satisfied:
who would not spare thy Son that I thy poor servant might be redeemed from
destruction. O King immortal and of eternal glory, do with me now what thou
please, and so sanctify my will that it may yield it self to be governed
by thee in all things. The Issues of thy will shall be sweet and pleasant to
me. Whatsoever thou willest, most gladly will I do. Psalm. 106.
My heart is ready O God, my heart is ready. Such servants, the great Lord of
heaven does love who observe their Masters nod with so vigilant an eye, that
the will of their Lord is their Law and rule, by which their lives and Actions
are regulated, who likewise can with cheer fullness say, It is the Lord, let
him do what he pleases. There is nothing better then to fear God, nothing
sweeter then to take heed to the Commandments of the Lord. Eccl. 23.
God delights in those servants who observe his precepts, and keep his
commands with all care and diligence. Who are ready at his beck to obey, and
bow when he would have them bend; who likewise though most afflicted can in one
day cheerfully, even a thousand and more times cry and say with heart and
voice. God's will be done, and let him do whatsoever he pleases. Thus
whatsoever these good men will, God wills the same, for they most constantly
and reselutely will not that, which they know God wills not but hate and
abhor it. By this means such holy minded men obtain what ever they desire,
because they desire nothing else but this that they may conform themselves
wholly and only to Gods good will and pleasure. They know how true that is
which St. Hierome once said when he writ to Paula concerning the death of
Blaesilla. God is good, and all that a good God does must needs be good.
Neither do men who are well minded, who have good and holy wills, account any
thing evil which comes from a good God. Are they in health? They give thanks
for this to their maker. Are they rich? even in this they acknowledge the will
of their Lord, and praise their loving Father.

Are they bereaved of their dear friends by death? They lament and bewail
their loss, but because they know this to be the good pleasure of their Lord,
they sustain and suffer it with a joyful mind and are contented. Is their
only son, taken from them? This is hard, but to be endured, because he is
taken away by that God, from whom he was sent or rather lent. Does poverty
(which is a sore burden) lie hard upon them; or sickness which is heavier then
that? does contumely or contempt, afflict their patient souls? do whole
troops of Injuries provoke their spirits? for all this, and in these great
extremities they suffer no other speeches to fall from their Tongues but this,
What the Lord has pleased, so has he done, and it is well done God be
praised; God be Blessed for it. With such sanctified and reformed wills ever
subjected to Gods, the righteous are settled and stayed as it were with an
Anchor, in the midst of many Tempests, Storms, and Changes, which shake the
minds of those that are not built upon Christ, who is a strong foundation. But
the godly relying upon Christ, his all sufficient merits, and throwing
themselves upon God by an entire subjection to his word, by suffering what he
wills, and doing what he commands, standing in this holy posture of their
souls, they expect their last hour, the hour of their change, and think
every misfortune and calamity short and little, that shall be seconded with an
happy state and condition, which shall be eternal and never have end.

anchor SYMBOLVM. XI.

Voluntatis in bonum propensio.

Inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas justificationes tuas in aeternum, propter
retributionem. Psalm. 118.



lute Emblem XII

Moderation of our passions

Thy desire shall be subject to thine husband, and he shall rule over thee --
Genesis -- 3.16.



The twelfth sign, IS The moderation of our affections set out by a
vvell-tuned Lute. The word or motto annexed to it.
GENESIS 3.16. Thy desire shall be subjest to thine Husband, and he shall rule
over thee. i.e. The sensitive appetite shall be subject to the command of
Reason.


THey that be Christ's have crucified their flesh with the vices and lusts
thereof: Gal. ^.
So says St. Paul. Elegantly Saint Bern. commenting upon Christ's words
inviting us to come unto him. He that will come after me, let him deny
himself. It is says he, as if Christ had said. He that desires to enjoy me
let him despise himself, and he that would do my will, must learn to forsake
and break his own. We may be wearied in the fight, but after victory we shall
be crowned. And this is the way to gain life to die daily to our selves, and
to mortify our affections: where and in whom they live, there reason is dead.
And therefore holy David prayed thus unto the Lord. Psalm. 119.
Open mine eyes that I may see the wondrous things of thy law. As if he should
have said; I know o Lord that in thy law are hid and contained great and
sublime mysteries, but I am a poor sinful man, cumbred and pressed with the
burden of my flesh: subject to diverse affections and lusts, neither am I
Ignorant how great is their power and strength: they molest my thoughts, and
blind my understanding. Do thou therefore of thy goodness open my eyes, and
dispell the mist of error which is spread in my foul by means of my
affections. Concerning these raging passions, Seneca says not amiss. Ep. 85.
et 116.
It is far more easy to stop their beginnings, then to master or rule their
violence, for as the body that is cast down headlong from an high Tovver has no
command of it self, nor power to resist, or stay its self before it falls to
the ground: even so the mind if it has thrown itself upon any base passion, if
it has yielded it self captive to any untamed affection, as of Anger, Love,
Hatred or the like, will not easily repress its unruliness, nor hinder its
force but shall be hurried by the precipitate humor of that affection, even to
commit the foulest sins to which his nature is prone. It is the safest way
therefore to prevent the beginning of any passion, to kill it in the bud, and
to stifle it in the Cradle before it gets strength and growth.. As an enemy is
to be driven out of the borders of the City, for when he has gotten with. in
the gates, or come within the Walls he vvil show little mercy to the captive
Citizens. Pro. 16.
He that is slow to Anger, is beter then the a strongman, and he that rules
his mind, is beter then he that wins a City. Blessed are the peacemakers, L.
deser. doc. c. 2.
says St. Aug. Those that make peace in themselves, those that compose the
tumults, and stirrs that arise in their own breasts, and subject them to the
command of Reason. Blessed are they who tame the lusts of the flesh by prayer
and abstinence, so that they become the kingdom of God or his house, wherein
all things are in order, no confusion to be found, wherein Reason guided and
enlightn'd by Gods spirit has the sole command, the senses of the body obeying
without any the least reluctance or contention.

This inward peace was proclaimed by a Quire of Angels, when Christ was
born, but it is not to be obtained easily but by much strife and pain. This
was presignified by Gods giving his law to Moses with the loud voice of a
Trumpet, Ex. 19.
an instrument of War.

A man would suppose that gentle and soft music had bin fitter for this
religious work; The Trumpet fits better with the Camp then a Church. But to
leave off these nice expostulations and disputes, we must know that God did
this to teach us, that as our life is a warfare, so we are called by God not to
sit still at ease, but to fight our battles against our sinful lusts, we are
called by him who gave the Law to Moses, which Law we cannot observe and keep,
unless we oppose, and fight against the Law's Enemies, which are our lusts.
None ever subdued his flesh by flattering it, none ever conquered an enticing
Devil, or the soothing world, but by resisting both with those weapons, which
God prescribes in his holy Scriptures. strive then we must, and fight with
every corrupt affection which is adverse to Gods Law, and so to be esteemed an
enemy. He that is only angry with his sins and favors his affections, he cuts
off the boughs of a bad tree, but spares the Root, and so long as this
remains, the boughs will again shoot out. Thus Chrysostom. commenting upon those
words of our Savior. He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her in his heart, says, that Christ in this precept
forbids not only the disease it self, but strikes also at the root of it. The
root of Adulstery is unchaste lust. And therefore he does not only condemn
Adultery, but concupiseence likewise which is its Mother or Nurse. So he
forbids not murder alone, but Anger also which is oftentimes the spawne or
cause of it, or contumelious and reproachful speeches which occasion many
quarrels, and the spilling of much blood. Anger and love are two violent
affections that admit of no laws, but those that are severe and serious: they
are not easily tamed by gentle and smooth precepts. Anger does not like other
vices which solicit by flatteries; it suatcheth away our minds, and drives
them furiously into dangers. And although scarce any man be found so cruel,
who having wounded his enemy with a sword, desires to bury his hand in the
vvound and never draw it out; yet Anger is such a weapon that can hardly be
drawn out when it is driven in. Anger is dareing, and fears not to act any
sin, and having designed a man for destruction, is never pacified till it draws
his hearts blood. An angry man is like the fire-stone which if it be struck
against the flint, spits fire immediately, and is hardly quenched. An angry man
stirs up strise, Pro. 29.
and a surious man abounds in transgression. So says Salemon. Anger and
wrath are abominable things, and the sinful man is subject to them both. No
plague or murraine has destroyed so many men as these two, Anger, and Wrath.
Anger slayes the foolish man, and envy the man of low degree.

Therefore my beloved Brethren, L. 4. de civ. c. 6.
let us not (says St. Aug.) bring so great an evil upon our selves, as to
harbor that which is the disease of the soul, puts out the eye of reason,
alienates us from God, makes us forget our famil^ar friends, the beginning of
Wars, the Author of our calam ities, and the worst of Devils, who is so much
the more to be abhorred, as he is most misceivous, letting almost none escape
his hands. Ep. 18.
This affection (says Seneca) sets most men's hearts on fire, it is engendered
as well by hatred as love, and no less conversant is it with our serious
discourses then with our merry sports and Jests, equally it mingles it self
with all these. And it is not so much to be regarded from what cause it
proceeds, as into what mind it enters. As it matters not how great the fire is,
but where it lights; for dry stubble or any the like combustible thing, will
take fire at a spark, and break forth into a great flame. Notwithstanding all
this, there is nothing so hard and difficult which the mind or spirit of man
cannot overcome, and there are no affections so feirce and untamed, which may
not be mastered and kept under by the Rod of discipline. The mind can effect
any thing which it commands it self to do. Although the work be not very easy
to keep Anger within its bounds, and with it to avoid madness, ravening,
cruelty, rage and the like passions which are its Attendants and Companions,
yet that Work has been, and it must be done.

What Seneca says of Anger, may be applied to those two famous and well known
furies Envy and Pride, the same too may be verified of those two most impious
Sisters Luxury, and Gluttony, and of all the whole brood and band of other
vices. All which may be subdued by bringing the mind to that settled and happy
tranquillity that there may be in it a sweet concord and harmony of all our
desires, not swerving from the rubric of Gods commandments. " Blessed is the
man who indulges or grants a little liberty to his affections, that he may
serve sin the less, and God the more. And happy he that nails, as it were, his
passions to the Cross, that he may place Reason in her Throne to act the Queen
or Mrs. over any rebellious passion. Those slaves who are confined to the Oars
in Galleys, have some remission (though it be but short) from their laborious
work: they rest sometimes; but they that serve their affections, they never are
at quiet, they are ever racked and tortured, and one commotion of their
tumultuous thoughts follows upon the neck, and at the heels of another: which
is fitly expressed by the Prophet Hier. c. 16.
You shall serve strange Gods night and day which shall never give you rest. To
avoid all these mischiefs and tumults in our selves, let us follow that
counsel of Ecclus. c. 18.
Go not after thy lusts. An unruly horse must be curbed with a Bit, but a resty
Jade must be quickened with a Spur or Whip. Thus must we deal with our
affections, whereof some when they are sluggish must be stirred up and driven
forward, others being too violent, must be held in and restrained. No man can
discover a greater hatred to his Soul, then he that loves himself with that
eager and hot affection, that giving the Reins to immoderate and unlawful
pleasures, he has neither command of himself, nor can deny himself those
things which he often desires to his own great hurt and prejudice. But let such
men of unhappy a temper and constitution, know what St. Romans 8.
Paul fore-tells shall befall them. If ye live says he after the flesh you
shall dye, but if through the spirit ye mo^tifie the deeds of the flesh, ye
shall live. None bears greater rule then he that is Lord over himself, that
can Master his corruptions: neither can there be a greater slavery then to be a
servant to passions, nor a greater triumph then that which attends the victory
gotten over our selves. That man has overcome his affections who is not a
servant to their commands. "And he is a servant to them, (says St Amb.) who is
broken with fear, L^ de Iac: et vit. bea.
entangled in pleasure, led with vain desires, exasperated with indignation,
and dejected with grief. Neither is there any servitude or slavery more
unbeseeming the brave spirit of man, then that which is voluntary, as when one
serves his lust, another his Avarice, a third his ambition. A good man (as St.
Aug. witnesses) although he be a servant, yet is free; a wicked man although
he be a King, yet he is a slave, having so many Masters as reigning sins. Yet
there is not more one kind of lusts and desires then there is of countenances
amongst men, who agree all in essence, yet differ in their outward shape and
fashions: So their affections are diverses; for some are affected with this
thing, and others with that, neither are we equally delighted with one and the
same object. This man burns with lust, that with the love of Gold; one man is
stifled with envy, another with malice. This man kills himself with drinking
too much, another with his sports, a third with Idleness. So vain are our
Inlaginations, that no man thinks he shall be destroyed by that happiness which
he has phancied to himself. As if a man that is drowned in Wine should be less
suffocated or choked, then he that is drowned in water. To imagine this is
vain, Saint Greg. L. 4. in Sam. c. 4.
asserts truly. 'That is pleasing to a reprobate mind, what it desires with
eagerness, but in hell that which was sweet here, is full of unpleasing
bitterness; poor wretched man that is deluded with shadows, whose heart is so
over rused with wanton concupiscence, that he catches at deceiving waters,
which pass by his mouth when he thinks they are surest. But tell me fond man,
what felicity is there in lust? St. Amb. tells us, it is hotter then a Fever,
it enflames more, and sinkes men into greater danger. The danger of it is not
discovered till a man repents of his madness, when the eye of his conscience is
opend, then he blushes with an inward blush, at the shameful filth of his
wickedness. Then God begins to be feared, and the sinner then desires to
conceal his filthiness, but cannot, (for his deformity lies open in the eyes
of God from whom no secret is hid) now does that wicked wretch (galled with a
guilty conscience) tremble at the fearful apprehension of Gods Indgement
which is terrible to none, but those who in their life, whilst they went on in
a constant course of sin did neglect and contemn it. Beside this odious and
staining sin of lust, there is another corrupt affection which bears a sway in
most of us, and that is the desire of money, a Spur to all wickchness. This
thirst is so violent and hot, that it is not satisfied with gain, but rather
increased by it: Neither does it less torment the mind when it has obtained
what it seeks, as when it seeks to obtain what it coveteth. And when other
sins grow old with Age, this of Coveteousnesse bloomes, and blossoms, and is
then in its youth and vigor, when a man is dropping into his Grave. A gain
hatred and envy are two pestilent diseases and not easily cured as other
affections, unless they be strangled in their first birth in their Cradles. But
those men that are servants to Gluttony and slaves to their palate, have a
froward Mrs. which is by so much the more imperious, by how much he that has
given up himself to her service is more observant of her commands.

And because Luxury is nere of kin to Gluttony, this latter does the more hurt
to chastity, by how much the more it is pampered with delights, And fed with
variety of dainty dishes.

Show me the man, and I will commend him as he deserves, who can glory with old
Tobias and say I have kept my soul pure from all lust and concupiscence. ^. 3.
He that does this has tuned his Instrument into a blessed harmony and
concord. Saul spared King Agag and only shut him up in Prison, sent (when he
ought to have brought him) to execution. Thus we do by our Affections, we use
them with too much clemency which is displeasing to God, whereas we should
exercise toward them much cruelty. They are to be slain, and we kill them
not, but only confine them to Prison, when we take care chiefly, not that
they be extirpated, but that they break not forth in that open rage and
violence, wherewith they disquiet and distract our souls. Thus whilst we
forbear to slay an hidden and close enemy we Arm him against our selves; and
by this means, that which was in the beginning but a slip and error, by
degrees becomes a custom, which at length grows unto a necessity, which is
not easily subdued and brought into subjection; So by little and little being
oppressed on all sides by a domesticke enemy, we cry out in our extremity and
say; I cannot here in this particular overcome my self. I cannot want those
things to which I have been long accustomed, I die if I be bereaved of this
delight. Thus our small errors degenerate into bad and inveterate manners, and
because we stifle not our affections in their first conception, but suffer them
to spring and sprout, at length they grow to a Wood and thicket which cannot by
any strength or force in us be rooted up. However we must not despair, but
know that custom may be weak n'd by another which is better, and our Crown
will be the more precious and sweet unto us, the harder our fight is with our
sins and infirmities, and we may promise to our selves the victory, if we sight
under Gods shield; if desiring to be conquerors, we grapple with our vices, and
beg of God in our prayers, to help and assist our weakness. Let but M^ses
strike the waves of the Sea with his Rod, God will take care for the rest, and
Israel shall pass safely over, Ex. 14.
when the Egyptians shall be drowned. The Amor^^e and the Canaanite shall be
driven out of our coast, if we do but inure our selves to fight and often
skirmish with our enemies. Sit still we may no^ in sloth and Idleness. Job 7.
The life of man upon earth is a warfare says Job, let no man trust himself,
for none has a more dangerous and treacherous enemy then himself, with whom to
make a truce is not very safe: Neither can it be secure for us to lay down our
weapons and shut them up in our Armories, until we put off our flesh and lay
that up in our Graves.

He that has a desire to get the victory over his Adversaries, must perpetually
watch and sleep in his Arms. Saint Cyprian says excellently to this purpose.
It is the greatest pleasure to a man to have overcome his pleasures, neither
can there be a greater and more noble victory then that which we obtain over
our lusts, and affections: for he that overcomes his enemy is indeed the
stronger, but this is in respect of another, but he that overcomes his lust, is
stronger then himself, in that he overpowers his own weakness.

The Musician never leaves handling his Jarring strings, until he has reduced
them to an harmonious concord. And a man predestined to salvation, never ceases
to allay the tumults, and reconcile the differences between Reason and his
affections, till he compose the quarrel in a religious peace; If we may
believe Plato, our body is (as it were) an Harp,our Reason the Harper or
Musician, who now plays upon these strings, anon upon those, sometimes it has
to do with the eyes, sometimes with the Tongue, in proposing certain Laws
and prescriptions to both, now it stops the cares, then it binds the hands, and
is still employed in managing and ordering the senses; sometimes an affection
of Luxury begins to rise, this is presently suppressed by casting upon it the
bridle of Chastity. At other times an affection of impatiency, does start up
and swell like a blister or bile; Reason lets not this alone, but lances it,
and lets out the corruption. Saint Paul was a skillfull Musician as appears by
that confession of his. 1 Cor. 9.
I chastise my body and bring it into subjection. And thus Gods elect ones are
principally employed in tuning their Instruments, in winding up or letting down
the pins. Now they strive with their Anger then reprehend Envy, now they stir
up and awaken their drowsinesse, by and by they bridle their Laughter and
wantonness, and if grief be predominant, they mitigate it with lenitives,
with the comforts that do spring and arise from Gods promises, and the
consideration of his providence. With the forenam'd and like strings of
passion, Reason like a good Artist is ever busied, remitting some, and
intending others, till all at length they become harmonious, free from debate
and dissension. Those that are marked for heaven, Gods chosen people never give
way to their loose affections, They are the greatest Admirers of other men's
virtues, and the hardest Censurers of their own infirmities, and ever show the
least pity to themselves; for if upon a privy search and enquiry into their
own bosoms they find any unlawful desire or any lust, that domineers in
their breasts, they presently sentence it to death and Crucify it: This
therefore is a sign that we are predestined to eternal life, if we crucify
the flesh with its imbred vices and lusts. They that do this belong to Christ.

To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be ascribed, as is most due, all
Glory and Honor from this time forth and for ever more.

Amen.

lute SYMBOLVM. XII.

Moderatio affectuum.

Sub te erit appetitus eius, et tu dominaberis illiut. Genes. 4.



AN APPENDIX To the twelve Signs of PREDESTINATION; Concerning the paucity or
small number of those that are predestined to salvation.
SAint BERNARD shall put an end to the former discourse, Ser. 2. de Oct Pasel.
who says, the Lord knows who are his, and he only knows, whom he has
chosen from the beginning of the World. But what man is there that knows
whether he deferves love or hatred? Therefore if it be certain that a man in
regard of his daily infirmities cannot be always certain of his Salvation,
who then will not be much delighted when one shall offer to his consideration
the signs of Election? And what rest can our Spirits find in themselves until
we have gotten some sure testimonies that we are predestined to eternal
joys? Faithful and true is the word, most worthy of all acceptance, which
commends unto us infallible testimonies and pledges of our salvation. In this
word indeed there is ministered comfort to the Efect, and all manner of excuse
is taken from the reprobate; For when the signs and marks of our
predestination are discovered, he that neglects them is manifestly convinced,
that he disregards the state of his Soul, and makes nothing of Heaven, the
Land of the living. By right such a man ought to blame none but himself who
will not understand nor be saved. God has not by a blind Chance predestined
these to Heaven, and those to Hell. known unto the Lord are his works from
the beginning of the world. Act. 15. Prosp. Resp 3. ad Object. Gal.
And Prosper says, That good men are not necessitated to perish, because they
are not predestined, but therefore not predestined to life, because God
foresaw that by their wicked deeds they would deserve death, Li. 1. ad simplic.
St. August. consents with Prosper in this; God says he, did not hate Esau as
a man, but as a man full of sin or as a notorious Sinner, For God hates nothing
in man but sin; he says also in another place thus, It is sin alone that
obstructs our way and stops our passage to Heaven: We all hasten and post to
one end or mark, and there be diverse paths and maine ways in which we move
and run to that end, and many perish in their race. The way that leads to life
is narrow and thorny: The way of perdition is spread with Roses, soft and easy,
it is a descent into pleasant valleys, whereas the other is climbing up of
high and rugged Mountains. Truth it self, or Christ who is the truth calls
unto us in the word, Mat. 7.27.
he exhorts and admonishes us to enter in at the strait Gate, for broad is the
gate, and wide is the way that leads to perdition, and many there be who enter
in it, but strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads to life, and
few there be that find it. Luke 13.23
In another place he does advise us to the same purpose, Strive to enter in at
the strait Gate, for I say unto you that many shall strive to enter in and
shall not. Truly the way is narrow that leads to happiness, it is so narrow
that but one can go in it, Gal. 6.
And that without a companion. For every one of us shall give an account to God
for himself. 1 Cor. 3.
And every one shall bear his own burden; every man shall be rewarded
according to his own works. This overthrowes that absurd opinion of the
Papists concerning works of Supererogation.

Again our Savior even sighing uttered these words, Mat. 20. et 22.
Many are called, but few are chosen. This one small word, Few as if it were a
terrible clap of Thunder, has roused a great part of the world from the
Lethargy or dead sleep of security. It has driven some out of populous Cities
into Dens and Wildernesses: and how many hundred thousand Martyrs has it forced
by a secret violence to expose themselves to the fury of Tormentors, whereby
they were cast into Prisons, put upon racks, burnt at Stakes, hanged upon
Gibbets, and devoured by beasts? Their only voice was this, We fear not to
die, but account death easy, so long as we hope to be glorified with the Few
Elect. Let the sword rage and drown it self in our blood, we weigh it not so
long as we may be numbered among the Elect, who are few in number, but for ever
blessed. And which of them durst not say? If J alone could be hanged upon an
hundred Gibbets, I would not refuse this shameful torment, If I could lay down
an hundred necks upon the block, and subject them to the Hatchet, I would not
subtract or withdraw one; To die an hundred deaths would be a pastime to me, I
should esteem of my torments as Recreations and sports, so long as I may be
admitted into the society of those Few which shall reign with Christ in
everlasting glory. From this spring did issue that generous and brave
exclamation of Ignatius, let Fire and the Cross, wild beasts and all the
torments that the Devil can invent, come and surprise me, so long as I may
enjoy Christ. This little word Few uttered by Christ's own mouth, has filled
many with that horror and amazement, that though they were men of most impure
lives, yet seaving the pleasant Meadows of luxury and voluptiousness they shut
themselves into the house of mourning and sadness: thinking it better to be
saved with a few, then to perish with many. It does not lessen our pain to
perish with a multitude. This Paucity of those that shall be saved was in all
ages proposed for a caution unto us. Concerning this even Noe a Preacher of
righteousness (so he is called by the Apostle Peter) preached an hundred years
before the Flood, 2 Pet. 2.
but all or most of them being obstinate in their wickedness, out of that great
and infinite number of men only eight persons were saved in that wooden Prison
or ship (call it which you will) the Ark: And amongst those Few there was a
Cham who was wicked. For as Roses grow not without Prickles and Thorns, so the
ungodly are ever mingled in the society of Gods Saints. And if God being about
to overthrow Sodom, Genesis 10.
would upon Abraham's request have spared that land, if he had found but ten
righteous men in it, which could not be found, we must conclude that honesty
and virtue there was very scarce. Therefore the Angels charged Lot to make
have out of it that he might be saved. Genesis 19.
Thus out of the great flame in which the two most flourishing Cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah were consumed, only three escaped, and to this day the Signs of
Gods wrath are extant in the places where those Cities stood. But we have
another story in holy writ, which clearly demonstrates the paucity or fewness
of those that shall be saved.

When Moses led out of Egypt six hundred thousand men on foot, besides Women
and Children, a promiscuous multitude also following the Camp, only two out of
so great a number came into the fruitful land of Canaan; to the rest the
wilderness was a capacious Grave, in which as in a Common burying place for the
dead, many thousand of the Israelites were interred.

But that Egyptian Tyrant who pursued them with a bloody fury, Exodus 14.
intending to stay their journey, was with his whole Army buried in the womb
of the red Sea. Ier: 10.
Behold how many thousand souls are here swallowed up by the devouring waves!
Who will not fear thee O King of Nations? When the Children of Israel had
corrupted themselves in worshipping a Calfe which they set up contrary to Gods
Commandments, Exo. 31.
Moses being full of wrath and grief proclaimed, He that is for the Lord, let
him join himself to me, and in that there were slain three and twenty
thousand men. A great slaughter it was and only caused by that golden Idol
which they worshipped, such and so great is one sin (especially that of
Idolatry) in Gods esteem. When Joshua had overthrown the City of Jericho by
compassing it seven times, Ios 6.
and causing the people to make a great shout against it, whatsoever was in it
both of men and beasts, all perished and were destroyed by fire and sword, and
at last the City it self was turned to ashes, and utterly consumed, only one
house (which was Rahabs) being preserved.

When Gedeon prepared War against the Midianites, Iud. 7.
out of thirty thousand Soldiers, three hundred only were chosen for that
fight, the rest being rejected. God measures not his people by their number but
by their virtue and goodness, it is not a multitude of men, but good men that
are pleasing to him. Neither is the way to destruction very long, it is run
over in a breath, by one deadly sin we become guilty of high Treason against
his divine Majesty, and deserve the eternal flames of Hell. Thus for one
libidinous act, Iud 20.
forty thousand of the Hebrews, and fifty thousand and six hundred Benjamit's
were put to death and slain by the sword.

How many thousands of the Bethshamit's but for looking into the Arc out of a
wanton curiosity were flaine with a great 1 Samuel 6
slaughter? we read v. 19. that there were slain fifty thousand, threescore
and ten men. This scarcity of the Predestinate or those that are Elect is no
less evidently set out unto us in the second of Samuel, where we read, that
when Absolon rebelled against his Father, 1 Samuel 15.
and had raised a great Army against him, a Messenger ran to King David and
told him, that all Israel followed after Absolon and clave unto him with one
heart, and with one joint consent. And when Sheba had stirred up a furious
multitude against his King, immediately after this there came another report to
David's ears, That all Israel was divided from David, and joynd to Sheba, Look
into the world with a strict observation, and you will find and see now the
very same thing. Christ our Lord and King has showed us a way to Heaven, a way
be-sprinckled with blood and signed with the footsteps of his bitter passion,
his Head is covered with a Crown of Thorns, and if we look upon him with the
eye of meditation, we may see him carrying his reproachful Cross upon his
innocent shoulders which did not become such a burden, laid upon him for our
sins, let us consider too his wan and pale countenance, his sad and mournful
eyes, swimming in tears mingled with blood thus attired; and in this
sorrowful habit, he ascended to Mount Calvarie, exhorting us to follow his
example; and to bear the Cross with patience and humility. But alas how few
are his followers, how few are there amongst us who do take up his Cross, and
by a cheerful suffering of affliction, conform themselves to the example of
his meekness? The whole World lies in sin and wickedness: most men follow
with their whole heart not Sheba, but Satan. There be but a few that go up to
Golgotha with Christ. To this which has been said (to prove the small number
of the predestinate) we may add that which we find recorded in the second of
Samuel concerning David when he had numbered the people, 2 Samuel 24.
God was so displeased with him, that he slew by the plague and pestilence
seventy thousand men. And indeed all these sad passages were shadows of future
things, and as it were a prologue and Exordium of that heavenly Sermon wherein
Christ declared the paucity or fewness of those that shall be saved. Mat. 7.
Luke 1.3.
Now take a Survey of the Jews, reckoning from Abraham to the last day of the
World, and you will easily perceive that the hundred forty and four thousand
which are mentioned in the Apocalypse will be scarce the thousandth part of all
the Jews that might be numbered. So that we may conclude upon this ground that
one Jew among a thousand shall not be saved. And what is affirmed of the
Hebrews may be also asserted proportionably of all other Nations. For what
Christ did foretell concerning the Jews is to be appropriated to all others of
what Country or Nation soever they be. For Christ did not say that only the
Jews should go in that narrovv path which leads to happiness, but he
pronounced [putting no difference betvveen any] That few there be who find it.
To confirm this truth, almost all the Prophets and their joint acclamations:
Is. 5.
Isaiah says, Hell has enlarged it self, and has opened his mouth without
measure, and their glory and their multitude and their pomp, and he that
rejoices among them shall descend into it, Is. 9.
for wickedness burns like a fire, it devoureth the Briars and the Thorns,
and will kindle in the thick places of the Forest, and they shall mount up
like the lifting up of smoke, for Brrars and Thorns shall cover the whole
earth. And where I pray you, do not the Briars of Luxury grow up even into a
Wood? Where do not the thorns of worldly cares, and of anxious thoughts for
money (not for heaven) spread themselves and increase? Truly the land is
infected by its Inhabitants, because they have transgressed my Laws, perverted
my Ordinances, and broken my everlasting Covenant. Is. 56.
For they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage. Hieremie
with no less lamentable complaint bewailes this small number of good men, where
he says; Ier. 5.
run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now, and know, and
inquire in the open places thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be any
that executes Judgment and see^eth the truth, and I will spare it. c. 6.
They are all rebellious Traitors, walking craftily: they are Brass and Iron,
they are all destroyers. Not only the rich men, but what is to be admired, even
the poor men have learned to be wanton and proud, and even poverty which used
to be the Mistress of Sobriety, is now familiarly conversant with sin and
iniquity.

They are all corrupted, the Brass and the Iron, the Silver and the Tin, all
are tainted, full of dross and Corruption. Ier. 8.
I hearkened and did listen, but none spoke a right (how truly may this be said
of our age.) no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done,
every one turned to their Race, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

Woe unto the land, woe unto the men of it, for the Land is full of Adulteries,
etc. the Prophet Michae in like manner laments the scarcity of the Righteous.
Mic. 7.
Woe is me for there is no Cluster to eat, [i.e. there is no godly man left]
the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright among men.
When David considered this, Ps. 14.
his eyes ran down with tears, God looked down from Heaven (says he) upon
the Children of men to see, if there were any that did understand and seele
after God. But they were all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Now let a man
attentively consider the lamentable state and condition of the times wherein we
live, and the diverse corruptions of men's manners, and he will certainly
conclude with himself that the days of Noah are wheeled about and come again.

For as in the days before the Flood, they did eat and drink, Mat. 24.
Marry, and give in marriage unto the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and
knew nothing till the Flood came and took them all away. Even so now virtue is
either banished from all quarters and places of the Earth, or where she is
admitted, she sojournes not as an Inhabitant or Inmate, but as a guest, and is
entertained as a stranger not to rest long in a place. But vice has gotten a
large dominion; it rules and reigns in all the Kingdoms of the World.
Injustice palliated or clothed with the Robe of Justice, sharp-sighted Envy,
which is Eagle-eyed in the discovery of others vices, these play their parts
every where with great boldness, and Luxury a sin odious to God, and
distastefull to all honest men, which used heretofore to seek Corners and dark
places to act its uncleanness, now displaies it self in the very face of the
Sun.

Thus the number of honest men is much abated and lessened: it is nothing if
compared with the number of wicked ones which is infinite. This is confirmed by
that saying of Byas, Good men are rare, but many are the ungodly these excel
the other in number. Saint Ambrose in a manner speaks the same words, In
comparison (says he) of the reprobate small or little is the number of the
Elect, for we may See every where and at all times a multitude of Sinners,
there is every where a great sort of men that run to Hell from happiness; Lam.
1.
Truly the ways of Sion do mourn, but the paths that lead to Babylon do laugh
and sing: indeed if a man cast his eyes upon the way which leads with a
downfall and descent to Hell; he shall find that it is so stuffed and crammed
with Travailess that one crowds and presses another. Thus most men hasten to
the flames of Hell as it were to a banquet, or marriage, corrupting each other
by the vicious examples of their lives, The way to Vice is not only plain and
easy, but also a dovvnfall with a Vast precipice; But the way that leads to
virtue is hard and uneasy, and those that walk in it are fevv, and those
strangers not acquainted with the World, and it is vain delights.

The Prophet Isaiah presaging of this, utters these mournful words. Is. 24.
Surely thus shall it be in the midst of the earth among the people as the
shaking of an O live tree, and as the Grapes when the Vintage is ended. By this
Prophecy the rarity of good Christians is intimated to us, they being compared
unto a few little boughs and Olive branches which are left for the use of the
poor when the Vintage is ended; but the great plenty of the ungodly who are
Satan's instruments to a plentiful increase of Grapes and Olives. There is no
truth (says the prophet Hoseah) nor mercy, Hos. 4.
nor knowledge of God in the Land: But swearing and lying, and murder, and
stealing and adulteries do abound, so that blood touches blood. By this and
the former instances we may perceive that the paucity or small number of good
men was ever deplored by the Prophets

The Apostles tears for this do mingle with the Prophets, for they too bewail
the scarcity of the godly. 1 Ioh. 5.
St. John affirms, That the whole world lies in wickedness. And St. Peter
demands.

If the godly shall scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.
where shall the ungodly and Sin: appra^^? Paul complains. That all men seek
their own, Phil. 2. Mat. 11.
and (...) the things that be Christ's. Christ himself said, The King(...) of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Neither did he
forbear to threaten.

Woe unto you rich men, for you have your Consolation; Luke 6. Luke 8.
Woe unto you that be full because ye shall hunger, Woe unto you that laugh
now, because ye shall mourn and weep. Again we find it recorded in St. Luke.

That part of the good seed fell among stones, Luke 7.
this was dried up and parched; part of it was sown among thorns and Briars,
this was suffocated and Choked; and part fell by the way side, which was
trodden under foot; how little a part and portion of it was sowed in good
ground whereby it was preserved? So of the ten Lepers that were cured, Luke 14.
only one returned with thanks in his mouth.

Those that were invited to a great Supper began all to excuse themselves for
not accepting of the invitation.

When the Pool of Bethesda was stirred by an Angel, Ioh. 5.
but one of many impotent diseased men, were healed: Ioh. 7.
Amongst the Ie wish Senators, only Nicodemus was bold to beg the Body of
Christ. And out of many rich misers that lived in Jericho, out of so many
Camells laden with heavy burdens, only Zacheus laying down his bunch (as Beza
speaks) he casting off the burden of his riches, and having entered in at the
strait gate made restitution of all that he had gotten by extortion.

Only Matthew out of the receipt of Custom, Luke 19.
and Mary Magdalen out of a Stews are reported to have bin translated from the
state of Sin to a better life of innocence and holiness. St. Paul when he
preached at Philippie a City of Macedonia, Act. 16.
had many hearers but found no doers, that did follow his instruction: Only
Lydias heart was opened, and she obeyed his precepts.

The same Paul being at Athens disputed of Christ in the Synagogue, Act. 17.
and found many Auditors there, and those learned ones, but with all many
scoffers, but there were none but Dyonisius and Damaris that believed his
sayings. In the famous Council of the seventy two High Priests and Elders,
Luke 23.
there was scarce one which did not thirst after Christ's blood and seek his
ruin; So our Savior when he was crucified had many Spectators, but fevv
lovers of his Cross, and imitatours of his sufferings; So at this day Sermons
do abound amongst us, but we see little amendment or Change of manners. The
flame of men's vices is only tonched not extinguished, they scarce endure to be
pointed at, much less to be extirpated. All this proves that of our Savior to
be true, Many are called, Hom. 19. in Evangel.
but few are chosen; many (says St. Gregory) came to the Faith, but few are
brought to the Kingdom of Heaven. Indeed there is in the sloore of the Church
more Chafe then Wheat, more leaves then fruit, many twigs in the Vine, but few
Grapes; many Thorns, but few Roses in our Gardens; many flints, but a few
Jewels: so the number of those whom the divine providence will advance to
happiness is small, if compared with that infinite multitude of the wicked
which shall be doomed to eternal pains. Hiercmias Prophecy is true and fit
to our purpose. Jer. 12.
The whole Land lies wast because no man sets his mind upon it (or thinks
on it with his heart,) By this is implied that our thoughts are flitting, and
wavering, and cannot abide to fasten upon the serious cogitation of our future
good, they wander where they please, and roave up and down; and hence it is
that there is so little fear of Hell amongst us, our desire of Heaven is cold
and not lasting. That of the Psalmist may be fitly applied to CHRISTIANS. They
thought meanly of that pleasant Land; Ps. 106.
So do these slight and contemn Heaven, then which nothing is more desirable;
but because our thoughts seldom or never mount up thither, and we disdain
this blessed Kingdom as a thing unknown, and Coldly do we desire it, as if it
were a thing not worthy our estimation hence it is that the Devil, that
Tartarean Giant or Behemath, takes courage and gets strength against us: He
trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth, Job. 40.
and he is confident whilst we neglect Heaven, that he shall swallow us up to
our everlasting perdition.

The holy man Job, he was of another temper then such Christians are, Heaven
and the day of Judgment were ever in his thoughts, and therefore said to God,
I feared all my works knowing that thou do not spare sinners, Job 9.
as if he should say, I suspect all my words and deeds, yea and my very
thoughts, I set a watch before all these whilst I remember daily Gods
memorable Justice. The consideration and thought of which made that good old
man Hilarion to tremble when he was dying and going to appear before Gods
Tribunal. Hieron in vita illius c. 38.
There was a little heat left which warmed his body, neither was there any
thing left of a living man but only fence and feeling, and yet he spoke
cheerfully to his fainting soul, Get thee out my soul, get the out, do
thou now fear, do thou now doubt? Thou have served Christ these seventy
years, and do thou now fear to die and approach to his presence? This good
man's Soul did not fear to die or be separated from the body, but was afraid
when it thought of Gods severe Judgment before which it was to stand and be
examined: consider this, O ye Christians who lead sinful and wanton lives. If
this Religious man did tremble for fear of failing of his Salvation, do ye
delight your selves in the vanities of this world, going on securely in your
sins, and heaping up Gold and Silver? Go to now, tear and consume one another
with the tooth of envy and malice; hunt after, Honors and let preferment and
glory be the only aim of your endeavors, please your genius and flatter your
selves in pleasures; say (as some worldlings have done) The earth has he given
to the Children of men, and we will inhabit it; let others if they please
labor to be Citizens of Heaven. Go feed your eyes with pleasing objects, give
your thoughts the Raines, and deny nothing to your raging and lustful
affections, let them excurr and fasten where they please, let them have what
they desire: imagine that to be lawful, which ye like, and deny your body no
pleasure that it wants and craves. Take care only that you may live here
voluptuously without any pain or grief, and walk in the sight of your eyes,
Eccle. 11.
and in the ways of your heart; But know that for all these things God will
bring you to Judgment. And though a man live many years, and rejoice in them
all yet shall he remember the days of darkness, because they are many; all
that comes is vanity. Therefore labor by your Faith and good works, 2 Pet.
1.
to make your calling and Election sure.

Ye have heard what be the signs of Predestination. First not to love our
friends only, but also our Enemies.

2ly. To relieve the poor not only by our bounty but also with an affection of
commiseration and pity.

3ly. To suffer all adversity patiently, relying upon Gods providence, and
submitting our selves to his will in all our extremities.

4ly. We must prefer the riches of Heaven before the goods of this world.

5ly. and 6ly. We must not only attend to the outward admonitions of men, but
also the interior or inward instructions of God, and yield obedience to both.

7ly. The sins and offenses of our life past are so to be deplored and bewailed
that ever after we for sake them for the time to come, and never commit the
same again.

8ly. Let no man think that he pleases God unless he be displeasing to
himself.

9ly. And let no man persuade himself that he loves Christ so long as he loves
not his mysterious presence in the Sacrament.

10ly. We must resist our vicious affections in their first beginnings, not
suffering them to grow into a feirce unruliness. He that does this is an
Emperor, having the command over himself which is the best, and greatest
conquest.

11ly. Our wills must be set upon goodness, otherwise, they will waver and
totter in the uncertain and giddie motions of our desires.

12. And lastly we must ever meditate on our last end, for death when it is often
thought upon is less hurtful, and least feared, That man will not die
unwillingly, who seriously thinks of dying daily. And this is the way to
attain to that life which is immortal and shall never be closed up with
death. Now let every man put questions to his own conscience, let him search
by a strict examination and inquiry whither he has found in himself these
signs of Predestination, whereby he may believe that he is in the way, wherein
the godly walk to Heaven.

The way of Sinners is plain and smooth, Ecclus. 21.
but the end thereof is Hell and darkness, notwithstanding this, so many and
so great a company run to their destruction in this plain and pleasant way,
that they make good by their practice the saying of Christ, wide is the Gate
and broad is the way that leads to perdition, and many there be that enter in
at that, and walk in this; certainly they are many, we see that they are many.
It is delivered in the writings of many learned Authors that a certain
Anchoret being once in an Ecstasy did see the souls of men glide and drop into
Hell like to Snow and Rain. So that the damned Spirits may not unfitly demand
(as one affirms they did) whether the world did persevere and continue in that
state in which it was? for indeed so many souls go to that place of Torment,
that a man would scarce believe there could be so many men living on the earth.

Vincentius Ferarius a Dominican Preacher discoursing out of the Pulpit
concerning the small number of the predestinate confirmed all that he said by a
remarkable passage, Vid. Philip Disy. To 5.
his words were these or to this effect?

Before Christ's coming into the world in our flesh there had passed above five
thousand years, it which time the whole wo^ld being given to much wickedness
pe^^shed in their sins, excepting a ^ew Is^^elites that were saved, by the
Covenant of faith wh^^^ God made with Abraham and (...) seed. So now likewise
in the time of the Gospel under Christ, how many men and women die and are
d^^med for want of Faith? Also how many Jews. Turks, how many Pagans and
Infidells perish for want of the knowledge of Christ? Besides these, how many
Christians be there who have pertaked of Baptism, and have an outvvard show
of godliness, yet wanting the power of (...) in their lives, being proud and
covetous, and luxurious wanton livers? How many [I say] be there of these that
never partake of Heavens joys? Faith and Baptism joined with a good life will
bring a man to salvation the way that leads unto it. And to hope to be saved
without these going in this way is high presumption. These things being so, I
will conclude this point with that exhortation of our Savior, strive to enter
in at the strait gate. The strait gate of Paradise is the Will of God, we must
squeese and contract our selves by repentance and humility, wholly denying our
selves and doing Gods will, if we have a purpose to enter into Paradise. The
wide gate is our own Will, which we must renounce by a cheerful and constant
submission to God, and obedience to his Commandments. The broad way that leads
to Hell is a worldly conversation, to live in surfeting and drunkenness, to
spend our days in Luxury and wantonness, to be revengefull and never to forget
or forgive injuries, etc. This is the common practice of the world; therefore
Few there are that shall be saved We find a story among the Popish Legends of
which we may make some use; It is of Bertoldus a Franciscan, an Eloquent
Preacher in Germany: This man declaiming in a Sermon with strong invectives
against a certain sin; there was a Woman then present who heard this sin
ripp'd up and the foulness of it laid open, and Conscious to her self of being
guilty of the same, was stoken with so great sorrow and perplexity in her
soul, that she presently in the midst of the people fell into a Swoon, but
afterward coming to her self again, and standing up with horror in her
countenance, and palenesse in her cheeks, she related what she had seen don
at the Tribunal of God; but among other things she affirmed this: That she
saw brought before it sixty thousand souls of diverse Nations, Christians and
Barbarians who had died several deaths, and of all these but only three were
saved, the rest were thrown down to Hell to be for ever tormented.

The truth of this story we will not now discuss, but let us all believe this
to be most true, That many enter in at the broad gate, and many walk in the
wide and spacious way that leads to perdition. Therefore St. Chrisostom said
well to this purpose, Tom. 3. Hom. 24. et Tom. 5. Hom. 40.
glossing upon our Saviors words, There be many more that enter in at Hells
Gate, but yet the Kingdom of Heaven is greater, although the Inhabitants be
fewer; And how many think you are in our City that shall be saved? I know (said
he) that what I say will not be pleasing to you; yet I will not forbear to
speak it; Amongst so many thousands, there are scarce one hundred that shall be
saved; Nay I doubt of that too: For what malice may we find in young men? what
Idleness and drowsiness in the ancient, etc. Thus Chrisostom a most wise and
holy man, a great Doctor of the Church, and he spoke this of An^ioch a most
populous City, and at that time when the fervency of that spirit and heat of
Zeal, [which warmed the hearts of the Primitive Christians] was not yet
extinguished and decayed: who then can wonder now that Saint Paul should so
solicitously exhort and admonish us; Phil. 2.
To work out our salvation with fear and trembling? Luke 13.
seeing that Christ too has so clearly advised us, To strive to enter in at the
strait gate; Strive [sayes he] who is truth it self; Strive, i. e. labor,
endeavor with all your strength and power to enter in at the strait gate, by
bringing forth fruit worthy of Repentance. We must not look to enter in with
faint and cool desires, but we must use the utmost of our best and most
vigilant endeavors, such as will break through all difficulties, and vvade
through the deepest waters of trouble and afflictions. For unless we be
carried onvvard to Heaven with a fervent intention of mind and spirit, and
unless a man force himself to go forvvard, he will easily start backward as
not able to pass through the straites of that narrow gate, being combred with a
load of worldly cares, and pestred with the burden of his unsatiate lusts: In
our strait passage too we are like to meet with many Tentations and
persecutions which the World and the Devil raise against those that labor to
enter in at that gate which leads to happiness. And as Watermen that Row
against the Wind and Tide, buckle themselves to their Oars with all force and
might: So those men (who in their laborious passage to Heaven, shall meet with
many assaults from their violent and malicious enemies) must stand fast to
their faith, never relinquish that, whose power is such that no strength of
their enemies shall be able to master it. If they let go this hold, give up
this faith, their Souls like unto a Boat driven with the Tide, will be hurried
into a Gulf from which they shall never be recovered. 1 Cor. 10.
Awake therefore to live righteously and sin not. 1 Cor. 15.
That man truly awakes and watches who does always, and in all places so order
his life and Actions that he accounts every day to be his last day, and in all
his thoughts, words, and Works, has such a care not to violate his Conscience
as if he were to die each day. And indeed thus should we do: And let us all do
that whilst we may, and have time to do it, i. e. repent; which those that are
in Hell would feign do, but cannot.

Whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap, Gal. 6
And he that sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption, but be
that sowes to the spirit shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting.

LAVS DEO.
A POSTSCRIPT. To all tenderhearted Christians, who are weak in Faith, and
desire to get assurance of their Interest in CHRIST.
MANY are the titles which God in his Holy Word fast^eth to his Elect ones, for
whom (...) Kingdom is provided: l. Io. 15.14 2 Lu 12.4. 3 Acts 16.17. 4 Ps.
83.3. Psalm. 135.4. 5 Mal. 3.7.
some ^f them are plain and positive, as there he calls them his 1. friends,
and 2. Servants; others more ^^struse and figurative, as when he ^iles them his
3. sucret ones, his. ^. peculiar Treasure, and his 5. ^wells, etc. Which latter
appel^tion is Analogicall, built upon this ground or reason; for that as
Jewel, are rare and precious, having in them a luster, a lightsome brightness,
which is not to be found in ordinary stones, so Gods Saints in Comparison of
Worldlings (that have no right to Christ, nor his promises) so they are as the
Israelites were to the huge host of the Syrians: they in comparison of these
are as a little flock of sheep, 1 King 20 27.
and Gods Children if compared with the Syrians of this World are a small
number, as has been demonstrated in the former Treatise.

Again they are precious and dear in the Esteem of God, whose Image they
bear in their Souls his Image of Holiness; and Righteousness, Luk 1.71.
containing a conformity of their wills and actions to God's: and Likeness
being the Mother of love, they must needs be dear to their heavenly Father,
whose mercy and Justice they represent and set forth in their lives.

In the last place they are his Jewels because of that light and luster which
is in their souls. For when Christ visits a soul in mercy, and unites
himself unto it by his spirit (which is the first union between God and us)
then that blessed spirit comes into the soul with discoveries; The first union
between Christ and a Soul.
it reveals unto it it is maine sins, the danger, and filthiness of them; It
reveals likewise this truth, that without Christ there is no salvation: This
discovery moves the soul to grief and sorrow for it is sins, it forces tears
from the eyes; Genesis 1.2.
and then the spirit of God moves upon the face of these waters; In this flood
of tears the soul (as I may so speak) sails to Christ; and when it
apprehend^ it self by reason of it is Corruption, to be in the suburbs or
Jaws of Hell, Genesis 8.9.
it flies with the Dove to the Ark, to the saving promises of the Gospel
[which are the Anchor and stay of our souls,] it takes hold on Christ, and
applies to it self for pardon of it is sins, the merits of his passion,
Resurrection and Ascension: The Application of which merits to our souls and
Consciences, The second Union between Christ and the soul.
is the second union which is between us and Christ, the Union of Faith. And
now having a taste of the goodness of God in the peace of Conscience, and joy in
the Holy Ghost; a soul thus united to Christ, is ready to cry out with that
dying Martyr; None but Christ, None but Christ; and with Saint Paul, it counts
all things but loss and dross in comparison of this great and incomparable
purchase. Phil. 3.8.
This change in a soul thus trampling upon the World with scorn and contempt,
and prizing Christ above all earthly riches, proceeds from that inward
illumination of Gods Spirit [proper only to the Elect] convincing the soul of
it is sinful wretchedness, and discovering Gods Mercy, reached out unto us in
Christ: who in his first approaches and accesses to an Elect soul to be
sanctified, breaks into it is dark rooms immittendo Spirituale lumen, Note
against the Illuminators to the time that this light neverdictates any thing
repugnant to the Word.
by setting up as it were a Candle in it, by clarifying it with spiritual 1 Timothy 1.14.6.11:
light, and ravishing it with joy and Heavenly delight.

For when Christ is united to a Soul by his spirit, and that soul to Christ
by a justifying Faith, which is ever attended with the band of 1 Timothy 1.14.6.11:
Love; by virtue of this spiritual Union it being joined to God in an holy
Communion, in a Communion of his Graces, in a participation of his piety and
Goodness, in a Communication of his strength and comfort to siritaine it in all
afflictions, I say, by virtue of that Union, and this blessed Communion, a
Soul rejoices in God above all things with a 1 Pet. 1.
joy unspeakable and glorious: a joy that can triumph and glory in the Cross;
rejoicing in tribulations. Such a joy filled the breast and warmed the spirits
of the Prophet David, as appears by that passage of his Psalm. 94.19. In the
multitude of the Sorrows which I had in my heart thy comforts have refreshed
my soul.

Thus when Christ is in the heart, and wedded to it by Faith and love, he
turns Water into Wine, as he did at the marriage of Cana, Ioh. 2.9.
for when there are nothing but discomforts and terrors without, then Christ
cheares the heart within; when there is nothing left but the water of
affliction, then Christ turns that water into inward Consolation. In the
multitude of the sorrows, etc.

This was D^uids case, and this is the happy condition of Christ's servants.
They receive the word in much affliction with joy in the Holy Ghost. These. 1:6.
They greatly rejoice though they be in heaviness. 1 Pet. 1.6.
And as this joy is Divine and heavenly quoad originem, in regard of the
principal Author of it, flowing from a divine and heavenly fountain, that is
Gods blessed Spirit, so it is also celestial and divine quoad objectum,
because it fasteneth on divine and Caelestiall objects. A soul thus filsed
with joy, rejoices in nothing more then Gods favor and in the smiles of his
gracious countenance, and greeves for nothing less then the loss of worldly
goods so long as it enjoyes God reconciled to it in Christ, Augus^nus.
so long as it finds Lucrum in conscientia, it cares not for damnum in crum^na:
A sanctified believing Christian slights all losses whilst he has God in his
Conscience, and is assured of this, that he is Christ's and Christ is His. 1
Cor. 23. Aquin. (...) Q. 28 1.


Now because that Joy (as the Schools determine) arises from the Conjunction
or fruition of the thing or person we love, it will follow that, when this Joy
[which I have proved to be divine] is settled in us, it is accompanied with a
persuasion [on which it is builded] that God is our God in Christ Jesus, by an
eternal Election; for we cannot, neither do we usually rejoice in things that
either are not known, or are uncertain, being built upon conjectures, which
are ever attended with doubtful fears. When our Savior in his instructions
to the seaventy disciples, willed them to rejoice because their names more
written in heaven; Luk 10.20.
He intimated thereby that a man may attain to a certain knowledge of his
Election, which our Divines call a certainty of Faith [in opposition to the
Papists assurance by Hope,] or a special certainty: when by Faith resting on
the merits of Christ as having satisfied his Fathers Justice, and fullfilled
the Law for us, we apply to our selves the promise of Salvation, because we
find in our selves by a reflexive knowledge, the performance of the condition
annexed to the promise, and accordingly ^eleive without doubt, or wavering that
remission of sins and, redemption from Hell, purchased by Christ's death or
his passive obedience, and life everlasting obtained by his Active, belong unto
us. Particular Faith and its properties.


This particular faith is a Jewel of great worth, for God and Christ, Heaven
and happiness depend upon it; and as it relates to the promises held forth in
the Gospel unto us, it is made up or compounded of these three Ingredients.
First, a consident persuasion that if I be not wanting to my self, not
neglectfull of the means, and so fail not on my part, Christ will not fail
in his. Secondly, a forceing of all the powers and faculties of Soul and Body
to perform the condition on which the promise is made. Thirdly, an Applying
the conditional promise by way of comparison and selfe-examination to my
particular present Estate and condition, and thence drawing this sweet
Inference upon sight of the condition in my self, that I am such a one to whom
the promise belongs, and shall have a part in it if I persevere in
well-doing, and do in the profession of godliness, as the Kine did which
carried the Ark to Bethsh^mesh, who took the strait way, and never stopped nor
stayed, 1 Samuel 6.12.
not turned aside to the right hand or to the left.

Now for the comfort of tender Christians, who find in their lives many
turnings and windings, many slips and failings, sins of natural infirmity, of
sudden surreption, and daily incursion, as lustful motions, distrustful
thoughts, a disorder in the Passions or the like, against which they strive,
and bend the force of their best endeavors to subdue them, but cannot, by
means of that Body of sin, Romans 6.6.
that lump of flesh, that principle of weakness, which they carry about them;
for the comfort of such, I must add this by way of a Corolarie or appendix to
the former Treatise, (which points at a Collective perfection scarce to be
found in a Christian,) It is this, Peccatum non damnat quod (...) nen placet
August.
That such frailties and Infirmities if they be bewailed daily in an humble
confession to Christ, if they be stroven against, and by a constant use of the
means [as prayer and fasting] be in part mastred, though a complete conquest
over them be not achieved, they shall not separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8.39
Who [as St. Paul intimates Romans 5.6. (...) etc. when we were weak died for us.

The Holy Ghost hereby assuring all such weak ones, that such sins as these, to
which their weakness betraies them, shall not damn them, so long as they be
resisted with a strict and constant opposition, with all the vigor and
activity of their souls, so that they be neither allowed of, nor conti^ued in
by a daily practice.

It remains in the last prace, that I complete what I in a manner promised in
my preface, that is for the better establishing the hearts of good Christians,
to discover more particularly then has been done before, the inward tokens and
outward fruits of sanctification, whereby they may attain to an assured
knowledge of their Election. And then for a Conclusion subjoyne some
qualifications which may [by Gods helpe] sustain the drooping Spirits of those
feeble Christians who either find not in themselves all the Signs that have
been set down in the preceding Treatise, or are burdened with the troubles of
an unquiet conscience, which is incident to the best and dearest of Gods Saints.

The Casuists prescribe unto us 2. Two ways to attain to the knowledge of our
Election.
ways whereby we may come to the knowledge of our Election, That our names are
written in the Book of the living. The First is by taking flight from Earth,
and by ascending as it were into Heaven, there to pry into Gods Cabinet, to
peep into his Closet, and to enquire into the deep and hidden Counsel of God;
this way is dangerous and not to be attempted, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
it being [besides the difficulty and danger of it] forbidden by the Word. This
Position was delivered by the Doctors in our University at the death of that
Famous and learned Man Dr. Whaly.


The Second, Is by descending into our selves in a privy search of our own
hearts, and so to climb up as it were by degrees and steps to Gods eternal
Counsel concerning the welfare of our Souls. This second way alone is to be
practiced, and it teaches us by certain signs and infallible testimonies in
our selves to collect or gather what is God's eternal purpose concerning our
Persons, our Souls and Bodies. Those testimonies which we call for their
infallibility (...) are of two sorts. The first is, The Testimony of Gods
Spirit; The Second, The Testimony of our spirits, of both which we read at once
Romans 8.15. The same spirit bears witness with our spirits that we are the
Sons of God.

The Testimony of the spirit is effected in us by an application of the
promises of the Gospel, in the form of a practical Syllogism thus;
Whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved: Ioh. 6.47.
Now when the Spirit shall [as J may so speak] break into the dark rooms of
the soul with light and discoveries, opening the eye of a man's understanding,
so as to perceive, and know that there is no other way to Heaven but by Christ,
and by stirring up the will and affections so, as to make an assumption with
freedom of Spirit, without hesitation or doubting, and to say, I believe, I
renounce my self, all my delight and comfort, my joy and confidence is in
Christ, my stay and trust is in his all-sufficient merits, from hence will
result a blessed Conclusion; Therefore shall be saved, and, I am the Child of
God. To say thus is the Testimony of the Spirit, per modum causalitatis, by way
of causality, to use the Scholemens phrase, because it proceeds no from flesh
and blood, Mat. 16.17.
from the strength of our own Will, but from the operation of the Holy Ghost,
stirring us up to believe, to embrace the promises, and to cry, Abba Father, as
St. Paul there speaks. St. Bernard has an excellent passage to this purpose,
which runs thus in English. Romans 8.15 Bern. Ep: 107.
Who is just but he that being loved of God returns love to him again? which
is not done but by the spirit of God, revealing by Faith unto man the eternal
purpose of God that concerns future salvation. Which Revelation is nothing
else but the infusion of spiritual grace, etc. He means the Grace of Faith
(as he expressed himself before) which is understood by that mark in the
forehead of the hundred forty and four thousand which stood with the Lamb in
Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1. and it is the only or chief mark of Election. And as I
take it, Christ is therefore said in one sense to be the saithfull witness,
Rev. 1. Rev. 1:5.
because by his spirit he stirs us up to believe, which is accompanied with
that inward experimental Joy and inexpressible Peace of Conscience, by the
which he in a manner witnesses to (that is assures) our souls, that we are
his, and shall infallibly one day (if we persevere in the Faith) partake of his
happiness.

The Second Testimony of our Election is the Testimony of our Spirit, of the
heart and Conscience purified and sanctified in the blood of Christ: And it
leads us to an assurance of Gods eternal love, and to a certainty of our
salvation two ways; (as we are taught by Masters in these great Mysteries.)

First, By inward tokens in it self which are so many earnests of the spirit
of Christ:

Secondly, By outward fruits which break forth in our lives and Actions.

The former are special Graces of God in the Spirit or soul of man, whereby
he may be assured of his Adoption, that he is God's Son. These tokens are of
two sorts; The one respecting our sins, The other Gods mercy in Christ who is
the propitiation for our sins. 1 John 2.2^.
The first are in respect of our sins Past. 3. marks of Election in regard
of sin Godly sorrow.
Present and To come.


The sign or inward token which respects sins past is Godly. sorrow, which St.
Paul fully describes, 2 Cor. 7.10. It is the mother, grace of many heavenly
graces, and it springs not from the Apprehension of Gods wrath but of his love
and goodness. It is that whereby a man grieves for sin as sin, for that thereby
his good God is offended and displeased, Upon which displ^asure follows the
loss of his Grace and favor, which we feel and find in the desertion of our
sad souls, when they are afrighted with the ugly sight and horror of our
sins. The Holy Ghost that we may not be deceived in judging the Truth of this
godly sorrow, has se^ down in the forenamed Chapter seven fruits thereof or
marks whereby it may be discovered.

Amendmen^ of our lives is the Sum of all those particulars which are so many
degrees and effects of true Repentance. It is a sure mark that will never fail
for sorrow for sin may fail; and hatred of sin may fail and deceive us, but
Amendment never fails; be that amendeth is only the true Convert. Secondly,
That token which is in regard of sins present, 2. The combat betwean the flesh
and the Spirit.
is that Combat between the flesh and the spirit, Gal. 5.17. and proper to
those who are regenerate, who are partly flesh and partly Spirit.

It is a fighting and striving of the Understanding, Will, and Affections with
themselves, whereby so far forth as they are renewed, they carry the man one
way, and as they remain in part corrupt, they hurrie him flat contrary, Genesis
25: 26.
yet commonly Grace like Jacob taking hold on Esaues heel pulls sin backward,
and breaking out in holy resolution, shows it self in Godly actions and for
the most part gets the Masterie over sinful provocations. Of this Temper
was St. Augustine who in one of his Sermons de Tempore confesses thus of
himself to the glory of Gods powerful grace; Sermon. 45. in Romans 7.
Can serv^o legi peccati dum concupiseam, sed mente Servio legi Dei dum non
consentiam, i. e. with my flesh, I serve the Law of sin whilst I covet and
lust, but with my spirit I serve the Law of God whilst I do not consent.

Thirdly, 3. Care to prevent sin
The token which respects sin that is in futurition or to come, which lies hid
or raked up in the Embers of our corrupt natures is a care to prevent it. That
this is a mark of Gods Children, 1 Ep. 5:18
appears by that testimony of St. John in his first Epistle; 3 Ep. 5.18
He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him
not. This care of keeping our (...) from the contagion of sin show it self
not only in ordering the outward actions of the body according to the rule of
Gods will and Commandments, but even also in regularing the very thoughts of
the heart, so as a righ^eous man is afraid to think that which the wicked is
not ashamed to Act. And this watchfullness over our thoughts, so as they be
chaste and pure, is an infallible note of the sincerity of our hea^ts.

The tokens which concern Gods mercy in Christ are specially two. 2dly.


The first is when a man feels himself distressed and loaded with the burden
of his sins, The first token that concerns Gods mercy in Christ. Luk 4.23
or when he apprehends the heavy displeasure of God in his Conscience for
them, then farther to feel how he stands in need of Christ [our heavenly *
Physitian] and withal heartlly to desire, yea to hunger and thirst after
reconciliation with God in Christ (and that above all things in the world that
can be wished or desired) this is an infallible sign that God has chosen that
foul out of the world, Ioh: 15.19.
and to all such Christ has made most sweet and comfortable promises John
7.38. Rev. 21.6. John 4.14.

The Second mark which concerns Gods mercy in Christ is a wonderful and
strange affection [if we respect the intensivenese of it] wrought in the heart
by the Spirit of God, The 2d.
whereby a man does so esteem and value, and set so high a price upon Christ
and his righteousness, Phil. 3.^.
that he accounts the most precious things that are, to be as Dung in
comparison of it. So that he would not lose those sweet contents, and ravishing
comforts which he enjoyes in his Soul and Conscience upon the fruition of
Christ, he would not part with these, (...) not for a moment, to gain as much.
Gold as would lie in the Vast Concave between Heaven and Earth. Indeed there is
no comparison between a finite and an Infinite good, between that which is
fading, and that which is everlasting.

Christ is an everlasting possession. Rev. 1.8.
The consideration of this kindled that holy flame in the breast of Saint Paul,
of which we read Phil. 3.8. whereby he set Christ upon the highest throne in
his affections, and trampled in scorn upon all worldly Commodities; The loss of
which did not move him so long as he enjoyed Christ and the riches of his grace
and goodness

And those good Souls who are so affected to Christ, and value all worldly
goods at no more then their own price, they being nothing else but so many
empty Vanities if compared with future hapiness, such men ever have in them a
love and longing desire to the coming of Christ, This love and desire to the
comeing of Christ is a Sign of the truth of our our affection to him:
[whether it be by death or to Judgement] and that to this end that their joy
may be perfected by a full participation of bliss and fellowship with him, in
whom their Soul delights. And such men when they lie upon their Deathbeds,
retaining the comfortable memory of a well acted life, behold death without
dread, and the Grave without fear, and embrace both as necessary guides to
endless glory.

Thus much of the Inward Signs of our Election or Adoption by Christ. J pass
now to the Outward token, after whose discovery (and that with brevity) I shall
wind up all with certain Corollaries or Qualifications of the former Doctrine
for the establishment and comfort of tender Consciences.

The Outward Token of our Election is New obedience, New obedience.
an holy frame of the Soul, and such a temper of Spirit whereby a man in
consideration of Gods great love unto him in making him a reasonable Creature,
a Christian, and providing Christ and Heaven for him, endeavors to show his
thankfullness by obeying God's Commandments, and making these the Rule of his
life and Actions. 1 Ioh. 2.5.
Hereby we know that we are in Him [i. e. Elected by God in Christ] if we keep
his Commandments. This Obedience must have have these qualifications to attend
it, otherwise it may be suspected as unsound and imperfect.

First, How our Obedience must be qualified.
It must not be performed with limitations and restrictions to some few of Gods
Commandments, but unto them all without Exception.

Herod heard John Baptist willingly, and did many things gladly, yet rejected
and made light of the Tho^ shall not committ ^dultery.
seventh Commandment, Mar. 6.20: many such Herod's are there amongst us. But
they must know that the badge or mark of sound obedience is it is Universality,
it stretches it self to all Gods Commandments, Ps. 119. v. 6. Then shall I
not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. As he that
amends repents, and he that obeys believes; so he that says he believes or
gives assent to the Infallible truth of God's word, yet being bewitched with
any sinful Custom, enticed by any Commodity, or hailed by any pleasure, gives
himself scope and liberty to live in the breach of any one of Gods
Commandments, be it secret or open, as constant neglect of the duties of
Religion in private, usual swearing or Lying, secret thoughts and practices of
Vncleaness, unsatiable desires of earthly greatness and abundance, unjust
increase of Riches by biting Usury, Bribery, or other secret indirect courses;
A man that allows himself in these or the like practices contrary to Gods
will revealed in his sacred word, in heart he is an Infidel, though in name he
be a Christian. He has an evil heart full of unbeliese (as the Apostle speaks
Heb. 3.12.) that having embraced certain Truths not prejudicial to it self,
upon vain and worldly considerations, and to which it may assent without
crossing it is desires and purposes, in others slips the Collar, and departs
from the living God by a refusal to yield Obedience to the Truth of that
Command which shall any way oppose his carnal affection. Ia. 2.10.
That of Saint James must be held by us for a maxim most true in the Schole of
Divinity. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point is
guilty of all. For he that acknowledges not God's sovereignty to be the same in
every Commandment, but breaks one wilfully and customarily, keeps none at
all for Conscience sake out of an humble acknowledgement of Gods supreme
Authority: And if occasion or an opportunity should invite him to sin, he would
be as ready to transgress in the rest as in any one.

Wherefore God, Heb. 4.12.
who is a discerner of the Spirit, judges him according to the disposition of
his heart; at whose door sin lies within, lurking, and ready if a strong
temptation should knock, to break forth into open act. To conclude this first
qualification of our new Obedience, I say, with a reverend and learned Divine;
Obedience, to many Commandments is indeed before God no Obedience but a flat
sin, if (...) man wittingly and willingly carry a purpose within to break any
duty of the Law. Again, He that repents of one sin heartily and seriously,
does truly repent of all: And he that lives but in one known sin without
repentance, repents of none indeed, although he pretends never so much
reformation of life.

Secondly, 2 Qualification.
As this Obedience must be Universal in regard of the Object which is the
whole law of God, so also it must be in regard of time. It must reach and
extend it self to the whole course of a man's life after he has made his peace
with God, and washed his soul in the laver of Repentance. Non confideratur in
Christianis principium sed finis; Says an ancient Father. God respects not so
much the beginning as the end in Christians. Many for want of constancy and
perseverance are now in Hell who made a fair show in the world, and began to
set footing in the race of Piety. Such as the course of a man's life is, such
is the man. Our failings in this or that particular do not prejudice our estate
before God, if so be we renew our Repentance daily, and make not a trade of
sin. It is not our falling into sin but our lying in it will damn us. There be
those now in Heaven that have been greater sinners then some of those that are
in Hell: The reason or ground of this difference is only Repentance. Heaven is
no place for unrepentant sinners. No unclean thing shall enter there. Without
aro Dogs, etc. Rev. 21.27.22.15.

Thirdly, 3. Qualification.
It is required in new Obedience that it be also Uniform, that it proceed from
the whole man; which is David's (...) His Holocaust mentioned in that
paenitentiall Psalm. Ps. 51. v. 19.
And this Holocaust or whole Burnt-Offering we then offer up unto God, when
every faculty of the Soul, and every member of the body are contributaries to
set forth His praise, and advance his glory. When our understandings are
seasoned with high thoughts of God, when we exalt him in our apprehensions to
the highest degree of Majesty, and, debasing our selves (with that good
Patriarch) to the lowest that may be, Genesis 18.27.
even to Dust and Ashes, we subject our wills to God's will by an humble
resignation of our selves to his divine pleasure, and in a cheerful readiness
either to do or suffer, whatsoever in his holy wisdom he shall think fit for
us. When our affections are chiefly set upon God, when we only fear his
displeasure (as a good Child is afraid of displeasing his Father) and tremble
at the very thought of sin whereby we may lose his favor; when upon this
ground we are no less afraid of sin then of Hell, and had rather be punished
there without sin, then sin here without punishment, Genesis 39.9.
and with chaste Joseph stick rather at the sin then at the Judgment, (which is
ever sins attendant) as those who if there were no Hell would shun the offense,
whereby the smiles of a loving God might be turned into the frowns of an angry
Lord; In a word when we love God above all things and for the love of him can
suffer the loss of all things here below in hope of enjoying him one day above
where there are pleasurs for evermore: And when we love whatsoever God loves;
when his love is made the rule of ours, so that we can love the poorest Saint
on earth above the richest Dives, when we behold God's Image stamped upon that
poor Lazarus, the Image of his Holiness, an inclination to all good and a
freedom from all wickedness, If our souls be thus tempered, if the faculties
be so well tuned, This is that reasonable service commended by St. Paul. Romans
12.1
then are they a sacrifice acceptable to God. And when all the members of our
Bodies are attemperd to our souls, so as each and every one of them serves God
in that way and in a full discharge of that work and duty for which it was made
and created.

When all the powers of our Souls and all the parts of our bodies shall thus
comply in a reverent devotion, so as when we are to act in the sacred affairs
of God, to offer or present our selves in any of his immediate services, as
hearing of the word, public or private Prayer, and receiving of the Holy
Eucharist, when our whole body shall strive (as we are bound in Conscience) to
testify the inward Veneration of the Soul, by a bare head, b^nded knees,
lifted up eyes and hands, with a cherefull and vocal sound of Gods praises
with our tongues, when the whole man shall thus ferve God as it seems St.
Basil did, of whom my Author records thus much, that he was like a * (...)
well. * (...)
strung and tuned Instrument played on by Gods holy spirit, which did ever sound
and set forth the Glory of God, If we be thus Uniformly in tune, so that there
is no jarring between the parts of our bodies and the faculties of our Souls;
Then our Obedience is entire and sound, which is more acceptable to God then
whole burnt sacrifices; and this Obedience with the forenamed Signs is an
undeniable and sure mark that we are adopted to be God's Sons.

If any desire further resolution in this point, desiring to get assurance that
he is elected to life, let him peruse with attention and a fixed Meditation
Christ our Saviors Sermon in the Mount, Mat. 5. The 15. Ps. and the 1. Ep. of
St. John (which are parcells of Scripture dictated by the Holy Ghost to the
Penmen of God for this purpose) and if he finds in himself those Graces and
Virtues commended in them to our practice, he shall not doubt of that future
blessedness which our Savior promised in that Sermon to his Disciples.

Now to annex some Corollaeries by way of caution to all tender Consciences
which may start at the former positions and be somewhat troubled, when they
find not in themselves upon scarch and enquiry, all the fore, named signs. 1.
Corolarie.


First, let such poor souls know that fire is fire if it has heat, though it
want flame. Therefore if a man finds in himself one or more of the forenamed
tokens and not all the rest, he must not set a black mark upon himself, nor
con^lude that he is rejected of God: for there is an infancy and Childhood in
Grace as well as in Nature: and he that in his first conversion has one Grace
truly wrought in his heart by the Holy Ghost, may conclude that he is partaker
of the Spirit of God though in a lesser measure and degree of sanctification,
Romans 8.9.
and having the spirit of Christ, he may with safety infer out of the word
that he belongs to Christ, and so in the number of those that shall be saved.

For in the second place we must know and believe that the first material
beginnings of the conversion of a sinner, 2. Coro.
or the smalest measures of renewing Grace have the promises of this and the
life to come annexed unto them. By beginnings I understand all those inward
motions and Inclinations of Gods Spirit that follow after the work of the Law
upon the Conscience, and spring up in the heart upon the meditation of those
sweet invitations to repentance, and of the promses to receive pardon for the
merits of Christ, all which are revealed and exhibited in the Gospel unto us.
That such inward motions of running to Christ, and shunning all things that may
displease him, that these seeds of regeneration entitle men to all the promises
of this life and of that which is to follow, if they rest not in these small
beginnings, but labor to increase them: this is confirmed by many Texts of
Scripture, and expresses of our Savior, Vid. Mat. 17.20. Es. 42.3. Mar. 10.21.
Mar. 12.34. Mat. 5:5. Jo. 7.37. Rev. 2.6. Ps. 10.17. Ps. 145.19.

In the Third place I must add for the comfort of all those who have that (...)
with the Canaanitish Woman (as Chrysostom. 3 Coro.
speaks Hom: 16 upon Gen:) who have an earnest desire to plase God in all holy
duties and services, and express that desire by the heat of their endeavor to
Obey his holy will and Commandments, yet fail through weakness in many
particulars, and fall sometimes into some scandalous sins, such men must not
for this admit of any desperate thoughts to doubt of their salvation, but try
and examine themselves by these two Rules, the only stay and succor of a poor
weak sinner.

First, Let him examine himself whether he feels and finds in his soul a
disliking of his sins as sins, as they are repugnant to Gods will revealed in
his Word.

Secondly, whether he finds in himself a desire of reconciliation with God his
heavenly Father, whose love and favor he prizes above all worldly riches; If
he desire to be reconciled to this end and purpose, that after reconciliation
God may be glorified by his Conversion, and if this desire be seconded and
backd by an industrious use of all those means which God has appointed for our
progress and increase in Grace, That man need not doubt, if he persevere in
that Godly course, but that God will make good unto him all his laving
promises, which he has made unto us in his son Christ Jesus. Let such an
humble sinner look into that of Mala: 3, 17, where it is written, That God will
spare them that fear him as a Father spares his Child, who accepts the thing
done as well done if the Child show his good will to please his Father, and do
what he can: 2 Cor: 8.12.
And thus God in mercy, who admits the will for the deed, accepts the
endeavors of the whole man to obey for perfect obedience it self.

Lastly in the fourth place if there be any [as without doubt, 4 Coro: Isa:
42.3.
and to my knowledge there be many] who are like the Prophets smoking flax and
bruised Reed, whose faith resembles a spark of fire, wrapped up in flax, or
raked up in the Embers, being smothered with doubtings, which arise from their
imbred corruption, like also to a bruised Reed being feeble and weak, and so
find not in themselves that testimony of the spirit, that strong persuasion
that their sins are pardoned, I shall for their comfort add this Corolarie, A
weak faith, asaving faith.
and so conclude; That a weak faith whereby a man is persuaded that his sins
are pardonable, and seriously desires in his heart to obtain the pardon of
them, but as yet cannot say that without doubt they are pardoned, such a faith
may as truly apprehend Gods merciful promises for the pardon of sins, as a
strong faith, though not so firmly with that soundness of Application. Even as
a man that has a palsy hand can stretch it out as well to receive a gift of a
King, as he that is more sound, though not with that firmness and steadiness in
retention. That such a weak faith quo ad substant^^m, if we respect the very
Essence or being of it is a true saving faith may be proved by these three
undeniable reasons.

First, The promises of salvation or life everlasting is made to the desire of
reconciliation, a desire that is not faint but constant and Serious, proceeding
also from an heart that is touched with shame and sorrow for it is sin. This
has been proved already in the first Corellarie out of many Texts in
Scripture, as Ps. 10.17.

Secondly, The hungring and panting desire after Grace is a sanctified
affection, and when one affection is sanctified, all in some degree or measure
are sanctified, and when all are sanctified, the whole man is sanctified, and
he that is sanctified is Justified, and he that is justified if he perseveres
in the performance of all holy duties, shall be saved.

Thirdly, God who more respects the Truth and sincerity of our faith, then
the strength and perfection of it, accepts the will to repent and believe, for
the deed, as has been already illustrated out of that noted place, 2 Cor.
8.12. Therefore, this desire of reconciliation which is an Ingredient of a weak
faith, and no fleeting motion of the heart, but proceeding from a bruised
spirit, ever bringing reformation with it, such a desire is true faith indeed
in Gods acceptance, and this touch only of the Hemme of Christ's Garment will
fetch as much virtue from him to cure our bloody Issues, as if we embraced him
in our Arms with those good men Joseph and Simeon, Mat: 27.59. Luke 2.28.
or could say with that Christian Champion St. Paul [who out of a strong faith
did outbrave Death and Hell] I am persuaded, etc. Romans 8 v. ult.

To conclude all, Let me exhort every one who with the Spouse in the Canticles
beholds his beloved Leaping upon the Mountains and skipping upon the Hills, 2
Cant. 8.
which apprehends him a far off at a greater distance by reason of the
weak-sightedness of his trembling Faith; Let such a one suffer the word of
exhortation, Let him labor for a closer and nearer communion with Christ;
never resting till he beholds Him with the spouse there standing behind the
wall. V. 9.
To this end and purpose, he must often meet Him in the Ministry of the word,
and the Administration of the Sacrament of his body and blood: A Sacrament,
whose neglect (I am persuaded) is the Cause of the great want of Faith and
Charity amongst many in these days, who are in name but not indeed and Truth
Christians.

A good Christian is of a fruitful, spreading, and growing condition; He is
ever climbing upon the degrees and steps of Grace, never resting till he
attaines to that perfection in the knowledge of Christ till he can say with
love and Cherefullness; My beloved is mine and I am his. Cant. 2.16
Blessed is the man that has attaind to this assurance; yea blessed is the man
that has the Lord for his God; who is a God not only of the Mountains but
also of the Valleys.

A man that is sunk low in an humble conceit of his unworthiness, and finds a
weakness in his faith by reason either of a want of knowledge in the Mysteries
of salvation, or by reason of the Temper of his body, a melancholy sadness
darkning his thoughts and stifling his spirits, all which increase fears and
multiply doubting Jealousies, such a dejected soul winged with strong desires
of getting that assurance of Gods love and favor, which is in well-grown
Christians, need not doubt but that God in mercy and tenderness of affection
looks upon this smoking flax as if it were a flame, and will in his good time
either blow up that spark, increase that faith, and bring it to perfection, to
a Joy in believing, Romans 15 13.
or else perfect it in Heaven with that beatificall Vision, when he shall see
God face to face in his Caelestiall Palace; which sight is the essential
happiness of Gods Saints. To this happiness God of his infinite mercy bring
Us, for the merits of his beloved Son Christ Jesus.

Amen.
Initium bonae vitae, cui vita etiam aeterna debetur, recta fides est; Est
autem fides credere quod nondum vides, cujus fidei merces est videre quod
credis. Augustinus de Verb. Apost. Ser. 27.
FINIS.

