SIR WILLIAM DRAKE HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT. Concerning the present
Distempers, and putting the Kingdom in a state of defense. November 10. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for W. L. 1641.

SIR WILLIAM DRAKE, His Speech in PARLIAMENT: November 10th. 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
IF we consider those dangerous disturbances that this Kingdom has of late
years labored under, it is certain, that in a general and original
consideration, we cannot but impute them to the wrath of God for the sins of
this nation. But in a second and more particular consideration, we may properly
assign them unto the violent Counsels of some late Ministers of State, who
either for want of Counsel; or by malicious practice, have brought this State,
from a happy, firm and strong constitution, to so weak and feeble a temper,
that the great Physician the Parliament, cannot, but with extreme difficulty,
apply remedies fit and proportionable to the disease, but they inevitably run
some hazard of indangering the body it self; it being very perilous to apply
stronger remedies then the strength and constitution of the patient can well
bear.

Mr. Speaker, You were truly told by a grave and worthy Member, at the
beginning of this Parliament: that it must be some extreme necessity that
would rectify and recover this State; and that when that extremity did come,
it would be a great hazard whether it might prove a remedy or a ruin. And this
is occasioned, chiefly because violent diseases, do most commonly require
violent remedies, and, violent remedies are ordinarily pregnant of new
mischiefs: which has caused your States, best skilled in government, always
to discern evil a far off in their causes, and by their wisdom and
foresight, prevent them: and I am confident, had we had frequent Parliaments,
we should have given a timely stop to mischiefs, and never have suffered them
to have broken in upon us with such an inundation of distempers, that without
Divine prevention, may yet swallow and destroy us.

Mr. Speaker, It Is observed of the Roman State, a pattern of best
government, so long as they held up their first virtue and valor, that after
a great defeat by Hannibal, Polye
their confederates began to forsake them. But Hero King of Siracusa, having so
piercing a judgment, that he could see through the present to the future; and
observing the Romans so considerate and constant in all their proceedings;
even in this extreme exigent of their affairs, and that their Laws were
never more strictly observed by their Magistrates, Lin.
nor their people more obedient to their Senate or Parliament, and how their
Military Discipline was never likewise more severely observed: this wise Prince
seeing their foundations stood thus firm, sent them Presents of great value,
and corresponded with them in a stricter league of friendship then ever before.
Not unlike a good Physician, who seeing favorable simptomes, in the strongest
fit of his patients disease, conceives firm hope of his perfect recovery.

Now Mr. Speaker, if we set before us an Image or representation of those
distempers we stand environed withal; there could not possibly be that
extreme danger in them, but that there might be good hopes of a speedy
recovery, had we kept close and constant to those grounds of Religion, Laws
and Military Discipline, which have bin noted by wisest Legislators, to have
bin the maine cause next under God, of the strength and duration of a State.

But Sir, If we examine it, how have our very foundations bin shaken? what
Superstition and Innovations have bin brought in upon our Religion of late
times by ambitious heady and passionate men? And from this fountain originally
as I conceive, flows most part of our present distractions. Queen Elizabeth,
of sacred and precious memory to this nation, keeping steadfast and constant to
this ground of Religion, kept this Kingdom peaceable and united at home,
afforded a comfortable influence and assistance to the Protestant parties
abroad, and after a long and happy Reign, went unto her eternal rest in glory.

And truly Sir, I speak it with all humility, yet with some confidence, that I
shall never expect, to see the quiet settled state of this Kingdom, till there
be some course taken to settle Religion to some rule and uniformity, and not to
be thus suffered in an uncertain condition, between illegal Innovations and
superstitions on the one side, and I know not what lawless and Irregular
confusion on the other.

And let us all I beseech you, calmely and seriously consider, how natural a
motion it is to most men, not limited by some Law, when they are come out of one
extreme, wherein they have bin held by fear, to run with a swift violent
course into another extreme; from superstition and idolatry to irreverence and
contempt of Gods public Worship and Ordinances.

For our Laws (Mr. Speaker) how have they bin violated by illegal Taxations,
Imprisonments, Monopolies, and other pressures, whereby the Subject has bin
prosecuted and grieved; but this is so obvious to every man's understanding and
sense, that I shall not insist upon it.

M. Speaker, I come next to our Military Discipline, and how has this ground
of strength bin shaken, partly by the loss of able and experienced Commanders
in fruitless, if not dangerous, attempts abroad; and partly by neglect, and
not duly keeping up our musters at home.

M. Speaker, Every man may lay it as lightly to heart as he please, but I shall
be bold to tell you that all the Laws that we have or shall make for the
defense of our Religion or Liberties without provident care in this particular
will be but like to sumptuous and glorious structures without roof or
covering, subject to all weather and storms that shall arise, and whatever
Parliaments shall with great wisdom and providence plant for the good estate
of future times, without due provisions for our Military defense, may be soon
cut down again by the violence and malice of a stronger sword.

Therefore (M. Speaker) as you have taken a provident care for the securing of
the Havens and Port Towns, so I desire there may be timely consideration had of
the Inland strength of the Kingdom, and that the Musters in all Counties of
the Kingdom be carefully (especially in these perilous times) kept up; and
that care be taken that every County may have a sufficient proportion of
powder, and other provision for their necessary defense. And that all commands
may rest in faithful hands, and that certificates of the true state of all
things how they stand for defense, may from time to time be sent either to the
Council of War you appoint for Ireland, or to any other whom the Parliament
shall think meet, and thereupon to take order from time to time, to supply all
defects, as well of Captains, as of Munition, Powder, and other necessaries.

M. Speaker, This point is more timely to be had in consideration, because our
perils will increase, as foreign estates settle and compose their affairs to
their best advantage: And therefore I shall desire that our quietness may not
rest any longer upon so tickle a ground, as the unquietness of our Neighbor
Kingdoms; for no State stands firm and secure, but upon its own foundations.

There is one thing more with which I will conclude, and I shall humbly
represent it as, in my weak opinion, a great cause of our growing distempers,
which is the abundance of humors we have stirred, and not purged away, which
are but fit fuel for fresh fires to take hold of, if it should burst forth;
therefore as there be a great number of this State, Qui paena and calamitate
publicae impunitatem sibi spondeus; I shall make it my humble motion and
desire, that we make some severe examples of some few of the most capital
offenders, and either pardon the meaner delinquents, if Justice will admit
thereof, or at least to let them in some reasonable time know what they may
trust too; otherwise you shall have as many as look desperately upon their
own fortune be too ready to give their vote for troubles, and seek their own
peace in the public disturbance, the number of whom, as I conceive, would be
warily prevented, especially in these times of increasing distraction.

Sir, I have troubled you too long, and am not so inconsiderate, but to object
to my self, that some (...) are of more instant present considerations than any
thing I have touched upon. As your sending (...) for Ireland, but I desire as
those affairs are in some (...) sure settled in a way we may timely apply our
selves to the Root and causes of our distempers, and to begin with those of
most importance, and to proceed with them to effect.

FINIS.

