An Hearty Acknowledgement, and humble Advertizement for the vindicating of the
Law of Nature, Reason, and Justice.

PRESENTED By the Defrauded and Distressed Creditors, and the poor and
oppressed Prisoners, To the Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth, the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

Qui monet ut facias, quod jam facis, etc. Also an ESSAY: Whereby to make
manifest the Concealed Estates of able Debtors, and fraudulent Settlements; By
which evil Practices many Widows, Orphans, and other honest People of this
Nation, have been, and are daily Deprived of their whole Livelihoods, a --

Quicquid sub terra est, in appricum proferet Aetas. Printed, MDC. LIX.

RIGHT HONORABLE:
THis present PARLIAMENT seems (like to Moses in his minority) to have been
preserved in your frail and flaggie Arkes of flesh, amidst the perilous and
uncertain waves of the late Governments for the vindicating our English Israel
from its (more then Egyptian) bondage, (i. e.) The tyranny of the practice of
the Common Law in these later times. It is the hope, and prayer of many
thousands, that ye may Imitate Moses (in the growth of your strength) in those
two most remarkable Acts of his; First, in smiting the Egyptian, the man of
Sin; (the cruelty, and iniquity of the practice of the Laws) that he dye.

Secondly, in composing Differences between brethren; albeit ye may (ptobably)
expect but an evil Requital from one (the most Injurious) of them, as Moses
had, who made the Ruler over us? In order hereunto it is the humble Request of
many defrauded and extremely dis^ressed Creditors and others, who have long,
and now do sue (in vain) in Forma pauperis, and of all poor, and oppressed
Prisoners, that they may be speedily and absolutely relieved against all
frauds and oppressions. It is known to all men, that the Norman yoke (contrary
to the manner of other yokes) is grown much rougher, and heavier by wearing;
but now the Cause (the Norman Monarchy) being taken away; The effect (the
Cruelty of those Laws) ought to cease. In respect to the Premises, and for
the preservation and just rights of my Countrymen of England; I am bold to
present unto your Honors these Considerations following:

1. That Bills of Middlesex, etc. carry more Cruelty and less Conscience with
them, then the Spanish Inquisition.

2. That none are Imprisoned (really) in England, but such as ought not to be,
i. e. the poorer sort, who are utterly unable to pay; whereas those who are
solvent, can give security to the Gaolors, and with their Silver key, pass
when, and whither they please. And that by these means the Prisons for Debt,
are Sanctuaries for Knaves, Purgatories for Christians, warehouses, and Shops
for the Lawyers, and their ministers, Bayliffes, etc. and ^aolors (all the
worst of men) and Slaughter-houses for the Devil.

3. That those who have most need of Justice, and are most injured, (the
paupers) seldom, or never obtain any Justice, or Equity; it being as
impossible to promove a Suit either in the Common Law, or Chancery with a
paupers purse, as to move a Mountain with a Child's or Sick man's strength.

4. That it will be impossible to administer relief, or Justice to those
Indigent persons; unless Intayl'd estates, but most especially fraudulent
Settlements of estates in Marriages (or otherwise) be questioned, and examined
in their behalf, and as there shall appear Cause, be rendered responsible. It
being Incumbent on all Supreme Courts of Indicature to grant Relief against
such Frauds, which neither could be prevented by Law, nor can be relieved by
the ordinary rules of Equity. And that it may be considered, that all
Settlements of Estates either before, or after the Debt contracted (being eodem
animo fallendi, with the same purpose of deceiving) are equally fraudulent; the
borrower well knowing, that by a private settlement of his whole estate, he had
made himself irresponsible, which the Lender could not know; but conceived that
himself and Heir being obliged by bond should have both been liable to give
satisfaction with the estate, which belonged unto the Borrower.

5. That the first Institution of Intailes was in ^ea. the 1. his Reign, on
purpose to keep the Normans about him, who were selling their Estates in
England, and returning into Normandy; but this afterward was derived to the
Nobility, and Gentry of this Nation; which (however) is not like to the Laws
of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, for we find that there is no Intaile
whatsoever, but is, or may be, cut off by Leviing a Fine, or by Act of
Parliament, to serve the turns of the owners; and why this ought not to be
done to satisfy Common Justice, no good reason (as I conceive, under favor)
can be given; what is pretended, for the preserving of families; It may be
alleged by many Creditors that by the preserving of one Family (which is often
also destroyed with Pride, Riot, and Luxury) ten others, and some of them, of
as good, or better quality then the other, may be, and often are ruined. That
all Entailed estates of Debtors by the free and full execution of the Laws are
totally liable to the satisfaction of Debts during the Life of the debtor;
whereby the Wife, and Children are, or may be reduced to extreme want, and
misery; whereas by the selling of those Estates all parties may be relieved and
preserved. So that an Act to this purpose will appear rather an amicable, and
conscientious Composition, and preservation on all parts, then any way
injurious; when on the contrary, the Debtors estate being extended during his
life, the Wife and Children do most unnaturally and unchristianlike expect, if
not desire o^ contrive the untimely death of Husband, and Parent, and many
times all perish by an irrational and ungodly obstinacy, as many Instances in
this kind may be given.

For the Discovery of able Debtors Concealed Estates.
6. That all Masters of Prisons (especially of the Vpper-Bench) deliver in the
names of those Securities, which they have received for those Prisoners who lie
in the Rules, and go at large, or slightly guarded. And that those who are
Security for such Prisoners, may also deliver in the Names of the collateral
Securities from the Prisoners to save themselves harmless, and likewise that
all such persons, who shall be suspected by the Creditors to have any of the
Debtors estates entrusted with them, may be strictly examined to that purpose.
And all this to be done upon Oath, or a full Declaration, and attestation of
the premises under their hand writings witnessed; and that the falsifying
either of Oath or hand in this kind may be punishable as Felony. The detaining
of any man's estate after the time of the Creditor or owners Consent is expired,
being of the same nature, and detriment to the party injured, as the taking the
same from him by stealth or force: And that Frauds, and wilfull-unjust dealing
in this kind deserve a more severe punishment, then other Thefts or Robberies.

These being committed for the most part by reason of extreme want, and for
selfe-preservation; the other to satisfy unsatiable Lusts, or unbounded
Avarice, being most wickedly ambitious thereby to raise or preserve their own
Families by the Ruin of others for the most part much better in all respects
then themselves or theirs. And lastly, how contrary these practices are to the
right Rule of Reason, and Justice, the nature, and well being of the (...) of
Mankind; and the Test of a good Conscience; It is left to all rational and
unbyassed men, and all upright and conscientious Christians to judge.

The very Heathen, who were guided only by the instinct of Nature and precepts
of Morality, were very seldom or never peccant herein, but held it always as
a thing sacred, and absolutely necessary, Suum cuique tribuere. -- Fiat
Iustitia Ruat (imo magis floriat) Parliamentum.

It will appear, that by the performance of this Justice and Charity, ye will
not only render your selves acceptable to God, your own Consciences and all
good men, but shall also have the hearts, hands, and estates of many thousands
ready to maintain all your Honorable, and pious Achievements.

THe humble address of a Gentleman of good birth and education, who being by
fraud (and this by a few persons whose estates may be rightly estimated at more
then 100000. pounds) bereaved of an estate of 20000. l. value at the least, and
for want of Money being utterly disabled to vindicate his rights by Law or
Equity, has been also twice wrongfully and miserably Imprisoned by the design
of some of his own Debtors and near Relations, who have been formerly much
obliged by him; and is now hourly in danger to be drag^ to Prison ag^^n by the
Agents of the same persons, and is also for the present totally destitute of
any means to preserve his life being more then 58. years aged, or to recover
any part of his Estate.

By these means like a Bird (whose wings are clip't) he lies prostrate and
panting at your Honors feet; submissively craving your protection for bread,
breath and liberty, etc.

A verse may take those, who a Sermon fly,
So godly, and the learned Herbert; I
Hope from your pious Ingenuitie.
PRinces pretended wants extort great sums
From Subjects; these (true-Beggers) ask but Crumbs
From Kings; such Loanes, or Gifts, they are
As the most home bred-Charity may spare.
And that with safety too, Heaven will be bound,
When no Security with Man is found:
If that is not liked; ye Landlords of our Earth
May make your own Conditions; grant new Birth
Of Justice in our Laws, and Conscience true,
Lend a Million, yee'le be paid your due
With Interest of Thanks, and Honor; Then
Your Faces will shine bright fore God, and men.
A Brightness far beyond those glittering Roofes,
Coaches, and Tombs; ah; These are small Behoofes.
When Kings shall once again be turned to Clay.
And silly-Folkes enquire where now are They?
Well-polisht virtue survives Marble; and
Conscience, and Truth (like Rocks of Diamonds) stand
Fair, and unblemisht to Eternity.
When all things else decay; These never Dye.
So shall your Names inrol'd in the book of Life.
Live ever free from Change, and void of strife.
This is the Prayer of To. D. and many thousands injured Creditors, and
oppressed Prisoners.


