A POEM UPON His Sacred Majesty, His Uoyage for Holland: By way of DIALOGUE,
BETWEEN Belgia and Britannia.

By Mrs. D' ANVERS.

LICENSED,

December 23. 1690. J. F.



LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bever, at the Hand and Star, near Temple Bar, in
Fleet Street, MDCXCI.

TO THE High and Mighty PRINCESS MARY Queen of Great Britain. etc. ALICIA
D'ANVERS Humbly Dedicates this POEM.
BRITANNIA. WRetched Britannia! Hapless, and undone!
How have my Follies called this Vengeance down,
And angered Heaven to so severe a Frown?
Shall a Cursed Nicety of Honors Law,
Tug from these Fondling Arms, my Dear Nassaw?
Councils, or hated business, call thee hence!
To Love, and Me, nothing's a just pretense.
Injurious War! Curse on the very Word;
Unkind Bellona, if thou'st called my Lord,
Shield that dear Bosom from the Ungentle Sword.
Gods! -- Should Britannia find that Rival there;
What ill remains? What is there left to fear?
Had not rough Sounds, and Groans of Dying Foes,
Charmed thy brave Youth, I had ignor'd these Woes.
Now less beloved, and fewer Charms I wear
Than Wounds, or Death itself received in War;
Ah me! Why was he born a Conqueror?

BELGIA. What D^mon fills thy be(...)ding Soul with Fears
Nymph, What has rais'^ the Storm (...) Sighs and ^ears

BRITANNIA. O(...) you demand It Is a Di^courteous part,
To give the Wound, and wonder at the Smart.
Have you not rent my Heart, and stabbed my Soul,
And all my Joys with my dear Albion stole?
By you at once of Love, and Guard bereft,
And to the Triumphs of Proud Gallia, left
Cruel -- yet to such Griefs you would add Restraint,
And check the Echoes of my loud Complaint.

BELGIA. Thou Rav'st, Fond Maid, such Idle Dreams as these
Assist thy Impatience to o'erthrow, thy Peace:
Gave I not first thy Albion to thy Arms,
Bold, and Undaunted, full of Martial Charm
In Armor were his first Approaches made,
And Warlike Sounds the only Serenade:
Your Infant Loves by War more Sinewy grew,
While Mars on Albion smiled, no less than you.
Here could I tell the Everlasting Story,
Of my Nassaw, and Noble Albion's Glory.
Had not the dazzling luster of his Name,
Already filled the wondering World with Fame.
To you, 'twere but Impertinence to prove,
The sole Inducement of Your Heart to Love;
Can you forget what Charms in Honor dwells?
Honor, Divinest of all Magic Spells!
By which my Dastard Soul's secured from fear,
And the hoarse Sounds of War delight my Ear.
Suppose our loved Nassaw, by fierce Alarms
(The Voice of Glory) summoned to his Arms.
My Tears were an unpardonable Wrong,
What General ever was harmed, who Honor won?
Must such fond Sorrows injure Albion?
Have I less Love than you? Is he less mine?
Yet I can hold a Grief like yours a Crime;
I Would scorn to own, nay Blush, to think a Sin,
You Have indulged your Heart so fondly in,
Methinks you're bold indeed, who dare Repine
At the Commission of the Powers Divine;
Since they are pleased to honor Albion so,
While Heaven directs as Generalissimo,
But ever I push these Martial Thoughts too far,
Which I perceive so ungrateful to Your Ear.
Least your mad Passion by mistake be ^and,
Know I Have not called your Albion to Command,
But to Consult, and to secure your ease,
His business! -- Belgia and Britannia's Peace --
And can his Absence, such well managed Hours,
Admit of such Ungrateful Sighs as yours?
Blush at the foolish Fondness of a Bride --

BRITANNIA. Blush at the wild Excursions of your Pride.
My Albion! Could my Albion come from you,
Be my kind Lord, and not ungentle too
Well, my Stepmother, now too late I Have seen,
What all Your Actions, and Your Drifts have been.
Why were my Praises spoke to Albion,
Called Fair, and Loved, and Courted, and Undone?
Malicious Gallia could but Curse my Joys
Which Belgia gave, and she alone destroys,
Now the Fantastic Ape, Laughs, shows her Teeth,
While the dull Crowd resounds my killing Grief;
But since my Tears must buy you Gallia's Smile,
No more let me be called the Happy Isle:
My Tears -- Alas! your Cruelties are more,
You Would quench her thirsty Vengeance with my Gore.
No sooner shall my dear Nassaw be gone,
Neatly retired, by yuor Pretenses home,
But Gallia claps her Poniard in my side,
And clears the way for a more Beauteous Bride.
Fonder -- More Foolish Belgia, to suppose
That my Remove shall not increase your Foes.
Mine shall despise thee, for the Inhuman Deed,
But for thy Crimes, Why should my Albion bleed?
For whom you spread your Macha villian Snares,
And fill with dull (to me dull) State Affairs,
Frown not, my Albion, though I disapprove,
The kindness of my dear mistaken Love,
I shake not for my worthless self so much,
As I can die to think thy dangers such.
Can Belgia boast in thee a larger share?
She may -- but not her Love with mine compare
Should Albion fall her Honor's Sacrifice,
Could her harsh Voice adorn his Obsequies,
Like the soft Mournings of my tender Cries?

BELGIA Then my harsh Voice offends your Curious Ear,
In your fair Eyes, I Am Ridiculed, (...)ear,
But since you have been pleased to (...)front me so,
No fears of mine forbid to let you know,
That you Britannia have been found of late,
Soft to a Scorn, Nice, and Effeminate,
From your Brave Ancestors degenerate.

BRITANNIA. Hold Angry Matron, hold, What have I done?
Pardon the hasty Errors of my Tongue,

BELGIA. It Is your Erroneous Zeal for Albion,
Which, I believe has offered me the wrong;
But your blind Love for him shall never be
Pretense, thus to reproach, and injure me.
Britannia, the just Gods, as well as thee,
Could never forget so black a Perjury;
Would I please Gallia with thy Overthrow,
Could Hell contrive, and break so strict a Vow?
You heard when I against the Strumpet swore,
Then let her Name offend my Ear no more:
Nor is this all, you are bolder yet, and dare
Censure the Love I to your Albion bear,
You're Young, and Smooth, and scorn these rough old Hands,
Which wrapped his tender Sides in Swaddling Bands;
It Is true, proud Nymph, what you disdain to own,
These Withered Breasts gave Suck to Albion.
While on my Careful Knee Heaven's Darling sat,
By this Knee raised to a more Glorious Fate,
The Child with Laurels played, and smiled on Bays;
While in his Ear I sung his future praise.
This hoarse rough Voice, which you so much despise,
Often brought kind Morpheus to his half-clos'd Eyes,
Shall not a Nurse, and Tender Mother too,
Feel Pangs of Love as sharp, and strong as you.
Shall Nuptial Vows, or Fair Britannia's Charms
For ever lock my Albion in her Arms.
Lock him for ever from these Longing Eyes,
Belgia (ye Gods!) with Expectation dies.
Why have I Wished, and Sighed so long in vain?
Partakes Nassaw of his soft Brides Disdain,
And fears to see this Wrinkled Face again?
He has gazed upon thy Winning Face so long,
'Till I Am scorned as much by Albion, --
But see he comes, spite of thy Wrath he will come.
Nassaw, now to the Gods I Will trust again,
Those Gods I never trusted yet in vain;
When poor Hibernia called him to her aid,
(Whose gashly Wounds, made Mars himself afraid)
'Twas those kind Gods returned the Mortal Blow,
Heaven will not spare him yet -- I Belgia know
There Is greater things for Albion yet to do:
But hold -- Britannia, you have forgot, I find,
How dear a Pledge your Lord has left behind; --
Thou Smil'st again, How fast thy Sorrow dies,
Sorrow, the Fair Britannia's worst Disguise!
Fresh Beauties in thy Cheeks themselves display!
What can the Lovely change pretend to say?

BRITANNIA. That I no more can for his Absence mourn,
Who leaves so dear a Pledge of his Return,
Belgia 'twas cruel, and your fault indeed,
To let my Soul so long with Sorrows bleed,
You Have wronged my Heart, (Belg.) Then there was wrong for wrong,
Give me your hand, be Friends, and let us a'done.

FINIS.

