DREGS OF DROLLERY* OR OLD POETRY IN ITS RAGS.

A full cry of Hell Hounds unkennelled to go a King-catching;

To the Tune of Chevy-Chace:

LONDON, Printed in the year 1660.

TO His most Honored Friend and Cousin, George Lord Monk, Vicount Poderidge,
Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Essex, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
Lord General of all His Majesty's Forces in the three Kingdoms, Master of his
Horse, and one of his most Honorable Privy Council.

DREGS OF DROLLERY, OR OLD POETRY In its Rags, etc.
To the Tune of Chevy-Chase.
1.
OF Buck-hunting, and Fox-catching
I have heard; But th'Royal Game,
King-catching, nere was heard of yet,
From the shrill Trumpet of Fame.
2.
Yet this unheard of drerefull sport,
I sadly sit and sing;
By Rebel Rogues acted upon
As gracious, as great King.
3.
His Judas servants first are the^
That for unrighteous wages;
Him shamefully into th'hands betray
Of Jewish bloody Sages.
4.
To him all things presented are,
Disordered in the Nation;
And therefore must a Parliament,
Be called for Reformation.
5.
Pembroke the wise, his mouth now ope's,
And tells him that he is nigh ill;
And that there now remains no hope,
(As he has heard from Mighill)
6.
To sage advice his ear bow down,
Unless he shall prove willing;
Lose surely he will, his triple Crown,
Called alias fifteen Shilling.
7.
A monstrous hand is then held forth
Of one of Anak's sons;
With six Fingers, that their design,
Even he may read that runs.
8.
And that strange antic names be not
Wanting to these Dissemblers;
These signally must now be called,
Kimbolton and five Members.
9.
These on a roar the whole house set
Impetuously a crying,
The peoples peace cannot be redeemed
Without great Strafford's dying.
10.
Then tumults raise they such, no sound
Is to be heard to ring,
But first we will no Bishops have,
And then we will have no King.
11.
And these like Bull-dogs traind indeed,
First fly't the Bishops head,
And never leave their hot pursuit,
Till Canterbury's dead.
12.
Our blessed brethren then, the Scots,
Must come into our aid;
For which their love they must have Pounds
Three hundred thousand paid.
13.
Horned Essex then into Regiments
Divides his City power;
For which horned beasts all still shall be
Upon Record in the Tower.
14.
And Atkins then with his wide stretch
Does his great Horse bestraddle,
That of the color of his Chain,
Eftsoons he makes his saddle.
15.
Then Is Edge-Hill-Fight, where whilst is seen
Many a brave soul on the ground,
Stout Wharton with his Morglai keen,
Is in a Saw-pit found.
16.
With more than good speed, then to'th' Town
of Gloucester high's our Liege;
And with a courage like himself,
Lays to it a close Siege
17.
Him after Cuckold Essex Posts,
And close to work he falls;
And with his Rams horns, Josuah-like*
He blows down the City walls.
18.
And thence away with winged speed,
Gets him into the West:
The King he follows soon, and chase
Gives to this Royal Beast*
19.
Thence to Exon come, and there having cheered
His Dear, and blessed his baby;
To Oxon then he hastes away,
With all the speed that may be.
20.
And now, when Essex had his hire
Of treason, by poison, paid;
And all his valiant traitorous acts,
By th'wall (...) are laid.
21.
Black Tom in this cursed Cuckolds place,
Being now his Oxcellence grown,
Tamely he hopes the King to seize,
But finds this great Bird flown.
22.
The King is now the Scottish Faith,
For safety, forced to sound;
But basely they him deliver up,
For two hundred thousand pound.
23.
Now, for's possession, to Holmeby brought,
One striveth to out-wit another;
But the Independents here is too hard
For his Presbyterian brother.
24.
Thence to Hampton Court in triumph led,
He Is there put in t'a fright,
B' Horse-regiments, and therefore must
Away to th'Isle of Wight.
25.
Cowes Castles first for the captive King,
Thought a convenient ward;
But then, for more security,
Hurste Castle a stronger guard.
26.
To James then first, thence Westminster,
Where he receives his charge,
From more Tertulluss's than one,
Whereon they boldl' enlarge.
27.
Black Bradshaw then in Bloud-red-robes,
Old Pontius Pilate acts;
And passes on our Sovereign Lord,
Sentence for traitorous acts.
28.
To White Hall last, his Royal Seat,
With strong guards they him bring;
To go forth from his Banqueting House,
To an Heavenly banqueting.
29.
One of's accusers, Dorislaus,
To his place (you know) is gone;
With Hoil, his Judge; and what o'th'rest*
Becomes, you will hear anon.
30.
And that all the Kings Enemies,
May prosper as did they,
All Loyal Subjects of the King,
I Am sure, will heart'ly pray.
The Wise man dies as the Fool; Eccles. 2. 16.
FINIS.
An Hymn, penned by an old Barde; but set to a new Tune of a latter date (
When I came first to London Town;) and now the rather thus far exposed to
public view; for that it is conceived to have something of a Prophetic Spirit
in it.
1.
NOw Countermarch Noll and face about;
The time is at hand of thy fatal rout;
Now the Lords Anointed begins t'appear;
No more room for thy Saints, and Idols is hear:
And now that these cease their phanatick noises,
Gods Preachers spite of thee, shall lift up their voices.
2.
The Soldier may practice now every day,
To trail his Pike a funeral way.
No sound to be heard from the beat of the Drums,
But look about Oliver, Rowland comes:
And all the notes, the clarions sound,
Is Noll must on a dry Hill be drowned.
3.
It Is time for thee Oliver to turn Hector,
For General thou may not be and Protector.
Look well to thy self; since the people all cry,
Noll must a Tibur-Martyr dye.
And it is their only unanimous vote,
An Haltar's the knife must cut Nolls throat.
4.
Now plaints of all sorts are entered the ears
Of the Highest, with Widows and Orphants tears;
These unto him will never cease to cry,
Till shamefully Noll there come to dye,
And these such vengeance shall draw down on thine head;
As shall make thy Nose look Hellfire red.
5.
Now Mopsa must cease to be a Queen,
And lie on her Parsley-bed so green;
And from her high surfeit of courtly wishes,
Learn her old trade of washing the dishes.
And since her old Oliver's going to his place,
Find out a new Traitor, to regain her Grace.
6.
And now her Jone-ship the three Kingdoms sway,
Sees that no longer she continue may;
That she may yet in some way be served,
Though she nor bread nor water e're deserved;
From her new Blackhall time that she address her,
To her old Royal Palace of Gurmunt-Chester.
7.
Now Salisbury and Pembroke, those two lofty Knaves,
That base Lenthals tamely are far baser slaves;
That take it for a character of their noble strain,
Like Hand-men, to bear up this poor Speakers train.
Dove, Garter, as those spurs, shall jointly loose,
Whilst Oliver's neck's tied up in a Noose.
8.
Now Pride to his Grain-tub must retire,
And Barksteade to's trying of dross by fire:
The one for his Crest a Thimble shall wear,
The other for his Arms a Sling shall bear.
And Vinour and Pack their spurs shall loose,
Whilst Oliver's neck's tied up in a Noose.
9.
Now high time for Prideaux to hye him away
To Black-Hall, where great Abaddon bears sway;
And since that of late he is dropped into Hell,
Where the Devil on his bones are feasting full well;
And his Soul in the Lake the Saints still see burn,
By Post 'twill be late to bethink of return.
10.
Now the Eagles chicks, with his wings displaid,
Gins bravely t'appear, by his fast friends aid;
And Coplestone with his sharp edge eyeing,
And the thin skull of his false honor descrying,
On his Cople-crown a stone shall let fall,
And so spoil a Knight and a General.
11.
Time then Doctor Walker in haste be fetched,
To make his last Will, whose neck must be stretched,
And thus religiously he begins,
It Is too late repent me of mine old sins;
And therefore my soul, after its long night,
To him I bequeath, has to it most right.
12.
To Bradshaw I give my cruelty,
To say and seal mine hypocrisy:
To Commissioner Fines my cowardice,
To Atty Haselrigge my covetise;
Mine heart to my Mistress, Lamberts wife,
When th'Gallows shall me have bereaft of life.
13.
Return shall we to our Trade, Pride thou shall be
Great Elder of our Swine-Presbytery;
And we having by Money got, and the Law of clubs,
We Will reconverse gladly with our Draugh-tubs;
And the Swine all the week we have fed with Draught
From the same Tubs on the Sabbath shall rarely be taught.
14.
And now, as the Swedes late frantic Queen,
Since no longer I may be what I have been.
O! That I might to Jamaica go!
But that way's obstructed both to and fro:
The place then I find must, for which I am bent,
Whither mine Harbinger Hannum before I have sent.
Or this mock Mock-panegyrick.
HOw does the present State toward us abound,
From whom ought nothing, but divine Truth sound?
How do they their late Ancestors outvie,
Toward our Tribe in works of piety?
The former is confined to a petty cure,
And whilst t'a Directory they us enure;
Though the pains they spared us of a studied Prayer,
Yet made they each Pulpit their triumphant Chair.
These our Commission graciously enlarge,
And grant each of us an Apostles charge.
The former forced us with our dawbing praise,
Basely to follow their triumphant Baies.
These, as the purest Gold, trying us by fire,
Their worth constraines in silence to admire:
So that cause it speak to the height none can,
We may no longer speak of God, or Man;
And yet, whilst Egypt's Taskmasters did sore
Oppress God 's people, as they still the more
Increast; whilst there our Bishops strive to rowt
Both Root and Branch, they thus still thick sprowt.
Each such a Bishop now, as has no less
Than the whole World for his vast Diocese.
And so are made now, by this blessed Crew;
Thousands of Gentiles for one wandering Jew.
And therefore, when, with brave acts of your glory;
You shall great volumes fill of Ballad-story;
Whilst daily at to Andrews corner there are sung,
The Ropes shall be yours, wherewith the Bells are rung.
Of Tombs his being Preacher in the Temple, And then afterward a new Gate made
thereinto from the Divel-Tavern.
ONce near the Temples pinnacle was seen
A Spirit unclean, and that the like has been
Among Tombs I Have heard, so that not strange to see
Tombs and the Devil sweetly to agree.
Tombs was the first, this Devils morris led;
Since thousands are there, him have followed:
'Twixt the Devil and Temple since such harmony*
That each to other passes readily.
Yea, each of these with us has the same lot,
To each we offer that they hurt us not:
And now the Templers getting where he was*
The Devil to him's no better than an Ass.
Newgate and Temple are now very near,
To the Devil fro the Temple the way now is clear.
Cromwell's march to Grocers-Hall.
ROom, room, make room, for your great General,
That on his march is now to Grocers-Hall:
His Rufties, and his Mufties, making way,
With bare teeth, fore him to a City fray,
And, as he rides, he ducketh, the boys to court,
Whilst they of this his courtship make them sport;
Only a Butcher, a true well-bred Lown,
In Wastecoats, red as Bradshaw's Scarlet Gown;
Within a Coach thinking he had seen his Fere,
Would Rumps and Kidneys fain have changed with her.
But on they go, and got the Hall within,
Their brains with Sack well warmed, there does begin
A Fray, enflamed with many a well filled Glass,
As thereto th'Counter-scuffle is an Ass.
Cushions, their breeches till now never did know;
Now valiantly they at each other throw.
And Atkins has out-flung with that smart spring,
And its guts 'bouts his ears so fluttering;
That Sack and it, so dye his chops in red,
No guts in's breech he has left him, less in's head.
And now enough has each of Pepper-grains,
Whilst ^^ch ^an^ Nutmegs yet, to cool his brains.
And in their Lords Coach set is suc^ a spoak,
That now he needs wheels most, they all are broak.
Grand Signieur and his Bashaws.
GRand Signieur Cromwell now himself bewail^,
For spreading so fa^re's grander Bashaws sails;
For now, for want of Ballast, every day,
Each the^r great Masters threats to over-sway:
Yea so far are they now with him to bring,
In no wise will they hear of's being King.
Mean time, whilst we in Coffee ^aily he^lth,
To make good w' have a Turkish Commonwealth;
And with our Turkish manners now we see,
This Turkish Phtheseude so well to agree:
Come fort^, for God's sake, all you Christian Kings:
And clip this great Turks, with his Bashaws wings;
And do a work, may well become you t'own,
Settle an exile brother on his Throne.
Upon the fall of the Stair of the Banqueting House.
THe Janisaryes to their grand Signieur come,
To visit, as to visit Mecha's Tomb.
No sooner has the Vizier the room entered
Of's great Lords presence, and there boldl'adventred
To make's address, the rest now on the stairs,
To drink in, what he spews with greedy ears:
But now they gotten up unto their height,
Soon sink those stairs under their sinful weight.
Examine their Religious very wind,
As steady as best of all them shall you find.
Their villainy is that, which sinks them dead
To th'deep Abyss, as Talents may of Lead.
And makes mean time their white, indeed Blacks Hall
No other than a Creeples Hospital:
Where heads are broak, and arms, and legs, and thighs;
But necks kept for a Tiburn sacrifice.
We cannot of that sad disaster hear
In the Black-Friars, and not shed a tear.
For that, though the Sufferers were of the Romish side,
Yet that they were Christians cannot be denied.
Such heathenish Rebels these, whom Bride-well sound,
May in a spittle sick be justly found:
And now may y' see what it is to make your King,
From the same room to pass to his suffering;
And take this for the First Fruits of your doom,
For Crowning thus your King with Martyrdom.
Upon the Authors late less of a Parsonage, for a passage in an Epistle of his
to a Sermon lately Printed, pinting ^he Knaves every day turning.
TRuth, as of old, so much more now is become
Of hatred, such a mother unto some,
That, let a man, a Knave, but dare to name,
More wince than that one will, as all the same;
So have I heard it be with many string,
No sooner is one touched, but all do ring.
That Cow-babe Fines, Fr' a Towr a shade can fright,
Dares quarrel yet Patrons undoubted sight;
And tender he, the least worm dares not harm,
Against Justice yet will stoutly lift his arm.
And boldly, blindly, sentence give that way,
Gold-weights the scale of Justice he finds sway;
And Lisle, poor Fool, that all the while Whitlock sat.
His fleering Grinders never dust open to prate,
Now, like a Virginal-jack, he still does chatter,
Though whether't be in tune, or no, no matter.
Such Gemini-keepers are they for this Isle,
That it is Treslisle Fines, as it is Fines Trelisle:
So peaceably are these two Consuls bent,
They Will never divided be in Argument:
But causes 'twixt them s' ordered may you see,
That it is naught else, but K. me, I Will K. thee.
Nor may good men see better days e're hope,
Till this their sweet accord end in a Rope.
Amen.
TO his highly esteemed Friend and Cousin, John, Lord Grenvile, Baron of Stow,
Earl of Bath and Biddiforde, Lord-warden of the Stanneryes, and Lord Lieutenant
of Devon and Cornwall, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
and one of the Getlemen of his Bedchamber.

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus; What by a graceful is expressed,
Is in men's thoughts more vigorously expressed.
GEORGE THE SECOND, FORERUNNER TO CHARLES The Second.
TO Good King Edgar's never dying praise,
It Is storied, he to God does Temples raise,
Monks for the Temples, and that the Monks abide,
Does for them liberal maintenance provide.
Lo here a Monk this Edgar does outvie,
He breath, without which the English Church must dye,
Restores unto this Church, in that the King,
Its nostrils breath, he does home safely bring,
Nay George as well as Monk is he, and has
Dragon Rumpsters put to endless scath.
Go on Great George, and make truth once more r.
Greater to make it is than to be a King.
And the reason by every boy is given daily,
Quod tale efficit magis est tale.
And since of late to our great good unthought,
From to Andrews Cross, thy self George whom thou have brought,
As Boniface does on the Imperial Throne,
Set Phocas, which to give yet's not his own;
Whilst he with universal Bishops name,
Does Boniface throughout the Worlds fame*
Our gracious Sovereign to thee prove a Carle,
I would not have, but Duke of Albemarle;
Let him create thee, yea, let him still live,
More honors of thy worth far short to give,
And the George-Garter let make still appear,
The a second English George dosts justly hear.
That lately have found out a new Charles-Wain,
For transfretating Charles thorough the Main.
Nay then the Kings Scire more must thy praise times sing,
That but a Prince thee getting, this a King.
Now Rebel-Scot, whose Viceroy George did ragin
Of late, too late it is to call George again;
Nor may Pharaticks ever hope more quarrels
To raise against our Sovereign Lord King Charles.
Yea this, and much more than I can say,
Was by thee finished, George on Charles Birthday.
Now Lilly is in his Prognostics faded,
And Wharton's Almanac true as he that made it;
Even now about much, each with other face,
And the former take the latters Newgate place.
And the Fates now observe we may decree,
Climb Haman shall Mordecay's cursed Tree.
And base Arguile according to his merit,
Shall great Montrosses unjust fate inherit;
And that the Den'shire man's the first day tried
A Courtier, now is the Proverb verifyed.
Since Grenvile, Monk, and Morris, bear all date,
Fro' the same Birthday of their great Triumvirate.
A knotty Dialogue betwixt the Good Lord Say, and the Good Earl of Northampton.
A Learned speech when many a Peer had made
In their own House, according to the old trade,
Up crawls old Say, by site of th'Isle of Lundee,
But by Religion of the Town of Dundee,
And clamours Bishops, and th'Book of Common Prayer,
As the only Trumpets to this unhallowed war.
To whom up rises the composed Lord Compton,
And thus (right Son of the Church as he is) he mumps him.
Your Lordships far from being in the right,
That Prayer thus, and Bishops to despite.
For not that Prayer the cause was, nor the Myter,
But only the Hellish Spirit of Jack-Presbyter.
And that this true is, you cannot chose but gather,
Peace, Prayer and Miter, being returned together.
And that our miseries sensibly now slack,
Since rooted out is now New-Elder-Jack.
Now Calvin may go look for his (Obey,)
Since Constantines old Bishops now're to sway:
Nay reason now shall we all have to sing,
We Lawn-sleeves, Surplice, Cross, we will have and Ring.
And now our Church to collective old Fines,
Shall say, thou shall not profane what ere mine is.
Now Presters teeth so dulled are, he cannot bite,
And the Mask is pulled off from this Hypocrite.
Upon some of the late Kings Judges.
ATkins, that have thought it th'greatest height of art,
To sweeten with the best perfume a Fart.
Thou never thought of tasting the waters of Marah,
Till the Trump now for Tiburn sounds Tarah, rah, rah, rah.
Lords Tichburn and Ireton, that as sharp were as Verjuice
In shuting up th'Church-doors against our Christmas service;
You never thought of tasting the waters of Marah,
Till the Trump now for Tiburn sounds Tarah, rah, rah, rah.
Upon the Author's Twelve pound Bishopric at Maribone, Given him by John
Foreset Esquire.
THe leaness of my Bishopric let none deride,
Since the better part by Fore-sets set aside.
This Seas yet pulse, and water, me more clear,
Than th*richest wines, and all the daintiest fare,
That the most errant, rageing, Tyrants board.
With all its greatest gayties can afford.
But why the Bishops sea's called Maribone,
Men's several fancies are not like, less one.
That Maribones it is called fro' a bone of Marrow,
Is a conjecture that is much too narrow;
Of all conjectures that is true alone;
From Maria bona it is called Marybone.
Scripsit Didimus Bullingerus Episcopus Maribonensis. Annis, 56, 57, 58, 59.
60. Ipse natus sex plusquam sexaginta.

Now th'Church robbing Major, with his more holy Horse,
Thought you had made a Covenant with Lady Mors.
You never thought of tasting the waters of Marah,
Till the Trump now for Tiburn sounds Tarah, rah, rah, rah.
Thou Lord Say and Seal do so sharply inveigh
Against the holy Book, whereby daily we pray;
Thou never thoughtst of tasting the waters of Marah,
Till the Trump now for Tiburn sounds Tarah, rah, rah, rah.
Let a man for his person be never so bold,
Thou Lambert can prove he may be a Cuckold;
Whilst thou never thought of tasting the waters of Marah,
Till the Trump now for Tiburn sounds Tarah, rah, rah, rah.
Thou Cromwell have swallowed the whole World for a time,
And thoughtst in bright luster the very Sun to outshine,
But never thoughtst of tasting the waters of Marah,
Till the Trump thee to Tophet call all Tarah, rah, rah, rah.
Go you cursed, etc. Mat. 25. 41. Nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. Qualis vita, Finis ita. FINIS.

