AMBOYNA: A TRAGEDY.

As it is ACTED At the THEATER ROYAL,

Written by JOHN DRYDEN Servant to His Majesty.

-- Manet alta mente repostum.
LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1673.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Clifford of CHVDLEIGH.
My Lord;
AFter so many Favors, and those so great, Conferred on me by Your Lordship
these many years; which, I may call more properly one Continued Act of Your
Generosity and Goodness; I know not whether I should appear either more
Ungrateful in my Silence, or more Extravagantly Vain in my endeavors to
acknowledge them. For, since all Acknowledgments bear a Face of Payment, it may
be thought, That I have flattered my self into an Opinion of being able to
return some part of my Obligements to You; the just despair of which Attempt,
and the due Veneration I have for his Person, to whom I must Address, have
almost driven me, to Receive only with a profound Submission the effects of
that Virtue, which is never to be Comprehended but by Admiration: And the
greatest note of Admiration is Silence. It Is that noble Passion, to which Poets
raise their Audience in highest Subjects, and they have then gained over them
the greatest Victory, when they are Ravished into a Pleasure, which is not to
be expressed by Words. To this Pitch, My Lord, the sense of my Gratitude had
almost raised me: to receive your Favors as the Jews of old received their
Law, with a mute Wonder, to think, that the Loudness of Acclamation, was only
the Praise of Men to Men, and that the secret homage of the Soul was a greater
Mark of Reverence, than an outward ceremonious joy, which might be counterfeit,
and must be irreverent in its Tumult. Neither, My Lord, have I a particular
right to pay you my Acknowledgments: You have been a Good so Universal, that
almost every Man in three Nations may think me Injurious to his Propriety, that
I invade your Praises, in undertaking to celebrate them alone. And, that have
assumed to my self a Patron, who was no more to be circumscribed than the Sun
and Elements, which are of Public benefit to humane kind.

As it was in much your power to oblige all who could pretend to Merit from the
Public, so it was more in your Nature and Inclination. If any went
ill-satisfy'd from the Treasury, while, it was in your Lordships Management, it
proclaimed the want of Desert, and not of Friends: You Distributed your Masters
Favor with so equal hands, that Justice her self could not have held the
Scales more even: but, with that Natural Propensity to do good, that had that
Treasure been your own, your Inclination to Bounty must have ruined you: No Man
attended to be denied: no Man bribed for Expedition: want, and desert were
pleas sufficient. By your own Integrity and your Prudent Choice of those whom
you employed, the King gave all that He intended, and Gratuities to His
Officers made not vain His Bounty. This, My Lord, you were in your Public
capacity of High-Treasurer, to which you ascended by such degrees, that your
Royal Master saw your Virtues still growing to His Favors faster than they
could rise to you. Both at home, and abroad, with your Sword and with your
Counsel, you have served Him with unbiased Honor, and with unshaken
resolution: making His Greatness, and the true Interest of your Country, the
standard and measure of your actions Fortune may desert the wise and brave;
but, true Virtue never will forsake it self. It Is the Interest of the World
that Virtuous Men should attain to Greatness, because it gives them the power
of doing good. But, when by the Iniquity of the Times they are brought to that
extremity, that they must either quit their Virtue or their Fortune, they owe
themselves so much, as to retire to the private exercise of their Honor; to be
great within, and by the constancy of their Resolutions, to teach the inferior
World, how they ought to judge of such Principles, which are asserted with so
generous and so unconstrained a Trial.

But, this voluntary neglect of Honors, has been of rare Example in the World:
few Men have frowned first upon Fortune, and precipitated themselves from the
top of her Wheel, before they felt at least the Declination of it. We read not
of many Emperors like Dioclesian, and Charles the Fifth, who have preferred a
Garden, and a Cloister, before a Crowd of Followers, and the troublesome Glory
of an Active Life, which robs the Possessor of his rest and quiet, to secure
the safety and happiness of others. Seneca, with the help of his Philosophy,
could never attain to that pitch of Virtue. He only endeavored to prevent his
fall by descending first; and, offered to resign that Wealth which he knew he
could no longer hold. He would only have made a Present to his Master of what
he foresaw would become his Prey: He strove to avoid the Jealousy of a Tyrant;
You dismissed your self from the Attendance and Privacy of a Gracious King. Our
Age has afforded us many Examples of a contrary nature: but your Lordship is
the only one of this. It Is easy to discover in all Governments those who
wait so close on Fortune, that they are never to be shaken off at any turn:
Such who seem to have taken up a resolution of being Great, to continue their
Stations on the Theater of Business: to change with the Scene, and shift the
Vizard for another part. These Men condemn in their Discourses that Virtue
which they dare not practice. But the sober part of this present Age, and
impartial Posterity will do right, both to your Lordship and to them. And when
they read on what Accounts, and with how much Magnanimity you quitted those
Honors, to which the highest Ambition of an English Subject could aspire, will
apply to you with much more reason, what the Historian said of a Roman
Emperor; Multi diuti^s Imperium tenuerunt; Nemo fortius reliquit.

To this Retirement of your Lordship, I wish I could bring a better
Entertainment, than this Play; which, though it succeeded on the Stage, will
scarcely bear a serious perusal, it being contrived and written in a Month,
the Subject barren, the Persons low, and the Writing not heightened with many
labored Scenes. The consideration of these defects ought to have prescribed
more modesty to the Author, than to have presented it to that person in the
World, for whom he has the greatest Honor, and of whose Patronage, the best of
his Endeavors had been unworthy. But, I had not satisfied my self in staying
longer, and could never have paid the Debt with a much better Play. As it is,
the meaness of it will show at least, that I pretend not by it to make any
manner of return for your Favors; and, that I only give you a new Occasion of
Exercising your Goodness to me, in pardoning the Failings and Imperfections of,
My Lord,

Your Lordships, Most Humble, Most Obliged, Most Obedient Servant, I. Dryden.

PROLOGUE TO AMBOYNA.
AS needy Gallants in the Scriv'ners hands,
Court the rich Knave that gripes their Mortgaged Lands,
The first fat Buck of all the Season's sent
And Keeper takes no Fee in Complement:
The doteage of some Englishmen is such
To fawn on those who ruin them; the Dutch.
They shall have all rather then make a War
With those who of the same Religion are.
The Streights, the Guiney Trade, the Herrings too,
Nay, to keep friendship, they shall pickle you:
Some are resolved not to find out the Cheat,
But Cuckold like, loves him who does the Feat:
What injuries soe'r upon us fall,
Yet still the same Religion answers all:
Religion wheedled you to Civil War,
Drew English Blood, and Dutchmens now would spare:
Be gulled no longer, for you will find it true,
They have no more Religion faith -- then you;
Interest's the God they worship in their State,
And you, I take it, have not much of that.
Well Monarchys may own Religions name,
But States are Atheists in their very frame.
They share a sin, and such proportions fall
That like astink, it is nothing to 'em all.
How they love England, you shall see this day:
No Map shows Holland truer then our Play:
Their Pictures and Inscriptions well we know;
We may be bold one Medal sure to show.
View then their Falsehoods, Rapine, Cruelty;
And think what once they were* they still would be:
But hope not either Language, Plot, or Art,
'Twas writ in haste, but with an English Heart:
And lest Hope, Wit, in Dutchmen that would be
As much improper as would Honesty.
Persons Represented.
By Captain Gabriel Towerson. Mr. Heart. Mr. Beamont English Merchants his
Friends. Mr. Mohun. Mr. Collins English Merchants his Friends. Mr. Lydal.
Captain Middleton, An English Sea Captain. Mr. Watson. Perez. A Spanish
Captain. Mr. Burt. Harman Senior, Governor of Amboyna. Mr. Cartwright. The
Fiscal. Mr. Wintershal. Harman Junior, Son to the Governor. Mr. Kynaston. Van
Herring, A Dutch Merchant. Mr. Beeston.
By Ysabinda Betrothed to Towerson An Indian Lady. Mrs. Marshal. Iulia Wife to
Perez. Mrs. James. An English Woman. Mrs. Cory. Page of Towerson. A Skipper.
Two Dutch Merchants.
SCENE Amboyna.

AMBOYNA, OR THE CRUELTIES OF THE DUTCH TO THE ENGLISH MERCHANTS.
ACT I.
SCENE, I. A Castle on the Sea.
Enter Harman Senior, the Governor, the Fiscal, and Van Herring: Guards. Fisc.
A Happy, day to our Noble Governor.


Har. Morrow Fiscal.


Van Her. Did the last Ships which came from Holland to these parts, bring us
no news of Moment?


Fisc. Yes, the best that ever came into Amboyna, since we set footing here, I
mean as to our interest.


Harm. I wonder much my Letters then, gave me so short accounts; they only
said, The Orange Party was grown strong again, since Barnevelt had suffered.


Van Her. Mine inform me farther, the price of Pepper, and of other Spices was
raised of late in Europe.


Harm. I wish that news may hold; but much suspect it, while the English
maintain their Factories among us in Amboyna, or in the neighboring Plantations
of Seran.


Fisc. Still I have news that tickles me within, ha, ha, ha. I faith it does,
and will do you and all our Countrymen.


Harm. Prithee do not torture us, but tell it.


Van Her. Whence comes this news?


Fisc. From England.


Harm. Is their East India Fleet bound outward for these parts, or cast away,
or met at Sea by Pirates?


Fisc. Better, much better yet, ha, ha, ha.


Harm. Now am I famished for my part of the laughter.


Fisc. Then my brave Governor, if you're a true Dutchman, I Will make your fat
sides heave with the conceit on it, till you're blown like a pair of large
Smiths Bellows, here look upon this Paper.

Harman reading. You may remember we did endamage the English East India
Company, the value of Five hundred thousand pounds, all in one year; a Treaty
is now Signed, in which the business is taken up for fourscore thousand. This is
news indeed; would I were upon the Castle Wall, that I might throw my Cap into
the Sea, and my Gold Chain after it, this is golden news, boys.


Van Her. This is news would kindle a thousand Bonfires, and make us piss 'em
out again in Rhenish Wine.


Harm. Send presently to all our Factories, acquaint them with these blessed
tidings: if we can escape to cheap, 'twill be no matter what villainies
henceforth we put in practice.


Fisc. Hum, why this now gives encouragement to a certain Plot, which I have
long been brewing, against these Skellum English. I almost have it here in
Pericranio, and it is a sound one faith, no less, then to cut all their Throats,
and seize all their Effects within this Island. I warrant you we may compound
again.


Van Her. Seizing their Factories, I like well enough, it has some Savor in it,
but for this whoreson cutting of Throats, it goes a little against the grain,
because it is so Notoriously known in Christendom, that they have preserved ours
from being cut by the Spaniards.


Harm. Hang 'em base English sterts, let 'em even take their part of their own
old Proverb, save a Thief from the Gallows; they would needs protect us Rebels,
and see what comes to themselves.


Fisc. You're in the right on it Noble Harman, their assistance, which was a
Mercy, and a Providence to us, shall be a Judgment upon them.


Van Her. A little favor would do well; though, not that I would stop the
Current of your Wit, or any other Plot to do them mischief, but they were first
discoverers of this Isle, first Traded hither, and showed us the way.


Fisc. I grant you that, nay more, that by composition made after many long and
tedious quarrels, they were to have a third part of the Traffic, we to build
Forts, and they to contribute to the charge.


Harm. Which we have so increased each year upon 'em, we being in power, and
therefore Judges of the Cost, that we exact what e're we please, still more
then half the charge, and on pretense of their Non-payment, or the least delay,
do often stop their Ships, detain their Goods, and drag 'em into Prisons, while
our Commodities go on before, and still forestall their Markets.


Fisc. These I confess are pretty tricks, but will not do our business, we must
our selves be ruined at long run, if they have any Trade here; I know our
charge at length will eat us out; I would not let these English from this Isle,
have Cloves enough to stick an Orange with, not one to throw into their
bottle-Ale.


Harm. But to bring this about now, there is the cunning.


Fisc. Let me alone a while, I have it as I told you here; mean time we must
put on a feeming kindness, call 'em our Benefactors, and dear Brethren, pipe
'em within the danger of our Net, and then we will draw it over 'em: when they are
in, no mercy, that is my maxim.


Van Her. Nay, Brother, I am not too obstinate for saving Englishmen; 'twas
but a qualme of conscience which profit will dispel: I have as true a Dutch
Antipathy to England, as the proudest He in Amsterdam, that is a bold word now.


Harm. We are secure of our Superiors there; well, they may give the King of
Great Britain a Verbal satisfaction, and with submissive fawning promises,
make show to punish us, but interest is their God as well as ours: to that
Almighty, they will sacrifice a thousand English Lives, and break a hundred
thousand Oaths, e're they will punish those that make 'em rich, and pull their
Rivals down. Guns go off within.


Van Her. Heard you those Guns?


Harm. Most plainly.


Fisc. The sound comes from the Port, some Ship arrived salutes the Castle, and
I hope, brings more good news from Holland. Guns again.


Harm. Now they answer 'em from the Fortress.


Enter Beamont and Collins. Van Her. Beamont and Collins, English Merchants
both, perhaps they will certify us.


Beam. Captain Harman Van Spelt, good-day to you.


Harm. Dear, kind Mr. Beamont, a thousand and a thousand good days to you, and
all our friends the English.


Fisc. Came you from the Port, Gentlemen?


Coll. We did; and saw arrive, our honest, and our gallant Countreyman, brave
Captain Gabriel Towerson.


Beam. Sent to these parts from our Employers of the East India Company in
England, as General of the Voyage.


Fisc. Is the brave Towerson returned?


Coll. The same, Sir.


Harm. He shall be nobly welcome. He has already spent twelve years upon, or
near these rich Molucca Isles, and home returned with honor and great wealth.


Fisc. The Devil give him joy of both, or I will for him.


Aside. Beam. He Is my particular Friend, I lived with him, both at Ternate,
Tydore, and at Seran.


Van Her. Did he not leave a Mistress in these parts, a Native of this Island of
Amboyna?


Col. He did, I think they call her Ysabinda, who received Baptism for his
sake, before he hence departed.


Harm. It Is much against the will of all her friends, she loves your
Countryman, but they are not disposers of her person; she is beauteous, rich,
and young, and Towerson well deserves her.


Beam. I think, without flattery to my friend, he does. Were I to choose of all
mankind, a Man, on whom I would rely for Faith and Counsel, or more, whose
personal aid I would invite, in any worthy cause to second me, it should be
only Gabriel Towerson; daring he is, and there to fortunate: yet soft and apt
to pity the distressed, and liberal to relieve 'em: I have seen him not alone
to pardon Foes, but by his bounty win 'em to his love: if he has any fault,
it is only that, to which great minds can only subject be, he thinks all honest,
'cause himself is so, and therefore none suspects.


Fisc. I like him well for that; this fault of his great mind, as Beamont calls
it, may give him cause to wish he was more wary, when it shall be too late.
Aside.


Harm. I was in some small hope, this Ship had been of our own Country, and
brought back my son. For much about this season I expect him, good morrow
Gentlemen, I go to fill a Brendice to my Noble Captains health, pray tell him
so; the youth of our Amboyna, I Will send before to welcome him.


Col. We'll stay, and meet him here.


Exeunt Harman, Fiscal, and Van Herring. Beam. I do not like these fleering
Dutchmen, they over act their kindness.


Col. I know not what to think of 'em, that old fat Governor Harman van Spelt,
I have known long; they say he was a Cooper in his Country, and took the
measure of his Hoops for Tuns, by his own Belly: I love him not, he makes a
jest of men in misery; the first fat merry fool I ever knew that was ill
natured.


Beam. He Is absolutely governed by this Fiscal, who was as I have heard, an
ignorant Advocate in Rotterdam, such as in England we call a Petty-fogging
Rogue; one that knows nothing, but the worst part of the Law, its tricks and
snares: I fear he hates us English mortally. Pray Heaven we feel not the
effects on it.


Col. Neither he, nor Harman, will dare to show their malice to us, now
Towerson is come. For though it is true, we have no Castle here, he has an aw
upon 'em in his worth, which they both fear and reverence.


Beam. I wish it so may prove, my mind is a bad Prophet to me, and what it does
forebode of ill, it seldom fails to pay me. Here a comes.


Col. And in his company, young Harman, Son to our Dutch Governor, I wonder how
they met.


Enter Towerson, Harman Junior, and a Skipper. Towers. entering to the Skipper.
These Letters see conveyed with speed to our Plantations. This to Cambello, and
to Hitto this, this other to Loho. Tell 'em their Friends in England greet 'em
well; and when I left 'em, were in perfect health.


Skip. Sir, you shall be obeyed. Exit Skipper.


Beam. I heartily rejoice that our employers have chose you for this place, a
better choice they never could have made, or for themselves, or me.


Col. This I am sure of, that our English Factories, in all these parts have
wished you long the man, and none could be so welcome to their hearts.


Harm. Iu. And let me speak for my Countrymen the Dutch, I have heard my
Father say, he is your sworn Brother: And this late accident at Sea, when you
relieved me from the Pirates, and brought my Ship in safety off, I hope will
well secure you of our gratitude.


Towers. You over-rate a little courtesy: In your deliverance I did no more,
then what I had my self from you expected: The common ties of our Religion, and
those yet more particular of Peace, and strict Commerce, betwixt us and your
Nation, exacted all I did, or could have done.

To Beamont. For you my Friend, let me never breathe our English air again; but
I more joy to see you, then my self, to have escaped the storm, that tossed me
long, doubling the Cape, and all the sultry heats, in passing twice the Line:
For now I have you here, methinks this happiness should not be bought at a less
price.


Har. I Will leave you with your friends, my duty binds me to hasten to receive a
Fathers blessing.


Exit Harman Junior. Beam. You Are so much a friend, that I must tax you for
being a slack lover. You have not yet inquired of Ysabinda.


Towers. No, I durst not, Friend, I durst not, I love too well and fear to know
my doom; there is hope, in doubt, but yet I fixed my eyes on yours, I looked with
earnestness, and asked with them: If ought of ill had happened, sure I had met it
there; and since, methinks, I did not, I have now recovered courage, and
resolve to urge it from you.


Beam. Your Ysabinda then --


Towers. You have said all in that, my Ysabinda, if she still be so.


Beam. Enjoys as much of health, as fear for you, and sorrow for your absence
would permit. Music within.


Col. Hark, Music I think approaching.


Beam. It Is from our Factory; some sudden entertainment I believe designed for
your return.


Enter Amboyner 's, Men and Women with Timbrels before them. A Dance. After the
Dance, Enter Harman Senior, Harman Junior, Fiscal, and Van Herring. Harm. Sen.
embracing Towerson. Oh my sworn Brother, my dear Captain Towerson; the man whom
I love better then a stiff gale, when I am becalmed at Sea; to whom, I have
received the Sacrament, never to be false-hearted.


Towers. You never shall have occasion on my part: the like I promise for our
Factories, while I continue here: This I Will yields Spice enough for both; and
Europe, Ports, and Chapmen, were to vend them.


Har. Sen. It does, it does, we have enough, if we can be contented.


Towers. And Sir, why should we not, what mean these endless jars of Trading
Nations? it is true, the World was never large enough for Avarice or Ambition;
but those who can be pleased with moderate gain, may have the ends of Nature,
not to want: nay, even its Luxuries may be supplied from her overflowing
bounties in these parts: from whence she yearly sends Spices, and Gums, the
Food of Heaven in Sacrifice. And besides these, her Gems of richest value, for
Ornament, more then necessity.


Har. Sen. You are in the right, we must be very friends, I faith we must, I have
an old Dutch heart, as true and trusty as your English Oak.


Fisc. We never can forget the Patronage of your Elizabeth, of famous memory;
when from the Yoke of Spain, and Alva's Pride, her potent Succors, and her well
timed Bounty, freed us, and gave us credit in the World.


Towers. For this we only ask a fair Commerce and Friendliness of Conversation
here: and what our several Treaties bind us to, you shall, while Towerson
lives, see so performed, as fits a Subject to an English King.


Harm. Sen. Now by my faith you ask too little friend, we must have more then
bare Commerce betwixt us: receive me to your bosom, by this Beard I will never
deceive you.


Beam. I do not like his Oath, there is treachery in that Judas colored Beard.
aside.


Fisc. Pray use me as your Servant.


Van Her. And me too Captain.


Tower. I receive you both as Jewels, which I Will wear in either Ear, and never
part with you.


Harm. Sen. I cannot do enough for him to whom I owe my Son.


Harm. Iu. Nor I, till fortune send me such another brave occasion of fighting
so for you.


Harm. Sen. Captain, very shortly, we must use your Head in a certain business,
ha, ha, ha, my dear Captain.


Fisc. We must use your Head indeed Sir.


Tower. Sir, Command me, and take it as a debt I owe your Love.


Harm. Sen. Talk not of Debt, for I must have your Heart.


Van Her. Your Heart indeed, good Captain.


Harm. Sen. You are weary now I know, Sea beat, and weary, it is time we respite
further Ceremony; besides, I see one coming, whom I know you long to embrace,
and I should be unkind to keep you from her Arms.


Enter Ysabinda and Julia. Ysabin. Do I hold my Love, do I embrace him, after a
tedious absence of three years? are ye indeed returned, are ye the same? do you
still love your Ysabinda? speak before I ask you twenty questions more: for I
have so much Love, and so much Joy: that if you do not love as well as I, I
shall appear distracted.


Towers. We meet then both out of our selves, for I am nothing else, but Love
and Joy; and to take care of my discretion now, would make me much unworthy of
that passion, to which you set no bounds.


Ysab. How could you be so long away?


Towers. How can you think I was: I still was here, still with you, never
absent in my mind.


Harm. Iun. She Is a most charming Creature, I wish I had not seen her. aside.


Ysab. Now I shall love your God, because I see that he takes care of Lovers:
but my dear Englishman, I prithee let it be our last of absence, I cannot bear
another parting from thee, nor promise thee to live three other years, if thou
again go hence.


Towers. I never will without you.


Harm. Sen. I said before, we should but trouble ye.


Towers. You make me blush, but if you ever were a Lover, Sir, you will forgive
a folly, which is sweet, though I confess, it is much extravagant.


Harm. Iun. A has but too much cause for this excess of Joy, oh happy, happy
Englishman, but I unfortunate. aside.


Towers. Now when you please, lead on.


Harm. Sen. This day you shall be feasted at the Castle, where our Great Guns
shall loudly speak your welcome.
All signs of joy shall through the I Will be shown,
Whilst in full Romers we our friendship crown.

Exeunt omnes. ACT II.
SCENE. I.
Enter Ysabinda, Harman Jun. Ysab. THis to me, from you, against your friend.


Harm. Have I not Eyes, are you not fair? why does it seem so strange?


Ysab. Come, it is a plot betwixt you: my Englishman is jealous, and has sent
you to try my faith, he might have spared the experiment after a three years
absence; that was a proof sufficient of my constancy.


Harm. I heard him say he never had returned, but that his Masters of the
East India Company, proffered him large conditions.


Ysab. You do belie him basely.


Harm. As much as I do you, in saying you are fair; or as I do my self, when I
declare I dye for you.


Ysab. If this be earnest, you have done a most unmanly and ungrateful part, to
court the intended Wife of him, to whom you are most obliged.


Harm. Leave me to answer that: assure your self I love you violently, and if
you are wise, you will make some difference 'twixt Towerson and me.


Ysab. Yes, I shall make a difference, but not to your advantage.


Harm. You must, or falsify your knowledge; an Englishman, part Captain, and
part Merchant; his Nation of declining interest here: consider this, and weigh
against that fellow, not me, but any, the least and meanest Dutchman in this
Isle.


Ysab. I do not weigh by bulk: I know your Countrymen have the advantage there.


Harm. Hold back your hand, from firming of your faith; you will thank me in a
little time, for staying you so kindly from embarking in his ruin.


Ysab. His fortune is not so contemptible as you would make it seem.


Harm. Wait but one month for the event.


Ysab. I will not wait one day, though I were sure to sink with him the next:
so well I love my Towerson, I will not lose another Sun, for fear a should not
rise to morrow. For your self, pray rest assured, of all Mankind, you should
not be my choice, after an act of such ingratitude.


Harm. You may repent your scorn at leisure.


Ysab. Never, unless I married you.


Enter Towerson. Towers. Now my dear Ysabinda, I dare pronounce my self most
happy: since I have gained your Kindred, all difficulties cease.


Ysab. I wish we find it so.


Towers. Why, is ought happened since I saw you last? methinks a sadness dwells
upon your Brow, like that I saw before my last long absence. You do not speak:
my friend dumb too? Nay then I fear some more then ordinary cause produces this.


Harm. You have no reason Towerson to be sad, you are the happy man.


Towers. If I have any, you must needs have some.


Har. No, you are loved, and I am bid despair.


Towers. Time, and your Services, will perhaps, make you as happy as I am in my
Ysabinda's love.


Harm. I thought I spoke so plain, I might be understood; but since I did not,
I must tell you Towerson, I wear the Title of your friend no longer, because I
am your Rival.


Towers. Is this true Ysabinda?


Ysab. I should not, I confess, have told you first, because I would not give
you that disquiet; but since he has, it is too sad a truth.


Towers. Leave us my Dear a little to our selves.


Ysab. I fear you will quarrel, for he seemed incensed, and threatened you with
ruin. To him aside.


Towers. It Is to prevent an ill, which may be fatal to us both, that I would
speak with him.


Ysab. Swear to me by your Love you will not fight.


Towers. Fear not my Ysabinda; things are not grown to that extremity.


Ysab. I leave you, but I doubt the consequence.


Exit Ysab. Towers. I want a name to call you by, Friend, you declare you are
not, and to Rival, I am not yet enough accustomed.


Harm. Now I consider on it, it shall be yet in your free choice, to call me,
one or other; for, Towerson, I do not decline your Friendship, but then yield
Ysabinda to me.


Towers. Yield Ysabinda to you?


Harm. Yes, and preserve the Blessing of my Friendship; I Will make my Father
yours, your Factories shall be no more oppressed, but thrive in all advantages
with ours; your gain shall be beyond what you could hope for from the Treaty:
in all the Traffic of these Eastern parts, ye shall --


Towers. Hold, you mistake me Harman, I never gave you just occasion to think I
would make Merchandise of Love; Ysabinda you know is mine, contracted to me
e're I went for England and must be so till death.


Har. She must not Towerson; you know you are not strongest in these parts, and
'twill be ill contesting with your Masters.


Towers. Our Masters? Harman you durst not once have named that Word in any
part of Europe.


Har. Here I both dare and Will, you ha'no Castles in Amboyna.


Towers. Though we have not, we yet have English Hearts and Courages, not to
endure Affronts.


Har. They may be tried.


Towers. Your Father sure will not maintain you in this Insolence, I know he is
too honest.


Har. Assure your self, he will Espouse my Quarrel.


Towers. We would complain to England.


Har. Your Country Men have tried that course so often, methinks they should
grow wiser, and desist: but now there is no need of troubling any others but
our selves; the sum of all is this, you either must Resign me Ysabinda, or
instantly resolve, to clear your Title to her by your Sword.


Towers. I will do neither now.


Har. Then I Will believe you dare not fight me fairly.


Towers. You know I durst have fought, though I am not vain enough to boast it,
nor would upbraid you with remembrance of it.


Har. You destroy your benefit with Rehearsal of it, but that was in a Ship,
backed by your Men, single Duel is a fairer Trial of your courage.


Towers. I Am not to be provoked out of my temper: here I am a Public Person,
entrusted by my King and my Employers, and should I kill you Harman, --


Har. Oh never think you can, Sir.


Towers. I should betray my Countrymen to suffer not only worse Indignities,
then those they have already born, but for ought I know, might give 'em up to
general Imprisonment, perhaps betray them to a Massacre.


Har. These are but pitiful and weak excuses, I Will force you to confess you
dare not fight, you shall have provocations.


Towers. I will not stay to take 'em: Only this before I go, if you are truly
Gallant, insult not where you have power, but keep your Quarrel secret, we may
have time and place out of this Island: mean while, I go to Marry Isabinda,
that you shall see I dare: No more, follow me not an Inch beyond this place no
not an Inch, adieu.


Exit Towerson. Har. Thou go to thy Grave, or I to mine.


Is going after him. Enter Fiscall. Fisc. Whither so fast Min Here?


Har. After that English Dog, whom I believe you saw.


Fisc. Whom, Towerson?


Har. Yes, let me go, I Will have his blood.


Fisc. Let me advise you first, you young Men are so violently hot.


Har. I say I Will have his Blood.


Fisc. To have his Blood is not amiss, so far I go with you, but take me with
you further for the means: first what is the injury?


Har. Not to detain you with a tedious Story, I love his Mistress, Courted her,
was slighted; into the heat of this he came, I offered him the best
Advantages, he could or to himself propose, or to his Nation, would he quit her
Love.


Fisc. So far you are prudent, for she is exceeding rich.


Har. He refused all, then I threatened him with my Fathers power.


Fisc. That was unwisely done; your Father, underhand, may do a mischief, but
it is too gross above board.


Har. At last, naught else prevailing, I defied him to single Duel, this he
refused, and I believe it was fear.


Fisc. No, no, mistake him not, it is a stout Whoreson, you did ill to press him,
'twill not sound well in Europe, He being here a public Minister; having no
means of scaping should he kill you, besides exposing all his Countrymen to a
Revenge.


Har. That Is all one, I Am resolved I will pursue my course and Fight him.


Fisc. Pursue your end, that is to enjoy the Woman, and her Wealth; I would,
like you, have Towerson dispatched; for as I am a true Dutchman, I do hate him,
but I would convey him smoothly out of the World, and without noise; they will
say we are Ungrateful else, in England, and barbarously cruel; now I could
swallow down the thing Ingratitude, and the thing Murder, but the Names are
odious.


Har. What would you have me do then?


Fisc. Let him enjoy his Love a little while, twill break no squares, in the
long run of a man's life; you shall have enough of her, and in convenient time.


Har. I cannot bear he should enjoy her first; no, it is determined; I will kill
him bravely.


Fisc. I, a right young Man's bravery, that is Folly: Let me alone, something
I Will put in practice, to rid you of this Rival e're he Marries, without your
once appearing in it.


Har. If I durst trust you now?


Fisc. If you believe that I have Wit, or Love you.


Har. Well Sir, you have prevailed; be speedy; for once I will rely on you;
farewell: Exit Harman.


Fisc. This hopeful business will be quickly spoiled, if I not take exceeding
care of it.

Stay, -- Towerson to be killed and privately, that must be laid down as the
groundwork, for stronger reasons then a young Man's Passion, but who shall
do it, no English Man will, and much I fear, no Dutchman dares attempt it.

Enter Perez. Well said, I faith old Devil let thee alone, when once a Man is
plotting Villainy, to find him a fit Instrument.

This Spanish Captain, who commands our Slaves, is bold enough, and is beside
in want, and proud enough to think he merits Wealth.


Perez. This Fiscal loves my Wife, I Am jealous of him, and yet must speak him
fair to get my Pay; Oh, there is the Devil for a Castilian, to stoop to one of
his own Masters Rebels who has, or who designs to Cuckold him. aside.

To Fiscal: I come to kiss your hand again Sir, six Months I am in arrear, I
must not starve, and Spaniards cannot beg.


Fisc I Have been a better Friend to you, then perhaps you think Captain.


Perez. I fear you have indeed. aside.


Fisc. And faithfully solicited your business; send but your Wife to morrow
Morning early, the Money shall be ready.


Perez. What if I come my self.


Fisc. Why ye may have it if you come your self Captain, but in case your
occasions should call you any other way, you dare trust her to receive it.


Perez. She has no skill in Money.


Fisc. It shall be told into her hand, or given her upon honor, in a lump; but
Captain, you were saying you did want, now I should think three hundred
Dobloons would do you no great harm, they will serve to make you Merry on the
Watch.


Perez. Must they be told into my Wife's hand too?


Fisc. No, those you may receive you self, if you dare Merit 'em.


Perez. I am a Spaniard Sir, that implies Honor: I dare all that is possible.


Fisc. Then you dare Kill a Man.


Perez. So it be fairly.


Fisc. But what if he will not be so civil to be killed that way? He Is a sturdy
Fellow, I know you stout, and do not question your Valor; but I would make sure
work, and not endanger you who are my Friend.


Perez. I fear the Governor will Execute me.


Fisc. The Governor will thank you: it is he shall be your Play Master; you shall
have your Pardon drawn up before hand, and remember, no transitory Sum, three
hundred Quadruples in your own Country Gold.


Perez. Well, name your Man.


Enter Julia. Fisc. Your Wife comes, take it in whisper.


They whisper. Iul. Yonder Is my Master, and my Dutch Servant, how lovingly they
talk in private; if I did not know my Don's temper to be monstrously jealous, I
should think, they were driving a secret Bargain for my Body; but Cuerno is not
to be digested by my Castilian. Mi Mohen, my Wife and my Mistress, a lays the
Emphasis on me, as if to Cuckold him were a worse sin, then breaking the
Commandment. If my English Lover Beamont, my Dutch Love the Fiscall, and my
Spanish Husband, were Painted in a piece with me amongst 'em, they would make a
Pretty Emblem of the two Nations, that Cuckold his Catholic Majesty in his
Indi's.


Fisc. You Will undertake it then?


Perez. I have served under Towerson as his Lieutenant, served him well, and
though I say it, bravely, yet never have been rewarded, though he promised
largely; it is resolved, I Will do it.


Fisc. And swear secrecy.


Perez. By this Beard.


Fisc. Go wait upon the Governor from me, confer with him about it in my name,
this Seal will give you credit.


Gives him his Seal. Perez. I go.

Goes a step or two, while the other approaches his Wife. What shall I be,
before I come again? Exit.


Fisc. Now my fair Mistress we shall have the opportunity which I have long
desired. To Julia.


Perez. The Governor is now a sleeping, this is his hour of afternoons repose,
I Will go when he is awake. Returning.


Fisc. He slept early this afternoon, I left him newly waked.


Perez. Well, I go then, but with an aching heart


Exit. Fisc. So, at length he is gone.


Iul. But you may find a was jealous by his delay.


Fisc. If I were as you, I would give evident proofs, should cure him of that
disease for ever after.


Enter Perez again. Perez. I have considered on it, and if you would go along
with me to the Governor, it would do much better.


Fisc. No, no, that would make the matter more suspicious. The Devil take thee
for an impertinent Cuckold.


aside. Perez. Well I must go then. Exit Perez.


Iul. Nay there was never the like of him, but it sha'n't serve his turn, we will
Cuckold him most furiously.


Enter Perez again. Per. I had forgot one thing, dear sweet heart go home
quickly, and oversee our business, it will not go forward without one of us.


Fisc. I warrant you, take no care of your business, leave it to me, I Will put
it forward in your absence, go go, you will lose your oppportunity; I Will be at
home before you, and sup with you to night.


Per. You shall be welcome, but --


Fisc. Three hundred Quadruples.


Perez. That Is true but --


Fisc. But three hundred Quadruples.


Perez. The Devil take the Quadruples.


Enter Beamont. Beam. There Is my Cuckold that must be, and my fellow swager the
Dutchman, with my Mistress, my Nose is wiped to day, I must retire for the
Spaniard is jealous of me.


Perez. Oh Mr. Beamont, I Am to ask a favor of you.


Beam. This is unusual, pray command it Sennor.


Perez. I am going upon urgent business, pray sup with me to night, and in the
mean time, bear my worthy friend here company.


Beam. With all my heart.


Perez. So, now I am secure; though I dare not trust her with one of 'em, I may
with both; they will hinder one another, and preserve my honor into the bargain.
Now for my Dobloons. Exit.


Beam. Now Mr. Fiscall, you are the happy Man with the Ladies, and have got the
precedence of Traffic here too; you have the Indie's in your Arms, yet I hope a
poor English Man may come in for a third part of the Merchandise.


Fisc. Oh Sir, in these Commodities here is enough for both, here is Mace for
you, and Nutmegg for me in the same Fruit; and yet the owner has to spare for
other friends too.


Iul. My Husbands Plantation's like to thrive well betwixt you.


Beam. Horn him, he deserves not so much happiness as he enjoyes in you; he is
jealous.


Iul. It Is no wonder if a Spaniard looks yellow.


Beam. Betwixt you and me; it is a little kind of venture, that we make in doing
this Dons drudgery for him; for the whole Nation of 'em is generally so Pocky,
that it is no longer a Disease, but a second nature in 'em.


Fisc. I have heard indeed, that it is incorporated among 'em, as deeply as the
Moors and Jews are, there is scarce a Family, but it is crept into their blood
like the new Christians.


Iul. Come I Will have no whispering betwixt you, I know you were talking of my
Husband, because my Nose itches.


Beam. Faith Madam, I was speaking in favor of your Nation: what pleasant lives
I have known Spaniards to live in England.


Iul. If you love me, let me hear a little.


Beam. We observed 'em to have much of the nature of our Flies, they buz'd
abroad a Month or two in the Summer, would venture about Dog days to take the
Air in the Park, but all the Winter slept like Dormice, and if ever they
appeared in public after Michaelmass, their Faces showed the difference
betwixt their Country and ours, for they look in Spain as if they were
Roasted, and in England as if they were Sodden.


Iulia. I Will not believe your description.


Fisc. Yet our observations of 'em in Holland, are not much unlike it; I Have
known a great Don at the Hague, with the Gentleman of his Horse, his Major
Domo, and two Secretaryes, all Dine at four several Tables, on the Quarters of
a single Pullet: the Victuals of the under Servants were weighed out in ounces,
by the Don himself; with so much Garlike in the other Scale: a thin slice of
Bacon, went through the Family a week together: for it was daily put into the
Pot for Pottage; was served in the midst of the Dish at Dinners, and taken out
and weighed by the Steward, at the end of every Meal, to see how much it lost;
till at length, looking at it against the Sun, it appeared transparent, and
then he would have whipped it up, as his own Fees, at a Morsel; but that his
Lord barred the Dice, and reckoned it to him for a part of his Board Wages.


Beam. In few words Madam, the general Notion we had of 'em, was, that they
were very frugal of their Spanish Coin, and very liberal of their Neapolitane.


Iulia. I see Gentlemen, you are in the way of Rallying; therefore let me be no
hinderance to your sport; do as much for one another, as you have done for our
Nation.

Pray Min Here Fiscal, what think you of the English.


Fisc. Oh, I have an Honor for the Country.


Beam. I beseech you leave your ceremony, we can hear of our faults without
choler, therefore speak of us with a true Amsterdam spirit, and do not spare
us.


Fisc. Since you command me, Sir, it is said of you, I know not how truly, that
for your Fishery at home, you are like Dogs in the Manger, you will neither
manage it your selves, nor permit your neighbors; so that for your Sovereignty
of the Narrow Seas, if the Inhabitants of 'em, the Herrings, were capable of
being Judges, they would certainly award it to the English, because they were
then sure to live undisturbed, and quiet under you.


Beam. Very good, proceed, Sir.


Fisc. It Is true, you gave us aid in our time of need, but you paid your selves
with our Cautionary Towns: and that you have since delivered them up, we can
never give sufficient commendation, either to your Honesty, or to your Wit; For
both which qualities, you have purchased such an immortal Fame, that all
Nations are instructed, how to deal with you another time.


Beam. A most grateful acknowledgment, sweet Sir, go on.


Fisc. For your Trade abroad, if you should obtain it, you are so horribly
expensive, that you would undo your selves and all Christendom: for you would
sink under your very profit, and the gains of the Universal World would beggar
you: you devour a Voyage to the Indi's, by the Multitude of Mouths with which
you Man your Vessels: providence has contrived it well, that the Indi's are
Managed by us, an Industrious and frugal people, who distribute its Merchandise
to the rest of Europe, and suffer it not to be consumed in England, that the
other members might be starved, while you of Great Britain, as you call it,
like a Rickety head, would only swell and grow bigger by it.


Iul. I have heard enough of England; have you nothing to return upon the
Neatherlands?


Beam. Faith very little, to any purpose; he has been before hand with us, as
his Contrymen are in their Trade, and taken up so many vices for the use of
England, that a has left almost none for the Low Countries.


Iul. Come a word however.


Beam. In the first place you showed your ambition, when you began to be a
State: for not being Gentlemen, you have stolen the Arms of the best Families
of Europe; and wanting a name, you made bold with the first of the divine
Attributes; and called your selves the HIGH and MIGHTY: though, let me tell
you, that, besides the Blasphemy, the Title is ridiculous; for HIGH is no more
proper for the Neatherlands then MIGHTY is for seven little rascally Provinces,
no bigger in all than a Shire in England. For my main Theme, your Ingratitude,
you have in part acknowledged it, by your laughing at our easy delivery of your
Cautionary Towns: the best is, we are used by you, as well as your own Princes
of the House of Orange, We and They have set you up, and you undermine their
Power, and circumvent our Trade.


Fisc. And good reason, if our interest requires it.


Beam. That leads me to your Religion, which is only made up of Interest: at
home, ye tolerate all Worships, in them who can pay for it; and abroad, you
were lately so civil to the Emperor of Pegu, as to do open sacrifice to his
Idols.


Fisc. Yes, and by the same token you English were such precise fools as to
refuse it.


Beam. For frugality in Trading, we confess we cannot compare with you; for our
Merchants live like Noblemen: your Gentlemen, if you have any, live like Bores;
you traffic for all the rarities of the World, and dare use none of 'em your
selves; so that in effect, you are the Mill Horses of Mankind, that labor only
for the wretched Provender you eat: a pot of Butter and a pickled Herring is
all your Riches; and in short, you have a good Title to cheat all Europe,
because in the first place, you cosen your own Backs and Bellies.


Fisc. We may enjoy more when e're we please.


Beam. Your liberty is a grosser cheat then any of the rest; for you are ten
times more Taxed, then any People in Christendom: you never keep any League
with Foreign Princes: you flatter our Kings, and ruin their Subjects: you
never denied us satisfaction at home for injuries, nor ever gave it us abroad.


Fisc. You must make your selves more feared when you expect it


Beam. And I prophecy that time will come, when some generous Monarch of our
Island, will undertake our quarrel, reassume the Fishery of our Seas* and make
them as considerable to the English as the Indies are to you.


Fisc. Before that comes to pass, you may repent your over lavish tongue.


Beam. I was no more in earnest then you were.


Iul. Pray let this go no further, my Husband has invited both to supper.


Beam. If you please, I Will fall to before he comes, or at least while he is
conferring in private with the Fiscal. aside to her.


Iul. Their private businesses let them agree,
The Dutch for him, the Englishman for me.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE 1.
Enter Perez. Perez. TRue, the Reward proposed is great enough, I want it too,
besides this Englishman has never paid me, since, as his Lieutenant, I served
him once against the Turk at Sea, yet he confessed I did my duty well, when
twice I cleared our Decks; he has long promised me, but what are promises to
starving Men, this is his House, he may walk out this morning.

Enter a Page and another Servant, walking by, not seeing him. These belong to
him, I Will hide till they are past.


Ser. He sleeps soundly for a Man who is to be married when he wakes.


Page. He does well to take his time, for he does not know when he is Married,
whether ever he shall have a sound sleep again.


Ser. He bid we should not wake him, but some of us in good manners should have
stayed, and not have left him quite alone.


Page. In good manners, I should indeed, but I Will venture a Masters anger at any
time for a Mistress, and that is my case at present.


Serve. I Will tempt as great a danger as that comes to, for good old English
fellowship; I am invited to a mornings draught.


Page. Good morrow Brother, good morrow; by that time you have filled your
Belly, and I have emptied mine, it will be time to meet at home again. Exeunt
severally.


Perez. So, this makes well for my design, He Is left alone, unguarded and
asleep: Satan, thou art a bounteous friend, and liberal of occasions to do
mischief, my pardon I have ready if I am taken, my Money half before hand; up
Perez, rouse thy Spanish courage up, if he should wake, I think I dare attempt
him, then my revenge is nobler, and revenge, to injured Men is full as sweet as
profit. Exit.


The Scene drawn, discovers Towerson asleep on a Couch in his Nightgown. A
Table by him, Pen, Ink, and Paper onit.
Re-enter Perez with a Dagger. Perez. Asleep as I imagined, and as fast, as all
the Plummets of eternal night were hung upon his Temples: oh that some
courteous Demon in the other world, would let him know, 'twas Perez sent him
thither: a Paper by him too, he little thinks it is his Testament, the last he
e're shall make: I Will read it first. takes it up.

Oh by the Inscription, it is a memorial of what he means to do this day: what is
here? my name in the first line? I Will read it. reads.

Memorandum, That my first action this morning shall be to find out my true and
valiant Lieutenant, Captain Perez, and as a testimony of my gratitude for his
honorable Service to bestow on him five hundred English pounds, making my just
excuse, I had it not before, within my power to reward him. [lays down the
paper. And was it then for this I sought his life; oh base degenerate Spaniard,
had thou done it, thou had been worse then damned; Heaven took more care of
me, then I of him, to expose this paper to my timely view. Sleep on thou
Honorable Englishman, I Will sooner now, pierce my own breast then thine; see,
he smiles too in his slumber, as if his Guardian Angel in a dream, told him, he
was secure; I Will give him warning, though to prevent danger from another hand.




Writes on Towerson's Paper, then sticks his Dagger in it. Stick there, that
when he wakens he may may know,
To his own Virtue he his Life does owe. Exit Perez.

Towerson awakens. Towers. I have o'reslept my hour this morning, if to enjoy a
pleasing dream, can be to sleep too long: me thought my dear Ysabinda and my
self, were lying in an Arbor, wreathed about with Myrtle and with Cypress; my
Rival Harman reconciled again to his friendship, strewn us with Flowers, and
put on each a Crimson colored Garment, in which we straight way mounted to the
Skies, and with us, many of my English friends, all clad in the same Robes: if
dreams have any meaning, sure this portends some good -- What Is that I see, a
Dagger stuck into the paper of my Memorials? and writ below, Thy Virtue saved
thy life; it seems some one has been within my chamber whilst I slept;
something of consequence hangs upon this accident: what ho, who waits without
-- None answer me: are ye all dead? -- what ho! --


Enter Beamont. Beam. How is it friend: I thought entering your House, I heard
you call.


Towers. I did, but as it seems without effect, none of my Servants are within
reach of my voice.


Beam. You seem amazed at somewhat!


Towers. A little discomposed: -- read that, and see if I have no occasion,
that Dagger was stuck there, by him who writ it.


Beam. I must confess you have too just a cause: I am my self surpised at an
event so strange.


Towers. I know not who can be my Enemy within this Island, except my Rival
Harman, and for him, I truly did relate, what passed betwixt us yesterday.


Beam. You bore your self in that as it became you, as one who was a witness to
himself of his own courage, and while by necessary care of others, you were
forced to decline fighting, showed how much you did despise the Man who sought
the quarrel: 'twas base in him, so backed as he is here, to offer it, much more
to press you to it.


Towers. I may find a foot of ground in Europe, to tell the insulting Youth, he
better had provoked some other Man, but sure I cannot think 'twas he, who left
that Dagger there.


Beam. No, for it seems too great a Nobleness of Spirit, for one like him to
practice: 'twas certainly an Enemy, who came to take your sleeping life; but
thus to leave unfinished the design, proclaims the act, No Dutchman.


Towers. That, time will best discover, I Will think no further of it.


Beam. I confess you have more pleasing thoughts to employ your mind at
present; I left your Bride just ready for the Temple, and came to call you to
her.


Towers. I Will straight attend you thither.


Enter Harman senior, Fiscal, and Van Herring. Fisc. Remember, Sir, what I
advised you; you must seemingly make up the business. To Harman.


Harm. I warrant you. What my brave bonny Bridegroom, not yet dressed, you are a
lazy Lover, I must chide you.


To Towerson. Towerson. I was just preparing.


Harm. I must prevent part of the Ceremony: you thought to go to her, she is by
this time at the Castle, where she is invited with our common friends; for you
shall give me leave, if you so please, to entertain you both.


Towers. I have some reasons, why I must refuse the Honor you intend me.


Harm. You must have none; what my old friend steal a Wedding from me? In troth
you wrong our friendship.


Beam. to him aside. Sir, go not to the Castle, you cannot in Honor accept an
invitation from the Father, after an affront from the Son.


Towers. Once more I beg your pardon, Sir.


Harm. Come, come, I know your reason of refusal, but it must not prevail; My
Son has been to blame, I Will not maintain him in the least neglect, which he
should show to any Englishman, much less to you, the best, and most esteemed of
all my friends.


Towers. I should be willing, Sir, to think it was a young Man's rashness, or
perhaps the Rage of a successless Rival, yet he might have spared some words.


Harm. Friend, he shall ask your pardon, or I Will no longer own him; what,
ungrateful to a Man, whose Valor has preserved him? he shall do it, he shall
indeed, I Will make you friends upon your own conditions, he is at the door, pray
let him be admitted: this is a day of general Iubilee.


Towers. You Command here, you know Sir.


Fisc. I Will call him in, I am sure he will be proud at any rate to redeem your
kind opinion of him.


Exit Fiscal, and reenters with Harman junior. Harm. Iun. Sir, my Father, I
hope, has in part satisfied you, that what I spoke, was only an effect of
sudden passion, of which I am now ashamed, and desire it may be no longer
lodged in your remembrance, then it is now in my intention to do you any injury.


Towers. Your Father may Command me to more difficult employments, then to
receive the friendship of a Man, of whom I did not willingly embrace an ill
opinion.


Harm. Iun. Nothing hence-forward, shall have power to take from me that
happiness, in which you are so generously pleased to reinstate me. Exeunt.


Harm. Sen. Why this is as it should be, trust me I weep for joy.


Beam. Towerson is easy, and too credulous. I fear it is all dissembled on their
parts. aside.


Harm. Sen. Now set we forward to the Castle, the Bride is there before us.


Towers. Sir, I wait you.


Ezeunt Harman Sen. Towerson, Beamont and Van Herring. Enter Captain Perez.
Fisc. Now Captain, when perform you what you promised concerning Towerson's
death?


Perez. Never -- There Judas, take your hire of blood again. Throws him a Purse.


Harm. Iun. Your reason for this sudden change.


Perez. I cannot own the name of Man and do it


Harm. Iun. Your Head shall answer the neglect of what you were Commanded.


Perez. If it must, I cannot shun my destiny.


Fisc. Harman, you are too rash, pray hear his reasons first.


Perez. I have 'em to my self, I Will give you none.


Fis. None, that is hard; well, you can be secret Captain, for your own sake I
hope.


Perez. That I have sworn already, my oath binds me.


Fisc. That Is enough: we have now changed our minds, and do not wish his death,
at least as you shall know. aside.


Perez. I am glad on it, for he is a brave and worthy Gentleman, I would not for
the wealth of both the Indies, have had his Blood upon my Soul to answer.


Fisc. aside to Harman. I shall find a time to take back our secret from him,
at the price of his life, when he least dreams of it; mean time it is fit we
speak him fair. To Perez.

Captain, a reward attend you greater then you could hope, we only meant to try
your honesty. I am more then satisfied of your reasons.


Perez. I still shall labor to deserve your kindness in any honorable way.
Exit Perez.


Harm. I told you that this Spaniard had not courage enough for such an
enterprise.


Fisc. He rather had too much of honesty.


Harm. Oh you have ruined me, you promised me this day, the death of Towerson,
and now instead of that, I see him happy; I Will go and fight him yet, I swear he
never shall enjoy her.


Fisc. He sha'nnot, that I swear with you, but you are too rash; the business
never can be done your way.


Harm. I Will trust no other Arm but my own in it.


Fisc. Yes, mine you shall, I Will help you, this evening as he goes from the
Castle, we will find some way to meet him in the dark, and then make sure of him
for getting Maidenheads to night; to morrow I Will bestow a Pill upon my Spanish
Don, least he discover what he knows.


Harm. Give me your Hand, you will help me.


Fisc. By all my hopes, I will: in the mean time, with a feigned Mirth, it is fit
we guild our Faces; the troth is, that we may smile in earnest, when we look
upon the Englishman, and think how we will use him.


Harm. Agreed, come to the Castle.


Exeunt. Enter Harman Senior, Towerson, and Ysabinda, Beamont, Collins, Van
Herring: they seat themselves. Epithalamium.
THe day is come, I see it rise,
Betwixt the Bride's and Bridegroom's Eyes,
That Golden day they wished so long,
Love picked it out amidst the throng;
He destined to himself this Sun,
And took the Reins and drove him on;
In his own Beams he dressed him bright,
Yet bid him bring a better night.
The day you wished arrived at last,
You wish as much that it were past,
One Minute more and night will hide,
The Bridegroom and the blushing Bride.
The Virgin now to Bed does go:
Take care oh Youth, she rise not so;
She pants and trembles at her doom,
And fears and wishes thou would come.
The Bridegroom comes, He comes apace
With Love and Fury in his Face;
She shrinks away, He close pursues*
And Prayers and Threats, at once does use,
She softly sighing begs delay,
And with her hand put his away,
Now out a loud for help she cries,
And now despairing shuts her Eyes.
Har. Sen. I like this Song, 'twas sprightly, it would restore me twenty years
of Youth, had I but such a Bride.


A DANCE. After the Dance: Enter Harman Junior and Fiscal. Beam. Come let me
have the Sea fight, I like that better, then a thousand of your wanton
Epithalamiums.


Har. Iun. He means that Fight in which he freed me from the Pirates.


Towers. Prithee Friend oblige me, and call not for that Song, 'twill breed ill
blood. to Beamont.


Beam. Prithee be not scrupulous, ye fought it bravely. Young Harman is
ungrateful if he does not acknowledge it. I say, sing me the Sea Fight. The Sea
Fight.
WHo ever saw a noble sight,
That never viewed a brave Sea Fight:
Hang up your bloody Colors in the Air,
Up with your Fights and your Nettings prepare,
Your Merry Mates cheer, with a lusty bold spright,
Now each Man his brindice, and then to the Fight,
St. George, St. George we cry,
The shouting Turks reply.
Oh now it begins, and the Gunroom grows hot,
Plie it with Culverin and with small shot;
Hark does it not Thunder, no it is the Guns roar,
The Neighboring Billows are turned into Gore,
Now each man must resolve to dye,
For here the Coward cannot fly.
Drums and Trumpets toll the Knell,
And Culverins the Passing Bell.
Now now they Grapple, and now board a Main,
Blow up the Hatches, they are off all again:
Give 'em a broadside, the Dice run at all,
Down comes the Mast and Yard, and tacklings fall,
She grows giddy now like blind fortunes wheel,
She sinks there, she sinks, she turns up her Keel,
Who ever beheld so noble a sight
As this so brave, so bloody Sea Fight.



Har. Iun. See the Insolence of these English, they cannot do a brave Action in
an Age, but presently they must put it into Meter, to upbraid us with their
benefits.


Fisc. Let them laugh that win at last.


Enter Captain Middleton and a Woman with him, all pale and and weakly, and in
tattered Garments. Towerson. Captain Middleton, you are arrived in a good hour,
to be partaker of my happiness, which is as great this day, as Love and
Expectation can make it.


Rising up to salute Middleton. Mid. And may it long continue so.


Towers. But how happens it that setting out with us from England, you came not
sooner hither?


Mid. It seems the Winds favored you with a quicker passage: you know I lost
you in a Storm on the other side the Cape, with which disabl'd, I was forced to
put into St. Hellens Isle, there 'twas my Fortune to preserve the life of this
our Country Woman, the rest let her relate.


Ysab. Alas, she seems half starved, unfit to make relations.


Van Her. How the Devil came she off, I know her but too well, and fear she
knows me too.


Towers: Pray Country Woman speak.


English Woman: Then thus in brief; In my dear Husbands Company, I parted, from
our sweet Native Isle: we to Lantore were bound, with Letters from the States
of Holland, gained for reparation of great damages, sustained by us; when by
the insulting Dutch, our Countrymen, against all show of Right, were
dispossessed, and Naked sent away from that rich Island, and from Poleroon.


Harm. Sen. Woman, you speak with too much spleen, I must not hear my
Countrymen affronted.


Woman. I wish they did not merit much worse of me then I can say of them: well
we sailed forward with a Merry Gale, till near St. Hellens Isle we were
o'retaken, or rather way-lay'd by a Holland Vessel, the Captain of which Ship,
whom here I see, the Man who quitted us, of all we had in those rich parts
before, now fearing to restore his ill got Goods, first Hailed, and then
Invited us on Board, keeping himself concealed; his base Lieutenant plied all
our English Mariners with Wine, and when in dead of night they lay secure in
silent sleep; most barbarously commanded, they should be thrown over board.


Fisc. Sir, do not hear it out.


Har. Sen. This is all false and scandalous.


Towers. Pray Sir, attend the Story.


Eng. Woman: The Vessel Rifl'd, and the rich Hold rummag'd, they sink it down
to rights; but first I should have told you, (Grief alas has spoiled my
Memory) that my dear Husband wakened at the Noise before they reached the Cabin
where we lay, took me all trembling with the sudden Fright, and leapt into the
Boat; we cut the Cordage, and so put out to Sea, driving at mercy of the Waves
and Wind; so escaped we in the dark. To sum up all, we got to shore, and in the
Mountains hid us, until the barbarous Hollanders were gone.


Towers. Where is your Husband, Country woman.


Woman: Dead with grief; with these two hands I scratched him out a Grave; on
which I placed a Cross, and every day wept over the ground where all my joys
lay buried. The manner of my Life who can express! the Fountain Water was my
only Drink, the crabbed Juice and rind of half ripe Lemmons, almost my only
food, except some Roots; my House the Widdow'd Cave of some wild Beast: in this
sad State, I stood upon the Shore, when this brave Captain with his Ship
approached, whence holding up and waving both my hands, I stood, and by my
Actions begged their Mercy, yet when they nearer came, I would a fled, had I
been able, least they should have proved those Murderous Dutch, I more then
Hunger feared.


Her. Sen. What say you to this accusation Van Herring?


Van Her. It Is as you said Sir, false and scandalous.


Her. Sen. I told you so; all false and scandalous.


Ysabinda: On my soul it is not: her Heart speaks in her Tongue, and were she
silent, her Habit and her Face speak for her.


Beam: Sir, you have heard the proofs,


Fiscal. Mere Allegations and no Proofs: seem not to believe it Sir.


Harm. Sen. Well, well, we will hear it another time.


Middleton: You seem not to believe her Testimony, but my whole Crew can
witness it.


Van Her. Ay, they are all English men.


Towers. That Is a Nation too generous to do bad Actions, and too sincere to
justify them done; I wish their Neighbors were of the same temper.


Har. Sen. Nay now you kindle Captain, this must not be, we are your Friends
and Servants.


Midl. It Is well you are by Land, at Sea you would be Masters; there I my self
have met with some Affronts, which though I wanted power then to return, I
hailed the Captain of the Holland Ship, and told him he should dearly answer
it, if e're I met him in the Narrow Seas: his answer was, (mark but the
insolence) if I should hang thee Middleton, up at thy Main Yard, and sink thy
Ship; here is that about my neck, (pointing to his Gold Chain) would answer it
when I came into Holland.


Har. Iun. Yes, this is like the other.


Towers. I find we must complain at home, there is no redress to be had here.


Ysab. Come Country woman, I must call you so; since he who owns my Heart is
English born; be not dejected at your wretched Fortune, my House is yours, my
Clothes shall Habit you, even these I wear, rather then see you thus.


Har Sen. Come, come, no more complaints let us go in: I have ten Romers ready
to the Bride; as many times shall all our Guns discharge, to speak the general
gladness of this day. I Will lead you Lady. takes the Bride by the hand.


Towers. A heavy Omen to my Nuptials!
My Country Men oppressed by Sea and Land,
And I not able to redress the wrong,
So weak are we, our Enemies so strong.

Exeunt omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE. A Wood.
Enter Harman Junior, and Fiscal, with Swords, and disguised in Vizards. Harm.
WE are disguised enough; the evening now grows dusk, I would the deed were done.


Enter Perez with a Soldier, and over-hears them. Fisc. 'Twill now be
suddenly, if we have courage; in this wild woody Walk, hot with the Feast, and
plenteous Bowls, the Bridal company are walking to enjoy the cooling breeze; I
spoke to Towerson as I said I would, and on some private business of great
moment, desired, that he would leave the company and meet me single here.


Harm. Where if he comes, he never shall return; but Towerson stays too long
for my revenge; I am in haste to kill him.


Fisc. He promised me to have been here e're now, if you think fitting, I Will go
back and bring him.


Harm. Do so, I Will wait you in this place. Exit Fiscal.


Perez. Was ever villainy like this? of these unknown Assasinates? Towerson, in
vain I saved thy sleeping life; if now I let thee lose it, when thou wak'st;
thou lately have been bountiful to me, and this way I Will acknowledge it. Yet to
disclose their crimes were dangerous. What must I do? This generous Englishman
will strait be here, and consultation then perhaps will be too late; I am
resolved. Lieutenant you have heard as well as I, the bloody purpose of these
Men.


Sold. I have; and tremble at the mention of it.


Perez. Dare you adventure on an action as brave as theirs is base?


Sold. Command my life.


Perez. No more; help me dispatch that murderer, e're his Accomplice come; the
Men I know not; but their design is treacherous and bloody.


Sold. And he they mean to kill, is brave himself, and of a Nation I much love.


Perez. Come on then. both draw. To Harm. Villain thou dy'st, thy conscience
tells thee why; I need not urge the crime. They assault him.


Harm. Murder,! I shall be basely murdered; help.


Enter Towerson. Towers. Hold Villains; what unmanly odds is this? Courage, who
e're thou art, I Will succor thee.


Towerson fights with Perez, and Harman with the Lieutenant, and drive them off
the Stage. Harm. Though, (brave unknown;) night takes thee from my knowledge,
and I want time to thank thee now; take this and wear it for my sake: Gives him
a Ring. Hereafter I Will acknowledge it more largely. Exit.


Towers. That voice I Have heard, but cannot call to mind, except it be young
Harman's -- Yet who should put his life in danger thus? this Ring I would not
take as Salary, but as a gage of his free heart who left it: and when I know
him, I Will restore the pledge; sure 'twas not far from hence I made the
appointment: I know not what this Dutchmans business is, yet I believe 'twas
somewhat from my Rival; it shall go hard but I will find him out, and then
re-joyn the Company. Exit.


Re-enter Harman Junior, and Fiscal. Fisc. The accident was wondrous strange:
did you neither know your Assasinates, nor your deliverer?


Harm. 'Twas all a hurrey, yet upon better recollecting of my self, the Man who
freed me, must be Towerson.


Fisc. Hark, I hear the company walking this way, will you withdraw?


Harm. Withdraw, and Ysabinda coming!


Fisc. The Wood is full of Murderers, every Tree methinks hides one behind it.


Harm. You have two qualities my friend, that sort but ill together, as
mischievous as Hell could wish you, but fearful in the execution.


Fisc. There is a thing within me called a Conscience, which is not quite
overcome, now and then it rebels a little, especially when I am alone, or in
the dark.


Harm. The Moon begins to rise, and glitters through the Trees.


Ysabinda within. Ysab. Pray let us walk this way, that farther Lawn between
the Groves, is the most green and pleasant of any in this Isle.


Harm. I hear my Siren's voice, I cannot stir from hence. Dear friend, if thou will e're oblige me, divert the company a little, and give me opportunity a
while to talk alone with her.


Fisc. You Will get nothing of her, except it be by force.


Harm. You know not with what eloquence, Love may inspire my tongue: the
guiltiest wretch when ready for his sentence, has something still to say.


Fisc. Well, they come, I Will put you in a way, and wish you good success; but
do ye hear; remember you are a Man, and she a Woman; a little force it may be
would do well.


Enter Ysabinda, Beamont, Middleton, Collins, Harman Senior, and Julia. Ysab.
Who saw the Bridegroom last?


Harm. Sen. He refused to pledge the last Romer; so I am out of charity with
him.


Beam. Come, shall we backward to the Castle, I Will take care of you Lady.


Iulia. Oh, you have drunk so much you are past all care.


Coll. But where can be this jolly Bridegroom? answer me that, I will have the
Bride satisfied.


Fisc. He walked alone this way; we met him lately.


Ysab. I beseech you, Sir, conduct us.


Har. Iun. I Will bring you to him, Madam.


Fiscal to Harman Iun. Remember, now is your time, if you over slip this minute,
fortune perhaps will never send another,


Harm. Iun. I am resolved.


Fisc. Come Gentlemen, I Will tell you such a pleasant accident, you will think the
evening short.


Iul. I love a Story, and a Walk by Moonshine.


Fisc. Lend me your hand then Madam; Takes her by the one hand


Beam. But one, I beseech you then; I must not quit her so. Takes her by the
other hand.


Exeunt. Re-enter Harman Iun. and Ysabinda. Ysab. Come Sir, which is the way? I
long to see my love.


Harm. Iun. You may have your wish, and without stirring hence.


Ysab. My Love so near? sure you delight to mock me.


Harm. Iun. It Is you delight to torture me; behold the Man who loves you more
then his own Eyes, more then the joys of Earth, or hopes of Earth.


Ysab. When you renewed your friendship with my Towerson, I thought these vain
desires were dead within you.


Harm. Iun. Smothered they were, not dead, your Eyes can kindle no such petty
fires as only blaze a while and straight go out.


Ysab. You know when I had far less ties upon me, I would not hear you;
therefore wonder not if I withdraw, and find the company.


Harm. Iun. That would be too much cruelty to make me wretched, and then leave
me so.


Ysab. Am I in fault if you are miserable? so you may call the rich man's
wealth, the cause and object of the Robbers guilt: pray do not persecute me
farther: you know I have a Husband now, and would be loath to afflict his
knowledge with your second folly.


Har. Iun. What wondrous care you take to make him happy! yet I approve your
Method. Ignorance, oh it is a Jewel to a Husband, that, it is peace in him, it is
virtue in his Wife, it is Honor in the World; he has all this, while he is
ignorant.


Ysab. You pervert my meaning: I would not keep my actions from his knowledge;
your bold attempts I would: but yet henceforth conceal your impious flames; I
shall not ever be thus indulgent to your shame, to keep it from his notice.


Harm. You are a Woman; have enough of Love for him and me; I know the
plenteous Harvest all is his: he has so much of joy, that he must labor under
it. In charity you may allow some gleanings to a Friend.


Ysab. Now you grow rude: I Will hear no more.


Harm. Iun. You must.


Ysab. Leave me.


Har. Iun. I cannot.


Ysab. I find I must be troubled with this idle talk some Minutes more, but
it is your last.


Har. Iu. And therefore I Will improve it: pray resolve to make me happy by your
free consent; I do not love these half Enjoyments, t'enervate my delights with
using force, and neither give my self nor you that full content, which two can
never have, but where both join with equal eagerness to bless each other.


Ysab. Bless me ye kind Inhabitants of Heaven, from hearing words like these:


Harm. Iun. You must do more then hear 'em* you know you were now going to your
Bridal Bed. Call your own thoughts but to a strict account, they will tell you all
this day, your fancy ran on nothing else; it is but the same Scene still you
were to act; only the person changed, it may be for the better.


Ysab. You dare not, sure, attempt this villainy.


Harm. Iun. Call not the act of Love by that gross name, You Will give it a much
better when it is done; and woo me to a second.


Ysab. Do thou not fear a Heaven!


Harm. No, I hope one in you. Do it, and do it heartily; time is precious; it
will prepare you better for your Husband. -- Come. Lays hold on her.


Ysab. Oh Mercy, Mercy, Oh pity your own Soul, and pity mine: think how you will
wish undone this horrid act when your hot Lust is slak'd: think what will
follow when my Husband knows it, if shame will let me live to tell it him; and
tremble at a power above, who sees, and surely will revenge it.


Harm. I have thought!


Ysab. Then I am sure you're penitent.


Harm. No, I only gave you scope to let you see all you have urged I knew: you
find it is to no purpose either to talk or strive.


Ysabinda running. Some succor, help, oh help.


She breaks from him. Harm. running after her. That too is vain, you cannot
escape me. Exit.


Harm. within. Now you are mine; yield, or by force I Will take it.


Ysab. within. Oh kill me first.


Harm. within. I Will bear you where your cries shall not be heard.


Ysab. as farther off. Succor sweet Heaven, oh succor me.


Enter Harman Senior, Fiscal, Van Herring, Beamont, Collins, Julia. Beam. You
have led us here a Fairies round in the Moonshine, to seek a Bridegroom in a
Wood, till we have lost the Bride.


Coll. I wonder what is become of her?


Harm. Sen. Got together, got together I warrant you, before this time; you
Englishmen are so hot, you cannot stay for Ceremonies, a good honest Dutchman
would have been plying the Glass all this while, and drunk to the hopes of Hans
in Kelder till 'twas Bedtime.


Beam. Yes, and then have rolled into the sheets, and turned of the the other side
to snore, without so much as a parting blow; till about midnight he would have
wakened in a maze, and found first he was Married by putting forth a Foot and
feeling a Woman by him; and it may be then in stead of kissing, desired yough
Fro to hold his head.


Coll. And by that nights work have given her a Proof what she might expect
for ever after.


Beam. In my Conscience you Hollanders never get your Children, but in the
Spirit of Brandee; you are exalted then a little above your Natural Phlegm, and
only that which can make you fight and destroy Men, makes you get 'em.


Fisc. You may live to know, that we can kill Men when we are sober.


Beam. Then they must be drunk, and not able to defend themselves.


Iulia. Pray leave this talk, and let us try if we can surprise the Lovers
under some convenient tree: shall we separate and look them?


Beam. Let you and I go together then, and if we cannot find them, we shall do
as good, for we shall find one another.


Fisc. Pray take that path, or that, I will pursue this.


Exeunt all but the Fiscall. Fisc. So, now I have diverted them from Harman:
I Will look for him my self; and see how he speeds in his adventure.


Enter Harman Junior. Harm. Jun. Who goes there?


Fisc. A Friend: I was just in quest of you, so are all the Company: Where have
you left the Bride?


Har. Jun. Tied to a Tree and Gagged, and --


Fisc. And what? Why do you stare and tremble? answer me like a man.


Har. Jun. Oh, I have nothing left of Manhood in me; I am turned Beast or
Devil; Have I not Horns, and Tail, and Leathern wings? methinks I should have
by my Actions -- Oh I have done a Deed so ill, I cannot name it.


Fisc. Not name it, and yet do it? that is a Fools Modesty: Come, I Will name it
for you: You have enjoyed your Mistress?


Har. Jun. How easily so great a Villainy comes from thy mouth! I have done
worse, I have ravished her.


Fisc. That Is no harm, so you have killed her afterward.


Harm. Killed her! Why thou art a worse Fiend then I.


Fisc. Those Fits of Conscience in another might be excusable; but, in you, a
Dutchman, who are of a Race that are born Rebels, and live every where on
Rapine; Would you degenerate, and have remorse? Pray what makes any thing a
sin but Law; and, What Law is there here against it? Is not your Father Chief?
Will he condemn you for a petty Rape? The Woman an Amboyner, and what is less,
now Married to an Englishman: Come, if there be a Hell, it is but for those that
sin in Europe, not for us in Asia; Heathens have no Hell. Tell me, How was it?
Prithee the History.


Harm. I forced her -- What resistance She could make she did, but 'twas in
vain; I bound her as I told you to a tree:


Fisc. And she exclaimed I warrant --


Harm. Yes, and called Heaven and Earth to witness.


Fisc. Not after it was done.


Harm. More then before -- Desired me to have killed her. Even when I had not
left her power to speak, she cursed me with her eyes.


Fisc. Nay, then, you did not please her; if you had she never had cursed you
heartily; but, we lose time: since you have done this action, it is necessary
you proceed; we must have no tales told.


Harm. What do you mean?


Fisc. To dispatch her immediately; Could you be so senceless to ravish her,
and let her live? What if her Husband should have found her? What if any other
English? Come there is no dallying; It must be done: My other plot is ripe,
which shall destroy 'em all to morrow.


Harm. I love her still to Madness, and never can consent to have her killed,
we will thence remove her if you please, and keep her safe till your intended
Plot shall take effect; And, when her Husband's gone, I Will win her Love by
every circumstance of kindness.


Fisc. You may do so; but, the other is the safer way: but I Will not stand with
you for one life. I could have wished that Towerson had been killed before I
had proceeded to my plot; but since it cannot be, we must go on; Conduct me
where you left her.


Harm. Oh that I could forget both Act and Place.


Exeunt. Scene Drawn discovers Ysabinda bound
Enter Towerson. Towers. Sure I mistook the place, I Will wait no longer,
something within me does forebode me ill; I stumbled when I entered first this
Wood: My Nostrills bled three drops: then stopped the Blood, and not one more
would follow. What Is that which seems to bear a Mortal Sees Ysabinda. shape,
yet neither stirs nor speaks! or, Is it some Illusion of the Night? some
Spectre, such as in these Asian parts more Frequently appear; What e're it be
I Will venture to approach it; My Ysabinda Bound and Gagged! Ye Powers Goes near.
I tremble while I free her, and scarce dare restore her liberty of Speech for
fear of knowing more.


Vnbinds her, and Vngagg's her. Ysab. No longer Bridegroom thou, nor I a Bride;
those names are vanished; Love is now no more; Look on me as thou would on
some foul Leaper; and do not touch me: I am all polluted, all shame, all over
dishonor; fly my sight, and, for my sake, fly this detested Isle, where horrid
Ills so black and fatal dwell, as Indians could not guess, till Europe taught.


Towers. Speak plainer, I am recollected now: I know I am a Man, the sport of
fate; Yet, Oh my better half, had Heaven so pleased, I had been more content,
to suffer in my self then thee.


Ysab. What shall I say! That Monster of a Man, Harman; now I have named him,
think the rest. Alone, and singl'd like a timorous Hind from the full Herd, by
flattery drew me first, then forced me to an Act, so base and Brutall, Heaven
knows my Innocence: but, Why do I call that to Witness! Heaven saw, stood
silent: Not one flash of Lightning shot from the Conscious Firmament to show
its Justice: Oh had it struck us both, it had saved me!


Towers. Heaven suffered more in that then you, or I: Wherefore have I been
faithful to my trust, true to my Love, and tender to the oppressed? Am I
condemned to be the second man, who ever complained, he virtue served in vain?
But dry your tears, these sufferings all are mine. Your breast is white, and
cold as falling Snow. You still as fragrant as your Eastern Groves; and your
whole frame as innocent, and holy, as if your being were all soul and spirit,
without the gross allay of flesh and blood. Come to my arms again.


Ysab. Oh never, never, I am not worthy now; My soul indeed is free from sin,
but the foul speckled stains are from my body never to be washed out, but in my
death. Kill me, my Love, or I must kill my self; else you may think I was a
black Adulteress in my mind, and some of me consented.


Towers. Your wish to die, shows you deserve to live. I have proclaimed you
guiltless to my self. Self-homicide, which was in Heathens honor, in us is
only sin.


Ysab. I thought the Eternal Mind had made us Masters of these mortal frames;
you told me he had given us wills to choose, and reason to direct us in our
choice; if so, why should he tie us up from dying, when death's the greater
good?


Towers. Can death, which is our greatest enemy, be good? Death is the
dissolution of our nature; and nature therefore does abhor it most, whose
greatest Law is to preserve our beings.


Ysab. I grant, it is its great general Law: But as Kings, who are, or should
be above Laws, dispense with 'em when levelled at themselves; Even so may man,
without offense to Heaven, dispense with what concerns himself alone: Nor is
death in it self an ill; then holy Martyrs sinned, who ran uncalled to snatch
their Martyrdom: And blessed Virgins, whom you celebrate for voluntary death,
to free themselves from that which I have suffered.


Towers. They did it to prevent what might ensue; your shame's already past.


Ysab. It may return, if I am yet so mean to live a little longer.


Towers. You know not, Heaven may give you succor yet; you see it sends me to
you.


Ysab. It Is too late, you should have come before.


Towers. Yet you may live to see your self revenged. Come you shall stay for
that, then I Will die with you. You have convinced my reason, nor am I ashamed to
learn from you. To Heavens Tribunal my appeal I make; if as a Governor he sets
me here, to guard this weak built Citadel of Life, when it is no longer to be
held, I may with honor quit the Fort. But first I Will both revenge my self and
you.


Ysab. Alas, you cannot take revenge, your Countrymen are few, and those
unarmed.


Towers. Though not on all the Nation, as I would; yet I at least can take it
on the man.


Ysab. Leave me to Heaven's revenge, for thither I will go, and plead my self
my own just cause. There Is not an injured Saint of all my Sex, but kindly will
conduct me to my Judge, and help me tell my story.


Towers. I Will send the offender first, though to that place he never can arrive:
ten thousand Devils damned for less crimes then he, and Tarquin in their head,
way-lay his Soul, to, pull him down in triumph, and to show him in pomp among
his Contrymen; for sure Hell has its Nether-lands, and its lowest Country
must be their lot.


Enter Harman Junior, and Fiscal. Harm. 'Twas hereabout I left her tied. The
rage of Love renews again within me.


Fisc. She Will like the effects on it better now. By this time it has sunk into her
imagination, and given her a more pleasing Idea of the man, who offered her so
sweet a violence.


Ysab. Save me, sweet Heaven, the Monster comes again.


Harm. Oh here she is: My own fair Bride, for so you are, not Towerson's: Let
me unbind you; I expect that you should bind your self about me now, and tie me
in your arms.


Towers. [drawing] No, Villain, no; hot Satyr of the Woods! Expect another
entertainment now. Behold revenge for injured chastity, this Sword Heaven draws
against thee, and here has placed me like a fiery Cherub, to guard this
Paradise from any second Violation.


Fisc. We must dispatch him, Sir, we have the odds; and when he is killed,
leave me to invent the excuse.


Harm. Hold a little: As you shunned fighting formerly with me, so would I now
with you. The mischiefs I have done are past recall. Yield then your useless
right in her I love, since the possession is no longer yours; so is your Honor
safe, and so is hers, the Husband only altered.


Towers Ye trifle, there is no room for treaty here: The shame's too open, and
the wrong too great. Now all the Saints in Heaven look down to see the Justice
I shall do, for it is their cause; and all the Fiends below prepare thy Tortures.


Ysab. If Towerson would, think thou my soul so poor to own thy sin, and
make the base act mine, by choosing him who did it? Know, bad man, I Will die with
him, but never live with thee.


Towers. Prepare, I shall suspect you stay for further help, and think not this
enough.


Fisc. We are ready for you.


Harm. Stand back, I Will fight with him alone.


Fisc. Thank you for that; so if he kills you, I shall have him single upon me.


All three fight. Ysab. Heaven assist my Love.


Harm. There, Englishman, 'twas meant well to thy heart.


Towerson wounded. Fisc. Oh you can bleed, I see, for all your cause.


Towers. Wounds but awaken English courages.


Harm. Yet yield me Ysabinda, and besafe.


Towers. I Will fight my self all scarlet o'r first; were there no love, or no
revenge, I could not now desist in point of honor.


Harm. Resolve me first one question, Did you not draw your sword this night
before, to rescue one oppressed with odds?


Towers Yes, in this very Wood: I bear a Ring, the badge of gratitude from him
I saved.


Harm. That Ring was mine; I should be loath to kill the frank redeemer of my
life.


Towers. I quit that obligation. But we lose time. Come, Ravisher.


They fight again, Towerson closes with Harman and gets him down; as he is
going to kill him, the Fiscal gets over him. Fisc. Hold, and let him rise; for
if you kill him, at the same instant you die too.


Towers. Dog, do thy worst, for I would so be killed; I Will carry his soul
captive with me into the other world.


Stabs Harman. Harm. Oh mercy, mercy, Heaven. dies.


Fisc. Take this then in return.


As he is going to stab him, Ysabinda takes hold of his hand. Ysab. Hold, hold,
the weak may give some help.


Towers. (rising) Now, Sir, I am for you.


Fisc. (retiring) Hold, Sir, there is no more resistance made, I beg you by the
honor of your Nation, do not pursue my life, I tender you my sword.


Holds his sword by the point to him. Towers. Base beyond example of any
Country, but thy own.


Ysab. Kill him, sweet Love, or we shall both repent it.


Fisc. (kneeling to her) Divinest Beauty! abstract of all that is excellent in
Woman, can you be friend to murder?


Ysab. It Is none to kill a Villain, and a Dutchman.


Fisc. ( kneeling to Towers.) Noble Englishman, give me my life, unworthy of
your taking. By all that is good and holy here I swear, before the Governor to
plead your cause; and to declare his son's detested crime, so to secure your
lives.


Towers. Rise, take thy life, though I can scarce believe thee; if for a coward
it be possible, become an honest man.


Enter Harman senior, Van Herring, Beamont, Collins, Julia, the Governors
Guard. Fisc. to Harm. Oh Sir, you come in time to rescue me; the greatest
Villain who this day draws breath stands here before your Eyes; behold your
Son, that Worthy, Sweet; unfortunate young Man lies there, the last cold breath
yet hovering betwixt his trembling Lips.


Towers. Oh Monster of Ingratitude!


Harm. Oh my unfortunate old age, whose prop, and only staff is gone, dead e're
I dye, these should have been his tears, and I have been that Body to be
mourned.


Beam. I am so much amazed, I scarce believe my Senses.


Fisc. And will you let him live, who did this Act? shall Murder, and of your
own Son, and such a Son go free? he lives too long by this one Minute which he
stays behind him.


Ysab. Oh Sir, remember, in that place you hold, you are a common Father to us
all; we beg but justice of you; hearken first to my lamented story.


Fisc. First hear me, Sir.


Towers Thee slave, thou liv'st but by the breath I gave thee, did thou but
now plead on thy knees for life? and offer'dst to make known my innocence in
Harman's injuries.


Fisc. I offered to have cleared thy innocence who basely murdered him? but
words are needless; Sir, you see evidence before your eyes, and I the witness,
on my oath to Heaven how clear your Son, how criminal this Man.


Coll. Towerson could do nothing but what was noble.


Beam. We know his Native worth.


Fisc. His Worth? behold it on the Murderers hand, a Robber first, he took
degrees in mischief, and grew to what he is: know you that Diamond, and whose
it was? see if he dares deny't?


Towers. Sir, 'twas your Sons, that freely I acknowledge; but how I came by it
--


Harm. No, it is too much, I Will hear no more.


Fisc. The Devil of Jealousy, and that of Avarice, both I believe possessed him;
or your Son was innocently talking with his Wife, and he perhaps had found 'em;
this I guess, but saw it not, because I came too late, I only viewed the sweet
Youth, just expiring, and Towerson stooping down to take the Ring: she kneeling
by to help him; when he saw me, he would, you may be sure have sent me after,
because I was a witness of the fact; this on my Soul is true.


Towers. False as that soul, each Word, each Syllable; the Ring he put upon my
hand this night, when in this Wood unknown, and near this place, without my
timely help he had been slain.


Fisc. See this unlikely story, what enemies had he who should assault him, or
is it probable that very Man who actually did kill him afterward, should save
his life so little time before.


Ysab. Base Man thou know the reason of his death; he had committed on my
Person Sir an impious Rape; first tied me to that tree, and there my Husband
found me, whose revenge was such, as Heaven and Earth will justify.


Harm. I know not what Heaven will, but Earth shall not.


Beam. Her story carries such a face of Truth, ye cannot but believe it.


Coll. The other a malicious ill-patch'd lie.


Fisc. Yes, you are proper Judges of his crime, who with the rest of your
Accomplices, your Contrymen, and Towerson the chief, whom we too kindly
used, would have surpised, the Fort, and made us Slaves; that shall be proved,
more soon then you imagine; I found it out this evening.


Towers. Sure the Devil has lent thee all his stock of falsehood, and must be
forced hereafter to tell truth.


Beam. Sir, it is impossible you should believe it.


Harm. Seize 'em all.


Coll. You cannot be so base.


Harm. I Will be so just till I can hear your plea against this plot, which if
not proved, and fully, you are quit, mean time, resistance is but vain.


Towers. Provided that we may have equal hearing, I am content to yield, though
I declare, you have no power to judge us. Gives his sword.


Beam. Barbarous ungrateful Dutch.


Harm. See 'em conveyed apart to several prisons, least they combine to forge
some specious Lie in their excuse, let Towerson and that Woman too be parted.


Ysab. Was ever such a sad divorce made on a Bridal night! but we before were
parted never to meet, farewell, farewell, my last and only Love.


Towers. Curse on my fond credulity, to think there could be Faith or Honor in
the Dutch: Farewell my Ysabinda, and farewell my much wronged Contrymen;
remember yet that no unmanly weakness in your sufferings disgrace the Native
Honor of our Isle;

For you I mourn; grief for my self were vain,
I have lost all, and now would lose my pain.

Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I. A Table set out.
Enter Harman, Fiscal, Van Herring, and two Dutchmen they sit, Boy, and
waiters, Guards. Harm. MY sorrow cannot be so soon digested for losing of a Son
I loved so well, but I consider, great advantages must with some loss be
bought* as this rich Trade which I this day have purchased with his death, yet
let me be revenged, and I shall still live on, and eat, and drink down all my
griefs. Now to the matter, Fiscal.


Fisc. Since we may freely speak among our selves, all I have said of Towerson
was most false; you were consenting, Sir, as well as I, that Perez should be
hired to murder him, which he refusing when he was engaged, it is dangerous to
let him longer live.


Van Her. Dispatch him, he will be a shroud witness against us, if he return to
Europe.


Fisc. I have thought better, if you please, to kill him by form of Law, as
accessory to the English plot, which I have long been forging.


Harm. Send one to seize him strait. Exit a Messenger. But what you said, that
Towerson was guiltless of my Sons death; I easily believe; and never thought
otherwise, though I dissembled.


Van Her. Nor I; but 'twas well done to feign that story.


1. Dutch. The true one was too foul.


2. Dutch. And afterward to draw the English off from his concernment, to
their own, I think 'twas rarely managed that.


Harm. So far, 'twas well; now to proceed, for I would gladly know whether the
grounds are plausible enough of this pretended plot.


Fisc. With favor of this Houourable Court, give me but leave to smooth the
way before you. Some two or three nights since, (it matters not;) a Iapan
Soldier under Captain Perez came to a Sentinel upon the Guard, and in familiar
talk did question him about this Castle, of its strength; and how he thought it
might be taken; this discourse the other told me early the next morning: I
thereupon did issue private order, to wrack the Iaponnese, my self being
present.


Harm. But what is this to the English?


Fisc. You shall hear, I asked him when his pains were strongest on him, if
Towerson, or the English Factory, had never hired him to betray the Fort, he
answered, (as 'twas true) they never had: nor was his meaning more in that
discourse then as a Soldier to inform himself, and so to pass the time.


Van Her. Did he confess no more?


Fisc. You interrupt me, I told him I was certainly informed the English had
designs upon the Castle, and if he franckly would confess their Plot, he should
not only be Released from Torment, but bounteously rewarded: present pain and
future hopes, in fine so wrought upon him, he yielded to subscribe what ever I
pleased; and so he stands committed.


Har. Well contrived, a fair way made upon this accusation, to put them all to
Torture.


2 Dutch. By his confession, all of 'em shall dye, even to their General
Towerson.


Har. He stands convicted of another Crime, for which he is to suffer.


Fisc. This does well, to help it though. For Towerson is here a Person
publicly Employed from England, and if he should appeal, as sure he will, you
have no power to Judge him in Amboyna.


Van Her. But in regard of the late League and Union, betwixt the Nations, how
can this be answered.


1 Dutch: To Torture Subjects to so great a King, a pain never heard of in
their happy Land, will sound but ill in Europe.


Fisc. Their English Laws, in England have their force; and we have ours,
different from theirs; at home; It is enough, they either shall confess; or we
will falsity their hands to make them; then for the Apology let me alone; I
have it writ already to a Tittle, of what they shall subscribe; this I will
publish, and make our most unheard of Cruelties, to seem most just, and legal.


Har. Then in the name of him, who put it first into thy Head to form this
damned false Plot, proceed we to the Execution of it; and to begin; first seize
we their Effects, Rifle their Chests, their Boxes, Writings, Books, and take of
them a seeming Inventory; but all to our own use; I shall grow young with
thought of this, and lose my Sons remembrance.


Fisc. Will you not please to call the Prisoners in? at least inquire, what
Torments have extorted.


Har. Go thou and bring us word* Exit Fiscal.

Boy, give me some Tobacco, and a stope of Wine, Boy.


Boy: I shall Sir.


Har. And a Tub to leak in Boy; when was this Table without a leaking Vessel.


Van. Her. That Is an Omission.


1 Dutch: A great Omission.

It Is a Member of the Table, I take it so.


Har. Never any thing of Moment was done at our Counsel Table, without a
leaking Tub; at least in my time; great affairs require great Consultations,
great Consultations require great Drinking, and great Drinking a great leaking
Vessel.


Van Her. I am even drunk with joy already, to see our godly business in this
forwardness.


Enter Fiscall. Har. Where are the Prisoners?


Fisc. At the door,


Har. Bring them in; I Will try if we can face them down by Impudence, and make them
to confess.

Enter Beamont and Collins Guarded. You are not ignorant of our Business with
you; the cries of your Accomplices already have reached your Ears; and your own
Consciences, above a thousand Summons, thousand Tortures instruct you what to
do. No farther Juglings, nothing but plain sincerity and truth to be delivered
now; a free confession, will first atone for all your sins above; and may do
much below to gain your Pardons, let me exhort you therefore, be you merciful,
first to your selves, and make acknowledgement of your Conspiracy?


Beam. What Conspiracy.


Fisc. Why la you, that the Devil should go Masked with such a seeming honest
face; I warrant you know of no such thing.


Har. Were not you Mr. Beamont, and you Collins both accessory to the horrid
Plot, for the Surprisal of this Fort and Island.


Beam. As I shall reconcile my Sins to Heaven, in my last Article of Life, I Am
innocent.


Collins: And so am I.


Har. So, you are first upon the Negative.


Beam. And will be so till death.


Collins: What Plot is this you speak of?


Fisc. Here are Impudent Rogues, now after confession of two Japonneses, these
English Starts dare ask what Plot it is.


Har. Not to inform your knowledge, but that Law may have its course in every
circumstance; Fiscal, sum up their accusation to them.


Fisc. You stand accused, that New years day late past, there met at Captain
Towerson's House, you present, and many others of your Factory: there, against
Law and Justice, and all Ties of Friendship, and of Partnership betwixt us, you
did conspire to seize upon the Fort, to Murder this our Worthy Governor; and
by the help of your Plantations near, of Iacatra, and Banda, and Loho, to keep
it for your selves.


Beam. What proofs have you of this?


Fisc. The confession of two Iaponneses hired by you to attempt it.


Harm. I hear they have been forced by Torture to it.


Harm. It matters not which way the truth come out; take heed, for their
Example is before you.


Beam. Ye have no right, ye dare not Torture us, we owe you no subjection.


Fisc. That Sir, must be disputed at the Hague; in the mean time we are in
possession here.


2 Dutch. And we can make our selves to be obeyed.


Van Her. In few words Gentlemen confess. There is a Beverage ready for you
else, which you will not like to swallow.


Collins: How Is this?


Har. You shall be muffl'd up like Ladies, with an Oiled Cloth put underneath
your Chins, then Water poured above; which either you must drink or must not
breath.


1 Dutch: That Is one way, we have others.


Har. Yes, we have two Elements at your Service, Fire, as well as Water;
certain things called Matches to be tied to your Fingers ends, which are as
sovereign as Nutmegs, to quicken your short Memories.


Beam. You are inhumane, to make your Cruelty your Pastime; Nature made me a
Man, and not a Whale, to swallow down a flood.


Har. You Will grow a Corpulent Gentleman like me; I shall love you the better
for it, now you are but a spare rib.


Fisc. These things are only offered to your choice; you may avoid your
Tortures and confess.


Collins: Kill us first, for that we know is your design at last; and it is more
Mercy now.


Beam. Be kind, and, Execute us, while we bare the shapes of Men, e're Fire and
Water have destroyed our Figures; let me go whole out of the World, I care not;
and find my Body when I rise again so, as I need not be ashamed on it.


Har. It Is well you're Merry; will you yet confess?


Beam. Never.


Har. Bear them away to Torture.


Van Her. We Will try your Constancy.


Beam. We Will shame your Cruelty; if we deserve our Tortures, it is first for
freeing such an infamous Nation, that ought to have been slaves, and then for
trusting them as Partners, who had cast off the Yoke of their lawful Sovereign.


Har. Away, I Will hear no more, now who comes the next?


Exeunt the English with a Guard. Fisc. Towerson's Page, a Ship Boy, and a
Woman.


Har. Call them in. Exit a Messenger.


Van-Her. We shall have easy work with them.


Fisc. Not so easy as you imagine, they have endured the Beverage already; all
Master of their pain, no one confessing.

the Devill's in these English, those brave Boys would prove stout Topers if
they lived.

Enter two Boys and a Woman led as from Torture. Come hither ye perverse Imps,
they say, you have endured the Water Torment, We Will try what Fire will do with
you: you Sirrah, confess, were not you knowing of Towersons Plot, against this
Fort and Island.


Page. I have told your Hangman no, twelve times within this hour; when I was
at the last Gasp, and that is a time I think, when a Man should not dissemble.


Har. A Man, mark you that now; you English Boys have learned a trick of late,
of growing Men betimes, and doing Men's Work too, before you come to twenty.


Van. Her. Sirrah, I will try if you are a Salamander, and can live in the Fire.


Page. Sure you think my Father got me of some Dutch Woman, and that I am but
of a half strain courage; but you shall find that I am all over English, as
well in Fire as Water.


2 Boy. Well of all Religions, I do not like your Dutch.


Fisc. No, and why young stripling.


2 Boy. Because your Penance comes before Confession.


Har. Do you mock us Sirrah, to the Fire with him.


2. Boy. Do so, all you shall get by it, is this; before I answered no, now
I Will be sullen and will talk no more.


Har. Best cutting off these little Rogues betime, if they grow Men, they will
have the Spirit of Revenge in them.


Page. Yes, as your Children have that of Rebellion; Oh that I could but live
to be Governor here, to make your fat Guts pledge me in that Beverage I drunk,
you Sir John Falstaff of Amsterdam.


2 Boy. I have a little Brother in England, that I intend to appear to, when
you have killed me; and if he does not promise me the Death of ten Dutchmen in
the next War, I Will haunt him instead of you.


Har. What say you Woman? have compassion of your self, and confess; you are of
a softer Sex.


Wom. But of a Courage full as Manly; there is no Sex in Souls; would you have
English Wives show less of Bravery then their Children do? to lie by an English
Man's side, is enough to give a Woman Resolution.


Fisc. Here Is a Hen of the Game too, but we shall tame you in the fire.


Wom. My Innocence shall there be tried like Gold, till it come out the purer.
When you have burnt me all into one Wound, cram Gunpowder into 't, and blow me
up, I Will not confess one word to shame my Country.


Har. I think we have got here the Mother of the Maccabees; away with them all
three. Exeunt the English Guarded. I Will take the pains my self to see these
Tortured.


Exeunt Harman, Van Herring, and the two Dutchmen with the English: manet
Fiscal. Enter Julia to the Fiscal. Iulia. Oh you have ruined me, you have
undone me, in the Person of my Husband!


Fisc. If he will needs forfeit his Life to the Laws, by joining with the
English in a Plot, it is not in me to save him; but dearest Iulia be satisfied,
you shall not want a Husband.


Iulia. Do you think, I Will ever come into a Bed with him, who robbed me of my
dear sweet Man?


Fisc. Dry up your Tears, I Am in earnest, I will Marry you, in faith I will; it
is your destiny.


Iulia. Nay if it be my Destiny: but I vow I Will never be yours but upon one
condition.


Fisc. Name your desire and take it.


Iulia. Then save poor Beamonts Life.


Fisc. This is the most unkind Request you could have made, it shows you Love
him better: therefore in prudence I should have his Death.


Iulia. Come, I Will not be denied, you shall give me his Life, or I Will not love
you, by this Kiss you shall Child;


Fisc. Pray ask some other thing.


Iulia. I have your word for this, and if you break it, how shall I trust you
for your Marrying me.


Fisc. Well, I will do it to oblige you. aside.

But to prevent her new designs with him, I Will see him shipped away for England
straight.


Iulia. I may build upon your promise then:


Fisc. Most firmly: I hear company.


Enter Harman, Van Herring, and the two Dutchmen with Towerson Prisoner. Harm.
Now Captain Towerson you have had the Privilege to be examined last: this on
the score of my old Friendship with you, though you have ill deserved it. But
here you stand accused of no less Crimes then Robbery first, then Murder, and
last Treason: what can you say to clear your self?


Towers. You're interested in all, and therefore partial; I have considered
on it, and will not plead, because I know you have no right to judge me: for the
last Treaty 'twixt our King and you expressly said, that causes Criminal were
first to be Examined, and then Judged, not here, but by the Council of Defense;
to whom I make Appeal.


Fisc. This Court conceives that it has power to judge you; derived from the
most High and Mighty States, who in this Island are Supreme, and that as well
in Criminal, as Civil Causes.


1 Dutchman. You are not to question the Authority of the Court which is to
Judge you.


Towers. Sir, by your favor, I both must, and will: I Will not so far betray my
Nations right; we are not here your Subjects, but your Partners: and that
Supremacy of power you claim, extends but to the Natives, not to us: dare you,
who in the British Seas strike Sail, nay more, whose Lives and Freedom are our
Alms, presume to sit and judge your Benefactors. Your base new upstart
Commonwealth should blush, to doom the Subjects of an English King, the
meanest of whose Merchants would disdain the narrow life, and the Domestic
baseness of one of those you call your mighty States.


Fisc. You spend your Breath in Railing; speak to the purpose.


Har. Hold yet: because you shall not call us cruel, or plead I would be judge
in my own cause; I shall accept of that appeal you make, concerning my Sons
death; provided first you clear your self from what concerns the public; for
that relating to our general safety, the judgment of it cannot be deferred; but
with our common danger.


Towers. Let me first be bold to question you: what circumstance can make this
your pretended Plot seem likely? the Natives first you tortured, their
confession Extorted so, can prove no crime in us. Consider next the strength of
this your Castle; it is Garrison above two hundred Men, besides as many of your
City Burgers, all ready on the least Alarm, or Summons, to Reinforce the
others, for ten English, and Merchants they, not Soldiers, with the Aid of ten
Iapanners; all of them unarmed, except five Swords, and not so many Muskets; the
attempt had only been for Fools or Madmen.


Fisc. We cannot help your want of Wit; proceed.


Towers. Grant then we had been desperate enough to hazard this; we must at
least forecast how to secure possession when we had it. We had no Ship nor
Pinnace in the Harbor; nor could have Aid from any Factory: the nearest to us
forty Leagues from hence, and they but few in number: you besides this Fort,
have yet three Castles in this Isle amply provided for, and eight tall Ships
riding at Anchor near; considering this, and think what all the World will
judge of it.


Harm. Nothing but Falsehood is to be expected from such a Tongue, whose Heart
is foul'd with Treason. Give him the Beverage.


Fisc. It Is ready Sir.


Harm. Hold; I have some reluctance to proceed to that extremity: he was my
Friend, and I would have him franckly to confess: push open that Prison door,
and set before him the image of his pains in other Men.


The Scene opens, and discovers the English Tortured, and the Dutch tormenting
them. Fisc. Now Sir, how does the Object like you?


Towers. Are you Men or Devils! D'Alva, whom you condemn for cruelty did never
the like; he knew original Villainy was in your Blood: your Fathers all are
damned for their Rebellion; when they Rebelled, they were well used to this:
these Tortures never were hatched in Humane Breasts, but as your Country lies
confined on Hell, just on its Marches, your black Neighbors taught ye, and just
such pains as you invent on Earth, Hell has reserved for you.


Harm. Are you yet moved?


Towers. But not as you would have me. I could weep tears of Blood to view this
usage; but you, as if not made of the same Mould, see with dry eyes the
Miseries of Men, as they were Creatures of another kind, not Christians, nor
Allies, nor Partners with you, but as if Beasts, transfixed on Theaters, to
make you cruel sport.


Har. These are but vulgar Objects, bring his Friend; let him behold his
Tortures; shut that door. The Scene closed.


Enter Beamont led, with Matches tied to his Hands. Towers. embracing him. Oh
my dear friend, now I am truly wretched! even in that part which is most
sensible, my friendship: how have we lived to see the English name, the scorn
of these, the vilest of Mankind.


Beam. Courage my friend, and rather praise we Heaven, that it has chose two
such as you and me, who will not shame our Country with our pains, but stand
like Marble Statues in their fires, scorched and defaced perhaps, not melted
down. So let 'em burn this Tenement of Earth; they can but burn me naked to my
soul* that is of a Nobler frame, and will stand Firm, Upright, and Unconsum'd.


Fisc. Confess; if you have kindness, save your friend.


Towers. Yes, by my death I would, not by my confession; he is so brave, he
would not so be saved; but would renounce a friendship built on shame.


Harm. Bring more Candles, and burn him from the Wrists up to the Elbows.


Beam. Do, I Will enjoy the Flames like Scaevola; and when one's roasted, give
the other hand.


Towers. Let me embrace you while you are a Man, now you must lose that form;
be parched and rivel'd like a dried Mummy, or dead Malefactor, exposed in
Chains, and blown about by Winds.


Beam. Yet this I can endure, Go on, and weary out two Elements; Vex Fire and
Water with the Experiments of pains far worse then death.


Towers. Oh let me take my turn; you will have double pleasure, I Am ashamed to
be the only Englishman untortur'd.


Van Her. You soon should have your wish; but that we know in him you suffer
more.


Harm. Fill me a brim full Glass: now Captain, here is to all your Countrymen;
I wish your whole East India Company were in this room, that we might use them
thus.


Fisc. They should have Fires of Cloves and Cinnamon, we would cut down whole
Groves to Honor 'em, and be at cost to burn 'em nobly.


Beam. Barbarous Villains! now you show your selves.


Harm. Boy, take that Candle thence, and bring it hither, I am exalted, and
would light my Pipe just where the Wyck is fed with English Fat.


Van Her. So would I; oh the Tobacco tastes Divinely after it.


Towers. We have friends in England who would weep to see this acted on a
Theater, which here you make your pastime.


Boam. Oh that this Flesh were turned a cake of Ice, that I might in an instant
melt away, and become nothing, to escape this Torment, there is not cold enough
in all the North to quench my burning blood.


Fiscal whispers Harman. Harm. Do with Beamont as you please, so Towerson dye.


Fisc. You Will not confess yet Captain?


Towers. Hangman, no. I would have don't before, if e're I would: to do it when
my friend has suffered this, were to be less then he.


Fisc. Free him. To Beamont aside.


They free Beamont. Beamont I have not sworn you should not suffer, but that
you should not dye; thank Iulia for it, but on your life do not delay this hour
to post from hence; so to your next Plantation; I cannot suffer a loved Rival
near me.


Beam. I almost question if I will receive my life from thee: it is like a cure
from Witches; 'twill leave a sin behind it.


Fisc. Nay, I Am not lavish of my courtesy; I can on easy terms resume my gift.


Harm. Captain, you're a dead man; I Will spare your torture for your Quality;
prepare for execution instantly.


Towers. I am prepared.


Fisc. You dye in charity I hope.


Towers. I can forgive even thee; my innocence I need not name, you know it.
One farewell kiss of my dear Ysabinda, and all my business here on earth is done.


Harm. Call her, she is at the door. Exit Fiscal.


Towes. to Beam. embracing. A long and last farewell; I take my death with the
more cheerfulness because thou liv'st behind me: tell my friends I died so as
became a Christian and a Man; give to my brave Employers of the East India
Company, the last remembrance of my faithful service; tell 'em I Seal that
Service with my Blood; and dying, wish to all their Factories, and all the
famous Merchants of our Isle, that Wealth their generous Industry deserves; but
dare not hope it with Dutch partnership. Last, there is my heart, I give it in
this kiss -- Kisses him. Do not answer me; Friendship's a tender thing, and it
would ill become me now to weep. --


Beam. Adieu, if I would speak, I cannot. -- Exit.


Enter Ysabinda. Ysab. Is it permitted me to see your Eyes once more, before
Eternal night shall close 'em.


Towers. I summoned all I had of Man to see you, 'twas well the time allowed
for it, was short, I could not bear it long: it is dangerous, and would divide
my Love 'twixt Heaven and you. I therefore part in haste; think I am going a
sudden journey, and have not the leisure to take a ceremonious long farewell.


Ysab. Do you still love me?


Towers. Do not suppose I do, it is for your ease, since you must stay behind
me; to think I was unkind, you will grieve the less!


Harm. Though I suspect you joined in my Sons Murder, yet since it is not
proved, you have your life.


Ysab. I thank you for it, I Will make the noblest use of your sad gift; that is,
to dye unforced; I Will make a present of my life to Towerson; to let you see,
though worthless of his Love, I would not live without him.


Towers. I charge you love my memory, but live.


Harm. She shall be strictly guarded from that violence, she means against her
self.


Ysab. Vain Men! there are so many paths to death, you cannot stop 'em all;
over the green Turf where my Love's laid, there will I mourning sit, and draw
no air but from the damps that rise out of that hallowed Earth; and for my
Diet, I mean my Eyes alone shall feed my Mouth. Thus will I live, till he in
pity rise, and the pale shroud take me in his cold Arms, and lay me kindly by
him in his Grave,


Enter Collins, and then Perez, Julia following him. Harm. No more; your time's
now come, you must away.


Coll. Now Devils; you have done your worst with tortures, Death's a privation
of pain; but they were a continual dying,


Iulia. Farewell my dearest, I may have many Husbands, but never one like thee.


Perez. As you love my Soul, take hence that Woman; my English friends, I Am not
ashamed of death, while I have you for part'ners; I know you innocent, and so
am I, of this pretended plot; but I am guilty of a greater crime; For, being
married in another Country: the Governors persuasions, and my love to that ill
Woman, made me leave the first, and make this fatal choice. I Am justly
punished, for her sake I dye; the Fiscal to enjoy her has accused me. There is
another cause -- by his procurement I should have killed. --


Fisc. Away with him, and stop his mouth. He is led off.


Towers. I leave thee Life with no regret at parting, full of whatever thou
could give, I rise from thy neglected Feast, and go to sleep: yet on this
brink of death, my Eyes are opened, and Heaven has bid me prophesy to you the
unjust contrivers of this Tragic Scene; An Age is coming, when an English
Monarch with Blood, shall pay that blood which you have shed: to save your
Cities from victorious Arms, you shall invite the Waves to hide your Earth, and
trembling to the tops of Houses fly, while Deluges invade your lower rooms:
Then, as with Waters you have swelled our Bodies, with damps of Waters shall
your Heads be swollen;

Till at the last your sap'd foundations fall,
And Universal Ruin swallows all.

He Is led out with the English; the Dutch remain. Van Her. Ay, ay, we will venture
both our Selves, and Children for such another pull.


1. Dutch. Let him prophesy when his Head's off.


2. Dutch. There Is never a Nostradamus of 'em all shall fright us from our gain.


Fisc. Now for a smooth Apology, and then a fawning Letter to the King of
England; and our work's done.


Harm. It Is done as I would wish it. Now Brethren, at my proper cost and
charges, three days you are my Guests; in which good time we will divide their
greatest Wealth by Lots, while wantonly we rifle for the rest:

Then in full Romers, and with joyful Hearts
We Will drink confusion to all English Starts Exeunt.

Epilogue.
A Poet once the Spartan's led to fight,
And made 'em Conquer in the Muses right:
So would our Poet lead you on this day:
Showing your tortured Fathers in his Play.
To one well born, the affront is worse and more,
When he is abused, and baffled by a Bore:
With an ill Grace the Dutch their mischiefs do,
They Have both ill Nature and ill Manners too.
Well may they boast themselves an ancient Nation,
For they were bred e're Manners, were in fashion:
And their new Common wealth has set 'em free,
Only from Honor and Civility.
Venetians do not more uncouthly ride,
Than did their Lubber-State Mankind bestride.
Their sway became 'em with as ill a Mien,
As their own Paunches swell above their Chin:
Yet is their Empire no true Growth but Humor,
And only two King's Touch can cure the Tumor.
As Cato did his Affricque Fruits display:
So we before your Eyes their Indies lay:
All Loyal English will like him conclude,
Let Caesar Live, and Carthage be subdued.
FINIS.

