Examen Poeticum: BEING THE THIRD PART OF Miscellany Poems.

Containing Variety of NEW TRANSLATIONS OF THE Ancient Poets.

Together with many ORIGINAL COPIES, BY THE Most Eminent Hands.

Haec potior soboles: hine Coeli tempore certo,
Dulcia mella premes. --
Virgil. Geor. 4. In medium quaesita reponunt.
Ibid. LONDON: Printed by R. E for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet. M DC XCIII.

THE THIRD PART OF Miscellany Poems.

TO THE Right Honorable, MY Lord RADCLIFFE.
My Lord,
THese Miscellany Poems, are by many Titles yours. The first they claim from
your accepttance of my Promise to present them to you; before some of them were
yet in being. The rest are derived from your own Merit, the exactness of your
Judgment in Poetry, and the candor of your Nature; easy to forgive some
trivial faults when they come accompanied, with countervailing Beauties. But
after all, though these are your equitable claims to a Dedication from other
Poets, yet I must acknowledge a Bribe in the case, which is your particular
liking of my Verses. It Is a vanity common to all Writers, to overvalue their
own productions; and it is better for me to own this failing in my self, than
the World to do it for me. For what other Reason have I spent my Life in so
unprofitable a Study? Why am I grown Old, in seeking so barren a Reward as
Fame? The same Parts and Application, which have made me a Poet, might have
raised me to any Honors of the Gown, which are often given to Men of as little
Learning and less Honesty than mv self. No Government has ever been, or ever
can be, wherein Time-servers and Blockheads will not be uppermost. The Persons
are only changed, but the same juglings in State, the same Hypocrisy in
Religion, the same Self-Interest, and Mis-mannagement, will remain for ever.
Blood and Money will be lavished in all Ages, only for the Preferment of new
Faces, with old Consciences. There is too often a Jaundise in the Eyesof Great
Men; they see not those whom they raise, in the same Colors with other Men.
All whom they affect, look Golden to them; when the Gilding is only in their
own distempered Sight. These Considerations, have given me a kind of Contempt
for those who have risen by unworthy ways. I am not ashamed to be Little, when
I see them so Infamously Great. Neither, do I know, why the Name of Poet should
be Dishonorable to me; if I am truly one, as I hope I am; for I will never do
any thing, that shall dishonor it. The Notions of Morality are known to all
Men: None can pretend Ignorance of those Idea's which are In-born in Mankind:
and if I see one thing, and practice the contrary, I must be Disingenuous, not
to acknowledge a clear Truth, and Base to Act against the light of my own
Conscience. For the Reputation of my Honesty, no Man can question it, who has
any of his own: For that of my Poetry, it shall either stand by its own Merit;
or sall for want of it. Ill Writers are usually the sharpest Censors: For they
(as the best Poet, and the best Patron said), when in the full perfection of
decay, turn Vinegar, and come again in Play. Thus the corruption of a Poet, is
the Generation of a Critic: I mean of a Critic in the general acceptance of
this Age: For formerly they were quite another Species of Men. They were
Defendors of Poets, and Commentators on their Works: to Illustrate obscure
Beauties; to place some passages in a better light, to redeem others from
malicious Interpretations: to help out an Author's Modesty, who is not
ostentatious of his Wit; and, in short, to shield him from the Ill Nature of
those Fellows, who were then called Zoili, and Momi, and now take upon
themselves the Venerable Name of Censors. But neither Zoilus, nor he who
endeavored to defame Virgil, were ever Adopted into the Name of Critics by
the Ancients: what their Reputation was then, we know; and their Successors in
this Age deserve no better. Are our Auxiliary Forces turned our Enemies? Are
they, who, at best, are but Wits of the Second Order, and whose only Credit
amongst Readers, is what they obtained by being subvervient to the Fame of
Writers, are these become Rebels of Slaves, and Usurpers of Subjects; or to
speak in the most Honorable Terms of them, are them from our Seconds, become
Principals against us? Does the Ivy undermine the Oak, which supports its
weakness? What labor would it cost them to put in a better Line, than the
worst of those which they expunge in a True Poet? Petronius, the greatest Wit
perhaps of all the Romans, yet when his Envy prevailed upon his Judgment, to
fall on Lucan, he fell himself in his attempt: He performed worse in his Essay
of the Civil War, than the Author of the Pharsalia: and avoiding his Errors,
has made greater of his own. Julius Scaliger, would needs turn down Homer, and
Abdicate him, after the possession of Three Thousand Years: Has he succeeded in
his Attempt? He has indeed shown us some of those Imperfections in him, which
are incident to Humane Kind: But who had not rather be that Homer than this
Scaliger? You see the same Hypercritick, when he endeavors to mend the
beginning of Claudian, (a faulty Poet, and Living in a Barbarous Age;) yet how
short he comes of him, and substitutes such Verses of his own, as deserve the
Ferula. What a Censure has he made of Lucan, that he rather seems to Bark than
Sing? Would any but a Dog, have made so snarling a Comparison? One would have
thought, he had Learned Latin, as late as they tell us he did Greek. Yet he
came off, with a pace tua, by your good leave, Lucan; he called him not by
those outrageous Names, of Fool, Booby, and Blockhead: He had somewhat more of
good Manners, than his Successors, as he had much more Knowledge. We have two
sorts of those Gentlemen, in our Nation: Some of them proceeding with a seeming
moderation and pretense of Respect, to the Dramatick Writers of the last Age,
only scorn and vilify the present Poets, to set up their Predecessors. But
this is only in appearance; for their real design is nothing less, than to do
Honor to any Man, besides themselves. Horace took notice, of such Men in his
Age: Non Ingeniis favet ille, Sepultis; nostra sed impugnat; nos nostraque
lividus odit. It Is not with an ultimate intention to pay Reverence to the Manes
of Shakespeare, Fletcher, and Ben Johnson, that they commend their Writings, but
to throw Dirt on the Writers of this Age: Their Declaration is one thing, and
their Practice is another. By a seeming veneration to our Fathers, they would
thrust out us their Lawful Issue, and Govern us themselves, under a specious
pretense of Reformation. If they could compass their intent, what would Wit and
Learning get by such a change? If we are bad Poets, they are worse; and when
any of their woeful pieces come abroad, the difference is so great betwixt them
and good Writers, that there need no Criticisms on our part to decide it. When
they describe the Writers of this Age, they draw such monstrous figures of
them, as resemble none of us: Our pretended Pictures are so unlike, that it is
evident we never sat to them: They are all Grotesque; the products of their
wild Imaginations, things out of Nature, so far from being Copied from us, that
they resemble nothing that ever was, or ever can be. But there is another sort
of Insects, more venomous than the former. Those who manifestly aim at the
destruction of our Poetical Church and State. Who allow nothing to their
Countrymen, either of this or of the former Age. These attack the Living by
raking up the Ashes of the Dead. Well knowing that if they can subvert their
Original Title to the Stage, we who claim under them, must fall of course.
Peace be to the Venerable Shades of Shakespeare, and Ben Johnson: None of the
Living will presume to have any competition with them: as they were our
Predecessors, so they were our Masters. We Trayl our Plays under them: but,
(as at the Funerals of a Turkish Emperor,) our Ensigns are furled, or dragged
upon the ground, in Honor to the Dead; so we may lawfully advance our own,
afterward, to show that we succeed: If less in Dignity, yet on the same Foot
and Title, which we think too, we can maintain, against the Insolence of our
own Janissaries. If I am the Man, as I have Reason to believe, who am seemingly
Courted, and secretly Undermined: I think I shall be able to defend my'self,
when I am openly Attacqu'd. And to show besides, that the Greek Writers only
gave us the Rudiments of a Stage, which they never finished. That many of the
Tragedies in the former Age amongst us, were without Comparison beyond those of
Sophocles and Euripides. But at present, I have neither the leisure nor the
means for such an Undertaking. It Is ill going to Law for an Estate, with him
who is in possession of it, and enjoys the present Profits, to feed his Cause.
But the quantum mutatus may be remembered in due time. In the mean while I
leave the World to judge, who gave the Provocation.

This, my Lord, is, I confess, a long digression, from Miscellany Poems to
Modern Tragedies: But I have the ordinary Excuse of an Injured Man, who will be
telling his Tale unseasonably to his Betters. Though at the same time, I am
certain you are so good a Friend, as to take a Concern in all things which
belong to one who so truly Honors you. And besides, being your self a Critic
of the Genuine sort, who have Read the best Authors, in their own Languages,
who perfectly distinguish of their several Merits, and in general prefer them
to the Moderns, yet, I know, you judge for the English Tragedies, against the
Greek and Latin, as well as against the French, Italian and Spanish, of these
latter Ages. Indeed there is a vast difference, betwixt arguing like Perault,
in behalf of the French Poets, against Homer and Virgil, and betwixt giving the
English Poets their undoubted due, of excelling AEschylus, Euripides, and
Sophocles. For if we or our greater Fathers, have not yet brought the Drama to
an absolute Perfection, yet at least we have carried it much farther than those
Ancient Greeks; who beginning from a Chorus, could never totally exclude it, as
we have done, who find it an unprofitable encumbrance, without any necessity of
Entertaining it amongst us; and without the possibility of establishing it
here, unless it were supported by a Public Charge. Neither can we accept of
those Lay-Bishops, as some call them, who under pretense of reforming the
Stage, would intrude themselves upon us, as our Superiors, being indeed
incompetent Judges of what is Manners, what Religion, and least of all, what is
Poetry and Good Sense. I can tell them in behalf of all my Fellows, that when
they come to Exercise a Jurisdiction over us, they shall have the Stage to
themselves, as they have the Laurel. As little can I grant, that the French
Dramatick Writers, excel the English: Our Authors as far surpass them in
Genius, as our Soldiers Excel theirs in Courage: It Is true, in Conduct they
surpass us either way: Yet that proceeds not so much from their
greaterKnowledge, as from the difference of Tastes in the two Nations. They
content themselves with a thin Design, without Episodes, and managed by few
Persons. Our Audience will not be pleased, but with variety of Accidents, an
Underplot, and many Actours. They follow the Ancients too servilely, in the
Mechanic Rules, and we assume too much License to our selves, in keeping them
only in view, at too great a distance. But if our Audience had their Tastes, our
Poets could more easily comply with them, than the French Writers could come up
to the Sublimity of our Thoughts, or to the difficult variety of our Designs.
However it be, I dare establish it for a Rule of Practice on the Stage, that we
are bound to please those, whom we pretend to Entertain: And that at any price,
Religion and Good Manners only excepted. And I care not much, if I give this
handle, to our bad Illiterate Poetasters, for the defense of their SCRIPTIONS
as they call them. There is a sort of Merit in delighting the Spectatours;
which is a Name more proper for them, than that of Auditors: Or else Horace is
in the wrong, when he commends Lucilius for it. But these common places I mean
to Treat at greater leisure: In the mean time, submitting that little I have
said, to your Lordship's Approbation, or your Censure, and choosing rather to
Entertain you this way, as you are a Judge of Writing, than to oppress your
Modesty, with other Commendations, which though they are your due, yet would
not be equally received, in this Satirical, and Censorious Age. That which
cannot without Injury be denied to you, is the easiness of your Conversation,
far from Affectation or Pride: not denying even to Enemies, their just Praises.
And this, if I would dwell on any Theme of this Nature, is no vulgar
Commendation to your Lordship. Without Flattery, my Lord, you have it in your
Nature, to be a Patron and Encourager of Good Poets, but your Fortune has not
yet put into your Hands the opportunity of expressing it. What you will be
hereafter, may be more than guessed, by what you are at present. You maintain
the Character of a Nobleman, without that Haughtiness which generally attends
too many of the Nobility, and when you Converse with Gentlemen, you forget not
that you have been of their Order. You are Married to the Daughter of a King,
who, amongst her other high Perfections, has derived from him a Charming
Behavior, a winning Goodness, and a Majestic Person. The Muses and the Graces
are the Ornaments of your Family. While the Muse Sings, the Grace accompanies
her Voice: even the Servants of the Muses have sometimes had the Happiness to
hear her; and to receive their Inspirations from her.

I will not give my self the liberty of going farther; for'tis so sweet to
wander in a pleasing way, that I should never arrive at my Journeys end. To
keep my self from being belated in my Letter, and tiring your Attention, I must
return to the place where I was setting out. I humbly Dedicate to your
Lordship, my own Labors in this Miscellany: At the same time, not arrogating
to my self the Privilege, of Inscribing to you, the Works of others who are
joined with me, in this undertaking; over which I can pretend no right. Your
Lady and You have done me the favor to hear me Read my Translations of Ovid:
And you both seemed not to be displeased with them. Whether it be the
partiality of an Old Man to his Youngest Child, I know not: But they appear to
me the best of all my Endeavors in this kind. Perhaps this Poet, is more easy
to be Translated, than some others, whom I have lately attempted: Perhaps too,
he was more according to my Genius. He is certainly more palatable to the
Reader, than any of the Roman Wits, though some of them are more lofty, some
more Instructive, and others more Correct. He had Learning enough to make him
equal to the best. But as his Verse came easily, he wanted the toil of
Application to amend it. He is often luxuriant, both in his Fancy and
Expressions; and as it has lately been observed, not always Natural. If Wit be
pleasantry, he has it to excess: but if it be propriety, Lucretius, Horace, and
above all Virgil are his Superiors. I have said so much of him already, in my
Preface to his Heroical Epistles, that there remains little to be added in this
place. For my own part, I have endeavored to Copy his Character what I could
in this Translation, even perhaps, farther than I should have done; to his very
Faults. Mr. Chapman in his Translation of Homer, professes to have done it
somewhat paraphrastically; and that on set purpose; his Opinion being, that a
good Poet is to be Translated in that manner. I remember not the Reason which
he gives for it: But I suppose it is, for fear of omitting any of his
Excellencies: sure I am, that if it be a Fault, it is much more pardonable, than
that of those, who run into the other extreme, of a litteral, and close
Translation, where the Poet is confined so straightly to his Author's Words,
that he wants elbow-room, to express his Elegancies. He leaves him obscure; he
leaves him Prose, where he sound him Verse. And no better than thus has Ovid
been served by the so much admired Sandys. This is at least the Idea which I
have remaining of his Translation; for I never Read him since I was a Boy. They
who take him upon Content, from the Praises which their Fathers gave him; may
inform their Judgment by Reading him again: And see, (if they understand the
Original) what is become of Ovid's Poetry, in his Version; whether it be not
all, or the greatest part of it evaporated. But this proceeded from the wrong
Judgment of the Age in which he Lived: They neither knew good Verse, nor loved
it; they were Scholars it is true, but they were Pedants. And for a just Reward
of their Pedantick pains, all their Translations want to be Translated, into
English.

If I Flatter not my self, or if my Friends have not Flattered me, I have given
my Author's Sense, for the most part truly: for to mistake sometimes, is
incident to all Men: And not to follow the Dutch Commentatours always, may be
forgiven to a Man, who thinks them, in the general, heavy gross-witted Fellows;
fit only to gloss on their own dull Poets. But I leave a farther Satire on
their Wit, till I have a better opportunity, to show how much I Love and Honor
them. I have like wise attempted to restore Ovid to his Native sweetness,
easiness, and smoothness; and to give my Poetry a kind of Cadence, and, as we
call it, a run of Verse, as like the Original, as the English can come up to
the Latin; As he seldom uses any Synalephas, so I have endeavored to avoid
them, as often as I could: I have likewise given him his own turns, both on the
Words and on the Thought: Which I cannot say are inimitable, because I have
Copyed them: and so may others, if they use the same diligence: But certainly
they are wonderfully Graceful in this Poet. Since I have Named the Synalepha,
which is the cutting off one Vowel, immediately before another, I will give an
Example of it, from Chapman's Homer which lies before me; for the benefit of
those who understand not the Latin Prosodia. It Is in the first Line of the
Argument to the First Iliad. Apollo 's Priest to the Argive Fleet does bring,
etc.


There we see he makes it not the Argive, but the Argive, to shun the shock of
the two Vowels, immediately following each other. But in his Second Argument,
in the same Page, he gives a bad Example of the quite contrary kind: Alpha the
Prayer of Chryses Sings:
The Army's Plague, the Strife of Kings.


In these word the Armies, the ending with a Vowel, and Armies beginning with
another Vowel, without cutting off the first, which by it had been the Armies,
there remains a most horrible ill-sounding-gap betwixt those Words. I cannot
say, that I have every way observed the Rule of this Synalepha, in my
Translation; but wheresoever I have not, it is a fault in sound: The French and
Italians have made it an inviolable Precept in their versification;
thereinfollowing the severe Example of the Latin Poets. Our Countrymen have not
yet Reformed their Poetry so far; but content themselves with following the
Licentious Practice of the Greeks; who though they sometimes use Synalepha's,
yet make no difficulty very often, to sound one Vowel upon another; as Homer
does, in the very first line of Alpha. (...). It Is true, indeed, that in the
second line, in these words (...), and (...), the Synalepha in revenge is twice
observed. But it becomes us, for the sake of Euphony, rather Musas colere
severiores, with the Romans; than to give into the looseness of the Grecians.

I have tired my self, and have been summoned by the Press to send away this
Dedication; otherwise I had exposed some other faults, which are daily
committed by our English Poets; which, with care and observation, might be
amended. For after all, our Language is both Copious, Significant, and
Majestical; and might be reduced into a more harmonious sound. But for want of
Public Encouragement, in this Iron Age, we are so far from making any progress
in the improvement of our Tongue, that in few years, we shall Speak and Write
as Barbarously as our Neighbors.

Notwithstanding my haste, I cannot forbear to tell your Lordship, that there
are two fragments of Homer Translated in this Miscellany; one by Mr. Congreve
(whom I cannot mention without the Honor which is due to his Excellent Parts,
and that entire Affection which I bear him;) and the other by my self. Both the
Subjects are pathetical; and I am sure my Friend has added to the Tenderness
which he found in the Original; and, without Flattery, surpassed his Author.
Yet I must needs say this in reference to Homer, that he is much more capable
of exciting the Manly Passions, than those of Grief and Pity. To cause
Admiration, is indeed the proper and adequate design of an Epick Poem: And in
that he has Excelled even Virgil. Yet, without presuming to Arraign our Master,
I may venture to affirm, that he is somewhat too Talkative, and more than
somewhat too digressive. This is so manifest, that it cannot be denied, in that
little parcel which I have Translated, perhaps too literally: There Andromache
in the midst of her Concernment, and Fright for Hector, runs off her Biass, to
tell him a Story of her Pedigree, and of the lamentable Death of her Father,
her Mother, and her Seven Brothers. The Devil was in Hector, if he knew not all
this matter, as well as she who told it him; for she had been his Bedfellow
for many Years together: And if he knew it, then it must be confessed, that
Homer in this long digression, has rather given us his own Character, than that
of the Fair Lady whom he Paints. His Dear Friends the Commentators, who never
fail him at a pinch, will needs excuse him, by making the present Sorrow of
Andromache, to occasion the remembrance of all the past: But others think that
she had enough to do with that Grief which now oppressed her, without running
for assistance to her Family. Virgil, I am confident, would have omitted such a
work of supererrogation. But Virgil had the Gift of expressing much in little,
and sometimes in silence: For though he yielded much to Homer in Invention, he
more Excelled him in his Admirable Judgment. He drew the Passion of Dido for
Eneas, in the most lively and most natural Colors that are imaginable: Homer
was ambitious enough of moving pity; for he has attempted twice on the same
subject of Hector's death: First, when Priam, and Hecuba beheld his Corpse,
which was dragged after the Chariot of Achilles; and then in the Lamentation
which was made over him, when his Body was redeemed by Priam; and the same
Persons again bewail his death with a Chorus of others to help the cry. But if
this last excite Compassion in you, as I doubt not but it will, you are more
obliged to the Translatour than the Poet. For Homer, as I observed before, can
move rage better than he can pity: He stirs up the irascible appetite, as our
Philosophers call it, he provokes to Murder, and the destruction of God's
Images; he forms and equips those ungodly Man killers, whom we Poets, when we
flatter them, call Heroes; a race of Men who can never enjoy quiet in
themselves, 'till they have taken it from all the World. This is Homer's
Commendation, and such as it is, the Lovers of Peace, or at least of more
moderate Heroism, will never Envy him. But let Homer and Virgil contend for the
Prize of Honor, betwixt themselves, I am satisfied they will never have a
third Concurrent. I wish Mr. Congreve had the leisure to Translate him, and the
World the good Nature and Justice, to Encourage him in that Noble Design, of
which he is more capable than any Man I know. The Earl of Mulgrave, and Mr.
Waller, two the best Judges of our Age, have assured me, that they could never
Read over the Translation of Chapman, without incredible Pleasure, and extreme
Transport. This Admiration of theirs, must needs proceed from the Author
himself: For the Translator has thrown him down as low, as harsh Numbers,
improper English, and a monstrous length of Verse could carry him. What then
would he appear in the Harmonious Version, of one of the best Writers, Living
in a much better Age than was the last? I mean for versification, and the Art
of Numbers; for in the Drama we have not arrived to the pitch of Shakespeare and
Ben Johnson. But here, my Lord, I am forced to break off abruptly, without
endeavoring at a Compliment in the close. This Miscellany, is without dispute
one of the best of the kind, which has hitherto been extant in our Tongue. At
least, as Sir Samuel Tuke has said before me, a Modest Man may praise what is
not his own. My Fellows have no need of any Protection, but I humbly recommend
my part of it, as much as it deserves, to your Patronage and Acceptance, and
all the rest to your Forgiveness.

I am My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, John Dryden.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
HAving formerly Printed two Parts of Miscellany Poems, they were so very
kindly received, that I had long before now Endeavored to obtain a Third, had
I not almost ever since the Publishing of the Second been Soliciting the
Translating of Juvenal, and Persius. Soon after the Publishing of that Book I
waited upon several Gentlemen to ask their Opinion of a Third Miscellany, who
encouraged me to endeavor it, and have considerably helped me in it.

Many very Ingenious Copies were sent to me upon my giving public notice of
this Design; but had I Printed em all, the Book would have swelled to too great
a bulk, and I must have delayed the Publishing of it 'till next Term: But those
omitted, shall upon Order from the Authors be restored; or if the Gentlemen
will be pleased to stay 'till next year, I shall take it as a favor to insert
them in another Miscellany, which I then intend, if I find by the Sale that
this proves as Entertaining as the former.

Several Reasons encourage me to Proceed upon the endeavoring a Fourth Volume:
As, That I had assurance of many Copies from Persons now out of England; which,
though not yet arrived, I am confident will be sent in a short time, and they
come from such Hands, that I can have no reason to doubt of their being very
much esteemed.

I would likewise willingly try if there could be an Annual Miscellany, which I
believe might be an useful diversion to the Ingenious. By this means care would
be taken to preserve every Choice Copy that appears; whereas I have known
several Celebrated Pieces so utterly lost in three or four years time after
they were written, as not to be recoverable by all the search I could make
after 'em.

I was for some years together possessed of several Poems of Sir Carr Scrope's,
written with his own Hand, which I in vain of late strove to recover; for as I
forgot to whom I lent 'em, so I believe the Person to whom they were lent does
not remember where they were borrowed: But if the present Possessour of them
reads this, I beg their being returned.

If I should go on with the Design of an Annual Miscellany, after I have
procured some Stock to proceed upon, I will give Public Notice of it. And I
hope the Gentlemen who approve of this Design, will promote it, by sending such
Copies as they judge will be acceptable.

Your very humble Servant JACOB TONSON.

THE CONTENTS.
THE First Book of Ovid's Metamorphoses Translated into English Verse, by Mr.
Dryden. Page x The Golden-Age. 8 The Silver Age. 10 The Brazen Age 11 The Iron
Age. Ibid. The Gyant's War. 13 The Transformation of Daphne into a Laurel. 39
The Transformation of Io into a Heifar. 49 The Eyes of Argos Transformed into a
Peacocks Train. 58 The Transformation of Syrinx into Reeds. 60 The Fable of
Iphis and Ianthe, from the Ninth Book of the Metamorphoses, Englished by Mr.
Dryden. 70 The Fable of Acis, Polyphemus, and Galatea, from the Thirteenth Book
of the Metamorphoses, Englished by Mr. Dryden. 84 On Mr. Hobbs. By the Earl of
Mulgrave. 99 On the Death of the Learned Mr. John Seldom. 104 Against
Immoderate Grief. To a young Lady weeping. An Ode in imitation of Casimire. By
Mr. Yalden. 111 To the Returning Sun. By J. H. 114 Against the Fear of Death.
By a Person of Honor. 117 The Dream: Occasioned by the Death of the most Noble
and Virtuous Lady, Elizabeth Seymour, Mother to his Grace the Duke of Somerset.
By Mr. J. Talbot. 121 A Hymn to the Morning. In Praise of Light. An Ode. By Mr.
Yalden. 127 A Hymn to Darkness. By Mr. Yalden. 132 AEneas his meeting with Dido
in the Elvsian Fields. being a Translation of the Sixth Book of Virgil's
AEnids. By Mr. Wolsley. 138 Out of the Italian of Fulvio Testi, to Count
Montecuccoli. Against Pride upon sudden Advancement. 143 Catullus. Epig. 19. By
the same Hand as the former. 148 Out of the Greek of Menage. By the same Hand
as the former. 150 Invitation into the Country. In imitation of the 34th Epig.
of Catullus. By the same Hand as the former. 151 On Mrs. Arabello Hunt Singing.
A Pindarique Ode. By Mr. Congreve. 153 To a Person of Honor. Upon his
Incomparable, Incomprehensible Poem. By Mr. Waller. 159 On the same by Dr. S --
162 Another on the same. By Mr. Mat. Clifford. 164 On the same. By the Ld. V.
-- 165 On two Verses out of the same. By the Duke of Buckingham. 166 To the
Prince and Princess of Orange, upon their Marriage. By Not. Lee. 168 Against
Sloth. When the King was at Oxford. 175 What art thou Love! By Mr. J.
Allestry. 178 Verses spoken before the Duke and Duchess of York, and Lady
Anne, in Oxford Theater. By the Ld. S. -- and Mr. C. -- 181 Humane Life,
supposed to be spoken by an Epicure, in imitation of the second Chapter of the
Wisdom of Solomon. A Pindarique Ode. Inscribed to the Lord Hunsdon. By Mr.
Yalden. 188 To Mr. Waller: Upon the Copy of Verses made by himself on the last
Copy in his Book. 197 Elogy: Occasioned by the Reading and Transcribing Mr.
Edmund Waller's Poem of Divine Love, since his Death. By Mr. J. Talbot. 199
Moschus: Idyl. 1st. Done into English by Mr. J. R. 201 Against Enjoyment. By
Mr. Yalden. 204 Priam's. Lamentation and Petition to Achilles, for the Body of
his Son Hector. Translated from the Greek of Homer. By Mr. Congreve. 207 The
Lamentations of Hecuba, Andromache, and Helen, over the dead Body of Hector.
Translated from the Greek of Homer. By Mr. Congreve. 215 Paraphrase upon
Horace. Ode 19. Lib. 1. By Mr. Congreve. 227 Horace, Lib. 2. Ode 14. Imitated
by Mr. Congreve. 229 An Ode, in Imitation of Horace, Ode 9. Lib. 1. By Mr.
Congreve. 234 To the Dut hess, on her Return from Scotland, in the Year 1682.
By Mr. Dryden. 239 A Song for St. Cecelia's Day, 1687. Written by John Dryden
Esquire, and Composed by Mr. John Baptist Draghi. 242 To Mr. Dryden: By Mr. Jo.
Addison. 247 To Mr. Dryden, on his Translation of Persius. By Mr. B. Higgons.
250 To Sir Godfrey Kneller, drawing my Lady Hides Picture. By Mr. B. Higgons.
253 Song on a Lady indisposed. By Mr. Higgons. 254 Song to a Fair, young Lady.
going out of the Town in the Spring. By Mr. Dryden. 255 A Song by my Ld. R. --
258 A Song by my Ld. R. -- 259 A Paean. or Song of Triumph, on the Translation
and Apothesis of King Charles the Second. By my Ld. R. -- 260 Out of Horace, By
my Ld. R. -- 262 To a Lady, who Raffling for the King of France's Picture,
flung the highest Chances on the Dice. By Mr. B. Higgons. 264 On my Lady
Sandwich's being stayed in Town by the immoderate Rain. By Mr. B. Higgons. 266
Ovid's Love-Elegies. Bock 1. Eleg. 7. To his Mistress whom he had beaten. By
Henry Cromwell, Esquire 268 Ovid's Love-Elegies. Book 1. Eleg. 8. Of Love and War.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire. 273 Ovid's Love-Elegies. Book 1. Eleg. 10. To his
Mercenary Mistress. By Henry Cromwell, Esquire. 277 Ovid's Love-Elegies. Book
1. Eleg. 15. Of the Immortality of the Muses. Inscribed to Mr. Dryden. By Henry
Cromwell, Esquire. 282 Ovid's Love-Elegies. Book 3. Eleg. 2. To his Mistress at
the Horse-Race. By Henry Cromwell, Esquire. 286 Ovid's Love-Elegies. Book 3.
Eleg. 3. Of his Perjured Mistress. By Henry Cromwell, Esquire 291 To the Lady
Castlemain, upon her encouraging his first Play. By Mr. Dryden. 295 Prologue to
the University of Oxford, 1681. By Mr. Dryden. 299 Prologue by Mr. Dryden. 302
Considerations on the Eighty Eighth Psalm. By Mr. Prior. 305 Veni Creator
Spiritus, Translated in Paraphrase. By Mr. Dryden. 307 The Curse of Babylon.
Paraphrased from the Thirteenth Chapter of Isaia. A Pindarique Ode. By Tho.
Yalden. 310 Out of Horace. Lib. 2. Ode. 3. 321 The Grove. 325 Love but One. 326
To the Author of Sardanapalus; upon that and his other Writings. 328 Of my Lady
Hide. Occasioned by the sight of her Picture. By Mr. George Granville. 329 An
Imitation of the second Chorus in the second Act of Seneca's Thyestes. By Mr.
George Granville. 331 Amor omnibus idem: Or the Force of Love in all Creatures;
being a Translation of some Verses in Virgil's third Georgick, from verse 209.
to verse 285. 335 To Mr. Congreve. An Epistolary Ode. Occasioned by his Play.
From Mr. Yalden. 343 On his Mistress drowned. By Mr. S -- 349 To the Pious
Memory of the Accomplished young Lady, Mrs. Anne Killigrew, Excellent in the two
Sister-Arts of Poesy and Painting. An Ode. By Mr. Dryden. 351 To the Earl of
Carlisle, upon the Death of his Son before Luxemburgh. 364 The Insect. Against
Bulk. By Mr. Yalden. 370 Written in a Lady's Advice to a Daughter. 373 Written
in a Lady's Waller. 375 Written in the Leaves of a Fan 377 An Incomparable Ode
of Malherb's. Written by him when the Marriage was a foot between the King of
France, and Anne of Austria. Translated by a Person of Quality, a great Admirer
of the easiness of the French Poetry. 378 On the Duchess of Portimouth's
Picture. 380 A Song. By the Earl of Rochester. 381 Song for the King's Birth
Day. 383 A Song. 387 A Song. 389 Song. 391 Song. 393 To the King. In the Year
1686. By Mr. George Granville. 394 Harry Martvn's Epitaph, by himself 396 To
his Friend Captain Chamberlain; in Love with a Lady he had taken in an Algerine
Prize at Sea. In allusion to the 4th Ode of Horace. Lib. 2. By Mr. Yalden. 397
A Song. By a Lady. 401 Written by a Lady. 403 Paraphrased out of Horace, the
23d Ode. of the 2d. Book. By Dr. Pope. 405 Love's Antidote. 407 Anachreon
Imitated. 409 Anachreon Imitated. 411 Anachreon Imitated. 412 From Virgil's
First Georgick. Translated into English Verse, by H. Sacheverill. Dedicated to
Mr. Dryden. 413 A French Poem: With a Paraphrase on it in English. 418, 419 A
Song: by Sir John Eaton. 422 Another Song in imitation of Sir John Eaton's
Songs. By the late Earl of Rochester. 424 A Song: By Sidny Godolphin, Esquire,
on Tom Killigrew, and Will Murrey. 425 Rondelay. By Mr. Drvden. 429 In a Letter
to the Honorable Mr. Charles Montague, By Mr. Prior. 431 An Ode. By Mr. Prior.
433 To a Lady of Quality's Playing on the Lute. By Mr. Prior. 437 An Epitaph on
the Lady Whitmore. By Mr. Dryden. 441 An Epitaph on Sir Palms Fairborne's Tomb
in Westminster-Abby. By Mr. Dryden. 442 To the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of
St. Paul's, on his Practical Discourse concerning Death. By Mr. Prior. 444 On
Exodus 3. 14. I am that I am. A Pindarique Ode. By Mr. Prior. 449 The Last
Parting of Hector and Andromache. From the Sixth Book of Homer's Iliads.
Translated from the Original by Mr. Dryden. 456 Syphilis. ult.
THE FIRST BOOK OF Ovid's Metamorphoses, Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr.
DRYDEN.

THE FIRST BOOK OF Ovid's Metamorphoses.
OF Bodies changed to various Forms I sing:
Ye Gods, from whom these Miracles did spring,
Inspire my Numbers with Celestial heat;
Till I, my long laborious Work complete:
And add perpetual Tenor to my Rhimes,
Deduced from Nature's Birth, to Caesar's Times
Before the Seas, and this Terrestrial Ball,
And Heavens high Canopy, that covers all,
One was the Face of Nature; if a Face,
Rather a rude and indigested Mass:
A lifeless Lump, unfashion'd, and unfram'd;
Of jarring Seeds; and justly Chaos named.
No Sun was lighted up, the World to view;
No Moon did yet her blunted Horas renew:
Nor yet was Earth suspended in the Sky;
Nor poised, did on her own Foundations lie:
Nor Seas about the Shoars their Arms had thrown;
But Earth and Air and Water were in one.
Thus Air was void of light, and Earth unstable,
And Waters dark Abyss unnavigable.
No certain Form, on any was impressed;
All were confused, and each disturbed the rest.
For hot and cold, were in one Body fixed;
And soft with hard, and light with heavy mixed.
But God or Nature, while they thus contend,
To these intestine Discords put an end:
Then Earth from Air, and Seas from Earth were driven,
And grosser Air, sunk from AEtherial Heaven.
Thus disembroil'd, they take their proper place;
The next of kin, contiguously embrace;
And Foes are sunder'd, by a larger space.
The force of Fire ascended first on high,
And took its dwelling in the vaulted Sky:
Then Air succeeds, in lightness next to Fire;
Whose Atoms from unactive Earth retire.
Earth sinks beneath, and draws a numerous throng
Of pondrous, thick, unweildy Seeds along.
About her Coasts, unruly Waters roar;
And, rising on a ridge, insult the Shore.
Thus when the God, what ever God was he,
Had formed the whole, and made the parts agree,
That no unequal portions might be found,
He molded Earth into a spacious round:
Then with a breath, he gave the Winds to blow;
And bad the congregated Waters flow.
He adds the running Springs, and standing Lakes;
And bounding Banks for winding Rivers makes.
Some part, in Earth are swallowed up, the most
In ample Oceans, disimbogu'd, are lost.
He shades the Woods, the Valleys he restrains
With Rocky Mountains, and extends the Plains.
And as five Zones th'AEtherial Regions bind,
Five Correspondent, are to Earth assigned:
The Sun with Rays, directly darting down,
Fires all beneath, and fries the middle Zone:
The two beneath the distant Poles, complain
Of endless Winter, and perpetual Rain.
Betwixt th'extreams, two happier Climates, hold
The Temper that partakes of Hot and Cold.
The Feilds of liquid Air, enclosing all,
Surround the Compass of this Earthly Ball:
The lighter parts, lie next the Fires above;
The grosser near the watery Surface move:
Thick Clouds are spread, and Storms engender there,
And Thunders Voice, which wretched Mortals fear,
And Winds that on their Wings, cold Winter bear.
Nor were those blustering Brethren left at large,
On Seas and Shoars, their fury to discharge:
Bound as they are, and circumscribed in place,
They rend the World, resistless, where they pass;
And mighty marks of mischief leave behind;
Such is the Rage of their tempestuous kind.
First Eurus to the rising Morn is sent,
(The Regions of the balmy Continent;)
And Eastern Realms, where early Persians run,
To greet the blessed appearance of the Sun.
Westward, the wanton Zephyr wings his flight;
Pleased with the remnants of departing light:
Fierce Boreas, with his Offspring, Islues forth
T'invade the frozen Wagon of the North.
While srowning Auster, seeks the Southern Sphere;
And rots with endless Rain, th'unwholsom year.
High over the Clouds and empty Realms of wind,
The God a clearer space for Heaven designed;
Where Fields of Light, and liquid Ether flow;
Purged from the pondrous dregs of Earth below.
Scarce had the Power distinguished these, when straight
The Stars, no longer overlaid with weight,
Exert their Heads, from underneath the Mass;
And upward shoot, and kindle as they pass, place.
And with diffasive Light, adorn their Heavenly
Then, every void of Nature to supply,
With Forms of Gods he fills the vacant Sky:
New Herds of Beasts, he sends the plains to share:
New Colonies of Birds, to people Air:
And to their Oozy Beds, the finny Fish repair.
A Creature of a more Exalted Kind
Was wanting yet, and then was Man designed:
Conscious of Thought, of more capacious Breast,
For Empire formed, and fit to rule the rest:
Whether with particles of Heavenly Fire
The God of Nature did his Soul Inspire,
Or Earth, but new divided from the Sky,
And, pliant, still, retained the AEtherial Energy:
Which Wise Prometheus tempered into paste,
And mixed with living Streams, the Godlike Image cast.
Thus, while the mute Creation downward bend
Their Sight, and to their Earthy Mother tend,
Man looks aloft; and with erected Eyes
Beholds his own Hereditary Skies.
From such rude Principles our Form began;
And Earth was Metamorphos'd into Man.
The Golden Age.
The Golden Age was first; when Man yet New,
No Rule but uncorrupted Reason knew:
And, with a Native bent, did Good pursue.
Un-forc'd by Punishment, un-aw'd by fear,
His words were simple, and his Soul sincere:
Needless was written Law, where none oppressed:
The Law of Man, was written in his Breast:
No suppliant Crowds, before the Judge appeared,
No Court Erected yet, nor Cause was heard:
But all was safe, for Conscience was their Guard.
The Mountain Trees in distant prospect please,
E're yet the Pine descended to the Seas:
E're Sails were spread, new Oceans to explore:
And happy Mortals, unconcerned for more,
Confined their Wishes to their Native Shore.
No walls, were yet; nor sense, nor mote nor mownd,
Nor Drum was heard, nor Trumpets angry sound:
Nor Swords were forged; but void of Care and Crime,
The soft Creation slept away their time.
The teeming Earth, yet guiltless of the Plough,
And unprovoked, did fruitful Stores allow:
Content with Food, which Nature freely bred,
On Wildings, and on Strawberries they fed;
Cornels and Bramble-berries gave the rest,
And falling Acorns, furnished out a Feast.
The Flowers un-sown, in Fields and Meadows reigned:
And Western Winds, immortal Spring maintained.
In following years, the bearded Corn ensued,
From Earth unasked, nor was that Earth renewed.
From Veins of Valleys, Milk and Nectar broke;
And Honey sweating through the pores of Oak.
The Silver Age.
But when Good Saturn, banished from above,
Was driven to Hell, the World was under Jove.
Succeeding times a Silver Age behold,
Excelling Brass, but more excelled by Gold.
Then Summer, Autumn, Winter, did appear:
And Spring was but a Season of the Year.
The Sun his Annual course obliquely made,
Good days contracted, and enlarged the bad.
Then Air with sultry heats began to glow;
The wings of winds, were clogged with Ice and Snow;
And shivering Mortals, into Houses driven,
Sought shelter from th'inclemency of Heaven.
Those Houses, then, were Caves, or homely Sheds;
With twining Oziers fenced; and Moss their Beds.
Then Ploughs, for Seed, the fruitful furrows broke,
And Oxen labored first, beneath the Yoke.
The Brazen Age.
To this came next in course, the Brazen Age:
A Warlike Offspring, prompt to Bloody Rage,
Not Impious yet --
The Iron Age.
-- -- Hard Steel succeeded then:
And stubborn as the Metal, were the Men.
Truth, Modesty, and Shame, the World forsook,
Fraud, Avarice, and Force, their places took.
Then Sails were spread, to every Wind that blew.
Raw were the Sailors, and the Depths were new:
Trees rudely hollowed, did the Waves sustain;
E're Ships in Triumph plough'd the watery Plain.
Then Landmarks, limited to each his right:
For all before was common, as the light.
Nor was the Ground alone required to bear
Her annual Income to the crooked share,
But greedy Mortals, rummaging her Store,
Dug from her Entrails first the precious Oar;
Which next to Hell, the prudent Gods had laid;
And that alluring ill, to sight displaid.
Thus cursed Steel, and more accursed Gold
Gave mischief birth, and made that mischief bold;
And double death, did wretched Man invade
By Steel assaulted, and by Gold betrayed.
Now, (brandished Weapons glittering in their hands,)
Mankind is broken loose from moral Bands;
No Rights of Hospitality remain:
The Guest by him who harbored him, is slain.
The Son in Law pursues the Father's life;
The Wife her Husband murders, he the Wife.
The Step-dame Poison for the Son prepares;
The Son inquires into his Father's years.
Faith flies, and Piety in Exile mourns;
And Justice, here oppressed, to Heaven returns.
The Giants War.
Nor were the Gods themselves more safe above;
Against beleaguered Heaven, the Giants move:
Hills pii'd on Hills, on Mountains, Mountains lie,
To make their mad approaches to the Sky.
Till Jove, no longer patient, took his time
T'avenge with Thunder their audacious Crime;
Red Lightning played, along the Firmament,
And their demolish't Works to pieces rent.
Singed with the Flames, and with the Bolts transfixt
With Native Earth, their Blood, the Monsters mixed:
The Blood, indu'd with animating heat,
Did in the Impregnant Earth, new Sons beget:
They, like the Seed from which they sprung, accursed,
Against the Gods, Immortal Hatred nursed.
An Impious, Arrogant, and Cruel Brood:
Expressing their Original from Blood.
Which, when the King of Gods beheld from high,
(Withal revolving in his memory,
What he himself had found on Earth of late,
Lycaon's Guilt, and his Inhuman Treat,)
He sighed; nor longer with his Pity strove;
But kindled to a Wrath becoming Jove:
Then, called a General Council of the Gods;
Who Summoned, Issue from their Blessed Abodes,
And fill the Assembly, with a shining Train.
A way there is, in Heavens expanded Plain,
Which when the Skies are clear, is seen below,
And Mortals, by the Name of Milky, know.
The Groundwork is of Stars; through which the Road
Lies open to the Thunderer's Abode;
The Gods of greater Nations dwell around,
And on the Right and Left, the Palace bound;
The Commons where they can, the Nobler sort
With Winding-doors wide open, front the Court,
This Place, as far as Earth with Heaven may vie,
I dare to call the Loovre of the Sky.
When all were placed, in Seats distinctly known,
And he, their Father, had assumed the Throne,
Upon his Ivory Scepter first he leant,
Then shook his Head, that shook the Firmament:
Air, Earth, and Seas, obeyed the Almighty nod:
And with a general fear, confessed the God.
At length with Indignation, thus he broke
His awful silence, and the Powers bespoke.
I was not more concerned in that debate
Of Empire, when our Universal State
Was put to hazard, and the Giant Race
Our Captive Skies, were ready to embrace:
For though the Foe was fierce, the Seeds of all
Rebellion, sprung from one Original;
Now, wheresoever ambient waters glide,
All are corrupt, and all must be destroyed.
Let me this Holy Protestation make,
By Hell, and Hell's inviolable Lake,
I tried whatever in the Godhead lay:
But gangreen'd Members, must be lopt away,
Before the Nobler Parts, are tainted to decay.
There dwells below, a Race of Demigods,
Of Nymphs in Waters; and of Fawns in Woods:
Who, tho not worthy yet, in Heaven to live,
Let Them, at least, enjoy that Earth we give.
Can these be thought securely lodged below,
When I my self, who no Superior know,
I, who have Heaven and Earth at my command,
Have been attempted by Lycaon's Hand?
At this a murmur, through the Synod went,
And with one Voice they vote his Punishment.
Thus, when Conspiring Traitors dared to doom
The fall of Caesar, and in him of Rome,
The Nations trembled, with a pious fear;
All anxious for their Earthly Thunderer:
Nor was their care, O Caesar! less esteemed
By thee, than that of Heaven for Jove was deemed,
Who with his Hand and Voice, did first restrain
Their Murmurs, then resumed his Speech again.
The Gods to silence were composed, and sat
With Reverence, due to his Superior State.
Cancel your pious Cares; already he
Has paid his Debt to Justice, and to me.
Yet what his Crimes, and what my Judgments were,
Remains for me, thus briefly to declare.
The Clamours of this vile degenerate Age,
The Cries of Orphans, and th'Oppressor's Rage
Had reached the Stars; I will descend, said I,
In hope to prove this loud Complaint a Lie.
Disguised in Humane Shape, I Traveled round
The World, and more than what I heard, I found.
Over Moenalus I took my steepy way,
By Caverns infamous for Beasts of Prey:
Then crossed Cyllene, and the piny shade
More infamous, by Cursed Lycaon made.
Dark Night had covered Heaven and Earth, before
I entered his Unhospitable Door.
Just at my entrance, I displayed the Sign
That somewhat was approaching of Divine.
The prostrate People pray; the Tyrant grins;
And, adding Profanation to his Sins,
I Will try, said he, and if a God appear
To prove his Deity, shall cost him dear.
It Was late; the Graceless Wretch, my Death prepares,
When I should soundly Sleep, oppressed with Cares:
This dire Experiment, he chose, to prove
If I were Mortal, or undoubted Jove:
But first he had resolved to taste my Power;
Not long before, but in a luckless hour
Some Legates, sent from the Molossian State,
Were on a peaceful Errant come to Treat:
Of these he Murders one, he boils the Flesh;
And lays the mangled Morsels in a Dish:
Some part he Roasts; then serves it up, so dressed,
And bids me welcome to this Humane Feast.
Moved with disdain, the Table I o're-turn'd;
And with avenging Flames, the Palace burned.
The Tyrant in a fright, for shelter, gains
The Neighboring Fields, and scours along the plains.
Howling he fled, and fain he would have spoke;
But Humane Voice, his Brutal Tongue forsook.
About his lips, the gathered foam he churns,
And, breathing slaughters, still with rage he burns,
But on the bleating Flock, his fury turns.
His Mantle, now his Hide, with rugged hairs
Cleaves to his back, a famished face he bears.
His arms descend, his shoulders sink away,
To multiply his legs for chase of Prey.
He grows a Wolf, his hoariness remains,
And the same rage in other Members reigns.
His eyes still sparkle in a narr'wer space:
His jaws retain the grin, and violence of face.
This was a single ruin, but not one
Deserves so just a punishment alone.
Mankind's a Monster, and the Ungodly times
Confed'rate into guilt, are sworn to Crimes.
All are alike involved in ill, and all
Must by the same relentless Fury fall.
Thus ended he; the greater Gods assent;
By Clamours urging his severe intent;
The less fill up the cry for punishment.
Yet still with pity, they remember Man;
And mourn as much as Heavenly Spirits can.
They ask, when those were lost of humane birth,
What he would do with all this waste of Earth:
If his dispeopl'd World, he would resign
To Beasts, a mute, and more ignoble Line;
Neglected Altars must no longer smoke,
If none were left to worship and invoke.
To whom the Father of the Gods replied,
Lay that unnecessary fear aside.
Mine be the care, new People to provide.
I will from wondrous Principles ordain
A Race unlike the first, and try my skill again.
Already had he tossed the flaming Brand;
And rolled the Tunder in his spacious hand;
Preparing to discharge on Seas and Land:
But stopped, for fear thus violently driven,
The Sparks should catch his Axle-tree of Heaven.
Remembering in the Fates, a time when Fire
Should to the Battlements of Heaven aspire.
And all his blazing Worlds above should burn;
And all the inferior Globe, to Cinders turn.
His dire Artill'ry thus dismissed, he bent
His thoughts to some securer Punishment.
Concludes to pour a Watery Deluge down;
And what he durst not burn, resolves to drown.
The Northern breath, that freezes Floods, he binds:
With all the race of Cloud-dispelling Winds:
The South he loosed, who Night and Horror brings;
And Foggs are shaken from his ^laggy Wings.
From his divided Beard, two Streams he pours,
His head and rhumy eyes, distill in showers.
With Rain his Robe and heavy Mantle flow:
And lazy mists, are lowering on his brow;
Still as he swept along, with his clench't fist
He squeezed the Clouds, the imprisoned Clouds resist:
The Skies from Pole to Pole, with peals resound;
And showers enlarged, come pouring on the ground.
Then, clad in Colors of a various dye,
Junonian Iris, breeds a new supply;
To feed the Clouds: Impetuous Rain descends;
The bearded Corn, beneath the Burden bends:
Defrauded Clowns, deplore their perished grain;
And the long labors of the Year are vain.
Nor from his Patrimonial Heaven alone
Is Jove content to pour his Vengeance down,
Aid from his Brother of the Seas he craves;
To help him with Auxiliary Waves.
The watery Tyrant calls his Brooks and Floods,
Who roll from mossie Caves (their moist abodes;)
And with perpetual Urns his Palace fill:
To whom in brief, he thus imparts his Will.
Small Exhortation needs; your Powers employ:
And this bad World, so Jove requires, destroy:
Let loose the Reins, to all your watery Store:
Bear down the Damms, and open every door.
The Floods, by Nature Enemies to Land,
And proudly swelling with their new Command,
Remove the living Stones, that stopped their way,
And gushing from their Source, augment the Sea.
Then, with his Mace, their Monarch struck the Ground:
With inward trembling, Earth received the wound;
And rising streams a ready passage found.
The expanded Waters gather on the Plain:
They flote the Fields, and overtop the Grain;
Then rushing onwards, with a sweepy sway,
Bear Flocks and Folds, and laboring Hinds away.
Nor safe their Dwellings were, for, sap'd by Floods,
Their Houses fell upon their Household Gods.
The solid Piles, too strongly built to fall,
High over their Heads, behold a watery Wall:
Now Seas and Earth were in confusion lost;
A World of Waters, and without a Coast.
One climbs a Cliff; one in his Boat is born;
And Ploughs above, where late he sowed his Corn.
Others over Chimney tops and Turrets row,
And drop their Anchors, on the Meads below:
Or downward driven, they bruise the tender Vine,
Or tossed aloft, are knocked against a Pine.
And where of late, the Kids had cropped the Grass,
The Monsters of the deep, now take their place.
Insulting Nereids on the Cities ride,
And wondering Dolphins over the Palace glide.
On leaves and masts of mighty Oaks they brouze;
And their broad Finns, entangle in the Boughs,
The frighted Wolf, now swims amongst the Sheep;
The yellow Lion wanders in the deep:
His rapid force, no longer helps the Boar:
The Stag swims faster, than he ran before.
The Fowls, long beating on their Wings in vain,
Despair of Land, and drop into the Main.
Now Hills and Vaies, no more distinction know;
And levelled Nature, lies oppressed below.
The most of Mortals perish in the Flood:
The small remainder dies for want of Food.
A Mountain of stupendous height there stands
Betwixt the Athenian and Boeotian Lands,
The bound of fruitful Fields, while Fields they were,
But then a Field of Waters did appear:
Parnassus is its name; whose forky rise
Mounts through the Clouds, and mates the lofty Skies.
High on the Summet of this dubious Cliff,
Deucalion wafting, moored his little Skiff.
He with his Wife were only left behind
Of perished Man; they two, were Humane Kind.
The Mountain Nymphs and Themis they adore,
And from her Oracles relief implore.
The most upright of Mortal Men was he;
The most sincere and holy Woman, she.
When Jupiter, surveying Earth from high,
Beheld it in a Lake of Water lie,
That where so many Millions lately lived,
But two, the best of either Sex survived;
He loosed the Northern Wind; fierce Boreas flies
To puff away the Clouds and purge the Skies:
Serenely, while he blows, the Vapors, driven,
Discover Heaven to Earth, and Earth to Heaven.
The Billows fall, while Neptune lays his Mace
On the rough Seas, and smooths its furrowed face.
Already Triton, at his call appears,
Above the Waves; a Tyrian Robe he wears;
And in his hand a crooked Trumpet bears.
The Sovereign bids him peaceful sounds inspire;
And give the Waves the signal to retire.
His writhen Shell he takes; whose narrow vent
Grows by degrees into a large extent,
Then gives it breath; the blast, with doubling sound,
Runs the wide Circuit of the World around:
The Sun first heard it, in his early East,
And met the rattling Eccho's in the West.
The Waters, listening to the Trumpets roar,
Obey the Summons, and sorsake the Shore.
A thin Circumference of Land appears;
And Earth, but not at once, her visage rears;
And peeps upon the Seas from upper Grounds;
The Streams, but just contained within their bounds,
By slow degrees into their Channels crawl:
And Earth increases, as the Waters fall.
In longer time the tops of Trees appear;
Which Mud on their dishonored Branches bear.
At length the World was all restored to view;
But desolate, and of a sickly hue:
Nature beheld her self, and stood aghast,
A dismal Desert, and a silent waste.
Which when Deucalion, with a piteous look
Beheld, he wept, and thus to Pyrrha spoke:
Oh Wife, oh Sister, oh of all thy kind
The best and only Creature left behind,
By Kindred, Love, and now by Dangers joined,
Of Multitudes, who breathed the common Air,
We two remain; a Species in a pair:
The rest the Seas have swallowed; nor have we
Even of this wretched life a certainty.
The Clouds are still above; and, while I speak,
A second Deluge, over our heads may break.
Should I be snatched from hence, and thou remain,
Without relief, or Partner of thy pain,
How cou'd'st thou such a wretched Life sustain?
Should I be left, and thou be lost, the Sea
That buried her I loved, should bury me.
Oh could our Father his old Arts inspire,
And make me Heir of his informing Fire,
That so I might abolisht Man retrieve,
And perished People in new Souls might live.
But Heaven is pleased, nor ought we to complain,
That we, the Examples of Mankind, remain.
He said; the careful couple join their Tears;
And then invoke the Gods, with pious Prayers.
Thus, in Devotion having eased their grief,
From Sacred Oracles, they seek relief.
And to Cephysus Brook, their way pursue:
The Stream was troubled, but the Foord they knew;
With living Waters, in the Fountain bred,
They sprinkle first, their Garments, and their Head,
Then took the way, which to the Temple led.
The Roofs were all defiled with Moss, and Mire,
The Desert Altars, void of Solemn Fire.
Before the Gradual, prostrate they adored;
The Pavement kissed, and thus the Saint implored.
O Righteous Themis, if the Powers above
By Prayers are bent to pity, and to love,
If humane Miseries can move their mind;
If yet they can forgive; and yet be kind,
Tell, how we may restore, by second birth,
Mankind, and People desolated Earth.
Then thus the gracious Goddess, nodding, said;
Depart, and with your Vestments veil your head:
And stooping lowly down, with loosn'd Zones,
Throw each behind your backs, your mighty Mother's bones.
Amazed the pair, and mute with wonder stand,
Till Pyrrha first refused the dire command.
Forbid it Heaven, said she, that I should tear
Those Holy Relics from the Sepulcher:
They pondered the mysterious words again,
For some new sense; and long they sought in vain:
At length Deucalion cleared his cloudy brow,
And said, the dark AEnigma will allow.
A meaning, which if well I understand,
From Sacrilege will free the Gods Command:
This Earth our mighty Mother is, the Stones
In her capacious Body, are her Bones.
These we must cast behind: with hope and fear
The Woman did the new solution hear:
The Man diffides in his own Augury,
And doubts the Gods; yet both resolve to try.
Descending from the Mount, they first unbind
Their Vests, and veiled, they cast the Stones behind:
The Stones (a Miracle to Mortal View,
But long Tradition makes it pass for true)
Did first the Rigor of their Kind expel,
And, suppl'd into softness, as they fell,
Then swelled, and swelling, by degrees grew warm;
And took the Rudiments of Humane Form.
Imperfect shapes: in Marble such are seen
When the rude Chizzel does the Man begin;
While yet the roughness of the Stone remains,
Without the rising Muscles, and the Veins.
The sappy parts, and next resembling juice,
Were turned to moisture, for the Bodies use:
Supplying humors, blood, and nourishment;
The rest, (too solid to receive a bent;)
Converts to bones; and what was once a vein
Its former Name, and Nature did retain.
By help of Power Divine, in little space
What the Man threw, assumed a Manly face;
And what the Wife, renewed the Female Race.
Hence we derive our Nature; born to bear
Laborious life; and hardened into care.
The rest of Animals, from teeming Earth
Produced, in various forms received their birth.
The native moisture, in its close retreat,
Digested by the Sun's AEtherial heat,
As in a kindly Womb, began to breed:
Then swelled, and quickened by the vital seed.
And some in less, and some in longer space,
Were ripened into form, and took a several face.
Thus when the Nile from Pharian Fields is fled,
And seeks with Ebbing Tides, his ancient Bed,
The sat Manure, with Heavenly Fire is warmed;
And crusted Creatures, as in Wombs are sorm'd;
These, when they turn the Glebe, the Peasants find;
Some rude; and yet unfinished in their Kind:
Short of their Limbs, a lame imperfect Birth;
One half alive; and one of lifeless Earth.
For heat and moisture, when in Bodies joined,
The temper that results from either Kind
Conception makes; and fighting till they mix,
Their mingled Atoms in each other six.
Thus Nature's hand, the Genial Bed prepares,
With Friendly Discord, and with fruitful Wars.
From hence the surface of the Ground, with Mud
And Slime besmeared, (the faeces of the Flood)
Received the Rays of Heaven; and sucking in
The Seeds of Heat, new Creatures did begin:
Some were of several sorts produced before,
But of new Monsters, Earth created more.
Unwillingly, but yet she brought to light
Thee, Python too, the wondering World to fright,
And the new Nations, with so dire a sight:
So monstrous was his bulk, so large a space
Did his vast Body, and long Train embrace.
Whom Phoebus basking on a Bank espied;
E're now the God his Arrows had not tried
But on the trembling Deer, or Mountain Goat;
At this new Quarry; he prepares to shoot.
Though every Shaft took place, he spent the Store
Of his full Quiver; and 'twas long before
The expiring Serpent wallow'd in his Gore.
Then, to preserve the Fame of such a deed,
For Python slain, he Pythian Games decreed.
Where Noble Youths for Mastership should strive,
To Quoit, to Run, and Steeds and Chariots drive;
The Prize was Fame: In witness of Renown
An Oaken Garland did the Victor crown.
The Laurel was not yet for Triumphs born;
But every Green, alike by Phoebus worn,
Did with promiscuous Grace, his flowing Locks adorn.
The Transformation of Daphne into a Laurel.
The first and fairest of his Loves, was she
Whom not blind Fortune, but the dire decree
Of angry Cupid forced him to desire:
Daphne her name, and Peneus was her Sire.
Swelled with the Pride, that new Success attends
He sees the Stripling, while his Bow he bends
And thus insults him; thou lascivious Boy,
Are Arms like these, for Children to employ?
Know such atchivements are my proper claim;
Due to my vigor, and unerring aim:
Resistless are my Shafts, and Python late
In such a feathered Death, has found his fate.
Take up thy Torch, (and lay my Weapons by)
With that the feeble Souls of Lovers fry.
To whom the Son of Venus thus replied,
Phoebus thy Shafts are sure on all beside,
But mine on Phoebus, mine the Fame shall be
Of all thy Conquests, when I conquer thee.
He said, and soaring, swiftly winged his flight:
Nor stopped but on Parnassus airy height.
Two different Shafts, he from his Quiver draws;
One to repel desire, and one to cause.
One Shaft is pointed with refulgent Gold;
To bribe the Love, and make the Lover bold:
One blunt, and tipped with Lead, whose base allay
Provokes disdain, and drives desire away.
The blunted bolt, against the Nymph he dressed:
But with the sharp, transfixt Apollo's Breast.
The enamored Deity, pursues the Chase;
The scornful Damsel shuns his loathed Embrace:
In hunting Beasts of Prey, her Youth employs;
And Phoebe Rivals in her rural Joys.
With naked Neck she goes, and Shoulders bare;
And with a Fillet binds her flowing Hair.
By many Suitors sought, she mocks their pains,
And still her vowed Virginity maintains.
Impatient of a Yoke, the name of Bride
She shuns, and hates the Joys she never tried.
On Wilds and Woods she fixes her desire:
Nor knows what Youth and kindly Love inspire.
Her Father chides her often; thou ow'st, says he,
A Husband to thy self, a Son to me.
She, like a Crime, abhors the Nuptial Bed:
She glows with blushes, and she hangs her head.
Then casting round his Neck her tender Arms,
Sooths him with blandishments, and filial Charms:
Give me, my Lord, she said, to live and die
A spotless Maid, without the Marriage Tie.
It Is but a small request; I beg no more
Than what Diana's Father gave before.
The good old Sire, was softn'd to consent;
But said her Wish would prove her Punishment:
For so much Youth, and so much Beauty joined
Opposed the State, which her desires designed.
The God of light, aspiring to her Bed
Hopes what he seeks, with flattering fancies fed;
And is, by his own Oracles misled.
And as in empty Fields, the Stubble burns,
Or nightly Travelers, when day returns,
Their useless Torches, on dry Hedges throw,
That catch the Flames, and kindle all the row,
So burns the God, consuming in desire,
And feeding in his Breast a fruitless Fire:
Her well-turn'd Neck he viewed (her Neck was bare)
And on her Shoulders her disheveled Hair,
Oh were it combed, said he, with what a grace
Would every waving Curl, become her Face!
He viewed her Eyes, like Heavenly Lamps that shone,
He viewed her Lips, too sweet to view alone,
Her taper Fingers, and her panting Breast;
He praises all he sees, and for the rest
Believes the Beauties yet unseen are best:
Swift as the Wind, the Damsel fled away,
Nor did for these alluring Speeches stay:
Stay Nymph, he cried, I follow not a Foe.
Thus from the Lion, trips the trembling Do;
Thus from the Wolf the frightn'd Lamb removes,
And, from pursuing Faulcons, fearful Doves,
Thou shunn'st a God, and shunn'st a God that loves.
Ah, lest some thorn should pierce thy tender foot,
Or thou shou'd'st fall in flying my pursuit!
To sharp uneven ways thy steps decline;
Abate thy speed, and I will bate of mine.
Yet think from whom thou do so rashly fly;
Nor basely born, nor Shepherd's Swain am I.
Perhaps thou know not my Superior State;
And, from that ignorance, proceeds thy hate.
Me Claros, Delphos, Tenedos obey,
These Hands the Patareian Scepter sway.
The King of Gods begot me: What shall be,
Or is, or ever was, in Fate, I see.
Mine is the invention of the charming Lyre;
Sweet notes, and Heavenly numbers I inspire.
Sure is my Bow, unerring is my Dart;
But ah more deadly his, who pierced my Heart.
Medicine is mine; what Herbs and Simples grow
In Fields and Forests, all their powers I know;
And am the great Physician called, below.
Alas that Fields and Forests can afford
No Remedies to heal their Lovesick Lord!
To cure the pains of Love, no Plant avails:
And his own Physic; the Physician fails.
She heard not half; so furiously she flies;
And on her Ear, the imperfect accent dies.
Fear gave her Wings; and as she fled, the wind
Increasing, spread her flowing Hair behind:
And left her Legs and Thighs exposed to view;
Which made the God more eager to pursue.
The God was young, and was too hotly bent
To lose his time in empty Compliment.
But led by Love, and fired with such a sight,
Impetuously pursued his near delight.
As when the impatient Greyhound slipped from far,
Bounds over the Glebe to course the fearful Hare,
She in her speed, does all her safety lay;
And he with double speed pursues the Prey;
O're-runs her at the sitting turn, and licks
His Chaps in vain, and blows upon the Flix,
She scapes, and for the neighboring Covert strives,
And gaining shelter, doubts if yet she lives:
If little things with great we may compare,
Such was the God, and such the flying Fair.
She urged by fear, her feet did swiftly move;
But he more swiftly, who was urged by Love.
He gathers ground upon her in the chase:
Now breaths upon her Hair, with nearer pace;
And just is fast'ning on the wished Embrace.
The Nymph grew pale, and in a mortal fright,
Spent with the labor of so long a flight:
And now despairing, cast a mournful look
Upon the Streams of her Paternal Brook:
Oh help, she cried, in this extremest need,
If Water Gods are Deities indeed:
Gape Earth, and this unhappy Wretch intomb;
Or change my form, whence all my sorrows come.
Scarce had she finished, when her Feet she found
Benumbed with cold, and fastened to the Ground:
A filmy rind about her Body grows;
Her Hair to Leaves, her Arms extend to Boughs:
The Nymph is all into a Laurel gone:
The smoothness of her Skin, remains alone.
Yet Phoebus loves her still, and casting round
Her Bole, his Arms, some little warmth he found.
The Tree still panted in the unfinished part:
Not wholly vegetive, and heaved her Heart.
He fixed his Lips upon the trembling Rind;
It swerved aside, and his Embrace declined.
To whom the God, because thou can not be
My Mistress, I espouse thee for my Tree:
Be thou the prize of Honor and Renown;
The deathless Poet, and the Poem crown.
Thou shall the Roman Festivals adorn,
And, after Poets, be by Victors worn.
Thou shall returning Caesar's Triumph grace;
When Pomps shall in a long Procession pass.
Wreathed on the Posts before his Palace wait;
And be the sacred Guardian of the Gate.
Secure from Thunder, and unharm'd by Jove,
Unfading as the immortal Powers above:
And as the locks of Phoebus are unshorn,
So shall perpetual green thy Boughs adorn.
The grateful Tree was pleased with what he sed;
And shook the shady Honors of her Head.
The Transformation of Io into a Heyfar.
An ancient Forest in Thessalia grows;
Which Tempe's pleasing Valley does enclose:
Through this the rapid Peneus takes his course;
From Pindus rolling with impetuous force:
Mists from the Rivers mighty fall arise;
And deadly damps enclose the cloudy Skies:
Perpetual Fogs are hanging over the Wood;
And sounds of Waters deaf the Neighborhood.
Deep, in a Rocky Cave, he makes abode:
(A Mansion proper for a mourning God.)
Here he gives Audience; issuing out Decrees
To Rivers, his dependant Deities.
On this occasion hither they resort;
To pay their homage and to make their Court.
All doubtful, whether to congratulate
His Daughter's Honor, or lament her Fate.
Sperchaeus, crowned with Poplar, first appears;
Then old Apidanus came crowned with years:
Enipeus turbulent, Amphrisos tame;
And AEas, last with lagging Waters came.
Then, of his Kindred Brooks, a numerous throng,
Condole his loss; and bring their Urns along.
Not one was wanting of the watery Train,
That filled his Flood, or mingled with the Main:
But Inachus, who in his Cave, alone,
Wept not another losses, but his own.
For his dear Io, whether strayed, or dead,
To him uncertain, doubtful tears he shed.
He sought her through the World; but sought in vain;
And no where finding, rather feared her slain.
Her, just returning from her Father's Brook,
Jove had beheld, with a desiring look:
And oh fair Daughter of the Flood, he sed,
Worthy alone of Jove's Imperial Bed;
Happy whoever shall those Charms possess;
The King of Gods, nor is thy Lover less,
Invites thee to yon cooler Shades; to shun
The scorching Rays of the Meridian Sun.
Nor shall thou tempt the dangers of the Grove
Alone, without a Guide; thy Guide is Jove.
No puny Power, but he whose high Command
Is unconfined, who rules the Seas and Land;
And tempers Thunder in his awful hand.
Oh fly not; (for she fled from his Embrace,)
Over Lerna's Pastures, he pursued the Chase:
Along the Shades of the Lyrnoean Plain;
At length the God, who never asks in vain,
Involved with Vapors, imitating Night,
Both Air and Earth; and then suppressed her flight
And mingling force with Love enjoyed the full delight.
Mean time the jealous Juno, from on high,
Surveyed the fruitful Fields of Arcady:
And wondered that the mist should overrun
The face of Daylight, and obscure the Sun.
No Natural cause the found, from Brooks, or Bogs,
Or marshy Lowlands, to produce the Fogs:
Then round the Skies she sought for Jupiter;
Her faithless Husband; but no Jove was there:
Suspecting now the worst, or I, she said,
Am much mistaken, or am much betrayed.
With fury she precipitates her flight:
Dispels the shadows of dissembled Night;
And to the day restores his native light.
The Almighty Leacher, careful to prevent
The consequence, foreseeing her descent,
Transforms his Mistress in a trice; and now
In Io's place appears a lovely Cow.
So slick her skin, so faultless was her make,
Even Juno did unwilling pleasure take
To see so fair a Rival of her Love;
And what she was, and whence, inquired of Jove:
Of what sair Herd, and from what Pedigree?
The God, half caught, was forced upon a lie:
And said she sprung from Earth; she took the word,
And begged the beauteous Heyfar of her Lord.
What should he do, 'twas equal shame to Jove
Or to relinquish, or betray his Love:
Yet to refuse so slight a Gift, would be
But more to increase his Consort's Jealousy:
Thus fear and love, by turns his heart assailed;
And stronger love had sure, at length prevailed:
But some faint hope remained, his jealous Queen
Had not the Mistress through the Heyfar seen.
The cautious Goddess, of her Gift possessed,
Yet harbored anxious thoughts within her breast;
As she who knew the falsehood of her Jove;
And justly feared some new relapse of Love.
Which to prevent, and to secure her care,
To trusty Argus, she commits the Fair.
The head of Argus (as with Stars the Skies)
Was compassed round, and wore an hundred eyes.
But two by turns their lids in slumber steep;
The rest on duty still their station keep;
Nor could the total Constellation sleep.
Thus, ever present, to his eyes and mind,
His Charge was still before him, though behind.
In Fields he suffered her to feed by Day,
But when the setting Sun, to Night gave way,
The Captive Cow he summoned with a call;
And drove her back, and tied her to the Stall.
On Leaves of Trees, and bitter Herbs she fed,
Heaven was her Canopy, bare Earth her Bed:
So hardly lodged, and to digest her Food,
She drank from troubled Streams, defiled with Mud,
Her woesul Story, fain she would have told
With hands upheld, but had no hands to hold.
Her head to her ungentle Keeper bowed,
She strove to speak, she spoke not, but she lowed:
Affrighted with the noise, she looked around,
And seemed to inquire the Author of the sound.
Once on the Banks where often she had played,
(Her Father's Banks) she came, and there surveyed
Her altered visage, and her branching head;
And starting, from her self she would have fled.
Her fellow Nymphs, familiar to her eyes,
Beheld, but knew her not in this disguise.
Even Inachus himself was ignorant;
And in his Daughter, did his Daughter want.
She followed where her Fellows went, as she
Were still a Partner of the Company:
They stroke her Neck, the gentle Heyfar stands,
And her Neck offers to their stroaking Hands.
Her Father gave her Grass; the Grass she took;
And licked his Palms, and cast a piteous look;
And in the language of her eyes, she spoke.
She would have told her name, and ask't relief,
But wanting words, in tears she tells her grief.
Which, with her foot she makes him understand;
And prints the name of Io in the Sand.
Ah wretched me, her mournful Father cried,
She, with a sigh, to wretched me replied;
About her Milk-white neck, his arms he threw;
And wept, and then these tender words ensue.
And art thou she, whom I have sought around
The World, and have at length so sadly found?
So found is worse than lost: with mutual words
Thou answer'st not, no voice thy tongue affords:
But sighs are deeply drawn from out thy breast;
And speech denied, by lowing is expressed.
Unknowing I, prepared thy Bridal Bed;
With empty hopes of happy Issue fed.
But now the Husband of a Herd must be
Thy Mate, and bell'wing Sons thy Progeny.
Oh, were I mortal, Death might bring relief;
But now my Godhead, but extends my grief:
Prolongs my woes, of which no end I see,
And makes me curse my Immortality!
More had he said, but, fearful of her stay,
The Starry Guardian drove his Charge away,
To some fresh Pasture; on a hilly height
He sat himself, and kept her still in sight.
The Eyes of Argus Transformed into a Peacock's Train.
Now Jove no longer could her sufferings bear;
But called in haste his airy Messenger,
The Son of Maya, with severe decree
To kill the Keeper, and to set her free.
With all his Harness soon the God was sped,
His flying Hat was fastened on his Head,
Wings on his Heels were hung, and in his Hand,
He holds the Virtue of the Snaky Wand.
The liquid Air, his moving Pinions wound,
And, in a moment, shoot him on the ground,
Before he came in sight, the crafty God
His Wings dismissed, but still retained his Rod:
That Sleep procuring Wand, wise Hermes took,
But made it seem to sight, a Shepherd's Hook.
With this, he did a Herd of Goats control;
Which by the way he met, and slily stole.
Clad like a Country Swain, he Pip'd and Sung;
And playing drove his jolly Troop along.
With pleasure, Argus the Musician heeds;
But wonders much at those new vocal Reeds.
And whosoever thou art, my Friend, said he,
Up hither drive thy Goats, and play by me:
This Hill has browz for them, and shade for thee;
The God, who was with ease induced to climb,
Began Discourse to pass away the time;
And still betwixt, his Tuneful Pipe he plyes;
And watched his Hour, to close the Keeper's Eyes.
With much ado, he partly kept awake;
Not suffering all his Eyes repose to take:
And asked the Stranger, who did Reeds invent,
And whence began so rare an Instrument?
The Transformation of Syrinx into Reeds.
Then Hermes thus; a Nymph of late there was,
Whose Heavenly Form, her Fellows did surpass.
The Pride and Joy of Fair Arcadia's plains,
Beloved by Deities, Adored by Swains:
Syrinx her Name, by Sylvans often pursued,
As often she did the Lustful Gods delude:
The Rural, and the Woodland Powers disdained;
With Cynthia Hunted, and her Rites maintained:
Like Phoebe clad, even Phoebe's self she seems,
So Tall, so Straight, such well proportioned Limbs:
The nicest Eye did no distinction know,
But that the Goddess bore a Golden Bow,
Distinguished thus, the sight she cheated too.
Descending from Lycoeus, Pan admires
The Matchless Nymph, and burns with new Defires.
A Crown of Pine, upon his Head he wore;
And thus began her pity to implore.
But e're he thus began, she took her flight
So swist, she was already out of sight.
Nor stayed to hear the Courtship of the God;
But bent her course to Ladon's gentle Flood:
There by the River stopped, and tired before;
Relief from water Nymphs her Prayers implore.
Now while the Lustful God, with speedy pace,
Just thought to strain her in a strict Embrace,
He filled his Arms with Reeds, new rising on the place.
And while he sighs, his ill-success to find,
The tender Canes were shaken by the wind:
And breathed a mournful Air, unhear'd before;
That much surprising Pan; yet pleased him more.
Admiring this new Music, thou, he sed
Who can not be the Partner of my Bed,
At least shall be the Consort of my Mind:
And often, often to my Lips be joined.
He formed the Reeds, proportioned as they are,
Unequal in their length, and waxed with Care,
They still retain the Name of his Ungrateful Fair.
While Hermes pip'd and sung, and told his tale,
The Keeper's winking Eyes began to fail;
And drowsy slumber, on the lids to creep,
'Till all the Watchman was, at length, asleep.
Then soon the God, his Voice and Song suppressed;
And with his powerful Rod, confirmed his rest:
Without delay his crooked Faulchion, drew,
And at one fatal stroke, the Keeper slew.
Down from the Rock, fell the dissever'd head,
Opening its Eyes in Death; and falling bled:
And marked the passage with a crimson trail;
Thus Argus lies in pieces cold and pale:
And all his hundred Eyes, with all their light,
Are closed at once, in one perpetual night.
These Juno takes, that they no more may fail,
And spreads them in her Peacock's gaudy tail.
Impatient to revenge her injured Bed
She wreaks her anger, on her Rival's head;
With furies frights her, from her Native Home;
And drives her gadding, round the World to roam.
Nor ceased her madness and her flight, before
She touched the limits of the Pharian Shore.
At length, arriving on the Banks of Nile,
Wearied with length of ways, and worn with toil,
She laid her down; and leaning on her Knees,
Invoked the Cause of all her Miseries:
And cast her languishing regards above
For help from Heaven and her ungrateful Jove.
She sighed, she wept, she lowed, 'twas all she could;
And with unkindness seemed to tax the God.
Last, with an humble Prayer, she begged Repose,
Or Death at least, to finish all her Woes.
Jove heard her Vows, and with a flattering look,
In her behalf, to jealous Juno spoke.
He cast his Arms about her Neck, and sed,
Dame rest secure; no more thy Nuptial Bed
This Nymph shall violate; by Styx I swear,
And every Oath that binds the Thunderer.
The Goddess was appeased; and at the word
Was Io to her former shape restored.
The rugged Hair began to fall away;
The sweetness of her Eyes did only stay;
Though not so large; her crooked Horns decrease;
The wideness of her Jaws and Nostrils cease:
Her Hoofs to Hands return, in little space:
The five long taper Fingers take their place.
And nothing of the Heyfar now is seen,
Beside the native whiteness of the Skin.
Erected on her Feet she walks again;
And Two the duty of the Four sustain.
She tries her Tongue; her silence softly breaks,
And fears her former lowings when she speaks:
A Goddess now, through all the Egyptian State:
And served by Priests, who in white Linen wait.
Her Son was Epaphus, at length believed
The Son of Jove, and as a God received:
With Sacrifice adored, and public Prayers,
He common Temples with his Mother shares.
Equal in years and Rival in Renown
With Epaphus, the youthful Phaeton
Like Honor claims; and boasts his Sire the Sun.
His haughty Looks, and his assuming Air
The Son of Isis could no longer bear:
Thou take thy Mother's word, too far, said he,
And have usurped thy boasted Pedigree.
Go base Pretender to a borrowed Name.
Thus taxed, he blushed with anger, and with shame;
But shame repressed his Rage: the daunted Youth
Soon seeks his Mother, and enquires the truth:
Mother, said he, this Infamy was thrown
By Epaphus on you, and me your Son.
He spoke in public, told it to my face;
Nor durst I vindicate the dire disgrace:
Even I, the bold, the sensible of wrong,
Restrained by shame, was forced to hold my Tongue.
To hear an open Slander is a Curse;
But not to find an Answer, is a worse.
If I am Heav'n-begot, assert your Son
By some sure Sign: and make my Father known,
To right my Honor, and redeem your own.
He said, and saying cast his arms about
Her Neck, and begged her to resolve the Doubt.
It Is hard to judge if Climene were moved
More by his Prayer, whom she so dearly loved,
Or more with fury fired, to find her Name
Traduced, and made the sport of common Fame.
She stretched her Arms to Heaven, and fixed her Eyes
On that fair Planet, that adorns the Skies;
Now by those Beams, said she, whose holy Fires
Consume my Breast, and kindle my desires;
By him, who sees us both, and chears our sight,
By him the public Minister of light,
I swear that Sun begot thee; if I lie
Let him his cheerful Influence deny:
Let him no more this perjured Creature see;
And shine on all the World, but only me:
If still you doubt your Mother's Innocence,
His Eastern Mansion is not far from hence,
With little pains, you to his Leve go,
And from himself, your Parentage may know.
With joy, the ambitious Youth, his Mother heard,
And eager, for the Journey soon prepared.
He longs the World beneath him to survey;
To guide the Chariot; and to give the day.
From Meroe's burning Sands, he bends his course,
Nor less in India, feels his Father's force:
His Travel urging, till he came in sight;
And saw the Palace by the Purple light.
The End of the First Book of Ovid 's Metamorphoses.
THE FABLE OF IPHIS and IANTHE, From the Ninth Book of the Metamorphoses.
Englished by Mr. Dryden.
THE Fame of this, perhaps, through Crete had flown:
But Crete had newer Wonders of her own,
In Iphis changed: For, near the Gnossian bounds,
(As loud Report the Miracle resounds)
At Phoestus dwelt a man of honest blood:
But meanly born, and not so rich as good;
Esteemed and loy'd by all the Neighborhood.
Who to his Wife, before the time assigned
For Childbirth came; thus bluntly spoke his mind.
If Heaven, said Lygdus, will vouchsafe to hear;
I have but two Petitions to prefer:
Short pains for thee; for me a Son and Heir.
Girls cost as many throws, in bringing forth:
Besides when born, the Titts are little worth.
Weak puling things, unable to sustain
Their share of Labor, and their Bread to gain.
If, therefore, thou a Creature shall produce
Of so great Charges, and so little Use,
(Bear witness Heaven, with what reluctance,)
Her hapless Innocence I doom to dye.
He said, and tears the common grief display
Of him who bade, and her who must obey.
Yet Telethusa still persists to find,
Fit Arguments to move a Father's mind:
TO extend his Wishes to a larger scope;
And in one Vessel not confine his hope.
Lygdus continues hard: her time drew near,
And she her heavy load could scarcely bear:
When slumbering, in the latter shades of Night,
Before the approaches of returning light,
She saw, or thought she saw, before her Bed
A glorious Train, and Isis at their head:
Her Moony Horns were on her Forehead placed,
And yellow Sheaves her shining Temples graced:
A Mitre, for a Crown, she wore on high:
The Dog and dappl'd Bull were waiting by;
Osyris, sought along the Banks of Nile;
The silent God; the sacred Crocodile:
And, last, a long procession moving on,
With Timbrels, that assist the laboring Moon.
Her slumbers seemed dispelled, and, broad awake,
She heard a Voice, that thus distinctly spoke.
My Votary, thy Babe from Death defend;
Nor fear to save whatever the Gods will send.
Delude with Art, thy Husband's dire Decree;
When danger calls, repose thy trust on me:
And know thou have not served a thankless Deity.
This Promise made; with Night the Goddess fled:
With joy the Woman wakes, and leaves her Bed:
Devoutly lifts her spotless hands on high;
And prays the Powers, their Gift to ratify.
Now grinding pains proceed to bearing throws,
Till its own weight the burden did disclose.
'Twas of the beauteous Kind: and brought to light
With secrecy, to shun the Father's sight.
The indulgent Mother did her Care employ;
And passed it on her Husband for a Boy.
The Nurse was conscious of the Fact alone:
The Father paid his Vows, as for a Son.
And called him Iphis, by a common Name
Which either Sex, with equal right may claim.
Iphis, his Grandsire was; the Wife was pleased,
Of half the fraud, by Fortune's favor eased:
The doubtful Name was used without deceit,
And Truth was covered with a pious Cheat.
The Habit showed a Boy, the beauteous Face
With manly fierceness mingled Female grace.
Now thirteen years of Age were swiftly run,
When the fond Father thought the time drew on
Of settling in the World, his only Son,
Ianthe was his choice; so wondrous fair
Her Form alone with Iphis could compare;
A Neighbor's Daughter of his own Degree;
And not more blessed with Fortunes Goods than he.
They soon espoused; for they with ease were joined,
Who were before Contracted in the Mind.
Their Age the same, their Inclinations too:
And bred together, in one School they grew.
Thus, fatally disposed to mutual fires,
They felt, before they knew, the same desires.
Equal their flame, unequal was their care;
One loved with Hope, one languish'd in Despair.
The Maid accused the lingering days alone:
For whom she thought a man, she thought her own.
But Iphis bends beneath a greater grief;
As fiercely burns, but hopes for no relief.
Even her Despair, adds fuel to her fire;
A Maid with madness does a Maid desire.
And, scarce refraining tears, alas, said she,
What issue of my love remains for me!
How wild a Passion works within my Breast,
With what prodigious Flames am I possessed!
Could I the Care of Providence deserve,
Heaven must destroy me, if it would preserve.
And that is my Fate; or sure it would have sent
Some usual Evil for my punishment:
Not this unkindly Curse; to rage and burn
Where Nature shows no prospect of return.
Nor Cows for Cows consume with fruitless fire,
Nor Mares when hot, their fellow Mares desire:
The Father of the Fold supplies his Ewes;
The Stag through secret Woods his Hind pursues:
And Birds for Mates, the Males of their own Species choose.
Her Females Nature guards from Female flame,
And joins two Sexes to preserve the Game:
Would I were nothing, or not what I am!
Crete famed for Monsters wanted of her Store;
Till my new Love produced one Monster more.
The Daughter of the Sun a Bull desired,
And yet even then, a Male, a Female fired:
Her passion was extravagantly new;
But mine is much the madder of the two.
To things impossible she was not bent;
But found the Means to compass her Intent.
To cheat his Eyes, she took a different shape:
Yet still she gained a Lover, and a leap.
Should all the Wit of all the World conspire,
Should Doedalus assist my wild desire,
What Art can make me able to enjoy,
Or what can change Ianthe to a Boy?
Extinguish then thy passion, hopeless Maid,
And recollect thy Reason for thy aid.
Know what thou art, and love as Maidens ought;
And drive these Golden Wishes from thy thought.
Thou can not hope thy fond desires to gain;
Where Hope is wanting, Wishes are in vain.
And yet no Guards, against our Joys conspire;
No jealous Husband, hinders our desire:
My Parents are propitious to my Wish
And she her self consenting to the bliss.
All things concur, to prosper our Design:
All things to prosper any Love but mine.
And yet I never can enjoy the Fair:
It Is past the Power of Heaven to grant my Prayer.
Heaven has been kind, as far as Heaven can be;
Our Parents with our own desires agree,
But Nature, stronger than the Gods above,
Refuses her assistance to my love.
She sets the Bar, that causes all my pain:
One Gift refused, makes all their Bounty vain.
And now the happy day is just at hand,
To bind our Hearts in Hymen's Holy Band:
Our Hearts, but not our Bodies: thus, accursed,
In midst of water, I complain of thirst.
Why come thou, Juno, to these barren Rites,
To bless a Bed, defrauded of delights?
Or why should Hymen lift his Torch on high,
To see two Brides in cold Embraces lie?
Thus lovesick Iphis her vain Passion mourns:
With equal ardour fair Ianthe burns:
Invoking Hymen's Name and Juno's Power
To speed the work, and haste the happy hour.
She hopes, while Telethusa fears the day;
And strives to interpose some new delay:
Now feigns a sickness, now is in a fright
For this bad Omen, or that boding sight.
But having done whatever she could devise,
And emptied all her Magazine of lies,
The time approached: the next ensuing day
The Fatal Secret must to light betray.
Then Telethusa had recourse to Prayer,
She and her Daughter with dishevelled hair:
Trembling with fear, great Isis they adored;
Embraced her Altar, and her aid implored.
Fair Queen, whodost on fruitful Egypt smile,
Who sway'st the Scepter of the Pharian Isle,
And sev'n-fold falls of disimbogueing Nile;
Relieve, in this our last distress, she said,
A suppliant Mother, and a mournful Maid.
Thou Goddess, thou were present to my sight;
Revealed I saw thee, by thy own fair light:
I saw thee in my Dream, as now I see
With all thy marks of awful Majesty:
The Glorious Train, that compassed thee around;
And heard the hollow Timbrels holy sound.
Thy Words I noted, which I still retain;
Let not thy Sacred Oracles be vain.
That Iphis lives, that I my self am free
From shame and punishment, I owe to thee.
On thy Protection, all our hopes depend:
Thy Counsel saved us, let thy Power defend.
Her tears pursued her words; and while she spoke
The Goddess nodded, and her Altar shook:
The Temple doors, as with a blast of wind,
Were heard to clap; the Lunar Horns that bind
The brows of Isis, cast a blaze around;
The trembling Timbrel, made a murmuring sound.
Some hopes these happy Omens did impart;
Forth went the Mother with a beating Heart:
Not much in fear, nor fully satisfied;
But Iphis followed with a larger stride:
The whiteness of her Skin forsook her Face;
Her looks emboldn'd, with an awful Grace;
Her Features and her Strength together grew;
And her long Hair, to curling Locks withdrew.
Her sparkling Eyes, with Manly Vigor shone,
Big was her Voice, Audacious was her Tone.
The latent Parts, at length revealed, began
To shoot, and spread, and burnish into Man.
The Maid becomes a Youth; no more delay
Your Vows, but look, and confidently pay.
Their Gifts, the Parents to the Temple bear:
The Votive Tables, this Inscription wear;
Iphis the Man, has to the Goddess paid,
The Vows that Iphis offered, when a Maid.
Now, when the Star of Day had shown his face,
Venus and Juno with their Presence grace
The Nuptial Rites, and Hymen from above
Descending to complete their happy Love:
The Gods of Marriage, lend their mutual aid;
And the warm Youth enjoys the lovely Maid.
THE FABLE OF ACIS, POLYPHEMUS, AND GALATEA, From the Thirteenth Book of the
Metamorphoses,
By Mr. DRYDEN.
GALATEA relates the Story.
ACIS, the Lovely Youth, whose loss I mourn,
From Faunus and the Nymph Symethis born,
Was both his Parents pleasure: but, to me
Was all that Love could make a Lover be.
The Gods our Minds in mutual Bands did join;
I was his only Joy, as he was mine.
Now sixteen Summers the sweet Youth had seen;
And doubtful Down, began to shade his Chin:
When Polyphemus first disturbed our Joy;
And loved me fiercely, as I loved the Boy.
Ask not which passion in my Soul was high'r,
My last Aversion, or my first Desire:
Nor this the greater was, nor that the less:
Both were alike; for both were in excess.
Thee, Venus, thee, both Heaven and Earth obey;
Immense thy Power, and boundless is thy Sway.
The Cyclops, who desi'd the AEtherial Throne,
And thought no Thunder louder than his own,
The terror of the Woods, and wilder far
Than Wolves in Plains, or Bears in Forests are,
The Inhumane Host, who made his bloody Feasts
On mangled Members, of his butchered Guests,
Yet felt the force of Love, and fierce Desire,
And burnt for me, with unrelenting Fire.
Forgot his Caverns, and his woolly care,
Assumed the softness of a Lover's Air;
And combed, with Teeth of Rakes, his rugged hair.
Now with a crooked Sithe his Beard he sleeks;
And mows the stubborn Stubble of his Cheeks:
Now, in the Crystal Stream he looks, to try
His Simagres, and rowls his glaring eye.
His Cruelty and thirst of Blood are lost;
And Ships securely sail along the Coast.
The Prophet Telemus (arrived by chance
Where AEtna's Summets to the Seas advance,
Who marked the Tracts of every Bird that flew,
And sure Presages from their flying drew,)
Foretold the Cyclops, that Ulysses hand
In his broad eye, should thrust a flaming Brand.
The Giant, with a scornful grin replied,
Vain Augur, thou have falsely prophesi'd;
Already Love, his flaming Brand has tossed;
Looking on two fair Eyes, my sight I lost.
Thus, warned in vain, with stalking pace he strode,
And stamped the Margin of the briny Flood,
With heavy steps: and weary, sought again,
The cool Retirement of his gloomy Den.
A Promontory sharp'ning by degrees,
Ends in a Wedge, and over-looks the Seas:
On either side, below, the water flows;
This airy walk, the Giant Lover chose.
Here, on the midst he sat: his Flocks, unled,
Their Shepherd followed, and securely fed.
A Pine so burly, and of length so vast,
That sailing Ships required it for a Mast,
He weilded for a Staff; his steps to guide:
But laid it by, his Whistle while he tried.
A hundred Reeds, of a prodigious growth,
Scarce made a Pipe, proportioned to his mouth:
Which, when he gave it wind, the Rocks around,
And watery Plains, the dreadful hiss resound.
I heard the Ruffian-Shepherd rudely blow
Where, in a hollow Cave, I sat below;
On Acis bosom I my head reclined:
And still preserve the Poem in my mind.
Oh lovely Galatea, whiter far
Than falling Snows, and rising Lillies are;
More flowery than the Meads, as Crystal bright,
Erect as Alders, and of equal height:
More wanton than a Kid, more sleek thy Skin
Than Orient Shells, that on the Shores are seen.
Than Apples fairer, when the boughs they lade,
Pleasing as Winter Suns or Summer Shade:
More grateful to the sight, than goodly Planes;
And softer to the touch, than down of Swans;
Or Curds new turned: and sweeter to the taste
Than swelling Grapes, that to the Vintage haste:
More clear than Ince, or running Streams, that stray
Through Garden Plots, but ah more swift than they.
Yet, Galatea, harder to be broke,
Than Bullocks, unreclaim'd to bear the Yoke,
And far more stubborn, than the knotted Oak:
Like sliding Streams, impossible to hold;
Like them fallacious, like their Fountains cold.
More warping than the Willow, to decline
My warm Embrace, more brittle than the Vine;
Immovable and fixed in thy disdain;
Rough as these Rocks, and of a harder grain.
More violent than is the rising Flood;
And the praised Peacock is not half so proud.
Fierce as the Fire, and sharp as Thistles are,
And more outrageous than a Mother-Bear:
Deaf as the billows to the Vows I make;
And more revengeful, than a trodden Snake.
In swiftness fleeter, than the flying Hind;
Or driven Tempests, or the driving Wind.
All other faults, with patience I can bear;
But swiftness is the Vice I only fear.
Yet if you knew me well, you would not shun
My Love, but to my wished Embraces run:
Would languish in your turn, and court my stay;
And much repent of your unwise delay.
My Palace, in the living Rock, is made
By Nature's hand; a spacious pleasing Shade:
Which neither heat can pierce, nor cold invade.
My Garden filled with Fruits you may behold,
And Grapes in clusters, imitating Gold;
Some blushing Bunches of a purple hue:
And these and those, are all reserved for you.
Red Strawberries, in shades, expecting stand,
Proud to be gathered by so white a hand.
Autumnal Cornels, latter Fruit provide;
And Plumbs to tempt you, turn their glossy side:
Not those of common kinds; but such alone
As in Phoeacian Orchards might have grown:
Nor Chestnuts shall be wanting to your Food,
Nor Garden-fruits, nor Wildings of the Wood;
The laden Boughs for you alone shall bear;
And yours shall be the product of the Year.
The Flocks you see, are all my own; beside
The rest that Woods, and winding Valleys hide;
And those that folded in the Caves abide.
Ask not the numbers of my growing Store;
Who knows how many, knows he has no more.
Nor will I praise my Cattle, trust not me;
But judge your self, and pass your own decree:
Behold their swelling Dugs; the sweepy weight
Of Ews that sink beneath the Milky freight;
In the warm Folds, their tender Lambkins lie;
Apart from Kids, that call with humane cry.
New Milk in Nut-brown Bowls, is duly served
For daily Drink; the rest for Cheese reserved.
Nor are these Household Dainties all my Store:
The Fields and Forests will afford us more;
The Deer, the Hare, the Goat, the Salvage Boar.
All sorts of Ven'son; and of Birds the best;
A pair of Turtles taken from the Nest.
I walked the Mountains, and two Cubs I found,
(Whose Dam had left 'em on the naked ground,)
So like, that no distinction could be seen:
So pretty, they were Presents for a Queen;
And so they shall; I took 'em both away;
And keep, to be Companions of your Play.
Oh raise, fair Nymph, your Beauteous Face above
The Waves; nor scorn my Presents, and my Love.
Come, Galatea, come, and view my face;
I late beheld it, in the watery Glass;
And found it lovelier than I feared it was.
Survey my towering Stature, and my Size:
Not Jove, the Jove you dream that rules the Skies
Bears such a bulk, or is so largely spread:
My Locks, (the plenteous Harvest of my head)
Hang over my Manly Face; and dangling down
As with a shady Grove, my shoulders crown.
Nor think, because my limbs and body bear
A thick set underwood of bristling hair,
My shape deformed; what fouler sight can be
Than the bald Branches of a leafless Tree?
Foul is the Steed, without a flowing Main:
And Birds without their Feathers and their Train.
Wool decks the Sheep; and Man receives a Grace
From bushy Limbs, and from a bearded Face.
My forehead, with a single eye is filled,
Round as a Ball, and ample as a Shield.
The Glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Radiant Sun
Is Nature's eye; and is content with one.
Add, that my Father sways your Seas, and I
Like you am of the watery Family.
I make you his, in making you my own;
You I adore; and kneel to you alone:
Jove, with his Fabled Thunder I despise,
And only fear the lightning of your eyes.
Frown not, fair Nymph; yet I could bear to be
Disdained, if others were disdained with me.
But to repulse the Cyclops, and prefer
The Love of Acis, (Heavens) I cannot bear.
But let the Stripling please himself; nay more,
Please you, though that is the thing I most abhor,
The Boy shall find, if e're we cope in Fight,
These Giant Limbs, endu'd with Giant Might.
His living Bowels, from his Belly torn,
And scattered Limbs, shall on the Flood be born:
Thy Flood, ungrateful Nymph, and fate shall find
That way for thee, and Acis to be joined.
For oh I burn with Love, and thy Disdain
Augments at once my Passion, and my pain.
Translated AEtna flames within my Heart,
And thou, Inhumane, wilt not ease my smart.
Lamenting thus in vain, he rose, and strode
With furious paces to the Neighboring Wood:
Restless his feet, distracted was his walk;
Mad were his motions, and confused his talk.
Mad as the vanquished Bull, when forced to yield
His lovely Mistress, and forsake the Field.
Thus far unseen I saw: when fatal chance
His looks directing, with a sudden glance,
Acis and I, were to his sight betrayed;
Where naught suspecting we securely played.
From his wide mouth, a bellowing cry he cast
I see, I see; but this shall be your last:
A roar so loud made AEtna to rebound;
And all the Cyclops labored in the sound.
Affrighted with his monstrous Voice, I fled,
And in the Neighboring Ocean, plunged my head.
Poor Acis turned his back, and help, he cry'a;
Help, Galatea, help, my Parent Gods,
And take me dying, to your deep Abodes.
The Cyclops followed: but he sent before
A Rib, which from the living Rock he tore,
Though but an Angle reached him of the Stone,
The mighty Fragment was enough alone
To crush all Acis; 'twas too late to save,
But what the Fates allowed to give, I gave:
That Acis to his Lineage should return;
And roll, among the River Gods, his Urn.
Straight issued from the Stone, a Stream of blood;
Which lost the Purple, mingling with the Flood.
Then, like a troubled Torrent, it appeared:
The Torrent too, in little space was cleared.
The Stone was cleft, and through the yawning chink,
New Reeds arose on the new River's brink.
The Rock, from out its hollow Womb, disclosed
A sound like Water in its course opposed.
When, (wondrous to behold,) full in the Flood,
Up starts a Youth, and Navel high he stood.
Horns from his Temples rise; and either Horn
Thick Wreaths of Reeds (his Native growth) adorn.
Were not his Stature taller than before,
His bulk augmented, and his beauty more:
His color blue, for Acis he might pass:
And Acis changed into a Stream he was.
But mine no more; he rowls along the Plains
With rapid motion, and his Name retains.
ON Mr. HOBS.
Written by The E. of MULGRAVE.
SUCH is the mode of these censorious days,
The Art is lost of knowing how to praise;
Poets are envious now, and Fools alone
Admire at Wit, because themselves have none.
Yet, whatsoever is by vain Critics thought,
Praising is harder much, than finding fault;
In homely pieces even the Dutch excel,
Italians only can draw Beauty well.
As Strings alike wound up, so equal prove,
That one resounding makes the other move;
From a like cause Satyrs have pleased so much,
We simpathize with each ill-natured touch:
And, as the sharp Infection spreads about,
The Reader's Malice helps the Writer out.
To blame, is easy; to commend, is bold;
Yet, if the Muse inspires it, who can hold?
To Merit we are bound to give applause,
Content to suffer in so just a Cause.
While in dark Ignorance Men lay afraid
Of Fancies, Ghosts, and every empty Shade;
Great Hobs appeared, and by his Reason's light
Put such Fantastic Forms to shameful flight:
Fond is their fear, who think we needs must be
To Vice enslaved, if from vain Terrors free;
The Wise and Good Morality will guide,
And Superstition all the World beside.
In other Authors, tho the sense be good,
It Is not sometimes so easily understood,
That Jewel often unpolished has remained,
Some words should be left out, and some explained:
So that in search of sense we either stray,
Or else grow weary in so rough a way:
But here bright Eloquence does always smile
In such a choice, yet unaffected style,
As does both Knowledge and Delight impart,
The force of Reason with the Flowers of Art;
Clear as a beautiful transparent Skin,
Which never hides the Blood, yet holds it in:
Like a delicious Stream it ever ran,
As smooth as Woman, but as strong as Man.
Bacon himself, whose Universal wit
Does admiration through the World beget,
Not more his Age's Ornament is thought,
Nor has more credit to his Country brought.
While Fame is young, too weak to fly away,
Envy pursues her, like some Bird of Prey;
But once on wing, then all the dangers cease,
Envy her self is glad to be at peace;
Gives over, wearied with so high a flight,
Above her reach, and scarce within her sight:
He, to this happy pitch arrived at last,
Might have looked down with Pride, on Dangers past.
But such the frailty is of Humane Kind,
Men toil for Fame, which no Man lives to find;
Long ripening under ground this China lies;
Fame bears no Fruit, till the vain Planter dies.
And Nature, tired with his unusual length
Oflife, which put her to her utmost strength,
So vast a Soul unable to supply,
To save her self, was forced to let him die.
ON THE DEATH Of the LEARNED Mr. JOHN SELDOM.
So fell the Sacred Sybill, when of old
Inspired with more than Mortal Breast could hold,
The gazing Multitude stood doubtful by
Whether to call it Death, or Ecstasy:
She silent lies, and now the Nations find
No Oracles but the Leaves she left behind.
Monarch of Time and Arts, who travel'd'st over
New Worlds of Knowledge, undescry'd before,
And have on Everlasting Columns writ
The utmost Bounds of Learning and of Wit.
Had thou been more like us; or we like thee,
We might add something to thy memory.
Now thy own Tongues must speak thee, and thy Praise
Be from those Monuments thy self did raise;
And all those Titles of Honor.
Titles thou did once display
Must yield thee Titles greater far than they.
Time which had Wings till now, and was not known
To have a Being but by being gone,
You did arrest his Motion, and have lent
A way to make him fixed and permanent;
Whilst by your Labors Ages past appear,
And all at once we view a Plato's year.
Actions and Fables were retrieved by you;
All that was done, and what was not done too.
Which in your Breast did comprehended lie,
As in the Bosom of Eternity;
You purged Records and Edmerus, Fleta.
Authors from their rust,
And sifted Pearls out of Rabinick dust.
By you the De diis Syris.
Syrian Gods do live and grow
To be Immortal, since you made them so.
Inscriptions, Medals, Marmora Arundeliana.
Statues look fresh still,
Taking new Brass and Marble from your Quill;
Which so unravels time, that now we do
Live our own Age, and our Forefathers too,
And, thus enlarged, by your discoveries, can
Make that an Ell, which Nature made a Span.
If then we judge, that to preserve the State
Of things, is every moment to create,
The World's thus half your Creature, whilst it stands
Rescued to memory by your Learned Hands.
And unto you, now fearless of decay,
Times past owe more, than Times to come can pay.
How might you claim your Country's just applause,
When you stood square and upright as your Cause
In doubtful times, nor ever would forego
Fair Truth and Right, whose Bounds you best did know.
You in the Tower did stand another Tower,
Firm to your self and us, whilst jealous Power
Your very Soul imprisoned, that no thought
By Books might enter, nor by Pen get out;
And, stripped of all besides, left you confined
To the one Volume of your own vast Mind;
There Virtue and strict Honor past the Guard,
Your only Friends that could not be debarred;
And dwelt in your Retirement; armed with these
You stood forth more than Admiral of our Seas.
Your Hands enclosed the Mare Clausum.
Watery Plains, and thus
Was no less Fence to them, than they to us;
Teaching our Ships to conquer, while each fight
Is but a Comment on those Books you write.
No foul Disgraces, nor the worst of things,
Made you like him (whose Anger Homer sings)
Slack in your Country's Quarrel, who adore
Their Champion now, their Martyr heretofore:
Still with your self contending, whether you
Could bravelier suffer, or could bravelier do.
We ask not now for Ancestors, nor care
Tho Seldom do nor Kindred boast, nor Heir,
Such worth best stands alone, and joys to be
To the self at once both Founder and Posterity.
As when old Nilus who with bounteous flows
Waters an hundred Nations as he goes,
Scattering rich Harvest keeps his Sacred Head
Amongst the Clouds still undiscovered.
Be It now thy Oxford's Pride, that having gone
Through East and West, no Art, nor Tongue unknown;
Laden with Spoils thou hang'st thy Arms up here,
But set'st thy great Example every where.
Thus when thy Monument shall it self lie dead,
And thy, His Epitaph made by himself in the Temple Chapel.
own Epitaph no more be read,
When all thy Statues shall be worn out so,
That even Seldom should not Seldom know;
Ages to come shall in thy Virtue share:
He that dies well makes all the World his Heir.
R. B. T.
Co. Oxon. December. 19. 54.
AGAINST Immoderate GRIEF. TO A young LADY weeping. AN ODE In Imitation of
CASIMIRE.
By Mr. YALDEN.
Could mournful Sighs, or floods of Tears prevent
The ills, unhappy Men lament:
Could all the anguish of my Mind,
Remove my Cares, or make but Fortune kind;
Soon I Would the grateful Tribute pay,
And weep my troubled Thoughts away:
To Wealth and Pleasure every Sigh prefer,
And more than Gems esteem each falling Tear.
2.
But since insulting Cares are most inclined
To triumph over the afflicted Mind:
Since Sighs can yield us no Relief,
And Tears, like fruitful Showers, but nourish Grief;
Then cease, fair Mourner, to complain,
Nor lavish, such bright Streams, in vain:
But still with cheerful thoughts thy Cares beguile,
And tempt thy better Fortunes with a Smile.
3.
The generous Mind is by its Sufferings known,
Which no Affliction tramples down:
But when oppressed will upward move,
Spurn down its clog of Cares, and soar above.
Thus the young Royal Eaglet trys
On the Sunbeams his tender eyes:
And if he shrinks not at the offensive light,
He Is then for Empire fit, and takes his soaring flight.
4.
Though Cares assault thy Breast on every side,
Yet bravely stem the impetuous Tide:
No tributary Tears to Fortune pay,
Nor add to any loss a nobler Day.
But with kind hopes support thy mind,
And think thy better Lot behind:
Amidst afflictions let thy Soul be great,
And show thou dare deserve a better State.
5.
Then, lovely Mourner, wipe those Tears away,
And Cares that urge thee to decay:
Like Ravenous Age thy Charms they waste,
Wrinkle thy youthful Brow, and blooming Beauties blast.
But keep thy looks, and mind serene,
All gay without, and calm within:
For Fate is awed, and adverse Fortunes fly,
A cheerful look, and an unconquered Eye.
TO THE Returning SUN.
By J. H.
Welcome thou glorious Spring of light, and heat,
Where have thou made thy long Retreat?
What Lands thy warmer Beams possessed,
What happy Indian Worlds thy fruitful Presence blessed?
Where deep in the dark bosom of the Ground,
Thy wondrous Operation's found,
Even there thy Beams the Earth refine,
And mix, and stamp thy Luster through the dazzling Mine.
Since thy retreat so far from our cold Isle,
She never wore a lovely Smile,
No joy her withered Brow adorned,
In dark unlovely Days, and in long Nights she mourned.
The poor dejected Beasts hung down their heads,
And trembled on their naked Beds;
No footsteps of green life remain,
But dying Fields, and Woods, and a bare, bleaky Plain.
The drooping Birds were silent in the Groves,
They quite forgot their Songs and Loves,
Their feeble Mates sat sullen by,
We thought the feathered World resolved their Kind should die.
But see the Land revives at thy approach,
She blooms and quickens at thy touch,
Her kindled Atoms life receive,
The Meadows, and the Groves, begin to stir and live.
Mixed with thy Beams the Southern breezes blow,
And help the sproutng Births below,
The Infant Flowers in haste appear,
And gratefully return Perfumes to the kind Air.
The Trees, and Fields again look fresh and gay,
The Birds begin their softer Play,
Thou have their Life, nay more, their Love restored,
Their late, and early Hymns praise thee, their welcome Lord.
The spreading Fire glides through the Plains, and Woods,
It even pierces the cold Floods:
The duller Brutes feel the soft Flame,
The Fishes leap for joy, and wanton in their Stream.
AGAINST THE FEAR OF DEATH. BY A Person of HONOR.
SINCE all must certainly to Death resign,
Why should we make it dreadful, or repine?
How vain is Fear where nothing can prevent
The loss, which he, that loses, cannot lament.
The Fear of Death is by our Folly brought,
We fly the acquaintance of it, in a thought;
From Something into Nothing is a change
Grown terrible, by making it so strange.
We always should remember, Death is sure,
What grows familiar most, we best endure;
For Life and Death succeed like Night and Day,
And neither gives increase, nor brings decay.
No more or less by what takes Birth or dies,
And the same Mass the teeming World supplies.
From Death we rose to Life; it is but the same,
Through Life again to pass, from whence we came.
With shame we see our Passions can prevail,
Where Reason, Certainty, and Virtue fail.
Honor, that Empty Name, can Death despise,
Scorned Love to Death as to a Refuge flies,
And Sorrow waits for Death with longing Eyes.
Hope triumphs over the thought of Death, and Fate
Cheats Fools, and flatters the Unfortunate.
Perhaps, deceived by Lust-supplying Wealth,
New enjoyed Pleasures, and a present Health,
We fear to lose, what a small time must waste,
Till Life it self grows the Disease at last:
Begging for Life, we beg for more decay,
And to be long a dying only pray.
No just and temperate thought can tell us why,
We should fear Death, or grieve for them that die;
The Time we leave behind, is ours no more,
Nor our concern, than Time that was before.
'Twere a fond fight, if those that stay behind
For the same passage, waiting for a wind
To drive them to their Port, sho'ud on the Shore
Lamenting stand, for those that went before.
We all must pass through Death's dead Sea of Night
To reach the Haven of Eternal Light.
THE DREAM: Occasioned by The Death of the most Noble and Virtuous Lady,
Elizabeth Seymour, Mother to His GRACE the Duke of Somerset.
BY Mr. J. TALBOT.
IF Righteous Souls in their blessed Mansions know,
Or what we Do, or Suffer here below,
And any leisure from their Joys can find,
To visit those whom they have left behind,
To view our endless Griefs, our groundless Fears,
Our hopeless Sorrows, and our fruitless Tears,
With pity, sure, they see the kind mistake,
Which weeping Friends at their departure make:
They wonder why at their Release we grieve,
And mourn their Death, who then begin to Live.
Tired with the Care and Sorrow of the day,
In silent night the sad Mecoenas lay,
His mind still laboring with the deadly weight
Of his dear Parent's much lamented Fate;
Till weary Nature with its Load oppressed,
Composed the tempest of his troubled Breast,
And borrowed from his Grief some time for rest:
When Sleep (Death's Image) to his fancy brought
The hourly Object of his waking Thought;
And lo! his Mother's awful Shade appears,
Not pale and ghastly, as the sullen Fears
Of brainsick Minds their dismal Phantomes paint,
But bright and joyful as a new-made Saint.
A Crown of Glories shone around her Head;
She smiled, and thus the happy Spirit said.
Hail, Noble Son, whom powerful Fates design
To fill the Glories of thy mighty Line,
In whom the Good is mingled with the Great,
As generous Light unites with active heat:
For thee I thought Life pleasant, and for thee
I after Death endured this World to see,
And leave a while the Dwellings of the Blessed,
Where Heavenly Minds enjoy Eternal Rest;
Where having reached the Universal Shore,
I fear the Winds and Billows now no more;
No more in anguish draw a painful Breath,
Nor wrestle with that mighty Tyrant, Death,
Who cannot boast he gave the Fatal blow,
I conquered Sin, from whence his Power did flow:
The proud Insulter threatened me in vain,
For Heaven increased my Patience with my Pain,
Till my unfettered Soul at last took Wing,
The Grave its Conquest lost, and Death its Sting.
No longer then these Pious Sorrows shed,
Nor vainly think thy happy Parent dead;
Whose deathless Mind from its weak Prison free,
Enjoys in Heaven its Native Liberty:
I soon distinguished in that blissful Place
Thy God-like Ancestors, a numerous Race;
There placed among the Stars, in them I see
A Glorious Destiny reserved for thee.
Then weep no more; even here I still survive
In thee, and in thy Virtuous Fair I live:
I saw her happy Mother shine on high,
A brighter Spirit never adorned the Sky;
With Joy she met me at the Crystal Gate,
And much inquired her beauteous Daughter's State,
She Wished her there; but Heaven ordains it late,
And long defers her Joys, that she may be
A mighty Blessing to this World, and Thee.
Long shall she live, and Ages yet to come
Shall bless the happy Burden of her Womb:
Still shall her Offspring, with her Years, increase,
With both, her Virtues, and thy Happiness.
In all thy Race the wondering World shall find
The Noble Image of each Parent's Mind.
Thus blessed in her and hers, thou shall receive
The richest Bounties Heaven and Earth can give.
Nor shall my Care be wanting to your aid,
My faithful Spirit shall hover over thy head,
And round thy lovely Fair alargeProtectionspread:
Till crowned with Years and Honors here below,
And every Gift kind Nature can bestow,
You both retire to Everlasting Rest,
And late increase the Joys and number of the Blessed.
She spoke: her Fellow-Angels all around
With joyful Smiles the happy Omen owned;
All blessed the Noble Pair, and took their flight
To the bright Regions of unfading Light.
A HYMN TO THE MORNING. IN Praise of Light. AN ODE.
By Mr. YALDEN.
1.
PArent of Day! whose beauteous Beams of Light
Spring from the darksom Womb of Night:
And midst their Native horrors show,
Like Gems adorning of the Negro's Brow.
Not Heaven's fair Bow can equal thee,
In all its gaudy Drapery:
Thou first Essay of Light, and pledge of Day!
That usher'st in the Sun, and still prepar'st his way.
2.
Rival of Shade, Eternal Spring of Light!
Thou art the Genuine Source of it:
From thy bright unexhausted Womb,
The beauteous Race of Days and Seasons come.
Thy Beauty Ages cannot wrong,
But spite of Time you are ever young:
Thou art alone Heavens modest Virgin light,
Whose Face a Veil of blushes hides from human sight.
3.
Like some fair Bride thou risest from thy Bed,
And do around thy Luster spread:
Around the Universe dispense
New life to all, and quickening influence.
With gloomy Smiles thy Rival Night
Beholds thy glorious dawn of Light:
Not all the Wealth she views in Mines below,
Can match thy brighter Beams, or equal Luster show.
4.
At thy approach Nature erects her head,
The smiling Universe is glad:
The drowsy Earth and Seas awake,
And, from thy Beams, new life and vigor take.
When thy more cheerful Rays appear,
Even Guilt and Women cease to fear:
Horror, Despair, and all the Sons of Night,
Retire before thy Beams, and take their hasty flight.
5.
To Thee, the grateful East their Altars raise,
And sing with early Hymns thy praise:
Thou do their happy Soil bestow,
Enrich the Heavens above, and Earth below.
Thou rifest in the fragrant East,
Like the fair Phaenix from her balmy Nest:
No Altar of the Gods can equal Thine,
The Air is richest Incense, the whole Land thy Shrine.
6.
But yet thy fading Glories soon decay,
Thine's but a momentary stay:
Too soon you are ravished from our sight,
Bore down the stream of day, and overwhelmed with light.
Thy Beams to their own ruin haste,
They Are sram'd too exquisite to last:
Thine is a glorious, but a short-lived State,
Pity so fair a Birth should yield so soon to Fate.
7.
Before the Almighty Artist framed the Sky,
Or gave the Earth its Harmony:
His first Command was for thy Light,
He viewed the lovely Birth, and blessed it.
In purple Swadling-bands it struggling lay,
Not yet maturely bright for Day:
Old Chaos then a cheerful Smile put on,
And from thy beauteous Form, did first presage its own.
8.
Let there be Light, the Great Creator said,
His Word the active Child obeyed:
Night did her teeming Womb disclose,
And then the blushing Morn, its brightest Off spring rose.
A while the Almighty wondering viewed,
And then himself pronounced it good:
With Night, said He, divide the Imperial Sway,
Thou my first Labor art, and thou shall bless the Day.
A HYMN TO DARKNESS.
BY Mr. YALDEN.
1.
DARKNESS, thou first kind Parent of us all,
Thou art our great Original:
Since from thy Universal Womb,
Does all thou shad'st below, thy numerous Offspring come.
2.
Thy wondrous Birth is even to Time unknown,
Or like Eternity thou would none:
Whilst Light did its first Being owe,
Unto that awful Shade, it dares to rival now.
3.
Say in what distant Region do thou dwell!
To Reason inaccessible:
From Form, and duller Matter, free,
Thou soar'st above the reach of Man's Philosophy.
4.
Involved in thee, we first receive our breath,
Thou art our Refuge too in Death:
Great Monarch of the Grave and Womb,
Where e're our Souls shall go, to thee our Bodies come.
5.
The silent Globe is struck with awful fear,
When thy Majestic Shades appear:
Thou do compose the Air and Sea;
And Earth a Sabbath keeps, Sacred to Rest, and Thee.
6.
In thy serener Shades our Ghosts delight,
And court the umbrage of the Night:
In Vaults, and gloomy Caves, they stray,
But fly the Mornings beams, and sicken at the day.
7
Though solid Bodies dare exclude the light,
Nor will the brightest Ray admit:
No Substance can thy Force repel,
Thou reign'st in depths below, do at the Center dwell.
8.
The sparkling Gems, and Oar in Mines below,
To thee their beauteous luster owe:
Though formed within the Womb of Night,
Bright as their Sire they shine, with Native Rays of Light.
9.
When thou do raise thy venerable head,
And art in genuine Night arrayed:
Thy Negro Beauties then delight,
Beauties like pollish'd Jeat, with their own Darkness bright.
10.
Thou do thy Smiles impartially bestow,
And know no difference here below:
All things appear the same by thee,
Though Light distinction makes, thou giv'st Equality.
11.
Thou Darkness art the Lovers kind retreat,
And do the Nuptial Joys complete:
Thou do inspire them with thy Shade,
Giv'st vigor to the Youth, and warm'st the yielding Maid.
12.
Calm, as the blessed above, the Ancorites dwell,
Within their peaceful gloomy Cell:
Their minds with Heavenly Joys are filled,
The Pleasures Light deny, thy Shades for ever yield.
13.
In Caves of Night, the Oracles of old,
Did all their Mysteries unfold:
Darkness did first Religion grace,
Gave terrors to the God, and reverence to the place.
14.
When the Almighty did on Horeb stand,
Thy Shades enclosed the Hallowed Land:
In Clouds of Night, he was arrayed,
And venerable Darkness his Pavillion made.
15.
When he appeared armed in his Power and Might,
He veiled the beatifick Light:
When terrible with Majesty,
In tempests he gave Laws, and clad himself in Thee.
16.
E're the Foundation of the Earth was laid,
Or brighter Firmament was made:
E're Matter, Time, or Place were known,
Thou Monarch Darkness sway'dst these spacious Realms alone.
17.
But now the Moon, (though gay with borrowed light)
Invades thy scanty Lot of Night:
By Rebel Subjects you are betrayed,
The Anarchy of Stars depose their Monarch shade.
18.
Yet fading Light its Empire must resign,
And Nature's Power submit to Thine:
An Universal ruin shall erect thy Throne,
And Fate confirm thy Kingdom, evermore thy own.
AENEAS HIS Meeting with DIDO In the ELYZIAN FIELDS. Being a Translation of
part of the sixth Book of Virgil's AEneids, beginning at Hic quoque durus Amor,
etc.
By Mr. WOLSLEY.
HERE those, who by Love's Cruelty have died,
Thick Myrtle Groves, and dark Retirements hide;
Vexed with old Griefs, and pale with long Despairs,
Death cannot free them from their lasting Cares.
Among the Trees Pasiphae does appear,
Phedra, and Procris, and Evadne, here,
Sad Eriphyle makes unpitied moan,
Pointing to Wounds, that still accuse her Son.
For her lost Honor, Coeneus mourns in vain,
By Death transformed to her own Sex again.
And Laodamia, with the numerous throng
Of hapless Lovers, weeping goes along.
Among the rest sorsaken Dido, round
The Desert wanders, with a gaping Wound,
Whom soon as near the Trojan Hero drew,
And that upbraiding injured Ghost through glimmering Shadows knew.
(As he who sees by the faint gloomy Light
A rising Moon half hid in Clouds and Night)
Straight into Tears his penitent Pity broke,
And to her, in the kindest terms of Love unfeigned he spoke.
The killing News that did my flight pursue
I find, alas, (unhappy Queen) is true!
Your mark still fresh upon your Breast I see,
That bleeding Wound you gave your self for Me.
Ah, it is too true! I was the unlucky Cause
Of your hard fate! cursed wretched Man! I was.
By all the Gods, who rule above, I vow,
And by that Faith (if any be) which Sacred is below,
Compelled, and threatened, sad, and discontent,
From your loved Shore, and dear Embrace, I went:
That awful Power, whose high Will to obey,
Even now through these Infernal Shades and dismal paths I stray;
Through endless Night, and unknown Desert Lands
Force me, delaying, by his dread Commands.
Nor could I think the loss of me would touch
Your Heart so deep! -- You valued me too much!
Oh stay, and take not from my Eyes, unkind,
A Face for ever present to my mind!
Whom do you fly? see him you held so dear!
His just defense and last farewell do not refuse to hear.
With such soft words the afflicted Hero strove
To sooth her Anger, and revive her Love.
While rising Sighs often stopped him as he spoke,
And falling tears the tender accents broke.
The Queen, who still resented his last flight,
Now turns her Eyes from his unwelcome sight,
And on the ground, with sad remembrance struck,
She fixed a sullen and dejected look.
Deaf to his Vows, regardless of his Tears,
Hard as a Rock her once kind Heart appears,
And his vain Courtship unconcerned she hears.
Frowning at length, averse to all he said,
Into the thickest of the Wood she fled;
Where her first Love attracts her just desires,
Shares all her Griefs, and burns in equal Fires.
Wounded afresh with that reproachful sight,
Afar the Prince pursues her scornful flight,
And long lamenting her unhappy Fate,
With fruitless Sorrow pities her too late.
Out of the ITALIAN OF FULVIO TESTI. TO Count Montecuccoli. AGAINST Pride upon
sudden Advancement.
Ruscelletto Orgoglioso, andC.
1.
PRoud and foolish noisie Stream!
Who to some muddy Plash thy Birth do owe,
Which casually a Brook became,
Assisted by the Rain, and melting Snow:
Though now thou boasts thy swelling Tide,
August will soon be here, and end thy short-lived Pride.
2.
The Thames, great King of Floods! the Thames
With peaceful Course hastes gently to the Main;
Yet He upon his silent Streams
The tallest Vessels does with ease sustain:
And while one Summer Thee devours,
His Flood shall never decrease, not Time contract his Shores.
3.
Thou foam'st, and boil'st along the Plain,
The Flocks, and Shepherds threatening by the way;
Through borrowed Waters basely vain,
List'st up thy head, and do regardless stray,
Troubled, Oblique, and this alone,
Thy noisie Pride is All which thou can call Thy own.
4.
I know, Sir, you may well admire,
To hear me Reason with a deaf'ning Stream,
But thus the Muse often strikes the Lyre,
When she would most Lofty, and Majestic seem,
And in Mysterious Numbers shroud
Deep Oracles, too deep, for the unthinking Crowd.
5.
While thus I spoke, there did appear,
Phoebus the God of every tuneful Lay,
A Laurel crowned his beamy Hair,
Which with a brighter Light improved the Day;
And thus he, what I saw, applied,
Short is the uncertain Reign, and Pomp of Mortal Pride.
6.
New turns, and changes every day,
Are of inconstant Chance the constant Arts,
Soon she gives, soon takes away,
She comes, embraces, nauseates you, and parts;
But if she stays, or if she goes,
The wise Man little Joy, or little Sorrow shows.
7.
Good is the Pilot, who preserves
His shattered Vessel on the Stormy Main;
But he no leass applause deserves,
Who fears the Flattery of the Watery Plain;
Who never trusts the fairest Gale,
But dreads to be o'reset, and spreads but little Sail.
8.
Of all the Heroes known of old,
I honor most Agathocles's Name;
Who, though he made the sparkling Gold
In polished Goblets on his Table flame:
To temper, and rebate its Ray,
He mixed his Father's Trade, the good old Potter's Clay.
9.
While thus the Charming God went on,
And fixed in Wonder, and Delight I stood:
Behold! the Upstart Stream was gone,
No drop remained of its insulting Flood:
But the worst Cattle of the Plain,
Trod over the thirsty Sand, and spurned it with disdain.
CATULLUS. EPIG. 19. Suffenus iste, Vare, quem probe nosti.
BY The same Hand as the former.
SUFFENUS whom you know, the Witty,
The Gay, the Talkative, and Pretty;
And, all his Wonders to rehearse,
The THING which makes a World of Verse,
I Am certain I should not belly him,
To say he has several thousands by him,
Yet none deformed with Critic blot,
Or wrote on Vellom to rub out.
Royal Paper! Scarlet Strings!
Gilded Backs! and such fine things!
But -- When you read 'em, then the Witty,
The Gay Suffenus, and the Pretty:
Is the dullest, heaviest Clown,
So altered, he can scarce be known.
This is strange! that he who now
Could so flatter, laugh, and bow,
So much Wit, such breeding show,
Should be so ungenteel a Wight,
Whenever he attempts to write,
And yet the Wretch is never so pleased,
As when he is with this madness seized.
Faith, Sir, we are all deceived alike,
All Labor in the same mistake,
Nor is the best of Men so clear
From every Folly, but somewhere
Still the Suffenus will appear.
Quickly we others Errors find,
But see not our own Load behind.
Out of the GREEK OF MENAGE. BY THE Same Hand as the former.
WHile here for the fair Amarillis I die,
She over Rocks, and over Streams from my Passion does fly;
O bring her, kind Venus! bring her here back again,
And the best of my Heifars on thy Altar lies slain:
But if she is appeased, if to Love she incline,
Take all my whole Herd, my little Herd is all thine.
Invitation into the COUNTRY. IN Imitation of the 34th EPIG. OF CATULLUS.
By the same Hand as the former.
GO -- for I Am impatient grown,
Bid him leave the noisie Town.
Charge him he no longer stay,
But with haste devour the way.
Though a thousand times he is staid
By that fond, bewitching Maid:
Though she summon all her Charms,
Kiss him, press him in her Arms.
Let him not the Siren mind,
Tears are Water, Sighs are Wind.
Tell him how kind Nature here,
Dresses up the Youthful Year,
Strowing on the thoughtless Hours,
Opening Buds, and newborn Flowers;
Tell him underneath this Shade,
Innocence and Mirth are laid;
Not without forbidden Claret,
Books or Music, if he will hear it.
See the Laurel, and the Vine,
Round about that Arbor twine,
So we Wit, and Pleasure join;
So Horace, and Anacreon meet
The Jolly God, within that Seat.
Thus from Noise and Care set free,
The snares of Beauty we defy.
Let him them no longer stay,
But with haste devour the way.
On Mrs. Arabella Hunt Singing. PIN DARIC ODE,
By Mr. CONGREVE.
I.
LEt all be hushed, each softest Motion cease,
Be every loud tumultuous Thought at Peace,
And every ruder Gasp of Breath
Be calm, as in the Arms of Death.
And thou most fickle, most uneasy Part,
Thou restless Wanderer, my Heart,
Be still; gently, ah gently, leave,
Thou busy, idle thing, to heave.
Stir not a Pulse; and let my Blood,
That turbulent, unruly Flood,
Be softly staid:
Let me be all, but my attention, dead.
Go, rest, y'unnecessary Springs of Life,
Leave your officious Toil and Strife;
For I would hear her Voice, and try
If it be possible to dye.
II.
Come all ye Lovesick Maids and wounded Swains,
And listen to her Healing Strains.
A wondrous Balm, between her Lips she wears,
Of Sovereign Force to soften Cares;
It Is piercing as your Thoughts, and melting as your Tears:
And this, through every Ear she does impart,
(By tuneful Breath diffused) to every Heart.
Swiftly the gentle Charmer Flies,
And to the tender Grief soft Air applies,
Which, warbling Mystic Sounds,
Cements the bleeding Panter's Wounds.
But ah! beware of clamorous Moan:
Let no unpleasing Murmur or harsh Groan,
Your slighted Loves declare:
Your very tenderest moving Sighs forbear,
For even they will be too boistrous here.
Hither let naught but Sacred Silence come,
And let all saucy Praise be dumb.
III.
And lo! Silence himself is here;
Methinks I see the Midnight God appear,
In all its downy Pomp aray'd,
Behold the reverend Shade:
An ancient Sigh he sits upon,
Whose Memory of Sound is long since gone,
And purposely annihilated for his Throne:
Beneath two soft transparent Clouds do meet,
In which he seems to sink his softer Feet.
A melancholy Thought, condensed to Air,
Stolen from a Lover in Despair,
Like a thin Mantle, serves to wrap
In Fluid Folds, his visionary Shape.
A wreath of Darkness round his Head he wears,
Where curling Mists supply the want of Hairs:
While the still Vapors, which from Poppies rise,
Bedew his hoary Face, and lull his Eyes.
IV.
But hark! the heavenly Sphere turns round,
And Silence now is drowned
In Ecstasy of Sound.
How on a sudden the still Air is charmed,
As if all Harmony were just alarmed!
And every Soul with Transport filled,
Alternately is thawed and Chilled.
See how the Heavenly Choir
Come flocking, to admire,
And with what Speed and Care,
Descending Angels cull the thinnest Air!
Haste then, come all the immortal Throng,
And listen to her Song;
Leave your loved Mansions, in the Sky,
And hither, quickly hither fly;
Your Loss of Heaven, nor shall you need to fear,
While she sings, it is Heaven here.
V.
See how they crowd, see how the little Cherubs skip!
While others sit around her Mouth, and sip
Sweet Hellelujahs from her Lip.
Those Lips, where in Surprise of Bliss they rove;
For never before were Angels blessed
With such a luscious Feast
Of Music and of Love.
Prepare then, ye immortal Choir,
Each sacred Minstrel tune his Lyre,
And with her Voice in Chorus join,
Her Voice, which next to yours is most divine.
Bless the glad Earth with heavenly Lays,
And to that Pitch the eternal Accents raise,
Which only Breath inspired can reach,
To Notes, which only she can learn, and you can teach:
While we, charmed with the loved Excess,
Are wrapped in sweet Forgetfulness
Of all, of all, but of the present Happiness:
Wishing, for ever in that State to lie,
For ever to be dying so, yet never die.
TO A Person of HONOR: UPON HIS Incomparable, Incomprehensible Poem.
By Mr. Waller.
SIR.
YOU have obliged the British Nation more
Than all their Bards could ever do before:
And (at your own Charge) Monuments as hard
As Brass, or Marble, to your Fame, have reared.
For as all Warlike Nations take Delight
To hear how their brave Ancestors could fight,
You have advanced to Wonder their Renown,
And no less Virtuously improved your own;
That 'twill be doubtful, whether you do write,
Or they have acted, at a Nobler height.
You (of your Ancient Princes) have retrieved
More than the Ages knew in which they lived;
Explained their Customs, and their Rights anew,
Better than all their Druids ever knew:
Unriddled those dark Oracles as well
As those that made'em, could themselves foretell.
For as the Britains long have hoped in vain,
Arthur would come to Govern them again:
You have fulfilled that Prophecy alone,
And in your Poem placed him on his Throne.
Such Magic Power has your prodigious Pen,
To raise the Dead, and give new Life to Men;
Make Rival Princes meet in Arms, and Love,
Whom distant Ages did so far remove.
For as Eternity has neither past,
Nor future, (Authors say) nor first, nor last;
But is all instant: Your Eternal Muse
All Ages can to any one reduce.
Then why should You (whose Miracles of Art
Can Life at Pleasure to the Dead impart)
Trouble in vain your better busi'd Head,
TO observe what times they lived in, or were dead.
For, since you have such Arbitrary Power,
It were defect in Judgment to go lower;
Or stoop to things so pitifully lewd,
As use to take the Vulgar Latitude.
For no Man's fit to read what you have writ,
That holds not some proportion with your Wit.
As Light can no way but by Light appear,
He must bring Sense, that understands it here.
On the Same.
By Dr. S --
YOur Book our old Knight Errants Fame revives,
Writ in a Style agreeing with their Lives.
All Rumors strength their Prowess did outgo,
All Rumors Skill your Verses far outdo:
To praise the Welsh the World must now combine,
Since to their Leeks you do your Laurel join:
Such lofty strains your Country's Story fit,
Whose Mountains nothing equals, but your Wit.
Bonduca, were she such, as here we see
(In British Paint) none could more dreadful be:
With naked Armies she encountered Rome,
Whose Strength with naked Nature you overcome.
Nor let small Critics blame this mighty Queen,
That in King Arthur's time she here is seen:
You that can make immortal by your Song,
May well one Life four hundred Years prolong.
Thus Virgil bravely dared for Dido's Love,
The settled course of Time and Years to move.
Though him you imitate in this alone,
In all things else you borrow help from none:
No Antic Tale of Greece or Rome you take,
Their Fables and Examples you forsake.
With true Heroic Glory you display
A Subject new, writ in the newest way.
Go forth, great Author, for the World's delight;
Teach it, what none e're taught you, how to write:
They talk strange things that Ancient Poets did;
How Trees, and Stones they into Buildings lead:
For Poems to raise Cities, now, it is hard,
But yours, at least, will build half Paul's Churchyard.
Another on the same.
By Mr. Mat. Clifford.
With Envy, Critics, you will this Poem read,
Whose Author's Wit does more than Man exceed;
Where all is so good alike, no Man can say
This may be added, or that pared away:
Where all is so new, no search can ever trace
The Persons mentioned, in their Time, or Place.
Great Soul of Nature, which do Books defy,
And their weak aid in this thy History:
Thou art no Slave to Rule, or President;
Where others imitate, thou do invent.
It is, we grant, all thy Invention;
The Language too, entirely is thy own:
Thou leave as Trash, below thy great pretense,
Grammar to Pedants; and to plain Men, Sense:
But as, in this thy matchless Poetry,
Thou follow'st none, so none can follow Thee.
On the same.
By the Ld. V.
WOnder not, Sir, that Praises yet never due
To any other, are yet heaped on You:
'Twas Envy robbed you of your Praise before;
Men fee their faults, and Envy now no more.
It Is but your Merit, nor can justly such,
Which gave too little once, now give too much.
Your Princes do all Poetry surpass
As much as Pen-main-maur exceeds Parnass.
It is so great a Prodigy of Wit,
That Art and Nature both fall short of it:
For leaving Art, and left of Nature too,
Your Poem has no other Muse than You.
On these two Verses.
Out of the same.
But Fame had sent forth all her nimble Spies
To blaze this Match, and lend to Fate some Eyes.

By the Duke of Buckingham.
BUT wherefore all this pother about Fame?
A Man might say, says one: the very same
Demand might well be made, another cries,
Of Fate; and how it got, from Fame, such Eyes?
It Is well; you're witty Persons both, say I;
Yet to your Wit this boldly I Will reply:
Fate is the Twin of Chance, by which you find
Fate must needs see, except that Chance were blind:
For, among Friends, 'twere Inequality
To think one should be blind, and the other see.
Now tell me, Critics, do not all the Wise
Profess that which they see, they see with Eyes?
And the same Figure do not I advance,
When I protest, I saw a thing by Chance?
Since then so various things by Chance we see,
Fate might have Eyes to multiplicity;
But our mild Author says, it has but some;
Thus, Critic vile, thus I have struck thee dumb:
And thus subscribe my self, with Heart, and Hand,
The Author's Friend, most Humble Servant, and
Buckingham.
TO THE PRINCE and PRINCESS OF ORANGE, Upon Their MARRIAGE.
Written by Mr. NOT. LEE.
HAIL, happy Warrior! hail! whose Arms have won
The fairest Jewel in the English Crown.
Happy in famous Dangers in the Field,
Happy in Courts which brightest Beauties yield.
Oh Prince! whose Soul is known so justly great,
As if that Heaven took leisure to create;
First, the rich Oar refined, then did allay,
Stamped thee his own, not shuffl'd thee away.
With wonder thus we all thy temper prize,
Not but thou art bold and brave, as thou art wise.
Like the cool English, who approach their Fate
With awe, and gravely first with Death debate.
They kindle slowly, but when once on Fire,
Burn on, and in the blaze of Fame expire.
Hail Princess! hail! thou fairest of thy Kind!
Thou shape of Angels, with an Angel's Mind!
Whose Virtues shine, but so as to be born,
Clear as the Sun, and gentle as the Morn.
Whose brighter Eyes like lambent Glories move,
And every glance wounds like a Dart of Love.
How well, oh Prince, how nobly have thou fought,
Since to thy Arms the Fates such Beauty brought!
Methinks I hear thee in thy Nuptial Bed,
When over the Royal Maid thy Arms were spread.
Enough, kind Heaven, well was my Sword employed,
Since all the Bliss Earth holds shall be enjoyed.
Pains I remember now with vast delight,
Well have I braved the thundering French in fight,
My hazards now are Gains, and if my Blood
In Battle mix and raise the vulgar Flood,
Her Tears (for sure she will be so good to mourn)
Like Balm shall heal the Wounds when I return.
But hark, it is rumored that this happy pair
Must go, the Prince for Holland does declare,
Called to the Business of Important War.
Go then, if thy Departure be agreed,
Your Friends must weep, your Enemies shall bleed.
And if in Poets minds, those vaster Souls,
Where all at once the vast Creation rouls,
To whom the Warrior is as much obliged,
As to Relievers Towns that are besieged.
(For Death would to their Acts an end afford,
Did not Immortal Verse outdo the Sword)
If ought of Prophecy their Souls inspire.
And if their fury gives a solid Fire,
Soft shall the Waftage be, the Seas and Wind,
Calm as the Prince, and as the Princess kind.
The World, why should not Dreams of Poets take,
As well as Prophets who but dream awake?
I saw them launch, the Prince the Princess bore,
While the sad Court stood crowding on the Shore.
The Prince still bowing on the Deck did stand,
And held his weeping Princess by the hand.
Which waving often, she bid them all farewell,
And wept as if she would the Ocean swell.
Farewell! thou best of Fathers, best of Friends!
While the moved Duke, with a heaved Sigh, commends
To Heaven the Care; in Tears his Eyes would swim,
But Manly Virtue binds them to the brim.
Farewell (she cried) my Sister, thou dear part,
Thou sweetest part, of my divided Heart.
To whom I all my Secrets did unfold,
Dear Casket! who did all my Treasures hold.
My little Love! her Sighs she did renew,
Once more (oh Heavens) a long and last adieu!
Part! must I ever lose those pretty Charms?
Then swoons, and sinks into the Prince's Arms.
The Court beheld, and wept.
Straight from their Griefs the pompous Navy fled
So fast, as if our Sighs increased their speed.
When of a sudden, from the Reedy Court,
The Trytons all with their grieved God resort;
In Troops upon the wandering Waves they glide,
And round their lifted Lord in Triumph ride.
At their first call the singing Mermaids come,
While the crowned Dolphins lash the Silver Foam.
Thus waited, the glad Prince beheld from far
The Belgic Shore, and heard the sound of War.
Some Hand unseen Heavens Azure Curtains drew
To make this Mighty Triumph Great and New,
A thousand Golden Heads peeped forth to view.
Cries, Shouts, and clapping Hands, all Ecstasy,
A hundred Cannons thundered to the Sky.
The Thunder answering did my Dream destroy,
And waked me from the Visionary Joy.
AGAINST SLOTH. When the King was at Oxford.
Hocagite, o Juvines, circumspicit, and stimulat vos,
Materiamque sibi Ducis indulgentia quoerit.

1.
HEnce, vain Attempter of the Good and Great;
Be gone from our secure Retreat,
With all thy dull unweildy Train
That clog and curb the active Brain,
Which else would, like a metall'd Steed, run over
Vast Nature's yet unnumber'd Store;
Over flowery Meads, and painted Fields,
And all the pleasant Scenes that beauteous Learning yields.
2.
We Are doubly armed against thy Cheats, and Thee,
(Thy Cheats which only find a place
Among the Ignorant and Base,)
By Knowledge, and by Majesty.
Thou, constant Guest of every Popish Cell,
Which do with Monks and Hermits dwell,
Must leave, with them, this Sacred Ground;
Banished from King and Court, at least, for ten Miles round.
3.
She Is gone; and now, methinks, an active fire
Does all my willing Veins inspire:
My drowsy Senses all anew
Are wakened by His powerful view.
The Glorious Ruler of the Morning, so,
But looks on Flowers, and straight they grow:
And when his Beams their Light unfold,
Ripens the dullest Earth, and warms it into Gold.
What art thou, Love!
Written by Mr. J. ALLESTRY.
1.
WHat art thou Love! whence are those Charms!
That thus thou bear an Universal Rule!
For thee the Soldier quits his Arms,
The King turns Slave, the wise Man Fool.
2.
In vain we chase thee from the Field,
And with cool thoughts resist thy Yoke:
Next Tide of Blood, alas! we yield,
And all those high Resolves are broke.
3.
Can we e're hope thou shou'd'st be true,
Whom we have found so often base?
Cozn'd, and cheated, still we view,
And fawn upon the treacherous Face.
4.
In vain our Nature we accuse;
And dote, because she says we must:
This for a Brute were an excuse,
Whose very Soul and Life is Lust.
5.
To get our likeness! what is that!
Our likeness is but Misery;
Why should I toil to propagate
Another thing as vile as I?
6.
From Hands Divine our Spirits came,
And Gods, that made us, did inspire
Something more Noble in our Frame,
Above the Dregs of Earthly Fire.
VERSES Spoken before the Duke and Duchess of YORK, AND Lady ANN, In Oxford
Theater, May the 21st. 1683.
By the Ld. S -- and Mr. C --.
Ld. S -- Great Sir,
WHen last your Royal Brother blessed this Place,
And all about did his kind Beams dispense;
A Joy Divine was seen in every Face,
Till Faction drove our Guardian Angel hence.

Mr. C -- Heaven well did know how much our Frame could bear;
Mingling our Rapture with some fit allay;
And that, for future Bliss, we might prepare:
Wisely reserved the Blessing of this day.
To the Duke.
We miss a Royal Brother by his side;

Ld. S -- We longed to see those Charms which him o'recame,

Mr. C -- To the Duchess.
You, Madam, was our only Joy and Pride,
To the Lady Ann
Who represented half the Stuarts Name.

Ld. S -- Would you then know how much you're welcome here?
Think what a Joy in Loyal Breasts did flow,
When fatal Gloucester all our hopes did bear,
Which the Gods lost to show their Care of Tou.
When Fears and Jealousies ran high, and loud;
And Zeal mistaken, blinded wilful Eyes,
Heaven shook the Rod to the Rebellious Crowd,
Threatening to snatch the Gem, they could not prize.

Mr. C -- Oxford (we hope) will not displease your view,
Where Tork first learned the Rudiments of War;
Those early Virtues here in Blossom grew,
Which now in growth, and full Perfection, are.
Though here new Towers and Buildings daily rise;
And Arms thrown off, we wear the peaceful Gown:
Our Breasts admit no change, know no disguise;
Prepared with Swords and Pens to assert the Crown.

Ld. S -- This is the place, in which the Sacred Names
Of Kings and Heroes annually resound;
The Triumphs, War and Peace, of Charles and James,
From Age to Age, are with fresh Laurels Crowned.

Mr. C -- As when a Prince's long expected Birth,
Glads every Heart, and each Muse tunes her Voice:
Or when the Captive Monarchs of the Earth
To the Lady Ann.
Beg to be Slaves, and in Your Chains rejoice.

Ld. S -- But why, in lasie Numbers, do we bind
Our thoughts? which should in active Raptures fly;
As the Celestial Circles unconfined,
And tuned to their Eternal Harmony.
Musick's the Dialect of happy Souls,
When severed from the Earth's unweildy Load;
The Universal Language of both Poles,
Of the vast distant Natives understood.
Let Instruments and Voices both combine
To Celebrate the Glories of this Day:
Let Art and Ecstasies their Forces join,
And in melodious Paths of Error stray.
Here they fate down, and Music played; which being ended, they stood up
again, and spoke by way of Pastoral. Ld. S -- Damon.
Mr. C -- Thyrsis.

Damon. AH! Thyrsis, how shall humble Swains,
As thou and I, perform such strains?
Can we a fitting Present make
For us to give, or These to take?

Thyrsis. The Garland, Chloris made, I Will bring,
When I threw Strephon from the Ring:
Though it should Caesar 's Birthday Crown,
Fresh Roses will for that be blown.

Damon. I have a Lamb as white as Snow,
Though half engaged to Pan by Vow:
I Will sacrifice it here, for He
Pan, or some greater God must be.

Thyrsis. Why do thou talk of Sacrifice,
These seem no angry Deities.
Would cruel Sylvia were here,
She Would learn to think her self less fair,
And, in a Noble mixture, find
Humility with Beauty joined.

Damon. Then may it please the Royal Three
TO accept one hearty Wish from me:
By all true Swains be Daphnis feared,
And no Whig-Wolves come nigh his Herd.

Both together. Then Tearly Hecatombs we'll pay,
If every Spring bring such a May.

HUMAN LIFE: Supposed to be spoken by an Epicure, in imitation of the second
Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon. A Pindarique ODE. Inscribed to the Lord
HUNSDON.
By Mr. YALDEN.
1.
THen will penurious Heaven no more allow!
No more on its own Darling Man bestow!
Is it for this he Lord of all appears,
And his great Maker's Image bears!
To toil beneath a wretched State,
Oppressed with Miseries and Fate:
Beneath his painful Burden groan,
And, in this beaten Road of Life, drudge on!
Amidst our Labors we possess
No kind allays of Happiness:
No softning Joys can call our own,
To make this bitter Drug go down;
Whilst Death an easy Conquest gains,
And the insatiate Grave in endless Triumph Reigns.
With Throes, and Pangs, into the World we come,
The Curse and Burden of the Womb:
Nor wretched to our selves alone,
Our Mothers Labors introduce our own.
In Cries and Tears our Infancy we waste,
Those sad Prophetic Tears that flow,
By instinct of our future Woe;
And even our dawn of Life with Sorrow's overcast.
Thus we toil out a restless Age,
Each his laborious part must have,
Down from the Monarch to the Slave,
Act over this Farce of Life, then drop beneath the Stage.
2.
From our first drawing Vital breath,
From our first starting from the Womb,
Until we reach the destined Tomb,
We all are posting on, to the dark Goal of Death.
Life, like a Cloud that fleets before the Wind,
No Mark, no kind Impression, leaves behind;
It Is scattered like the Winds that blow,
Boisterous as them, full as inconstant too,
That know not whence they come, nor where they go.
Here we are detained a while, and then
Become Originals again:
Time shall a Man to his first self restore,
And make him entire nothing, all he was before.
No part of us, no remnant shall survive!
And yet we impudently say, we live:
No! we but ebb into our selves again,
And only come to be, as we had never been.
3.
Say, learned Sage, thou that art mighty wise!
Unriddle me these Mysteries:
What is the Soul, the Vital Heat
That our mean Frame does animate?
What is our breath, the breath of Man,
That buoys his Nature up, and does even Life sustain?
Is it not Air, an empty Fume,
A Fire that does it self consume?
A warmth that in a Heart is bred,
A lambent Flame with heat and motion fed.
Extinguish that, the whole is gone,
This boasted Scene of Life is done:
Away the Phantome takes its flight,
Damned to a loathsome Grave, and an Eternal Night.
The Soul, the Immortal part we boast,
In one consuming Minute's lost:
To its first Source it must repair,
Scatter with Winds, and flow with common Air.
Whilst the fallen Body, by a swift decay,
Resolves into its Native Clay:
For Dust and Ashes are its second Birth,
And that incorporates too, with its great Parent Earth.
4.
Nor shall our Names, or Memories survive,
Alas, no part of Man can live!
The empty blasts of Fame shall die,
And even those Nothings taste Mortality.
In vain, to future Ages, we transmit
Heroic Acts, and Monuments of Wit:
In vain, we dear-bought Honors leave,
To make our Ashes gay, and furnish out a Grave.
Ah Treacherous Immortality!
For thee, our stock of Youth we waste,
And urge on Life, that ebbs too fast;
To purchase thee with Blood, the Valiant fly,
And to survive in Fame, the Great and Glorious die.
Lavish of Life, they squander this Estate,
And for a poor Reversion wait:
Bankrupts and Misers, to themselves they grow,
Imbitter wretched Life, with Toils and Woe,
To hoord up endless Fame, they know not where, or how.
5.
Ah think, my Friends, how swift the Minutes haste!
The present Day entirely is our own,
Then seize the Blessing e're it is gone:
To Morrow, fatal sound! since this may be our last.
Why do we boast of Years, and sum up Days!
It Is all imaginary space:
To day, to day is our Inheritance,
It Is all penurious Fate will give,
Posterity'll to Morrow live, hence.
Our Sons crowd on behind, our Children drive us
With Garlands then your Temples Crown,
And lie on Beds of Roses down:
Beds of Roses we'll prepare,
Roses that our Emblems are.
A while they flourish on the Bough,
And drink large draughts of Heavenly Dew:
Like us, they smile, are young, and gay,
And like us too, are Tenants for a day,
Since with Night's blasting breath, they vanish swift away.
6.
Bring cheerful Wine, and costly Sweets prepare!
It Is more than frenzy now to spare:
Let cares and business wait a while,
Old Age affords a thinking Interval;
Or if they must a longer hearing have,
Bid them attend below, adjourn into the Grave.
Then gay and sprightly Wine produce,
Wines that Wit and Mirth infuse:
That feed, like Oil, th'expiring Flame,
Revive our drooping Souls, and prop this tottering Frame.
That when the Grave our Bodies has engrost,
When Virtues shall forgotten lie,
With all their boasted Piety,
Honors, and Titles, like our selves, be lost;
Then our Recorded Vice shall flourish on,
And our Immortal Riots be for ever known.
This, this is what we ought to do,
The great Design, the grand Affair below!
Since bounteous Nature's placed our Stuard here,
Then Man his Grandeur should maintain,
And in excess of Pleasure Reign,
Keep up his Character, and Lord of all appear.
TO Mr. WALLER, UPON THE Copy of Verses made by himself on the last Copy in his
Book.
1.
WHen Shame, for all my foolish Youth had writ,
Advised, 'twas time the Rhyming Trade to quit,
Time to grow wise, and be no more a Wit --
The Noble Fire, that animates thy Age,
Once more enflamed me with Poetic Rage.
2.
Kings, Heroes, Nymphs, the Brave, the Fair, the Young,
Have been the Theme of thy Immortal Song;
A Nobler Argument, at last, thy Muse,
Two things Divine; Thee, and Her self, does choose.
3.
Age, whose dull weight makes vulgar Spirits bend,
Gives Wings to thine, and bids it upward tend.
No more confined, above the Starry Skies,
Out, from the Body's broken Cage, it flies.
4.
But oh! vouchsafe, not wholly to retire,
To join with, and complete the Etherial Quire!
Still here remain! still on the Threshold stand;
Still at this distance view the promised Land,
Though thou may seem, so Heavenly is thy Sense,
Not going thither, but new come from thence.
ELEGY: Occasioned By the Reading and Transcribing Mr. Edmund Waller's Poem, OF
DIVINE LOVE, Since his Death.
By Mr. J. TALBOT.
SUch were the last, the sweetest Notes that hung
Upon our dying Swan's melodious Tongue:
Notes, whose strong Charms the dullest Ear might move,
And melt the hardest Heart in flames of Love:
Notes, whose Seraphic Raptures speak a mind
From Human Thoughts, and Earthly Dross refined;
So just their Harmony, so high their flight,
With Joy I read them, and with Wonder write.
Sure, happy Saint, this Noble Song was given
To fit Thee for the approaching Joys of Heaven:
Love, wondrous Love, whose Conquest was thy Theme,
Has taught thy Soul the airy way to climb;
Love snatched Thee, like Elijah to the Sky,
In Flames that not consume, but purify:
There with thy Fellow-Angels mixed, and free
From the dull load of dim Mortality;
Thou feel'st new Joys, and feed'st thy ravished sight
With unexhausted Beams of Love and Light:
And sure, blessed Spirit, to complete thy Bliss,
In Heaven thou sing'st this Song, or one like This.
MOSCHUS: IDYL 1st. Done into ENGLISH
BY Mr. J. R.
HER Son not heard of, and by none descried,
In a shrill voice thus pensive Venus cried.
He who can News of a stray Cupid tell,
My Run-a-way, shall be rewarded well.
His Fee for the obliging News is this,
He may come hither, and demand a Kiss.
But if he can the Vagabond restore;
He shall have Kisses, and have somewhat more.
Amongst a Hundred you the Boy may know,
Large are his Tokens, and his Marks enough.
Not white his body, but resembling Flame;
His Eyes all cruel, and his Heart the same:
Soft are his words, where he designs no Love,
Nor do his Heart and Tongue together move.
Sweet is his Voice as Honey when he is pleased,
But when enraged, how hard to be appeased!
He always lies: it is a pernicious Boy,
Fraud is his Sport, and Tyranny his Joy.
Bold are his Eyes, divinely curled his Hair;
Small are his Hands, but oh! they kill from far!
How great, how large is their extensive Power,
From which great Pluto's self is not secure!
Close are his Thoughts and Soul, his Body bare:
Swift as a Bird, he strikes an amorous Pair,
Invades the inmost Fortress of the Fair.
Small is his Bow, nor are his Arrows great,
And yet even These have reached the Heavenly Seat.
A Golden Quiver on his back he ties,
Where his Artillery in dreadful order lies.
All cruel, all -- but oh! the cruel Boy
Does with his Taper Phoebus self annoy;
Torments even me, his Mother, ruins all my Joy.
Charge him from me, if seen, with an arrest;
Let pity be a Stranger to your breast.
If you can seize him, lead the Captive bound,
Let no compassion for his tears be found.
Avoid his kisses, and his amorous wiles,
There Is worse than Poison in his treacherous smiles.
Nay, should he offer you his arms, beware,
Of Arrows tipped with Fire have a care.
AGAINST ENJOYMENT.
By Mr. YALDEN.
WE Love and Hate, as restless Monarchs fight,
Who boldly dare invade another's Right:
Yet when through all the dangerous toils they have run,
Ignobly quit, the Conquests they have won;
Those charming hopes that made them valiant grow,
Palled with Enjoyment, makes them Cowards now.
Our Passions only form our Happiness,
Hopes still enlarge, as Fears contract it less:
Hope with a gaudy Prospect feeds the Eye,
Sooths every sense, does with each wish comply;
But false Enjoyment, the kind Guide destroys,
We lose the Passion in the treacherous Joys.
Like the gay Silkworm, when it pleases most,
In that ungrateful Web it spun, it is lost.
Fruition only cloys the Appetite,
More does the Conquest, than the prize delight:
One Victory gained, another fills the mind,
Our restless Wishes cannot be confined.
Like boisterous waves, no settled bounds they know,
Fix at no point, but always ebb or flow.
Who most expects, enjoys the pleasure most,
It Is raised by Wishes, by Fruition lost:
We Are charmed with distant views of happiness,
But near approaches make the prospect less.
Wishes, like painted Landscapes, best delight,
Whilst distance recommends them to the sight:
Placed afar off, they beautiful appear,
But show their course, and nauseous colors, near.
Thus the famed Midas, when he found his Store,
Increasing still, and would admit of more:
With eager arms his swelling bags he pressed,
And expectation only made him blessed:
But when a boundless Treasure he enjoyed,
And every wish was with fruition cloyed:
Then damned to heaps, and surfeited with Oar,
He cursed that Gold, he doated on before.
PRIAM's Lamentation and Petition TO ACHILLES, For the Body of his Son HECTOR.
Translated from the Greek of Homer, (...). (...).
By Mr. CONGREVE.
Beginning at this Line, (...): --

ARGUMENT Introductory to this Translation.
Hector 's Body, (after he was slain) remained still in the Possession of
Achilles; for which, Priam made great Lamentation. Jupiter had pity on him, and
sent Iris to comfort and direct him, after what manner he should go to Achilles
's Tent, and how he should there ransom the Body of his Son. Priam accordingly
orders his Chariot to be got ready, and preparing rich Presents for Achilles,
sets forward to the Grecian Camp, accompanied by no body but his Herald Idaeus.
Mercury, at Jupiter 's Command, meets him by the way, in the Figure of a young
Grecian, and, after bemoaning his misfortunes, undertakes to drive his Chariot,
unobserved, through the Guards, and to the door of Achilles 's Tent: which
having performed, he discovered himself a God, and giving him a short
Instruction, how to move Achilles to Compassion, flew up to Heaven.

SO spoke the God, and Heav'nward took his flight:
When Priam from his Chariot did alight;
Leaving Idoeus there, alone he went
With Solemn pace, into Achilles Tent.
Heedless, he passed through various Rooms of State,
Until approaching where the Hero sat;
There at a Feast, the good old Priam found
Jove's best beloved, with all his Chiefs around:
Two only were to attend his Person placed,
Automedon and Alcymus; the rest
At greater distance, greater State expressed.
Priam, unseen by these, his entrance made,
And at Achilles Feet his Aged Body laid,
About his Knees, his trembling Arms he threw,
And clasped 'em hard, as, they together grew;
Then, caught his Hands, and pressed, and kissed 'em close,
Those Hands, the inhumane Authors of his Woes;
Those Hands, whose unrelenting Force had cost
Much of his blood, (for many Sons he lost)
Now bathed in tears, he to his Cheeks did lay,
As if he meant to wash their Guilt away.
But, as a Wretch who has a Murder done,
And seeking Refuge, does from Justice run;
Entering some House, in haste, where he is unknown,
Creates amazement in the lookers on:
So did Achilles gaze, surpised to see
The Godlike Priam's Royal Misery;
All on each other gazed, all in surprise
And mute, yet seemed to question with their Eyes.
Till he at length the Solemn silence broke;
And thus the venerable Suppliant spoke.
Divine Achilles, at your Feet behold
A prostrate King, in wretchedness grown old:
Think on your Father, and then, look on me,
His hoary Age and helpless person see;
So furrowed are his Cheeks, so white his Hairs,
Such, and so many his declining Years;
Could you imagine (but that cannot be)
Could you imagine such, his Misery!
Yet it may come, when, he shall be oppressed,
And Neighboring Princes lay his Country waste;
Nay, at this time perhaps some powerful Foe,
Who will no Mercy, no Compassion show,
Entering his Palace, sees him feebly fly,
And seek Protection, where no help is nigh.
In vain, he may your fatal absence mourn,
And wish in vain for your delayed return;
Yet, that he hears you live, some comfort gives,
And while he hopes (though vainly) he believes:
It glads his Soul to think, he once may see
His much-loved Son; would that were granted me!
But I, most wretched I! of all bereft!
Of all my Royal Sons, how few are left!
Yet fifty goodly Youths I had to boast,
When firsts the Greeks invaded Ilion's Coast:
Nineteen, the joyful Issue of one teeming Womb,
Are now, alas! a mournful Tribute to one Tomb:
Merciless War, this devastation wrought,
And their strong Nerves to Dissolution brought.
Still one was left, in whom was all my hope,
My Age's comfort, and his Country's prop;
Hector, my Darling, and my last Defense,
Whose life alone, their deaths could recompense:
And, to complete my store of countless Woe,
Him you have slain -- of him bereaved me too!
For his sake only, hither am I come;
Rich Gifts I bring, and Wealth, an endless Sum;
All to redeem that fatal Prize you won,
A worthless Ransom for so brave a Son.
Fear the just Gods, Achilles; and on me
With pity look, think you your Father see;
Such as I am, he is, alone in this,
I can no equal have in Miseries;
Of all Mankind, most wretched and forlorn,
Bowed with such weight, as never has been born;
Reduced to kneel and pray to you, from whom
The Spring and Source of all my Sorrows come;
With Gifts, to court mine and my Country's Bane,
And kiss those hands, which have my Children slain.
He spoke. --
Now, sadness over Achilles face appears,
And viewing Priam, for his Father fears;
That, and Compassion melt him into Tears.
Then, gently with his hand he put away
Old Priam's Face, but he, still prostrate lay,
And there with tears, and sighs, afresh did moan
The untimely death, of his beloved Son.
But Passion different ways, Achilles turns,
Now, he Patroclus, now, his Father mourns:
Thus both with Lamentations filled the place,
Till Sorrow seemed to wear one common face.
THE LAMENTATIONS OF Hecuba, Andromache, and Helen, Over the Dead Body of
HECTOR. Translated from the Greek of Homer. (...). (...).
By Mr. CONGREVE.
Beginning at this Line, (...).

Connection of this with the former Translation.
Priam, at last, moves Achilles to Compassion, and after having made him
Presents of great value, obtains the Body of his Son. Mercury awakens Priam
early in the Morning, and advises him to haste away with the Body, lest
Agamemnon should be informed of his being in the Camp: He himself helps to
harness the Mules and Horses, and conveys him safely, and without noise,
Chariot and all, from among the Grecian Tents; then flies up to Heaven, leaving
Priam and Idaeus to travel on with the Body toward Troy.

Now, did the Saffron Morn her beams display,
Gilding the Face of Universal Day;
When mourning Priam to the Town returned;.
Slowly his Chariot moved, as that had mourned;
The Mules, beneath the mangled Body go,
As bearing (now) unusual weight of Woe.
To Pergamus high top, Cassandra flies,
Thence, she afar, the sad Procession spies:
Her Father and Idoeus first appear,
Then Hector's Corpse extended on a Bier;
At which, her boundless grief, loud Cries began,
And, thus lamenting, through the Streets she ran:
Hither, ye wretched Trojans, hither all!
Behold the Godlike Hector's Funeral!
If e're you went with Joy, to see him come
Adorned with Conquest and with Laurels home,
Assemble now, his Ransomed Body see,
What once was all your Joy, now, all your Misery!
She spoke, and straight the numerous Crow'd obeyed,
Nor Man, nor Woman, in the City staid;
Common consent of Grief had made 'em one,
With clamorous moan to Scoeas Gate they run,
There, the loved Body of their Hector meet,
Which they, with loud and fresh lamentings, greet.
His Reverend Mother, and his Tender Wife,
Equal in Love, in Grief had equal strife:
In Sorrow, they no Moderation knew,
But wildly wailing, to the Chariot flew;
There, strove the rolling Wheels to hold, while each
Attempted first his breathless Corpse to reach;
Aloud they beat their Breasts, and tore their Hair,
Rending around with shrieks the suffering air.
Now had the throng of People stopped the way,
Who would have there lamented all the day,
But Priam from his Chariot rose, and spoke,
Trojans enough; Truce with your Sorrows make;
Give way to me, and yield the Chariot room,
First let me bear my Hector's Body home,
Then mourn your fill. At this the Crowd gave way,
Opening a Pass, like Waves of a divided Sea.
Idoeus to the Palace drove, then laid,
With care, the Body on a Sumptuous Bed,
And round about were skilful Singers placed,
Who wept, and sighed, and in sad notes expressed
Their Moan; All, in a Chorus did agree
Of Universal, Mournful Harmony.
Andromache alone, no Notes could find,
No Music wild enough for her distracted Mind;
Her Grief, long smothered, now from silence broke,
And thus (close pressing his pale Cheeks) she spoke.
Andromache 's Lamentation.
O my lost Husband! let me ever mourn
Thy early Fate, and too untimely Urn:
In the full Pride of Youth thy Glories fade,
And thou in ashes must with them be laid.
Why is my Heart thus miserably torn!
Why am I thus distressed! why thus forlorn!
Am I that wretched thing, a Widow left?
Why do I live, who am of Life bereft!
Yet I were blessed, were I alone undone;
Alas, my Child! where can an Infant run?
Unhappy Orphan! thou in Woes art nursed;
Why were you born? -- I am with blessings cursed!
For long e're thou shall be to Manhood grown,
Wide Desolation will lay waste this Town:
Who is there now, that can Protection give,
Since He, who was her strength, no more does live?
Who, of her Reverend Matrons; will have care?
Who, save her Children from the Rage of War?
For He to all Father and Husband was,
And all are Orphans now, and Widows by his loss.
Soon will the Grecians, now, insulting come
And bear us Captives to their distant home;
I, with my Child, must the same Fortune share,
And all alike, be Prisoners of the War;
Amongst base-born Wretches, he, his Lot must have,
And be to some inhuman Lord, a Slave.
Else some avenging Greek, with Fury filled,
Or for an only Son, or Father killed
By Hector's hand, on him will vent his Rage,
And, with his Blood, his thirsty grief assuage;
For many fell by his relentless hand,
Biting that ground, which, with their Blood was stained.
Fierce was thy Father (O my Child) in War,
And never did his Foe in Battle spare;
Thence come these sufferings, which, so much have cost,
Much woe to all, but sure, to me the most.
I saw him not, when in the pangs of Death,
Nor did my Lips receive his latest breath;
Why held he not to me his dying hand?
And why received not I his last Command?
Something he would have said, had I been there,
Which I should still in sad remembrance bear;
For I could never, never words forget,
Which, Night and Day, I would with Tearsrepeat.
She spoke, and wept afresh, when all around,
A general Sigh, diffused a mournful sound.
Then, Hecuba, who long had been oppressed
With boiling Passions, in her Aged Breast,
Mingling her words with sighs and tears, begun
A Lamentation for her Darling Son.
Hecuba 's Lamentation.
Hector, my Joy, and to my Soul more dear
Than all my other numerous Issue were;
O my last Comfort, and my best beloved!
Thou, at whose fall, even Jove himself was moved
And sent a God his dread Commands to bear,
So far thou were High Heaven's peculiar care!
From fierce Achilles Chains thy Corpse was freed;
So kind a Fate was for none else decreed:
For all my other Sons, taken by his hands,
Were sold like Slaves, and shipped to Foreign Lands.
Thou too were sentenced by his barbarous Doom,
And dragged when dead, about Patroclus Tomb,
His loved Patroclus whom thy hands had slain:
And yet that Cruelty was used in vain,
Since all could not restore his life again.
Now fresh and glowing, even in death thou art,
And fair as he who fell by Phoebus Dart.
Here weeping Hecuba her Passion stayed,
And Universal moan, again was made;
When Helen's Lamentation, hers supplied,
And thus, aloud, that fatal Beauty cried.
Helen 's Lamentation.
O Hector, thou were rooted in my Heart,
No Brother there had half so large a part:
Scarce my own Lord, to whom such love I bore,
That I forsook my Home; scarce he had more!
O would I never had seen that fatal day,
Would I had perished, when I came away.
Now, twenty Years are past, since that sad hour,
When first I landed on this ruined Shore.
For Ruin (sure) and I, together came!
Yet all this time, from thee I never had blame,
Not one ungentle word, or look of Scorn,
Which I too often have from others born;
When you from their Reproach have set me free,
And kindly have reproved their Cruelty:
If by my Sisters, or the Queen reviled,
(For the good King, like you, was ever mild)
Your kindness still, has all my grief beguiled.
Ever in tears let me your loss bemoan,
Who had no Friend alive, but you alone:
All will reproach me now, where e're I pass,
And fly with Horror from my hated Face.
This said; she wept, and the vast throng was moved,
And with a general Sigh her Grief approved.
When Priam (who had heard the mourning Crowd)
Rose from his Seat, and thus he spoke aloud.
Cease your Lamentings, Trojans, for a while,
And fell down Trees to build a Funeral Pile;
Fear not an Ambush by the Grecians laid,
For with Achilles, twelve days Truce I made.
He spoke, and all obeyed as with one mind,
Chariots were brought, and Mules and Oxen joined;
Forth from the City all the People went,
And nine days space was in that labor spent:
The tenth, a most stupendous Pile they made,
And on the top the Manly Hector laid,
Then gave it fire, while all, with weeping eyes
Beheld the rolling Flames and Smoke arise.
All night they wept, and all the night it burned,
But when the Rosy Morn with day returned,
About the Pile the thronging People came,
And with black Wine quenched the remaining Flame.
His Brothers then, and Friends searched every where,
And gathering up his Snowy Bones with care,
Wept over 'em; when an Urn of Gold was brought,
Wrapped in soft purple Palls, and richly wrought,
In which the Sacred Ashes were interred;
Then over his Grave a Monument they reared.
Mean time, strong Guards were placed, and careful Spies,
To watch the Grecians, and prevent surprise.
The Work once ended, all the vast resort
Of mourning People, went to Priam's Court;
There, they refreshed their weary Limbs with rest,
Ending the Funeral with a Solemn Feast.
PARAPHRASE UPON Horace. Ode. 19. Lib. I.
By Mr. CONGREVE.
Matter soeva Cupidinum, etc.
1.
THe Tyrant Queen of soft desires,
With the resistless aid of sprightly Wine
And wanton Ease, conspires
To make my Heart its peace resign,
And re-admit Loves long rejected Fires.
For beauteous Glycera, I burn,
The Flames so long repelled with double force return:
Endless her Charms appear, and shine more bright
Than polished Marble when reflecting light;
With winning coyness, she my Soul disarms,
And when her looks are coldest, most she warms:
Her Face darts forth a thousand Rays,
Whose Luster, an unwary sight betrays,
My Eye Balls swim, and I grow giddy while I gaze.
2.
She comes! she comes! she rushes in my Veins!
At once all Venus enters and at large she reigns!
Cyprus, no more with her abode is blessed,
I am her Palace, and her Throne my Breast.
Of Savage Scythian Arms, no more I write,
Or Parthian Archers, who in flying fight
And make rough War their sport;
Such idle. Themes, no more shall move,
Nor any thing but what is of high import:
And what is of high import, but Love?
Vervain and Gums, and the green Turf prepare;
With Wine of two years old, your Cups be filled:
After our Sacrifice and Prayer,
The Goddess may incline her Heart to yield.
HORACE, Lib. II. Ode 14.
Imitated by Mr. Congreve.
Eheu Fugaces, Posthume, Posthume, Labuntur Anni, etc.
I.
AH! No, it is all in vain, believe me it is
'This Pious Artifice.
Not all these Prayers and Alms, can Buy
One Moment towered Eternity.
Eternity! that boundless Race,
Which, Time himself can never run:
(Swift, as he flies, with an unweari'd pace,)
Which, when Ten Thousand, Thousand Years are done,
Is still the same, and still to be begun.
Fixed are those Limits, which prescribe
A short Extent to the most lasting Breath,
And though thou could for Sacrifice, lay down
Millions of other Lives to save thine own;
'Twere fruitless all; not all would bribe
One Supernumerary Gasp from Death.
II.
In vain's thy Inexhausted Store
Of Wealth, in vain thy Power,
Thy Honors, Titles; all must fail,
Where Piety it self does naught avail.
The Rich, the Great, the Innocent and Just,
Must all be huddl'd to the Grave,
With the most Vile and Ignominious Slave,
And undistinguished lie in Dust.
In vain, the Fearful, flies Alarms,
In vain, he is secure, from wounds of Arms,
In vain, avoids the Faithless Seas,
And is confined to Home and Ease,
Bounding his Knowledge, to extend his Days.
In vain, are all those Arts we try,
All our Evasions, and Regret to Die:
From the Contagion of Mortality,
No Clime is pure, no Air is free:
And no Retreat
Is so Obscure, as to be hid from Fate.
III.
Thou must, alas! thou must my Friend;
(The very Hour thou now do spend
In studying to avoid, brings on thine end,)
Thou must forego the dearest Joys of Life;
Leave the warm Bosom of thy tender Wife,
And all the much loved Offspring of her Womb,
To moulder in the Cold Embraces of a Tomb.
All must be left, and all be lost;
Thy House, whose stately Structure so much cost,
Shall not afford
Room for the stinking Carcass of its Lord.
Of all thy pleasant Gardens, Grots, and Bowers,
Thy Costly Fruits, thy far-fetched Plants and Flowers:
Naught shall thou save;
Unless a sprig of Rosemary thou have,
To wither with thee in the Grave:
The rest shall live and flourish, to upbraid
Their Transitory Master Dead.
IV.
Then shall thy long-expecting Heir,
A Joyful Mourning wear:
And Riot in the waste of that Estate
Which thou have taken so much pains to get.
All thy hid Stories he shall unfold,
And set at large thy Captived Gold.
That precious Wine, condemned by thee
To Vaults and Prisons, shall again be free:
Buried alive, though now it lies,
Again't shall rise,
Again its sparkling Surface show,
And free as Element, profusely flow.
With such choice Food he shall set forth his Feasts,
That Cardinals shall wish to be his Guests;
And pampered Prelates see
Themselves outdone in Luxury.
An ODE, In imitation of HORACE, Ode IX. Lib. 1.
By Mr. CONGREVE.
Vides ut alta, etc. --
I.
BLess me, it is cold! how chill the Air!
How naked does the World appear!
But see (big with the Offspring of the North)
The teeming Clouds bring forth.
A Shower of soft and fleecy Rain,
Falls, to new cloth the Earth again.
Behold the Mountain-Tops, around,
As if with Fur of Ermins crowned:
And lo! how by degrees
The universal Mantle hides the Trees,
In hoary Flakes, which downward fly,
As if it were the Autumn of the Sky,
Whose Fall of Leaf would theirs supply:
Trembling, the Groves sustain the Weight, and bow
Like aged Limbs, which feebly go
Beneath a venerable Head of Snow.
II.
Diffusive Cold does the whole Earth invade,
Like a Disease, through all its Veins it is spread,
And each late living Stream, is num'd and dead.
Lets melt the frozen Hours, make warm the Air:
Let cheerful Fires Sol's feeble Beams repair;
Fill the large Bowl with sparkling Wine;
Let Us drink, till our own Faces shine,
Till we like Suns appear,
To light and warm the Hemisphere.
Wine can dispense to all both Light and Heat,
They are with Wine ineorporate:
That powerful Juice, with which no Cold dares mix,
Which still is fluid, and no Frost can fix:
Let that but in abundance flow,
And let it storm and thunder, hail and snow,
It Is Heavens Concern; and let it be
The Care of Heaven still for me:
These Winds, which rend the Oaks and plough the Seas;
Great Jove can, if he please,
With one commanding Nod appease.
III.
Seek not to know to Morrows Doom;
That is not ours, which is to come.
The present Moment's all our Store:
The next, should Heaven allow,
Then this will be no more:
So all our Life is but one instant Now.
Look on each Day you have past
To be a mighty Treasure won:
And lay each Moment out in haste;
We Are sure to live too fast,
And cannot live too soon.
Youth does a thousand Pleasures bring,
Which from decrepit Age will fly;
Sweets that wanton in the Bosom of the Spring.
In Winter's cold Embraces dye.
IV.
Now, Love, that everlasting Boy, invites
To revel while you may, in soft Delights:
Now, the kind Nymph yields all her Charms,
Nor yields in vain to youthful Arms.
Slowly she promises at Night to meet,
But eagerly prevents the Hour with swifter Feet.
To gloomy Groves and obscure Shades she flies,
There vails the bright Confession of her Eyes.
Unwillingly she stays,
Would more unwillingly depart,
And in soft Sighs conveys
The Whispers of her Heart.
Still she invites and still denies,
And vows she will leave you if you are rude;
Then from her Ravisher she flies,
But flies to be pursued:
If from his Sight she does her self convey,
With a feigned Laugh she will her self betray,
And cunningly instruct him in the way.
TO The Duchess, On Her Return from SCOTLAND, In the Year 1682.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
WHen Factious Rage to cruel Exile, drove
The Queen of Beauty, and the Court of Love;
The Muses drooped, with their forsaken Arts,
And the sad Cupids broke their useless Darts.
Our fruitful Plains to Wilds and Deserts turned,
Like Edens Face when banished Man it mourned:
Love was no more when Loyalty was gone,
The great Supporter of his awful Throne.
Love could no longer after Beauty stay,
But wandered Northward to the verge of day,
As if the Sun and He had lost their way.
But now the Illustrious Nymph returned again,
Brings every Grace Triumphant in her Train:
The wondering Nereids, though they raised no storm,
Foreslow'd her passage to behold her form:
Some cried a Venus, some a Thetis past:
But this was not so fair, nor that so chaste.
Far from her sight flew Faction, Strife and Pride:
And Envy did but look on her, and died.
What e're we suffered from our sullen Fate,
Her sight is purchased at an easy rate:
Three gloomy Years against this day were set:
But this one mighty Sum has cleared the Debt.
Like Joseph's Dream, but with a better doom;
The Famine past, the Plenty still to come.
For Her the weeping Heavens become serene,
For Her the Ground is clad in cheerful green:
For Her the Nightingales are taught to sing,
And Nature has for Her delayed the Spring.
The Muse resumes her long-forgotten Lays,
And Love, restored, his Ancient Realm surveys;
Recalls our Beauties, and revives our Plays.
His Wast Dominions peoples once again,
And from Her Presence dates his second Reign.
But awful Charms on her fair Forehead sit,
Dispensing what she never will admit.
Pleasing, yet cold, like Cynthia's silver Beam,
The Peoples Wonder, and the Poet's Theme.
Distempered Zeal, Sedition, cankered Hate,
No more shall vex the Church, and tear the State;
No more shall Faction civil Discords move,
Or only Discords of too tender Love:
Discord like that of Musick's various parts,
Discord that makes the harmony of Hearts,
Discord that only this dispute shall bring,
Who best shall love the Duke, and serve the King.
A SONG FOR St. CECILIA's Day, 1687.
Written by John Dryden, Esquire And Composed by Mr. John Baptist Draghi.
1.
FRom Harmony, from Heavenly Harmony
This Universal Frame began.
When Nature underneath a heap
Of jarring Atoms lay,
And could not heave her Head,
The tuneful Voice was heard from high,
Arise ye more than dead.
Then cold, and hot, and moist, and dry,
In order to their stations leap,
And MUSICK'S Power obey.
From Harmony, from Heavenly Harmony
This Universal Frame began:
From Harmony to Harmony
Through all the compass of the Notes it ran,
The Diapason closing full in Man.
2.
What Passion cannot MUSIC raise and quell!
When Jubal struck the corded Shell,
His listening Brethren stood around
And wondering, on their Faces fell
To worship that Celestial Sound.
Less than a God they thought there could not dwell
Within the hollow of that Shell
That spoke so sweetly and so well.
What Passion cannot MUSIC raise and quell!
3.
The TRUMPETS loud Clangor
Excites us to Arms
With shrill Notes of Anger
And mortal Alarms.
The double double double beat
Of the thundering DRUM
Cries, hark the Foes come;
Chare, Charge, it is too late to retreat.
4.
The soft complaining FLUTE
In dying Notes discovers
The Woes of hopeless Lovers,
Whose Dirge is whispered by the warbling LUTE.
5.
Sharp VIOLINS proclaim
Their jealous Pangs, and Desperation,
Fury, frantic Indignation,
Depth of Pains, and height of Passion,
For the fair, disdainful Dame.
6.
But oh! what Art can teach
What human Voice can reach
The sacred ORGANS praise?
Notes inspiring holy Love,
Notes that wing their Heavenly ways
To mend the Choires above.
7.
Orpheus could lead the savage race;
And Trees unrooted left their place;
Sequacious of the Lyre:
But bright CECILIA raised the wonder high'r;
When to her ORGAN, vocal Breath was given
An Angel heard, and straight appeared
Mistaking Earth for Heaven.
Grand CHORUS
As from the power of Sacred Lays
The Spheres began to move,
And sung the great Creator's praise
To all the blessed above;
So when the last and dreadful hour
This crumbling Pageant shall devour,
The TRUMPET shall be heard on high,
The Dead shall live, the Living die,
And MUSIC shall untune the Sky.
TO Mr. DRYDEN.
BY Mr. JO. ADDISON.
How long, Great Poet, shall thy Sacred Lays,
Provoke our Wonder, and transcend our Praise?
Can neither Injuries of Time, or Age,
Damp thy Poetic Heat, and quench thy Rage?
Not so thy Ovid in his Exile wrote,
Grief chilled his Breast, and checked his rising Thought;
Pensive and sad, his drooping Muse betrays
The Roman Genius in its last Decays.
Prevailing Warmth has still thy Mind possessed,
And second Youth is kindled in thy Breast.
Thou make the Beauties of the Romans known,
And England boasts of Riches not her own;
Thy Lines have heightened Virgil's Majesty,
And Horace wonders at himself in Thee.
Thou teach Persius to inform our Isle
In smoother Numbers, and a clearer Style;
And Juvenal instructed in thy Page,
Edges his Satire, and improves his Rage.
Thy Copy casts a fairer Light on all,
And still out-shines the bright Original.
Now Ovid boasts the advantage of thy Song,
And tells his Story in the British Tongue;
Thy charming Verse, and fair Translations show
How thy own Laurel first began to grow;
How wild Lycaon changed by angry Gods,
And frighted at himself, ran howling through the Woods.
O may thou still the Noble Tale prolong,
Nor Age, nor Sickness interrupt thy Song:
Then may we wondering read how Human Limbs,
Have watered Kingdoms, and dissolved in Streams;
Of those rich Fruits that on the Fertile Mould
Turned yellow by degrees, and ripened into Gold:
How some in Feathers, or a ragged Hide
Have lived a second Life, and different Natures tried.
Then will thy Ovid, thus transformed, reveal
A Nobler Change than he himself can tell.
Mag. Coll. Oxon, June 2. 1693.
TO Mr. DRYDEN, On His TRANSLATION OF PERSIUS.
BY Mr. B. HIGGONS.
AS Mariners at Sea, far off descry
Some unknown Land, and pass regardless by,
Their Charts some eminent Cape, or Mountain tell,
And all the rest but Blanks and Ciphers fill;
So we at distance gloomy Persius viewed,
But none approached, and his rough Tracts pursued,
Till mighty Dryden ventured first on Shore,
And the dark unknown Region did explore:
Dressed by thy artful Hand, he does appear
Bright and perspicuous, as he is severe:
With this rich Present you oblige our Isle,
And in his Urn make Persius Ashes smile;
By thee preserved from the ignoble Grave,
Whose Reputation will his Credit save.
If with another's Arms so keen you fight,
How will your own well-pointed Satire bite?
Our Vices, as old Rome's, are not so few,
And we do wait to be chastis'd by you;
To see unchain'd thy Generous Muse's Rage,
At once to oblige, and lash an Impious Age:
What don't the wondering World expect from thee?
Thou have more cause, a greater Persius we.
Nor is thy Talent to our Art confined,
But Universal as thy boundless Mind:
Thy knowing Muse all sorts of Men does teach,
Philosophers instructs to live, Divines to preach,
Statesmen to govern, Generals to fight,
At once Mankind you profit and delight.
Virtue so lovely dressed by thee, does shine,
So bright appears in each instructing Line:
Vast the Ideas which from thee we take,
While the dull Pulpits no impression make.
But where to Love thy softer thoughts unbend,
There all the Graces on thy Muse attend.
Thy charming Numbers do our Souls inthrall,
The Rigid melt, and we turn Lovers all;
The Cupids dance in every Ladies eye,
Who reading Love as they were acting, die.
TO Sir GODFREY KNELLER, Drawing My Lady Hide's Picture.
By Mr. B. HIGGONS.
THe Cyprian Queen drawn by Apelles's hand,
Of perfect Beauty did the Pattern stand,
But then bright Nymphs from every part of Greece,
Did all contribute to adorn the Piece,
From each a several Charm the Painter took,
(For no one Mortal so divine could look)
But, happier Kneller, Fate presents to you
In one that finished Beauty, which he drew.
But oh, take heed, for vast is the design,
And Madness were for any Hand but thine.
For mocking Thunder bold Salmoneus dies,
And it is as rash to imitate her Eyes.
SONG on a LADY Indisposed.
By Mr. B. HIGGONS.
Flavia's Eyes, like Fires suppressed,
More fiercely flame again,
Nor can her Beauty be decreast,
Nor altered by her Pain;
Those various Charms which round her play,
And do her Face adorn,
Still as they ripned fall away,
Fresh Beauties still are born:
So does it with the Lovers fare,
Who do the Dame adore,
One fit of Love killed by Despair,
Another rages more.
SONG TO A Fair, Young LADY, Going out of the TOWN In the SPRING.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
1.
ASK not the Cause, why sullen Spring
So long delays her Flowers to bear;
Why warbling Birds forget to sing,
And Winter Storms invert the Year?
Chloris is gone; and Fate provides
To make it Spring, where she resides.
2.
Chloris is gone, the Cruel Fair;
She cast not back a pitying Eye:
But left her Lover in Despair;
To sigh, to languish, and to die:
Ah, how can those fair Eyes endure
To give the Wounds they will not cure!
3.
Great God of Love, why have thou made
A Face that can all Hearts command,
That all Religions can invade,
And change the Laws of every Land?
Where thou had placed such Power before,
Thou should have made her Mercy more.
4.
When Chloris to the Temple comes,
Adoring Crowds before her fall;
She can restore the Dead from Tombs,
And every Life but mine recall.
I only am by Love designed
To be the Victim for Mankind.
A SONG.
BY My Ld. R.
WHile in Divine Panthea's Charming Eyes,
I view the naked Boy, that basking lies,
I grow a God; so blessed, so blessed am I,
With Sacred Rapture, and Immortal Joy,
But absent, if she shines no more,
And hides the Suns that I adore;
Straight, like a Wretch, despairing I
Sigh, Languish in the Shade, and die.
Oh, I were lost in endless Night,
If her bright Presence brought not Light!
Then I revive, blessed as before;
The Gods themselves can be no more.
A SONG.
BY My Ld. R.
PITY, Fair Sapho, one that dies
A Victim to your beauteous Eyes:
For while on them I dare to gaze,
Their dazzling Glories so amaze,
My Soul does melt with new Desire,
I rave, I burn with secret Fire,
And, Blessing the dear Cause, expire.
A PAEAN, or SONG OF TRIUMPH, ON THE Translation and Apotheosis OF King Charles
the Second.
By my Ld. R.
OMuse, to whom the Glory does belong,
To make Great Men live in Immortal Song!
In lofty Numbers, teach me how to sing,
To tune the Lyre, and strike the sounding String:
Good Kings are numbered with Immortal Gods,
When hence translated to the blessed Abodes;
For Princes (truly Great) can never dye,
They only lay aside Mortality:
So Charles the Gracious is not dead,
But to his Kindred Stars is fled;
There happy, and Supremely blessed,
With Mighty Jove, his Sire, does feast.
See how with Majesty Divine,
And dazzling Glory, his bright Temples shine:
He now an equal God, by Gods is Crowned,
While Golden Harps and Trumpets sound,
And to his Health the Nectar-Bowl goes round:
Celestial Concerts Io-Poean sing,
And Heavens grand Chorus makes Olympus ring.
OUT OF HORACE.
BY My Ld. R.
HE. WHile I was Monarch of your Heart,
Crowned with a Love, where none had part,
Each Mortal did with Envy die,
No God but wished, that he were I.

SHE. While you adored no Charms but mine,
And vowed that they did all outshine;
More Celebrated was my Name,
Than that of the bright Grecian Dame.

HE. Chloe's the Saint that I implore,
Chloe's the Goddess I adore;
For whom to die the Gods I prayed,
If Fates would spare the Charming Maid.

SHE. Amyntas is my Lover's Name,
For whom I burn with mutual Flame;
For whom I twice would die with Joy,
If Fates would spare the Charming Boy.

HE. If I once more should wear your Chain,
And take my Lydia back again;
If banish Chloe from my Breast,
That you may there for ever rest.

SHE. Tho he is Charming as a God,
Serene and Gay, Divinely good,
You rough as Billows raging high,
With you I choose to live, and die,

TO A LADY, WHO Raffling for the King of France 's Picture, flung the highest
Chances on the Dice.
BY Mr. B. HIGGONS.
FOrtune exerts her utmost power for you,
Nor could she more for her own Louis do;
She thought some mighty Kingdom was the Stake,
And did this throw for the great Monarch make;
But as all Princes at far distance woe,
First send their Image where their Heart is due:
So now, thrice happy Nymph, would you resort,
Where Fate invites you, to the Gallick Court:
That lucky Genius which the Picture gave,
Would make the great Original your Slave;
He, like the Piece, can only be your Prize,
Who never yields, but to the brightest Eyes.
ON My Lady SANDWICH's Being stayed in TOWN BY THE Immoderate Rain.
BY Mr. B. HIGGONS.
THE Charming Sandwich would from Cities fly,
While at her Feet adoring Princes lie;
And all her Nobler Conquests would forego,
Less glorious Slaves, and Peasants to subdue:
Thus Conquering Monarchs who have Kingdoms won,
And all their Neighboring States with Arms o're-run;
For want of work, their Armies to employ,
Remote and Salvage Provinces destroy:
But Heaven in pity weeps, while we complain,
Or else our tears exhaled, drop down in Rain.
The darkn'd Sun does scarce through Clouds appear,
And Tempests rage to keep our Wishes here.
The Floods free passage to her Scorn deny,
And Nature disobeys her Cruelty.
But could the Waves rise equal to our Flame,
We'd drown the World, to stop the flying Dame.
OVID's Love-Elegies. BOOK I. ELEG. VII. To his Mistress whom he had beaten.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire
COme, if you are Friends, and let these hands be bound,
Which could with impious Rage a Mistress wound;
What more did Ajax in his fury do?
When all the Sacred grazing Herd he slew;
Or Orestes.
He who spared not her who gave him breath;
So ill the Son revenged his Father's death!
Then I had broke the most Religious Ties
Both to my Parents, and the Deities:
I tore (oh Heavens) her finely braided Hair;
How charming then looked the disordered Fair!
So Atalanta in her Chase is drawn
Where the Arcadian Beasts her Empire own:
So Ariadne, left upon the Shore,
Does all alone her lost Estate deplore,
Curses the Winds and Seas which perjured Theseus bore:
Who would not then have railed and talked aloud?
(Which to the helpless Sex might be allowed;)
She only did upbraid me with her Eye,
Whose speaking Tears did want of words supply,
'Twas but too much (ye Gods) to make me die:
O that some merciful Superior Power
Had struck me lame before that fatal hour,
And not have suffered me to pierce my Heart
So deeply, in the best and tenderest part;
To make a Lady that Subjection own,
Which is not to the meanest Roman known;
'Twas Diomed, who first a Goddess struck,
I from his hand that cursed Example took;
But he was far less Criminal than I,
I was a Lover, He an Enemy:
March like a Conqueror in Triumph now,
With Lawrel-wreaths encompassing your brow,
And render to the mighty Gods your Vow;
So, as you pass, the attending gazing Crowd,
By their applause shall speak your Courage loud;
Let your sad Captive in the Front appear
With streaming Cheeks, and with dishevelled Hair,
Through all her Griefand Wounds most eminently fair.
Such Lips were formed for kinder wounds than these,
Wounds made by Lovers furious Ecstasies:
Though like a Torrent I was hurried on,
A Slave to Passion, which I could not shun;
I might have only pierced her tender Ear
With threatening Language, such as Virgins fear:
Fear having chilled the current of her blood,
Pale as a Parian Marble Statue stood
The senseless Frame -- Then shook her trembling Knees,
As when the Winds do whistle through the Trees,
Or softly curl the surface of the Seas:
So slender Rushes, easily inclined
By every blast, are ruffled by the Wind;
Tears, which suspense did for a while restrain,
Gushed forth, and down her Cheeks the Deluge ran,
As when the Sun does by a powerful Beam
Dissolve the Frost, it runs into a Stream:
The lamentable Object struck me dead,
And tears of Blood to quench those tears I shed:
Thrice at her feet the prostrate Suppliant fell,
And thrice did she repulse the Criminal:
What would I not, your anger to abate,
Redeem your favor, -- or remove your hate?
To your revenge no means or method spare;
Revenge, alas! is easy to the Fair:
But lest some eloquent remaining Sign
Should still reproach me with so black a Crime,
Let no disorder in your Face appear,
From your bright eyes let there not 'scape a tear,
And once again compose your scattered hair.
OVID's Love-Elegies. BOOK I. ELEG. VIII. Of Love and War.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire.
TRust me, my Atticus, in Love are Wars;
And Cupid has his Camp, as well as Mars:
The Age that is fit for War best suits with Love,
The old in both unserviceable prove,
Infirm in War, and impotent in Love:
The Soldiers which a General does require
Are such as Ladies would in Bed desire:
Who, but a Soldier and a Lover, can
Bear the Night's cold in showers of Hail and Rain?
One in continual Watch his station keeps,
Or on the Earth in broken slumbers sleeps;
The other takes his still repeated round
By's Mistress's House -- then lodges on the ground:
The Soldiers long and tedious Marches make:
The active Lover, for his Mistress sake,
Will any toils and dangers undergo;
Not rugged Mountains, nor untrodden Snow,
Rivers by Floods increast, no raging Sea,
Nor adverse Winds can ever make him stay,
When Love commands, and Beauty leads the way.
Soldiers and Lovers, with a careful Eye,
Observe the motions of the Enemy:
One to the Walls makes his approach in form,
Pushes the Siege, and takes the Town by Storm;
The other lays his close to Celia's Fort,
Presses his point, and gains the wished for Port:
As Soldiers, when the Foe securely lies
In Sleep and Wine dissolved, the Camp surprise
So when the jealous to their rest remove,
And all is hushed, -- the others steal to Love:
Uncertain is the State of Love and War,
The vanquished rally, and their loss repair,
Regain the ground, and rout the Conqueror.
You then, who think that Love's an idle fit,
Know, that it is the exercise of Wit:
In flames of Love the fierce Achilles burns,
And quitting Arms, absent Briseis mourns:
From the Embraces of Andromache
Went Hector armed for War and Victory:
As Agamemnon saw Cassandra pass
With Hair dishevelled, and disordered Dress,
H'admir'd the Beauties of the Prophetess:
The God of War was caught in the act of Love;
A Story known to all the Court above:
Once did I pass my hours in sloth and ease,
Cool Shades, and Beds of Down could only please;
When a commanding Beauty raised my mind,
I left all little trifling thoughts behind,
And to her Service all my Heart refign'd:
Since, like an active Soldier, have I spent
My time, in toils of War, in Beauties Tent;
And for so sweet a pay all dangers underwent:
You see, my Atticus, by what I prove,
Who would not live in Idleness, -- must love.
OVID's Love-Elegies. BOOK I. ELEG. X. To his Mercenary Mistress.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire.
As Helen, when to Troy she did escape,
And Greeks with Fire and Sword pursued the Rape;
As Leda, when the God his Love trick played,
Under the Figure of a Swan, betrayed;
As Amymone, wandering over the Plains,
That rural Fair, admired by all the Swains;
So fair was You, so much in Love was I,
I ran to the extremes of Jealousy,
Feared Eagles, Bulls, and every shape that Jove
Had e're transformed himself into, for Love:
Now free from Love or Fears, my Mind's at ease,
Nor does that Beauty any longer please:
This humor, you may say, is wondrous strange,
And ask the reason of this sudden change;
Once, when your undesigning Heart was kind,
Fair was your Face, and perfect was your Mind;
But now the slighter Beauties of the Skin
Do yield to the prevailing Vice within:
Love is a Child, who uses no deceit,
Nor wears he Clothes to cover any cheat,
Accepts no bribes; -- why for a wretched Fee
Should you then prostitute his Deity?
Make Venus to her Son serve every day,
And drudge in the meanest Offices, for pay?
They Are softly bred, and would not work, but play:
The Whore, to whom each Purchaser has right,
Forces for gain decaying appetite,
Yet there is a Bawd to whom the Spoils accrue;
She fain would shun what you by choice pursue:
These sordid ways the very Brutes reprove,
Who by their practice teach you how to love;
The lusty Bull his Female does enjoy,
Nor can a bribe their mutual Loves destroy:
Woman alone rejoices in the Spoil,
And makes advantages of every smile,
Rates at her pleasure the high-priz'd delight,
And Men must purchase every happy night;
Yet does she meet him with as much desire,
And no less fierce and raging is the fire;
Since with an equal pace our passions move,
Why should one buy, and the other sell in Love?
Why, since the pleasures mutual, should it be
To you advantage, and a loss to me?
The way is infamous a Witness takes,
Who of his Perjury a living makes;
So for the raising of a low Estate
To set your Body at a common rate!
Can you to such mean ends as these employ
The gifts by Nature's bounty you enjoy?
Grant but the Blessing freely, and you may
An everlasting Obligation lay;
But where is the mighty favor, when we pay?
Forbear, ye fair, to make a Trade of Love,
The Wealth that is got so ill can never improve;
Justly the Tarpeia.
Vestal by their Armor fell,
Who would her Honor for their Bracelets sell:
The rich your Wishes are obliged to meet,
And lay their frequent Presents at your feet;
Alcinous Orchards Fruit enough can spare,
From the full Vines the Grapes in clusters tear,
And ease the o're-loaded boughs which numerous
Apples bear:
Let Faith and Love supply my little Store,
The Will shall never be wanting to the Power:
Verse is the greatest Tribute I can bring;
Your Charms I could to future Ages sing;
Jewels and Gold will perish, -- but the Fame
The Muses give shall ever be the same:
You check my generous passion when you crave,
Not that I Am loath to part with what I have,
Had you not asked me, I had freely gave.
OVID's Love-Elegies. BOOK I. ELEG. XV. Of the Immortality of the Muses.
Inscribed to Mr. DRYDEN.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire.
THY well known malice, fretful Envy, cease,
Nor tax the Muse and me --
With a weak Genius, and inglorious ease;
What -- I should then, whilst Youth does vigor yield,
Pursue the dusty Glories of the Field:
Our Father's praise! or bend my utmost care
To the dull noise of the litigious Bar;
No! these must die; -- but the most noble Prize,
That which alone can Man immortalize,
Must from the Muses Harmony arise:
Homer shall live, whilst Tenedos shall stand,
Or Ida's top survey the Neighboring Strand,
Whilst Simois Streams along the Valleys glide,
And in the Sea discharge their rapid tide: --
Hesiod shall live, till Corn is not in use,
Till the plump Grape denies its wealthy juice: --
The World Callimachus shall ever prize,
For what his Fancy wants, his Art supplies: --
The Tragedies of Mighty Sophocles
Shall in no Age their just applauses miss: --
So well Aratus of the Planets wrote,
That Sun and Moon must fail when he is forgot: --
When crafty Davus a hard Father cheats
To serve the Son, -- when easy Cully treats
The jilting Whore and Bawd, the figures show,
The Comic from Menander's Model drew: --
Ennius, whose Muse by Nature was designed
Complete, had Art with bounteous Nature joined; --
And Tragic Accius, of Style sublime,
And weighty words, shall stand the shock of time: --
Whilst Jason's Golden Fleece shall have a Name,
Who shall a Stranger be to Varro's Fame? --
Lucretius Nature's Causes did rehearse
In such a lofty and commanding Verse,
As shall remain till that one fatal day,
Which must the World it self in ruins lay: --
Virgil, thy Works Divine shall Patterns stand
For each succeeding Age's copying Hand,
Whilst Rome shall all its conquered World command: --
Whilst Capid shall be armed with Bow and Dart,
And flaming Shafts shall pierce the Lovers Heart;
Shall we, O sweet Tibullus, love each line
That comes from that soft moving Pen of thine: --
Both East and West resound with Gallus Fame,
Gallus and his Lycoris are their Theme: --
Statues and Tombs with Age consume and die;
It Is Verse alone has Immortality:
To Verse must yield the greatest acts of Kings;
Riches and Empire are but empty things,
Without the lasting Fame a Poet brings:
Let vulgar Spirits trivial Blessings choose;
May thy Castalian Spring inspire my Muse,
O God of Wit! and Myrtles wreath my hair;
Then the too fearful Lover may repair
To what I write, to free his Breast from care:
As living worth Detraction still attends,
Which after death a juster Fame defends;
So I shall my last Funeral flame survive,
And in my better part for ever live.
OVID's Love-Elegies. BOOK III. ELEG. II. To his Mistress at the Horse-Race.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire.
NOT in the Circus do I sit to view
The running Horses, but to gaze on you;
Near you I choose an advantageous place,
And whilst your eyes are fixed upon the Race,
Mine are on you -- Thus do we feast our sight,
Each alike pleased with Objects of delight;
In softest whispers I my Passion move,
You of the Rider talk, but I of Love.
When, to please you, I straight my Subject quit,
And change my Wishes to your Favorite;
Oh might I ride, and be so much your care,
I Would start with courage from the Barrier,
And with a swift short compass brush the Goal --
Unless the sight of you my course restrains,
And makes my hands forgo the loosned Reins;
As Pelops gazed on Hippodamia's face,
Till he had almost lost the important Race;
Yet he his Mistress by her Favor won;
So may our Prize assist us when we run.
What mean these starts? you must not, cannot remove;
This kind auspicious place was framed for Love.
I fear you're crowded, -- Gentlemen, forbear,
Pray let your Arms and Knees the Lady spare;
Madam, your Gown hangs down -- nay, pray let me --
Oh Heavens! what fine, what curious Legs I see!
Sure, who Diana in a Forest drew,
Coppi'd in this, the gracefull'st part from you;
Such Atalant discovering as she ran,
What rapturous Wishes seized Minalion.
I burned and raged before -- what then are these,
But Flames on Flames, and Waters to the Seas?
By these a thousand other Charms are guest,
Which are so advantageously suppressed.
Oh for some air! this scorching heat remove,
Your Fan would do it -- but it is the heat of Love.
But now the Pomp appears, the Sacred throng,
Command applauses from the Heart and Tongue;
First Victory with expanded Wings does move,
Be near (O Goddess!) to assist my Love;
To Mars let Warriors Acclamations raise,
The Merchants Tongues resound with Neptune's Praise;
Whilst I, whom neither Seas nor Arms invite,
In Love alone, the fruit of Peace delight;
To their Apollo let the Prophets pray,
And Hunters to Diana Homage pay,
Let the Mechanics to Minerva vow,
Rusticks to Ceres and to Bacchus bow;
Whilst I devote my self to thee alone,
Kind Venus, and the powerful God thy Son;
O be propitious to my Enterprise,
Inform with all thy softness these fair Eyes,
And to Love's Cause her gentle Breast incline;
She grants, and has confirmed it with a Sign;
Do you assure it too, you who are to me;
(With Venus leave) the mightier Deity.
By all these Heavenly Witnesses, to you
Will I be ever faithful, ever true.
Now in the open Cirque the Game's begun,
The Praetor gives the signal, now they run;
I see which way your Wishes are inclined,
To him a certain Conquest is designed,
For even the Horses seem to know your mind.
He takes too large a compass to come in,
And lets his Adversary get between;
Recall him, Romans, for a second heat,
And clear the Course, --
Now see your ground you better do maintain,
This Lady's Favor and your Fame regain;
The Prize is his, -- As yours successful prove,
So let my Wishes, which are all for Love;
I Am yet to conquer, and your Heart's the Prize;
Something she promised with her sparkling Eyes,
And smiled; -- Enough, did I transported cry,
The rest I Will leave to Opportunity.
OVID's Love-Elegies. BOOK III. ELEG. III. Of his Perjured Mistress.
By Henry Cromwell, Esquire.
CAn there be Gods? -- has she not falsely swore?
Yet is the Beauty that she was before!
The curious Tresses of her dangling Hair,
As long and graceful still as e're they were;
That same inimitable White and Red,
Which over her Face was so distinctly spread,
The Roses and the Lillies keep their place,
And every Feature still as justly grace,
Her sparkling Eyes their Luster still retain,
That form, that perfect shape does still remain,
As if she never had sinned: -- And Heaven, ('it is plain)
Suffering the fairer Sex to break their Vows,
To the Superior Power of Beauty bows.
T'inforce my credit to her Perjuries,
Often would she swear by those persuasive Eyes;
As if that Charm, had been too weak to move,
She Has added mine; -- tell me, ye Powers above,
Why all this pain? why are these guiltless Eyes,
For her Offense the attoning Sacrifice?
Was It not enough Andromeda has died,
An Expiation for her Mother's pride?
Is It not enough that unconcerned you see,
(Vain Witnesses for Truth, for Faith, for me,)
Such an affront put on Divinity?
Yet no Revenge the daring Crime pursue,
But the deceived must be her Victim too.
Either the Gods are empty Notions, crept
Into the minds of Dreamers as they slept,
In vain are feared, are but the tricks of Law,
To keep the foolish cred'lous World in awe;
Or, if there be a God, he loves the Fair,
And all things at their sole disposal are.
For us are all the Instruments of War
Designed, the Sword of Mars, and Pallas Spear,
Against us alone Apollo's Bows are bent,
And at our Heads Jove's brandished Thunder sent;
Yet of the Ladies, oh! how fond are they!
Dare not the Injuries, they receive, repay,
But those, who ought to fear 'em, they obey.
Jove to his Votaries is most severe,
Temples nor Altars does his Lightning spare,
Obliging Semele in Flames expires,
But those who merit, can escape the Fires;
Is this the justice of your Powers Divine?
Who then will offer Incense at a Shrine?
Why do we thus reproach the Deities?
Have they not Hearts? -- and surely they have Eyes,
Nay had I been a God, I had believed
The lovely Criminals, and been deceived,
Had waved the Judgments to their Perj'ries due,
And sworn my self that all they spoke was true;
Since then the Gods such ample Gifts bestow,
As make you absolute over Men below;
Pray let me find some Mercy in your Reign;
Or spare at least your Lover's Eyes from pain.
TO THE Lady CASTLEMAIN, UPON Her encouraging his first Play.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
AS Seamen, Shipwrack'd on some happy Shore,
Discover Wealth in Lands unknown before;
And, what their Art had labored long in vain,
By their Misfortunes happily obtain;
So my much envied Muse, by storms long tossed,
Is thrown upon your hospitable Coast,
And finds more favor by her ill success,
Than she could hope for by her Happiness.
Once Cato's Virtue did the Gods oppose;
While they the Victor, He the Vanquished chose:
But you have done what Cato could not do,
To choose the Vanquished, and restore him too.
Let others still Triumph, and gain their Cause
By their Deserts, or by the World's Applause;
Let Merit Crowns, and Justice Laurels give,
But let me happy by your Pity live.
True Poets empty Fame, and Praise despise,
Fame is the Trumpet, but your Smile the Prize:
You sit above, and see vain Men below
Contend, for what you only can bestow:
But those great actions, others do by chance,
Are, like your Beauty, your Inheritance:
So great a Soul, such sweetness joined in one,
Could only spring from Noble Grandison:
You, like the Stars, not by Reflection bright,
Are born to your own Heaven, and your own light;
Like them are good, but from a Nobler Cause,
From your own Knowledge, not from Nature's Laws.
Your Power you never use, but for Defense,
To guard your own, or others Innocence:
Your Foes are such, as they, not you, have made,
And Virtue may repel, though not invade.
Such Courage did the Ancient Heroes show,
Who, when they might prevent, would wait the blow:
With such assurance as they meant to say,
We will overcome, but scorn the safest way.
What further fear of danger can there be,
Beauty, which captives all things, sets me free?
Posterity will judge by my success,
I had the Grecian Poet's happiness,
Who, waving Plots, found out a better way,
Some God descended, and preserved the Play.
When first the Triumphs of your Sex were sung
By those old Poets, Beauty was but young,
And few admired the native Red and White,
Till Poets dressed them up, to charm the fight;
So Beauty took on trust, and did engage
For Sums of Praises, till she came to Age.
But this long growing Debt to Poetry
You justly (Madam) have discharged to me,
When your Applause and Favor did infuse
New life to my condemned and dying Muse.
PROLOGUE TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, 1681.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
THE famed Italian Muse, whose Rhymes advance
Orlando, and the Paladins of France,
Records, that when our Wit and Sense is flown,
It Is lodged within the Circle of the Moon
In Earthen Jars, which one, who thither soared,
Set to his Nose, snufft up, and was restored.
What e're the Story be, the Moral's true,
The Wit we lost in Town, we find in you.
Our Poets their fled Parts may draw from hence,
And fill their windy Heads with sober Sense.
When London Votes with Southwark's disagree,
Here they may find their long lost Loyalty.
Here busy Senates, to the old Cause inclined,
May snuff the Votes their Fellows left behind:
Your Country Neighbors, when their Grain grows dear,
May come and find their last Provision here:
Whereas we cannot much lament our loss,
Who neither carried back, nor brought one Cross;
We looked what Representatives would bring,
But they helped us, just as they did the King.
Yet we despair not, for we now lay forth
The Sybill's Books, to those who know their worth:
And tho the first was Sacrificed before,
These Volumes doubly will the price restore.
Our Poet bade us hope this Grace to find,
To whom by long Prescription you are kind.
He, whose undaunted Muse, with Loyal Rage,
Has never spared the Vices of the Age,
Here finding nothing that his Spleen can raise,
Is forced to turn his Satire into Praise.
PROLOGUE.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
GAllants, a bashful Poet bids me say
He Is come to lose his Maidenhead to day.
Be not too fierce, for he is but green of Age;
And never, till now, debauched upon the Stage.
He wants the suffering part of Resolution;
And comes with blushes to his Execution.
E're you deflow'r his Muse, he hopes the Pit
Will make some Settlement upon his Wit.
Promise him well, before the Play begin;
For he would fain be cozened into Sin.
It Is not but that he knows you mean to fail;
But, if you leave him after being frail,
He Will have, at least, a fair pretense to rail;
To call you base, and swear you used him ill,
And put you in the new Deserters Bill:
Lord, what a Troop of perjured Men we see;
Enough to fill another Mercury!
But this the Ladies may with patience brook:
Their's are not the first Colors you forsook!
He would be loath the Beauties to offend;
But, if he should, he is not too old to mend.
He Is a young Plant, in his first Year of bearing,
But his Friend swears, he will be worth the reering.
His gloss is still upon him: tho it is true
He Is yet unripe, yet take him for the blue.
You think an Apricot half green is best;
There Is sweet and sour: and one side good at least.
Mango's and Limes, whose nourishment is little,
Though not for Food, are yet preserved for Pickle.
So this green Writer, may pretend, at least,
To whet your Stomachs for a better Feast.
He makes this difference in the Sexes too,
He sells to Men, he gives himself to you.
To both, he would contribute some delight;
A mere Poetical Hermaphrodite.
Thus he is equipped, both to be wooed, and woo;
With Arms offensive, and defensive too;
It Is hard, he thinks, if neither part will do.
CONSIDERATIONS ON THE Eighty Eighth Psalm.
BY Mr. PRIOR.
Heavy, O Lord, on me thy Judgments lie,
And cursed I am; for God neglects my cry.
O Lord, in Darkness and Despair I groan;
And every place is Hell; for God is gone.
O Lord, arise, and let thy Beams control
Those horrid Clouds, that press my frighted Soul:
O rise, and save me from Eternal Night,
Thou that art the God of Light.
Downward I hasten to my destined place;
There none obtain thy Aid, none sing thy Praise.
Soon I shall lie in Death's deep Ocean drowned:
Is Mercy there; is sweet Forgiveness found?
O save me yet, whilst on the brink I stand;
Rebuke the Storm, and set me safe to Land.
O make my Longings and thy Mercy sure,
Thou that art the God of Power.
Behold the wearied Prodigal is come
To Thee, his Hope, his Harbor, and his Home:
No Father he could find, no Friend abroad,
Deprived of Joy, and destitute of God.
O let thy Terrors and his Anguish end!
Be thou his Father, and be thou his Friend:
Receive the Son thou did so long reprove,
Thou that art the God of Love.
Veni Creator Spiritus, Translated in PARAPHRASE.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
CReator Spirit, by whose aid
The World's Foundations first were laid,
Come visit every pious Mind;
Come pour thy Joys on Human Kind:
From Sin, and Sorrow set us free;
And make thy Temples worthy Thee,
O, Source of uncreated Light,
The Father's promised Paraclite!
Thrice Holy Fount, thrice Holy Fire,
Our Hearts with Heavenly Love inspire;
Come, and thy Sacred Unction bring
To Sanctify us, while we sing!
Plenteous of Grace, descend from high,
Rich in thy sev'n-fold Energy!
Thou strength of his Almighty Hand,
Whose Power does Heaven and Earth command:
Proceeding Spirit, our Defense,
Who do the Gift of Tongues dispense,
And crown'st thy Gift, with Eloquence!
Refine and purge our Earthy Parts;
But, oh, inflame and fire our Hearts!
Our Frailties help, our Vice control;
Submit the Senses to the Soul;
And when Rebellious they are grown,
Then, lay thy hand, and hold 'em down.
Chase from our Minds the Infernal Foe;
And Peace, the fruit of Love, bestow:
And, lest our Feet should step astray,
Protect, and guide us in the way.
Make us Eternal Truths receive,
And practice, all that we believe:
Give us thy self, that we may see
The Father and the Son, by thee.
Immortal Honor, endless Fame
Attend the Almighty Father's Name:
The Savior Son, be glorified,
Who for lost Man's Redemption died:
And equal Adoration be
Eternal Paraclete, to thee.
The CURSE of BABYLON. PARAPHRASED From the Thirteenth Chapter OF ISAIA. A
Pindarique ODE.
BY THO. YALDEN.
1.
NOw let the fatal Banner be displayed!
Upon some lofty Mountain's top,
Go set the dreadful Standard up!
And all around the Hills, the bloody Signals spread.
Forlo, the numerous Hosts of Heaven appear!
Th'imbattl'd Legions of the Sky,
With all their dread Artillery,
Draw forth in bright Array, and muster in the Air.
Why do the Mountains tremble with the noise!
And Valleys echo back their Voice:
The Hills, tumultuous grow and loud,
The Hills that groan beneath the gathering Multitude.
Wide as the Poles of Heavens extent,
So far's the dreadful Summons sent:
Kingdoms, and Nations, at his Call appear,
For even the Lord of Hosts commands in Person there.
2.
Start from thy Lethargy, thou drowsy Land,
Awake, and hear His dread Command!
Thy black tempestuous Day comes louring on,
O fatal Light! O inauspicious Hour!
Was ever such a Day before!
So stained with Blood, by marks of Vengeance
Nature shall from her steady Course remove,
The well-fix'd Earth be from its Basis rent,
Convulsions shake the Firmament,
Horror seize all below, Confusion reign above.
The Stars of Heaven shall sicken at the sight,
Nor shall the Planets yield their light:
But from the wretched Object fly,
And like extinguished Tapers, quit the darkened Sky.
The rising Sun as he was conscious too,
As he the fatal business knew:
A deep, a bloody Red shall stain,
And at his early dawn shall set in Night again.
3.
To the destroying Sword I Have said, Go forth,
Go fully execute my Wrath!
Command my Hosts, my willing Armies lead,
For this Rebellious Land and all therein shall bleed.
They shall not grieve me more, no more transgress,
I will consume the stubborn Race:
Yet Brutes and Salvages I justly spare,
Useless is all my Vengeance there,
Ungrateful Man's the greater Monster far.
On guiltless Beasts I will the Land bestow,
To them The Inheritance shall go,
Those elder Brothers now, shall Lord it here below.
And if some poor remains escape behind,
Some Relicts left of lost Mankind:
The astonished Herds shall in their Cities cry,
When they behold a Man, Lo there is a Prodigy!
4.
The Medes I call to my assistance here,
A People that delight in War:
A generous Race of Men, a Nation free
From Vicious Ease, and Persian Luxury.
Silver is despicable in their Eyes,
Contemned the useless Metal lies:
Their conquering Iron they prefer before
The finest Gold, even Ophir's tempting Oar.
By these the Land shall be subdued,
Abroad their Bows shall overcome,
Their Swords and Flames destroy at home,
For neither Sex nor Age shall be exempt from Blood.
The Nobles, and the Princes of thy State,
Shall on the Victor's Triumphs wait:
And those that from the Battle fled,
Shall be with Chains oppressed, in cruel Bondage led.
5.
I Will visit their Distress with Plagues and Miseries,
The throws that Women's Labors wait,
Convulsive Pangs, and bloody Sweat,
Their Beauty shall consume, and vital Spirits seize.
The ravished Virgins shall be born away,
And their dishonored Wives be led,
To the insulting Victor's Bed,
To brutal Lusts exposed, to Fury left a Prey.
Nor shall the teeming Womb afford
Its forming Births a Refuge from the Sword:
The Sword, that shall their pangs increase,
And all the throws of Travel, curse with Barrenness.
The Infants shall expire with their first breath
And only live in pangs of death:
Live, but with early cries to curse the Light,
And at the dawn of Life, set in Eternal Night.
6.
Even Babylon adorned with every grace,
The Beauty of the Universe:
Glory of Nations! the Caldeans pride,
And joy of all the admiring World beside.
Thou Babylon! before whose Throne
The Empires of the Earth fall down:
The prostrate Nations Homage pay,
And Vassal Princes of the World obey.
Thou that with Empire art exalted now,
Shall in the dust be trampled low:
Abject and low upon the Earth be laid,
And deep in ruins hide thy ignominious Head.
Thy strong amazing Walls, whose impious height
The Clouds conceal from human sight:
That proudly now their polished Turrets rear,
Which bright as Neighboring Stars appear,
Diffusing Glories round the inlightn'd Air;
In flames shall downwards to their Center fly,
And deep within the Earth as their Foundations lie.
7.
Thy beauteous Palaces (though now thy Pride!)
Shall be in heaps of Ashes hid:
In vast surprising heaps shall lie,
And even their ruins bear the Pomp of Majesty.
No bold Inhabitant shall dare,
Thy razed Foundations to repair:
No pitying hand exalt thy abject State;
No! to succeeding Times thou must remain,
An horrid exemplary Scene,
And lie from Age to Age, ruined and desolate.
Thy falls decreed, (amazing turn of Fate!)
Low as Gomorrah's wretched State:
Thou Babylon shall be like Sodom cursed,
Destroyed by flames from Heaven, and thy more burning Lust.
8.
The day's at hand, when in thy sruitful Soil,
No Labourer shall reap, no Mower toil:
His Tent the wandering Arab shall not spread,
Nor make thy cursed Ground his Bed;
Though faint with Travel, though oppressed with thirst,
He to his drooping Herds shall cry aloud,
Taste not of that embittered Flood,
Taste not Euphrates Streams, they are poisonous all and cursed.
The Shepherd to his wandering Flocks shall say,
When over thy Battlements they stray:
When in thy Palaces they graze,
Ah fly unhappy Flocks! fly this infectious place.
Whilst the sad Traveller that passes on,
Shall ask, lo where is Babylon!
And when he has thy small remainder found,
Shall say I Will fly from hence, it is sure accursed ground.
9.
Then shall the Savages and Beasts of Prey,
From their deserted Mountains haste away;
Every obscene and vulger Beast,
Shall be to Babylon a Guest:
Her Marble Roofs, and every Cedar Rome,
Shall Dens, and Caves of State to Nobler Brutes become.
Thy Courts of Justice, and Tribunals too,
(O Irony to call them so!)
There, where the Tyrant and Oppressor bore
The Spoils of Innocence and Blood before;
There shall the Wolf and Savage Tiger meet,
And griping Vulture shall appear in State,
There Birds of prey shall rule, and ravenous Beasts be great.
Those uncorrupted shall remain,
Those shall alone their genuine use retain,
There Violence shall thrive, Rapine and Fraud shall reign.
Then shall the melancholy Satyrs groan,
Over their lamented Babylon;
And Ghosts that glide with horror by,
To view where their unbury'd Bodies lie;
With doleful cries shall fill the Air,
And with amazement strike the affrighted Traveller.
There the obscener Birds of Night,
Birds that in gloomy Shades delight,
Shall solitude enjoy, live undisturbed by light.
All the ill Omens of the Air,
Shall scream their loud presages there.
But let them all their dire Predictions tell,
Secure in ills, and fortified with woe,
Heaven shall in vain its future vengeance show:
For Thou art happily insensible,
Beneath the reach of Miseries fell,
Thou need'st no desolation dread, no greater Curses fear.
Out of Horace, Lib. II. Ode 3.
AEquam Memento --
I.
BE calm, my Delius, and serene,
However Fortune change the Scene!
In thy most dejected state,
Sink not underneath the weight;
Nor yet, when happy Days begin,
And the full Tide comes rolling in,
Let a fierce unruly Joy
The settled quiet of thy Mind destroy:
However Fortune change the Scene,
Be calm, my Delius, and serene!
II.
Be thy Lot good, or be it ill,
Life ebbs out at the same rate still:
Whether with busy Cares oppressed,
You wear the sullen time away;
Or whether to sweet Ease and Rest,
You sometimes give a day;
Carelessly laid,
Underneath a friendly Shade
By Pines, and Poplars, mixed embraces made;
Near a River's sliding Stream,
Fettered in Sleep, blessed with a Golden Dream.
III.
Here, here, in this much envied state,
Let every Blessing on thee wait;
Bid the Syrian Nard be brought,
Bid the Hidden Wine be sought,
And let the Roses short-lived Flower,
The smiling Daughter of an Hour,
Flourish on thy Brow:
Enjoy the very, very now!
While the good Hand of Life is in,
While yet the Fatal Sisters spin.
IV.
A little hence my Friend, and Thou
Must into other hands resign
Thy Gardens and thy Parks, and all that now
Bears the pleasing name of Thine!
Thy Meadows, by whose planted Tides,
Silver Tyber gently glides!
Thy pleasant Houses; all must go,
The Gold that is hoarded in 'em too;
A jolly Heir shall set it free,
And give the Imprisoned Monarchs Liberty.
V.
Nor matters it, what Figure here,
Thou do among thy Fellow Mortals bear;
How thou were born, or how begot;
Impartial Death matters it not:
With what Titles Thou do shine,
Or who was First of all thy Line:
Life's vain amusements! amidst which we dwell;
Not weighed, nor understood, by the grim God of
Hell!
VI.
In the Same Road (alas!) All Travel on!
By All alike, the Same sad Journey must be gone!
Our blended Lots together lie,
Mingled in One common Urn;
Sooner or Later out they fly:
The fatal Boat then wafts us to the Shore,
Whence we never shall return,
Never! -- never more!
The GROVE.
SEe how Damon's Age appears,
This Grove declares his fading years:
For this he planted once, and eat
The Maiden Fruits of what he set.
Young It was then, like him; but now,
Sapless, and old, is every Bow.
Thus, my Lesbia, will it be
In time to come with Thee, and Me.
Come then, in Love, and youthful play
Let Us pass the smiling Hours away,
Before this tender Amorous Mark
Grow wide upon it is fading Bark;
And show, like Damon's Grove, that We
Are Old, and Gray, as well as He.
Love but one.
1.
SEE these two little Brooks that slowly creep,
In Snaky Writhings through the Plains,
I knew them once one River swift and deep,
Blessing and blessed by Poets strains.
2.
Then touched with awe, we thought some God did pour
Those Floods out of his Sacred Jar;
Transforming every Weed into a Flower,
And every Flower into a Star.
3.
But since it broke it self, and double glides,
The Naked Banks no dress have worn;
And yon dry barren Mountain now derides
These Valleys, which lost Glories mourn.
4.
Such, Chloris, is thy Love; which, while it ran,
Confined within a single Stream,
Fired every tuneful Son of mighty Pan;
And thou were mine, and all Men's Theme.
5.
But when imparted to one Lover more,
It in two Streams did faintly creep;
The Shepherds common Muse grew low and poor,
And Mine, as lean as these my Sheep.
6.
Alas! that Honor, Chloris, thou have lost,
Which we to thy full Flood did pay!
While now, that Swain, that swears he loves thee most,
Slakes but his thirst, and goes away!
To the AUTHOR of SARD AN AP ALUS; UPON That, and His other Writings.
Though Teaching thy peculiar business be,
Learn this one Lesson, Schoolmaster, of me;
Where good Sense fails, the best Description's vile;
And a rough Verse the noblest Thoughts will spoil.
Think it not Genius, to know how to scan,
Nor great, to show a Monster for a Man.
Wound not the Ear with ill-turn'd Prose in Rhyme;
Nor mistake furious Fustian for Sublime:
Believe this truth, and thy vain tumbling quit:
What is not Reason, never can be Wit.
From the Boy's hand, take Horace into thine,
And thy rude Satires by his Rules refine.
See thy gross faults in Boy leau's faithful Glass,
And get the sense, to know thy self an Ass.
OF My Lady HYDE. Occasioned by The sight of Her PICTURE.
BY Mr. George Granville.
THe Painter with Immortal Skill may trace
A Beauteous Form, or show a Heavenly Face;
The Poet's Art, less straightened and confined,
Can draw the Virtues, and describe the Mind,
Unlock the Shrine, and to the sight unfold
The Secret Gems, and all the inside Gold.
This dazzling Beauty is a lovely Case
Of shining Virtues, spotless as her Face;
With Graces that attract, but not ensnare,
Divinely Good, as she is Divinely Fair.
Two only Patterns do the Muses name,
Of perfect Beauty, but of guilty Fame;
A Venus and a Helen have been seen,
Both perjured Wives, the Goddess and the Queen;
In this the third, are reconciled at last
Those jarring Attributes of Fair and Chaste;
This matchless Charmer is a beam of Light,
Without a Cloud or spot, for ever bright,
With Beauty, nor affected, vain, nor proud,
With greatness, eafie, affable, and good,
The Soul, and Source of all that we admire,
Of every Joy, but hope to our desire:
Like the chaste Moon, she shines to all Mankind,
But to Endymion is her Love confined;
What cruel Destiny on Beauty waits,
When on one Face depend so many Fates;
Obliged by Honor, to relieve but One,
By thousands we despair, and are undone.
An Imitation Of the second Chorus, in the second Act of Seneca's Thyestes.
By Mr. George Granville.
AT length the Gods, propitious to our Prayers,
Compose our Tumults, and conclude our Wars,
The Sons of Inachus repent the Guilt
Of Crowns usurpt, and blood of Parents spilt;
For Impious Greatness, Vengeance is in store,
Short is the date of all ill-gotten Power.
Give ear, ambitious Princes, and be wise,
Listen, and learn wherein true Greatness lies;
Place not your Pride in Roofs that shine with Gems,
In purple Robes, nor sparkling Diadems,
Nor in Dominion, nor extent of Land;
He Is only Great who can himself command.
Whose Guard is peaceful Innocence, whose Guide
Is faithful Reason, who is void of Pride,
Checking Ambition, nor is idly vain
Of the false Incense of a popular Train.
Who without strife or envy can behold
His Neighbor's Plenty, and his heaps of Gold,
Nor covets other Wealth, but what we find
In the Possessions of a Virtuous Mind.
Fearless he sees, who is with Virtue crowned,
The Tempest rage, and hears the Thunder sound,
Most truly Noble, who contemning Fate,
In midst of Spears and Javelins keeps his State,
Composed and firm he stands, nor shrinks to feel
The piercing Arrow, or the pointed Steel;
Disdaining Chance, regardless he looks down,
Ever the same, whether she smile, or frown:
Serenely as he lived, resigns his breath,
Meets Destiny half way, nor grieves at Death.
Ye Sovereign Lords, who sit like Gods in State,
Awing the World, and bustling to be Great;
Boast not of Power, nor of Imperial Sway,
Vassals your selves, who every Lust obey;
The Reins of Empire, ill befit those Hands,
Where Passion governs, and where Rage commands.
What is this Fame, for which our Kings are Slaves?
The breath of Fools, and blast of flattering Knaves.
A peaceful Conscience, and a generous Breast,
Of all the Gifts of Fortune are the best.
What need of Arms, and Instruments of War,
Or battering Engines which destroy from far?
Who Lord of his own Appetites can be,
The greatest King and Conqueror is He,
Blessed with a Power, which nothing can destroy,
And each is his own Master to enjoy.
Whom worldly Luxury, and Pomps allure,
They tread on Ice, and find no footing sure;
Place me, ye Gods, in some obscure retreat,
Oh! keep me innnocent, make others Great:
In quiet shades, content with Rural Sports,
Give me a Life, remote from guilty Courts,
Where free from Hopes or Fears, in humble Ease,
Unheard of I may live, and dye in Peace.
Happy the Man, who thus retired from sight,
Studies himself, and seeks no other Light!
But most unhappy He, who sits on high,
Exposed to every Tongue, and every Eye,
Whose Follies blazed about, to all are known,
And are a secret to himself alone:
Worse is an Evil Fame, much worse, than none.
Amor omnibus idem: Or, the Force of Love in all Creatures; Being a Translation
of some Verses in Virgil's third Georgick, from Verse 209 to Verse 285.
WHether the nobler Horses breed you raise,
Or duller Herds your fertile Pastures graze;
Nothing will more a vigorous strength produce,
Than to forbid them the licentious use
Of Love's enfeebling Rites: Be therefore sure,
Your Bulls are pastur'd by themselves secure;
Let some broad River, or a rising Hill
Be interposed; or let them take their fill
In closer Stalls: For wanton Love's desire
Is kindled at the Eyes; whose wastful fire
Consumes them by degrees, and makes them slight
Their Food, while they behold the pleasing sight.
Besides the fierce Encounters that ensue,
When Rival Bulls the alluring Object view:
Who, both inspired with Jealousy and Rage,
For the fair Female bloody Battles wage:
Till with black Blood their sides are covered over,
And their curled Foreheads meet with hideous roar,
Which neighboring Groves, and distant Caves rebound,
And great Olympus ecchos back the sound,
Whilst the glad Victor does the Spot maintain,
And of his warlike hazards reaps the gain:
The conquered Foe forsakes the Hostile place,
With deep Resentments of his past Disgrace:
The ignominious Wounds the Conqueror gave,
In his grieved mind no slight Impression leave:
Departing he his absent Love does moan,
Looks back with longing Eyes, and many a Groan
On those his ancient Realms, where once he
Ruled alone.
Then with redoubled Care his Strength supplies,
Rough on the flinty Ground all Night he lies,
And Shrubs, and prickling Thistles for his Food suffice.
Then runs his Horns into some solid Oak,
Whose reeling Trunk does scarce sustain the stroke.
With vain Assaults provokes the yielding Air,
And makes his Flourishes before the War.
Then with his Force and Strength prepared, does go
With headlong Rage against th'unwary Foe:
Like a white Wave that is defcry'd from far
Rolling its Vastness toward the frighted Shore;
Till with loud Noise against the pointed Beaks
Of solid Rocks, the moving Mountain breaks;
Whilst the chaft Billows from the bottom throw
The rising Sands, that on the Surface flow.
All Creatures thus the Force of Love do find;
For, whether they be those of Human Kind,
Or Savage Beasts, or Neptune's spawning Fry,
Or wanton Herds, or painted Birds that fly,
They all the like transporting Fury try.
It Is with this Rage the Lyoness is stung,
When over the Forest (mindless of her Young)
She sternly stalks: It Is then the shapeless Bear
With fierce desire does to the Woods repair,
And wide Destruction makes: It Is then we see
The Savage Boar's and Tyger's Cruelty.
Let then the Sunburned Traveller forbear
In Lybia's Sandy Deserts to appear.
See how the Winds the trembling Stallions fray,
When first to their sagacious Nostrils they
The distant Female's well-known scent convey!
Then no restraining Curbs, nor cruel blows
Nor hollow Caves, nor obvious Rocks oppose
Their passage, nor the Sea's objected Force,
That bears the Mountains down its violent Course.
The Sabine Boar does then prepare to wound,
And whets his foamy Tusks, and paws the Ground:
His Sides against the rugged Trees does tare,
And hardens both his Shoulders for the War.
What does the Leander.
Youth in whose enraged Veins
The heat of Love's distempered Fever reigns?
Through stromy Seas he his bold Fortune tries,
Though in his Face the obvious Billows rise,
And dash him back to Shore; whilst from the Throne
Of Heaven its loud Artillery rattles down
On his devoted Head: Nor can the sound
Of Waters which against the Rocks rebound
Recall his desperate Course, nor all the Tears
Occasioned by his careful Parents fears,
Nor his loved Hero.
Nymph who soon the self-same Fortune shares.
'Twere long to tell the spotted Linx's Wars,
By Love excited: Or the furious Jars
Of prowling Wolves, or Mastives headstrong Rage:
Even timorous Stags will for their Hinds engage.
But most of all in Mares the amorous Fire
Appears; whom Venus did Her self inspire.
What time that Potnian Glaucus (to improve
Their speed) withheld them from the Rites of Love;
With Rage incensed they struck their Master dead,
And on his mangled Limbs by piecemeal fed.
Over craggy Mountains Love their way does guide,
And spurs them through the depths of Rivers wide:
When Spring's soft Fire their melting Marrow burns
(For it is in Spring the lusty warmth returns)
They to the tops of steepest Hills repair,
And with wide Nostrils snuff the Western Air,
Wherewith conceiving, (wonderful to tell)
Without the Stallions help their Bellies swell:
Whose frantic Fury makes them scour amain
Over solid Rocks, and through the liquid Plain,
Nor Hills, nor streightning Vales their giddy Course restrain:
Nor do they toward the Suns uprising steer
Their headstrong way, nor toward the frozen Bear,
Nor toward the place where tepid Auster pours
Upon the pregnant Earth his plenteous Showers:
Till from their lustful Groins at last does fall
Their Offspring, which the Shepherds rightly call
Hippomanes: A slimy, poisonous Juice,
Which muttering Step-Dames in Enchantments use,
And in the mystic Cup their powerful Herbs infuse.
But time is lost, which never will renew,
Whilst ravished, we the pleasing Theme pursue.
TO Mr. CONGREVE. AN EPISTOLARY ODE. Occasioned by his late Play. From Mr.
YALDEN.
I.
Famed Wits and Beauties, share this common fate,
To stand exposed to public Love and Hate,
In every Breast They different Passions raise,
At once provoke our Envy, and our Praise.
For when, like you, some noble Youth appears,
For Wit and Humor famed above his Years:
Each emulous Muse, that views the Laurel won,
Must praise the worth so much transcends their own,
And, while his Fame they envy, add to his renown.
But sure like you, no youth, could please,
Nor at his first attempt boast such success:
Where all Mankind have failed, you glories won:
Triumphaut are in this alone,
In this, have all the Bards of old outdone.
II.
Then may thou rule our Stage in triumph long,
May Thou it is injured Fame revive,
And matchless proofs of Wit, and Humor, give,
Reforming with thy Scenes, and Charming with thy Song.
And though a Curse ill-fated Wit persues,
And waits the Fatal Dowry of a Muse:
Yet may thy rising Fortunes be
Secure from all the blasts of Poetry;
As thy own Laurels flourishing appear,
Fear.
Unsullied still with Cares, nor clogged with Hope and
As from its want's be from its Vices free,
From nauseous servil Flattery:
Nor to a Patron prostitute thy Mind,
Tho'like Augustus Great, as Famed Moecenas kind.
III.
Though great in Fame! believe me generous Youth,
Believe this often experienced Truth,
From him that knows thy Virtues, and admires their worth.
Though You Are above what vulgar Poets fear,
Trust not the ungrateful World too far;
Trust not the Smiles of the inconstant Town:
Trust not the Plaudits of a Theater,
(Which D -- fie shall, with Thee, and Dryden share)
Nor to a Stages interest Sacrifice thy own.
Thy Genius, that is for Nobler things designed,
May at loose Hours oblige Mankind:
Then great as is thy Fame, thy Fortunes raise,
Join thriving interest to thy barren Bays,
And teach the World to envy, as thou do to praise
The World, that does like common Whores embrace,
Injurious still to those it does caress:
Injurious as the tainted Breath of Fame,
That blasts a Poet's Fortunes, while it sounds his Name.
IV.
When first a Muse inflames some Youthful Breast,
Like an unpracticed Virgin, still she is kind:
Adorned with Graces then, and Beauties blessed,
She charms the Ear with Fame, with Raptures fills the Mind.
Then from all Cares the happy Youth is free,
But those of Love and Poetry:
Cares, still allayed with pleasing Charms,
That Crown the Head with Bays, with Beauty fill the Arms.
But all a Woman's Frailties soon she shows,
Too soon a stale domestic Creature grows:
Then wedded to a Muse that is nauseous grown,
We loath what we enjoy, druge when the Pleasure's gone.
For tempted with imaginary Bays,
Fed with immortal Hopes, and empty Praise:
He Fame pursues, that fair, but treacherous, bait,
Grows wise, when he is undone, repents when'tis too
V.
Small are the Trophies of his boasted Bays,
The Great Man's promise, for his flattering Toil,
Fame in reversion, and the public smile,
All vainer than his Hopes, uncertain as his Praise.
'Twas thus in Mournful Numbers heretofore,
Neglected Spencer did his Fate deplore:
Long did his injured Muse complain,
Admired in midst of Wants, and Charming still in vain
Long did the Generous Cowley Mourn,
And long obliged the Age without return:
Denied what every Wretch obtains of Fate,
An humble Roof, and an obscure retreat,
Condemned to needy Fame, and to be miserably great.
Thus did the World thy great Forefathers use,
Thus all the inspired Bards before,
Did their hereditary Ills deplore:
From tuneful Chaucer's, down to thy own Dryden's Muse.
VI.
Yet pleased with gaudy ruin Youth will on,
As proud by public Fame to be undone:
Pleased tho'he does the worst of Labors choose,
To serve a Barbarous Age, and an ungrateful Muse.
Since Dryden's self, to Wit's great Empire born,
Whose Genius and exalted Name,
Triumph with all the Spoils of Wit and Fame;
Must midst the loud Applause his barren Laurels mourn.
Even that Famed Man whom all the World admires,
Whom every Grace adorns, and Muse inspires:
Like the great injured Tasso shows,
Triumphant in the midst of Woes;
In all his Wants Majestic still appears,
Charming the Age to which he ows his Cares,
And cherishing that Muse whose fatal Curse he bears.
From Mag. Col. Oxon.
ON His Mistress drowned.
BY Mr. S --
SWeet Stream, that do with equal pace
Both thy self fly, and thy self chase,
Forbear a while to flow,
And listen to my Woe,
Then go, and tell the Sea that all its brine
Is fresh, compared to mine;
Inform it that the gentler Dame,
Who was the life of all my Flame,
In the Glory of her Bud
Has passed the fatal Flood.
Death by this only stroke triumphs above
The greatest power of Love:
Alas, alas! I must give over,
My sighs will let me add no more.
Go on, sweet Stream, and henceforth rest
No more than does my troubled Breast;
And if my sad Complaints have made thee stay,
These tears, these tears shall mend thy way.
To the Pious Memory Of the Accomplished Young LADY Mrs. ANNE KILLIGREW.
EXCELLENT In the two Sister-Arts of Poesy, and Painting. An ODE.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
1.
THou youngest Virgin-Daughter of the Skies,
Made in the last Promotion of the Blessed;
Whose Palms, new plucked from Paradise,
In spreading Branches more sublimely rise,
Rich with Immortal Green above the rest:
Whether, adopted to some Neighboring Star,
Thou rol'st above us, in thy wandering Race,
Or, in Procession fixed and regular,
Moved with the Heavens Majestic Pace;
Or, called to more Superior Bliss,
Thou tread'st, with Seraphims, the vast Abyss.
What ever happy Region is thy place,
Cease thy Celestial Song a little space;
(Thou will have time enough for Hymns Divine,
Since Heavens Eternal Year is thine.)
Hear then a Mortal Muse thy Praise rehearse,
In no ignoble Verse;
But such as thy own voice did practice here,
When thy first Fruits of Poesy were given;
To make thy self a welcome Inmate there:
While yet a young Probationer,
And Candidate of Heaven.
2.
If by Traduction came thy Mind,
Our Wonder is the less to find
A Soul so charming from a Stock so good;
Thy Father was transfused into thy Blood:
So were thou born into the tuneful strain,
(An early, rich, and inexhausted Vein.)
But if thy Praeexisting Soul
Was formed, at first, with Myriads more,
It did through all the Mighty Poets roll,
Who Greek or Latin Laurels wore.
And was that Sappho last, which once it was before.
If so, then cease thy flight, O Heaven-born Mind!
Thou have no Dross to purge from thy Rich Ore:
Nor can thy Soul a fairer Mansion find,
Than was the Beauteous Frame she left behind:
Return, to fill or mend the Quire, of thy Celestial kind.
3.
May we presume to say, that at thy Birth,
New joy was sprung in Heaven, as well as here on Earth.
For sure the Milder Planets did combine
On thy Auspicious Horoscope to shine,
And even the most Malicious were in Trine.
Thy Brother-Angels at thy Birth
Strung each his Lyre, and tuned it high,
That all the People of the Sky
Might know a Poetess was born on Earth.
And then if ever, Mortal Ears
Had heard the Music of the Spheres!
And if no clust'ring Swarm of Bees
On thy sweet Mouth distilled their golden Dew,
'Twas that, such vulgar Miracles,
Heaven had not Leisure to renew:
For all the Blessed Fraternity of Love
Solemnized there thy Birth, and kept thy Holyday above.
4.
O Gracious God! How far have we
Profaned thy Heavenly Gift of Poesy?
Made prostitute and profligate the Muse,
Debased to each obscene and impious use,
Whose Harmony was first ordained Above
For Tongues of Angels, and for Hymns of Love?
O wretched We! why were we hurried down
This lubrique and adult'rate age,
(Nay added fat Pollutions of our own)
To Increase the steaming Ordures of the Stage?
What can we say t'excuse our Second Fall?
Let this thy Vestal, Heaven, atone for all!
Her Arethusian Stream remains unsoil'd,
Unmixt with Foreign Filth, and undefiled,
Her Wit was more than Man, her Innocence a Child!
5.
Art she had none, yet wanted none:
For Nature did that Want supply,
So rich in Treasures of her Own,
She might our boasted Stores defy:
Such Noble Vigor did her Verse adorn,
That it seemed borrowed, where'twasonly born.
Her Morals too were in her Bosom bred
By great Examples daily fed,
What in the best of Books, her Father's Life, she read.
And to be read her self she need not fear,
Each Test, and every Light, her Muse will bear,
Though Epictetus with his Lamp were there.
Even Love (for Love sometimes her Muse expressed)
Was but a Lambent-flame which played about her Breast:
Light as the Vapors of a Morning Dream,
So cold her self, whilst she such Warmth expressed,
'Twas Cupid bathing in Diana's Stream.
6.
Born to the Spacious Empire of the Nine,
One would have thought, she should have been content
To manage well that Mighty Government;
But what can young ambitious Souls confine?
To the next Realm she stretched her Sway,
For Painture near adjoining lay,
A plenteous Province, and alluring Prey.
A Chamber of Dependences was framed,
(As Conquerors will never want Pretense,
When armed, to justify the Offense)
And the whole Fief, in right of Poetry she claimed.
The Country open lay without Defense:
For Poets frequent In-rodes there had made,
And perfectly could represent
The Shape, the Face, with every Lineament;
And all the large Demains which the Dumb-sister swayed,
All bowed beneath her Government,
Received in Triumph wheresoever she went.
Her Pencil drew, what e're her Soul designed,
And often the happy Draught surpassed the Image in her Mind.
The Sylvan Scenes of Herds and Flocks,
And fruitful Plains and barren Rocks,
Of shallow Brooks that flowed so clear,
The bottom did the top appear;
Of deeper too and ampler Floods,
Which as in Mirrors, showed the Woods;
Of lofty Trees, with Sacred Shades,
And Perspectives of pleasant Glades,
Where Nymphs of brightest Form appear,
And shaggy Satyrs standing near,
Which them at once admire and fear.
The Ruins too of some Majestic Piece,
Boasting the Power of ancient Rome or Greece.
Whose Statues, Freezes, Columns broken lie,
And though defaced, the Wonder of the Eye,
What Nature, Art, bold Fiction e're durst frame,
Her forming Hand gave Feature to the Name.
So strange a Concourse never was seen before,
But when the peopled Ark the whole Creation bore.
7.
The Scene then changed, with bold Erected Look
Our Martial King the sight with Reverence struck:
For not content t'express his Outward Part,
Her hand called out the Image of his Heart,
His Warlike Mind, his Soul devoid of Fear,
His High-designing Thoughts, were figured there,
As when, by Magic, Ghosts are made appear.
Our Phoenix Queen was portrai'd too so bright,
Beauty alone could Beauty take so right:
Her Dress, her Shape, her matchless Grace,
Were all observed, as well as heavenly Face.
With such a Peerless Majesty she stands,
As in that Day she took the Crown from Sacred hands:
Before a Train of Heroins was seen,
In Beauty foremost, as in Rank, the Queen!
Thus nothing to her Genius was denied,
But like a Ball of Fire the further thrown,
Still with a greater Blaze she shone,
And her bright Soul broke out on every side.
What next she had designed, Heaven only knows,
To such Immod'rate Growth her Conquest rose,
That Fate alone its Progress could oppose.
8.
Now all those Charms, that blooming Grace,
The well-proportion'd Shape, and beauteous Face,
Shall never more be seen by Mortal Eyes;
In Earth the much lamented Virgin lies!
Not Wit, nor Piety could Fate prevent;
Nor was the cruel Destiny content
To finish all the Murder at a blow,
To sweep at once her Life, and Beauty too;
But, like a hardn'd Fellon, took a pride
To work more Mischievously slow,
And plundered first, and then destroyed.
O double Sacrilege on things Divine,
To rob the Relic, and deface the Shrine!
But thus Orinda died:
Heaven, by the same Disease, did both translate,
As equal were their Souls, so equal was their Fate.
9.
Mean time her Warlike Brother on the Seas
His waving Streamers to the Winds displays,
And vows for his Return, with vain Devotion, pays.
Ah, Generous Youth, that Wish forbear,
The Winds too soon will waft thee here!
Slack all thy Sails, and fear to come,
Alas, thou know not, thou art wrecked at home!
No more shall thou behold thy Sister's Face,
Thou have already had her last Embrace.
But look aloft, and if thou ken'st from far,
Among the Pleiad's a New-kindl'd Star,
If any sparkles, than the rest, more bright,
It Is she that shines in that propitious Light.
10.
When in mid-Air, the Golden Trump shall sound,
To raise the Nations under ground;
When in the Valley of Jehosaphat,
The Judging God shall close the book of Fate;
And there the last Assizes keep,
For those who Wake, and those who Sleep;
When rattling Bones together fly,
From the four Corners of the Sky,
When Sinews over the Skeletons are spread,
Those clothed with Flesh, and Life inspires the Dead;
The Sacred Poets first shall hear the Sound,
And foremost from the Tomb shall bound:
For they are covered with the lightest Ground,
And straight, with in born Vigor, on the Wing,
Like mounting Larks, to the New Morning sing.
There Thou, sweet Saint, before the Quire shall go,
As Harbinger of Heaven, the Way to show,
The Way which thou so well have learned below.
TO THE Earl of CARLISLE, UPON THE DEATH of His SON BEFORE LUXEMBURG.
He Is gone, and was it then by your Decree,
Ye envious Powers, that we should only see
This Copy of your own Divinity?
Or thought ye it surpassing Human State,
To have a Blessing lasting as 'twas Great?
Your cruel Skill you better never had shown,
Since you so soon designed him all your own.
Such torturing Favors to the Damned are given,
When to increase their Hell, you show 'em Heaven,
Was it too Godlike, he should long inherit
At once his Father's, and his Uncle's Spirit?
Yet as much Beauty, and as calm a Breast
As the mild Dame, whose teeming Womb he blessed.
H' had all the Favors Providence could give,
Except its own Prerogative to live:
Reserved in Pleasures, and in Dangers bold,
Youthful in Action, and in Prudence old:
His humble Greatness, and submissive State,
Made his Life full of Wonder, as his Fate.
One, who to all the heights of Learning bred,
Read Books, and Men, and practiced what he read.
Round the wide Globe searce did the busy Sun
With greater haste, and greater Luster run.
True Gallantry and Grandeur he descried
From the French Fopperies, and German Pride.
And like the industrious Be, where e're he flew,
Gathered the Sweets which on sweet Blossoms grew.
Babel's confused Speeches on his Tongue,
With a sweet Harmony and Concord hung.
More Countries than for Homer did contest,
Do strive who most were by his Presence blessed.
Nor did his Wisdom damp his Martial Fire,
Minerva both her Portions did inspire,
Use of the Warlike Bow, and Peaceful Lyre.
So Caesar doubly triumphed when he wrote,
Showing like Wit, as Valor, when he fought.
If God (as Plato taught) Example takes
From his own Works, and Souls by Patterns makes,
Much of himself in him he did unfold,
And cast him in his Darling Sidney's Mold,
Of too refined a Substance to be old.
Both did alike disdain an Hero's Rage,
Should, come like an Inheritance by Age.
Ambitiously did both conspire to twist
Bays with the Ivy, which their Temples kissed:
Scorning to wait the slow advance of Time,
Both fell like early Blossoms in their Prime,
By blind Events, and Providence's Crime.
Yet both, like Codrus, over their yielding Foe
Obtained the Conquest, in their Overthrow;
And longer Life do purchase by their Death,
In Fame completing what they want in breath.
Oh! had kind Fate stretched the contracted Span,
To the full Glories of a perfect Man;
And as he grew could every rolling Year
A new addition to our Wonder bear,
He Had paid to his Illustrious Line that Stock
Of ancient Honor, which from thence he took.
But oh!
So hasty Fruits, and too ambitious Flowers,
Scorning the Midwifery of ripening Showers,
In spite of Frosts, spring from the unwilling Earth,
But find a nip untimely as their birth.
Abortive Issues so delude the Womb.
And scarce have Being, e're they want a Tomb.
Forgive (my Lord) the Muse that does aspire
With a new breath to fan your raging Fire;
Whose each officious and unskilful sound
Can with fresh Torture but enlarge the wound.
Could I, with David, curse the guilty Plain
Where one more loved than Jonathan was slain:
Or could I flights high as his Merits raise,
Clear as his Virtue, deathless as his Praise,
None who (though Laurels crowned their aged Head)
Admired him living, and adored him dead,
With more Devotion should enroll his Name
In the long Consecrated List of Fame.
But since my artless and unhallowed Strain
Will the high worth, it should commend, profane;
Since I despair my humble Verse should prove
Great as your loss, or tender as your Love;
My Heart with sighings, and with tears mine Eye,
Shall the defect of written Grief supply.
THE INSECT. AGAINST BULK.
Inest sua gratia parvis.

By Mr. YALDEN.
WHere Greatness is to Nature's Works denied,
In Worth and Beauty it is well supplied:
In a small space the more Perfection's shown,
And what is exquisite, in Little's done.
Thus Beams contracted in a narrow Glass,
To Flames convert their larger useless Rays.
It Is Nature's smallest products please the Eye,
Whilst greater Births pass unreguarded by:
Her Monsters seem a Violence to sight,
They Are formed for Terror, Insects to delight.
Thus when she nicely frames a piece of Art,
Fine are her strokes, and small in every part;
No Labor can she boast more wonderful,
Than to inform an Atom with a Soul:
To animate her little beauteous Fly,
And cloth it in her gaudy'ft Drapery.
Thus does the little Epigram delight,
And charm us with its minature of Wit:
Whilst tedious Authors give the Reader pain,
Weary his thoughts, and make him toil in vain;
Whenin less Volumes we more pleasure find,
And what diverts, still best informs the Mind.
It Is the small Infect looks correct and fair,
And seems the product of her nicest Care.
When wearied out with the stupendous weight,
Of forming Prodigies, and Brutes of State:
Then she the Infect frames, her Masterpiece,
Made for Diversion, and designed to please.
Thus Archimedes, in his Crystal Sphere,
Seemed to correct the World's Artificer:
Whilst the large Globe moves round with long delay,
His beauteous Orbs in nimbler Circles play;
This seemed the Nobler Labor of the two,
Great was the Sphere above, but fine below.
Thus smallest things have a peculiar Grace,
The great w' admire, but it is the little please;
Then since the least so beautifully show,
B' advised in time, my Muse, and learn to know
A Poet's Lines should be correct, and few.
Written in a LADY's Advic^e TO A DAUGHTER.
It Is true -- in these well-polish'd Lines,
The Author's Noble Genius shines:
A happy Wit, a thought well weighed,
And in a Charming Dress conveyed,
Adorn each curious Page -- it is true:
But what is all this, fair Maid, to You?
Have lovely Faces need of Paint?
Are Manuals useful to a Saint?
Let careless Nymphs be plied with Rules,
Let Wit be thrown among the Fools:
In both of these You boast a Store,
Compared with which, our Author's poor.
Alas! as He directs his Pen
To Maids, should You advise the Men;
Should You your easy Minutes vex,
To make Reprisals on the Sex,
We great Pretenders then should find
Our Selves, our Darling Selves, out-shin'd,
Not more in Body, than in Mind:
She-Wit and Sense would mount the Throne,
And our loved Salic-Law be gone.
Written in a LADY's WALLER.
THE Lovely Owner of this Book
Does here on her own Image look:
Each happy Page, each finished Line
Does with Her matchless Graces shine;
And is, with Common Verse compared,
What She is among Beauty's Herd.
The Poet boasts a Lofty thought,
In Softest Numbers Smoothly wrought;
Has all that pleases the Severe,
And all that charms a Listening Ear.
And such the Nymph is -- blessed with all
That we can Sweet, or Noble call:
For never sure was any Mind,
Of all that from Heavens Treasury came
Of better Make, and more Refined,
Or lodged within a Fairer Frame.
Such Angels seem, when pleased to wear
Some lovely Dress of colored Air!
Oh! had she lived, before the old
Bard had so many Winters told;
Then, when his Youthful Veins ran high,
Enflamed with Love, and Poetry;
He only to This shining Maid
The Tribute of his Verse had paid:
No meaner Face, no lesser Name
Had fixed his Eyes, or fed his Flame;
Her Beauties had employed his Tongue,
And Sacharissa died unsung.
Written in the Leaves of a FAN.
FLAVIA the least and slightest Toy
Can, with resistless Art, employ.
This Fan, in meaner Hands, would prove
An Engine, of small Force, in Love.
Yet she, with Graceful Air and Mien,
(Not to be told! or safely seen!)
Directs its wanton Motions so,
That it wounds more than Cupid's Bow:
Gives Coolness to the matchless Dame,
To every other Breast a Flame.
AN Incomparable ODE OF MALHERB's.
Written by Him when the Marriage was afoot between this King of France, and
Anne of Austria. Translated by a Person of Quality, a great Admirer of the
easiness of the French Poetry.
CEtte Anne si belle, THis Anna so Fair, Qu'on vante sifort, So talked of by
Fame, Pourquoy ne vient Elle? Why don't she appear? Vrayment, Elle a tort!
Indeed, she is to blame! Son Louis soupire Lewis sighs for the sake Apres set
Appas: Of her Charms, as they say: Que veut elle dire, What excuse can she
make, Que elle ne vient pas? For not coming away? Si il ne la possede, If he
does n't possess, Il s'en va Mourir; He dies with Despair; Donnons y Remede,
Let Us give him redress, Allons la Querir. And go find out the Fair.

NOTE.

The Translator proposed to turn this Ode with all imaginable Exactness; and he
hopes he has been pretty just to Malherb, only in the sixth Line he has made a
small Addition of these three words -- as they say -- which he thinks is
excusable, if we consider that the French Poet there talks a little too
familiarly of the King's Passion, as if the King himself had owned it to him.
The Translator thinks it more mannerly and respectful in Malherb to preterd to
have the Account of it only by Hearsay.


On the Duchess of Portsmouth's PICTURE.
HAD she but lived in Cleopatra's Age,
When Beauty did the Earth's great Lords engage,
Britain, not Egypt, had been Glorious made;
Augustus then, like Julius, had obeyed:
A Nobler Theme had been the Poet's boast,
That all the World for Love had well been lost.
A SONG.
By the Earl of Rochester.
Insulting Beauty, you mispend
Those Frowns upon your Slave;
Your Scorn against such Rebels bend,
Who dare with confidence pretend,
That other Eyes their Hearts defend,
From all the Charms you have.
Your conquering Eyes so partial are,
Or Mankind is so dull,
That while I languish in Despair,
Many proud senseless Hearts declare,
They find you not so killing Fair,
To wish you merciful.
They an Inglorious Freedom boast;
I triumph in my Chain;
Nor am I unrevenged, though lost;
Nor you unpunished, though unjust,
When I alone, who love you most,
Am killed with your Disdain.
SONG For the KING's Birthday.
SHine forth, bright Sun, and gild the Day,
With a more than common Ray.
The Day that gave us more,
Than all the rolling Years that Thou
Have numbered out, could e're bestow,
Or Britain wish before.
From greenness of Touth, to ripeness of Age,
With what dangers, what troubles did Caesar engage.
In the Field, on the Flood,
Through the Waves, and through Blood,
The Race of bright Honor he ran!
How Great in Distress,
How Calm in Success!
In both, how much more than Man!
CHORUS.
Where-e're his Birth had been by Fortune placed,
Such Virtue Heaven must needs have crowned at last.
Heaven has been just, and Right has prevailed,
Though by Hell's Malice and Forces assailed;
Rebellion and Faction are sunk whence they rose,
And Caesar the Wounds of his Nation does close,
Rewarding his Friends, and forgiving his Foes.
In the Glory gained by War,
Vulgar Hands and Fortune share;
But the more Noble and Solid Renown
That arises from Pardon to Penitents shown,
All render to Caesar, it is Caesar's alone.
Caesar nobly does disdain
Over less than Hearts to Reign;
Let Tyrants force the ignobler part,
God and Caesar claim the Heart.
Hark how the Nation United rejoices
In the glad Consort of Hearts and of Voices!
What Thanks they express
For their Plenty and Peace,
And the long desired Blessings of Freedom and Ease.
Hark, the joyful Song goes round,
It Is the Universal Sound:
Long may Heaven and Caesar smile,
Heaven on Him, and He on us;
Long, long may he Rule our Isle,
And long, long Rule it thus!
As loved in Peace, as feared in Arms,
And ever blessed in Gloriana's Charms.
A SONG.
1.
AFter the fiercest Pangs of hot Desire,
Between Panthoea's rising Breasts,
His bending Breast Philander rests:
And vanquished, yet unknowing to retire,
Close hugs the Charmer, and ashamed to yield,
Though he has lost the day, yet keeps the Field.
2.
When, with a sigh, the fair Panthoea said,
What Pity it is, ye Gods, that all
The Noblest Warriors soonest fall:
Then with a Kiss she gently reared his Head;
Armed him again to fight, for nobly she
More loved the Combat than the Victory.
3.
But more enraged, for being beat before,
With all his strength he does prepare
More fiercely to renew the War;
Nor ceased he till the Noble Prize he bore:
Even her much wondrous Courage did surprise,
She hugs the Dart that wounded her, and dies.
A SONG.
1.
THrough mournful Shades, and solitary Groves,
Fanned with the sighs of unsuccessful Loves,
Wild with Despairs, young Thyrsis strays,
Thinks over all Amyra's Heavenly Charms,
Thinks he now sees her in another's Arms;
Then at some Willow's Root himself he lays,
The Loveliest, most unhappy Swain;
And thus to the wild Woods he does complain.
2.
How art thou changed, O Thyrsis, since the time
When thou could love, and hope without a Crime;
When Nature's Pride, and Earth's Delight,
As through her shady Evening Grove she past,
And a new day did all around her cast;
Could see, nor be offended at the sight:
The melting, sighing, wishing Swain,
That now must never hope to wish again.
3.
Riches and Titles! why should they prevail,
Where Duty, Love, and Adoration fail?
Lovely Amyra, should thou prize
The empty noise that a fine Title makes;
Or the vile Trash that with the Vulgar takes,
Before a Heart that bleeds for thee, and dies:
Unkind! but pity the poor Swain
Your Rigor kills, nor Triumph in the Slain.
SONG.
YOU say you love! Repeat again,
Repeat the amazing Sound;
Repeat the ease of all my pain,
The Cure of every Wound.
What you to thousands have denied,
To me you freely give;
Whilst I in humble Silence died,
Your Mercy bids me live.
So on cold Latmos top each Night,
Endymion sighing lay,
Gazed on the Moon's transcendant Light,
Despaired, and durst not Pray.
But Divine Cynthia saw his Grief,
The Effect of conquering Charms;
Unasked, the Goddess brings relief,
And falls into his Arms.
SONG.
FAirest of thy Sex, and best,
Admit my humble Tale;
'Twill ease the Torment of my Breast,
Though I shall never prevail.
No fond Ambition me does move
Your Favor to implore,
I ask not for return of Love,
But Freedom to adore.
To the King. In the Year 1686.
BY Mr. George Granville.
HEroes of old, by Rapine and by Spoil,
In search of Fame, did all the World embroil,
Thus to their Gods each then allied his Name,
This sprang from Jove, and that from Titan came;
With equal Valor, and with like Success,
Dread King, might thou the Universe oppress;
But Christian Rules constrain thy Martial Pride;
Peace is thy Choice, and Piety thy Guide:
By thy Example Kings may learn to sway,
Heroes are taught to fight, and Saints to pray.
The Grecian Chiefs had Virtue but in share;
Nestor was wise, but Ajax brave in War:
Their very Deities were graced no more,
Mars had the Courage, Jove the Thunder bore:
But all Perfections meet in James alone,
And Brittain's King is all the Gods in one.
HARRY MARTEN's EPITAPH, BY HIMSELF.
HEre, or elsewhere (all is one to you, to me)
Earth, Air, or Water gripes my Ghostless Dust,
None knowing when brave Fire shall set it free;
Reader, if you an often tried Rule will trust,
You Will gladly Do and Suffer what you must.
To his Friend Captain Chamberline; In Love with a Lady he had taken in an
Algeriene Prize at Sea. In Allusion to the 4th Ode of Horace, Lib. the 2d.
BY Mr. YALDEN.
1.
It Is no disgrace (brave Youth) to own
By a fair Slave you are undone:
Why do thou blush to hear that Name!
And stifle thus a Generous Flame!
Did not the fair Briseis heretofore
With powerful Charms subdue?
What though a Captive, still she bore
Those Eyes that Freedom could restore,
And make her haughty Lord, the proud Achilles bow.
2.
Stern Ajax, though renowned in Arms,
Did yield to bright Tecmessa's Charms:
And all the Laurels he had won,
As Trophies at her Feet were thrown.
When beautiful in tears, he viewed the mourning Fair,
The Hero felt her Power:
Though great in Camps, and fierce in War,
Her softer looks he could not bear,
Proud to become her Slave, tho'late her Conqueror.
3.
When Beauty in Distress appears,
An irresistless Charm it bears:
In every Breast does pity move,
Pity the tender'st part of Love.
Amidst his Triumphs great Atrides showed
Unto a Weeping Maid:
Though Troy was by his Arms subdued,
And Greece the bloody Trophies viewed,
Yet at a Captive's feet the imploring Victor laid.
4.
Think not, thy Charming Maid can be
Of a base Stock, a mean Degree:
Her Shape, her Air, her every Grace,
A more than Vulgar Birth confess.
Yes, yes, my Friend, with Royal Blood she is great,
Sprung from some Monarch's bed:
Now mourns her Family's hard Fate,
Her mighty Fall, and abject State,
And her Illustrious Race conceals with Noble Pride.
5.
Ah think not an Ignoble House!
Could such a Heroine produce:
Nor think such generous sprightly Blood,
Could flow the corrupted Crowd.
But view her Courage, her undaunted Mind,
And Soul with Virtues crowned:
Where dazzling Interest cannot blind,
Nor Youth, nor Gold admittance find,
But still her Honor's fixed, and Virtue keeps its Ground.
6.
View well her great Majestic Air,
And modest Looks Divinely Fair:
Too bright for Fancy to improve,
And worthy of thy Noblest Love.
But yet suspect not thy officious Friend,
All jealous thoughts remove:
Though I with Youthful heat commend,
For Thee I all my Wishes send,
And if she makes Thee blessed, it is all I ask of Love,
A SONG.
BY A LADY.
1.
YE Virgin Powers, defend my Heart
From amorous Looks and Smiles,
From saucy Love, or nicer Art,
Which most our Sex beguiles;
2.
From Sighs and Vows, from awful Fears,
That do to pity move;
From speaking Silence, and from Tears,
Those Springs that water Love.
3.
But if through Passion I grow blind,
Let Honor be my Guide;
And where frail Nature seems inclined,
There place a Guard of Pride.
4.
An Heart whose Flames are seen, though pure,
Needs every Virtues aid;
And she who thinks her self secure,
The soonest is betrayed.
Written by a LADY.
STREPHON has Fashion, Wit, and Youth,
With all things else that please;
He nothing wants but Love and Truth
To ruin me with ease.
But he is Flint, and bears the Art
To kindle fierce Desire,
Whose Power enflames another's Heart,
And he never feels the Fire.
O how it does my Soul perplex,
When I his Charms recall,
To think he should despise our Sex;
Or, what is worse, love 'em all.
So that my Heart, like Noah's Dove,
In vain has sought for rest,
Finding no hopes to fix my Love,
Returns into my Breast.
PARAPHRASED Out of Horace, the 23d Ode of the 2d Book.
BY Dr. POPE.
THe wary Gods lock up in Cells of Night
Future Events, and laugh at Mortals here.
If they to pry into 'em take delight,
If they too much presume, or too much fear.
O Man! for thy short time below
Enjoy thy self, and what the Gods bestow:
Unequal Fortunes here below are shared,
Life to a River's course may justly be compared:
Sometimes within its bed,
Without an angry Curl or Wave,
From the Spring head
It gently glides to the Ocean, its Grave.
Then unawares, upon a sudden Rain,
It madly overflows the Neighboring Plain:
It ploughs up beauteous Ranks
Of Trees, that shaded and adorned its Banks;
Overturns Houses, Bridges, Rocks,
Drowns Shepherds and their Flocks:
Horror and Death rage all the Valley over,
The Forests tremble, and the Mountains roar.
LOVE's Antidote.
WHen I sigh by my Mistress, and gaze on those Eyes
Where all-conquering Love in Garrison lies.
When her Nose I commend with a true Roman bend,
And run on in Flattery World without end:
On her ample high Forehead, and her little soft hand,
To which, if compared, the best Ivory is tanned:
On the words which with Grace from her Rosy Lips flow,
And such Harmony make, as was never heard below,
Then she bridles the Pride, and swells with Disdain,
And slights her Adorer, now fast in her Chain.
With Scorn in her haughty looks, and in her words Thunder,
Then drunken with Love do I reel to the Wonder:
Then with three or four Glasses my languishing passes,
And off slides the Load, Love lays on his Asses.
Then I swear I Will for ever keep out of the scrape,
Love's Sovereign Antidote is the blood of the Grape.
Anacreon imitated.
OFTEN the Reverend Dotards cry,
Why so loving, Daphnis, why?
Love's a thing for Age alone:
Love's a God, and you're too young.
Let the Harvest crown your Brow,
And adorn your Head with Snow:
Love may boldly enter then:
Years will countenance your Flame.
Fruits, unripe, disgust the taste;
Falling ripe they please us best.
Colts are skittish; but the Dam,
(Once a Colt) is still and tame:
Reverend Dotards, why so wise?
Why these Reverend Fooleries?
Who neglects to back the Horse,
Till his Years compute him worse?
Generous Brutes that latest die,
Early to Enjoyment fly:
Vigorous Nature scorns a Tie.
Gathered Fruit are best of all;
We despise them when they fall.
Thus your Follies show to me,
What my Reverend Age shall be.
Bring the Glass then, bring the Fair,
Fill it, it is a Health to her.
For experimental I
Will a great Example be
To convince such Reverend Fools
Of their own mistaken Rules.
Anacreon imitated.
OH how pleasant is it! how sweet!
While with Beauties exquisite
Nature paints the fragrant Grove,
Thus to walk and talk of Love.
Here no envious Eastern Gale
Sells us Pleasure by Retail.
Western breezes here dispense
Joys so full, they cloy the sense.
Gods! oh Gods! how sweet a Shade
Has that Honey-Suckle made,
Clasping round that spreading Tree,
Clasping fast, and apeing me.
Me who, there with Celia laid,
First informed this lovely Maid
So to clasp, and so to twine.
Oh! how sweet a life is mine!
Anacreon imitated.
COme fill't up, and fill it high,
The barren Earth is always dry;
But we'll steep't in kindly Showers,
It laughs in Dew, and smiles in Flowers.
The Jovial Gods did, sure, design,
By the Immortal Gift of Wine,
To drown our Sighs, and ease our Care,
And make's content to Revel here.
To Revel, and to reign in Love,
And be throughout like those above.
FROM Virgil's 1st Georgick,
Beginning at Imprimis venerare Deos, etc.

Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY H. SACHEVERILL.
Dedicated to Mr. DRYDEN.
FIrst let thy Altars smoke with Sacred Fire,
Thy Earthly Labors the just Gods require.
Let Ceres Blessings usher in the Year,
To give an Omen to thy future Care.
With Sacrifice adorn her Grassy Shrine,
With Milk, with Honey, and with flowing Wine.
Then go, the mighty Goddess to adore,
When Spring buds forth, and Winter is no more.
Then well fed Lambs thy plenteous Tables load,
And mellow Wines give appetite to Food.
Whilst the cool Shade by small refreshing Streams
Invite soft Sleep, and gentle pleasing Dreams.
The Rustic Youth the Goddess should implore
To bless their Fruits, and to increase their Store.
Thrice let the Sacrifice in Triumph led
Crown the new Offspring of her fruitful Bed.
A joyful Quire shall sing her Praises round,
And with unequal Motions beat the Ground.
Whilst Oaken Branches on their Temples twine,
To show the better use of Corn and Wine.
The Goddess thus appeased, will bend her Ear,
And with a plenteous Harvest will reward your Care.
The certain Seasons of the Year to know
Great Jove has taught us, and from whence they flow,
Droughts, Rains, and Winds their certain Signs forego,
Those Messengers of Fate fly to provide the way,
To give the Signal of a gloomy Day.
The Moon her Tokens constantly fulfils,
And with her Beams points out the approaching Ills.
Her waining Orb puts on a various Form
To give the Sign of an impending Storm.
When South Winds rise the Herdsmen justly fear,
And seek a Shelter when the Tempest's near.
First from a gentle blast the Winds arise,
Whose Infant Voice in whispering Murmurs flys,
Then with loud Clamours fills the troubled Skies.
By small degrees advanced, it stronger grows,
Till every Point each other does oppose.
Then through the jarring Zones it frets and roars,
And lifts the swelling Billows to the Shores.
Vast watery Mountains roll upon the Sand,
And angry Surges beat the trembling Land.
A harsh, shrill noise the ecchoing Caverns fills,
And strikes the Ear from the resounding Hills;
Whose Reverend Tops, with aged Pine-trees crowned,
Rock with the Wind, and tremble with the sound.
Then threatening Surges hardly can forbear
The tattered Vessel, while the Seamen fear
Each rolling Billow should their last appear.
The frightened Native of the troubled Waves
His long accustomed Habitation leaves.
Now born aloft a winged Army soar
To seek for safety on a calmer Shore.
The More-Hen, conscious of the Tempest near,
Plays on the Sand, and so prevents her fear.
The Hern forsakes his ancient marshy Bed,
And towers to Heaven while Clouds bedew his head.
Sometimes he is met by a descending Star,
Which warns the Tempest rushing from afar.
The headlong Planet glides in fiery Streams,
And shoots through Darkness with its Radiant Beams.
It cuts the Shadows with a Train of Light,
And makes a Medley of the Day and Night.
A sportive Whirlwind lifts the moving Sand,
In my stick Circles dancing on the Land.
Now wanton Feathers whiten all the Flood;
And sapless Leaves fly over the shaken Wood,
At distance black'ning in a dusky Cloud.
But when a new-fledg'd Storm comes blustering forth,
And quits the thundering Regions of the North:
When East and West in distant Poles conspire,
Uniting Rage, to swell the Deluge higher,
With rapid Streams the full-charg'd Channels flow,
Collecting Forces as they farther go.
The unruly Tide no sturdy Banks control,
Over unknown Plains the furious Torrents roll.
The Reapers mourn to see the Deluge bear
Their long expected Labors of the Year.
LA jeune Iris aux cheveux gris
Disoit a Theodate,
Retournons, mon cher a Paris,
Avaunt que l'on combatte;
Vous me donnes trop de souci,
Car Guillaume ne raille.
Helas! que feriez-vous icy?
Le jour d'une bataille.
Il est vray que vous partires
Sans Lauriers and sans Gloire,
Et que vous Embarrasseres
Ceux qui font Votre Histoire;
Mais vous deves laisser ces soins
A D'Espreaux and Corneille;
Vous ne les payeries pas moins,
Quand vous feries merveille,
Vous punirez une autre fois
Ces gens qui m'ont pillee.
Qu'elle honte qu'a Charleroy
Ils m'ussent amenee!
Quoy que je sois ainee de vous,
Et que je sois bien sage,
Jaurois pass parmy ces fous
Pour un Rebut de Page.
A Paraphrase on the French.
IN Gray-hair'd Celia's withered Arms
Whilst Mighty Lewis lay,
She cried, if I have any Charms,
My Dearest let us away.
I tremble for you when I hear
Of Drums the dreadful Rattle:
Alas, Sir! what should you do here
In dreadful day of battle.
Perhaps you will ask what can repair
The Ruins of your Glory:
It Is fit you leave so mean a Care
To those who Pen your Story.
Are not D'Espreaux and Corneile paid
For Panegyric writing?
They know how Heroes may be made
Without the help of fighting.
Your Foes too saucily approach,
It Is best to leave them fairly:
Put six good Horses in your Coach,
And carry Me to Marly.
Let Bousters, to secure your Fame,
Go take some Town, or buy it;
Whilst you, great Sir, at Nostredame,
Te Deum sing in quiet.
A SONG
BY Sir JOHN EATON.
1.
TEll me not I my time mispend,
It Is time lost to reprove me;
Pursue thou thine, I have my end
So Chloris only love me.
2.
Tell me not others Flocks are full,
Mine poor, 'let them despise me
Who more abound with Milk and Wool,'
So Chloris only prize me.
3.
Tire others easier Ears with these
Unappertaining Stories;
He never felt the World's Disease
Who cared not for its Glories.
4.
For pity Thou that wiser art,
Whose thoughts lie wide of mine;
Let me alone with my own Heart,
And I Will never envy thine.
5.
Nor blame him who e're blames my Wit,
That seeks no higher Prize,
Than in unenvied Shades to sit,
And sing of Chloris Eyes.
Another SONG In Imitation of Sir JOHN EATON's Songs.
By the Late Earl of ROCHESTER.
TOO late, alas! I must confess
You need no Arts to move me:
Such Charms by Nature you possess,
'Twere madness not to love you.
Then spare a Heart you may surprise,
And give my Tongue the Glory
To boast, though my unfaithful Eyes
Betray a kinder Story.
A SONG
BY SIDNY GODOLPHIN, Esquire ON Tom. Killigrew and Will. Murrey.
1.
TOM and Will were Shepherds twain,
Who Lived and Loved together,
Till Fair Pastora crossed the Plain,
Alack, why came the thither!
Pastora's Fair and Lovely Locks
Set both their Hearts on fire,
Although they did divide their Flocks,
They had but one desire.
2.
Tom came of a Gentile Race,
By Father and by Mother,
Will was Noble, but alas,
He was a Younger Brother.
Neither of them no Huntsman was,
No Fisher, nor no Fowler;
Tom was styled the prop'rer Lad,
But Will the better Bowler.
3.
Tom would Drink her Health and Swear,
The Nation could not want her;
Will would take her by the Ear,
And with his Voice Enchant her.
Tom was always in her sight,
And never forgot his Duty;
Will was Witty, and could write
Sweet Sonnets on her Beauty.
4.
Which of them she Loved most,
Or whither she Loved either;
It Was thought they found it to their cost,
That she indeed Loved neither.
And yet she was so sweet a She,
So comely of behavior;
That Tom thought He, and Will thought He,
Was greatest in her Favor.
5.
Pastora was a Beauteous Lass,
Of a charming sprightly Nature,
Divinely Good and Kind she was,
And smiled on every Creature.
Of Favors she was provident,
But yet not over sparing,
She gave no loose Encouragement,
Yet kept Men from despairing.
6.
Now flying Fame had made report
Of Fair Pastora's Beauty,
That she must needs unto the Court,
There to perform her Duty.
Unto the Court Pastora's gone,
(It were no Court without her,)
The Queen her self, with all her Train,
Had none so Fair about her.
7.
Tom hung his Dog, and flung away
His Sheep-hook and his Wallet;
Will broke his Pipes, and cursed the day
That e're he made a Ballet.
Their Nine-pins and their Bowls they broke,
Their Tunes were turned to Tears,
It Is time for me to make an end,
Let them go shake their Ears.
RONDELAY.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
1.
CHLOE found Amyntas lying
All in Tears, upon the Plain;
Sighing to himself, and crying,
Wretched I, to love in vain!
Kiss me, Dear, before my dying;
Kiss me once, and ease my pain!
2.
Sighing to himself, and crying
Wretched I, to love in vain:
Ever scorning and denying
To reward your faithful Swain:
Kiss me, Dear, before my dying;
Kiss me once, and ease my pain!
3.
Ever scorning, and denying
To reward your faithful Swain;
Chloe, laughing at his crying,
Told him that he loved in vain:
Kiss me, Dear, before my dying;
Kiss me once, and ease my pain!
4.
Chloe, laughing at his crying,
Told him that he loved in vain:
But repenting, and complying,
When he kissed, she kissed again:
Kissed him up, before his dying;
Kissed him up, and eased his pain.
In a Letter to the Honorable Mr. Charles Montague.
By Mr. PRIOR.
1.
However, it is well, that whilst Mankind,
Through Fate's Fantastic Mazes errs,
He can imagined Pleasures find,
To combat against real Cares.
2.
Fancies and Notions we pursue,
Which never had Being but in thought;
And like the doting Artist woo,
The Image we our selves have wrought.
3.
Against Experience we believe,
And argue against Demonstration;
Pleased that we can our selves deceive,
And set our Judgment by our Passion.
4.
The hoary Fool, who, many Days,
Has struggled with continued Sorrow,
Renews his Hope, and blindly lays
The desperate Bet upon to Morrow.
5.
To Morrow comes, it is Noon, it is Night,
This day like all the former fled;
Yet on he runs to seek Delight
To Morrow, till too Night he is dead.
6.
Our Hopes, like towering Falcons, aim
At Objects in an Airy height,
But all the Pleasure of the Game,
Is afar off to view the Flight.
7.
The worthless Prey but only shows,
The Joy consisted in the Strife;
Whatever we take, as soon we lose,
In Homer's Riddle, and in Life.
8.
So whilst in Fev'rish Sleeps we think
We taste what waking we desire,
The Dream is better than the Drink,
Which only feeds the sickly Fire.
9.
To the Minds Eye things well appear,
At distance through an artful Glass;
Bring but the flattering Objects near,
They Are all a senseless gloomy Mass.
10.
Seeing aright, we see our Woes,
Then what avails it to have Eyes?
From Ignorance our Comfort flows,
The only wretched are the Wise.
11.
We wearied should lie down in Death,
This Cheat of Life would take no more;
If you thought Fame but stinking Breath,
I, Phillis but a perjured Whore.
An ODE.
By Mr. PRIOR
1.
WHilst blooming Youth and gay Delight
In all thy Looks and Gestures shine;
Thou have, my Dear, undoubted Right
To Rule this destined Heart of mine;
My Reason bends to what your Eyes ordain,
For I was born to love, and you to reign.
2.
But would you meanly then rely
On Power, you know I must obey;
It Is but a Legal Tyranny
To do an Ill, because you may.
Why must I thee, as Atheists Heaven adore,
Not see thy Mercy, and but dread thy Power.
3.
Take heed, my Dear, Youth flies apace,
Time equally with Love is blind;
Soon must those Glories of thy Face
The Fate of Vulgar Beauty find.
The thousand Loves that arm thy potent Eye,
Must drop their Quivers, flag their Wings, and die.
4.
Then thou will sigh, when in each Frown
A hateful wrinckle more appears;
And putting peevish humors on,
Seems but the sad effect of Years:
Even Kindness then too weak a Charm will prove
To raise the Ghost of my departed Love.
5.
Forced Complements and formal Bows
Will show Thee Just above Neglect,
The heat with which thy Lover glows
Will settle into cold Respect;
A talking dull Platonic I shall turn,
Learn to be civil, when I cease to burn.
6.
Then shun the ill, and know, my Dear,
Kindness and Constancy will prove
The only Pillars fit to bear
So vast a weight as that of Love:
If thou can wish to make my Flames endure,
Thine must be very fierce, and very pure.
7.
Haste Celia, haste, whilst Love invites,
Obey the Godhead's gentle Voice,
Fill every Sense with soft Delights,
And give thy Soul a loose to Joys;
Let millions of repeated Blisses prove
That thou art Kindness all, and I all love.
8.
Be mine, and only mine, take care to guide
Your Looks, your Thoughts, your Dreams
To me alone, nor come so far,
As liking any Youth beside:
What Men e're court thee, fly 'em, and believe
They Are Serpents all, and thou the tempted Eve.
9.
So shall I court thy dearest Truth
When Beauty ceases to engage;
And thinking on thy charming Youth,
I Will love it over again in Age.
So time it self our Raptures shall improve,
And still we'll wake to Joy, and live to Love.
TO A LADY of Quality's Playing on the Lute.
By Mr. PRIOR.
WHat Charms you have, from what high Race you sprung,
Have been the Subject of our Daring Song;
But when you pleased to show the laboring Muse
What greater Theams your Music could produce;
Our Babbling Praises we repeat no more,
But hear, rejoice, stand silent, and adore.
The Persians thus, first gazing on the Sun,
Admired how high 'twas placed, how bright it shone;
But, as his Power was known, their Thoughts were raised,
And soon they worshipped, what at first they praised.
Eliza's Glory lives in Spencer's Song,
And Cowley's Verse keeps fair Orinda young:
That you in Beauty, and in Birth excel,
The Muse might dictate, and the Poet tell;
Your Art, no other Art can speak, and you,
To show how well you play, must play anew:
Your Musick's power your Music must disclose,
For what Light is, it is only Light that shows.
Strange force of Harmony that thus Controuls
Our inmost Thoughts, and sanctifies our Souls:
Whilst with its utmost Art your Sex could move
Our Wonder only, or at'best our Love.
You far beyond both these your God did place,
That your high power might worldly thoughts destroy,
That with your Numbers you our Zeal might raise,
And, like himself, Communicate your Joy.
When to your Native Heaven you shall repair,
And with your Presence Crown the Blessings there
Your Lute may wind its strings but little higher,
To tune their Notes to that Immortal Quire.
Your Art is perfect here, your Numbers do,
More than our Books, make the rude Atheist know
That there is a Heaven, by what he hears below.
As in some Piece, whilst Luke his Skill expressed,
A Cunning Angel came and drew the rest:
So, whilst you play, some Godhead does impart
Harmonious aid, Divinity helps Art;
Some Cherub finishes what you begun,
And to a Miracle improves a Tune.
To burning Rome when frantic Nero played,
Viewing your Face, no more he had surveyed
The reigning flames, but struck with strange surprise,
Confess 'em less than those of Anna's Eyes.
But, had he heard thy Lute, he soon had found
His Rage eluded, and his Crime atton'd;
Thine, like Amphion's Hand had raised the Stone,
And from Destruction called a Fairer Town;
Malice to Music had been forced to yield,
Nor could he Burn so fast, as thou could Build.
An EPITAPH ON THE Lady WHITMORE.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
FAir, Kind, and True, a Treasure each alone;
A Wife, a Mistress, and a Friend in one;
Rest in this Tomb, raised at thy Husband's cost,
Here sadly summing, what he had, and lost.
Come Virgins, e're in equal Bands you join,
Come first and offer at her Sacred Shrine;
Pray but for half the Virtues of this Wife,
Compound for all the rest, with longer Life,
And wish your Vows, like hers may be returned,
So Loved when Living, and when Dead so Mourned.
AN EPITAPH, ON Sir Palms Fairborne's TOMB IN Westminster -Abbey.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
Sacred To the Immortal Memory of Sir Palms Fairborne, Knight, Governor of
Tangier; in execution of which Command he was mortally wounded by a Shot from
the Moors, then Besieging the Town, in the 46th. year of his Age. October 24th.
1680.
YE Sacred Relics which your Marble keep,
Here undisturbed by Wars in quiet sleep:
Discharge the trust which when it was below
Fairborne's undaunted Soul did undergo,
And be the Towns Palladium from the Foe.
Alive and dead these Walls he will defend,
Great Actions great Examples must attend.
The Candian Siege his early Valor knew,
Where Turkish Blood did his young hands imbrew.
From thence returning with deserved Applause,
Against the Moors his well-flesh'd Sword be draws;
The same the Courage, and the same the Cause.
His Youth and Age, his Life and Death combine,
As in some great and regular design,
All of a Piece throughout, and all Divine.
Still nearer Heaven his Virtues shone more bright,
Like rising flames expanding in their height,
The Martyr's Glory Crowned the Soldiers Fight.
More bravely British General never fell,
Nor General's Death was e're revenged so well,
Which his pleased Eyes beheld before their close,
Followed by thousand Victims of his Foes.
To his lamented loss for time to come,
His pious Widow Consecrates this Tomb.
To the Reverend Dr. SHERLOCK, Dean of St. Paul's; ON His Practical Discourse
Concerning DEATH.
BY Mr. PRIOR.
FOrgive the Muse, who in unhallowed Strains
The Saint one Moment from his God detains:
For sure, what e're you do, where e're you are,
It Is all but one good Work, one constant Prayer.
Forgive her: and entreat that God, to whom
Thy favored Vows with kind acceptance come,
To raise her Numbers to that blessed Degree
That suits a Song of Piety and Thee.
Wondrous good Man! whose Labors may repel
The force of Sin, may stop the Rage of Hell:
Who, like the Baptist, from thy God were sent
To be the Voice, and bid the World repent:
Thee, Youth shall study; and no more engage
His flattering Wishes for uncertain Age;
No more, with fruitless Care, and cheated Strife,
Chase fleeting Pleasure through this Maze of Life;
Finding the wretched All He here can have
But present Food, and but a future Grave;
Each, great as Philip's Son, shall sit and view
This sordid World, and, weeping, ask a New.
Decrepit Age shall read Thee, and consess
Thy Labors can assuage, where Medcine's cease:
Shall bless thy Words, their wounded Souls relief
The drops that sweeten their last Dregs of Life;
Shall look to Heaven, and laugh at all beneath,
Own Riches gathered Trouble; Fame, a breath;
And Life an Ill, whose only Cure is Death.
Thy even thoughts with so much plainness flow,
Their Sense untutored Infancy may know,
Yet to that height is all that plainness wrought,
Wit may admire, and lettered Pride be taught:
Easy in words thy Style, in Sense sublime,
On its blessed Steps each Age and Sex may rise,
It Is like the Ladder in the Patriarch's Dream,
Its foot on Earth, its height beyond the Skies.
Diffused its Virtue, boundless is its Power,
It Is public Health, and Universal Cure:
Of Heavenly Manna it is a second Feast,
A Nation's Food, and All to every taste.
To its last height mad Brittain's Guilt was reared,
And various Deaths for various Crimes she feared;
With your kind Works her drooping Hopes revive,
You bid her read, repent, adore, and live.
You wrest the Bolt from Heavens avenging hand,
Stop ready Death, and save a sinking Land.
O save us still! still bless us with thy stay!
O want thy Heaven, till we have learnt the way!
Refuse to leave thy destined Charge too soon,
And for the Church's good, defer thy own!
O live! and let thy Works urge our belief!
Live to explain thy Doctrine by thy Life;
Till future Infancy, baptized by thee,
Grow ripe in Years, and old in Piety,
Till Christians, yet unborn, be taught to die;
Then in full Age, and hoary Holiness
Retire, great Teacher, to thy promised Bliss:
Untoucht thy Tomb, uninjur'd be thy Dust,
As thy own Fame amongst the future Just,
Till in last Sounds the dreaded Trumpet speaks,
Till Judgment calls, and quickened Nature wakes,
Till through the utmost Earth, and deepest Sea
Our scattered Atoms find their hidden way,
In haste to cloth their Kindred Souls again,
Perfect our State, and build Immortal Man:
Then fearless, Thou, who well sustain'dst the Fight,
To Paths of Joy, and Worlds of endless Light,
Lead up all those who heard thee, and believed;
'Midst thy own Flock, great Shepherd, be received,
And glad all Heaven with Millions thou have saved.
ON EXODUS 3. 14. I am that I am. A Pindarique ODE.
BY Mr. PRIOR.
MAN! foolish Man!
Scarce know thou how thy self began,
Scarce have thou Thought enough to prove Thou art,
Yet steeled with studied boldness, thou dare try
To send thy doubting Reason's dazzled Eye
Through the mysterious Gulf of vast Immensity.
Much thou can there discern, and much impart,
Vain Wretch! suppress thy knowing Pride,
Mortify thy Learned Lust;
Vain are thy thoughts, whilst thou thy self art Dust.
Wisdom her Oars, and Wit her Sails may lend,
The Helm let Politic Experience guide,
Yet cease to hope, thy short-lived Bark shall ride
Down spreading Fate's unnavigable Tide.
What though still it farther tend?
Still it is further from its end,
And in the bosom of that boundless Sea
Loses it self, and its increasing way.
2.
With daring Pride and insolent Delight
You boast your Doubts resolved, your Labors crowned,
And (...) your God, forsooth, is found
Incomprehensible and Infinite.
But is he therefore found? Vain Searcher! no:
Let your imperfect Definition show
That nothing less than nothing you the weak Definer know.
3.
Say why should the collected Main
It self within it self contain?
Why to its Caverns should it sometimes creep,
And with delighted Silence sleep
On the loved Bosom of its Parent Deep?
Why should its numerous Waters stay
In comely Discipline, and fair Array,
Prepared to meet its high Commands,
And with diffused Obedience spread
Their opening Ranks over Earth's submissive head:
And march through different Paths to different Lands?
Why should the constant Sun
With measured steps his Radiant Journeys run?
Why does he order the Diurnal Hours
To leave Earth's other part, and rise in ours?
Why does he wake the correspondent Moon,
And, filling her willing Lamp with liquid Light,
Commanding her with delegated Power
To beautify the World, and bless the Night?
Why should each animated Star
Love the just Limits of its proper Sphere?
Why should each consenting Sign
With prudent Harmony combine
To keep in order, and gird up the regulated Year?
4.
Man does with dangerous Curiosity
These unfathomed Wonders try,
With fancied Rules and Arbitrary Laws,
Matter and Motion he restrains,
And studied Lines and fictious Circles draws;
Then with imagined Sov'raignty
Lord of his new Hypothesis he reigns.
He reigns: how long? till some Usurper rise,
And he too, mighty Thoughtful, mighty Wise,
Studies new Lines, new Circles feigns,
On t'other's Ruin rears his Throne,
And showing his mistakes, maintains his own.
Well then! from this new toil what Knowledge flows!
Just as much, perhaps, as shows
That former Searchers were but bookish Fools,
Their choice Remarks, their Darling Rules,
But canting Error all, and Jargon of the Schools.
5.
Through the aerial Seas, and watery Skies,
Mountainous heaps of Wonders rise;
Whose towering Strength will never submit
To Reason's Batteries, or the Mines of Wit.
Yet still Enquiring, still Mistaking Man,
Each hour repulsed, each hour dare onward press,
And levelling at God his wandering Guess,
(That feeble Engine of his Reasoning War,
Which guides his Doubts, and combats his
Despair,)
Laws to his Maker the learned Wretch can give,
Can bound that Nature, and prescribe that Will,
Whose pregnant Word did either Ocean fill,
And tell us how all Beings are, and how they move and live.
Vain Man! that pregnant Word sent forth again,
Through either Ocean,
Might to a World extend each Atom there;
And for each drop call forth a Sea, a Heaven for every Star.
6.
Let cunning Earth her fruitful Wonders hide,
And only lift thy staggering Reason up
To trembling Calvary's astonished top;
The mock thy Knowledge, and confound thy Pride,
By telling thee, Perfection suffered Pain,
An Eternal Essence died;
Death's Vanquisher by vanquished Death was slain,
The promised Earth profaned with Deicide.
Then down with all thy boasted Volumes down,
Only reserve the Sacred One;
Low, reverently low,
Make thy stubborn Knowledge bow;
Weep out thy Reason's, and thy Body's Eyes,
Deject thy self, that thou may rise;
And to see Heaven be blind to all below.
Then Faith, for Reason's glimmering light, shall give
Her Immortal Perspective;
And Grace's presence Nature's loss retrieve:
Then thy enliv'ned Soul shall know
That all the Volumes of Philosophy,
With all their Comments, never could invent
So politic an Instrument,
So fit, as Jacob's Ladder was to scale the distant Sky.
THE Last parting OF Hector and Andromache. FROM THE SIXTH BOOK OF Homer's
Iliads. Translated from the Original
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT.
Hector, returning from the Field of Battle, to visit Helen his Sister-in-Law,
and his Brother Paris, who had fought unsuccessfully hand to hand, with
Menelaus, from thence goes to his own Palace to see his Wife Andromache, and
his Infant Son Astyanax. The description of that Interview, is the Subject of
this Translation.

THus having said, brave Hector went to see
His Virtuous Wife, the fair Andromache.
He found her not at home; for she was gone
(Attended by her Maid and Infant Son,)
To climb the steepy Tower of Ilion.
From whence with heavy Heart she might survey
The bloody business of the dreadful Day.
Her mournful Eyes she cast around the Plain,
And sought the Lord of her Desires in vain.
But he, who thought his peopled Palace bare,
When she, his only Comfort, was not there;
Stood in the Gate, and asked of every one,
Which way she took, and whither she was gone:
If to the Court, or with his Mother's Train,
In long Procession to Minerva's Fane?
The Servants answered, neither to the Court
Where Priam's Sons and Daughters did resort,
Nor to the Temple was she gone, to move
With Prayers the blew-ey'd Progeny of Jove;
But, more solicitous for him alone,
Than all their safety, to the Tower was gone,
There to survey the Labors of the Field;
Where the Greeks conquer, and the Trojans yield.
Swiftly she passed, with Fear and Fury wild,
The Nurse went lagging after with the Child.
This heard, the Noble Hector made no stay;
Th'admiring Throng divide, to give him way:
He passed through every Street, by which he came,
And at the Gate he met the mournful Dame.
His Wife beheld him, and with eager pace,
Flew to his Arms, to meet a dear Embrace:
His Wife, who brought in Dower Cilicia's Crown;
And, in her self, a greater Dower alone:
Aetion's Heyr, who on the Woody Plain
Of Hippoplacus did in Thebe reign.
Breathless she flew, with Joy and Passion wild,
The Nurse came lagging after with her Child.
The Royal Babe upon her Breast was laid;
Who, like the Morning Star, his beams displayed.
Scamandrius was his Name which Hector gave,
From that fair Flood which Ilion's Wall did lave:
But him Astyanax the Trojans call,
From his great Father who defends the Wall.
Hector beheld him with a silent Smile,
His tender Wife stood weeping by, the while:
Pressed in her own, his Warlike hand she took,
Then sighed, and thus Prophetically spoke.
Thy dauntless Heart (which I foresee too late,)
Too daring Man, will urge thee to thy Fate:
Nor do thou pity, with a Parent's mind,
This helpless Orphan whom thou leave behind;
Nor me, the unhappy Partner of thy Bed;
Who must in Triumph by the Greeks be led:
They seek thy Life; and in unequal Fight,
With many will oppress thy single Might:
Better it were for miserable me
To die before the Fate which I foresee.
For ah what comfort can the World bequeath
To Hector's Widow, after Hector's death!
Eternal Sorrow and perpetual Tears
Began my Youth, and will conclude my Years:
I have no Parents, Friends, nor Brothers left;
By stern Achilles all of Life bereft.
Then when the Walls of Thebes he o'rethrew,
His fatal Hand my Royal Father slew;
He slew Action, but despoiled him not;
Nor in his hate the Funeral Rites forgot;
Armed as he was he sent him whole below;
And reverenced thus the Manes of his Foe:
A Tomb he raised; the Mountain Nymphs around,
Enclosed with planted Elms the Holy Ground.
My sev'n brave Brothers in one fatal Day
To Death's dark Mansions took the mournful way:
Slain by the same Achilles, while they keep
The bellowing Oxen and the bleating Sheep.
My Mother, who the Royal Scepter swayed,
Was Captive to the cruel Victor made:
And hither led: but hence redeemed with Gold,
Her Native Country did again behold.
And but beheld: for soon Diana's Dart
In an unhappy Chase transfixed her Heart.
But thou, my Hector, art thy self alone,
My Parents, Brothers, and my Lord in one:
O kill not all my Kindred over again,
Nor tempt the Dangers of the dusty Plain;
But in this Tower, for our Defense, remain.
Thy Wife and Son are in thy Ruin lost:
This is a Husband's and a Father's Post.
The Scoean Gate commands the Plains below;
Here marshal all thy Soldiers as they go;
And hence, with other Hands, repel the Foe.
By yon wild Fig Tree lies their chief ascent,
And thither all their Powers are daily bent:
The two Ajaces have I often seen,
And the wronged Husband of the Spartan Queen:
With him his greater Brother; and with these
Fierce Diomede and bold Meriones:
Uncertain if by Augury, or chance,
But by this easy rise they all advance;
Guard well that Pass, secure of all beside.
To whom the Noble Hector thus replied.
That and the rest are in my daily care;
But should I shun the Dangers of the War,
With scorn the Trojans would reward my pains,
And their proud Ladies with their sweeping Trains.
The Grecian Swords and Lances I can bear:
But loss of Honor is my only Fear.
Shall Hector, born to War, his Birthright yield,
Belie his Courage and forsake the Field?
Early in rugged Arms I took delight;
And still have been the foremost in the Fight:
With dangers dearly have I bought Renown,
And am the Champion of my Father's Crown.
And yet my mind forebodes, with sure presage,
That Troy shall perish by the Grecian Rage.
The fatal Day draws on, when I must fall;
And Universal Ruin cover all.
Not Troy it self, though built by Hands Divine,
Nor Priam, nor his People, nor his Line,
My Mother, nor my Brothers of Renown,
Whose Valor yet defends the unhappy Town,
Not these, nor all their Fates which I foresee,
Are half of that concern I have for thee.
I see, I see thee in that fatal Hour,
Subjected to the Victor's cruel Power:
Led hence a Slave to some insulting Sword:
Forlorn and trembling at a Foreign Lord.
A spectacle in Argos, at the Loom,
Gracing with Trojan Fights, a Grecian Room;
Or from deep Wells, the living Stream to take,
And on thy weary Shoulders bring it back.
While, groaning under this laborious Life,
They insolently call thee Hector's Wife.
Upbraid thy Bondage with thy Husband's name;
And from my Glory propagate thy Shame.
This when they say, thy Sorrows will increase
With anxious thoughts of former Happiness;
That he is dead who could thy wrongs redress.
But I oppressed with Iron Sleep before,
Shall hear thy unavailing Cries no more.
He said.
Then, holding forth his Arms, he took his Boy,
(The Pledge of Love, and other hope of Troy;)
The fearful Infant turned his Head away;
And on his Nurse's Neck reclining lay,
His unknown Father shunning with affright,
And looking back on so uncouth a fight.
Daunted to see a Face with Steel o're-spread,
And his high Plume, that nodded over his Head.
His Sire and Mother-smil'd with silent Joy;
And Hector hastened to relieve his Boy;
Dismissed his burnished Helm, that shone afar,
(The Pride of Warriors, and the Pomp of War:)
The Illustrious Babe, thus reconciled, he took:
Hugged in his Arms, and kissed, and thus he spoke.
Parent of Gods, and Men, propitious Jove,
And you bright Synod of the Powers above;
On this my son your Gracious Gifts bestow;
Grant him to live, and great in Arms to grow:
To Reign in Troy; to Govern with Renown:
To shield the People, and assert the Crown:
That, when hereafter he from War shall come,
And bring his Trojans Peace and Triumph home,
Some aged Man, who lives this act to see,
And who in former times remembered me,
May say the Son in Fortitude and Fame
Out-goes the Mark; and drowns his Father's Name:
That at these words his Mother may rejoice:
And add her Suffrage to the public Voice.
Thus having said,
He first with suppliant Hands the Gods adored:
Then to the Mother's Arms the Child restored:
With Tears and Smiles she took her Son, and pressed
The Illustrious Infant to her fragrant Breast.
He wiping her fair Eyes, indulged her Grief,
And eased her Sorrows with this last Relief.
My Wife and Mistress, drive thy fears away;
Nor give so bad an Omen to the Day:
Think not it lies in any Grecian's Power,
To take my Life before the fatal Hour.
When that arrives, nor good nor bad can fly
The irrevocable Doom of Destiny.
Return, and to divert thy thoughts at home,
There task thy Maids, and exercise the Loom,
Employed in Works that Womankind become.
The Toils of War, and Feats of Chivalry
Belong to Men, and most of all to me.
At this, for new Replies he did not stay,
But laced his Crested Helm, and strode away:
His lovely Consort to her House returned:
And looking often back in silence mourned:
Home when she came, her secret Woe she vents,
And fills the Palace with her loud Laments:
Those loud Laments her ecchoing Maids restore,
And Hector, yet alive, as dead deplore.
SYPHILIS.

Written (IN LATIN) By that Famous POET and PHYSICIAN Fracastorius.

ENGLISHED BY Mr. TATE.

THE TRANSLATOR TO Dr. THO. HOBBS.
ACcept, great Son of Art, this faint effect
Of a most active, and unfeigned Respect:
Numbers that yield (Alas!) too just survey
Of Physick's growth and Poetry's decay.
That show a generous Muse impaired by Me,
As much as the Author's skill's outdone by Thee.
This Indian Conqu'rer's fatal March he sung,
To the same Lyre his own Apollo strung;
Whose Notes yet failed the Monster to assuage,
Revenging Here, invading Spaniard's Rage.
Dear was the Conquest of a new found World,
Whose Plague e're since through all the Old is hurled.
Had Fracastorius, who in Numbers told
(Numbers more rich than those new Lands of Gold)
This great Destroyer's Progress, seen this Age
And thy Success against the Tyrant's Rage,
Bembus, had then been no immortal Name,
Thou and thy Art had challenged all his Flame!
Thou driv'st the Usurper to his last Retreats,
Repairing as Thou go the ruined Seats:
Thus while the Foe is by thy Art removed,
The Holds are strengthened, and the Soil improved.
Thy happy Conquest does at once Expel
The Invader's force, and inbred Factions quell.
Thy Patients and Augusta's fate's the same,
To rise more fair and lasting for the Flame:
While meaner Artists this bold Task essay,
In The little World of Man they lose their way.
Thou know the secret Passes to each Part,
And, skilled in Nature, can not fail in Art.
THE LIFE OF Fracastorius.
FRacastorius was descended from the Fracastorian Family of great Antiquity in
Verona. He seemed not only to rival the Fame of Catullus and Pliny, who had
long before made that City renowned, but to have very far exceeded all his
Contemporaries, for Learning and Poetry. His Parents were Paulo-Philippus
Fracastorius, and Camilla Mascarellia, both of great Reputation. He was so well
educated by his Father, that he gave early proofs of a great Genius, so that in
his Childhood all men conceived hopes of an extraordinary man. Nor was
Providence wanting to give him a signal Testimony, forasmuch as when he was an
Infant in the Arms of his Mother, a sudden Tempest arising, in which the Mother
was struck dead by Lightning, the Child received no harm. He was sent for
literature while very young to Padua, where even in that Age with indefatigable
labor, he opened his way to that height of Glory which he afterward attained:
After the initiatory Arts he applied himself to the secrets of distinct
Sciences, but infinitely delighted with the Mathematics, in all, assisted by a
Memory equal to his Ingenuity. After several years spent in Philosophical
studies under the Tutorship of Peter Pomponatius of Mantua; he devoted himself
by the dictates of his Genius to Physic, with such resolution and success,
that in the School disputations, not only his fellow Students, but most
experienced Doctors, were sensible that he was designed by Providence for great
Undertakings. Accordingly they then gave him the honor of the Pulpit, which
had never before been permitted to any person till they had perfected their
studies, and were arrived to the years of Manhood. This School being dissolved
by the breaking out of the War, while he had thoughts of returning to his
Country (his Father being then dead) he was on honorable conditions invited
by Livianus, General of the Venetian Forces, and a noble Patron of Wit, to the
College Forojuliensis, etc. -- and lodged in the same apartment of Andrea
Naugerus and Johannes Cottac, two excellent Poets. He had not long resided here
before he published Verses on every extraordinary Occasion that happened, which
were received with such general applause throughout Italy, that their fame has
to this day stifled the performances of his Companions. Having afterward
accompanied Livianus through many Wars, the General being at last overthrown
and taken Prisoner by the French at Abdua; he returned late into his native
Country, where in the general devastation he found his Patrimony almost
utterly destroyed.

He married, but was soon unhappy in the loss of two Sons, whose untimely Death
he bewailed in a most passionate Elegy. He was low of Stature, but of good
bulk, his Shoulders broad, his Hair black and long, his Face round, his Eyes
black, his Nose short and turning upwards by his continual contemplation of the
Stars, a lively air was spread over his Countenance, that displayed the
Serenity and Ingenuity of his Mind. He affected a quiet and private life, as
being a Man free from abmitious desires; contenting himself with a moderate
fortune, and placing his happiness in improvement of his knowledge. He was
cheerful though frugal at his Table, having a constant regard to his health;
his Wit being always the best part of his Banquet. He was notwithstanding
sparing in his Speech, and affecting no vanity in his Dress: he was never
censorious of other Men's performances, but always glad of an occasion to
commend; for which he was deservedly celebrated by Johannes Baptista in a noble
Epigram. He spent his time in curing the diseased, a divine Power seeming
always to attend his endeavors, above the sordid desire of gain, and thought
himself best rewarded in the health of his Patient. By these means he
contracted many friendships, and had (deservedly) no Enemy.

He was not only esteemed for his skill in his own Country, but was sought to
by foreign Princes in desperate sickness, for which though vast rewards were
offered, he brought nothing home beside their Friendship.

In his leisure he diverted himself with reading History, at which time
Polybius, or Plutarch were never out of his hands. He sometimes relieved his
Studies with Mathematics and Music, and made no ^mall performances in
Cosmography. He was much alone, yet always employed; and though by reason of
his backwardness to discourse, he seemed of a Saturnine Temper, yet none were
more cheerful and pleasant when entered into Coversation. He performed wonders
by his exact knowledge of Herbs and Simples, by searching the best Books of the
Ancients. That most excellent Antidote called Diascordium, was of his
preparing; we are likewise beholding to his judgment for specifying many useful
Herbs, of which the Ancients had left uncertain description. The Age in which
he lived saw nothing equal to his Learning, but his honesty. In his retreat
from the City, while the Pestilence raged, he found leisure to compose the
following Poem, a work of such elegance, that Sanazarius freely acknowledged it
to excel his own, De partu Virginis, that had cost him above twenty years
labor and correction. His Treatises in Prose and efforts of Poetry are too
numerous to be recited on this occasion.

In all which he affected so little vanity, that he never preserved a Copy; and
we are beholding for what are extant, to the Industry of his Friends that
collected them after his death.

He was above 70 years old when he dyed, which was by an Apoplexy that seized
him while he was at Dinner at his Country seat. He was Sensible of his malady,
though speechless, often putting his Hand upon the top of his Head, by which
sign he would have had his Servants administer a Cupping-Glass to the part
affected, by which he had formerly cured a Nun in Verona, laboring under the
same Distemper. But his Domestics, not conceiving his meaning, applied first
one thing and then another, till in the Evening he gently Expired. He was
Interred at Verona: His Statue, together with that of Andrea Naugerus,
delicately cast in Brass, was erected in the School of Padua by Johannes
Baptista Rhamnusius. His fellow Citizens of Verona, not to be behind Rhamnusius
in respect (two years after the erecting the brazen Statue in Padua) set up his
Image in marble at Verona, in imitation of their Ancestors, who had performed
the same honor to their Catullus and Pliny; with Laurel round their Heads.

TO His Friend, The Writer of the ENSUING TRANSLATION.
WEll has thy Fate directed thee to choose
An Author, worthy of the noblest Muse:
His learned Pen has, what was long unknown,
In Roman language, like a Roman shown.
And thine as sweet, in British numbers taught
The Labors of his vast Poetic thought.
Of Earth, of Seas, of putrid Air He sung,
To search from whence that dire Contagion sprung,
Which now does worse than fellest Plagues deface
The beauteous Form of God's resembling Race.
From the Malignant influence of the Skies,
It Is sure the Seeds of most Diseases rise.
But if this merciless, consuming Flame,
From Vapors, or infectious Planets came;
Why raged it not much more in ancient Times,
From Exhalations of impurer Climes?
Besides; no settled Consequence can spring
From whatsoever contingent Causes bring.
The raging Pestilence, that long lays wast
The spotted Prey, devours it self at last.
And sure had this been never so strong entailed,
The vile succession must e're now bave failed.
Blame not the Stars; it is plain it neither fell
From the distempered Heavens, nor rose from Hell.
Nor need we to the distant Indies rome;
The cursed Originals are nearer home.
Whence should that foul infectious Torment flow,
But from the baneful source of all our woe?
That wheedling, charming Sex, that draws us in
To every punishment and every sin.
While Man, by Heavens command, and Nature led,
Through this vast Globe his Maker's Image spread;
The Godlike Figure formed in every Womb
Prolifick stems, for Ages yet to come.
Uncurst, because he did not vainly toil,
On barren Mountains, or impregnant soil;
Healthful and vigorous, He, over the face
Of the wide Earth, dispersed the Sacred race.
But now, that Tribe, who all our Rights invade,
Pervert the wise Decrees which Nature made.
Prompt to all ill, Insatiately they fire
At every pampered Brutes untamed desire:
And while they prostitute themselves to more
Than Eastern Kings had concubines before;
The foul Promiscuous Coition breeds,
Like jarring Elements, those poisonous seeds,
Which all the dreadful host of Symptoms bring;
And with one cursed Disease a Legion spring.
Were the decayed, degenerate race of Man,
Untainted now, as when it first began;
And there were no such torturing Plague on Earth,
The first inconstant Wretch would give it birth.
Shun her, as you would fly from splitting Rocks;
Not Wolves so fatal are to tender Flocks:
Though round the world the dire Contagion flew,
She Will poison more, than e're Pandora slew.
A POETICAL HISTORY OF THE FRENCH DISEASE.
THrough what adventures this unknown Disease
So lately did astonished Europe seize,
Through Asian Coasts and Libyan Cities ran,
And from what Seeds the Malady began,
Our Song shall tell: To Naples first it came
From France, and justly took from France his Name,
Companion of the War --
The Methods next of Cure we shall express,
The wondrous Wit of Mortals in distress:
But when their Skill too faint Resistance made,
We'll show the Gods descending to their aid.
To reach the secret Causes we must rise
Above the Clouds, and travel over the Skies.
The daring Subject let us then pursue,
Transported with an Argument so new,
While springing Groves and tunefuli Birds invite,
And Muses that in wondrous Theams delight.
O Bembus, Ornament of Italy,
If yet from Cares of State thou can be free,
If Leo's Councils yet can spare thy skill,
And let the Business of the World stand still;
O steal a visit to those cool retreats,
The Muses dearest most frequented Seats;
And, gentle Bembus, do not there disdain
A Member of the Esculapian Train,
Attempting Physics practice to rehearse,
And clothing low Experiments in Verse.
A God instructs, these mysteries of old
By great Apollo's self in equal streins were told.
The smallest objects often attract our Eyes,
But here, beneath a small appearance, lies
A Source, that greatest wonder will create,
Of Nature much and very much of Fate.
But thou, Urania, who alone can trace
First Causes, measure out the Starry space;
That know the Planets number, force and use,
And what Effects the vari'd Orbs produce:
So may the Spears thy Heavenly Course admire,
The Stars with envy at thy Beams retire;
As thou a while shall Condescend to dwell,
With me on Earth, and make this Grove thy Cell;
While Zephyrus, can my head, with Myrtle bound,
And imitating Rocks my Song resound.
Say, Goddess, to what Cause we shall at last
Assign this Plague, unknown to Ages past;
If from the Western Climes 'twas wafted over,
When daring Spaniards left their Native shore;
Resolved beyond the Atlantic to descry,
Conjectured Worlds, or in the search to dye.
For Fame Reports this Grief perpetual there,
From Skies infected and polluted Air:
From whence it is grown so Epidemical,
Whole Cities Victims to its Fury fall;
Few escape, for what relief where vital Breath,
The Gate of Life, is made the Road of death?
If then by Traffic thence this Plague was brought,
How Dearly Dearly was that Traffic bought!
This Prodigy of sickness, weak at first,
(Like Infant Tyrants and in secret Nursed)
When once confirmed, with sudden rage breaks forth
And scatters dessolation through the Earth.
So while the Shepherd traveling through the dark
Strikes his dim Torch, some unsuspected Spark
Falls in the Stubble, where it smothers long
But by degrees becomes at last so strong,
That now it spreads over all the Neighboring soil,
Devours at once the Plowmans hope and Toil;
The sacred Grove next Sacrifice must be,
Nor Jove can save his dedicated Tree;
The Grove Foments its Rage from whence it flies
In curling flames and seems to fire the Skies.
Yet observation rightly taken draws
This new Distemper from some newer Cause;
Nor Reason can allow that this Disease,
Came first by Comerce from beyond the Seas;
Since instances in diverse Lands are shown,
To whom all Indian Traffic is unknown:
Nor could the Infection from the Western Clime
Seize distant Nations at the self same time;
And in Remoter parts begin its Reign,
As fierce and early as it did in Spain.
What slaughter in our Italy was made
Where Tiber's Tribute to the Oceans paid;
Where Poe does through a hundred Cities glide,
And pours as many Streams into the Tide.
All at one Season, all without relief,
Received and languisht with the common grief.
Nor can the Infection first be charged on Spain,
That sought new Worlds beyond the Western Main.
Since from Pyrene's foot, to Italy,
It shed its Bane on France, while Spain was free.
As soon the fertile Rhine its fury found,
And Regions with eternal Winter bound:
Nor yet did Southern Climes its vengeance shun,
But felt a flame more scorching than the Sun.
The Palms of Ida now neglected stood,
And Egypt languisht while her Nile o'erflow'd;
From whence it is plain this Pest must be assigned
To some more powerful Cause and hard to find.
In all productions of wise Nature's hand,
Whether Conceived in Air on Sea or Land;
No constant method does direct her way,
But various Beings various Laws obey;
Such things as from few Principles arise,
In every place and season meet our eyes;
But what are framed of Principles abstruce,
Such places only and such times produce.
Effects of yet a more stupendous Birth,
And such as Nature must with pangs bring forth,
Where violent and various Seeds unite,
Break slowly from the Bosom of the Night;
Long in the Womb of Fate the Embryo's worn,
Whole Ages pass before the Monster's born.
Diseases thus which various Seeds compound,
As various in their Birth and date are found.
Some always seen, some long in darkness hurld,
That break their chains at last to scourge the World.
To which black List this Plague must be assigned,
Nights foulest Birth and Terror of Mankind.
Nor must we yet think this escape the first,
Since former Ages with the like were cursed.
Long since he scattered his Infernal flame,
And always Being had, though not a Name,
At least what Name it bore is now unfound:
Both Names and things in times Abyss lie drowned,
How vainly then do we project to keep
Our Names remembered when our Bodies sleep?
Since late Succession searching their descent,
Shall neither find our dust nor Monument.
Yet where the Western Ocean finds its bound
(The World so lately by the Spaniards found)
Beneath this Pest the wretched Natives groan
In every Nation there and always known,
Such dire Effects depend upon a Clime,
On varying Skies and long Revolving time:
The temper of their Air this Plague brought forth,
The Soil it self disposed for such a Birth.
All things conspired to raise the Tyrant there,
But time alone could fix his Conquest here.
If therefore more distinctly we would know
Each Source from whence this deadly Bane did flow,
His Progress in the Earth we must survey
How many Cities groan beneath his sway.
And when his great Advancement we have traced,
We must allow his Principles as vast.
That Earth nor Sea the Ingredients could prepare
And wholly must ascribe it to the Air,
The Tyrant's seat, his Magazine is there.
The Air that does both Earth and Sea surround,
As easily can Earth and Sea confound;
What Fence for Bodies when at every pore
The soft Invader has an open door?
What fence, where poyson's drawn with vital Breath,
And Father Air the Author proves of Death?
Of subtle substance that with ease receives
Infection, which as easily it gives.
Now by what means this dire Contagion first,
Was formed aloft, by what Ingredients nursed,
Our Song shall tell; and in this wondrous Course,
Revolving times and varying Planets force.
First then the Sun with all his train of Stars,
Amongst our Elements raise endless Wars;
And when the Planets from their Stations Range,
Our Orb is influenced, and feels the Change.
The chiefest instance is the Suns retreat,
No sooner he withdraws his vital heat,
But fruitless Fields with Snow are covered over,
The pretty Fountains run and talk no more.
Yet when his Chariot to the Crab returns,
The Air, the Earth, the very Ocean burns.
The Queen of Night can boast no less a sway,
At least all humid things her power obey.
Malignant Saturn's Star as much can claim,
With friendly Jove's, bright Mars, and Venus flame,
And all the host of Lights without a Name.
Our Elements beneath their influence lie,
Slaves to the very Rabble of the Sky.
But most when many meet in one abode,
Or when some Planet enters a new road,
Far distant from the Course he used to run,
Some mighty work of Fate is to be done.
Long tracts of time indeed must first be spent,
Before completion of the vast event;
But when the Revolution once is made
What mischiefs Earth and Sea at once Invade!
Poor Mortals then shall all extremes sustain
While Heaven dissolves in Deluges of Rain;
Which from the mountains with impetuous course,
And headlong Rage, Trees, Rocks and Towns shall force,
Over swelling Ganges then shall sweep the Plain,
And peaceful Poe outroar the Stormy Main.
In other parts the Springs as low shall lie,
And Nymphs with Tears, exhausted streams supply.
Where neither Drought nor Deluges destroy,
The winds their utmost fury shall employ;
Whlie Hurricans whole Cities shall o'erthrow,
Or Earthquakes Gorge them in the depths below.
Perhaps the Season shall arrive (if Fate
And Nature once agree upon the date)
When this most cultivated Earth shall be
Unpeopled quite, or drenched beneath the Sea;
When even the Sun another Course shall steer,
And other Seasons constitute the year:
The wondering North shall see the springing Vine,
And Moors admire at Snow beneath the Line.
New Species then of Creatures shall arise
A new Creation Nature's self surprise.
Then Youth shall lend fresh vigor to the Earth,
And give a second breed of Giants birth.
By whom a new assault shall be performed,
Hills heaped on Hills, and Heaven once more be stormed.
Since Nature's then so liable to change,
Why should we think this late Contagion strange;
Or that the Planets where such mischiefs grow,
Should shed their poison on the Earth below?
Two hundred rolling years are past away,
Since Mars and Saturn in Conjunction lay.
When through the East an unknown Fever Raged,
Of strange Effects and by no Arts Asswag'd;
From suffocated Lungs with pain they drew
Their breath, and blood for spittle did ensue;
Four days the wretches with this Plague were grieved,
(Oh dismal sight) and then by death relieved.
From thence to Persia the Contagion came,
Of whom the Assyrians caught the spreading flame.
Euphrates next and Tigris did complain,
Arabia too styled happy now in vain;
Then Phrygia mourned, from whence it crossed the Sea
(Too small to quench its flame) to Italy.
Then from this lower Orb with me remove
To view the Starry Palaces above,
Through all the Roads of wandering Planets rove.
To search in what position they have stood,
And what Conjectures were from them made good.
To find what Signs did former times direct,
And what the present Age is to expect:
From hence perhaps we shall with ease descry
The Source of this stupendous Malady.
Behold how Cancer with portentous harms
Before Heavens Gate unfolds his threatening Arms;
Prodigious ills must needs from thence ensue,
In which one House we may distinctly view
A numerous Cabal of Stars conspire,
To hurl at once on Air their bainsull fire.
All this the Reverend Artist did descry
Who nightly watched the Motions of the Sky,
Ye Gods (he cried) what does your rage prepare,
What unknown Plague engenders in the Air?
Besides, I see dire Wars on Europe shed,
Ausonian Fields with Native Gore overspread.
Thus Sung the Sage, and to prevent debate,
In writing left the Story of our Fate.
When any certain Course of years is run
Ever the next Revolution be begun,
Heavens Method is, for Jove in all his State,
To weigh Events and to determine Fate;
To search the Book of destiny and show
What change shall rise in Heaven or Earth below.
Behold him then in awful Robes arrayed,
And calling his known Counsel to his aid;
Saturn and Mars the Thundering Summons call,
The Crab's portentous Arms unlock the Hall,
Mark with what various mien the Gods repair,
First Mars with sparkling Eyes and flaming Hair,
So furious and addicted to Alarms,
He dreams of Battles, though in Venus Arms.
But see with what august and peaceful brow
(Of Gold his Chariot if the Fates allow)
Great Jove appears, who does to all extend
Impartial Justice, Heaven and Nature's friend.
Old Saturn last with heavy pace comes on,
Loath to obey the Summons of his Son;
Often going stopped, often pender'd in his mind
Heaven's Empire lost, often to return inclined;
Thus, much distracted, and arriving late,
Sits grudging down beside the Chair of State.
Jove now unfolds what Fate's dark laws contain,
Which Jove alone has Wisdom to Explain:
Sees ripning Mischiefs ready to be hurled,
And much Condoles the Sufferings of the World:
Unfolded views deaths Adamantine Gates,
War, Slaughters, Factions and subverted States.
But most astonished at a new Disease,
That must forthwith on helpless Mortals seize,
These secrets he unfolds, and shakes the Skies:
The Gods Condole and from the Council rise.
Hell's Agent thus no sooner quits his Cage,
But on the starting Spheres he hurles his rage:
The purer Orbs disdain the Infernal foe,
And shake the Taint upon the Air below.
The grosser Air receives the banefull Seeds,
Converting to the Poison which it feeds:
Whether the Sun from Earth this Vapor drew,
In late Conjunction with his fiery Crew;
Or from Fermenting Seas by Neptune sent
In Envy to the higher Element,
Is hard to say; or if more Powers combined,
Sent forth this Prodigy to fright Mankind.
The Offices of Nature to define,
And to each Cause a true effect assign,
Must be a Task both hard and doubtful too,
Since various consequences often ensue:
Nor Nature always to her self is true.
Some Principles shall on the Instant work,
Whilst others shall for tedious Ages lurk:
Besides the Power of Chance shall often prevail,
On Natures force, and cause Events to fail.
Nor is the influence of Maladies
Less various than the Seeds from whence they rise.
Sometimes the infected Air hurts Trees alone,
To grass and tender flowers pernicious known.
The blast sometimes destroys the furrowed soil,
With mildew'd Ears not worth the Reapers toil.
Or if some Dale with Grain seems more enriched,
It moulds and rots before the sheaves are pitchd.
When Earth yields store, yet often some strange Disease
Shall fall and only on poor Cattle seize.
Here it shall sweep the Stock, while there it sheds
Its fury only on devoted Heads.
My own Remembrance to this hour retains,
An Autumn drowned with never ceasing Rains:
Yet this Malignant Luxury the breed
Of Goats alone did rue, the rest were freed.
See how at break of day their number's told,
See how the Keeper drives them from the Fold:
Behold him next beneath a hanging Rock,
And chearing with his Reed the browzing Flock,
While them he charms nor is himself less pleased,
With a sharp sudden Cough some darling Kid is seized
The Cough his knell, for with a giddy round
He whirls, and straight falls dead upon the ground.
This fever thus to Goats and Kids severe
While Autumn held, confined his Vengeance there;
Next Spring, both lowing Herd and Bleating Flock
At once it seized, spared none but swept the Stock:
With such uncertainty from tainted Skies
In Bodies placed on Earth effects arise.
Since then by dear experiment we find
Diseases various in their Rise and Kind:
Of this Contagion let us take a view,
More terrible for being Strange and new,
That with the proudest Son of Slaughter vies,
And claims no lower kindred than the Skies;
And as he did aloft conceive his Flame,
The proud Destroyer seeks no common Game,
He scorns the well finn'd Sporters of the Flood,
He scorns the well plumed Singers of the wood;
Disdains the wanton Browzers of the Rock,
Disdains the lowing Herd and bleating Flock;
With Wolf or Bear, despizes to engage,
Nor can the generous Horse provoke his rage:
The Lords of Nature only he annoys,
And humane frame, Heavens Images, destroys.
The bloud's black viscous parts he seizes first,
By whose malignant Aliments he is nursed;
And ever he can the fierce Assault begin,
Factions of humors take his part within;
The strongest Holds of nature thus he gains,
Quar'tring his cruel Troops throughout the veins,
While some more noble Seat the Tyrant's Throne contains.
Such principles brought this Distemper forth,
Such Aliments maintained the dreadful Birth.
His certain signs and symptoms to rehearse,
Is the next task of our instructing Verse.
O, may it prove of such a lasting date,
To conquer Time, and Triumph over Fate.
Apollo's self inspires the useful Song,
And all that to Apollo does belong,
Like him, should ever, live and be for ever young.
How shall Posterity admire our skill,
Taught by our Muse to know the lurking ill,
And when his dreadful Visage they behold,
Cry, this is the Disease whose Signs of old
Th'inspir'd Physician in bright numbers told.
For tho the infernal Pest should quit the Earth,
Absconding in the Hell, that gave it Birth;
Yet after lazy Revolutions past
The unsuspected Prodigy at last,
Shall from the womb of Night once more be hurled,
TO infect the Skies, and to amaze the World.
What therefore seems most wondrous in his course
Is that he should so long conceal his Force;
For when the Foe his secret way has made,
And in our Intrails strong detachments laid;
Yet often the Moon four monthly rounds shall steer
Before convincing Symptoms shall appear;
So long the Malady shall lurk within,
And grow confirmed before the danger's seen;
Yet with Disturbance to the wretch diseased,
Who with unwonted heaviness is seized,
With drooping Spirits, his affairs persues,
And all his Limbs their offices refuse,
The cheerful glories of his Eyes decay,
And from his Cheeks the Roses fade away,
A leaden hue over all his Face is spread,
And greater weights depress his drooping Head;
Till by degrees the Secret parts shall show,
By open proofs the undermining Foe;
Who now his dreadful ensigns shall display,
Devour, and harass in the sight of day.
Again, when cheerful Light has left the Skies,
And Night's ungrateful shades and Vapors rise;
When Nature to our Spirits sounds retreat,
And to the Vitals calls Her straggling Heat;
When th'out works are no more of warmth possessed,
Bloudless, and with a load of humors pressed;
When every kind Relief's retired within,
It Is then the Execrable Pains begin;
Arms, Shoulders, Legs, with restless Arches vexed,
And with Convulsions every Nerve perplexed;
For when through all our Veins the Infection's spread,
And by what ever should feed the Body fed;
When Nature strives the Vitals to defend,
And all destructive humors outward send:
These being viscous, gross and loath to start,
In its dull March shall torture every Part;
Whence to the Bloudless Nerves dire Pains ensue,
At once contracted, and extended too;
The thinner Parts will yet not stick so fast,
But to the Surface of the Skin are cast,
Which in foul Botches over the Body spread,
Profane the Bosom, and deform the Head:
Here Puscles in the form of Achorns swelled,
In form alone, for these with Stench are filled,
Whose Ripness is Corruption, that in time,
Disdain confinement, and discharge the slime;
Yet often the Foe would turn his Forces back,
The Brawn and inmost Muscles to attack,
And pierce so deep, that the bare Bones have been
Betwixt the dreadful fleshy Breaches seen;
When on the vocal parts his Rage was spent,
Imperfect sounds, for tunefull Speech was sent.
As on a springing Plant, you have beheld
The juice that through the tender Bark has swelled,
That from the Sap's more viscous part did come,
Till by the Sun condensed into a Gumm:
So when this Bane is once received within,
With such Eruptions he shall force the Skin;
And when the Humor for a time has flowed,
Grow fixed at last, and harden to a Node.
Hence some young Swain, as on the Rocks he stood,
To view his Picture in the crystal Flood,
And finding there his lovely Cheeks deformed,
Against the Stars, against the Gods he stormed:
Mean while the Sable Wings of Night are spread,
And balmy Sleep on every creature shed.
These wretches only no Repose could take,
By this tormenting Fiend still kept Awake;
Impatient till the Morn restored the Light,
Then cursed her Beams, and wished again for Night.
Ceres in vain her blessings did afford,
In vain the flowing Goblet crowned the Board;
No comfort they in large Possessions had,
Of Farms, or Towns, but even in Banquets sad:
In vain the Streams, and Meads they did frequent,
The dismal Thought persu'd wheree'er they went;
And when for Prospect they would climb the Hill,
The dire Remembrance Hagg'd their Fancy still:
In vain the Gods themselves they did invoke,
Adorned their Shrines, and made their Altars smoke:
They Bribed and Prayed, yet still reliefless lay,
Their offered Gumms consumed less fast than they.
Shall I relate what I my self beheld,
Where Ollius stream with gentle plenty swelled?
In those fair Meads where Ollius cuts his way,
A Youth of Godlike form I did survey,
By all the World besides unparalled,
And even in Italy by none excelled;
First Signs of Manhood on his Cheeks were shown,
A tender Harvest, and but thinly sown,
Besides those charms that did his Person grace,
Descended from a rich and noble Race:
What transport in Spectatours did he breed,
Mounted, and managing the fiery Steed,
What Joy at once, and Terror did we feel,
When he prepared for Field, and shone in Steel?
Of equal Strength and Skill for Exercise,
All conflicts tried, but never lost a Prize;
Often in the Chase his Courser he would forgo,
Trust his own Feet, and turn the swiftest Roe.
For him each Nymph, for him each Goddess strove,
Of Hill, of Plain, of Meadow, Stream and Grove;
Nor can we doubt that in this numerous Train,
Some One (neglected) did to Heaven complain
Who though in vain She loved, yet did not Curse in vain;
For whilst the Youth did to his Strength confide,
And Nerves in every Task of hardship tried.
This finished Piece, this celebrated Frame,
The Mansion of a loathed Disease became:
But of such banefull, and malignant Kind,
As Ages past never knew, and future never shall find.
Now might you see his Spring of Youth decay,
The Verdure dye, the Blossoms fall away;
The foul Infection over his Body spread,
Prophanes his Bosom, and deforms his Head;
His wretched Limbs with filth and stench over flow,
While Flesh divides, and shows the Bones below.
Dire Ulcers (can the Gods permit them) prey
On his fair Eye Balls, and devour their Day,
Whilst the neat Pyramid below, falls Moulding quite away.
Him neighboring Alps bewailed with constant Dew
Ollius; no more his wonted Passage knew,
Hills, Valleys, Rocks, Streams, Groves, his Fate Bemoaned,
Sebinus Lake from deepest Caverns groaned.
From hence malicious Saturn's Force is known,
From whose malignantOrbthisPlague was thrown,
To whom more cruel Mars assistence lent,
And club'd his Influence to the dire Event:
Nor could the malice of the Stars suffice,
To make such execrable Mischief rise;
For certainly ever this Disease began,
Through Hells dark Courts the cursing Furies ran,
Where to astonished Ghosts they did relate,
In dreadful Songs, the Burden of our Fate;
The Stygian Pool did to the bottom rake,
And from its Dregs the cursed Ingredients take,
Which scattered since through Europe wide and far,
Bred Pestilence, and more consuming War.
Ye Deities who once our Guardians were,
Who made the Ausonian fields your special Care,
And thou O Saturn, Father of our Breed,
From whence does this unwonted Rage proceed
Against thy ancient Seats?
Has Fate's dark Store a Plague yet left, which we
Have not sustained even to Extremity?
First let Parthenope her griefs declare,
Her Kings destroyed her Temples sacked in War.
Who can the Slaughter of that Day recite,
When hand to hand we joined the Gauls in fight,
When Tarrus Brook was so o'er-swell'd with Blood
Men, Horses, Arms, rolled down the impetuous Flood?
Eridanus in wandering Banks receives
The purple Stream, and for our Fate with Brother Tarrus grieves.
To what estate, O wretched Italy
Has civil Strife reduced, and mouldr'd Thee!
Where now are all thy ancient Glories hurled?
Where is thy boasted Empire of the World?
What nook in Thee from barbarous Rage is freed,
And has not seen her captive Children bleed?
That was not first to savage Arms a Prey,
And does not yet more savage Laws obey?
Answer ye Hills where peaceful Clusters grew,
And never till this hour disturbance knew,
Calm as the Flood which at your Feet ye View;
Calm as Erethenus who on each side,
Beholds your Vines, and ravished with their Pride,
Moves slowly with his Tribute to the Tide.
O Italy, our Ancient happy Seat,
Glory of Nations, and the Gods Retreat,
Whose fruitful Fields for peopled Towns provide,
Where Athesis, and smooth Benacus glide,
What words have force, thy Sufferings to relate,
Thy servile Yoke, and ignominious Fate.
Now dive, Benacus, thy famed course give over
And lead thy Streams through Laurel-Banks no more.
Yet, when our Mis'ries thus were at their height,
As if our Sorrows still had wanted weight,
As if our former Plagues had been too small,
We saw our Hope, Minerva's Darling fall,
Thy Funeral, Marcus, we did then survey
Snatched from the Muses Arms before thy day,
Benacus Banks at thy Interment groaned,
And neighboring Athesis thy Fate bemoaned;
Where by the Moon's pale Beams, Catullus came,
And nightly still was heard to sound thy Name,
His Songs once more his native Seats inspire,
The Groves were charmed, and knew their Master's Lyre.
'I was now the Galls began their fierce Alarms,
And crushed Liguria with victorious Arms,
While other Provinces as fast expire
By Caesar's Sword, and more destructive Fire;
No Latian Seat was free from Slaughter found,
But all alike with Tears and Blood were drowned.
Now for our second Task, and what Relief
Our Age has found against this raging Grief,
The Methods now of Cure we will express,
The wondrous Wit of Mortals in distress.
Astonished long they lay, no Remedy
At first they knew, nor Courage had to try,
But learnt by slow Experience to appease,
To check, and last to vanquish the Disease.
Yet after all our Study we must own
Some Secrets were by Revelation known:
For though the Stars in dark Cabals combined,
And for our Ruin with the Furies joined,
Yet were we not to last Destruction left,
Nor of the Gods Protection quite berest.
If strange and dreadful Maladies have reigned,
If Wars, dire Massacres we have sustained,
If Flames have laid our Fields and Cities waste,
Our Temples too in common Rubbish cast;
If swelling Streams no more in Banks were kept,
But Men, Herds, Houses with theFlood were swept;
If few survived these Plagues, and Famine slew,
The greater Part of that surviving Few.
Yet of such great Adventures we are proud,
As Fate had to no former Age allowed.
For, what no Mortals ever dared before,
We have the Ocean stemmed from sight of Shore;
Nor was it enough, by Atlas farthest bound,
That we the fair Hesperian Gardens found,
That we to Arabia a new Passage sought,
While Ships for Camels the rich Lading brought:
To the outmost East, we since a Voyage made,
And in the rising Sun our Sails displayed,
Beyond the Ind large tracts of Land did find,
And left the World's reputed bounds behind,
To pass the World's reputed bounds was small
Performances, of greater Glory call
Our famed Adventures on the western Shore,
Discovering Stars, and Worlds unknown before;
But waving these, our Age has yet beheld
An inspired Poet, and by none excelled,
Parthenope extolled the Songs he made,
Sebethe's God, and Virgil's sacred Shade,
From Gardens to the Stars his Muse would rise,
And made the Earth acquainted with the Skies.
His Name might well the Ages pride sustain,
But many more exalted Souls remain;
Who, when Expired, and Envy with them dead
To equal the best Ancients shall be said:
But, Bembus, while this List we do unfold,
In which Heavens blessings on the Age are told,
Leo, the most illustrious place does claim,
The great Restorer of the Roman Name;
By whose mild Aspects, and auspicious Fire,
Malignant Planets to their Cells retire.
Jove's friendly Star once more is seen to rise
And scatters healing Luster through the Skies,
He, only He, our Losses could repair,
And call the Muses to their native Air,
Restore the ancient Laws of Right and Just,
Polish Religion, from Barbarian Rust.
For Heaven, and Rome engaged in fierce Alarms,
With pious Vengeance, and with sacred Arms,
Whose terror to Euphrates Banks was spread,
While Nile retired to his undiscovered Head,
And frighted Doris dived into hisoozy Bed.
While some more able Muse shall fing his Name,
In Numbers equal to his Deeds and Fame.
While Bembus thou shall this great Theme rehearse,
And weave his Praises in eternal Verse,
Let me, in what I have proposed, proceed
With Subject suited to my slender Reed.
First, then your Patient's Constitution learn,
And well the Temper of his Blood discern,
If that be pure, with so much greater ease
You will engage, and vanquish the Disease,
Whose venom, where black Choler choaks the Veins,
Takes firmer hold, and will exact more Pains
More violent Assaults you there must make,
And on the battered Frame no pity take.
Who ever can soon discern the lurking Grief,
With far less labor may expect Relief;
But when the Foe has deeper inroads made,
And gained the factious humors to his Aid,
What Toil, what Conflicts must be first sustained
Before he is dispossessed, and Health regained;
Therefore with Care his first approaches find,
And hoard these useful Precepts in thy Mind.
From noxious Winds preserve your self with care,
And such are all that from the South repair
Of Fens and Lakes, avoid th'unwholsome Air.
To open fields and sunny Mountains fly
Where Zephyr fans, and Boreas sweeps the Sky:
Nor must you there indulge Repose, but stray,
And in continued actions spend the Day;
With every Beast of Prey loud Warproclaim,
And make the grizly Boar your constant Game,
Nor yet amongst these great Attempts disdain,
To rouse the Stag, and force him to the Plain.
Some I have known to th'Chase so much inclined,
That in the Woods they left their Grief behind,
Nor yet think fcorn the sordid Plow to guide,
Or with the pondrous Rake the Clods divide,
With heavy Ax, and many weary blow,
The towering Pine, and spreading Oak o'erthrow;
The very House yields Exercise, the Hall
Has room for Fencing, and the bounding Ball.
Rouse, rouse, shake off your fond desire of Ease,
For Sleep foments and feeds the foul Disease,
It Is then th'Invader does the Vitals seize.
But chiefly from thy Thoughts all sorrows drive.
Nor with Minerva's knotty Precepts strive,
With lighter Labors of the Muses sport,
And seek the Plains where Swains and Nymphs resort.
Abstain however from the Act of Love,
For nothing can so much destructive prove:
Bright Venus hates polluted Mysteries,
And every Nymph from foul Embraces flies.
Dire practice! Poison with Delight to bring,
And with the Lovers Dart, the Serpent's sting.
A proper Diet you must next prepare,
Than which there is nothing more requires your care;
All Food that from the Fens is brought resuse,
Whatever the standing Lakes or Seas produce,
Nor must long Custom pass for an Excuse;
Therefore from Fish in general I dissuade,
All these are of a washy Substance made,
Which though the luscious Palate they content,
Convert to Humors more than Nourishment;
Even Giltheads, though most tempting to the sight,
And sharp-fin'd Perch that in the Rocks delight.
All sorts of Fowl that on the Water prey,
By the same Rule I Would have removed away,
Forbear the Drake, and leave Rome's ancient Friend
The Capitol and City to Defend.
No less the Bustard's luscious Flesh decline,
Forbear the Back and Entrails of the Swine,
Nor with the hunted Boar thy Hunger stay,
Enjoy the Sport, but still forbear the Prey.
I hold nor Cucumber nor Mushroms good,
And Artichoke is too salacious Food:
Nor yet the use of Milk would I enjoin,
Much less of Vinegar or eager Wine,
Such as from Rhaetia comes, and from the Rhine;
The Sabine Vintage is of safer Use,
Which mellow and Well-water'd fields produce:
But if your Banquets with the Gods you would make
Of Herbs and Roots the unbought Dainties take;
Be fure that Mint and Endive still abound,
And Sowthistle, with leaves in Winter crowned.
And Sian by clear Fountains always found;
To these add Calamint, and Savery
Burrage and Balm, whose mingled sweets agree,
Rochet and Sorrel I as much approve:
The climbing Hop grows wild in every Grove,
Take thence the infant Buds, and with them join
The curling Tendrells of the springing Vine,
Whose Arms have yet no friendly shade allowed,
Nor with the weight of juicy Clusters bowed.
Particulars were endless to rehearse,
And weightier Subjects now demand our Verse.
We'll draw the Muses from Aonian Hills,
To Natures Garden, Groves and humble Rills,
Where if no Laurels spring, or if I find
That those are all for Conquerours designed;
With Oaken Leaves at least I Will bind my Brow,
For millions saved you must that Grace allow.
At first approach of Spring, I would advise,
Or even in Autumn months if strength suffice,
To bleed your Patient in the regal Vein,
And by degrees the infected Current drein:
But in all Seasons fail not to expel,
And purge the noxious Humors from their Cell;
But fit Ingredients you must first collect,
And then their different Qualities respect,
Make firm the Liquid and the Gross dissect.
Take, therefore, care to gather, in their prime,
The sweet Corycian and Pamphilian Time,
These you must boil, together with the Rest
In this ensuing Catalogue expressed;
Fennel and Hop that close Embraces weaves,
Parsley and Fumitory's bitter Leaves;
Wild Fern on every Down and Heath you will meet
With Leaves resembling Polypus's shagg'd feet,
And Mayden-hair, of virtue strange, but true
For dipped in Fountains, it reteins no Dew:
Hart's-tongue and Citarch must be added too.
The greater Part, and with success more sure,
By Mercury perform the happy Cure;
A wondrous virtue in that Mineral lies,
Whether by force of various Qualities
Of Cold and Heat, it flies into the Veins,
And with a fiercer Fire their Flame restrains,
Conquering the raging Humors in their Seat,
As glowing Steel exceeds the Forge's heat,
Or whether his keen Particles (combined
With strange connection) when the are once disjoined,
Disperse, all Quarters of the Foe to seize,
And burn the very Seeds of the Disease;
Or whether it is with some more hidden force
Endowed by Nature to perform its Course,
Is hard to say, but though the Gods conceal
The virtual Cause, they did its use reveal.
Now by what means 'twas found our Song shall show,
Nor may we let Heavens Gifts in Silence go.
In Syrian Vales where Groves of Osier grow,
And where Callirrhoe's sacred Fountains flow.
Ilceus the Huntsman, who with Zeal adored
The rural Gods, with Gifts their Altars stored;
Was yet afflicted with this restless Grief,
And, if Tradition may obtain belief,
As he was watering there each spicy Bed,
Thus to entreat the Sylvan Powers, is said.
You Deities by me adored, and Thou,
Callirrhoe, who do Relief allow
Against all Diseases, as I slew for. Thee
The Stag, and fixed his Head upon a Tree;
A Tree that does with lesser Branches spread,
Than those that join to that most horrid Head:
You sacred Powers if you will remove away
This plague that Racks my Frame all Night and Day,
I, all the mingled glories of the Spring,
Lilies and Violets to your Seats will bring,
With Daffadills first budding Roses weave,
And on your Shrines the fragrant Garland leave.
He said, and down upon the Herbage lay,
Tired with the raging Pain, and raging Day.
Callirrhoe (bathing in the neighboring Well,
With Musk that grew in Plenty round the Cell)
Heard the Youth's prayer and straight in soft repose,
The Indulgent Nymph his heavy Eyes did close,
Then to his Fancy, from her sacred Streams,
Appeared and charmed him with prophetic Dreams.
Ilceus (said she) my Servant, and my Care,
The Gods at last have hearkened to thy Prayer;
Yet, on the Earth, as far as Sol can spy,
For thy Disease remains no Remedy.
Cynthia and Phoebus too at her Request,
Into thy tortured Veins have sent this Pest,
The Stag to her was sacred which you slew,
And this the Punishment that did ensue,
For which the Earth, as far as Sol can see,
The spacious Earth, affords no Remedy:
Then since her Surface no relief canlend,
To her dark Entrails for thy Cure descend;
A Cave there is its self an awful shade,
But by Jove's spreading Tree more dreadful made,
Where mingling Cedars wanton with the Air,
Thither at first approach of Day repair;
A jet-black Ram before the Entrance slay,
And cry, these Rites great Ops to Thee I pay.
The lesser Powers, pale Ghosts and Nymphs of Night,
The Smoke of Yew and Cypress shall invite;
These Nymphs shall at the outmost Entrance stay,
And through the dark Retreats conduct thy way.
Rise, rise, nor think all this an idle Dream,
For know I am the Goddess of this Stream.
This for thy pious Homage to my Cell --
So spoke the Nymph, and dived into the Well.
The Youth starts up astonished, but restored,
With grateful prayers th'obliging Nymph adored:
Thy Voice, bright Goddess, I Will with speed Obey,
O still assist and bless me on my Way.
With the next Dawn the sacred Cave he found,
With spreading Oaks and towering Cedars crowned;
A jet-black Ram did at the Entrance slay,
And cried these Rites, great Ops, to thee I pay:
The lesser Powers, pale Ghosts and Nymphs of Night,
The Smoke of Yew and Cypress did invite.
His Voice resounding through the hollow Seats,
Disturbed the Nymphs within their deep Retreats.
Those Nymphs that toil in Metals underground,
Gave over their Work at the unexpected Sound;
Some Quicksilver and Sulphur others brought,
From which calcined, the golden Oar was wrought;
Of pure AEtherial Light a hundred beams,
Of Subterranean fire a hundred Streams,
With various seeds of Earth and Sea they joined,
For humane Eyes too subtle and refined.
But Lipare who forms the richer Oar,
And to the Furnace brings the Sulfurous store,
To Ilceus through the dark Recesses broke,
And in these words the trembling Youth bespoke.
Ilceus (for I have heard your Name and Grief)
Callirrhoe sends you hither for relief;
Nor has the Goddess counseled you in vain,
These Cells afford a Medicine for your Pain;
Take courage therefore, and the Charge obey,
She said, and through the Cavern leads the way
He follows wondering at the dark aboads,
The spacious Voids and Subterranean Roads;
Astonished there to see those Rivers move,
Which he observed to lose themselves above:
Each Cave, cried Lipare, some Power contains,
In The lowest Mansion Proserpine remains;
The middle Regions Pluto's Treasure hold,
And Nymphs that work in Silver, Brass and Gold,
Of which rich Train am I, whose Veins extend,
And to Callirrhoe's Stream the smoking Sulphur send.
Thus through the Realms of Night they took their way,
And heard from far the Forge and Furnace play.
These (said the Nymph) the Beds of Metals are,
That give you wretched Mortals so much Care.
By thousand Nymphs of Earth and Night enjoyed,
Who yet in various Tasks are all employed.
Some turn the Current, some the Seeds dissect
Of Earth and Sea, which some again collect,
That, mixed with Lightning, make the golden Oar,
While others quench in Streams the shining store.
Not far from hence the Cyclop's Cave is found,
See how it glows, hark how their Anvils sound.
But here turn off, and take the right hand way,
This Path does to that sacred Stream convey,
In which thy only Hope remains: She said,
And under golden Roofs her Patient led,
Hard by, the Lakes of liquid Silver slow'd,
Which to the wondering Youth the Goddess showed;
Thrice washed in these (said she) thy Pains shall end,
And all the Stench into the Stream descend.
Thrice with her Virgin hands the Goddess threw
On all his suffering Limbs the healing Dew:
He, at the falling Filth admiring stood,
And scarce believed for joy, the virtue of the Flood.
When therefore you return to open Day,
With Sacrifice Diana's Rage allay,
And Homage to the Fountain's Goddess pay.
Thus spoke the Nymph, and through the Realms of Night,
Restored the grateful Youth to open Light.
This strange Invention soon obtained belief,
And flying Fame divulged the sure Relief.
But first Experiments did only join,
And for a Vehicle use lard of Swine:
Larch-gum and Turpentine were added next,
That wrought more safe and less the Patient vexed;
Horse-grease and Bears with them they did compound,
Bdellium and Gum of Cedar useful found;
Then Myrrh, and Frankincense were used by some,
With living Sulphur and Arabian Gum;
But if black Helebore be added too,
With Rainbow Flowers your Method I allow;
Benzoin and Galbanum I next require,
Lint-Oil, and Sulphur's ever it feels the Fire.
With these Ingredients mixed, you must not fear
Your suffering Limbs and Body to besmear,
Nor let the foulness of the Course displease,
Obscene indeed, but less than your Disease:
Yet when you do anoint, take special care
That both your Head and tender Breast you spare
This done, wrapped close and swathed, repair to Bed,
And there let such thick Cov'rings be o'e-rspred,
Till streams of Sweat from every pore you force:
For twice five Days you must repeat this Course;
Severe indeed but you your Fate must bear,
And signs of coming Health will straight appear.
The Mass of Humors now dissolved within,
To purge themselves by Spittle shall begin,
Till you with wonder at your feet shall see,
A tide of Filth, and bless the Remedy.
For Ulcers that shall then the Mouth offend,
Boil Flowers that Privet and Pomgranets send.
Now, only now, I would forbid the Use
Of generous Wine that noble Soils produce;
All sorts without distinction you must fly,
The sparkling Bowl with all its Charms deny.
Rise, now victorious, Health is now at hand,
One labor more is all I shall command,
Easy and pleasant; you must last prepare
Your Bath, with Rosemary and Lavander,
Vervain and Yarrow too must both be there;
Amongst these your steeping Body you must lay,
To cheer you, and to wash all Dreggs away.
But now the verdant Blessings that belong
To new discovered Worlds demand our Song.
Beyond Herculean bounds the Ocean roars
With loud applause to those far distant Shoars.
The sacred Tree must next our Muse employ,
That only could this raging Plague destroy;
Just Praise (Urania) to this Plant allow,
And with its happy Leaves upon thy Brow,
Through all our Latian Cities take thy way,
And to admiring Crowd the healing Boughs display;
Even I may self shall prize my Streins the more,
For Blessings never Seen nor Sung before.
Perhaps some more exalted Poet (warmed,
For Martial Streins) with this new subject Charmed
Shall quit the noble business of the Field,
Bequeath to Rust the Sword and polisht Shield,
Leave wrangling Heroes that overcome or Dye,
Both shrouded in the same obscurity;
Pass over the harast Soil and bloody Stream,
To prosecute this more delightful Theme;
To tell how first auspicious Navies made
More bold attempts, and th'Ocean's bounds essayed;
To sing vast Tracts of Land beyond the Main,
By former Ages guessed, and wished in Vain,
Strange Regions, Floods and Cities to rehearse,
And with true Prodigies adorn their Verse;
New Lands, new Seas, and still new Lands to spy,
Another Heaven, and other Stars descry.
When this is done resume their Martial Strein,
And crown our Conquests in each savage Plain,
That even from Vanquishment advantage draws,
Enriched with European Arts and Laws,
Shall sing (what future Ages will confound)
How Earth and Sea one Vessel did Surround.
Thrice happy to Bard whom indulgent Heaven,
A Soul capacious of this Work has given.
My weaker Muse shall think her Office done,
Of all these wonders to record but one:
One single Plant which these glad Lands produce
To specify and show it is sovereign Use,
By what adventures found, and wasted over
From unknown Worlds to Europe's wondering shore.
Far Westward hence where the Ocean seems to boil
Beneath fierce Cancer, lies a spacious Isle,
Descried by Spaniards roving on the Main,
And justly honored with the Name of Spain.
Fertile in Gold but far more blessed to be,
The Garden of this consecrated Tree:
Its Trunk erect, but on his Top is seen,
A spreading Grove with Branches ever Green;
Upon his Boughs a little Nut is found,
But poignant and with Leaves encompassed round;
The stubborn Substance toothless makes the Saw,
And scarcely from the Axe receives a flaw;
Dissected, various Colors meet your view,
The outward Bark is of the Laurel hue;
The next like Box, the parts more inwards set,
Of dusky grain but not so dark as Jet;
If to these mixtures you will add the Red,
All colors of the gaudy Bow are spread.
This Plant the Natives conscious of its use
Adore, and with religious Care produce;
On every Hill, in every Vale it is found,
And held the greatest Blessing of the ground
Against this Pest that always Rages there,
From Skies infected and polluted Air:
The outward Bark as useless they refuse,
But with their utmost force the Timber bruise,
Or break in Splinters, which they steep a while
In fountains, and when soaked, in Vessels boil,
Regardless how too fierce a fire may make
The juice run over, whose healing Froth they take,
With which they Bath their Limbs where Pustles breed,
And heal the Breaches where dire Ulcers feed.
Half boiled away the Remnant they retain,
And adding Honey boil the Chips again:
To use no other Liquor when they Dine,
Their Countries Law, and greater Priest enjoin:
The first Decoction with the rising Light
They drink, and once again at fall of Night;
This course they strictly hold when once begun,
Till Cynthia has her monthly Progress run,
Housed all the while where no offensive Wind,
Nor the least breath of Air can entrance find.
But who will yield us credit to proceed,
And tell how wondrous slenderly they Feed;
Just so much Food as can bare Life preserve,
And to its joint connect each seeble Nerve:
Yet let not this strange Abstinence deter,
And make you think the Method too severe.
This Drink it self will wasted Strength repair,
For Nectar and Ambrosia too are there;
All offices of Nature it maintains,
The Heart refreshes, and recruits the Veins.
When the Draught's taken, for two hours and no more
The Patient on his Couch is covered over;
For by this means the Liquor with more ease,
Expells in streams of Sweat the foul Disease.
All Parts (O prodigy!) grow found within,
Nor any Filth remains upon the Skin;
Fresh youth in every Limb, fresh vigour's found,
And now the Moon has run her monthly Round.
What God did first the wondrous use display,
Of this blessed Plant, what chance did first convey
Our European Fleet to that rich shore,
That for their Toil so rich a Traffic bore,
Our Song shall now unfold; a Navy bound
For no known Port nor yet discovered Ground,
Resolved the secrets of the Main to find,
And now they leave their Native shore behind,
Clap on more Sail and skudd before the Wind.
Thus on the spreading Ocean they did stray,
For many Weeks uncertain of their way:
The thronging Sea-Nymphs wondering at the Pride,
Of each tall Ship appear above the Tide,
And with proportioned speed around them glide,
Charmed with each painted Stern and golden Prow,
With each gay Streamer, striving as they go
To catch their Pictures in the Flood below.
'Twas night, but Cynthia did such beams display.
So strong as more than half restored the Day.
When the bold Leader of this roving Train,
(The bravest Youth that ever stemmed the Main;)
As on the Decks he lay with anxious care,
And watchful over his charge, conceived this Prayer;
Bright Goddess of the night (said he) whose sway,
All humid Things and these vast Seas obey;
Twice have we seen thy infant Crescents spring,
And twice united in a glorious Ring,
Since first this Fleet commenced her restless toil,
Nor yet have gained the Sight of any Soil.
O Virgin Star, of nightly Planets chief,
Vouchsafe your weary Wanderers relief;
Let some fair Continent at last arise,
Or some less distant Isle salute our Eyes;
At least some Rock with one small Rill and Port,
For these o'er-labour'd Boats and Youths support.
The Goddess heard not this Address in Vain,
But leaves to her nocturnal Steeds the Rein,
And like a Sea-Nymph floats upon the Main:
So well disguised That Clotho's self might be
Deceived, and take her for Cymothoe;
With such a mien she cut the yielding Tide,
And in these words bespoke the wandering Guide;
Take courage, for the next approaching Day,
Shall see these Ships safe riding in the Bay;
But stay not long where first your Anchors fall,
The Fates to yet more distant Regions call;
Find Ophyre high-seated in the Main;
Those Seats for you the Destinies ordain.
She said, and pusht the Keel; a brisker Gale
Forthwith descends and pregnates every Sail:
Now from the East the Sun invites their Eyes,
As fast they westward see the Mountains rise
Like clouds at first, but as they nearer drew,
Rocks, Groves and Springs were opened to their View;
High on the Decks the joyful Sailers stand,
And thrice with Shouts salute the expected Land.
Then safely Anchored in the promised Bay,
First to the Gods their just Devotion pay.
Four days, no more, are spent upon this Soil,
To fit their shattered Ships for farther Toil,
Each hand once more is to his Charge assigned,
All take advantage of the friendly Wind;
A swift and steady course they now maintain,
And leave Anthylia floating on the Main:
With Hagia's coast, and tall Ammeria's Isle,
The Cannibals most execrable Soil,
Over all the Deep they now see Turrets rise,
And Islands without number meet their Eyes;
Amongst these they singled one from whence they heard
Streams fall, while spreading Groves aloft appeared,
Charmed with these Objects there they put to shore,
Where first the Islands Genius they adore,
Then spread their Banquet on the verdant ground,
Whilst Bowls of sparkling Wine go nimbly round;
Refresht, they separate, someto descry
The country, others more o'er-joy'd to spy
Beneath the Flood pure Gold lie mixed with Sand,
And seize the shining Oar with greedy hand.
At length a Flock of painted Birds they view,
With azure Plumes and Beaks of Coral-hue,
Which fearless through the Glades did seem to rove,
And percht securely in their native Grove;
The Youths to tempered Engines have recourse
That imitate the Thunders dreadful Force,
Vulcan's invention while with wondrous Art,
He did to Men the Arms of Jove impart;
Each takes his Stand and singles out his Mark,
The dire Ingredients with a sudden Spark
Enflamed, discharge with rage the whizzing Ball,
The unsuspecting Birds by hundreds fall;
The Air with Smoke and Fire is covered round,
The Groves and Rocks astonished with the sound,
And shaking Sands beneath the Seas rebound.
The Remnant of the Flock with terror fly
To Rocks whose Turrets seemed to pierce the Sky;
From whence with humane Voice (O dire Portent!)
One of this feathered Tribe these Numbers sent.
You who have Sacrilegioufly assayed,
The Sun'slov'd Birds, and impious slaughter made,
Hear what the enraged avenging God prepares,
And in prophetic Sounds by me declares.
Know, you at last have reached your promised soil,
For this is Ophyre's long expected Isle,
But destined Empire shall not yet obtain
Of Provinces beyond the western Main,
The Natives of long Liberty deprive,
Found Cities, and a new Religion give,
Till Toils by Earth and Sea are undergone,
And many dreadful Battles lost and won;
For, most shall leave your Trunks on foreign Land,
Few shattered Ships shall reach your native Sand;
In vain shall some Sail back again to find,
Their wretched Comrades whom they left behind;
Whose Bones of flesh divested shall be found,
For Cyclops too in these dire Coasts abound:
Your Foes o'er-come, your Fleet in Civil Rage
Shall disagree, and Ship with Ship engage.
Nor end your sufferings here, a strange Disease,
And most obscene shall on your Bodies seize;
In this distress your Error you shall mourn,
And to these injured Groves for Cure return;
This dreadful Doom the feathered Prophet spoke,
And sculkt within the Covert of the Rock.
Astonished with the unexpected sound,
The offending Men fell prostrate on the ground;
Forgiveness from the sacred Flock to gain,
But chiefly Phoebus Pardon to obtain.
The Guardians of the Grove to reconcile,
And once more hail the fair Ophyrian Isle.
These Rites performed, returning on their way,
A race with humane Shape they did survey,
But black as Jet, who sallied from the Wood,
And made the Vale more dark in which they stood;
No Garment over their Breasts or Shoulders spread,
And wreaths of peaceful Olive on their Head;
Unarmed, yet more with wonder struck than fear,
They viewed the Strangers, and approached more near;
Astonished at their glittering Arms, but more
At each proud Vessel lodged upon the Shore,
The Flags and Streamers sporting with the Wind,
And thought their Owners more than humane kind,
Some Gods or Heroes to the Gods allied,
And more than Mortal reverence applied;
But to our Chief their first Respect they paid,
And cheap, but yet most royal Presents made,
Rich golden Oar, of use and worth unknown,
And only prized by them because it shone,
With which the blessings of their Fields were born,
Ripe blushing Fruits and pondrous Ears of Corn;
Unpolisht but capacious Vessels filled
With Honey from each fragrant Tree distilled,
Which did from Heaven in nightly Dew arrive,
Without the tedious labors of the Hive.
With them our Garments like Reception found,
And now the Tribes sat mingled on the Ground,
With Indian Food and Spanish Vintage crowned:
Who can express the Savages delight,
As if the Gods some Mortal should invite
To heavenly Courts, and with the Nectar-bowl
Into a Deity exalt his ravished Soul.
By chance the solemn Day was drawing near,
The greatest Festival of all the Year;
And to the Sun their greatest God belonged,
To which from every part the Natives thronged,
With whom their Neighbors of Hesperia met;
And now within the sacred Vale were set
Each Sex, and all degrees of Age were seen,
But placed without distinction on the Green;
Yet from the Infant to the grizled Head,
A cloud of Grief over every Face was spread,
All languish'd with the same obscene Disease,
And years, not Strength distinguished the Degrees;
Dire flames upon their Vitals fed within,
While Sores and crusted Filth profaned their Skin.
At last the Priest in snowy Robes arrayed,
The Boughs of healing Guiacum displayed,
Which (dipped in living Streams) he shook around
To purge, for holy Rites the tainted Ground.
An Heifer then before the Altar slew,
A Swain stood near on whom the Blood he threw;
Then to the Sun began his mystic Song,
And straight was seconded by all the Throng.
Both Swine and Heifers now by thousands bleed,
And Natives on their roasted Entrails feed.
Our Train with wonder saw these Rites, but more
Astonished at the Plague unseen before:
Mean while our Leader in his careful breast,
Formed sad Conjectures of this dreadful Pest,
This, this said he (the Gods avert our Fate)
Is that dire Curse which Phoebus did relate;
The Birds prodigious Song I now recall,
The strange Disease that on our Troops should fall.
As therefore from the Altar they retired,
Our General of the Native Prince inquired,
To what dread Power these Offerings did belong?
What meant that languishing infected Throng?
And why the Shepherd by the Altar stood?
And wherefore Sprinkled with the gushing blood?
To which the Island Monarch, noble Guest,
With annual Zeal these Offerings are addressed,
To Phoebus enraged Deity assigned,
And by our Ancestors of old enjoined;
But if a foreign Nations toils to learn,
And less refined be worth your least concern,
If you have any Sense of Strangers fate,
From its first source the Story I Will relate:
Perhaps you may have heard of Atlas name,
From whom in long descent great Nations came;
From him we sprang, and once a happy Race,
Beloved of Heaven while Piety had place,
While to the Gods our Ancestors did Pray,
And grateful Offerings on their Altars lay.
But when the Powers to be despised began,
When to lewd Luxury our Nation ran;
Who can express the Mis'ries that ensued,
And Plagues with each returning Day renewed?
Then fair Atlantia once an Isle of fame;
(That from the mighty Atlas took its Name,
Who there had governed long with upright Sway)
Was gorged entire, and swallowed by the Sea.
With which our Flocks and Herds were wholly drowned,
Not one preserved or ever after found.
Since when outlandish Cattle here are slain,
And Bulls of foreign Breed our Altars stain;
In that dire Season this Disease was bred,
That thus over all our tortured Limbs is spread:
Most universal from it Birth it grew,
And none have since escaped or very few;
Sent from above to scourge that vicious Age,
And chiefly by incensed Apollo's Rage,
For which these annual Rites were first ordained,
Whereof this firm Tradition is retained.
A Shepherd once (distrust not ancient Fame)
Possessed these Downs, and Syphilus his Name.
A thousand Heifers in these Vales he fed,
A thousand Ews to those fair Rivers led:
For King Alcithous he raised this Stock,
And shaded in the Covert of a Rock,
For now 'twas Solstice, and the Syrian Star
Increast the Heat and shot his Beams afar;
The Fields were burnt to ashes, and the Swain
Repaired for shade to thickest Woods in vain,
No Wind to fan the scorching Air was found,
No nightly Dew refresht the thirsty Ground:
This Drought our Syphilus beheld with pain,
Nor could the sufferings of his Flock sustain,
But to the Noonday Sun with up-cast Eyes,
In rage threw these reproaching Blasphemies,
Is it for this O Sol, that thou art styled
Our God and Parent? how are we beguiled
Dull Bigots to pay Hom'age to thy Name?
And with rich Spices feed thy Altar's flame:
Why do we yearly Rites for thee prepare,
Who take of our affairs so little Care?
At least thou might between the Rabble Kine
Distinguish, and these royal Herds of Mine.
These to the great Alcithous belong,
Nor ought to perish with the Vulgar throng.
Or shall I rather think your Deity
With envious Eyes our thriving Stock did see?
I grant you had sufficient cause indeed,
A thousand Heifers of the snowy Breed,
A thousand Ews of mine these Downs didfeed;
Whilst one Etherial Bull was all your stock,
One Ram, and to preserve this mighty Flock,
You must forsooth your Syrian Dog maintain,
Why do I worship then a Power so Vain?
Henceforth I to Alcithous will bring
My Offerings and Adore my greater King,
Who does such spacious Tracts of Land possess,
And whose vast Power the conquered Seas confess.
Him I Will invoke my Sufferings to redress.
He Will straight command the cooling Winds to blow,
Refreshing Showers on Trees and Herbs bestow,
Nor suffer Thirst, both Flock and Swain to kill:
He said, and forth with on a neighboring Hill
Erects an Altar to his Monarch's name,
The Swains from far bring Incense to the Flame;
At length to greater Victims they proceed,
Till Swine and Heifers too by hundreds Bleed,
On whose half roasted Flesh the impious Wretches feed.
All quarters soon were filled with the Report,
That ceased not till it reached the Monarch's Court;
The Aspiring Prince with Godlike Rites over joy'd,
Commands all Altars else to be destroyed,
Proclaims Himself in Earth's low sphere to be
The only and sufficient Deity;
That Heavenly Powers lived too remote and high,
And had enough to do to Rule the Sky.
The all-seeing Sun no longer could sustain
These practices, but with enraged Disdain
Darts forth such pestilent malignant Beams,
As shed Infection on Air, Earth and Streams;
From whence this Malady its birth received,
And first the offending Syphilus was grieved,
Who raised forbidden Altars on the Hill,
And Victims blood with impious Hands did spill;
He first wore Buboes dreadful to the sight,
First felt strange Pains and sleepless past the Night;
From him the Malady received its name,
The neighboring Shepherds caught the spreading Flame:
At last in City and in Court 'twas known,
And seized the ambitious Monarch on his Throne;
In this distress the wretched Tribes repair
To Ammerice the Gods Interpreter,
Chief Priestess of the consecrated Wood,
In whose Retreats the awful Tripod stood,
From whence the Gods responsal she expressed;
The Crowd enquire what Cause produced this Pest,
What God enraged? and how to be appeased,
And last what Cure remained for the Diseased?
To whom the Nymph replied -- the Sun incensed,
With just revenge these Torments has commenced.
What man can with immortal Powers compare?
Fly, wretches, fly, his Altars soon repair,
Load them with Incense, Him with Prayers invade,
His Anger will not easily be laid;
Your Doom is past, black Styx has heard him swear,
This Plague should never be extinguished here,
Since then your Soil must never be wholly free,
Beg Heaven at least to yield some Remedy:
A milkwhite Cow on Juno's Altar lay,
To Mother Earth a jet-black Heifer slay;
One from above the happy Seeds shall shed,
The other rear the Grove and make it spread,
That only for your Grief a Cure shall yield.
She said: the Crowd returned to the opened Field,
Raised Altars to the Sun without delay,
To Mother Earth, and Juno Victims slay.
'Twill seem most strange what now I shall declare.
But by our Gods and Ancestors I swear,
It Is sacred Truth --
These Groves that spread so wide and look so green
Within this Isle, till then, were never seen,
But now before their Eyes the Plants were found
To spring, and in an instant Shade the ground,
The Priest forthwith bids Sacrifice be done,
And Justice paid to the offended Sun;
Some destined Head t'attone the Crimes of all,
On Syphilus the dreadful Lot did fall,
Who now was placed before the Altar bound,
His head with sacrificial Garlands crowned,
His Throat laid open to the lifted Knife,
But interceding Juno spared his Life,
Commands them in his stead a Heifer slay,
For Phoebus Rage was now removed away.
This made our grateful Ancestors enjoin,
When first these annual Rites they did assign,
That to the Altar bound a Swine each time
Should sland, to witness Syphilus his Crime.
All this infected Throng whom you behold,
Smart for their Ancestors Offense of old:
To heal their Plague this Sacrifice is done,
And reconcile them to the offended Sun.
The Rites performed, the hallowed Boughs they seize,
The speedy certain Cure for their Disease.
With such discourse the Chiefs their Cares deceive,
Whose Tribes of different Worlds united live,
Till now the Ships sent back to Europes shore,
Return and bring prodigious Tidings over.
That this Disease did now through Europe rage,
Nor any Medicine found that could assuage,
That in their Ships no slender Number mourned,
With Boils without and inward Ulcers burned.
Then called to mind the Bird's prophetic sound,
That in those Groves Relief was to be found.
Then each with solemn Vows the Sun entreats,
And gentle Nymphs the Gardians of those Seats.
With lusty Strokes the Grove they next invade,
Whose weighty Boughs are on their Shoulders laid,
Which with the Natives methods they prepare,
And with the healing Draughts their Health repair,
But not forgetful of their Country's good,
They freight their largest Ships with this rich Wood,
To try if in our Climate it would be
Of equal use, for the same Malady:
The years mild Season seconds their desire,
And western Winds their willing Sails inspire.
Iberian Coasts you first were happy made
With this rich Plant, and wondered at its Aid;
Known now to France and neighboring Germany
Cold Seythian Coasts and temperate Italy,
To Europe's Bounds all bless the vital Tree.
Hail heaven-born Plant whose Rival never was seen,
Whose Virtues like thy Leaves are ever green;
Hope of Mankind and Comfort of their Eyes,
Of new discovered Worlds the richest Prize.
Too happy would Indulgent Gods allow,
Thy Groves in Europe's nobler Clime to grow:
Yet if my Streins have any force, thy Name
Shall flourish here, and Europe sing thy Fame.
If not remoter Lands with Winter bound,
Eternal Snow, nor Libya's scorching Ground;
Yet Latium and Benacus cool Retreats,
Shall thee resound, with Athesis fair Seats.
Too, blessed if Bembus live thy Growth to see,
And on the Banks of Tyber gather thee,
If he thy matchless Virtues once rehearse,
And crown thy Praises with eternal Verse.
FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 5. line 12 for newer read never, p. 35 l. 3. for wandering r.
wondering, p. 58 l. 5. for, to Bard r. Bard to.


