A Treatise of Baptism: WHEREIN That of Believers and that of Infants is
examined by the Scriptures.

WITH The History of both out of Antiquity; making it appear, that Infants
Baptism was not practiced for Three Hundred Years, nor enjoined as necessary
till (by the Popes Canons here at large) Four Hundred Years after Christ; with
the fabulous Traditions, and erroneous Grounds upon which it was (with Gossips
Chrysme, Exorcisme, Consignation, Baptising of Churches and Bells, and other
Popish Rites) founded: And that the famous Waldensian and old British Churches
and Christians witnessed against it.

With the Examination of the Stories about Thomas Munzer, and John a Leyden.

As also, The History of Christianity amongst the Ancient Britains and
Waldenses.

And, A brief Answer to Mr. Bunyan about Communion with Persons Unbaptized.

That Persons Baptized in Infancy, are to be Baptized after they Believe, which
is not to be esteemed Rebaptisation, but Right Baptism. Pet. Bruis the great
Waldensian Martyr, Osiander Cent. 12. L. 3. P. 262.

By H. D.

Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

Act. 17.28. As certain also of your own Poets have said.

London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1673.

The Preface.
AMongst all those Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, that the Man of Sin
has so miserably mangled, metamorphised and changed, none has been more
horribly abused than that of Baptism; which as to Matter and Form, Subject and
Circumstance, has suffered such apparent Alteration and Subversion, that
nothing but the very name of the thing remains, and yet that also very
improperly too, if duly considered.

Which the better to Demonstrate, you have here not only a Platform of the
Primitive Institution, in Christ's Commiss^on, the Apostles Precepts and
Practice, and the Spiritual Ends thereof, plainly laid down from the
Scriptures, and confirmed by the Learned; But the change it self of Believers
into Infants Baptism, traced out and detected, with all the Foppish, Ridiculous
Superstitions, and Fooleries, made essential to it, and concomitant with it,
and that according to Apostolical Tradition, as their impious Forgeries would
impose upon us;

Than which, as nothing did ever more tend to defile and ruin the true Church,
and reproach the Wisdom and Authority of Christ their Head; So nothing could
rationally more establish and confirm the false, or more apparently promote the
Sovereignty and Dignity of Antichrist their Head; which is so plain, that he
that runs may read.

For if the very Act of Sprinkling, or pouring a little Water on the Child's
Head, or Face (with the Charms attending it) must give Grace, Regenerate, take
away Sin, save the Soul, add to the Church, and give right to all the
Ordinances; as Mr. Pope has been pleased, sitting in the Temple of God, as
God, to Ordain and Decree, and that with Anathema's too, against every one that
shall not so receive it:

How naturally must it needs follow;

First, That Christ's Conversion, and the powerful Preaching of the Gospel, his
means to effect it, must be slighted and despised; Ignorance and Profaneness,
the true Interest of this State, necessarily; brought in; Christ's Baptism,
with all the Spiritual Ends and Uses, outed and contemned; the Jewish
Antichristian Rites of a National Church and High Priesthood, with all the
Apurtenances, introduced.

But Secondly, That as the Nations should accept this New Project of being made
Christians and Church Members by the Popes Christening, they necessarily oblige
themselves by receiving his Law, to embrace also his Government, and to be
Ruled in chief by himself (as the greatest part, called Christendom, have done
accordingly) who can deny it? To the erecting a Throne for the Beast, and to
give that vile Person (who blasphemously they call his Holiness) cause to say
(looking over his goodly Fabric, with his Father of old, Dan. 4.30.) Is not
this great Babylon, that I have built by the might of my Power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? And so has it become the Corner and ^oundation-Stone of
the Antichristian Church and State.

For as they who take (as far as they can judge) living Stones (called the
Spiritual Seed, Saints by Calling, or Believers) to build Christ a House or
Church, Orderly joining them together by Dipping, Do yield Obedience to Christ's
Command, conform to the Primitive Pattern of the New- Testament-Churches,
ascribe honor and glory to the Lord Christ the Institutor:

So they, who take the Carnal Seed, viz. Ignorant and Unconverted ones, to make
up the National, or any particular Church, joining them together by Sprinkling,
do thereby yield Obedience to the Popes Canons, conform to the Jewish and
Antichristian Pattern, and reflect Honor and Dignity to their Sovereign Lord
the Pope, the Contriver and Imposer thereof. And is not this very observable,
that Pope Innocentius the first, (that Abaddon and Apollyon) that had so many
marks of Antichrist, as you will find in the account here given of him, was the
first Confirmer and Imposer hereof.

But that which is most to be lamented is, That the Protestant Reformers, who
detected and cast away so many Antichristian Abominations, should yet hold fast
such a Principal Foundation-Stone of their Building; though it is granted, with
the rejecting of many of its Superstitions, and also upon other pretended
Grounds. For when the Rotteness of the Popish Grounds aforesaid did appear for
Infants-Sprinkling, it had certainly fallen to the Ground, but for some new
Contrivances to support it, though therein they have not been so happy to agree
amongst themselves in their Conclusions.

For some are for Baptizing all Children, whose Parents are never so wicked;
others only the Children of Professors; whilst others are for the Baptising the
Children of such Professors only, whose Parents are Inchurched, viz. Belonging
to some particular Congregation. Some are for Baptising Children upon their own
particular Faith, (which with much confidence it is affirmed they have.) Others
deny that with great Vehemence, affirming they ought only to be Baptized upon
an Imputative Faith, viz. upon the Faith of others, though herein, as you will
find, they vastly differ; some saying, it must be by the Imputative Faith of
the Church; others of the Gossip; others of the Parent or Proparent in Covenant
upon the account of Federal Right.

So that some are for Baptising upon an Ecclesiastical Faith, some an
Imputative, some a Seminal, some an Habitual, some a Dogmatical, and some upon
a Justifying Faith.

Upon which Variety of Differences, you have Mr. Baxter himself in the
beginning of his Book of the Sacraments say, That it may seem strange, that
after 1600 Years use of Christian Baptism, the Ministers of the Gospel should
be so unresolved to whom it does belong; Yet so it is (says he) and I observe
it is a Question that they are now very sollicitous about: and I cannot blame
them, it being not only about a matter of Divine appointment, but a practical
of such concernment to the Church.

And it is no wonder, that such Contradictions should proceed from such
contrary Principles; For if from ^ne Baptism, Ephesians. 4. Christ would oblige and
engage us to Unity, Let it not be thought strange, that from a Baptism so
different from Christ's, such Differences and Divisions should flow.

For as one ingeniously observes, That as it happens to Travelers, when they
are out of the way, one conjectures he should go this way, another that, and
sometimes at hot Disputes and Contentions about it, and in the contest many
By-ways are attempted. Yet still the further they go, the more they are out of
the way, till they can come to the true Road again. So it has been with the
Baptisers of Infants, they are fallen into many New Devices to maintain it, which
has occasioned many hot Contests, Breaches and Divisions amongst themselves,
whose principal Arguments and Scripture Pretenses for the Practice, you have
here also Examined, and Answered.

The Ancient Waldenses you find here from good Authority, were great Assertors
of this Primitive Institution of Believers Baptism, and faithful Impugners of
Infants, as a Human and Antichristian Tradition and Invention.

And is it not very strange, that the Protestants, who pretend to derive their
Succession from them, should so much degenerate in so principal a Foundation,
and give thereby so much advantage to the Common-Enemy to reproach their whole
Separation? For since they assert but two Sacraments in opposition to their
Popish seven, how lamentable is it that by this deviating from this Primitive
Rule and Pattern, they should so miserably differ in both, but more especially
in this of Baptism?

objected, That if the business of Believers Baptism, be a thing so clear, as
you would make it; how comes it to pass, that so many learned and pious men,
so many fearing God, both Men and Women, should so zealously and
conscientiously cleave to such a piece of Error and Darkness, in Sprinkling
their Children, whilst so few, in comparison, do embrace this great Truth of
Baptizing Believers?

viz.

1. That the Wisdom and Grace of God may more appear, that many times Reveals
his Truths to Babes and weak ones, which he withholds from the wise and
prudent, to prevent boasting, and that no flesh should glory in his presence,
and to fulfill his holy good Pleasure, who opens Hearts and Ears, and gives
Understanding, as seems him good.

2. To demonstrate that great Truth, That as Gods People went into Mystical
Babylon gradually, that Iniquity prevailing by Steps; so must their coming out
be, some at one time, and some at another, as they came out of Literal Babylon.

Therefore has it been, that some Ages have recovered much of the Doctrinal
part, whilst yet they have been very corrupt in Discipline, and held fast many
Dregs of Antichristianism; as Luther and many of these Reformers, that under
their zealous pleading for the Doctrine of Justification against Popish Merits,
etc. yet held fast Images in Churches, and Consubstantiation, and many other
things. And again, many that have got light in the Discipline, have yet been
very corrupt in Doctrine, if not in Manners. Many having recovered the Form of
Godliness, that have not lived up to the Power; and on the contrary many who
have lived much in the Power of Godliness, and holy living, that have been
zealous opposers of the Right Form.

And as to that of Discipline, how Gradually has it got Ground, sometime in
the Negative, opposing false Worship and Superstition; sometime in the Positive
part; some Age getting and recovering one piece, some others another, as for
instance;

How zealous have the Protestants been in opposing Popery in one Age, and yet
as zealous opposers of any further Light that sprang up in the next? And again,
how zealous the Puritans and Non-conformists were in opposing the Hierarchy and
Prelacy, and yet as zealous opposers of a further Reformation as to Church-
Order and Discipline according to Christ's Pattern? Oh what a strange thing was
Independency among many holy, zealous and learned Men a few years since, and
how few were there that stood up to assert it? But especially what a monstrous,
prodigious thing was Anabaptism!

3. Another Reason may be from the inconsiderable Persons, as to Gifts, Parts,
Learning, Worldly Power and Greatness, that have been in the Profession and
Practice of it, few but the Poor having embraced it.

4. Another from the Contemptibleness of the thing it self, in the
Administration thereof, being calculated not for the Meridian of fleshly
Wisdom, or show, but the quite contrary; yet exceedingly accommodated to
further Grace, Humility, Mortification, Self-denial, to increase Faith, Love,
Holiness, etc.

5. An other may be from the Reproaches and Slanders cast upon the Professors
thereof; or real Falls and Scandals of those under it, who may be suffered to
fall for the offense of others that seek it; for it is said, That offenses must
needs be, Matthew. 18.

6. And lastly, to instruct Humility in all seize, having nothing but
what we have received, and therefore to exercise Tenderness and Compassion to
those that differ, knowing that he which is first may be last, and he which is
last may be first.

Quotations from Paedobaptists? As though it were probable, That men that so
much oppose your Practice, would advantage you by their Assertions, if truly
urged.

Answ. 1. To which I would reply, That it must be granted, that there needs no
better Testimony, than the Confession of Parties themselves, and herein, I
conceive, there is enough from their own Pens, to contradict and condemn their
own, and to justify our Practice in every part thereof. And if they have
injured themselves by their acknowledgments, it will be their parts to show
their own Mistakes, or to reconcile, if they can, their Contradictions.

Authorities, as the strength of the Reason urged by them, that they are
produced, not that any new thing is brought forth by them that has not been
offered by some of our own; But Arguments from some Persons of Note among
themselves, prevail forty times more than the very same, from persons they have
a prejudice against; And therefore Paul quoted they ownr Poets, Acts 17.

Practice, by so much the power and Providence of God may appear so, to make
their own Pens and Tongues to fall upon themselves; witness what more
especially is quoted from Mr. Baxters Right to Sacraments, and Dr. Tailors Plea
for the Anabaptists in his Liberty of Prophecy.

Baxter, that has been esteemed the great Maul^ of the Anabaptists, should
make Assertions so much in Contradiction to his former Positions? Has he then
changed his mind, and revoked his former Apprehensions?

Answ. That he has made all these Assertions, and many more to the same
purpose, his own Books are witness, from whence they are faithfully quoted,
especially that which he calls The Second Disputation of the Right to
Sacraments: From whence it is that Mr. Tombs fetches the twenty Arguments he
wrote against Mr. Blake, and improves them all against himself, discovering
Contradiction to his former Principles in every one of them, in his Book which
he calls Felo de se, or The Self-Destroyer; to which Mr. Baxter has never made
the least Reply, that I have heard of, though in the end of Mr. Tombe's said
Book he provoked him to a Reply, by these words, viz. By the reading of this
Book, all Intelligent Persons may perceive Mr. Baxter's deceitfulness, or
heedlesness, and if he persist in defending Infants Baptism, his unreasonable
pertinacy in his own Conceit; and if he do not declare his forsaking his
Doctrine in his Book of Baptism, his Impenitency, and unrighteous dealing with
the Church of God, which he has injured. Therefore how much is he concerned to
give some account, how such Assertions can be reconciled to his former
Writings, which in the apprehensions of such ignorant Creatures as we are, seem
to be as contrary to each other, as Light to Darkness.

Though I doubt not, but that through the Prosoundness of his Speculation, and
Subtilty of his Distinction (having therein so much outdone Thomas Aquinas
himself in his late Writings) he will as soon Reconcile these seeming
Contradictions, as many of his former, wherein he has so much abounded, (none
more that I know of,) being, as you will find, sometime a great Opposer, then a
great Defender of Episcopacy; sometime for Nonconformity (in whose Tents he
has seemed to shelter himself in the Storm, and with their Indulgence to come
forth of his hole) and yet at length so highly to disgrace the same. Sometimes
a friend to Calvin, and then a greater to Arminius; sometime a great Defender
of the Parliament and their Cause, and then none more to renounce them, or to
betraitor them for their pains; sometimes a great Opposer of Tradition, and
anon a great Defender thereof; sometimes a violent Impugner of Popery, and yet
at last, who has spoke more in favor of it, witness those very strange
Passages in his late Book, called the Christian Directory, so much the talk of
the Town, which coming just to my hand upon the writing hereof, I shall presume
for the novelty of them (to make a little Digression) to give you an Account of
some of them, Popish Christenings lawful.
and which you may please to take as follows, viz. That it is lawful to offer
ones Child to be baptized in a Popish Country, in their way of Baptizing, viz.
with E^orcisme, Chrysme, Milk, Honey and White Garments, rather than not have
it baptized. Those Ceremonies of Milk, Honey, White Garments and Chrysm, being
(as he tells us) so Ancient, that their Original is not known; called by
Epiphanius and others the Tradition and Custom of the Universal Church, p. 826.

That Temples, Fonts, Utensils, Church, Reverence due to holy Places and things.
Lands, much more Ministers are holy, and Reverence due to them; For to say, as
some do, that [they are indeed Consecrated and Separated, but not holy,] is to
be ridiculously wise by self-contradiction. And that to be uncovered in the
Church, etc. does tend to preserve due Reverence to God, and to his Worship, 1.
Cor. 16.20. P. 915.

That the unjust Alienation of Temples, Alienating holy Places and Things.
Utensils, Lands, Days, etc. which were separated by God himself, and
consecrated by Man, are sacrilegious. P. 916.

That the name Priests, Sacrifices, Altars, may be used instead of Christ's
Ministers, Popish Names of Priests, Altars, Sacrifice justified.
Worship, Holy Temple; And that sober Christians should allow each other the
liberty of such Phrases, without Censoriousness or breach of Charity or Peace,
p. 882.

That the Communion Table may be turned Altar- wise, and Railed in to keep Dogs
and Boys from it, Railing the Altar.
and that it is lawful to come up to the Rails, and to communicate Kneeling, as
being indeed things that Christians ought not to censure or condemn each other
for. P. 882. compared with 859.

That it is lawful, Keeping Holy Days, or Saints-Daies.
to keep Anniversary Festivals, in Commemoration of Saints Departed, if it be
lawful to keep the fifth of November. P. 762. Sect. 24.

And to keep Humane Holy Days and Lent also, if Abstinence be enjoined, not in
imitation, but Commemoration of Christ's forty days East. P. 866.

That Church-Musick is profitable, being a Natural help to the minds alacrity.
And it is a Duty, Church-Musick.
not a Sin, to use the Helps of Nature and lawful Art, though to institute
Sacraments of our own: And that as it is lawful to use the comfortable help of
Spectacles in reading the Bible; so is it of Music, to exhilarate the Soul
toward God. Jesus Christ joined with the Jews that used it, no Scripture
forbids it; nothing can be against it, that I know of.

And whereas some say, they find it does them harm; as wise men say, they find
it does them good. And why should the Experience of some prejudiced
self-conceited Person, or of an half-man, that knows not what Melody is, be
set against the Experience of all others, and deprive them of all such Helps
and Mercies, as these People say they find no benefit by? It is a great wrong
that some do to ignorant Christians, by putting such Whimsies and Scruples into
their heads, etc. P. 885.

That it is lawful to make Vows of Chastity, Vows of Chastity.
and that such Vows, though amongst the Papists, ought not to be broke. P. 488.

To use Crucifixes.
That a Crucifix, or Historical Image of Christ, is lawful, to excite and stir
up in us Worshipping Affections. And that a Crucifix well befits the
imagination and mind of a Believer. P. 876.

That the Romish Clergy may be reputed true Ministers of Christ, by virtue of
their Ordination, P. 775.

That their erroneous saying of Mass, or Preaching their erroneous Doctrines,
Popish Clergy Christ's Ministers.
does not nullisy their office to the Church, no though they derive from
Antichrist, the Head thereof, who sits not in the Temple of God as Antichrist,
but as God; and so not an open, but a secret Deceiver, p. 776. And that neither
the Ordinati^^, ^n Baptism that they confer, are to be esteemed Nullities, Page
777. That it is not necessary to believe that the Pope is Antichrist, ibid. To
read Apocrypha and Homelies etc.


That it is lawful to read the Apocrypha, Homilies, or any good book in the
Church, besides the Scriptures, p. 901. and to read a Prayer, p. 848.

That there is a Praying to Saints or Angels, Praying to Saints.
which is Superstitions, but not Idolatrous, Rev. 22.8. Col. 1.18.

That it is lawful to bow at the name of Jesus, p. 858. To stand up at the
Gospel, p. 858. Romish Rites.
To kneel at the reading the Commandments, p. 854. That the Ancient
Church-Custome of Worshipping toward the East, was not to be condemned, p.
877. 2d Original Sin.


That there is a Secondary Original Sin, besides that from Adam, p. 822.

But lest I should tire you with Instances, I must refer you to that great Book
it self, hoping though, that some judicious hand may ere long furnish you with
a more exact Collection of these things, with some Animadversions also, to
antidote the Poison of them, lest with the good things in the Book, tending to
promote Virtue and Morality, the Antichristian Infection be taken in also; so
destructive to Christ's Institutions.

Oh! Was ever the like yet heard from any Protestant-writer, so to palliate, if
not to justify such abominations (and that at this time-a-day too, in the
midst of the fears of Popery) by such endeavors, not only to Reconcile us to
so many of the Idolatrous Popish names (so long spued out) as Altar, Priests,
Sacrifices, etc. But so many of their things also; yea and those too, wherein
so much of the Heart and Life of their Religion consists; viz. not only their
Baptism, that Foundation-stone, though attended with so many impious and
blasphemous Circumstances, as the following discourse makes manifest: But their
Ministry also, those Locusts and Frogs that come out of the Bottomless-Pit, the
top-stone of their Building!

But that which is most to be admired therein, is his Plea for the validity of
their Ordination by the Pope, though Antichrist himself; Because he does not
Ordain them as Antichrist, but as God ( viz. as Christ's Vicar in the Name of
Jesus.) As though the aggravation of the thing, wherein the Mystery of the
Iniquity, Antichristianisme, and great Blasphemy lies, should be urged for its
extenuation, and to enforce its validity. For by the same Argument, are not all
their cursed Idolatrous Rites and Ceremonies to be vindicated, with all their
Blasphemous Bulls, and Bloodiest Inquisitions and Massacres that have been
imposed and perpetrated by the Popes Authority, who never did them as
Antichrist, but in the Name of Jesus Christ, and to promote his Service and
Interest. And if this be a good Argument for the Popes, why not for the Turks
Ministers also, the Mufti being not Ordained from Mahomet, as a Blasphemer, but
as the greatest Prophet of God. And could not Jeroboam have pleaded much of
this kind for his Calves, as Mr. Ainsworths Arrow against Idolatry, very
excellently upon the point reasons, which yet nevertheless would not excuse
him and his Adherents for their worshipping the Devil therein, nor deliver them
from all the wrath and vengeance that followed them for the same.

But alas! Whereto will not men run, left to themselves, who leave the Word for
their Rule, to embrace the Traditions and Inventions of men? Oh! were not those
twenty Queries, In his 2d Admonit. p. 142.
so much against the self-evidencing Authority of the Scriptures, in favor of
Tradition, a heinous provocation, to say no more of them?

And not only so favorable to their Ministry, but so many of their
Ministrations also, of Bowing, Kneeling, Music, Homilies, Apocrypha, Vows,
Holiness of Days, Times, Places, yea even Images and Crucifixes also. And as
though by a Monkish zeal and confidence, and some sweet pretensions to
Brotherly Love, Peace and Moderation, with the Legerdemain of Fallacy and
Quiddity, and (as Rutherford calls it) unwashen distinction, we were at last to
be Trapan'd into Popery, and persuaded to lick up all the vomit again. And
thereby to creat to himself the honor of being (as the great Dictator, so) the
great Reconciler of the World, and to do no less in the achievement, than to
reconcile Christ and Antichrist, God and Belial, Heaven and Hell.

And is there not ground from hence to cry out with the Prophet, Be astonished,
O ye Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid? And admiringly to say, Is not
this one of God's wonders we are to marvel at, mentioned Isaiah 29.13, 14.
Forasmuch as their Fear toward me is taught by the Precepts of Men. Therefore,
behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work among this People, even a
mavelous work and a wonder. For the wisdom of their Wise men shall perish,
and the understandin^ ^f their Prudent men shall be hid, and surel^ their
turning things upside down, shall be esteemed as the Potters clay: with 1 Cor.
1.19. For I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the Prudent, Where is the wise? Where is the Disputer? etc.

And as to those other Quotations that are so often cited from Dr. Tailors
Liberty of Prophecy; I know it is usually said, That what he wrote therein, was
not his own Judgment, but done on purpose to set the Parliamentarians together
by the ears, in taking so much the part of the most hated Sect amongst them.

To which I would say, That surely Dr. Tailor had the Reputation of a person of
more Integrity, Conscience, and Honesty than so egregiously to prevaricate in
the things of God.

Yet if that really was his design in bringing forth so much Truth (with such
fullness of Demonstration) though in guile, envy, and deceit, we are yet therein
to rejoice, as says the Apostle Phil. 1.4. And the more also to magnify the
Power, Wisdom, and Grace of God, so to take the wise in their own craftiness,
and that can make Balaam himself, that designs to curse his People, to bless
them altogether.

Quote so many Authors, to prove Believers Baptism? who ever denied it? For is
it not all along urged, that Pagans and Infidels should not otherwise be
Baptized, but upon Profession of Faith; and that the Children of Christians, if
not baptized in Infancy, should be baptized upon Profession of Faith?

Arguments in the first Part, are not so much to prove that Believers
professing Faith are to be Baptized; but that they only are so to be, and not
others. And that the Authors that are produced to prove Believers Baptism,
whether from the Commission, Order, or Ends thereof, do also by Substantial
Arguments conclude against the Baptising of any other; and so necessarily, by
their own Grants, exclude ignorant and Unconverted ones: And besides, as so
many of themselves acknowledge, the Catechumens were not only the Children of
Heathen, but of Christians also, and such too as were born to them after their
Christianity; witness those many instances given in the Fourth Century, and by
Mr. Baxter himself.

And as for Baptising Professors, whether the Children of Pagans or Christians,
we ask no more, Because Sprinkling of Infants, as by many Arguments you will find,
is a mere Nullity, no Baptism, if not worse than none, as you will find made good:
An Ordinance being so profaned, and the Name of God taken in vain, where
neither true Matter, nor right Manner is observed.

forth, in a point so controversal, at this juncture, where there is more need
of Healing than Dividing Subjects?

To which I reply, Paul uses so powerful an Argument from one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.
to press Union and Peace, then if there has been another Baptism set on foot
in opposition to it, that must needs be a Makebate with a witness, it being no
less than an Error in a Foundation, Nay that which does assert two Foundations,
and two Principles; And if so,

Then what more hopeful Endeavors can there be put forth to effect Peace, than
to discover and remove such a Rock of offense, by Delivering from the false,
and Recovering to the true and one Baptism, which does not only heal the
Division betwixt the Baptist and Poedobaptist, but the Poedobaptists amongst
themselves, who are, as you have heard, at so great odds in the point, and so
sollicitous, as Mr. Baxter tells us, in a Practical of such Concernment.

Without which, there being such an Error in the Principle, such a Foundation
of Antichrist held fast, all Exhortations to Union, viz. in Church Fellowship
and Communion will signify little. Therefore let the cause be removed, the
bone of contention taken away, the peaceable effects necessarily follow.

A faithful Pleading and Pressing whereof, is the upright design of this
Undertaking, and is therefore with the more Faith and Confidence recommended to
the Blessing of God, and to the Hearts and Consciences of all Sincere, Upright
Ones, that desire to keep the Commandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus
Christ.

With this earnest Desire and Expectation, that the Candid, Ingenuous Reader,
however contrary-minded, will overlook what of frailty and weakness he may take
notice of, which may be too much; and eye principally the Design, Drift and
Scope thereof. And that if by the multitude of Quotations, through so ancient a
track, he finds any particular mistake, misquotation, or misapplication, that
he will not so dwell, or insist upon it, to reject the Truth of all the rest,
that are full and clear without exception; which is the way that Carpers and
Sophisters take, and the method that Papists have all along taken in Reply to
our Protestant-Writers. Though this withal I can assure you, that I have not
willingly given any such occasion; But have either transcribed the Authorities
from their own Works, or from some Authentic Writers, that have so done, and
especially from the Magdiburgensian History, so much esteemed amongst the
Protestants, and whereof I shall be accountable to any judicious Enquirer, that
may doubt the truth hereof.

Though by the the way, it must be remembered, That all Humane Authority urged
from Antiquity, is at best but Argumentum ad Hominem: It being
Scripture-Authority only, that is of Divine force, and, as coming from God, can
oblige the Conscience.

Therefore if you will but please, before you make up your Judgment, and pass
the Definitive Sentence, to read the whole, and laying all parts together,
weigh them (with an impartial mind) in the Balance of the Sanctuary; you will
find, I doubt not, That as no Ordinance of Jesus Christ is more fully and
clearly asserted from the Scripture, founded with greater Wisdom and
Righteousness, or of more excellent Use to the Church, than that of Believers
Baptism, however it has been contemned, nicknamed, and reproached:

So no Invention of Man, or Innovation of Antichrist has been more pernicious,
either to the Church or World, or founded upon less of Reason, Righteousness,
and Truth, than that of Sprinkling Infants, though it has so long and so
currently past for Christ's Ordinance of Baptism.

Lastly, If any shall be offended at this Witness, (though thus made good by a
sevenfold Demonstration twice told) Let them know, (that the Providence of God
has so ordered, as they will find herein) that they cannot oppose it, without
opposing and contradicting themselves; there being scarce one Argument in the
whole Book, that is not substiantially confirmed by some eminent men of their
own.

Amongst several Mistakes committed by the Press, the Reader is desired to
correct these following, some whereof alter the sense, viz.
PAge 29. Line 15. Read, or Church. P. 30. l. 18. r. and respective. l. 19.
none for man. l. 22. r. Body of Christ. P. 50. l. 2. r. of Infants Bapt. P. 72.
l. 4. r. by for t^. P. 86. l. 14. r. that. P. 94. l. 24. r. incapable. P. 129.
l. 19. r. the name. P. 134. dele rather. P. 145. l. 17. r. new Garment. P. 151.
l. 4. r. for. P. 152. l. 23. r. know that P. 191. l. 22. r. intail. P. 229. l.
8. r. Generations. p. 271. l. 12. r. them. P. 276. l. 16. r. conform to. P 285.
l. 15. r. Lanifrank. P. 287. l. 18. dele for. P. 296. l. 18. r. Manichean. P.
307. l. 12. r. ^ppositions. In the Postscript. p. 41. l. 13. r. contemptious
traducing, p. 50. l. 1. dele which. p. 51. l. 19. by the Church.

The Contents of the whole. The Book consists of Two Parts, the first proving
Believers; The second disproving Infants Baptism, under these two Heads.
1. That the Baptising of Believers, is only to be esteemed Christ's Ordinance
of Baptism.

2. That the Baptising of Infants is no Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

The first whereof is proved in seven Chapters, viz.
1. From Christ's positive Institution and Commission commanding it, P. 1. 2.
From the Apostolical Doctrines and Precepts teaching it, p. 6. 3. From the
Examples of Primitive Saints practicing it, p. 9. 4. From the Spiritual Ends in
the Ordinance enjoining it, p. 15. 5. From the New-Testament-Dispensation
requiring it, p. 35. 6. From the Constitution of all the Primitive Churches
confirming it, p. 39. 7. From the Testimonies of Learned Men in all Ages, since
Christ, witnessing to it, p. 55.
The second is also made good in seven Chapters more, viz.
1. From the Scriptures total Silence as to any Precept or Practice to warrant
it, p. 97. 2. From the Silence of Antiquity it self, as to any practice of it
for 300 years, or the imposing of it, for at least till 400 years after Christ,
p. 107. 3. From the erroneous Grounds, both as to fabulous Traditions, and
mistaken Scriptures pretended for it, p. 151. 4. From the Change and Alteration
of the Rite and Ceremony it self of Dipping the whole Man, into Sprinkling a
little Water on the Head or Face, p. 232. 5. From the Nullity and utter
Insignificancy of it as to any Gospel-Ordinance, p. 253. 6. From the
Absurdities and Contradictions of it. p. 261: 7. From the eminent witness born
against it all along. p. 269.
The Examination of the Stories about Thomas Munzer, and John a Leyden. p. 318.
With the History of the Antiquity of the Christianity of the Ancient Britains
and Waldenses. And a Postscript in Answer to Mr. Bunyan.
Believers Baptism Proved.
CHAP. I. Wherein the Baptism of Believers is proved to be the only true
Baptism, I. From Christ's positive Commission.
from Christ's positive Institution and Commission, viz. MATT. 28.18, 19.
ANd Jesus spoke unto the Disciples, saying, All Power is given to me in Heaven
and Earth, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe
all things that I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always unto the end
of the world. With

Mark 16.16. And he said unto them, Go Ye into all the World, and Preach the
Gospel to every Creature. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved;
but he that believes not, shall be damned,

Where we have have this plain order of Christ laid down.

First, That men should be taught the Doctrine of Faith; And Secondly, Being so
taught, they should be Baptized; And thirdly, That they should in his School
[or Church, whereof they are then made Members] be instructed in every thing
else, they ought to learn.

Baxter.
Which Method Mr. Bauter himself does fully acknowledge in his Book called, The
Second Disputation of right to Sacraments, P. 149, 150. in his 16th. Argument,
where he has these Words, viz. This (says he, speaking of the Commission of
Christ ^o his Disciples) is not like some occasional mention of Baptism; but it
is the very Commission it self of Christ to his Disciples for Preaching and
Baptizing, and purposely expresses their several Works, in their several
places and Orders.

Their First task is to make Di^ciples, which are by Mark called Believers. The
Second work is to Baptize them; whereto is annexed the Promise of their
Salvation. The Third work is ^o teach them all other things, which are after to
be learned in the School of Christ.

To contemn this Order (says he) is to contemn all Rules of Order; for where
can we expect to find it, if not here. I profess, my Conscience is fully
satisfied from this Text, that it is one sort of Faith, even saying, that must
go before Baptism, the Profession whereof the Minister must expect, [But is it
possible, that an Ignorant Babe can observe this Order, and answer this
expectation] of which (says he) see, what is to this purpose before cited by
Calvin and Piscator, which he also mentions, P. 85. viz.

Calvin Calvin
upon Mat. 3.6. says, Therefore, that men may rightly offer themselves to
Baptism, Confession of sins is required, otherwise the whole Action would be
nothing else but sport.

Piscator, Piscator.
upon Mark 1.4. says, It is called the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of
sins, because John Preached the Remission of sins to the Penitent Believers.

Which Quotations of Mr. Baxters both here and hereafter fetched from that his
second disputation, etc. I desire the Reader to take notice, I transcribe out
of Mr. Tombe's Book, called Fel^ de se, (that of Mr. Baxter being not not at
hand, nor easily to be come by) in which Book Mr. Tombs very judiciously
returns Mr. Baxters 20. Arguments, he wrote against Mr. Blake, upon himself, as
naturally opposing Infants Baptism. And which I conclude were faithfully
recited, and would hope convincingly improved, because Mr. Baxter has never
contradicted them, that I have heard, nor given the least reply thereto, as his
Bookseller informs.

Mr. Perk.
Mr. Perkins in concurrence herewith upon these words; Teaching all Nations,
Baptizing them, says, I explain the terms thus; mark first of all, it is said,
Teach them, that is, Make them my Disciples, by calling them to believe, and to
repent. Here we are to consider the Order, which God observes in making with
men a Covenant in Baptism. First of all he calls them by his Word, and
commands them to believe and to repent. Then in the second place, God makes his
promise of Mercy and Forgiveness. And Thirdly, He Seals his promise by
Baptism. They that know not, nor consider this Order which God used in
Covenanting with t^em in ^aptisme, deal preposterously, oversliping the
Commandment of Repenting and Believing. And this (says he) is the cause of so
much profaneness in the world.

Paraeus Paraeus.
also upon Mat. 3.5. shows, That the Order was, that Confession as a Testimony
of true Repentance go first, and then Baptism for Remission of sins
afterward.

But how possible it is for an Ignorant Babe, or any but men of Knowledge to
answer this Rule, and Order in Christ's Commission is left to common sense to
determine: And whether they that assert another Order, viz. of Baptizing first,
and then teaching and expecting Repentance and Faith after, (which is the case
of all Children) do not contradict this, and hold out thereby a necessity of
some other Commission to justify such a practice.

CHAP. II. Wherein the Baptizing of Believers is proved to be the only Baptism
from the Apostles Doctrine teaching the same. ACTS 2.37.
II. From the Apostles Doctrine.
ANd when they heard this they were pricked at the Heart, and said unto Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter
said unto them, Repent and be baptiz^d every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ for the Remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

Acts 8.36, 37. And the Eunuch said, See here is Water, what does hinder me to
be baptized. And Philip said unto him, If thou believe with all thy Heart,
thou may.

Acts 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, to testify, That
it is he, which was ordained of God to be Judge of quick and dead; To him gave
all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him,
shall receive Remission of sins, while Peter spoke these words, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them which heard the Word, etc. Then said Peter, Can any man forbid
Water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost,
as well as we. And he commanded them to be baptized.

Acts 16.29. And the Keeper of the Prison fell down before Paul and Silas, and
said, Sirs, What must I do to be savd; and the said, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House. And he accordingly believing in
God and his House, as it is said, v. 34. were baptized he and all his straight
way.

To which may be added the Apostolical Order in laying down the Principles of
the Doctrine of Christ, viz. First, Repentance from dead works. Secondly, Faith
toward God. Thirdly, ly, The Doctrine of Baptismes, Heb. 6.12.

Bid Bid.
says, That men were first to be instructed unto the Knowledge of the Truth,
then to be baptized, as Christ has taught, because without Faith it was
impossible to please God. Magdeb, Cent. 8. p. 220.

Erasmus Erasmus
in his Paraphrase upon 28. Math. observes, That the Apostles were commanded
first to teach, and then to Baptize. The Jews were brought by Ceremonies to the
Knowledge of the Truth, but Christians must learn first.

So that does it not from hence necessarily follow, that if the Apostles only
taught, that persons should be baptized after Repentance, and Faith, according
to the Commission, and that there is no instance to be found of any other
teaching, that then such should be baptized, and no other. And for any to
introduce another practice, it is not only contrary to Christ's Commission, but
contradictious to the Apostles teachings.

CHAP. III. Wherein believers Baptism is proved the only Baptism from the
example and practice of the primitive Saints. ACTS 2.41.
THen they that gladly received his Word were baptized. III. From the example
of primative Saints.


Acts 8.12, But when they believed Philip Preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both Men and
Women, Verse 37.32. And Philip said, if thou believe with all thy Heart, thou
may. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
And he commanded the Chariot to stand still, and they went down both into the
Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.

Acts 18 8. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord
with all his House, and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were
baptized.

Acts 22.14. And Ananias said unto Paul, the God of our fathers has chosen
thee, that thou should know his will, and see the just fine, and should
hear the voice of his mouth. And now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord, Acts 9.18. And he
aros^ forthwith and was baptiqed.

Which is also confirmed by the following Testimonies.

Luther Luther.
de Sacrament. Tom. 3. fol. 168. says, That in times past it was thus, that
the Sacrament of Baptism was administered to none, except it were to those,
that acknowledged and confessed their faith, and know how to rehearse the same,
and that it was necessary to be done, because the Sacrament was constituted
externally to be used, that the faith be confessed and made known to the Church

Bulling.
Bullinger in his House-book 48. Sermon, Baptism (says he) has no prescribed
time by the Lord, and therefore it is left to the free choice of the faithful.

Those that believed at the Preaching of Peter upon the day of Pentecost, as
also the Eunuch, whom Philip baptized. Cornelius the Captain, Paul the Apostle
at Damascus, Lydia the seller of Purple, a Woman that feared God, the Keeper of
the Prison at Philippi, and other more as well Women as Men, so soon as they
tasted the gifts of Christ, and believed his Word, presently desired to be
baptized.

Mr. Baxter further in his 16. Mr. Bax.
Argument against Mr. Blake in the aforesaid 2d. Disputation, P. 149. (says
most significantly) If there can be no example given in Scripture of any one,
that was baptized without the profession of a saving Faith, nor any precept for
so doing, then must we not baptize any without it.

But the Antecedent is true, therefore so is the Consequent. In proof whereof
he produces the several Scripture examples of Persons that were baptized, which
(says he) might afford us so many several Arguments, but I shall put them
together, viz.

First, John, as I have showed you, required the profession of true Repentance,
and that his Baptism was for the remission of sin.

Secondly, when Christ lays down the Apostolical Commission, the Nature and
Order of the Apostles work, is first to make them Disciples, and then to
Baptize them into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as before.

That it was saving Faith that was required of the Jews, Jews.
and professed by them (Acts 2.38.) is plain in the Text.

The Samaritans Samaritans.
believed, and had great Joy, and were baptized into the name of Jesus Christ,
Acts 8.12. whereby it appears, that it was both the Understanding and Will
that were both changed, and that they had the profession even of a saving
Faith, yea, even Simon himself, 37. v.

The Condition upon which the Eunuch Eunuch.
must be baptized was, if he believed with all his Heart, which he professed to
do, and that was the Evidence Philip expected.

Paul Paul.
was baptized after true conversion, Acts 9.18.

The Holy Ghost fell on the Gentiles before they were baptized, Acts 10.44.

Lydia.
Lydias Heart was opened before she was baptized, and she was one the Apostles
judged faithful to the Lord, and offered to them the Evidence of her faith,
Acts 16.30.

The example also of the Jailer Jailer.
is very full to the resolution of the Question in hand. He first asks, Wrat
he shall do to be saved; The Apostle answers him, Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, and thy House. So that it was a saving says that is
here mentioned. He rejoiced and believed with all his House, and was baptized
the same hour of the night, or straight way.

Crispus Crispus.
the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his House.

And many of the Chrinthians hearing, Corinth.
believed, and were baptized, Acts 18.8.

Philip Philip.
in Acts 8.37. is determining a Question, and gives this in as the decision?
If thou believe with all thy Heart, thou may. And to say that this is but
de Bone esse, meaning that it includes not the Negative, otherwise thou may
not, is to make Philip to have deluded, and not decided, or resolved.

In a word; (says he) I know of no one word in Scripture that gives us the
least intimation, that ever man was baptized without the profession of a saving
Faith.

Thus Fa^ Mr. Baxter, who to save us the labor, has himself (you see) given
such an exact Catalogue of the Examples of the baptized in the Scripture, among
whom (as he so well observes) there is not one to be found, that answered not
Christ's Commission, and the Apostles Precept in a professed Faith and
Repentance: But it is said, he mentions only such as were baptized aged. That is
very true, and the reason is; because the Scripture affords examples of none
other as he confesses.

But Secondly, By his own grant in the words beforegoing. If Philips answer was
decisive, and not delusive, all others are excluded. And that none but such as
are capable to give some demonstration, that they believe with all their Heart,
ought to be admitted to Baptism.

CHAP. IV. Wherein believers are proved to be the only subjects of Baptism,
IV. From the Spiritual ends of the Ordinance.
from the Spiritual ends of the Ordinance.
THe first End or Use we shall meant on, is, 1. To be a Sign of the Mysteries
the Gospe^
that the Baptized might have that represented in a Sign or Figure, and preached
to his Eye in the Ordinance which had been preached to his Ear and Heart by the
Word and Spirit of God, respecting the whole Mystery of the Gospel, and his
Duty and Obligation therein? A Sign being, as Paraeus observes, some outward
thing appearing to the Sense, through which some inward thing is at the same
time apprehended by the Understanding. Therefore he calls the Sacraments, Signa
in oculos incurrentia.

And therefore Mr. Perk^ns says, That the Preaching of the Word, and the
Administration of the Sacraments are all one in substance; for in the one the
witness of God is seen, and in the other heard. Case Cons. p. 177.

And some do call them Hieroglyphics, viz. Such visible Representations of
things, as the Egyptians used to teach and instruct by.

Which therefore calls for Understanding and Judgment, and Senses to be
exercised in all that partake thereof, otherwise the action will be wholly
insignificant, and therefore for any to carry a poor Ignorant Babe to the
Ordinance of Baptism, is as much as if you should carry it to hear a Sermon,
which would be as significat, as if you should represent some goodly Show to a
Blind man, or instruct a stock or a stone. 2. To witness Repentance.


The second and that we shall mention, is, that the party Baptized might
thereby witness his Repentance, Mat. 3.11.3, 6. Act. 2. called therefore The
Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1. To which whoever offered themselves, were to
bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and amendment of Life.

Mr. Bax.
For which we are beholding to Mr. Baxter for very convincing Arguments, upon
his first Argument with Mr. Blake in the fore mentioned Book, viz, wherein he
does positively affirm, that we must not Baptize any without the profession of
true Repentance, which he proves thus.

First Argument. If John Baptist required the profession of true Repentance
before he would baptize them; then so must we; but John did so; therefore the
third Consequence is clear. The Antecedent I prove from Mark 1.3, 4. He
Preached the Baptism of Repentance unto Remission of sins, and doubtless that
Repentance (says he) which is to Remission of sins, is true special Repentance.

Second Argument. If Jesus Christ has by Scripture, Precept and Example
directed us to baptize those that profess true Repentance, and no other, then
we must baptize them, and no other. But the Antecedent is true, so therefore is
the Consequent, which is fully made good from Mat. 4.17. Mark 1.15, and 16, 12.
Acts 17.30. Luke 24.47. Where Christ himself did, and sent forth his Disciples
also to Preach Repentance to prepare them for Baptism, which afterward
followed, as Mat. 3.11, Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. Acts 2.37, 38, 41.

Third Argument. If they that profess to be buried with Christ in Baptism, and
to rise again, do profess true Repentance, etc. But all that are Baptized must
do so, etc. Colos. 2.11, 12, 13 Romans 6. 4, 5. Then in further Conficmation he
Quotes.

Bullinger
Bullinger upon Acts 2.38. Who says, To be Baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, is by the Sign of Baptism to testify, that we do believe in
Christ for the Rimission of sins. First mark, it is not only an engagemenent to
believe hereafter, but the profession of a present Faith. Secondly, And that
not a common Faith, but that which has Remission of sins. Thirdly, and this
was not an accidental separable use of Baptism, but the very exposition of, to
be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

A Third End of ^aptisme is to evidence present regeneration, 3. End to
evidence present Regeneration.
whereof it is a lively Sign or ^ymbol. Regeneration being called in allusion
to it, The washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. And a being born of Water and of
the Spirit, John 3. Which is so essential to the Ordinance, that if that thing
signifie^ thereby be wanting, the Sign only will be very ineffectual, and
insignificant^ As,

D. Tailor
Dr. Tailor late Bishop of Down, very elegantly faith it in his Plea for the
Baptists, lib. of Proph. p. 242. This indeed is truly to be baptized, when it
is both in the Symbol, and in the Mystery. Whatsoever is less then this, is but
the Symbol only, a mere Ceremony, an opus operatum, a dead Letter, an empty
shadow, an Instrument without an Agent to manage, or force to actuate it. And
to the same purpose you have,

Mr. Baxter in his 10 Argument p. 117, 118. Mr. Bax.
Christ has instituted no Baptism, but what is to be a Sign of present
Regeneration: But to men that profess not a justifying Faith, it cannot be
administered, as a Sign of present Regeneration. Therefore he has instituted no
Baptism to be admininistred to such.

The Major is plain, says he, in John 3.5. Except a man be born of Water and
tho Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God And so in Tit. 3.5. Where
it is called The Laver of Regeneration,

And what can be a fuller grant, that Infants Baptism is neitheir significant,
nor any Institution of Christ, then what these two learned men have here given
us?

4th. End is signally to represent the Covenant and Promise, 4. End signally to
represent the Covenant on man's part
that the Believer enters into hereby, viz. to dye to sin, and live to Christ
in new Obedience, by that Figurative Death and Resurrection, in being dipprd in
Water, and by so going down under, and rising up out of the water, he is said
to be buried, and to rise with Christ, to be planted into the likeness of his
Death and Resureection, to dye and live with Christ by Morti^^ation and
Vivification To which purpose you have

Mr. Perkins very significant, viz. The Action of the party baptized is a
certain stipulation, or Obligattion, whereby he binds himself to give Homage
to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. This Homage stands in Faith, wherereby all
the promises of God are believed, and in obedience to all his Commanaments. The
Sign of this Obligation is, that the party baptized willingly yield himself to
be washed with Water? and also you have

Mr. Baxt.
Mr. Baxter very fully upon his Thir^ Argument to Mr. Blake, viz. It is o^ the
instituted Nature of Baptism to b^ in general a professing sign for the
present as well as an engaging sign for the future

For first the Minister does baptiz^ into the name of the Father, Son an^ Holy
Ghost, and the party does consen^ thereto; First voluntarily offering himself
to Baptism; And secondly voluntarily receiving that Baptism: And his offer of
himself here goes before the Ministers baptizing of him, and his reception of
that Baptism is essential to it: So that Baptism essentially contains on
his part a signal profession of consent, to that which is meant in the form
used by the Minister; [viz. I Baptize thee in the name, etc.] So that it is a
most clear case, that Baptism as Baptism according to its instituted nature
and use, does contain the persons actual signal profession of present assent to
the Gospel, and acceptance of God, the Father Son, and Holy Ghost, as there in
offered; and anactual signal profession that we there presently consecrate,
devote, and dedicate our selves to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost in the
aforesaid Relations.

Secondly another part of Baptism is the Ministers washing the person; and the
person first offering himself to be washed, and after actually receiving it,
does hereby signally profess his consent. Now this washing does essentially
signify our washing from our former filth of sin, together with the guilt, our
putting away the old man, which is corrupt according to our deceitful lusts,
being buried with Christ? for all that are baptized must profess to be buried
with him; and to rise again signifies a being dead to sin, and alive to God to
newness of life, and not only an engagement of this for the future, but a
profession also of it at present, which is made good from Col 2.11, 12, 13.
Romans 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11. Yea he that reads the whole Chapter with judgment
and impartiality will soon discern, that true Repentance, and abrenuntiation of
the service of sin was to be professed by all that would be baptized, and
thereupon they sealed their own profession and Covenant by the reception of
Baptism, as Christ sealed his part by the actual baptizing of them

Dr. Tail.
Concerning which you have Dr. Tailor very excellently, Page 243. Baptism
(says he) is never propounded, mentioned, or enjoined as a means of Remission
of sins, or of Eternal Life, but something of duty, choice and ^anctity, is
joined with it in order to the production of the end so mentioned Know ye not,
that as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his Death? There is
the Mystery and Symbol together, and declared to be perpetually united. All of
us who were baptized into the one, were baptized into the other; not only into
the Name of Christ, but into his Death also; But the meaning of this, as it is
explained in the following words of St. Paul, makes much for our purpose. For
to be bapitzed into his Death, signifies to be buried with him in Baptism;
That as Christ rose from the Dead, we also should walk in newness of Life; that
is the full Mystery of Baptism. For being baptized into his Death, or (which
is all one in the next words) into the likeness of his Death, cannot go alone,
if we be so planted into Christ, we shall be partakers of his Resurrection, and
that is not instanced in precise reward, but in exact duty; for all this is
nothing but Crucifixion of the old man, and destroying of the body of sin, that
we no longer serve sin.

And therefore it is, that Baptism is called, The answer of a good Conscience
toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. Which can by no means be applied to the Infant. And
thereupon Dr Tailor again p. 244. That Baptism which saves us, is not not
only the washing with Water, of which only Children are capable; but the answer
of a good Conscience toward God, of which they are not capable till the use of
Reason, till they know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

Mr. Bax.
And Mr. Baxter very fully p. 156. If (says he) according to the institution,
the answer of a good Conscience must be joined with Baptism, for the attaining
of its end, then we must admit of none that profess not the answer of a good
Conscience; but the former (says he) is certain from the Text; for Baptism is
said to save; that is its appointed Use; yet not the External washing, but the
Answer of a good Conscience does it. Therefore this is of a necessary
injunction, and without it Baptism cannot attain its Ends: But it is to be
administered, and received only in order to the attainment of its End; and
theerefore never in a way, by which the end is apparently not attainable. What
the answer of a good Conscience is, the common Expositions fully confirm, as I
maintain.

The Assemblies Annotations (says he) recite both thus, viz. By the Answer of
a good Conscience, we may understand that unfeigned Faith, whereof they made
confession at their Baptism, and whereby their Consciences were purified, and
whereby they received the Remission of their sins.

The Fifth End of Baptism is to be a Sign to the Believer of the Covenant on
Gods part of washing away his sins by the Blood of Christ, Fifth end to be a
sign of the Covenant on Gods part.
to give Spiritual Life and Salvation, Act. 2.32, 3.3. Act. 22.16. 1 Pet. 3 21.

To which truth Mr. Perkins sets his Seal. Mr. Perk.
We see (says he) what is done in Baptism, the Covenant of Grace is
solemnized between God and the Party baptized; and in this Covenant something
belongs to God, and something to the Party baptized.

And Bullinger Bullinger
upon Act. 2.38. That Baptism is an Agreement or Covenant of Grace which
Christ enters into with us, when we are baptized, as well as a professing sign
of our true Repentance.

A Sixth End is, Si^th end to represent the union betwixt Christ and the
Believer.
That it might be a signal Representation of a Believers union with Christ,
called therefore a being baptized into Christ, and a putting on of Christ
figured out by such an Union and Conjunction with the Element, as imports a
being born thereof, and and being clothed therewith.

Upon which (says Dr. Tailor) Whoever are baptized into Christ, Dr. Tail.
have put on Christ, have put on the new man. This whole Argument is the very
words of St. Paul; The Major proposition is Dogmatically determined, Gal. 3.24.
The Minor in Ephesians. 4.24. The Conclusion then is obvious, that they who are not
formed in Righteousness, and Holiness and Truth. (They who remaining in their
i^capacities, cannot walk in newness of Life, they have not been baptized into
Christ; and then they have but one Member of the distinction used by St. Peter;
they have that Baptism, which is the putting away the filth of the Flesh; but
they have not that Baptism, which is the Answer of a good Conscience toward
God, which is the only Baptism, that saves. And this, says he, is the Case
of Children.

Mr Bax.
And to this purpose also Mr. Baxter again p. 98. If it be the appointed use of
all Christian Baptism to solemnize our Marriage with Christ, or to Seal or
confirm our Union with him, or ingrafting into him, then must we baptize none
that profess not justifying ^aith, because this is necessarily prerequisite,
and no other can pretend to union Marriage, or ingrafting into Christ.

Both the Antecedent and the Consequent are evident in Gal. 3 27, 28, 29. For
as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, ye are
all one in Christ Jesus; and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
Heirs according to Promise. Here we see, that it is not an accidental or
separable thing for Baptism to be our Visible entrance into Christ, Our
putting him on, Our admittance by solemnization into the State of Gods
Children, and Heirs according to Promise. For (as all own) if we be truly
baptized, we are baptized into Christ, then are we Christ's, and have put on
Christ, and are all one in Christ, and Abraham's Seed according to Promise.

A seventh End of Baptism is, Seventh End entrance into the Visible Church.
that the Baptized person may orderly thereby have an entrance into the visible
Church, and have a right given him to partake of all the Ordinances and
Privileges thereof. For as Circumcision of old was the visible door of
entrance into the Old testament-church, and so essentially necessary thereto,
that without it none were esteemed either Church Members, or were to Partake
either of the Passover, or of any of the Privileges thereof, all without,
being called the Uncircumcision: So also was Baptism such a Door, and Visible
entrance into the New-testament-church, that none were esteemed Members
thereof, or did partake of its Ordinances before they were baptized, being so
Gods Hedge and Boundary, that others were esteemed without: And therefore as
Christ had laid down the Order in the Commission, first to teach, then to
Baptize, and then to teach them all things, viz. in the place of teaching his
School or Church. So did they practice accordingly, as we read Act: 2.41, 42.
Where after Peter had taught them, it is said, That they who gladly received
his Word, were bapt zed, and the same day there was added unto them 3000.
Souls, and they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship,
and breaking of Bread and Prayer: So that after Baptism, not before, the
Believers were said to enjoy, and partake of all the Church Privileges, And
which is Christ's directory and Standard for Rule and Order to the end of the
world. The Church of Corinth were said 1 Cor. 11.2. to have kept the
Ordinances, as they were delivered to them. And it was the Apostles joy and
rejoicing to see the Order and Faith of the Saints, Col. 2.5.

And therefore it is said 1 Cor. 12.13. That by one Spirit we are all baptized
into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit, viz.

The same Spirit of Faith, Regeneration and Holiness, which gives right to
Baptism, orderly lets into the Body and Church, and so admits also unto the
Supper, which is the received sense of most interpreters upon the place.

And by this Order believers were said to be baptized into Christ, and to be
implanted together with him, Romans 6 3 Gal 3.27.

For as public Officers are invested into their trust by some external
solemnity, that passes upon them at the time of their installment: And as the
Husband and Wife enter into their Relation by some solemn act done at the time
of their Marriage. Or as a Corporation by some public act done, does receive
its Members at their Enfranchisement; Even so according to the import of these
Scriptures mentioned, do Men and Women receive that Relative being, which they
have in Christ, and as Visible Members of that Spiritual ^orporation, wherein
Christ is Head and Chief, from that solemn act of being baptized into him.

And as the Officer is not invested with his Authority: Or Husband and Wife
with that Power over each others Bodies, (as 1 Cor. 7.4.) nor any Members with
the Immunities of the Corporation by any prequalifications, or actions
preparatory thereto, (...) that be acted and done by way of Solemnity, which
immediately invests them with their several Respect^ and Capacities. In like
manner m^n are to ^e esteemed capable of those privileges, which visibly do
belong to the body of the Church, upon the account of any precedaneous
Qualification or Action whatsoever, until first they have past through those
spiritual solemnities in Baptism, upon which they are invested with the
denomination and visible privileges, which belong in common to the Members of
Christ's Mystical body.

Which Order of Christ has had such a sanction upon it, that all, or for the
most part all, that have professed Christianity, whether Papists, Prelatists,
Presbyterians, or Independents have owned the same, not communicating in the
Supper with any they judged unbaptized.

In a word, Baptism has been called of old amongst the Ancients, and not
without Reason, Janna Sacramentorum, the Gate of the Sacraments, whereof they
gave this Reason.

In all respects the Order of the Mystery is kept, that first by Remission of
sins a Medicine be prepared for their wounds, and then the Nourishment of the
Heavenly Table be added. Ambrose. Ambrose


Which Truth is further witnessed unto and confirmed by the following
Testimonies, viz.

Justin Martyr, Justin Martyr.
in secunda Apologia pro Christianis; speaking of the Lords Supper, to which
the new baptized person is admitted, says, This food we call the Eucharist, to
which no man is admitted, but only he that believes the truth of our Doctrine,
being washed in the Laver of Regeneration for Remission of sins, etc.

Vrsinus Vrsinus.
in his Catechism; Baptism is a Sacrament of entrance into the Church, whence
it comes, that the Supper is presented to none, except first baptized.

The Assemblies Catechism. ^ssem^lies Catechism.
Baptism (say they) is a Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus
Christ, not only for the solemn admission of the party baptized into the
Visibit Church: But etc.

Mr. Bax.
Mr. Baxter in his plain Scripture proof, p. 24. As a Soldier before Listing,
and a King before Crowning and taking his Oath; so are we Church Members before
Baptism: But as every one that must ^e admitted solemnly into the Army, must
be admitted by Listing, as the solemn engaging sign: So every one that has
right to be solemnly admitted into the Visible Church must ordinarily be
admitted by Baptism; proved thus.

If we have neither Precept nor Example in Scripture, since Christ ordained
Baptism, of any other way of admiting Visible Members, but only by Baptism;
then all that must be admitted Visible Members, must ordinarily be baptized.

But since Baptism was instituted, we have no Precept or Example of admitting
Visible Members any other way, but constant Precept, and Example for admittance
this way.

Therefore all that must be admitted Visible Members, must be baptized.

I know not (says he) what in show of Reason can be said to this by those that
renounce not Scripture. For what man dare go in a way that has neither Precept
nor Example to warrant it from a way that has a full current of both. Yet they
that will admit Members into the Church without Baptism, do so.

I had thought to have been larger upon this Point, and intended particularly
to have answer^d a late piece of Mr. ^unions in contradiction hereto: But ^eing
so well replied to by Mr. Paul, in his serious Reflections so lately Printed; I
shall say thereto little more, then what you find in the Sixth Chapter,
respecting the constitution of the Primative Churches.

Now may it not be referred to the Judgment and Conscience of the considerate
Impartial Reader, whether any but the believer can possibly reach, or attain
these Spiritual ends mentioned? and how capable poor ignorant Babes are to
answer any of them? and whether it is not contradictious to common sense and
Experience for any to assert it? For what Repentance or Faith are they capable
to profess? What present Regeneration can they evidence; What Testimony of a
good Conscience can they give in striking, or keeping Covenant with God herein?
And how can they embrace, or improve the Covenant on Gods part for Pardon,
Purging, Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation?

And therefore is Mr. Faxter forced to confess in his plain Scripture proof, p.
301. That as to the Ends of Baptism they are rather to be fetched from the
Aged, then Infants; and that because the aged 1. are the most fully capable
Subjects. 2. The most Excellent and Eminent Subjects. 3. Of whom the Scripture
fully speaks, etc. But on the contrary, as for Infants Baptism be
acknowledges in the same place, that the Scripture speaks darkly of it: Yea,
that it is so dark in the Scripture, that the Controversy is thereby become not
only hard, but so hard, as he says, he finds it.

Wherein if he has not said more in a few words for the baptizing of
Believers, and against that of Infants, then all his great book can answer: Let
all the world judge, though he calls it in contradiction hereto, plain
Scripture Proof for Infants Church Membership and Baptism.

CHAP. V. Wherein the Baptism of believers is proved to be the only Baptism
from the New-testament-dispensation, so differing from that of the old.
THe Old Testament Church, Fifthly, from the new Testament Dispensation.
we find, was national, consisting of the Natural and Fleshly Seed of Abraham:
Therefore were Infants by the Ordinance of Circumcision added thereto: Wherein
they had a worldly Sanctuary, Carnal Ordinances, a Temporary Priesthood, and
multitude of Ceremonies.

The New-testament-church was by Christ's appointment to be a separated people
out of the Nations consisting only of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; and
therefore believers upon profession of Faith by the Ordinance of Baptism were
added thereto, Acts 2.31, 1 Cor. 12.13. Wherein a^ in the Spiritual house, the
true Tabernacle, they partake of Spiritual Ordinances in Communion of Spiritual
Members: And by an unchangeable Priesthood do offer Spiritual Sacrifices, and
Worship God, as true Wroshippers in Spirit and Truth.

And therefore upon this change you have John Baptist discharging that
Privilege, (of Abraham's natural Seed) that admitted into the old Church, from
any such Rite in the new, Mat. 3.9, etc. telling them in express terms, That
now in Gospel days they must not say within themselves, That they have Abraham
for their Father, viz. That they are the Children of a godly Parent, No, that
which might have served turn under Moses, will not a vail, nor must not be
admitted now under Christ. Nothing now but fruits meet for Repentance give
right to the Bap^isme of Repentance; and nothing short of the Spirits birth can
orderly admit to Water-birth and Spiritual Ordinances. And the Genuine Reason
Christ himself gave to that Doctor in Israel; (though yet, it seems, ignorant
of the Mystery of the new birth, which only gives the right of admission into
the New testament church) Because (says he) that which is born of the flesh,
is but flesh; Regeneration being not entailed to Generation.

To which purpose therefore Dr. Owen Dr. Owen.
very excellently in his Catechism about Government, p. 106. Our Lord Jesus
Christ has laid down (says he) as an Everlasting Rule, that unless a man be
born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. Requiring
Regeneration as an indispensible condition in a Member of his Church, a Subject
of his Kingdom: for his Temple is now to be built of Living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.
Men Spiritually and savingly quickened from their death in sin, and by the Holy
Ghost (whereof they are partakers) made a meet habitation for God, Ephesians. 2 21 22
1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. Which receiving Vital supplies from Christ its Head
increases in faith and holiness, edifying it self in love. Thus far the Doctor.

Under the Law, Ceremony, Shadow, Letter, and Carnal Seed suited to Carnal
Ordinances: But when the substance and Spirit was come, (under the Gospel) then
only a spiritual Seed as most meet and suitable, must attend the spiritual
Worship, and spiritual Ordinances.

Dr. Tail.
And herein does Dr. Tailor very well accomodate this Truth, P. 242. They (says
he) that baptize Children, make Baptism to be wholly an outward Duty, a Work
of the Law, a Carnal Ordinance, it makes us adhere to the Letter without regard
of the Spirit, to be satisfied with Shadows, to return to Bondage, to
relinquish the mysteriousness, the substance and spirituality of the Gospel,
which Argument is of s^ much the more consideration; because under the
Spiritual Covenant, or the Gospel of Grace, if the Mystery go^^ not before the
Symbol; (which doe^ when the Symbols are consignations o^ Grace, as the
Sacraments are) yet i^ always accompanies it, but never follow^ in order of
time. And this is cle^ in the perpetual Analogy of Holy Scripture.

CHAP. VI. Wherein Believers Baptism is confirmed to be the only true
Baptism, from the constitution of the Primitive Churches, who were formed not
of Ignorant Babes, but of professing Men and Women, that upon Baptism were
joined together to observe all the Ordinances of Christ, which is also further
evidenced by the Dedications of the Epistles to the Churches, as well as
Contents of the same.
THe Truth whereof appears not only from the Order directed unto in Christ's
Commission, 6. From the constitution of the Primitive Churches
which (as already observed) requires, that men be first taught in the Faith.
2. That then they be baptized into the Faith. And then thirdly, that they be
edified or taught in the Faith, viz. in the place of teaching, the Church, or
School of Christ. (The contemning which Order, as Mr. Baxter says, is to
contemn all Rules of Order.)

Jerusalem.

Jerusalem.
Acts 2.41, 42. Then they that gladly received his Word were baptized, and the
same day there were added to them 3000. Souls. (The (them) that they were added
to, appear to be the Baptized Disciples mentioned Acts. 1.15, 21, 22.) And so
they continued in the Apostles Doctrine, fellowship, breaking of Bread, and
Prayers. Where you have the order fully observed; 1. Receiving or believing the
Word. 2. Baptizing. 3. Church fellowship in Doctrine, breaking Bread, and
Prayer.

And so in like manner you will find the self-same order was observed in all
the Churches: As,

Secondly, The Church of Samaria. Samaria.


Acts 8.12. Where it is said, that when the Samaritans believed Philp Preaching
the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus, they were
baptized both Men and Women, (but not a Word of Children)

Thirdly, The Church at Cesarea. Cesarea.


Acts 10 47, 48. Where Peter upon Cornelius and his Companies believing and
receiving the Holy Spirit) said, Can any man forbid Water, that these should
not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as We? And he
commanded them to be baptized.

Fourthly, The Church of Philippi. Philippi.


Acts 16.14. It is said, That Lydia a Worshipper of God heard us, whose Heart
the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things that were spoken by Paul,
and was baptized, and her household.

And Verse 32. They said unto the Ialour, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved: And they spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all
that were in his house. 33. And he was baptized, he and all his straightway.
34. ^elieving in God with all his House.

Where you have two Families bapti^ed, but no Child mentioned in either, but
only such, who were capable to hear the Word of the Lord, and to believe the
same.

Fifthly, The Church at Coloss. Coloss.


Col. 2.10, 11, 12. Where the Apostle asserts, that that Church at Coloss was
buried with Christ in Baptism, wherein they were risen with him, through the
faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.

Which cannot be truly said of any but professed believers.

Sixthly, Concerning the Church at Corinth, Corinth.
it is said.

Acts 18.18. And Crisp^^ the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord
with all his House, and that many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed, and
were baptized; and in 1 Cor. 1.13. Paul tells the Church at Corinth, That they
were not baptized in his name. And in 1 Cor. 12.13. That by one Spirit they
were all baptized into one Body, viz. That they were joined to the Church by
baptism; of whom it is said, 1 Cor. 14.2 That they kept the Ordinances, as
they were delivered to them.

Seventhly, of the Church of Rome it is written.

Romans 6.3. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his Death. Therefore we are buried with him in Baptism into
Death.

Eighthly, of the Church at Galatia. Galatia.


Gal. 3.26, 27. For ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

And lastly, of the Church at Ephesus Ephesus.
it is Recorded.

Acts 9.1, 2, 3. That Paul having past through the upper Coasts, came to
Ephesus, and finding Disciples, said unto them, Have you received the Spirit
since you believed; and they said, No etc. And he said, unto what were you
baptized, etc.

By which Scriptures it manifestly appears, that the New Testament Churches
were formed only of baptized believers, wherein we neither find one Ignorant
Babe, nor one unbaptized person a Member.

And that Infants have as little right to be admitted into the Church, and
esteemed Members thereof, or to partake of the spiritual Ordinances therein, as
they have to that initiating Ordinance Baptism. It may further appear, if you
do but consider, how incongruous it is to Reason and sense to imagine, that
little Children are any way concerned as Church Members, either in the
Dedications of the Epistles sent to the Churches, or in the Epistles themselves.

Rome, Romans 1.7. Directed to the beloved of God, called to be Saints, and whose
Faith was spoken of through the whole world.

But can that be said of any Infant?

And secondly those Epistles to the Corinthians, are they not also directed to
those that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that
in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord and theirs,
enriched with all utterance and Knowledge, etc.

But what Ignorant Babe could be concerned therein?

And thirdly, that Epistle written to the Church at Ephesus; Is it not to the
Faithful in Christ, the chosen, adopted, abounding in Wisdom and Prudence?

But what poor silly Babe could be intended thereby?

And Fourthly, In the Letter directed to the Church at Philippi. Is it not to
all the Saints in Christ's Jesus, who have had their fellowship in the Gospel
from the first day till then? Philip. 1.1.

But how can that be said of any Child.

And fifthly, those Epistles inscribed to the Church at Thessalonica, were they
not to such as did abound in Love, Faith, Hope, Patience, that received the
word in much affliction, and joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. 1 These. 1. 2 These. 1.3.

But what Patience, Love, or Hope can be attributed to silly Children.

And lastly, those seven Epistles written to the Asian Churches, wherein
several Graces are commended, and s ns reproved and threatened, and every one
that had an Ear commanded to hear what the Spirit said to these Churches.

But how could there be one Child concerned therein?

The Church of England Church of England.
in their 19th. Article, do acknowledge, that the Visible Church is a number of
Christians by profession.

Dr. Owen gives a description of a Gospel Church.
Dr. Owen in his Catechism about New Testament Worship, P. 89. tells us, That a
Gospel Church is a society of Persons called our of the World, or their Natural
worldly state by the administration of the Word and Spirit unto the obedience
of the Faith, or the Knowledge and Worship of God in Christ joined together in
an Holy band, or by special agreement, for the exercise of the communion of
Saints in the due observation of all the Ordinances of the Gospel, Romans 1.5, 6.
1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Cor. 14.15. Heb. 3.1. James 1.18. Rev. 1.20. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians.
2.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.

And again in Page 106. As the Apostles in their Writings do ascribe unto all
the Churches, and the Members of them, a Participation in this effectual
Vocation, affirming, that they are Saints, Called, Sanctified, Justified and
Accepted with God in Christ; for which he again cites the foregoing Scriptures)
so many of the Duties which are required of them in that Relation and condition
are such, as none can perform to the Glory of God, their own benefit, and the
edification of others, (the ^nds of all obedience) unless they are partakers of
this effectual Calling, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. 1 Cor. 12.12, Ephesians. 4.16.

Mr. Baxter in his 10th. Argument to Mr. Blake, Mr. ^ax.
has these words very significant to our purpose, viz. Paul calls all the
baptized Church of Corinth justified: None that profess not a justified Faith,
are called justified, therefore none such should be baptized. The Major is
proved out of 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are Wa^hed, ye are Sanctified, ye are Justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

To which he adds, I confess it is sad, that good men should be so unfaithful
to the Truth, which is so precious, and is not their own, and which they should
do nothing against, but all they can for i^.

Secondly, 2. Nor in the Epistles themselves.
As Children are not concerned in the Dedications of the Epistles, so neither
are they as Church Members in the Epistles themselves, as may appear by a few
instances, to which you may abundantly add in your reading the Epistles.

The first we shall mention is that 1 Cor. 6.4. 1 Cor. 6.4
If then you have Judgment of things pertaining to this Life, set them to judge
that are least esteemed in the Church. And that he meant least esteemed for
Wisdom and Judgment, the fifth Verse explains.

But Infants of 8 or 10 days old can neither judge nor speak, therefore we
must necessarily conclude, there were no such Members in the Church of Corinth.

2. Another you have in 1 Cor. 10.16, 17 compared with 11.28, 29. The Cup of
blessing which webless is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? And the
bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we
being many are one Bread, and whosoever does eat and drink unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and eats and drinks Damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body, etc. But poor Ignorant Babes without
understanding cannot possibly either examine themselves, or have the least
discerning of the Lords body, whether considered as Symbolically or Mystically
represented in that Ordinance.

Therefore were none such to be sound in the Church at Corinth, nor in any
other Gospel Church, as Dr. Owen says very well.

Dr. Owen Dr. Owen
p. 103. As God has appointed Saints to be the seal and subject of all his
Ordinances, having granted the right of them to them alone, 1 Timothy 3.15.
Instructing them with the exercise of that Authority, which he puts forth in
the Rule of his Disciples in this world: He has also appointed the most holy
institution of his Supper to denote and express that Union and Communion, which
the Members of each of these Churches have by his Ordinance among themselves, 1
Cor 10.7. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body
of Christ? For we being many are one bread and one body, for we are all
partakers of that one bread.

How consonant, (by the way) and agreeable both to Rule, and Reason, and
Righteousness does it appear to be, to admit men upon profession of Faith to
both Ordinances, keeping thereby the right Subjects, as well as to the due
Order.

But how Childishly ridiculous it was in those first inventers of Baptism for
600. years, so well to observe the Order, [ viz. first to baptize and then to
communicate] and yet so miserably to miss it in the Subjects, applying the
Spiritual Ordinances to Ignorant Babes.

And how much worse in the Protestant Reformers, that so lamentably miss it
both in the due Order, and right Subjects also.

Which the Prelate and Presbyter do in admitting Children to Baptism and
Membership, but not to the Supper?

And the Independent more in point of Order in admitting them to B^ptisme, but
neither to Membership, nor the Supper.

A third observeable Passage we have in 1 Cor. 12 25, 26. 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
Where the Apostle exhorts, That there be no Schism in the body, but that the
Members should have the same care one for another.

But how ridiculous would this be to be applied to a little Ignorant careless
Infant.

A fourth considerable Instance may be fetched from 1 These. 5.2, 4. 1 These. 5.2,
4.
Where the Apostle says, That they all knew perfectly; that the Day of the
Lord so comes, as a Thief in the night. That he speaks of all is evident verse
4, 5. in these words. But ye, brethren are not in darkness, that that day
should overtake You, as a Thief; Ye are all the Children of the Day, and of the
Light, etc.

But little Children that have no understanding, are no such Children of the
Light, as to know perfectly, or in part the coming of the Day of God; For they
know nothing at all of it: therefore no such Infants were Members of the Church
at Thessalonica.

And fifthly, another convincing Passage we have in Heb. 6.11, 12. Heb. 6.11,
12.
The Apostle thus exhorting; And we desire, that every one of you do show the
same diligence to the full assurance of hope to the End, that ye be not
slothful, but of them, who through Faith, and Patience inherit the Promises.

But little Children can show no such diligence to the full assurance of hope
to the end, neither can they show such diligence in following of them, who
through Faith and Patience did inherit the Promises: For they have no
understanding in Earthly things; How then can they understand Heavenly? John
3.12. Therefore no such Babes were Church Members in the Church of the Hebrews.

And as a further proof against Infants Church Membership, 3. From the
Characters Christ gives his Disciples.
we may add the Character Christ gives of his Disciples, viz.

John 8.31, 32. Then said Jesus to those Jews, which believed on him; If you
continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the
Truth, and the Truth shall make you free.

And John 15.8. A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another,
as I have loved you; That you also love one another: By this shall all men know
that you are my Disciples. And again.

John 15.1. Herein is my Father glorified, that you bear much Fruit; so shall
you be my Disciples.

And again, Luke 14.27. And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after
me cannot be my Disciple

And Verse 33. So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that
he has, cannot be my Disciple.

But how absurd would it be to apply any of these Characters to little Ignorant
Infants?

And lastly, from that General Exhortation, that Christ gives to all his
Disciples, Mark 13.37. Watch and Pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things, and to stand before the Son of Man, and what I say
unto you, I say unto all, Watch.

But how ridiculous would it be to include a little Babe herein?

Which Argument about Church Membership, we shall conclude with those full
words of Dr. Owen Dr. Owen
so much to the purpose, P. 107. viz.

From all which it appears, who are the ^ubject matter of these Churches of
Christ, as also the means whereby they come to be so, namely, the
Administration of the Spirit and Word of Christ. As also by the Gifts and
Graces of the Spirit given to them, to make every one of them meet for, and
useful in that place, which he holds in such Churches, as the Apostle
discourses at large, 1 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17, to 27. Col. 2.9. Ephesians. 4.16. It
being manifest (says he) that no Ordinance of Christ is appointed to be
observed by his Disciples; No Communication of Gifts of the Holy Ghost is
promised to them; but with respect unto these Churches of his Institution

CHAP. VII. Wherein there is an account of some eminent Witness, that has been
born to Believers Baptism, in a brief History thereof; giving the Decrees of
Councels, and the Opinions of the Learned, (through out the Centuries) with the
necessity of Instructing and Catechizing not only the Child^en of Pagans, bu^
of the Christians also in Order to it; with some rema^kable Instances of the
Children of Christians no^ Baptized till Aged, Collected ^u^ of several
Authors, especially the famous Magdiburgensian History.
CENTURY I.
NOt further to mention the Elders and Fathers of the first Century all of them
so fully, VII. The Testimony of Learned men in all Ages witnessing to it.
(as you have heard) confirming and establishing this great Truth; as Matthew,
Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter, Barnabas, Timothy, Titus, Jude, etc. many of
whose Authorities have been at large rehearsed; We shall proceed to give an
Account here, of some Humane Authorities also, which we produce not for any
Proof; but by way of Illustration on^y, and because they may be of weight with
some; and whereby it may be manifest, that not only Scripture Authority, but
even Antiquity it self, (which has been so much boasted of) is altogether for
Believers, and not for Infants Baptism.

The Magdiburgenses in their excellent History, do tell us, that as to the
business of Baptism in the first Century they find to have been after this
manner, viz.

First as to the Subjects of Baptism, The 1st. Subject of Baptism
they tell us, that in this Age they find they Baptized only the Adult or Aged,
whether Jews or Gentiles, whereof they say we have instances in the
2.8.10.16.19. Chapters of the Acts; but as to the baptizing of Infants, they
confess they read of no Example, Cent. 1. l. 2. 496.

Secondly, as to the Administrators The 2. Administrator.
of Baptism, they say they find other Ministers of the Church besides the
Apostles did baptize, which in after Ages came more especially to be fixed upon
Bishops, though in Case of necessity, not only Laymen, but Women also were
admitted to administer that Ordinance.

Thirdly, The 3. Place.
As to the Place of Baptism, they find it was as occasion offered, where
Rivers and Fountains, and other coveniencies for baptizing were, and which was
done as well privately, where only two Persons, Philip and the Eunuch, were as
in a great Congregation, Acts 2.

Neither do they find that the Water was in this Age first Consecrated before
baptism, which with so much Ceremony was after enjoined to be in Fonts and
Baptisterious fixed in the Temples.

Fourthly, The 4. Time.
As to the Time when it was to be done. They say they find to be as any fit
season, no certain Day or Feast being either by Christ or his Apostles,
appropriated thereto, as after it was to Easter and Whitsen^ide,

Fifthly, The 5. Manner.
As to the Manner of Baptizing; It was by Dipping or Plunging in the Water into
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which was (they say) so agreeable
not only to the sense of the Word, which signifies Immersion in Water, but to
the Allegory of Death, Burial, and Resurrection, to which the Apostle so
properly alludes, Romans 6. Col. 2. As also to the many Places where it is used
for the washing away of sin, as 1 Pet. 3. Heb. 2.10 Ephesians. 5. Tit. 3. and in the
22. Acts, where they observe, that Ananias commands Paul to be Baptized, and to
Wash away his sins, which said Custom of dipping the whole body in Water, was
changed into sprinkling a little Water in the Face.

The 6. Ceremony
Sixthly, As to the Ceremonies, they tell us, the Parties Baptized did freely
come and offer themselves, professing their Faith, though not in any formal way
of Confession, which after was enjoined, and that without any Gossips or
Sureties, to confess or undertake for them, which after was required, both for
the Adult, as for the Infant, neither were there any giving of Names in
Baptizing, no Excorismes, Chrysmes or Annointings, no Consignations, Albes,
Salt, Spittle, no Gifts given or received, no Confirmation or Bishoping, no
giving of Meats, Milk or Honey, all which were after introduced and enjoined,
as you will hear Magdib. Cen. 1. l. 2. c. 6. p. 496. 497.

CENTURY II.
AS to Baptism in the second Century, they say, Cent. 2. c. 6. p. 109. That it
does not appear by any app^oved Authors, that there was any mutation or
variation from the former; and in Confirmation thereof, Quote what Justin
Martyr, Justin Martyr.
says in his second Apology to Anto^ Pius the Emperor. Which because it is so
considerab^e an Instance, I shall give it you at large, as I find it in the
Apology it self in the words that Mr, Baxter himself has rendered it in his
Saints Rest, c. 8. Ser. 5. viz

I will declare unto you how we offer up our selves to God after that we are
renowed through Christ Those amongst us that are Instructed in the Faith, and
believe that which we teach them is true, being willing to live according to
the same, we do admonish to fast and pray for the forgiveness of sins, and we
also fast and pray with them; And when they are brought by us into the Water,
and there as we were new born, are they also by new birth renewed; and then in
calling upon God the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, they
are washed in Water. Then we bring the Person thus washed and instructed to the
Brethren; (as they are called) where the Assemblies are, that we may pray both
for our selves and the new illuminated Person, that we may be found by true
Doctrine, and by good Works worthy observers and keepers of the Commandments,
and that we may attain Eternal Life and Salvation. Then Bread and Wine being
brought to the chief Brother, (so they call the chief Minister) he takes it
and offers Praise and Thanksgiving to the Father, by the Name of the Son and
Holy Spirit: And so awhile he celebrateth Thanksgiving; after Prayers and
Thanksgiving, the whole Assembly says, Amen.

Thanksgiving being ended by the President, (or chief Guide) and the consent of
the whole People, the Deacons as we call them, do give to every one present,
part of the Bread and Wine, over which Thanks was given, and they also suffer
them to bring it to the absent.

This Food we call the Eucharist; to which no man is admitted, but only he that
believes the truth of the Doctrine, being washed in the Laver of Regeneration
for Remission of sins, and that so lives as Christ has taught. And this,
says Mr. Baxter, is you see no new way.

This Justin Martyr is believed to have been converted to Christ within 30
years after the Apostle John, when it is credible also very many were living,
who had been frequent Auditors of the Apostle, who was beheaded under Verus the
Emperor.

Now they that shall consider this description he makes of the Christian
Baptism, and the manner that Christians were admitted after it into the
Churches of Christ in those days, can hardly, I presume, pick out any good
warranty for Infants Church Membership, or Baptism out of the same.

CENTURY III.
IN this Third Century, they say as to the Rites of Baptism in the Asiatick
Churches, they have no Testimony as to any Alteration; but concerning the
Affrican Churches they give some account, and of the great corruptions creeping
into the Church, respecting this Ord^nance of Baptism at least in Opinion,
(though as to practice, they say they cannot give any particular Instance) both
as to subject, time, manner and ceremonies, Cent. 3. c. 6.123, 124, 125.

Tertull
They tell us, That Tertullian in his Book de Baptismo, opposes himself (by
several Arguments at large, to some that asserted Infants Baptism, affirming,
That the Adult were the only proper subjects of Baptism; because, says he,
fasting confession of sins, prayer, profession, renouncing the Devil and his
Works is required from the Baptized.

Mr. Bax.
Mr. Baxter is pleased to give us this farther account of Baptism in this Age,
in his Saints Rest, Part 1. c. 8. Sect. 5 in these words, viz. That Tertullian,
Origin, and Cyprian, who lived, says he, in the second and third Centuries, do
all of them affirm; that in the Primative times, none were bap^ized without an
express covenanting, wherein they renounced the World, Flesh and Devil and
engaged themselves to Christ, and promised to obey him.

And again he is pleased to tell us in his defense of the Principles of Love,
P. 7. in these words. That he knew that in the days of Tertullian, Nazianzen
and Austin, Men had liberty to be baptized, or to bring their Children, when,
and at what age they pleased, and that none were forced to go against their
Consciences therein And that he knew not that our Rule or Religi^n is changed,
or that we are grown any wiser or ^e^^^ then they.

Eusebius Eusebius
Lib. 6. Hist. Eccles. says, That Origin was appointed by Demetrius, to be at
Alexandria a Catichist, that is, a Teacher of those that were Disciples and
Scholars in the faith, which Office before his time after the Apostles Plautius
and Clemens did execute, whose Disciples he says were Plutarch, ^erenus,
Heraclus and Heron; and that a Woman after she was Baptized with Water, was as
a Martyr put to Death, and Baptized with fire for Christ's sake; after Origin,
Heracles; and after him D^onysius taught in the said School of Alexandria those
that were to be instructed in the faith before Baptism. And again in Lib. 7.
Chap. 8. There was with us a Brother which believed, who being present amongst
those that were to be Baptized and heard how they were Questioned, and how they
answered, came weeping to me, and desired of me to be cleansed, and washed by
Christian Baptism.

CENTURY IV.
IN this Age they tell us, That it was the Universal practice to Baptize the
Adult upon profession of Faith, and for which they give us several Authorities
out of the learned Fathers and Councils at that time, some whereof you have as
follows.

Athan.
Athanasius contra Arianos. Our Savior, says he, did not slightly command to
Baptize. For first of all he said Teach, and then Baptize, that true Faith
might come by teaching, and Baptism perfected by Faith.

Hillary Hillary.
Lib. 2. de Trinitate. The Lord has commanded to baptize upon the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, that is upon Confession of the beginners,
the only begotten, and him that was given And farther, the said Hillary prays
thus to God, O living Lord preserve my Faith, and the Testimony of my
Conscience; so that I may always keep what I have confessed in the Sacrament of
my Regeneration, when I was Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, namely, that I may worship thee O God our Father, with thy Son, and
stir up thy Holy Spirit in me, which proceeds or goes out from thee.

And again says, That all the Eastern Churches did only Baptize the Adult.

Basil Basil.
contra Eunomium Lib. 3. Must the faithful be sealed with Baptism, Faith must
needs precede and go before. And in his Exhortation to Baptism, says, that
none were to be baptized but the Catachumens, and those that were duly
instructed in the faith.

Gregory Nazian.
Gregory Nazianzen in his Third Oration, says, That the Baptized used in the
first place to confess their Sins, and to renounce the Devil and all his Works
before many Witnesses. And again, That none were baptized of old, but they that
did so confess their sins, and how dangerous it was headily, and without due
preparation to partake thereof.

He therefore advises, That the Baptism of Infants be deferred till they could
give an Account of ^hei^ Faith, as Dr. Tailor, p 239.

Ambrose Ambrose
says in his Third Book de Sacramentis, c. 2. That the Baptized did not only
make Confession of his Faith, but was to desire the same.

And in his Second Book de ^piritu Sancto. In our Sacrament, says he, there
are three Questions propounded, and three Confessions made, without which none
can be washed

Arno^ius Arnobius
in Ps. 146 Thou art not first (says he) baptized, and then beginnest first to
affect and embrace the faith but when thou art to be baptized, thou signifiest
unto the Priest what thy desire is, and make thy confession with thy mo^th.

Jerome Jerome.
upon Matthew says, The Lord commanded his Apostles, that they should first
Instruct and Teach all Nations, and afterward should baptize those that were
instructed in the Mysteries of the Faith; for it cannot be, says he, that the
Body should receive that Sacrament of Baptism, till the Soul have before
received the true Faith.

Jerome Jerome.
says, That in the Eastern Churches, the Adul^ were only Baptiz^d in his
Epistle against the Errors of John of Jerusalem. And again in his Epistle to
Pamachius says, That they are to be admitted to Baptism to whom it does
properly belong, viz. those only who have been Instructed in the Faith.

Decrees of Councels.
IN the 4th. Council of Carthage it was determined, C. Carth.
That whoever was to be baptized, should give in his Name, and that then after
due Examinations and Preparations Baptism was to be administered, Magd. Cent. 4
c. 6. 417.

C. Laodi.
In the Council of Laodicea in their 46. Canon, it was determined, that the
baptized should Rehearse the Articles of the Creed, Magd. Cent. 4. 418.

C. Neo.
In the 6. Canon of the Council of Neocesaria, It is said, That Confession and
free choice was necessary to Baptism, Mag. Cent. 4. 616.

Grotius Grotius.
in his Annotations upon Mat. 19. says. That the Canon of the Syn^^ of
Neocaesaria, held in the year 315. Determined, that a Woman with Child might be
baptized, because the Baptism reached not the fruit of the Womb; because in
the Confession made in Baptism each ones own free choice is showed; from which
Canon, says he, Balsamon and Zoncras do infer, that an Infant cannot be
baptized, because it has no power to confess or choose the Divine Baptism.

Dr. Tailor Dr. Tail
upon mentioning the Canon, p. 238. says. It speaks Reason, and it intimates a
practice, which was absolutely universal in the Church of interrogating the
Catechemeni concerning the Articles of their Creed, which is one Argument, that
either they did not admit Infants to Baptism, or that they did prevaricate
egregiously in asking questions of them, who themselves knew were not capable
of giving answers.

And in farther assurance and confirmation of this great truth, you have most
remarkable Instances of several of the Most eminent Persons of this Century,
that were not baptized till aged, though the Offspring of believing Parents;
viz. Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Ierom, Austin, Nectarius,
Constantine, Theodosius, etc. and for proof whereof take the following
Authorities.

Osiander Cent 4. l. 3. c. 42. 371. Basil baptized aged.
says, That Basil the great Bishop of Caesaria, the Son of Basil Bishop of
Nisen, and his Wife Eumele, whose Grandfather was a Martyr, under the
persecution of Maximinus, was tenderly educated like a second Timothy under his
gracious Mother, became a learned man, and great Preacher, and after Baptized
in Jordan by Maximinus the Bishop, as he says, is declared by Vincentius in
speculo; and for which Story he also quotes Socrates, l. 4. c. 26. Sozam. l. 6.
c. 34. Magd. Cent. 4. c. 10. p. 939.

Gregory Nazian. baptized after 20. years old.
Osiander Cent 4. l. 3. c. 43. p. 380. Tells us, That Gregory Nazianzen was the
Son of Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen, by his Wife Nonna, a very pious holy Woman,
and instructed this her Son as Hannah of old did Samuel, who in the 20th. Year
of his age was baptized.

Hugo Grotius Anot. in Mat. 19.14. says, It was no small Evidence that
Baptism of Infants many hundred years was not ordinary in the Greek Church;
because not only Constantine the great, Constantine baptized aged.
the Son of Helena, a zealous Christian was not baptized till aged: But also
Gregory Nazianzen, who was the Son of a Christian Bishop, and brought up long
by him, was not baptized till he came to years; as is, says he, related in his
Life.

Paulinus in vita Ambrosi, says, That Ambrose, Ambrose baptized after Bishop
of Milan.
born of Christian Parents, his fathers name was Ambrose, and his Mothers
Marcelina, remained instructed in the Faith unbaptized, till he was chosen
Bishop of Millan, as which time he received Baptism.

Hugo Grotius farther upon Mot. 19. Chr^sost. Baptized at 21.
tells us, That Chrysostom was born of Christian Parents, and educated by
Miletius a Bishop, was not baptized till past 21. years; who adds farther, That
many of the Greeks in every age unto this day, do keep the custom of deferring
the Baptism of little ones, till they could themselves make a Confession of
their faith.

Erasmus in Vita Hieronimi, Jerome Baptized in his 30. year.
Testifies, That Jerome, born in the City of Strydon of Christian Parents, and
brought up in the Christian Religion, was baptized at Rome in the 30th. year of
his age.

Walafridus Strabo, who lived about 840. in his Book de Reb. Eccles Cap. 26.
says, That in the first times the Grace of Baptism was wont to be given to
them only who were come to that integrity of mind and body, that they could
know and understand what profit was to be gotten by Bap^i^me, what was to be
confessed and believed, Austin Baptized about the 30th. year of his Age.
what lastly was to be observed by them that are new born in Christ, and
confirms it by Austins own Confession of himself, continuing a Catachumenus,
long before Baptized: But afterward Christians understanding Original sin, and
least their Children should perish without any means of Grace, had them, he
says, Baptized to the decree of the Council of Africa, and then adds, how
Godfathers and Godmothers were invented, and the superstitious and impious
consequent of it, etc.

Nauclerus Generat. 14. An. 391. says, Austin the Son of the virtuous Monica,
being instructed in the faith, was baptized when he was about 30. years of age.

Vossins de Baptismo Page 106. says, That Nectarius was made Bishop of
Constantinople before he was baptized.

Historia Tripartita Lib. 1. affirms, That Theodosius the Emperor, Theodosius
baptized aged.
born in Spain, his Parents being both Christians, was even from his youth
instructed and educated in the faith, who falling sick at Thessalonica, was by
Achalio baptized, and thereupon recovered of his sickness.

Mounsieur Daille, the learned French man, a great searcher into Antiquity, in
his Book called the Use of the fathers, says, In ancient times they often
deferred the Baptism of Infants; as appears by the History of Constantine
the great, Constantinus, Theodosi^s, Valentinian, Gracian, and in St. Ambrose,
and also by the Orations of Greg. Nazianzen, and St. Basil on this subject, and
some of the Fathers have been of opinion, that it is sit it should be deferred;
but whence is it, says he, that the very mentioning hereof is scarce to be
endured at this day, Lib. 2. P. 149.

Dr. Field Dr. Field.
on the Church, P. 729. says, That very many that were born of Christian
Parents, besides those that were converted from Paganism, put off their
Baptism for a long time, insomuch that many were made Bishops before they were
baptized.

Beatus Rhenanus B. Rhen.
in Anot. sup. Tert. says. That the old Custom was, that those that were come
to their full growth, were baptized with the Bath of Regeneration, which
Custom, says he, was observed till the time of Charles the great, and Lodwick
Emperors, as by the Statutes by the^^ established appeared, etc.

Mr. Den, Mr. Den.
besides the former Instances of the Children of Christian Parents not baptized
till aged, adds, Pancrati^^, Pontius, Nazarius, Tecia, Laigerus, and Erasma
Tusca.

Dr. Tail.
Dr. Jerome Tailor in his Lib Proph. P. 239. affirms out of an Antiquity, That
the Parents of Austin, Jerome, and Ambrose, although Christians did not baptize
their Children till they were 30. years of Age, and that it will be very
considerable, in the example, and of great efficacy for destroying the supposed
necessity of derivation of Infants Baptism from the Apostles.

Dr. B. Letter.
Dr. B. late Dr. of the Chair, a person of great learning and eminency, has
these words in a Letter I have seen in Print. viz. I do believe and know that
there is neither Precept nor Example in Scripture for Pedobaptisme, nor any
just evidence for it for above 200 years after Christ, that Tertullian condemns
it as an unwarrantable Custom, and Nazianzen a good while after him dislikes it
too, sure I am that in the primitive times they were Chatacumeni, then
Illuminati or Baptizati; and that not only Pagans, and Children of Pagans
converted, but Children of Christian Parents.

The truth is, I do believe Pedobaptisme; how, or by whom I know not, came into
the world in the second Century, and in the third and fourth began to be
practiced, though not generally, and defended as lawful from the Text, grossly
misunderstood, Jo. 3.5, upon the like gross mistake of Jo. 6.53. they did for
many Centuries both in the Greek and Latin Church Communicate Infants, and give
them the Lords Supper, and I do confess they might do both as well as either:
But although they baptized some Infants, and thought it lawful so to do; yet
Austin was the first that ever said it was necessary; and farther says.

I have read what my learned and worthy friends Dr. Hamond, Mr. Baxter, and
others say in defense of it, and I confess I wonder not a little, that men of
such great parts should say so much to so little purpose; for I have not yet
seen any thing like an Argument for it. Thus far Dr. B.

CENTURY V.
BElieve i^ Baptism was asserted in this Age, and the grounds thereof by many
of the learned writers, whereof you have the following Instances.

Chrysostom Chrysostom.
says, That the time of G^^ce on Conversion was the only fit (...) for
Baptism, which he says, was the season the 3000. in the second Acts, and the
5000, afterward were baptized, Acts 4.

And again, In Baptism the Principal thing to be looked after, is the Spirit by
which the Water is made effectual; for says he, in the Apostles time the
Baptism of Water, and the Baptism of the Spirit were different things, and
done at different times, Magd. 5, Cent. 363.

And again, As Isaac was brought forth by the Word of Promise, so must we be
b^^^ by the Word of God, which only makes Baptism powerful and effectual, 364.

Austin Austin.
himself in his Book de fide and bono aper. Cap. 6 says, That none without
due. Examination both as to Doctrine and Conversation, ought to be ^dmitted to
Baptism, Cent. 5 p, 654.

And again, That no ignorant or scandalous Person ought by any means without
due Instruction and fruits of R^p^ntance, to be admitted to Baptism, 654, 655.

Austins Creed, and Chrysostomes Creed also were calculated for the
Catachumeni, for their better instruction before Baptism, p 655.

The names and qualities of several Adult persons that were baptized in this
Age, are inserted p. 655.

CENTURY. VI.
IN this Age the Adult upon profession of faith were baptized.

Gregory Gregory.
Lib. 4 Cap. 26. says, That a Sermon was used to be Preached to those that
were to be baptized, and that the pomps of the Devil were used to be renounced
before Baptism; and that the hearts of believers are through Grace cleansed
thereby.

Gregory, in Baptism the Elect receive the gift of the the Spirit, whereby
also their understandings are enlightened in the Scripture, and that by faith in
Baptism all sins are relaxed, Cent 6. 226, 227.

Cassiodarus Cass^odor
calls Baptism the Divine fountain, wherein the faithful have the new
Creature brought forth, Cent 6. p. 226.

Olimpi^dorus Olimp.
says. Our Spiritual life is one and the same effected with our spiritual
death, for they who are born, are buried with Christ in Baptism, p. 226.

CENTURY VII.
THe Bracarens Council Brac. C.
in Spain decreed, That no Adult Person, but such who had been well instructed
and Chatechised, and duly examined, should be baptized, Cent. 7. 146.

The 6th Council of Constance C. of Con.
ordained, That none should receive Baptism without rehearsing the Creed, or
Lords Prayer, 146.

The Council of Tolletanus, C. of Tol.
in the 5th. Chapter says, That by being dipped into Water, we do as it were
descend into Hell, and by rising up out of the Water, we do witness a
Resurrection.

Paulinus Baptized in the River Trent in England, a great number both of men
and women at noon day, Bead. l. 2. c. 16. Cent. 7. 145.

CENTURY VIII.
Bid says, That men were first to be instructed into the knowledge of the
Truth, then to be baptized as Christ has taught, because without faith it was
impossible to please God, Cent. 8. p 220.

And again, as the body is visibly cleansed by Water, so the soul of the
faithful is invisibly cleansed by Baptism,

And again, only that kind of Baptism where the Spirit of the Lord regenerates
is effectual, 223. And again, if the Word or Water be wanting, it is no
Baptism, 218.

And again upon Jo. 3. All those that came to the Apostles to be baptized were
instructed and taught concerning the Sacraments of Baptism, then they received
the holy administration thereof.

Haimo Haimo.
in Postilla upon Mat. 28. Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc Fol.
278. In this place, says he, is set down a Rule how to baptize, that is, that
teaching should go before Baptism; for he says, Teach all Nations, and then
he says Baptize them; for he that is to be Baptized, must be first Instructed,
that he first learn to believe that which in Baptism he shall receive; for as
faith without works is dead, so works when they are not of faith, are nothing
worth.

CENTURY IX.
Rabonus.
RAbonus Cap. 4. says, That the Catechism which is the Doctrine of faith, must
go before Baptism, to the intent that he that is to be Baptized, may first
learn the mysteries of faith. And farther, he says, the Lord Christ anointed
the Eyes of him that was born blind, with Clay made of Spittle, before he sent
him to the Water of Shiloah, to signify, that he that is to be Baptized, must
first be instructed in the faith concerning the incarnation of Christ, when he
does believe, then he is to be admitted to Baptism, to the intent that he may
know what the Grace is which he receives in Baptism, and whom he afterward
in duty ought, and is bound to serve.

Albinus Albinus.
says, Three things are visible in Baptism, viz. the Body, the Water, and the
Administrator, and three things are invisilbe, the Soul, Faith, and the Spirit
of God, which being all joined by the word, they are effectual in that
Sacrament, Cent. 8. 225.

Damascenus, Damas.
We are buried with the Lord in Baptism, as says the Apostle, p. 220.

Rabonus Rabonus.
again says, That the Adult were first to be instructed in the faith, and duly
examined before they were baptized: And that as Noah and his family were saved
by Wood and Water, so the faithful are saved by Baptism, and the Cros^, Cent.
8. p. 144.

Remigius says in 22. Remig.
That faith is the principal thing in Baptism; for without it, it is
impossible to please God, p. 145.

Walafrid Strabo, Walafrid Strabo.
who lived about 840. in his Book de Reb. Eccles. Cap. 26, says, That in the
first times, the Grace of Baptism was wont to be given to them only, who were
come to that integrity of mind and body, that they could know and understand
what profit was to be gotten by Baptism, what is to be confessed and believed,
what lastly is to be observed by them that are new born in Christ; and confirms
it by Austins own confession of himself, continuing a Chatachnmenus long before
Baptism. But afterward understanding Original sin, and least their Children
should perish without any means of Grace, had them, he says, baptized
according to the Council of Africa, etc.

CENTURY X.
Auslbert.
AVslbertus says, That the faithful are born not of blood, but of God, viz. of
the Word of God Preached, and of the Baptism of God duly administered, by which
Sacraments says he, Gods Children are begotten. Cent. 10 p. 186

Smarag.
Smaragdo on Mat 28. First men are to be taught in the faith, then after to be
baptized therein; for it is not enough that the body is baptized, but that the
Soul first by faith receive the truth thereof, p. 187.

Theophi.
Theophilact says, Whoever are truly baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,
p. 189.

CENTURY XI.
ANselme says, That believers are baptized into the death of Christ, that
believing his death, and conforming thereto, may as dying with him, live also
with him, Cent. 11. p. 169.

Anselme.
And again, The Baptism of Christ is the washing in Water into the Word of
life, take away either Water or Word, Baptism cease, p. 116.

And again, Whoever is baptized, has Heaven opened to him, and knows God is
there above ready to receive him, which as by the Steps of a Ladder he must
from his Baptism ascend to him, for as Solomon says, The way of life is above
to the wise, p. 160, 170.

Algerus Algerus.
says, As Water extinguisheth, cleanses and whitneth above other Liquors, so
in Baptismal Water fleshly lusts are quenched, sin both Original and Actual
washed away, and white Innocence thereby begotten; and so whilst the Image of
the Heavenly father is reformed, the Sons of Adoption are begotten.

CENTURY XII.
RVpertus Rupertus
says, That they who do believe and make confession thereof, are to be
Baptized, Cent. 12. p. 597.

And again in his 4th Book of Divine Offices, Cap. 18. says, That in former
times the Custom of the primitive Churches was, that they administered not the
Sacrament of Regeneration, but only at the feast of Easter and Pentecost, and
all the Children of the Church, which throughout the whole year through the
Word were moved, when Easter came, gave up their names, and were the following
days till Pentecost instructed in the Rules of faith, rehearsing the same and
by their Baptism, and dying thus with Christ, rose again with him.

Johannes Bohemius Bohemius
Lib. 2. de Gent. moribus, It was in times past, says he, the Custom to
administer Baptism only to those that were instructed in the faith, and seven
times in the week before Easter and Pentecost Catechized, but afterward when
it was thought and adjudged needful to Eternal life to be baptizeed. It was
ordained, that new born Children should be baptized, and Godfathers were
appointed, who should make Confession, and renounce the Devil on their behalf.

Rupertus Rupertus
again says, That many who are baptized with Water, are not renewed in the
Spirit of their minds, have not put off the old man, and his deeds, as if he
was drowned in the Water, and the new man really put on, in his 3. Book upon
the second of John.

And again, That the visible Baptism of Water may confer, but that in which
the virtue of Baptism does consist we cannot, p 598.

Peter Lumbard P. Lumb.
says, That the Reason why Baptism was instituted was, that the mind might be
changed, that the man, who by sin was made old, by Grace might be renewed. And
that Believers, who are baptized in faith, receive both the Sacrament and the
thing; but they who have not faith, may receive the Sacrament, but not the
thing intended in the Sacrament, p. 529.

Albertus Magnus Albert. Magnus.
says, That the Laver of Regeneration is not proper; but to the Illuminated
and Called, who can draw virtue from the Death and Resurrection of Christ,
Cent. 13. 413.

And again, That Baptism is Christ's Seal, wherewith he seals Believers, and
that where Regeneration is, there the sanctifying power of the Spirit operates
with the Water, 414.

And again, That Baptism works to Salvation in those that are Regenerate, but
not in those that are not Regenerate, p. 425.

Thomas Aquinus Th. Aqui
says, That in Baptism God works inwardly, as he dispenses outwardly, there
is not only a consignatio^ of the Soul, but the Body, because the whole man by
Baptism is dedicated to God for by Baptism we die to the life of sin, and
begin to live a new life of Grace, d. 424.

And again, In Baptism there is a four fold purification, viz. ^y the Word, by
the Spirit, by the Blood of Christ, and by baptismal Grace, viz. Repentance,
Faith, and Mortification fetched from Christ's Death, p. 425.

Alexander, Bonaventure, Aegedius, and other learned men of this Age, spoke
also after the same manner in ^ustification of Believers Baptism.

CENTURY 14, 15, 16, 17.
THough the Magdiburge^stan History reach no farther then the end of the 13th.
Century, yet we do find, than both the Principal and practice thereof, was
owned by many of the learned downwards in the rest of the Centuries.

Ludovicus Vives L. Vives.
says, That they continued to baptize the Adult, even in Italy in his days,
in his Comment upon August, l. 1. c. 26.

Bellarm.
And Bellarmine himself tells us in his Book de bon. Operib l. 2. c. 17. That
amongst the Lutherans the Custom of Baptizing the Catachumens, and absolving
the penitent at Easter is abolished, whereas amongst the Catholics; (but
especially in the City of Rome) there is no year wherein great multitudes are
not baptized, whereby a relick and footstep of Truth may appear even in Rome it
self.

Grotius Grotius.
says, That in every age many of the Greeks unto this day keep the Custom of
deferring the Baptism to little ones, till they could themselves make a
Confession of their faith; and the Armenians are confessed by Heylin in his
Microcos. 573. to defer Baptism of Children, till they be of grown years.

Zwinglius Zwingli.
in his Book of Articles, Art. 18. In the old time says the Children were
openly instructed, who when they came to understanding, were called
Catachumens, that is, such as are instructed in the Word of Salvation, and when
they had imprinted the faith in their Hearts, and made confession thereof with
their mouths, they were admitted to Baptism, and this Cu^tom, says he, of
teaching, I wish it were in use in our time.

Luther, Luther.
In times past it was thus, says he, that the Sacrament of Baptism was
administered to none; except it were to those that acknowledged and confessed
their faith, and knew how to rehearse the same

Bullinger in his house Book, 48. Sermon, Bulling.
upon these words, God has not sent me to Baptize, but Preach the Gospel,
says, This must not slightly be understood, as if he were not sent to to
baptize at all, but that teaching should go before Baptism, for the Lord
commanded his Apostles both to Preach, and also to administer the Sacraments.

Erasmus Erasmus
paraphraseth, that upon those words in Mat, 28. When you have taught them the
Word of God if they then believe you, and receive it, if they begin to repent
themselves of their former life, and are ready and willing to embrace the
Doctrine of the Gospel, then let them be baptized. with Water in the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, that they may be marked with his Mark, and
written amongst the number of those which trust, that are through the merits of
his death freed and washed from their sins, and received to be Children of God

Ludovicus Vives in his Comment aforesaid, L. Vives.
l. 1. c. 27. None, says ^e, were baptized of old, but those that are of Age,
who did not only understand what the Mystery of the Water mean, but desired
the same, the perfect Image whereof we have yet in our Infants Baptism; for it
is asked of the Infant, Will thou be baptized, for whom the sureties answer, I
will.

Melancton upon 1 Cor. 11. In times past, says he, those in the Church that
had Repented them, were baptized, Melanc.
and was instead of an Absolution, wherefore Repentance must not be separate
from Baptism; for Baptism is a Sacramental sign of Repentance.

Beza Beza.
upon 1 Cor. 7.14. says, That to permit all Children to be Baptized, was
unheard of in the primimitive Church, whereas every one ought to be instructed
in the Faith, before he were admitted to Baptism.

Bucer Bucer.
in his Book entitled, The Ground, Work, and Cause, says, That in the
Congregation of God, Confession of sins is always first, the which in times
past went before Baptism; For commonly Children were baptized when they came
to their understanding, and that in the beginning of the Church no man was
Baptized, and received into the Congregation; but those that through hearing
the Word, wholly gave over, and submitted themselves to Christ.

Chamier Chamier.
Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 15. Ser. 19. says Who sees not that the Custom of the
scrutiny of the Baptized, was not in that time, when scarce the 1000 Person was
Baptized before he came to Age, and was diligently exercised in Catechism.

Dr Ham
Dr. Hamond in his Chat. Lib. 1. l. 3, p 23. says, That all men were
instru^ted in the Fundamentals of faith anciently before they were permitted te
be baptized.

Dr. Field Dr. Field
on the Church, p. 729. says, That very many that were born of Christian
Parents, besides those that were converted from Paganism, put off their
Baptism for a long time, insomuch that many were made Bishops hefore they were
baptized.

Chapter Cate.
The Doctrine of the Church of England held sorth in their public Catechism,
gives Testimony to this Truth, where it is asserted, That Repentance whereby we
forsake sin, and faith whereby we steadfastly believe the promises are required
in every one that is to be baptized, confessing also that Children can neither
repent nor believe. Which though they would salve by saying they do both by
their Sureties; upon which invention they lay the stress of the whole; for if
there be no warranty for Sureties in the Case, they have in these few words
given up the Controversy. For they grant that Faith and Repentance are
requisite to qualify to Baptism, and ingeniously acknowledge, that Children
are not capable of either; but that they do repent and believe by their
sureties; which how Consonant to Reason, Rule, and Righteousness, let all the
upright judge; and concerning which Practice take the judgment of Dr. Tailor,
Bishop of Down, Dr. Tail.
p. 239. of his Lib. of Pro.

I know, says he, God might if he would have appointed Godfathers, to give
answer in behalf of Children, and to be fiduciors for them, but we cannot find
any authority or ground that he has, and if he had, that it is to be supposed
he would have given them Commission to have transacted the solemnity with
better Circumstances, and given Answers with more truth; for the Question is
asked of believing in the present, and if the Godfathers answer in the name of
the Child, I do believe, it is notorious they speak false and ridiculous, for
the In^ant is not capable of believing, and if he were, he were also capable of
discenting; and how then do they know his mind; and therefore, said he,
Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen gave advice, that the Baptism of Infants
should be deferred till they could give an account of their own faith.

How this invention of Gossips came in, and by what Pope it was instituted, and
how they were required in the Baptism of Bells and Churches, as well as
Infants, you will hear farther in the other Historical Part. We shall now
conclude this Chapter with that wonderful Testimony given by M^. Baxter, in
his 20th. Argument to Mr. Blake in these words.

Mr. Bax.
Here note (says he) speaking of the Eunuchs not being admitted (...) Baptism,
till he made a profession of his Faith, first that Baptism as received, is the
Seal of our Faith, (how much soever denied by Mr. Blake) as it is the Seal of
Gods Promise; secondly, That the constant order is that Baptism follow Faith;
thirdly, That it is (...) better then an impious profanation of it, if it go
without Faith, that is first if the Party seek it without the presence of
Faith, secondly if the Pastor administer is without the profession of Faith.

Thus you see by plentiful Evidence, that the Lord has not left himself
without witness hereto from men, and that in several Ages not only before, but
since the Antichristian darkness took place; but that which is most to be
admired and adored in this Providence is, that much of this blessed Testimony
for Truth, has proceeded from the Pens of some of its chiefest Adversaries,
whereby the Wisdom and Power of God has much appeared, who cannot only out of
the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, but out of the very mouths of Enemies also,
create and perfect his own praise. And make even their own Tongues to fall upon
themselves, for what is esteemed better Evidence and Testimony amongst men,
then the confession of Parties themselves.

But it may be Objected, that how^ver you improve many of these sayings of the
Pedobaptists to justify your way, and condemn theirs; yet they have another
meaning, which will well enough reconcile such Principles to their Practice of
baptizing Infants, and whereby you will be found mistaken in in the supposed
advantage; for is it to be thought possible that such pious, wise and learned
men, should so positively contradict themselves, as you seem to make them do?

To which I answer, That whatever their meaning may be, yet their word and
reasons appear substantial Arguments for the Baptists, and full and clear
Evidence against themselves; for is not the Commission it self fully owned, the
Order of it, and Practice upon it, viz. That Persons ought first to be taught
in the faith, before they are to be baptized into the same, and that none in
the Apostles times, and for some Ages after were otherwise baptized; and that
it is ridiculous, yea profane for any otherwise to practice, and that there
was neither Precept nor Example for the baptizing of Infants, who as confessed
are so capable either of themselves, or any for them to answer the great ends
thereof: but owned to be a practice taken up, and enjoined several Ages after,
as many of the forecited Pedobaptists, both Papists and Protestants, have
confessed, and will more fully and particularly appear in the next part, And
what is or can be said more by the Baptists themselves, in confirmation of of
their way and Practice.

Thus we have dispatched the first part and may it not now be recommended to the
Conscience of the impartial unprejudiced Reader, whether this first assertion,
[viz That Believers Baptism is only to be esteemed Christ's Ordinance of
Baptisme] is not substantially made good, not only from clear and undeniable
Scripture, and Reason: But from most pregnant Authohities of learned men, and
most of them parties themselves.

End of the first Part.
Infants Baptism Disproved. The Second Part disproves Infants Baptism under
this Head, viz. That the Baptising of Infants is no Ordinance of Jesus Christ,
which is made good in the seven following Chapters.
CHAP. I. Wherein the Scriptures total silence about Infants Baptism is
observed, with the necessity of Scripture-warranty to authorize every
Ordinance, and that by the confession of Parties themselves.
IF Infants Baptism had been any Appointment or Ordinance of Jesus Christ, No
Scripture for Baptising Infants.
there would have been some Precept, Command, or Example in the Scripture to
warrant the same; but in as much as the Scripture is so wholly silent therein,
there being not one syllable to be found in all the New Testament about any
such practice, it may well be concluded to be no Ordinance of Jesus Christ; for
where the Scripture has no tongue, we ought to have no ear according to that
known Maxim, To practice any thing in the Worship of God, as an Ordinance of
his, without an Institution, ought to be esteemed Will Worship and Idolatry.

And that there is neither Precept or Example for any such thing as Infants
Baptism in the Scripture, The Parties themselves owning it.
we have the ingenuous confession of Parties themselves, viz.

Magdib.
The Magdiburgenses, in Cent. 1. L. 2. p. 496. do say, That concerning the
baptising of the Adult, both Jews and Gentiles, we have sufficient proof from
Acts 2.8.10.16. chapters; but as to the baptising of Infants, they can meet
with no Example in the Scriptures.

Luther.
Luther in P^still. says, Young Children hear not, nor understand the Word of
God, out of which Faith comes, and therefore if the Commandment be followed,
Children ought not to le baptized. And again;

In his Epistle of Anabaptism, says, We cannot prove, by any place of
Scripture, that Children do believe; neither do the Scriptures clearly, and
plainly, with these or the like words, say, Baptize your Children, for they
believe; wherefore we must needs yield to those that drive us to the Letter,
because we find it no where written.

Erasmus Erasmus.
in his Book of the Union of the Church, says, It is no where expressed in the
Apostolical Writings, that they baptized Children.

And again, upon Romans 6. Baptising of young Infants was not in use, says he,
in St. Paul 's time. And again;

In his 4th Book, De Ratione Concio. says, That they are not to be condemned
that doubt whether Childrens Baptism was ordained by the Apostles.

Calvin, Calvin.
in his 4th Book of Institutes, Chap. 16. confesses, That it is no where
expressly mentioned by the Evangelists, that any one Child was by the Apostl's
hands baptized.

Bucer Bucer.
upon Mat. says, That Christ no where commanded to baptize Infants.

Staphilus Staphilus
in Epitome says, That young Children should be baptized, is not expressed in
the holy Scriptures.

Choelens, Choelens.
De Bapt. Parvulorum, says, That Jesus took a Child, and placed him in the
midst of them; what Child was it? I think it was not a young or newborn Child,
and that the same was not baptized.

For Infants were not in those days baptized, but such as being come to their
full growth, confessed their sins.

Melancthon, Melanct.
in his Treatise concerning the Doctrine of Anabaptists, writes, That there is
no plain Commandment in the holy Scriptures, that Children should be baptized.

Zwinglius, Zwing.
In his Book of the Movers of Sedition, speaking of baptizing of Children, So
it is, says he, That there is no plain words of the Scripture, whereby the
same is commanded.

These latter Quotations from the Germane Doctors, you have in an old Dutch
Author, called, A very plain and well-grounded Treatise concerning Baptism.
Englished 1618.

Mr. Daniel Rogers, Mr. Rogers.
in his Treatise about Baptism, Part 29, confesses himself to be unconvinced
by demonstration of Scripture for it.

Mr. Baxter Mr. Baxter.
himself, that wrote that Book called, Plain Scripture Proof for Infants
Church Membership and Baptism; yet in contradiction thereto, in the same Book,
p. 3. confesses, That Infants Baptism is not plainly determined in the
Scriptures.

And again, in the Defense of the Principles of Love, in the Epistle, says,
That he having had more invitation to study the Point thoroughly, and to treat
of it largly, than most that are offended herein, that they must give him leave
to say, that he knows it to be a very difficult Point.

Dr. Tailor, Dr. Tailor.
Lib. Proph. p. 239, says, It is against the perpetual Analogy of Christ's
Doctrine to baptize Infants; for besides that, Christ never gave any Precept to
baptize them; nor ever himself, nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any
of them: All that either he or his Apostles said concerning it, requires such
previous dispositions to Baptism, of which Infants are not capable, and those
are Faith and Repentance. And not to instance in those innumerable places that
require Faith before Baptism, there needs no more but this one of our Blessed
Savior. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be condemned. Plainly thus, Faith and Baptism will bring a
man to Heaven; but if he has no Faith, Baptism shall do him no good; so that
if Baptism be necessary, so is Faith much more, for the want of Faith dawns
absolutely; it is not said so of the want of Baptism.

The necessity of Scripture Authority to warrant every Ordinance.
Thus you have it acknowledged by Adversaries themselves, that there is neither
Precept, President, or Example in Scripture for baptising of Infants.

And in the next place you have it further owned, That there is a necessity for
Scripture-Authority to warrant every Ordinance and Practice in Divine Worship,
viz.

Luther Luther.
upon Gal. 1.9. says, There ought no other Doctrine to be delivered, or heard,
in the Church, besides the pure Word of God, that is, the holy Scriptures; let
other Teachers and Hearers, with their Doctrines, be accursed.

Calvin, Calvin.
Lib 4. Inst. Cap. 8. Sermon. 8. Let this be a firm Axiom, says he, That nothing
is to be accounted the Word and Will of God, to which place should be given in
the Church; but that which is first contained in the Law and the Prophets, and
after in the Apostolical Writings.

Basil, Basil.
in his Sermon de Fide, says, That it would be an Argument of Infidelity, and
a most certain sign of pride, if any man should reject things written, and
should introduce things not written.

Austin Austin.
himself says, Detrabe Verbum, quid est Aqua nisi Aqua? Take away the Word,
what is the Water but pl^^n Water? If the Word of Instituti^^ be wanting, what
does the Element of Water signify?

Theophilact, Theophil
Lib. 2. Paschal. It is, says he the part of a Diabolical Spirit, to think any
thing Divine, without the Authority of the holy Scrip^ures.

Tertul. Tertu.
Contra Hermog. I do adore, says he, the fullness of the Scripture; Let
Hermogines show that it is written, if it be not written, Let him fear the we
destined to those who add or detract.

And Mr. Ball, Mr. Ball.
very excellently to to this purpose, in his Answer to the New England Elders,
p. 38, 39. saying, We must for every Ordinance look to the Institution, and
neither stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the Lord has made it; for
he is the Institutor of the Sacraments, according to his own good pleasure, and
it is our parts to learn of him, both to whom, how, and for what end the
Sacraments are to be administered, in all which we must affirm nothing but what
God has taught us, and as he has taught us.

The sixth Article of the Churh of England
The sixth Article of the Church of England, says very fully to this Point,
That the Holy Scriptures do contain all things necessary to Salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required by any man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite and necessary to Salvation.

We shall conclude this Chapter with that notable Observation that Bellarmine
makes in the Case, upon the Anabaptists calling for plain Scripture Proof for
the Baptising of Infants, from them who so exactly require it from others, and
will not in any other case admit the omission thereof; in his Book De Bapt.
Lib. 1. Bellarm.
c. 8. where he says, That though the Argument of the Anabaptists, from defect
of Command or Example, have great force against the Lutherans, forasmuch as
they use that Principle every where, viz. That the Rite which is not in
Scripture, having no Command or Example there, is to be rejected. Yet is it of
no force against Catholics, who conclude that Apostolical Tradition is of no
less Authority with us than the Scripture, for the Apostl's speak with the same
Spirit, with which they did write. But that this of baptising of Infants is an
Apostolical Tradition, we know whence we know the Apostolic Scripture to be
the Apostolic Scripture, viz. from the Testimonies of the Ancient Church.

Objection that is usually brought under this Head is, That there is no express
Command or Example for Women's receiving the Lord's Supper; yet who doubts of a
good ground from consequential Scripture for their so doing.

Answer whereto, you will find there is both Example and Command for the Practice,
viz.

1. From Example, Acts 1.14. where we read that Mary and other Women were
gathered together, and that these Women, together with the rest of the
Disciples, were all together in one place, and continued steadfastly in the
Apostl's Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread and Prayers, Chap. 2.42
44. it being expressly said, That all that believed were together.

2. It appears from command, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat; the Greek word signifies a Man or a Woman, the word is (...), a
word of the Common Gender, as appears 1 Timothy 2.4, 5. There is one Mediator
betwixt God, and Man, and Woman; there is the same word used Gal. 3.28. There
is neither Male nor Fem^le, but ye are all one in Christ: Let but as good proof
appear for Infants Baptism and it shall suffice.

CHAP. II. Wherein by an Historical Account of Infants Baptism in its Rise and
Establishment, viz. when, by whom, and to what ends instituted, it does appear,
that there was no authentic Practice thereof for 300, nor any humane A^thority
enjoining it till 400 years after Christ. Together with an account also of its
growth, and how, and by what lying Authorities it was; with many superstitious
Rites, founded upon Apostolical Tradition; with the impious and ridiculous
fooleries added to it in every Age.
FRom the learned Authorities before given, we have gained thus much; That as
there was no Precept in Scripture for the baptizing of Infants, so neither was
there the least Practice to be found thereof in the Apostl's days, as was so
ingenuously before confessed by the Magdiburgenses, Luther, Calvin, Erasmus,
Rogers, etc.

Secondly, That the approved Practice, and known Custom of the Primitive Church
was to baptize the Adult, as all Ages acknowledge, and only they (at least) for
the first Ages, as so fully attested by Eusebius, Beatus Rhenanus, Lud. Vives,
Bullinger, Haimo, the Neocaesarian Council, etc.

Thirdly, That not only the Children of Pagans were as the Catachumens, to be
instructed and taught in the Faith, in order to their Baptism; but the Children
of the Christians also, as those famous Instances given from the Fourth
Century, by Field, Naucler, Daille, Grotius, Walafrid Strabo, Tailor, and
others.

Fourthly, The next thing we shall make appear is, that as there was no
Scripture-Authority to enforce it, so there was no Humane-Authority to enjoin
it till above 400 years after Christ, though to justify that injunction,
Apostolical-Tradition, to supply the want of Scripture-Institution was
pretended; whereof you have by the way this following account out of the three
first Centuries.

CENT. I.
The first and most ancient pretended Authority that has been urged to prove
Infants Baptism to be an Apostostolical Tradition, The first pretended prooff
for Apostolical Tradition, is Dionisius the Areopagite.
is that of Dionysius the Areopagite, Paul's Convert at Athens, who flourished,
as is supposed, about the 70th year of this Century: Who (as the Story tells
us) after his converse with Paul, was sent by Clement, Bishop of Rome, to
preach the Gospel in the West with Saturninus, Lucianus, Rusticus, and others;
and that his Lot was to go into France, where he Preached, and wrought many
Miracles, and was afterward martyred at Paris; And that he wrote a multitude
of Books, as enumerated by Suidas and others, and amongst them, that famous
Piece, called his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which tells us of the several
Orders and Dignities of the Clergy; Rites, Services, and Sacraments of the
Church; and among them, acquaints us of the baptizing of Infants, which he
tells us he received from his Prefectors, as an Ancient Apostolical Tradition;
with the additional Rites belonging thereto of Consecration, Consignation,
Confirmation, Chrysme, Exorcism, which he affirms were all in use in the
Apostl's time: As Magdiburg. Cent. 1. p. 625. which was, they tell us, also
learnedly refuted by Erasmus, etc. especially by Laurentius Valla, who
observes, that none of either the Greek or Latin Fathers, or Church-Historians
do so much as mention him, or any of his Works. Neither Eusebius, Origin,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, or Gregory. Nor that Jerome, who gave a Catalogue of all
the eminent Writers, takes the least notice of him; and how ridiculous and
contradictious his lying Stories are about Monkery and the Clergy, and all the
Romish Ceremonies about Baptism, that had no footing in the World, for several
Ages after, and that the Learned in his days supposed these Books fathered
upon Dionysius in this Age, were done by one Apollinarius, several Ages after,
as the Magdib. Cent. 1. p. 616.

CENT. II.
As a further proof of Infants Baptism, and the several Rites annexed thereto,
we have more Authorities fathered upon, and pretended to be fetched from this
second Century, of which the Magdiburg. do give us the account, viz.

First, The second proof is from Just. Martyr's Responses
The Responses fathered upon Justin Martyr, the 56 whereof, propounds the
different condition of those Children who die baptized and unbaptized, and in
others, affirm that Gossips, Oil, and Consignation, were then used in Baptism,
which they renounce as spurious, upon many considerations, Cent. 2. p. 111.

Secondly, Third P. Clement.
That of Pope Clements appointing Oil in Baptism, and also that he in his
fourth Decretal Epistle affirms, that after Baptism there should be
Consignation, viz. a signing with the sign of the Cross, and Confirmation, viz.
a laying on of hands for the sevenfold Spirit.

A third is that of Pope Hyginus his appointing of Gossips, or Sureties, Fourth
P Hyginus
both in Baptism and Consecration; which Decree of Pope Hyginus, we have word
for word out of Gratian L. Osiander, Cent. 2. Lib. 2. cap. 5. viz. In
Catechism, Baptism, and Confirmation, let there be a Gossip if necessity
require.

5th P. Victor.
A fourth is that of Pope Victor, who is said to confine the Catholic
celebration of Baptism to Easter, except some urgent necessity intervene; and
that they should baptize in Fonts as well as Rivers.

6th P. Pius.
A fifth is that of Pope Pius (who was much about Justin's time) his
Consecrating Baptisterions, or Fonts to baptize in.

But how feigned and fabulous these are, you have at large hereafter.

CENT. III.
In this Century we have two other famous Testimonies, that are much leaned
upon by all sorts to prove Infants Baptism to be an Apostolical Tradition.

7 Origin.
The first is that of Origin, who in his Homelies upon Levit. and the Romans, is
said to affirm, That the baptizing of Infants was a Tradition of the Apostles,
and according to the usage of the Church, Century 3. p. 124.

The second is that of Cyprian, 8 Cyprian
in an Epistle said to be writ to one Fidus a Priest, who herein is supposed to
deliver it to be his, and the Opinion of 66 Bishops, that Children should be
baptized at any time in opposition to Fidus his confining it to the eighth day,
after the manner of Circumcision; both which Authorities you have at large
examined afterward.

Tertullian in this Century, gave several Arguments against Infants Baptism,
whereof you have a particular ^ccount hereafter.

Many were the corruptions about Baptism, The Corruptions about Baptism
creeping in in this Age.
that in this Age were creeping in, as the confining Baptism ordinarily to be
performed by a Bishop, Mag. Cent. 3. p. 123. Limiting the time to Easter and
Whitsontide 129. altering the Form from Dipping to Sprinkling; and the place
from Rivers and Fountains, to Baptisterious; with diverse superstitious Rites,
as p. 125, 126. Though they tell us with all, p. 125. That they do not find, by
any Authentic Testimony, that any one person was actually baptized in this
manner and form this Age, whereby it may be conjectured that their corruptions
were more in the Notion than Practice, which though afterward come all of them
to be in use.

CENT. IV.
By the Decrees that passed in several Councils in this Age, viz. that of
Carthage, Neocasaria, Laodicea, etc. holding out the necessity of Confession
and Profession before Baptism, already in the former History mentioned; As also
by those famous Instances of so many of the eminent Persons of this Century,
born of Christian Parents, that were not baptized till aged, before expressed;
It does manifestly appear, that Infants Baptism was neither esteemed an
Apostolical Tradition, nor so much as in use the greatest part of this Century,
either in the Latin or Greek Church.

In the latter end of the fourth Century, Infants Baptism practiced.
It is true, toward the latter end of this Century, it is said, That in some
parts of Africa they did baptize Children, as Magdiburg. Cent. 4. p. 415.

And that some of the Greek Church did begin to approve it also.

Greg. Nazianzen (who by Perkins is placed 380.) is said, in his fortieth
Oration, to admit Infants to be baptized in case of necessity, being in danger
of death, that they may not miss, as he says, of the common Grace; but gives
his Opinion of others, that they should stay longer that they might be
instructed, and so their Minds and Bodies might be sanctified.

Jerome that by Helvicus is placed ten years after him 390, is said to incline
to it also after Origin and Cyprian.

Many are the corruptions fetched from this and that former Age, Lying
forgeries about the baptism of Constantine by the Papists.
and not a few of them fathered upon Constantine in his Baptism, which they say
was done at Rome, in a Baptisterion, by P. Silvester, and administered with all
the Romish Rites of Consecration, Consignation, Chrysm, Exorcism, Albes,
Ringes, Donation, etc. how Constantine was first miraculously cured thereby of
his Leprosy, and the great Donation he gave the Sea Apostolic, and the
acknowledgment to their Universal Bishopric; all held forth in an Edict, said
to be writ with Constantine's own hand, and fairly kept in the Vatican Library,
writ in Letters of Gold, as says Du Plessis, in his Mystery of Iniquity; yet
all a notorious forgery and cheat, Constantine being Baptized at Nicomedia, and
not at Rome, and not by P. Silvester, who was dead fifteen years before;
neither had Constantine any such Leprosy, or miraculous Cure, nor gave any
such Donation or Acknowledgment to the Romish See, as you have at large
evidenced by the Magdiburg. Cent. 4. p. 568.

And concerning which Osiander says, Cent. 4. c. 38. Which foolish and
impudent Fable is by many Learned Men refuted, viz. Marsilius, Patavinus, La^r.
Valla, Cardinal Casanus, and Aeneas Sylvius, after Pope Pius the Second.

The working of the Mystery of Iniquity, did, as the Magdiburgenses tell us,
strongly begin to act in many Particulars, viz. Not only in the corrupting the
Rites and true form of Baptism, but by those superstitious and sumptuous
Ceremonies that were used in the Dedication, Bapt. of Churches.
Consecration, or Baptizing of Churches, viz. either such Idol- Temples that
were given by the Emperors to Christian Service, or such new ones that were now
erected, as Cent. 4. p. 76, 497, 499, 520.

The superstitious Collection and Exposure of the Relics Relics.
of Saints for Adoration, p. 499.

The inclination to prohibit Marriage, Priests Marriage.
as appeared by the Council of Nice, where it was only checked by the famous
Paphnutius, p. 1088.

The distinction in point of Sanctification, Distinction betwixt Laymen and
Clergy began.
now made betwixt Laymen and Clergymen, the one reputed Spiritual, the other
Carnal.

And it was in this Age, as appears by the Decrees of P. Silverster, Julius,
and Sericius, Priests appointed to Marry folks.
that all Marriages must pass the Benediction of a Priest, and to be esteemed
little less than Sacrilege to omit it; of which, in the former Centuries no
mention is made, Magd. Cent. 4. c. 6. p. 482. -- and for which they quote Gigas
and Luitpraud.

CENT. V.
This was the Age wherein Infants Baptism did receive its Sanction by the
Decrees of Popes and Councils, Infants Baptism first enjoined in the Militan
Council.
and as absolutely necessary was enjoined and imposed by Anathemas, never till
then, concerning which, Dr. Tailor in his Lib. o Prophecy, p. 237. gives us a
true, brief, and notable account, which you may please to receive in his own
words; And the truth of the business is, (says he) as there was no command of
Scripture to oblige Children to the susception of it, so the necessity of
Paedobaptism was not determined in the Church till the Canon that was made in
the Milevitan Council, a Provincial in Africa, Never till then. I grant, says
he, it was practiced in Africa before that time, and they, or some of them,
thought well of it; and though that is no argument for us to think so, yet none
of them did ever pretend it to be necessary, none to have been a Precept of the
Gospel. Austin the first that ever preached it necessary.
St. Austin was the first that ever preached it to be necessary, and it was in
his heat and anger against Pelagius, who had so warmed and chafed him, that
made him innovate herein.

This Milevitan or Militan Council, was celebrated by 92 Bishops, Anselm the
Pop's Legate, and Austin presiding in the fifth year of Arcadius, and first of
Pope Innocentius, in the year 402, as Magdiburg. Cent. 5. p. 835.

The occasion of the Council, is expressed to be about the difference that had
happened betwixt Pelagius and Coelestius, Austin and others, respecting Original
sin, baptizing of Children, etc.

The Constitutions and Decrees of the said Council are at large expressed by the
Magdiburg. out of the Book of Decretals, and among other Canons, made in this
Council, we find this, viz.

That it is Our Will, The Canon of the Milevitan Council about Infants Baptism.
That all that affirm that Young Children receive everlasting Life, albeit they
be not by the Sacrament of Grace or Baptism renewed; And that will not that
young Children, which are new born from their Mothers Womb, shall be baptized
to the taking away Original Sin.

That they be Anathematised.

Which with the rest of the Decrees was transmitted to Rome to Pope Innocentius
for his Apostolic confirmation in their large Letters, p. 841. P Innocent the
first ratifies it.


And which with a ready mind he performs accordingly by his Decretal Epistle,
expressed at large p. 845.

Afterward the fifth General Council at Carthage, in the year 416, did Decree
to the same purpose in these words.

The Canon of the 5th Council of Carthage.
We will, That whoever denies that little Children by Baptism are freed from
Perdition, and eternally saved,

That they be accursed.

Which was also by Austin, and seventy Bishops in their Letter, transmitted to
the same Pope Innocent for his further ratification, Confirmed by Pope Innocent.
and accordingly received the same in his Decretal Epistle at large, p. 822,
825. Inscribing their Letters thus, The Fathers of the Council to Innocent the
Pope and High Priest, stiling him Most Holy Father --

And that Pope Innocentius in these African Councils, was the first that ever
enjoined the necessity of this practice is further confirmed to us;

By Wilfrid Strabo, Wilfrid Strabo.
as before, who tells us, That Children were baptized, according to the Decree
of the Council of Carthage, for the taking away of original sin, which
aforetime was not practiced.

Luther Luther.
says, It was not determined till Pope Innocentius.

And Grotius Grotius.
in his Annotations, Mat. 19. says, It was not enjoined till before that
Council of Carthage.

Which Canons of Pope Innocentius were afterward confirmed by Pope Zosimus his
Successor, and afterward by Pope Boniface that succeeded Zosimus, as appears
in Cod. Can. cap. 110. Aff. cap. 77. and de Consecrat. distinct.

The Opinions of the Doctors of this Age, in confirmation hereof, The Doct. of
this Age approving Infants Baptism.
we find to be as follows.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
That Infants ought to be baptized, as universally received by the Catholic
Church to take away Original Sin.

And again, that which the Holy Church throughout the World, unanimously
teaches and practices about the baptizing of Children, ought not carelessly to
be slighted, Mag. Cent. 5. p. 375.

Austin Austin.
was as a great Patron, so a great Defender of Infants Baptism, in his contests
both against the Donatists, and the Pelagians, and the Coelestians, whereof you
have some Instances.

In his Sermon, De Baptismo Parvulorum, against the Pelagians, chap. 14. says,
That Children should be baptized, because of Original Sin, and that without
which they could never be regenerated or saved, Mag. Cent. 5, 377, 378, 379.

And in his third Book of Free Will, Cap. 23. says, Infants may be baptized by
the Faith of another, and that the Faith of the Party that offers and dedicates
the Child to Baptism, profits the Child therein, as the Church (he says)
wholsomly appoints: For if the Faith of the Widow profited to the raising of
the dead Child, much more may the Faith of another profit the young Child, p.
516.

And again, in his Fourth Book against the Donatists, Cap. 23. Infants, says
he, are to be baptized, who can neither believe with their Hearts to
Justification, nor confess with their Mouths to Salvation, p. 516.

This Controversy he managed with much furious Zeal against the Pelagians in
the African Councils; And so inordinate was he herein, that in his 23d Epist.
to Boniface, he holds forth such a certainty of Regeneration by it, that he not
only puts Regeneration for Baptism, but also makes no Question of the
Regeneration of Infants, Baptism to cure Diseases.
though they that brought them, did not bring them with that Faith that they
might be regenerated, but only to procure health to their Bodies; a custom, it
seems, they had to bring persons to be baptized for Cure.

Justifying thereby such a profane Use thereof, as that of Athanasius, A
Schoolboy baptized in sport, confirmed by a Bishop.
who baptized a Boy in sport, (playing the Bishop amongst his School-fellows)
which was confirmed notwithstanding to be good Baptism by the Bishop of
Alexandria.

And again, in his 7th Tom. Lib. 1. c. 27. asserts to the same purpose, That
all baptized Infants are Believers, and that the unbaptized are Unbelievers,
saying, Who knows not that to Infants to believe, is to be baptized, not to
believe is not to be baptized.

All the foolish ridiculous Ceremonies, called the Romish Baptismal Rites,
before mentioned, were owned and practiced by Austin and others in this
Century, with this addition, viz.

That the Lord's Supper was given to the baptized Infants, Lord's Supper given
to Infants.
as Austin in his 107 Epistle says, where he holds a like necessity of their
receiving that Sacrament with that of Baptism from Joh. 6.53. wherein he was
also so earnest, that he boldly says, in vain do we promise Infants Salvation
without it. Thus far Austin.

In the next place before we leave this Century, The Character of Pope Innocent
1.
I think it will not be amiss to give some little account of this Pope
Innocenitus (our first confirmer and imposer of Infants Baptism) of whom it may
s^ truly be said that he was one that changed Times and Laws, and that sat
himself in the Temple of God as God. As we find it recorded by the Magdiburg:
Cen. 5. page. 1228. viz.

He set up the Universal Bishopric.
That he most strenuously labored for the Universal Bishopric and Supremacy
over all Churches, as appears (say they) in all his Epistles designing to bring
the Determiation of all Principal Ecclesiastical Causes into that See,
especially in his Epistle to Victoricum and Decentium whereby say they it was
manifest that the mystery of Iniquity 2 These. 2. did gradually get Ground and
increase.

Who was (say they) a great Establisher of humane Traditions, Gave Divine
honor to the Popedom.
and who blasphemously attribu^ed divine Honor to the P^pedom, as appears in
that Epistle to Victoricum.

It was he that made Con^irmation a Sacrament, made Confirm. a Sacrament.
and confined it only to the Bishops to lay hands on Baptized Infants 1230.

It was he also forbad Priests Marriages 1231. Forbad Marriage.
and Damned the Nuns if they married; That also forbad Marriage to any that
by due Divorce put away their Wives; that also instituted many of the Jewish
and Pagan Laws, as appears say they in his Book de Pontiff.

And it was he that to witness his Supremacy did excommunicate the Emperor
Arcadius and the Empress Eudoxia and all his Ecclesiastics that had their
hands in the Banishing of John Chrysostom 662. 663. Excommunicated the Emp.
Arcadius, etc.


It was he that first appointed that the Eucharist should be given to Young
Children so soon as they were baptized; Ordained the Eucharist to Children
after Bapt.
a Cust^m that continued several Hundred Years after

And as head of the Antichristian race was the first says Socrates Lib. 7.19.
Expelled the Novatians.
That expelled the Novations from Rome that famous worthy Church and People.
Concerning whom we shall conclude with what the Magdiburgs say in their Epistle
to this 5. Cent. To Ericus King of Sweden.

That it might then be understood that Rome that had heretofore Governed the
world, was now made the very Seat of Antichrist. And again that the Spirit of
Antichrist did then man^festly begin to spread it self by the Bishop of Rome
lifting up himself in Supremacy above all other Bishops and Churches.

And this was that Innocent who was the first great Patron and Imposer of this
Innovation: and was it not excellent Service think you, for Austin to play the
Game into the hand of such a vile Wretch.

CENT. VI.
The Council of Gerunden in Spain held about 520. Ordained,

Gerunden Canon.
That young Children from their Mothers womb be baptized.

The Council of Bracarense 572, and the Council of Vivense ordained the very
same, Vossus de Bapt. 179.

Tee Maris Canon.
The Council of Marisconenses held 580. Ordained.

That the Baptism of Ehildren should be at Easter except necessity hindered.
Magd. Cent. 6. 613.

P. Greg. D^cretal.
Pope Greg. the Great, Lib 3. Ep. 4. ad Boniface-dist. 4 de Consec. Let all
young Children be Baptized as they ought to be according to the Tradition of
the Fathers.

Who gave Instruction to his Legate Austin to give Christendom to Children when
he sent him into Britain which you may Read at large in the Book of Martyrs.

Justinian the Emperor, who reigned 530, Ordained, The Decree of the Emperor
Justinion.
That Children should be admitted to Baptism, and yt those that were come to
their full growth shall be taught before they be baptized. Novel Institute. 444.

Justinus the Emperor who Reigned 570. Ordained, That it seemed him good, that
when the Samaritans that desire the unspotted Baptism, that they for the space
of two years together be Instructed in the Faith and the holy Scriptures and
that upon their Repentance they be admitted thereto. But as concerning the
Children which in regard of their years cannot Receive Divine Doctrine, they
shall without delay be made worthy, or pertakers of Baptism.

That Gossips were appointed to all that were Baptized, as says Paulus
Diaconus. Lib. 16 in Justiniano.

And that it was the Custom when the Children of Princes and Potentates were
Baptized, that Bishops should be the Gossips. Magd. Cent. 6. 332.

Maxentius Maxentius.
says, that Children are not only adopted into a State of Sonship, but have
the Remission of all Sin by Baptism. Cent. 6. p. 227.

All the forementioned Superstitions of the Romish Baptismal Rites were in use
in this Age, with this addition.

Ri^iculous Ceremo^ies.
That l^ghted Tapors were to be put into the hands of the Baptized p. 332.

The Temples or Churches, Altars and Relics in their Dedications were
Christined by Sprinkling the Water of Conjuration upon them. p. 369.

The Uncleanness and Murders found in Monastries.
In this Cent we meet with a dreadful piece of Infants Baptism viz. the Heads of
6000 Infants that had been murdered and buried in a Warren near a Monastry, as
Test^fied by Udulricus to P. Nicolas, Cent. 6. p. 388.

CENT. 7.
Canon of Toletan.
The Council of Toletanus insti^uted, That Infants without natural capacity
should be baptized, and that none should deny Baptism to them at their peril.

The Council of Constance Ordained the same. Mag. Cent. 7. p. 146. Canon of
Constable.


Isidorus Isidorus.
says, That if Children were not baptized, and so thereby renewed, and
Original Sin washed away, they were in a state of damnation. p. 98.

To the former, ridiculous Ceremonies now in use, were added, That the names of
Saints departed, or Relations, should be given to the Baptized at their Baptism.

That none should be admitted to be Gossips without rehearsing the Lords-Prayer
and the Creed.

And that none of the Gossips might marry together, Gossips must not marry
together.
because of the spiritual Affinity and Relation they had contracted at the
Font. p. 147.

At the Consecration and Dedication of Temples, the names of some Angel or
Saint departed was to be given to them.

A Child that died unbaptized this Age, was taken up and Christened, A dead
child christened.
and had his Fathers name given him. Magd. cent. 7. p.

CENT. 8.
Carolus Magnus declares, Decree of the Emp. Charles the Great. Daniel.
That Baptism should be administered to Infants as well as to the Adult. Cent.
8. p. 219.

Daniel in his Epistle to Boniface concludes, that Infants should be baptized.
p. 347.

Bid also concludes for the baptizing of Infants. p. 218.

To all the former continued Superstitions there were added,

Superstitious rites
1. That the Administration be in the Latin tongue. p. 384.

2. That Salt be used in Baptism. Aponius, lib. 1. p. 349.

3. That the Hair of the Baptized be cut. p. 350.

4. That some Gift was to be given in Baptism, which was to be called Deodans.
p. 349.

Temples baptizd in the name of the Trinity.
5. That Temples should be consecrated in the name of the Trinity. p. 336.

Bells were posited in Temples in this Age. p. 342.

CENT. 9.
Sericius Sericius.
at large demonstrates, That according to the Custom of the Church little
ignorant Babes should be baptized: for which he cites the Decrees of the
African Council by Pope Innocent; another of Pope Leo's; and another of Pope
Gregory's at large. Cent. 9. p. 140, 141.

Gizelbert Gizelbert.
says, That after Baptism neither Original nor Actual Sin Remains. Who also
calls Marriage a Sacrament. p. 171.

To the former filthy Customs this Age added, That in Exorcism the Head,
Impious Customs.
Ears, and Nose should be salted and anointed before Baptism. p. 235.

To the former christening of Temples, they added the pouring out of Oil, and
anointing with holy Chrism, singing Jacobs words, This is no other than the
House of God; how dreadful is this place! according to the 24th Canon of
Aquensis. Cent. 9. p. 229.

CENT. 10.
Smaragdus Smaragdus.
says, That little Infants are to be baptized, because it is said, Suffer
little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, etc. Hence (says he) the
Holy Mother the Church does beget the Innocent Infant into a holy and pure
state by the grace of Baptism. Cent. 10. p. 188.

Zonaras says, That the Infants as well as the Adult were to be baptized. p.
292.

To the former wicked Customs they now added,

1. Wicked Additions
That the Water of Baptism should on Easter Day be consecrated after this
manner; viz. The Priests hand should be stretched over the Water, as Moses his
hand was over the Sea. 2. That he should blow upon it. 3. Hold a burning Taper
over it, to answer the Type of the fiery Pillar. 4. That as they entered the
Red Sea by Night; so should Baptism be administered in the Evening. p. 239.

The Gossips were to put on White Garments as well as the Priests and the
Baptized. p. 299.

And as a further addition to Church-Christening, the Bishop was before the
Water was brought to him to strike the Earth, and then to pour down a great
deal of Water, and then to name the Church.

And further; It was in this Age that Bells began also to be Christened, which
from henceforward was most religiously observed.

Bells first baptized by P. John
Pope John the 14th was the first that baptized Bells, who christened the great
Bell of the Church of Lateran, calling it John: which was done to drive away
evil Spirits, and to prevent any ill accident that might happen by Lightning
and Tempest. Magd. cent. 10. p. 295.

Vossius Vossius.
in his Book de Bapt. p. 158. tells us, That though the more prudent did call
this Baptizing or Christning of Bells Consecration, yet that they had most of
the Baptismal Rites and Ceremonies, both Godfathers and Godmothers, sprinkling,
Anointing, giving of Names, and great Donations; and that the silly Women used
to bring Presents of Coral, Linen, and other things; and that they had a
Superstitious Conceit, that the sprinkling of that Baptismal Water procured
Health to the Sick.

Vossius also informs us in the said Book from good Authority, The abominable
custom to baptize naked for 7 or 800 years.
That from Austin till Bernard's time, seven or eight hundred years, the custom
was to baptize naked both Men, Women, and Children, with the Reasons usually
given by the Ancients for the same, viz. That they might therein be as in the
state of Innocence; and be as naked in their second, as in their first birth;
And as they expected to be in Heaven and therein no otherwise then Christ was
upon the Cross, which you may read at large in page 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
quoting these several Authorities to justify it, viz. Cyril Heir. Cat. Mystag.
11. Amphilochius in vita St. Basil, Chrysostom. Tom. 6. c. 11. Elias Cretenses in
Orat. 4. Naz. Zeno Varonenses, Anselm on Mat. 3. Ambros. Sermon. 10. Bernard.
Sermon. 46. de Pauper. Greg. Mag. tom. 2. col. 269. Alcuinus in divin. off. cap.
19. Chrysostom. ep. ad Innocent, etc.

So, just was it was it with God to leave men that went a whoring after their
own Inventions [forsaking the Word of God, to embrace the Traditions of man] to
such unseemly and unnatural practices.

Mr. Baxter sh^meful ssander fixed upon the Anabaptists.
Yet is not Mr. Baxter ashamed to fix such an abominable slander upon the
Baptists of this our Age of baptizing naked (which it seems was so long the
real practice of the Pedobaptists) and about which he spends three whole pages
in his Scripture Proof, viz. 136, 137, 138. to aggravate the heinousness of
that their custom (which he is pleased to father upon them). And though I am
persuaded he cannot but be convinced that the thing is most notoriously false,
and brought forth by him rather out of prejudice (not to say malice) rather
than any proof or good testimony he ever received thereof. Yet have I never
heard that he has done himself his injured neighbors, and the abused world
that right, as to own his great weakness and sinful shortness therein, in any of
the many Editions of that Piece, which I humbly conceive as well deserved a
Recantation as some other things he has judged worthy thereof.

CENT II.
Anselm Anselm.
asserts that Children should be Baptized, and gives these Reasons:

1st. That the Devil by the faith of the Parent may be cast out of the Children
in Baptism; as the Woman of Canaan in the 15. Mat. v. 21. had the Devil cast
out of her Daughter. p. 171.

2ly. That they may thereby be freed from Original sin, and be rendered Saints
and holy ones by Baptism as they are owned to be, 1 Cor. 7. p. 171.

3ly. That they may die to sin: for they that are Baptized into Christ are so,
being Baptized into his Death; which he says is without exception: for
whosoever is Baptized into Christ, is Baptized into his Death.

Meginhardus Meginhardus.
says, if little Infants or weak ones be brought to Baptism, let them answer
for them that bring them, and then let hands be laid upon them with holy
Chrysme;
and so let the Eucharist be Communicated to them. p. 168.

Ivo says, that the Infants as well as the Adult are to be Baptized, because
of the Faith of the Sacrament; p. 260.

The Latins in this age did Rebaptise the Greeks who dssowned their Baptism. p.
263. And the Greeks did excommunicate the Latins for renouncing theirs. p. 401.

To the former Superstitious Rites, they added, That Salt should be put into
the mouth of the Baptized. p. 261.

And to the Christning of Churches, that Salt should also be mixed with the
Water of Execration.

Waldenses witness against Infant Bapt.
The Waldenses did appear this Age to witness against the Romish Superstitions,
and amongst the rest that of the Real Presence in the Eucharist, and Baptizing
of Infants: which you have at large hereafter, with the opposition and
persecution they met with for the same. They were called B^ringarians, from
Beringarius one of their chief Leaders.

CENT. 12.
Peter Lombard Peter Lombard.
says, That to the baptizing the Adult, their proper faith is required; but to
the baptizing an Infant the faith of others suffices. Cent. 12. p. 418.

And] again, Children are to be baptized, because they are thereby cleansed from
original sin. p. 596.

Bernard Bernard.
says, That without Baptism Children cannot be saved. p. 604.

And again, As Children of old were circumcised without or against their wills
for their Salvation; so may they now be baptized. p. 599.

Peter Cluniacenses Peter Cluniacenses.
writing against Peter Bruis, one of the Waldensian Barbes who denied Infants
Baptism, says, Lib. 1. Ep. 2. They who are not baptized with Christ's Baptism,
cannot be Christians: And shall the Children of the Jews be saved with the
Sacrament of Circumcision, and shall not the Children of Christians be saved
with the Sacrament of Baptism? p. 599.

Heldigard Heldigard
says, That as our little Children that are not capable to feed themselves,
have others to feed them to keep them from temporal death; So is it with them
in Baptism, who being neither capable to believe or profess, have spiritual
helps provided for them, that they may not want that spiritual food that may
preserve them from eternal death. p. 602.

Alexander Alexand.
the 3d, in his Decretals, L. 3. Tit. 40. c. 2. says, They who have any doubt
concerning their Baptism, may be baptized with these words, [If thou art
baptized, I do not baptize thee; but if thou be not, I do baptize thee in
the Name of etc.

The former ridiculous Rites were this Age observed with this Addition.

Bernard says, To the Dedication or right-Christning of Churches, there must
be Aspersion, Inunction, Illumination,
Benediction, and Nomination. p. 861.

And that if the Temple should come to be polluted by the Priests committing
Adultery in it, The sprinkling it afresh with Holy Water cleanses it again.
Alex. 3. L. 5. Decret.

When Marriage prohibited.
The certain times wherein Marriages were prohibited was from Septuagesima to
Easter, from R^gation to Whits^ntide, from Advent to Epiphany: Which were done
by the Edict of Pope Clement, as says Gigas. p. 919.

The Waldenses were in this Age great Witnesses to the baptizing of Believers,
Petro Brusians writ against Infants Baptism.
and as great opposers of Infants Baptism, called by the name of
Petro-Brusians, Apostolici and Henerici; and for which they were great
Sufferers, is hereafter. p. 844, 845, 846.

CENT. 13.
Thomas Aquinas Tho. Aqui.
says, Children are to be baptized not in their own proper faith, but in the
faith of the Church. p. 419.

And again, That they may be freed from Original Sin and Condemnation. p. 422.

Alexander says, Baptism conferrs grace to little ones, not only purging them
from Original Sin, but by the Merits of Christ's Suffering, the faith of the
Surety, but by the virtue of the Sacrament. p. 426.

Bonaventure Bonavent.
says, If Children dye that are baptized before they come to years of
discretion, they so receive grace by the faith of another, that by Christ's
merit they shall be saved, which (he says) is denied by certain cursed
Heretics. p. 419.

Concurring hereto are several other Doctors of this Age, as Hugo, p. 544.
Gulielmo, p. 419. Albert, and the Decree of the Neomansian Synod, 594. the
Synod of Coloniae, 938, 944. but let these already mentioned suffice.

Tho. Aquinas says, Though a Priest be the proper Administrator of Baptism,
yet, in case of necessity, not only a Deacon, but a Lay person, yea a Woman;
nay, an Heretic or Pagan may baptize, so be it the true form of the Church be
observed, and intend thereby what the Church intends. p. 419.

An Exposition of many of their ridiculous Customs. Gulielm.
All the Abominable Rites beforementioned, were in this Age observed with this
following Exposition upon them:

Gulielm. says, That the matter of the Sacrament of Confirmation is Oyl-Olive
mixed with Balsom, and incorporated upon the fire, called Chrysm, and which can
only be done by the hands of a Bishop. The form of which Sacrament, he says,
is this, viz. I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with the
Crysm of Salvation in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Amen. And
which only a Bishop can administer. p. 417.

By Ex^rcism the Devil is blown away. Hugo.

Albertus Albertus.
says, By blowing in Execration the power of the Devil is expelled; and being
signed upon the breast and forehead with the sign of the Cross, he is driven
not only from the heart, but more visibly from the outward man. And that the
Salt is to be put into the mouth, the better to endue with spiritual savor and
wisdom; And that the ears and nose is to be anointed with spittle, that grace
and discretion from God may be conferred, which because the spittle descends
from the Head that is thereby signified. And that the Breast must be anointed
to prepare the Heart for God; and the Shoulders anointed to be enabled to bear
God's burden.

After Baptism the Neck must be anointed with Chrisme, that the mind may be
better disposed for God and holy contemplation, which by Chrism is signified
being made of shining Oil and healing sovereign Balsome. They must be endewed
with white Garments, to hold forth that Innocence which is received in Baptism;
as well as the Glory which they are to partake of at the Resurrection. And a
burning Taper put into the hand that the Word of God may be a light to his Feet.

Gulielmus says, That as to the form of Baptism the Virgin Mary, A blasphemous
addition.
is to be added to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, viz. I Baptize thee in the
name of the Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and the blessed Virgin
Mary, 419.

Thom. says there are seven Sacraments; 7 Sacraments.
viz. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extream-Vnction, Order, and
Matrimony. Two whereof, viz. Baptism, and the Eucharist were instituted by
Christ, and the other five by the Apostles, as Alexander. 406.

Which seven Sacraments were after confirmed by the Council of Trent, with
Anathema to those who should deny them.

When and by whom Tyths first granted.
Pope Gregory X. was the first in Anno 1271. granted Tithes to the Churches.
Those that opposed and witnessed against Infants Baptism and other Popish
Superstitions in this Age, were the Albigenses and Aumionenses, Magdeburg.
Cent. 13. P. 554, etc.

CENT. 14, 15, 16, 17.
That the Baptizing of Infants, with all the Rites and Ceremonies, still
continued, especially in the Romish Church, we need not question, when we read
the Canons of the Council of Trent, which was called on purpose as to establish
their old Superstitions and Idolatries, so to suppress the Light and Truth that
especially did shine in the Empire: In which Council, which ended 1564. we have
the following Canons. The Canons of the Council of Trent about Inf. Bapt.


In the 5th Session about Original Sin in the 4th Canon,

It was Decreed, That they who shall deny Baptism to young Children from their
Mothers Womb, for the taking away Original Sin.

Let them be accursed. Os. 16 Cent. c. 60, 380.

In the 7th Session about Baptism, in the 13 Canon,

It was Decreed, That whosoever puts not young baptized Children amongst the
faithful, or says they must be re-baptised at the years of discretion, or that
it is better to omit their vaptism till then,

Let them be accursed.

And in the 14 Canon It was decreed, That whosoever shall say, that baptized
Children, when they come to Age, ought not to be enjoined to ratify the
promise made in their name, but to be left to their will if they refuse, Not
compelling them to Christian life, but denying them other Ordinances,

Let them be accursed.

In the 3 Canons about Confirmation, it was Decreed,

That whosoever said, It was an idle Ceremony not a Sacrament properly, or that
it was formerly used, that Children might give an account of their faith. 2.
That to give virtue to Chrysome, was t^ wrong the Holy Spirit. 3. Tha^ every
simple Priest is the ordinary Minister for confirmation and not the Bishop only.

Let them be accursed. Os. 16 Cent. page 417.

And as a standing Rule to justify themselves in their Determinations they
conclude and Decree,

A blasphemous Decree.
That their Traditions should b^ observed Pari Pietatis affectu, with the same
pious affection with the Holy Scriptures.

Charl. V. his Interim.
In that Instrument, called the Interim, That Decretal of Charles the Fifth,
made till the Councels Canon^ could be perfected, it was determined,

That young Children by the faith and confession of the Sureties, should be
Baptized.

And that all Ancient Ceremonies that pertained to the Sacrament (...)
Baptism, should be continued, as Exorcisme, Chrysme, etc. Osiander p. 482.

Among the many A^^^christian oppressions the Princes of Germany exhibited to
the Pope from their Convention of Norimberg, they complained o^ that of
baptizing Bells, wherein they say, The Suffragans have invented, Baptizing of
Bells complained of by the Princes of Germany
that no other but only themselves, may Baptize Bells for the Lay People,
Whereby the simple people, upon their affirmation, do believe, That such Bells
so baptized, will drive away evil Spirits and Tempests: Whereupon a great
number of Godfathers are appointed, especially such as are rich, which at the
time of the baptizing holding the Rope wherewithal the Bell is tied, the
Suffragan speaking before them, as is accustomed in the baptizing of young
Children, they altogether do answer, and give the name to the Bell; the Bell
having a new name put upon it, as is accustomed to be done to the Christians,
after this they go to sumptuous Feasts, whereunto also the Gossips are bidden,
that thereby they may give the greater reward to the Suffragans, their Chaplins
and Mi^^sters; whereby it happens oft-times, that even in a small Village an
hundred Florins are consumed, in such Cristenings; which is not only
superstitious, but contrary to Christian Religion, a seducing of the simple
People, and mere Extortion. Wherefore such wicked unlawful things are to be
abolished. Fox's Acts and Monum. 990. Pius the Fifth baptized the Duke of Alva
's Standard; Standard Baptized.
and called it Margaret. Dr. Morison de Depra. Bell. p. 24.

The German Protestants about Infants Baptism.

Luther August. Confess^o^.
The Lutherans in their Augustan Confession made 1530. do declare,

That Baptism is necessary to Salvation. That Gods Grace is conferred thereby.
That Children ought to be baptized, who by Baptism are dedicated and received
into the grace and favor of God: condemning the Anabaptists, who deny Baptism
to Children, and who affirm that Children without Baptism may be saved, Osiand.
16 Cent. p. 153.

In the Smalkald Articles 1536. the Lutherans say,

In the Smalkald Articles.
Concerning Infants we teach, that they are to be baptized; For inasmuch as
they do belong to the promised Redemption made by Jesus Ehrist, the Church
ought to baptize and to declare the promise to them. Osiand. Cent. 16. p. 278.

In the Conference betwixt the Calvinists and Lutherans at Mumpelgartens. 1529.
In the Conference at Mumpelgart.


It was agreed, that Baptism came in the room of Circumcision, and that the
Children of the Christians are to be Baptized. Osiand. Cent. 16. 1020.

Though about the Ground of Baptizing them they differed; The Lutherans
affirming, that they had a proper and peculiar Faith to entitle them thereto.
The Calvinists asserting they had none, but ought to be baptized by virtue of
the Faith of the Parent in Covenant.

In the Book of Concord, In the Book of Concord.
1580. by the Lutherans.

They agree that the Tenets of the Anabaptists are to be renounced, that say,
Infants are not to be baptized, because they have no use of reason. Osiand. 16
Cent. p. 254.

The English Protestants about Infants Baptism.

In the Reformation begun in Edward the Sixth time, In the E^glish Liturgy.
about 1549 the Form of Worship and Administration of the Sacraments, with all
their Rites and Ceremonies, were held forth in the English Liturgy, as it was
translated out of the Latin Mass Book, concerning which we have this account
from Mr. Fox in his Martyrology, p. 1499.

That in the Rising in Devonshire, upon the translating the Latin Mass Book
into English, the King writes after this manner to quiet them, viz.

The English Service translated out of the Latin Mass Book.
As for the Service in the English Tongue, perhaps it seems to you as New
Service, when indeed it is no other but the Old; the self same words in English
which were in Latin, saving a few things taken out, so fond, that it has been
a shame to have heard them in English; as all they can judge that list to repeat
the truth: And if it was good in Latin, it remains good in English, for
nothing is altered, but to speak with knowledge what was spoken with ignorance,
etc.

Wherein the Time, Order, Manner and Ceremony of Baptizing of Infants, is
directed and enjoined, with all the Rites appertaining thereto.

In the said Service Book in the Rubric before the Catechism it is said, That
Children being baptized, have all things necess ry for their Salvation, and be
undoubtedly saved. And therefore after Baptism the Priest must say, We yield
thee hearty thanks, that it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant with
thy Holy Spirit. And the Child is afterward to be instructed, when he comes to
understanding, to say, That therein he was made a Member of Christ, and a Child
of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. Just comporting length and
breadth with Pope Innocents first Canons.

In the 27th. Article of the Church of England, 27. Article of the Church ^
England.
it is said, That the Baptizing of young Children, is in any wise to be
retained in the Church, as most agreeable to the Institution of Christ, made in
Q. Eliz. time, 1562.

In the Scotch Service Book, Scotch Service Book.
imposed in the beginning of the late War, it is said, That as often as new Water
is put into the Font, the Priest shall say, Sanctify this Fountain of Baptism,
Oh thou which art the Sanctifier of all things.

The Directory, Directory
in the Parliamen^s time, leaves out Gossips, and signing with the Sign of the
Cross, changes the Fonts into Basins. And the Parliaments Ordinance May 2.
1648. made it Imprisonment to affirm, Infants Baptism unlawful, and that such
should be Baptized again. Mr. Marshal informs us, out of Phocius, p. 3334 That
some of the Greek Churches have Laws, That whatsoever baptized Person refused
to bring their Children, and Wives too, to be baptized, should be
Anathamatised, and punished also.

The wicked Decree of Zurick.
At Zurick, as Dr. Featly tells us out of Gassius, p. 68. The Senate made an
Act, That if any presumed to Rebaptize viz. to baptize any that had been
baptized in their Infancy, That they should be drowned; and that at Vienna,
many for Baptizing such were so tied together in Chains, that they drew the
other after him in the River, wherein they were all drowned.

And that at Roplestein, the Lords of that place Decreed, that such should be
burnt with a hot Iron, and bear the base Brands of those Lords, in whose Lands
they had so offended.

And p. 182. out of Ponton Catalog. through Germany, Alsatia, and Swedeland
many Thousands of this Sect, who defiled their first Baptism by a second, were
baptized the third time in their wn Blood.

CHAP. III. Wherein the Erroneous Grounds both as to fabulous Traditions, and
mistaken Scriptures, upon which Infants Baptism has been both formerly and
laterly founded, is made manifest.
THe First and Principal Ground that has been asserted for this practice, has
been Ecclesiastical and Apostolical Tradition; or however (as has been said)
the Scripture is so silent in the Case, yet the clear, full and uninterrupted
Tradition of the Church, makes up that defect, to which the Church of Rome and
some others have adhered.

Though many Protestants, since the Reformation, have chose to fly to some
Consequential Arguments deduced, as they suppose from the Scriptures to
justify the same.

Both which in this Chapter are brought forth, and duly weighed in the Balance
of Truth.

The First we shall examine is the point of Tradition, and therein do these two
things, Show that it has primarily been asserted to be the ground thereof.
Secondly, The insufficiency of the Authorities that have been urged to prove
the same. Tradition the principal ground of Infants Baptism.


That Tradition has principally been leaned upon, as the main ground of the
Practice, you have the following Instances.

Austin Austin.
tells us, That the Custom of our Mother the Church in Baptizing little
Infants, is not to be despised, nor to be judged superfluous, nor to be
believed at all, unless it were an Apostolical Tradition. Lib. 10. de Genesis c.
23.

And again in his 4th Book against the Donatists, 24 Chap. says, That if there
be any that do inquire for a Divine Authority for the Baptizing of Children,
Let them that know what the Universal Church holds, nor was instituted in
Councils, but always retained, is most rightly believed to have been delivered
by no other than Apostolical Authority.

Chrysostom.
Chrysostom says, That Infants ought to be baptized, as universally received
by the Catholic Church, to take away Original Sin. Mag. Cent. 4.

Bellarmine, Tom. 1. L. 4. c. 2. says, That the Baptism of Infants is an
Apostolical Tradition not written; because, says he, it is not written in any
Apostolical Book though written, he says, in the Books of almost all the
Ancients.

And which Tradition of the Apostles, says he, is of no less Authority with
us, than the Scriptures.

In the Council of Trent, Council of Trent.
after they had in the 5th and 7th Sessions made those Canons about
Infants Baptism, before mentioned, do conclude, That their Traditions, touching
the same, should be received, Pari Pietatis affectu, with the same pious
affection with the Holy Scriptures, as you have it, p. 144.

In the Council of Basil, Council of Basil.
in the Oration of the Cardinal of Ragusi, It is asserted, That in the
beginning of this Sacrament of Baptism, they only were to be baptized, who
could by themselves answer Interrogatories concerning their Faith; And that it
was no where read in the Canon of Scripture, that a newborn Infant was
baptized, who could neither believe with the Heart to Justification, nor
confess with the Mouth to Salvation. Yet nevertheless, says he, the Church
has appointed it.

Eckius Eck us.
against the Lutherans writes, That the Ordinance concerning the Baptism of
Children is without Scripture, and is found to be only a Custom of the Church.
And in his Enchiridion calls it a Commandment and Ordinance of Man, and that
it is not to be proved out of the Holy Scriptures.

A great Papist, lately in London, going to a Dispute about Infants Baptism,
told his friend, He was going to hear a Miracle, viz. Infants Baptism to be
proved by Scripture.

And the Ground and Reason why they do so firmly own this Truth to the
Protestants upon that subject, is but the better to enforce and introduce their
many other Traditions, there being nothing else for that.

But whereas some object, That Bellarmine and others do also bring Scripture
for it, Becan. Bec^n.
Lib. 1. c. 2. Sec. 24. answers, That some things may be proved out of
Scripture, when the Churches sense is first heard about the Interpretation
thereof, for so, he says, it is concerning Infants Baptism, which is proved
from John 3.5. Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit, etc. But the sense
whereby to prove it, it only manifest by Tradition. And it is confirmed in the
Canon Law and Schoolmen, That Infants Baptism was not reckoned perfect, till
the Bishop laid on hands, which was called Confirmation, viz. of the imperfect
Baptism in Infancy: and therefore says Caistans Caistans.
secundum Jewel, That an Infant wanting Instruction in the Faith, has not
perfect Baptism, Tom. prec. p. 86. Dr. Field, Dr. Field.
Lib. 4. P. 375. says, That Infants Baptism is therefore called a Tradition,
because it is not expressly delivered in the Scriptures, that the Apostles did
baptize Infants, or that they should do so.

The Oxford Divines Oxford Divines.
in a full Convocation, Jan. 1647. say, That without the consentaneous judgment
and practice of the Universal Church, they should be at a l^ss, when they are
called upon for proof in the point of Baptizing Infants, Mr. Tombs.

Dr. Prideaux Dr. Prid^.
Controv. Theol. Sec. 392. Infants Baptism (says he) rests upon no other
Divine right than Episcopacy, viz. Diocesan Episcopacy, in use in these Nations.

Mr. Baxter Mr. Baxter.
in Defense of the Principles of Love, p. 7. says, That the Anabaptists are
Godly men, that differ from us in a Point so difficult, that many of the
Papists and Prelatists have maintained, That it is not determined in Scripture,
but depends upon the Tradition of the Church. (Though, he says, he is of
another mind himself.)

To which many more might be added, to prove to you, That Apostolical
Tradition, for want of Scripture, has been urged as the principal and first
ground of this Practice. And not only for this, but for all other Rites and
Ceremonies, as well those that have been already declared; as Chrysme,
Exorcisme, Consignation, and innumerable more, as those that have not yet been
heard of or declared: for as a late learned. Author excellently observes, That
the Papists, Dr. Owen
in point of Tradition, do herein very much exceed the Jews, those old
Tradition- mongers, who so made void the Law of God in their days by it. For
they tell us plainly, that now their whole Oral Law is written, and that they
have no reserve of Authentic Traditions not yet decla^r'd: But here the
Romanists, says he, fail us, for although, they have given us heaps upon heaps
of their Traditions, yet they plead that they have still an inexhaustible
treasure of them laid up in their Church-stores, and^ breast of their Holy
Father, to be drawn forth at all times, as occasion shall require. And which
Principle has been the means of their Apostasy, and is the great Engine,
whereby they are rendered incurable therein. Dr. Owen his Proleg. P. 67.

Dr. Tailor, D. Tailor
P. 237. argues so fully and strenuously upon this point of Tradition, that I
cannot pass him by, who says, Tradition by all means must supply the place of
Scripture, and there is pretended a Tradition Apostolical, that Infants were
baptized. But at this (says he) we are not much moved, For we who rely upon
the written Word of God, as sufficient to establish all true Religion, do not
value the allegation of Tradition: And however the world goes, none of the
Reformed Churches can pretend this Argument for this Opinion: Because they who
reject Tradition, when it is against them, must not pretend it in the least for
them; but if we allow the Topic to be good, yet how will it be verified? For
so far as can yet appear, it relies wholly upon the Testimony of Origin, for
from him Austin had it. Now a Tradition Apostolical, if it be not consigned
with a fuller testimony than of one person, whom all other Ages have condemned
of many Errors, and whose, works, says Erasmus, are so spurious that he that
reads them is uncertain, whether he read Origin or Ruffinus. Therefore will
obtain so little reputation amongst those, who know that things have upon
greater Authority, been pretended to be received from the Apostles, but falsely;
that it will be a great Argument, that he is ridiculous and weak, that shall be
determined by so weak Probation in matters of so great concernment. But besides
that the Tradition cannot be proved to be Apostolical, we have very good
evidence from Antiquity, That it was the Opinion of the Primitive Church, That
Infants ought not to be Baptized, which, says he, is clear in the Canon of the
Council of Neocaesarca, which he mentions at large in the original Greek;
Determining that none ought to be baptized, without giving an account of their
Faith, and desiring the same. That tie Traditons for Inf. Bapt. are fabulous.
Thus far Dr. Tailor.

In the next place we shall give you some account of the insufficiency and
weakness, if not the wickedness of those first Authorities, that have been
leaned upon to prove this Practice to be an Apostolical Tradition, and which
appearing fabulous, all others depending upon the same, necessarily fall to the
ground; whereof you have four or five of the principal of them, and which may
be useful to the Protestants, whatever they are to the Papists, viz.

The first and earliest we meet with to prove Infants Baptism to be an
Apostolical Tradition, is that of Dyonisius the Ar^opagite, mentioned already
P. 109. and quoted by Bellarmin, Tom. 3. Lib. 8. Cassander in his Book de Bapt.
and many other learned Papists, for Authentic proof that Infants Baptism was
Apostolical, out of his Ecclesiastical Hi^rarchy, etc. But that this was a
piece of Forgery put upon the world, may yet further more fully appear to you
in that which follows, viz.

This Dionysius the Areopagite living at Athens, Dionysius Areopag.
who some will have to be Bishop of Corinth, though Eusebius calls him Bishop
of Athens (for you must know, according to Eusebius and Dorotheus, all men of
Name in the New Testament, must be Bishops of some place or other, and
therefore they can tell you, not only the Names of the seventy Disciples, but
what Bishoprics each did belong unto.) Now this Person being an Athenian, must
be supposed to be a learned Greek Philosopher, and therefore upon none more
fitly in this Age could be fathered all those Philosophical Tracts that are put
upon him; and amongst which you have two of most eminency, viz. his Hierarchy
of Angels, wherein you have the Orders, Ranks, Dignities, Names, and Offices of
the Angels and Archangels (a profound piece no doubt.)

The other his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, wherein the Consecrations, Orders,
Offices and Ranks of the Inferior Angels, viz. the Priests, Friars, Monks,
Bishops, Archbishops, and Popes are methodically treated and handled, as also
diverse Rites and Ceremonies discussed, amongst which that of Infants Baptism is
asserted to be an ancient Apostolical Tradition, which he declares he received
from his Prafectors, together with various Ceremonies, that according to like
Apostolic Authority, are confirmed as an Appendix thereto, viz. Gossips, or
Sureties; Chrysme, or the Anointing Cream; Exorcisme or Sufflation, viz. a
blowing used in Baptism, whereby the Devil was to be blown away; Consignation,
or the signing the baptized with the Sign of the Cross; Confirmation, or
Bishoping the Baptized Children, afterward, to complete his imperfect Baptism
by laying on of Hands, Albes or white Garments for the Baptized, Baptisterions,
or large Fonts to be placed in the Temples, Altars also for the Eucharist, and
several other things, which he affirms to have been in use in the Apostles days.

And this is one of the first Authorities that Father Bellarmine and others of
them give us, for the proof of this Apostolical Institution, and which must be
received with equal Authority to the Holy Scriptures (and a very convincing one
no doubt) concerning which, though if there was nothing but the bare Repetition
thereof, it may sufficiently detect the Cheat; the lies being so gross, so ill
made, and laid together, that every common understanding may easily perceive
the juggle; For how absurdly ridiculous is it to say, that Paul or his
Praefectors should acquaint him, that it was an ancient Apostolical Tradition;
if it had been true, Paul might have told him it had been new, but by no means
in those days an old Apostolical Tradition. And to tell the world of
Baptisterions and Altars in Temples, when no such things as Temples for
Christian Worship, for above 200. years after. And also of those other impious
fooleries, that were not known nor heard of for some Ages after, so strangely,
by Gods Providence, were they infatuated, to come forth with such ridiculous
madness to detect their own folly: And to testify that this was to be that
Interest that should appear with all deceivableness of Unrighteousness.

Which horrid Cheat you have very convincingly discovered and detected by many
Learned Men; and besides those already mentioned Page. 110 in the first
Chapter, You have he Magdiburgenses, Cent. 1. L. 2. p. 625, 626. and Cent. 4.
p. 420, 554, and 1129. Also by Perkins, Reynolds, Rivet, proving by many
Arguments it was wholly spurious and supposititious, and that it could not,
from many considerations, be written by the ingenuous Contriver, till the
fourth or fifth Century, that none of the Church-writer, in those times took
any notice of it, and that Austin himself went not higher than Origin, And
which wretched Forgery is excellently detected in 39 Arguments by the Learned
Dailly, a late renowned Protestant-writer in France, in his Book called de
Scriptis.

A Second Proof leaned upon to verify the truth of its Apostolicalness, is
that of Justin Justin.
Martyrs Martyr.
Responses, Responses.
especially to the 56 Questions before mentioned, Page 111. and Chap. 2. which
many of the aforesaid Authors do learnedly detect to be spurious also, as
Perkins, Rivet and others, yea and many of the very Papists themselves do
disown the same as ridiculous, forasmuch as Origin and the Manichees are
mentioned therein, that were not in being for so long time after. And
concerning which Responses, M. Baxter
Mr. Baxter himself, in his plain Scripture proof, P. 155. is pleased to tell
us, That as to that of Justin Martyrs to the 56th Question, He would not insist
upon it, because though the place be most express for Infants Baptism, (for
when the Friars hand was in, he could do it to a hairs breadth) and the Book
ancient, yet that it was either spurious or interpolate.

A Third ancient Proof urged in Confirmation hereof, is the Decretals and
Institutions of several Popes in this 2d Cent. viz. Pope Clement P. Clem.
for Chrysm, Consignation, and Confirmation. Secondly, Pope Hyginus P. Huginus.
for Gossips, Chrysm, and Dedication of Churches, upon whose Authority Mr.
Baxter lays so much stress, that he Prints it in the front of his
Scripture-proofs, amongst other of the Ancients, and boastingly calls for as
good proof from Antiquity against Infants-baptisme, concluding that Gossips
could not be but for Infants Baptism: Though the words out of Gracian, as L.
Osiander gives them, are otherwise, Cent. 2. L. 2. C. 5. viz. In Catechism, in
Baptism, and in Confirmation, if necessity require, there may be one Surety,
(or Gossip, as usually rendered) Infants being not so much as mentioned, having
it seems Gossips (as hereafter you will find) in other Rites, as well as in
Baptism; and for Men and Women, as well as Children.

Thirdly, Pope Victor P. Victor.
for confining Baptism to Easter. Fourthly, Pope Pius P. Pius.
for Baptisteri^ns; The spuriousnes of all which Decretals is learnedly by
Osiander, Perkins, Rivet, etc. detected. And to whom I shall add what I find
in Mr. Fox Mr. Fox.
in his Martyrology, Vol. 1. P. 75. who speaking of these Decretals, says
judiciously, if not prophetically, viz. Most lamentable it is, that the
falsifying of such trifling Traditions, under the false pretenses of Antiquity,
either was begun in the Church to deceive the People, or that it has remained
so long undetected: For (says he) I think the Church of God will never be
perfectly reformed, before these Decretal Constitutions and Epistles, which
have so long put on the vizard of Antiquity, shall be fully detected, and
appear in their colors, wherein they were first painted.

And concerning which the Magdiburgenses Magdib.
very excellently, Cent. 2. p. 111. That if it should be taken for granted,
that all this was true, as is expressed in these Decretals of these Roman
Bishops, then what could be more certain than that even now the Mystery of
Iniquity began to work in the Church of Rome, in their so corrupting and
contaminating the simple Form of Baptism, concerning which nothing is so much
as mentioned of in any other Church.

The next Testimony that is alleged for Authentic proof in the Case, is that
of Origin in the Third Century, Origen's Testimony examined.
and of which there is so much stress laid by Austin and others, for from him,
says Dr. Tailor, he only had his proof of Apostolic Tradition, for as yet, it
seems, the former Testimonies had not seen the Sun; his words are these, taken
out of his fifth Book in his Homilies upon the sixth Chap. of the Romans viz. The
Church received a Tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to Children.

But whether this Testimony ought any more to be regarded than the former, let
these following Considerations determine:

1. Origin a single Testimony.
And first it is to be considered, that if this was Origen's own, as it is
asserted out of his supposed Homelies upon Lev. and the Romans (it being
mentioned in both) yet that is but one single Testimony in the Case, as Dr.
Tailor well observes before, and that against so much positive witness to the
contrary, who with one mouth do testify, that none but the Adult were either in
the Apostles times, or the next Centuries after, baptized.

2. Origin very corrupt.
Secondly, His writings, or at least those that are fathered upon him, are so
notoriously corrupt and erroneous, as the Magdiburgenses do affirm in Cent. 3.
P. 262, 263, etc. and whereof they give several instances, viz. That he was not
only very Heretical and blasphemous about Christ, asserting two Christ's, and
denying his Godhead, who was (as Epiphanius says) the very Head of the
Arrians; but as Jerome says, holding very desperately about the Spirit, and
very corruptly about Angels, Devils, Creation, Providence, Original Sin,
Church Government, and the Resurrection, a fearful Allegoriser of Scripture,
but desperately Erroneous about Baptism it self, viz. First, That the very Act
it self of Baptizing in Water, merits the Spirit. Secondly, That in that very
Act, all Sin is taken away. Thirdly, That it enables to keep the whole Law.
Fourthly, That there is to be a Baptism after the Resurrection, to purge away
Sin: And that the Baptized ought to be signed with the Sign of the Cross: And
upon the 5th of Math. says, Peter by promise ought to be the Foundation of the
Church: and upon Luke 17. That Peter was the Prince of the Apostles. Whose
Writings therefore, (for a great part of them) for their Corruption, were
impugned and rejected by Jerome and others; yea, and not only by several of the
Greek Fathers, as Alexandrinus, Epiphanius, Theophilus, Cyrenus and others, but
by some Greek Councils too, as appears by the Magd. Eusebius, and others: So
that we may say of Origin, if these indeed were his own, as the Magdiburgens.
say of the former Decretals, That they bespoke him an early Factor for
Antichrist, and that the Mystery of Iniquity did work strongly in him; But what
appears in the next Consideration, may give us to hope better of him.

Origen's Homeiies upon Lev. and Romans spurious.
But Thirdly, and more especially, It is to be observed, That many of Origen's
Works fell into ill hands, and particularly those Homelies of Levit. and the
Romans, if indeed there were any such, which Mr. Perkins and others doubt,
because no Greek Copies thereof have been extant, and of which Vossius in his
Book De Baptis. says, Sed de Origene minus laborabimus, quia quae citabimus
Graece non extant. There being only a corrupt Latin piece, called a Translation
of Ruffinus, who ingenuously confesses, that he took so much liberty in his
Translation, as to add and alter at his pleasure; which gives Erasmus so much
occasion to say, That you know not when you read Origin, and when Ruffinus. And
therefore are those Homilies rejected as spurious, and put by Perkins and
others amongst his counterfeit Works: And well they may, if you consider the
Story the Magdiburgs tell us of this Ruffinus, and his way of Translation and
Writing, of which, I shall take the freedom to give you a brief account, as I
find it in Cent. 4. cap. 10. p. 1201, etc. That you may better understand what
trade was driven of this kind, and what fine Merchants we have to deal with
about this Romish trash.

This Ruffinus, you must know, The History of ^uffinus and his F^rge^ies.
lived about the latter end of the 4. Century, who was an Italian M^nk of
Aquila, a wicked, though wi^ty, learned Man, who went away with a famous Roman
Cu^tizan into Asia, and sojourned at Jerusalem with her above thirty years; at
first a great friend and companion of Jerome's, but afterward when Jerome
discovered his wickedness, especially in his abusing Origen's Works, many
whereof he translated out of Greek into Latin, sophisticating them at his
pleasure, and for which, and for several bastardy pieces he brought forth,
Jerome, Anastasius, and others write several pieces to detect and reprove him.
Several corrupt Heretical Treatises he wrote, and fathered upon others, viz.
One containing diverse corrupt Tenants of Origin, he fathered upon Pamphilia a
Martyr, who lived about the Third Century, the better to put it off in the
Martyrs name; Another Book of one Xystus a Pythagorean, which he fathered upon
a Roman Bishop and Martyr; seve^al Homilies upon J shua, which he fathered upon
another eminent Person; A Book of the Lives of the Monks of Basil, a feigned
piece; and another Book of Monks, innumerating a Multitude, as Jerome says,
that ^ever were, and fathering Origen's Errors upon those that were. He made a
corrupt, vicious Translation of Josephus, as discovered by Gallenius that was
more faithful therein; he added two lying pieces to the History of Eusebius
from Constantine to the Death of Theodosius, which Socrates reproves; and he
wrote another frivolous Book of Jacobs blessing the Patriarchs, and an
Explanation thereof.

By whose Impostures of this kind, you may discern what stuff was forged at the
Antichristian Anvil, and particularly what Credit is to be given to this Man's
Works.

Another Traditional Testimony, greatly boasted of, is that of Cyprian,
Cyprians Evidence tried.
about the middle of the third Century, in that his Epistle, said to be writ to
one Fidus a Priest, wherein he declares his own and the judgment, as it is said,
of Sixty six African Bishops, That Children should be baptized, as well before
as after the Eigth day, with the Reasons and Grounds thereof, as at large
expressed in the Epistle, viz. From the extent of Gods Grace and Salvation
tendered to all, even the greatest of Sinners, therefore that Children should
be baptized. Concerning which testimony of Cyprian, there are these things to
be considered.

First, That he does not urge the Practice of it from any Ap^stolical Tradition
or Prece^t, but from his own and Bishops Arguments (such as they are) to
enforce the same: And truly, if he had asserted it to have been an Apostolical
Tradition, his word would no sooner have been taken, than when he tells us that
Chrysme was so.

Secondly, Because there is good ground to question, whether this was Cyprian's
and sixty six Bishops, Conclusion. First, Because we meet with no such Council,
neither can it appear where it was held: and if Austin's Argument
beforementioned be good to prove it an Apostolical Tradition, because no
Council had determined it, it concludes against any such Council. Secondly,
That the grounds upon which the Conclusion is grounded, are so weak and
frivolous. Thirdly, Because it was a Doctrine so much contradicted by his great
Master Tertullian, whom he so much reverenced. And therefore if you will
believe Baronius, Tom. 1. p 415. Cyprian was not for Infants Baptism, as Mr.
Blackwood observes. Fourthly, Because other things have been fathered upon him,
which were not his, as a piece called, De Cardinalibus Operibus Christi, by an
Abbot in France, as Dailly demonstrates in his Book De Scriptis. p. 466. c. 39.
L. 2.

Cyprian
But if his own, there is as little cause to receive it as other corrupt and
Antichristian Tenants, very corrupt.
that are found in his Writings, and said to be his, viz. That the Church of
Rome is the Mother Church. That there ought to be one High Priest over the
Church: And the Principle Church is Peters-chair, from whence the Unity of the
Priesthood arises; And that upon Peter the Church is founded, with much more
such stuff, which the Magdiburgenses have collected out of his Book, called De
Ordine in Ecclesia, Cent. 3. c. 4. p. 84. A violent impugner of Priests
Marriages, p. 86. In his Sermon of Alms concludes, That Sins committed after
Baptism were done away by Alms and good Works, p. 80. And again, That as Water
extinguisheth Fire, so does Alms extinguish Sin, p. 81.

And concerning Baptism it self very absurdly corrupt, Saying, That the Water
ought first to be Consecrated by a Priest, to make it more efficacious to take
away Sin. That the Person baptizing conferred the Holy Spirit, and the baptized
was inwardly sanctified thereby. That Chrysme, or anointing the baptized, was
absolutely necessary, page 82.

That Exorcismes were also necessary to drive away the Devil; That Baptism
should be done in Temples, and that the Kiss should be given by the Priest to
the Baptized Infant, and that Sprinkling might serve instead of Dipping, p. 125.

By all which you may understand, that either Cyprian had been vilely Ruffined,
and these things Fathered upon him, or that he himself was a notable Factor for
Antichrist, and that in him the Mystery of Iniquity did very strongly work.

But we would rather believe, That these things were foisted into his Writings
by that villainous cursed Generation, that so horribly abused the Writings of
most of the ancient Writers, as appears by the Index Expurgatorius, and who
durst venture upon any Forgery, how impious soever, for the benefit of the Holy
Church, witness that impudent Fable, as Osiander calls it, of the Baptism of
Constantine, before mentioned, in the fourth Century, in the first Chap. 2.
Part.

Thus you have the Principal Authorities urged for Apostolical Tradition,
proved forged and fabulous; and what does more refute that fond conceit of the
uninterrupted Tradition, so much boasted of, to prove this Practice, than the
Testimony Justin Martyr gives, That the Believers were in his days the only
subjects of Baptism. And the witness Tertull, gives against Infants-Bapt. in
the third Century, and the advice that Nazianzen gives to defer it; The Decrees
of so many Councils to that purpose, and especially so many eminent Christians
in the fourth Century that did not baptize their Children, till they could give
an account of their Faith, as has been before so learnedly observed by Dailly,
Grotius, Dr. B. Dr. Tailor and others, and which I humbly conceive, are
unanswerable Arguments against it.

But it is said, Tertullians opposing it, it may seem that there were some that
practiced it in the third Century, and can it be supposed that any did so,
except it had been warranted by such Apostolical Tradition?

It is granted, Answer.
Tertullian did oppose it. But who it was that asserted it, and whether upon
any such account, as supposed, is not mentioned; if any do affirm, it will be
on their part to prove the one and the other, The Magdiburgenses and others, as
you have heard, do tell us, That they meet with no instance of any that either
practiced this or any other of these Inventions fathered also upon Apostolical
Tradition, as Chrysme, Exorcisme, Consignation, etc. in that Age. But it is
said, If they did, it would demonstrate, especially in the practice of the
latter, That the Mystery of Iniquity did then begin to work, in so corrupting
that Ordinance of Christ, and had they not as good ground to do the one as the
other?

Whereby that word of Prophecy 2 These. 3. concerning the taking place of that
Mystery of Iniquity was so much fulfilled, which was to come on with all
Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, and with strong Delusions to believe Lies;
and which in nothing more appears than in this very thing, having not only
forged so many Lies about it, but imposed their Lies to be believed by others.
As their Forefathers, the Priests of old, that hired the Soldiers to tell a Lie
about the Body of Christ, and then imposed, that their Lie to be believed, to
delude others, Mat. 28.12, 13, 14, 15. The consideration whereof may, I hope,
be of use to Protestants, though as to the hardened and deluded Papists they
are, as well observed before, utterly incurable herein.

In the next place we come to examine the Scripture-grounds urged for the
practice, and to evince, Scripture grounds for Infants Baptism examined.
That they have been no less mistaken in their Scriptural, than in their
Ecclesiastical Author^ties to found it upon, whereof we shall give you an
account of some of the principal, and leave you to judge of the rest.

First we shall mention, is that which was called (of old) the Scripture-Canon
for Infants Baptism, and upon which much stress has been laid since to prove
the same, viz. Mat. 19.14. Mat. 19.14.
Suffer little Children to come to me, and forbid them not, for to such belongs
the Kingdom of Heaven. But may we not well say, How does Baptism come to be
concerned in this Text, except it can be made out, That blessing was baptizing.
D. Tailor
And to which Dr. Tailor has spoken so fully for us, that I need say no more,
p. 230. Who says. From the Action of Christ's blessing Infants, to infer, that
they were baptized, proves nothing so much, as that there is a want of better
Arguments: For the Conclusion would, with more probability, be derived thus;
Christ blessed Children, and so dismissed them, but baptized them not,
therefore Infants are not to be baptized. But let this be as weak as its enemy,
Yet that Christ did not baptize them, is an Argument sufficient, that he has
other ways of bringing them to Heaven than by Baptism; He passed an Act of
Grace upon them by Benediction and Imposition of Hands. And therefore, although
neither Infants, nor any Man, in puris Naturalibus, can attain to a
supernatural end, without the addition of some Instrument, or means of Gods
appointing, ordinarily and regularly, yet where God has not appointed a Rule,
nor an Order, as in the Case of Infants, we contend he has not, the Argument
is invalid.

And as we are sure God has not commanded Infants to be baptized, so we are
sure God will do them no injustice, nor damn them for what they cannot help;
viz. If the Parent baptize them not.

Many 1000 ways there are, by which God can bring any reasonable soul to him,
but nothing is more unreasonable than because he has tied all men of years and
discretion to this way, Therefore we of our own heads shall carry Infants to
him that way, without his direction: The conceit is poor and low, and the
action consequent to it, is bold and venturous. Let him do what he pleases with
Infants, we must not.

Second Scripture that has been much leaned upon, is that of Joh. 3.5. Joh.
3.5.
Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit, he can in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of God. From whence it is concluded, that there is no other way to
regenerate and save Infants, and add them to the Church, but by Baptism; and
therefore have they baptized them, as the Canons and Decretals of Popes, and
the Opinions of the Ancients do demonstrate.

But the Consequences drawn from hence, to infer the Baptizing and Saving of
Infants, savours of so much Ignorance and Popish Darkness, that we need say
little to it; for since the Reformation, most of the Protestants have protested
against this as erroneous; Yet for the sake of others that yet cleave to it,
saying, That in Analogy hereto, Children are hereby made Members of Christ,
Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, I shall refer them to
Bishop Tailor for Solution, whose words will have more weight than any thing I
can say in the Case, who in p. 231. Calls such a sense of the words, a
prevaricating of Christ's Precepts. For, says he, the Water and Spirit in this
place, signify the same thing, and by Water is meant the effect of the Spirit,
cleansing and purifying the Soul, as it appears in its parallel place of
Christ's B^p izing with the Spirit and with Fire: For although this was
literally fulfilled in the day of Pentecost, yet mor^lly there is more in it,
for it is the Sign of the effect of the Holy Ghost and his productions upon the
Soul: And you may as well conclude, that Infants must also pass through the
Fire, as through the Water. And that we may not think this a trick to elude the
pressure of this place, Peter says the same thing. For where he had said, That
Baptism saves us, he adds by way of Explication (not the washing away of the
filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God,) plainly
saying, That it is not Water, or the purifying of the Body, but the cleansing
of the Spirit that does that which is supposed to be the Effect of Baptism.

But to suppose it meant External Baptism, yet this no more infers a necessity
of Infants Baptism, than the other words of Christ infer a necssity to give
them the holy Communion: Joh. 6.53. Except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, you have no life in you. And yet we do not think these
words a sufficient Argument to Communicate them. If men therefore will do us
justice; either let them give both Sacraments to Infants, as some Ages of the
Church did, or neither. For the wit of man is not able to show a disparity in
the Sanction, or in the Energy of its expression. And therefore they were
honest that understood the Obligation to be parallel, and performed it
accordingly; and yet because we say they were deceived in one instance, and yet
the Obligation (all the world cannot reasonably say but) is the same, they are
honest and as reasonable that do neither: And sure the Ancient Church did, with
an equal opinion of Necessity, give them the Communion, and yet men now adays
do not, Why should men be more burdened with a prejudice and a name of
obliquity, for not giving the Infants one Sacrament more than you are disliked,
for not affording them the other? And farther, p. 242. If we must suppose Grace
to be effected by the external work of the Sacrament alone, how does this
differ from the Opus operatum of the Papists, save that it is worse; for they
say the Sacrament does not produce its effects, but in a Suscipient disposed by
all Requisi es and due Preparat^ves of Piety, Faith, and Repentance; though in
a subject so disposed, they say, the Sacrament by its own virtue does it. But
this opinion says, it does it of it self, without the help, or so much as the
co-existence of any condition, but the mere reception.

M. Baxter
Mr. Baxter to this point, p. 306. of his plain Scripture Proof, That Baptism in
it self can work no such Cause, for the Water is not a subject capable of
receiving Grace, or of conveighing it to the Soul, it cannot approach or touch
the Soul, nor infuse Grace into it if it could.

Amesius in Bell. Enervat. Tom. 3. L. 2. c. 3. Outward Baptism, says he,
cannot be a Physical Instrument of the infusing of Grace, because it has it
not in any wise in it self.

Zwingli.
Zwinglius denies Baptism of it self works any Grace, or pardons Sin, or
renews, as Tom. 2. p. 119, 120, 121.

Dr. Owen Dr. Owen.
in his Theolog. l. 6 chapter 5. p. 477. upon the point, says, That the Father of
lies himself could not easilier have invented a more pernicious Opinion, or
which might power in a more deadly poison into the minds of Sinners.

Third Scripture insisted on, is the Commission it self, Mark 16.16, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Mar. 16.16
But Infants are Believers, Therefore according to the Comm^ssion, they are to
be baptized. In which though all Parties agree, yet how they do believe, and
what faith this is, there is great confusion and contradiction.

Viz. The Ancients said they had the Faith of the Sacrament, as Austin: The
Papists the Faith of the Church; as Tho. Aquinas, which is intailed to all
within the Pale thereof. The Lutherans say, they have a proper Faith, which
they hotly desended at the Conference with the Calvinists at Montpelgart, and
therefore Baptize all whether the Parents be good or ba^. The Calvinists say,
they have an imputative Faith from the Parent in Covenant, as Musculus,
Oecolampadius and others at that Conference maintained, and therefore baptize
only the Children of Believers.

The Prelatick Protestants affirm, they have the Faith of the Gossip or Surety,
but none of their own, as the Com. Catechism tells us: Most of the Non
Conformists do agree with the Calvinists, that it is an imputative Faith from
the Parent, or Pro-parent in Covenant. Mr. Baxter in his Right to Sacraments,
as before, says, They have a Justifying, and Mr. Blake his opposite allows
but a Dogmatical Faith; some say it is a Physical, some a Metaphysical, and
some a Hyperphysical Faith; some saying, as before, that Baptism is an
Instrument to conveigh real Grace to Infants; some say to all, as Mr. Bedford
and others; some only to the Elect, as Dr. Burgos: And thus you see they are
not agreed in their Verdict, nor who shall speak for them. But for an Answer
hereto, I shall again refer you to Dr. Tailor, D. Tailor
p. 240. speaking so much my mind, and the truth herein, says he, Whether
Infants have Faith or no, is a Question to be disputed by persons that care not
how much they say, and how little they prove.

First. Personal and Actual Faith they have none, for they have no acts of
Understanding; and besides, how can any man know that they have, since he never
saw any sign of it, neither was he told so by any that cold tell? Secondly,
Some say they have Imputative, but then so let the Sacrament be too, that is,
if they have the Parents faith or the Churches, then so let Baptism be imputed
also by deriuation from them, and as in their Mothers Womb, and while they hang
on their Mothers Breasts, they live upon their Mothers Nourishment: So they may
upon the Baptism of their Parents, or their Mother the Church: For since Faith
is necessary to the susception of Baptism (and they themselves confess it by
striving to find out new kinds of Faith to daub the matter up) such as the
Faith, such must be the Sacrament: for there is no proportion between an actual
Sacrament, and an imputative Faith; this being in immediate and necessary order
to that. And whatsoever can be said to take off from the necessity of Actual
Faith, all that and much more may be said to excuse from the actual susception
of Baptism. The first of these devices was that of Luther and his Scholars;
the second of Calvin and his, and yet there is a third Device, which the Church
of Rome teaches, and that is, that Infants have habitual Faith; but who told
them so? How can they prove it? What Revelation or Reason teaches any such
thing? Are they by this habit so much as disposed to an actual Belief, without
a new Master? Can an Infant, sent into a Mahumetan Province be more confident
for Christianity, when he comes to be a Man, than if he had not been baptized?
Are there any Acts precedent, concomitant, or consequent to this pretended
Habit? This strange Invention is absolutely without Art, without Scripture,
Reason, or Authority; But the Men are to be excused unless there were a better.

To which, says he, this Consideration may be added, That if Baptism be
necessary to the Salvation of Infants (as the Fathers of old, and the Church of
Roms and England since) upon whom is the imposition laid? To whom is the
Command given? To the Parents, or the Children? Not to the Parents, for then
God has put the Salvation of innocent Babes into the Power of others, and
Infants may be damned for their Fathers carelessness or malice. It follows that
it is not necessary at all to be done to them, to whom it cannot be prescribed
as a Law, and in whose behalf it cannot be reasonably entrusted to others, with
the appendent necessity; and if it be not necessary, it is certain it is not
reasonable, and most certain it is no where in terms prescribed; and therefore
it is presumed that Baptism ought to be understood and administered according as
other Precepts are with reference to the capacity of the subject, and the
reasonableness of the thing.

And again to this purpose, p. 242. And if any Man runs for succor to that
exploded Cresphugeton, that Infants have Faith, or any other inspired Habit, of
I know not what or how; we desire no more advantage in the world, than that
they are constrained to answer without Revelation, against Reason, common
Sense, and all the Experience in the World.

The Argum. from federal Holiness examined. 4. Argum. From Federal Holiness
examined.


The other Scriptures we shall speak to, are those that are supposed to hold
cut a Covenant-Right to the Children of Believers, and from whence Arguments
are drawn for the Baptizing of them, which are principally, 1 Cor. 7.14. Genesis
17.7. compared Romans 4.11. and Acts 2.39. From whence it is asserted, That the
Children of Believers being a holy Seed, and in Covenant, that to them
therefore belong the Seals of the Covenant, which we shall examine with care
and circumspection; so much stress being laid thereon. And as previous to our
Answer thereto, shall in the fir place take notice, that this way of arguing
has been the new way, which since the Reformation has been taken up to prove
Infants Baptism by.

Antiquity of the Argum. from Federal Holiness.
For when the unsoundness and rotteness of the ancient ground of
Infants-Baptisme appeared, they being loath to part with the Tradition,
endeavored to build it upon this new Foundation; for when it was discovered
that Infants might be saved without Baptism, and that they were not damned if
they died without it, and that the Sacrament did not give Grace by the bare
work done, nor took not away Original Sin, it was high time to lay a new
Foundation for it, or else it would have fallen, therefore is this new way of
Covenant-Holiness found out, upon which our Congregational-Men, especially both
in Old as well as New England seem to go, of which Zwinglius about 120 years
since, forasmuch as I can learn, was the first Founder, wherein he was singular
from all that went before him. And which he seems himself to own in his Book
of Baptism, Tom. 2. Fol. 57. Saying, That all those who have from the Apostles
times written of Baptism, have not in a few things erred from the scope; he
having it seems, found out a way freer from Error and Exception, than all the
Tracts of the Ancients.

Having observed to you the Antiquity of this new Foundation, we shall in the
next place weigh and consider the Arguments themselves.

The First and chiefest is from 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean,
The Arguments from Foederal-holiness examined. 1 Cor. 7.4.
but now are they holy. From whence this Argument is raised,

That they who are holy with a Covenant-holiness, may be baptized: But the
Infants of Believers are holy with a Covenant-holiness, for it is said in the
Text, but now are they holy; therefore they may be baptized.

In which Argument we have these two things asserted, but not at all proved.
First, that the holiness in the Text is a federal, or Covenant holiness.
Secondly, That Federal or Covenant holiness qualifies Infants for Baptism. Both
which are positively denied upon the following Grounds.

First, Because the Holiness in the Text, be it what it will, whether Moral,
Federal, or Matrimonial, is neither here, or elsewhere, assigned to be a ground
of baptizing Children upon; it being only the ground laid down in the
Institution that can warrant the same.

The Female, as well as the Male Children, under the Law, had all of them a
Legal or Federal Holiness, yet must none of them be Circumcised, because God
had not so ordained; And for twenty Generations before the Law, Circumcision
was neither administered to Male or Female for the like Reason. It being Gods
Word only, not our Reason, or the Inventions or Persuasions of Learned Men that
can warrant our practice in Gods Ordinances. That Profession of Faith and
Repentance is a substantial ground to Baptize upon, is undeniably proved from
Scripture, and consented to by themselves. But that foederal Holiness, or any
other Qualification in Infants, is any Scriptural ground for the same, is yet
to be proved, this Text being altogether silent herein.

But Secondly. If it should be granted that Federal Holiness was a ground to
baptize Children upon under the Gospel, as it was to circumcise them under the
Law, which must not be owned by any means. Yet from substantial Arguments it
will appear, that no such Holiness is intended here.

First, No such Federal Holiness in the N. T.
Because there is no such Holiness in the New Testament, as a federal Holiness
belonging to Children, That because the Parents are Believers, and in the New
Covenant, their Natural Seed must therefore be so esteemed, and have the like
right thereby to the Evangelical, as the Children under the Law had to the
Legal Ordinances; which, as no where to be found, so not to be admitted upon
the following Considerations.

1. Because it contradicts the Gospel Dispensation as before.

2. Because such apprehensions intails Grace to Nature, Regeneration to
Generation; in contradiction to that of our Savior, John 3. That which is born
of the flesh, is flesh. And that we are all the Children of wrath by Nature,
Ephesians. 2.

3. Because it contradicts all the experience, both of former and latter times,
wherein Godly Men have had Wicked Children, and wicked Men good Children; as
Abraham had an Ishmael, Isaac an Esau, David an Absalom; and on the contrary
wicked Ahaz begat good Hezekiah, wicked Abia good Asa, wicked Amon good Josia.

4. Because it necessitates an owning the Doctrine of Falling from Grace.

2. The Text intends an other Holiness, viz Matrimonial.
Secondly, Because the Text intends another Holiness, viz. A Civil or
Matrimonial Holiness in opposition to Fornication, Uncleanness, Bastardy. And
which does fully appear,

First, From the Scope of the place; The Question propounded by the Believing
Corinthians for Solution was, 1. From the scope of the place.
Whether their new Spiritual Relation to Christ, in the Gospel, did not
dissolve their Carnal Relation entered into in Unbelief; and whether they
could, without defilement, maintain their Converse without Sin any more than
they could in Ezra and Nehemiah's time?

To which the Apostle replies, That the Civil Relation, before orderly entered
into, was clean now, as before; The unbelieving Husband is as much clean and
sanctified to his believing Wife; and that she might as freely converse with
^im in the Conjugal State now as before the Spiritual difference happened
betwixt them. For Religion breaks no Bands nor Civil Contracts, They being as
true Man and Wife as before the Marriage, as Honorable as before. And
therefore the Apostle advises that they should abide in the state and Calling,
Religion finds them in, Ver. 20. And that by no means the believer should
depart, and upon that account break the Relation, but that he should maintain
his Civil, in expectation of gaining her over to a spiritual Relation. And in
confirmation hereof brings an Argument ab absurdo; for otherwise the Children
that they had together would be unclean, viz. if they should depart from their
Relations from the unlawfulness of the Marrage, and uncleanness of the bed,
what would they make their Children but Bastards, or unclean. But in as much as
they had no question of their legitimacy or holiness; neither had they any
cause to scruple the other. And farther also, the believer had the least ground
to doubt hereof, because to him all lawful things are clean, whether Husband,
Wife, Child, Estate, etc. which is all the Holiness I conceive can be meant in
the Text agreeable to the Holiness, 1 These. 4.3, 4. and Mal. 2.15. the Bastard
being amongst the unclean and unholy, Deuteronomy. 32.2. as Mr. Calvin upon Mal. 2.15.
says wtll, namely.

Calvin.
Wherefore has God made one? to wit seeking a Seed of God, a Seed of God is
here taken for Legitimate, as the Hebrews do name that Divine, which is pure
from any fault or spot, therefore he sought a Seed of God, that is appointed
Marriage from whence should be born a Legitimate and pure Offspring; secretly
therefore does the Prophet here show, that they are all Bastards that shall be
born by Poligamy; because they neither can, nor ought to be accounted
legitimate but they who are begotten according to Gods institution; but where
the Husband violates the faith given to the Wife, and takes to himself another,
as he perverts the order of Marriage; so also he cannot be a lawful father;
thus Calvin.

2. The holiness the same spoken to be in the unbeliever.
A second Argument, why it is a Holiness of this kind, and not such a faederal
Holiness as suggested; because the Holiness of the Children is of no other
nature, then that spoke of the unbelieving Parent in the Text, and if one will
entitle to the Ordinance so the other.

A third is from the consideration that Children in the Text, is not to be
limited to Infants, or such Children that they might have since the Religious
difference happened, 3. Children not to be taken for Infants only.
but of grown Children; for a Man's Child is his Child whilst he lives, through
30, 40, or 50, years old; and we suppose it would be as absurd to say, a
Heathenish Son should be baptized upon a faederal Holiness, as to say the
unbelieving Parent should so be.

A fourth Argument, 4. Ber. it cannot be known.
why this cannot be a new Covenant-holiness that must qualify and entitle to
Baptism; first, because that cannot be known; for if the Parent professing
faith be a Hypocrite, and not in Covenant themselves, then may you baptize a
wrong subject as well as a right one.

And secondly, such an absurdity would follow, that no unbelievers Child is in
Covenant or Elect, which is notoriously false; for as before Hezekiah was the
Son of wicked Ahaz, and Asa of Abia, and Josia the Son of wicked Amon.

Thirdly from the concurrent Testimony and Confession of many learned
Commentators, 3. From the confession of Commentators upon the place.
and parties themselves.

Austin Austin.
a great asserter of Infants Baptism, as before, says hereupon. It is to be
held without doubting, whatsoever that Sanctification was, it was not of power
to make Christians, and remit sins.

Jerome says, Because of Gods appointment, Marriage is Holy.

Ambrose Ambrose
thus upon the place; The Children are Holy, because they are born of lawful
Marriage.

Melanc.
Melancton in his Commentary upon the place thus. Therefore Paul answers, that
the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder, for their unlike opinions of God;
if the impious Person do not cast away the other, and for comfort he adds as a
Reason, The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the believing Wife; meat is
sanctified, for that which is Holy in use, that is granted to believers from
God; so here he speaks the use of Marriage to be Holy, and to be granted of
God, things prohibited under the Law, as Swines flesh, and a Woman in her
pollution were called unclean. The Connection of the Argument is this, If the
use of Marriage should not please God, your Children would be Bastards, and so
unclean: But your Children are not Bastards, therefore the use of Marriage
pleases God, and how Bastards were unclean in a peculiar manner, the Law
shows, Deuteronomy. 23.

Musculus in his Comment upon the place, confesses, Muscul.
That he had abused formerly that place against the Anabaptists, but found it
impertinent to that purpose.

Camerareus in his Commentary up- the place, says, Camera.
(For the unbelieving Husband has been sanctified an unusual change of the
Tense, that is) sanctified in the lawful use of Marriage; for without this,
says he, it would be that their Children should be unclean, that is infamous,
and not Legitimate; who so are Holy, that is during the Marriage, are without
all blot of ignominy.

Erasmus upon the place, says thus. Erasm.
Infants born of such Parents, as the one, being a Christian, the other not,
are holy legitimately; for the conversion of either Wife or Husband does not
dissolve the Marriage which was made, when both were in unbelief.

And to which we might add many more; for as a learned searcher into this
Controversy affirms, that all the ancients went this way, and that none ever
affirmed this new way of faederal Holiness till the Controversy of Anabaptists
in Germany arose, Mr. Tombs in his Examen 82.

Sydnam, and Mr. Baxter again and again) Holiness is taken for a separation to
God, but never in a common sense.

Cor. 1115. is rendered a ^ail: So the word (...) that generally; and in most
other places is translated to bless, does in Job 1.5, 11. and 2.9. signify a
quite contrary sense, namely to Curse, and of which we might give you many
Instances, but let one more serve for all in the very word it self, viz. (...)
which generally signifies Holiness; yet in Deuteronomy. 23.17. Hosea 4.14. 2 Kings
23.17. is rendered Whoredom or Sodomy.

And secondly, neither are we to seek of some parallel place. where the word
Holy signifies this sort of Holiness, viz. Matrimonial or Conjugal Holiness,
Mal. 2.15. a Holy Seed, viz. a Legitimate Seed, as Calvin and Camer, and others
enlarge upon it in opposition to Bastardy or unholy; for so were Bastards to be
esteemed, Deuteronomy. 23.17. And so 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. This is the will of God, even
your sanctification, that you should abstain from fornication, that every one
should know how possess his Vessel in sanctification and honor, as it is said
of the Young men, 1 Samuel 21.5. and not in the lust of Concupiscence, etc. Where
Holiness is put in opposition to uncleanness and fornication.

But Thirdly, neither can Matrimonial Holiness be said not to be a separation
to God; for it is no other then a setting apart according to Gods Ordinance,
and which is called honorable, (or in this sense holy) and that too all
whereby Men and Women are dedicated and devoted to each other by mutual solemn
contract, according to Gods Institution, that of two they may be made one, and
fill up a Relation to the Holy ends God appointed, viz. to prevent uncleanness
for mutual help and propagation: And though we do not call a Marriage a
Sacrament with the Papists, yet we own it an honorable and holy state, Gods
Ordinance having made it so.

express words; for is it not said that the unbelieving Husband is sanctified
by the Wife, which is a sanctification derived from the Believer.

Gal. 1.16, [to me] 2. P. 2.5. [to faith] Acts 4.12. [to men] which the scope
overrules, and which must needs be so here, which Mr. Marshal grants Tombs Ex.
P. 79. for in no sense can it be sanctified by her: for he is not spiritually
sanctified, being as yet an unbeliever; and one Argument therefore of the Wives
remaining to endeavor to convert him: Neither can it be a faederal Holiness;
for that by this Argument would entitle him to Baptism as well as the
Children; nor can it be proper to say, the unbeliever is sanctified in a
Matrimonial sanctification by his believing Wife for that is only so by Gods
appointment; therefore must it necessarily be to the Wife, viz. to her use and
lawful enjoyment, as Food and Raiment, and all Gods blessings are, it being
not as [Mr. Marshal grants] a Holiness of State, but of use, and therefore she
did not sin in continuing in the station and place Religion found her, which is
the Answer to the Scruple.

But is it not said,

Beza's sense of the words may be a very proper Answer, viz. That the word (is
not to be understood an Adverb of Time, but a Conjunction that is wont to be
used in the assumptions of Arguments; and so the sense is [but now] that is,
for as much as the unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the Wife, your Children
are holy, that is lawfully begotten and born.

Therefore notwithstanding your difference in Religion, that although he be an
Idolater, and you a Christian, yet the civil state lawfully entered into before
this alteration may be converst in without sin: For if the Believer should
depart, and break the Relation, it was either for the defect of the first Band
or Tie, or for unequal yoaking with Infidels, as in Ezra s time. But as to the
latter, there being no such Law to the Gentiles to put away Wives and Children
upon that account. And to the former you having no doubt of the Legitimacy of
your Children, but take it for granted they are Holy, neither need you doubt of
your lawful Marriage state, your new Relations infringing neither: Therefore
from the Holiness both of Bed and Birth continue together, and let not the
believing Husband put away his unbelieving Wife; not let not the believing Wife
depart from her unbelieving Husband, which is all the Holiness that is found in
this Text, and no such thing as a faederal Holiness, Though if there was, it
would be no ground to Baptize an Infant upon, as before:

The Arguments from Circumcision Examined.
Another, and none of the least Arguments that is urged to prove Infants
Baptism by, is from pretended Consequences, from the Covenant made with
Abraham, Genesis 17.
From whence it is thus argued.
THose to whom the Gospel Covenant belonged, The Argument from Circumcision
to them the Seal thereof appertained; but to Believers and their Seed, the
Gospel Covenant belonged; as Genesis 17.7. I Will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed;
and Acts 2.39. The Promise is to you and your Child^en.

Therefore to them the Seal thereof Circumcision so called, Romans 4.11. did
appertain, Genesis 17.10. For the Foederati were to be Signati, those in the
Covenant were to have the Seal thereof. And therefore by Consequence it
naturally follows; That if Circumcision, the Seal of the Gospel Covenant
belonged to the Seed of Believers under the Law, then does the Gospel Seal,
Baptism, much more appertain to the Seed of Believers under the Gospel, which
comes in the Place, Room, and Use of Circumcision, otherwise the privilege
under the Gospel, would be less then that of the Law; should Children be denied
such a benefit.

Answer. That this is falacious, and false reasoning, (and that there is ^o
natural Consequence at all from this Scripture, to infer the Baptizing of
Infants; nor any ground to build the Gospel-Ordinance Baptism, upon the
command of the Legal-Ordinance Circumcision) may fully appear by examining the
following particulars, which are begged, but not proved in the Argument.

1. Whether Circumcision, called here the Gospel Seal, did of old belong to all
in Gospel Covenant.

2. Whether the new (or Gospel) Covenant, and that mentioned Gen 17. be one and
the same.

3. Whether the Seed mentioned was Abraham's Natural or Spiritual Seed.

4. Whether Circumcision was a Seal of the new Covenant to the Children under
the Law.

5. Whether Circumcision was administered to Believers as Believers, and to
their Seed only.

6. Whether Baptism did succeed in the Place, Room and Use of ^ircumcision.

7. Whetheo the not baptizing Infants makes the privileges under the Gospel,
less then the Circumcising them under the Law.

To the first, Circumcision, not the Seal of the Gospel Covenant to all
Believers.
Whether Circumcision called the Gospel-Seal did belong of old to all in
Gospel Covenant.

It Is answered, that the contrary does manifestly appear upon a double account;
1. Because some that were in the Gospel Covenant were not Sealed; and 2dly.
some that were out of the Covenant were Sealed therewith.

1. 1. Many in Covenant not Sealed with it.
There were many persons in Covenant that were not Circumcised, that were
Foederati, but not Signati; as for instance, all the Believers from Adam to
Abraham, who received no such Seal; nor 2dly. did any of the Believers out of
Abraham's Family, as Lot, Melchisedeck. Job, that we read of, received any such
Seal; neither 3dly. did any of the believing Families in any Age receive it.

2. Many out of the Covenant they were Sealed.
And 2dly. there were some to whom the Covenant did not belong, that received
that called the Seal of Circumcision: For of Ishmael God had said, that this
Covenant was not to be established with him, but with Isaak, and yet he was
Circumcised, Genesis 17.20, 21, 25. Gal. 4.29.30. And the same may be said of
Esau, Romans 9.10, 11, 12.13. And as to all the Strangers in Abraham's House, or
bought with Money in Israel, that were Circumcised, it may well be doubted
whether the New Covenant Promises did belong to them.

2. The Covenant in Genesis 17 a mixed Covenant as the Seed was.
To the second, Whether the Ne^ Covenant, and that mentioned in Genesis 17. be the
same.

In answer whereto it must be understood, That as Abraham by Promise stood in a
double Capacity, viz. The Father of a Nation, viz. the Natural Israelites; so
to be also a Father of many Nations, comprehending the Spiritual Israel,
whether Jews or Gentiles throughout the world; and so accordingly the Promises
were of two sorts, sometimes respecting his Natural Seed, whether Domestic or
National, who were Typical of the Spirtual, as the Birth of Isaac, the
deliverance of his Posterity out of Egypt, the possessing of the Land of
Canaan, with many outward Temporal Blessings, and benefits annexed thereto, as
Genesis 15.13, 18.17.8.15, 16. Acts 7.3, 4, 5, 6.

And others again respecting in a peculiar manner the Spiritual Seed, the
Family, of the faithful, viz. the Elect, of whom through Christ he was Father,
and which are Evangelical, and in an especial manner belonging to the new
Covenant, as Genesis 12.3.18.18. In thee shall all Nations be blessed, which is
called a Gospel-promise, Gal. 3.8, 9. so Genesis 15.5. So shall thy Seed be, Genesis
17.5. A Father of many Nations. And Verse the 8th. To be his God, and the God
of his Seed. And therefore must the mind of Wisdom rightly distinguish, and
truly apply the Promises that are many times so mixed, that the one may be
taken for the other, and sure I am, much of the mistake and error lies here in
this very thing, by applying that to the one, which belongs to the other.

3. The Seed in the 7th. Verse the Spiritual Seed only.
But 3dly. What Seed of Abraham is it to whom the Promise does belong? In the
7th. Verse, Whether the Natural or Spiritual, and who those Children of
Promise, Acts 2.39.

To the clearing the first, namely, That of the Seed, Verse the 7th. I shall
refer you to the Exposition it self, the Scripture has given us hereof, with
the concurring sense of many judicious Expositors, and all of them parties
themselves.

1. The Scriptures expounding this Text are Gal. 3.16. Gal. 3.16
Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; he says not to Seeds as
of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed which is Christ; And therefore says
Ver. 29. If you be Christ's, then are you Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to
Promise, and farther, Romans 9.7, 8. To. 9.7, 8
Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in
Isaac shall thy Seed be called; that is, they which are the Children of the
Flesh. These are not the Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are
counted for the Seed. And Romans 4. 13, 14. Romans 4.13, 14.
For the promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham,
or to his Seed through the Law, but through the Righteousness of faith; for if
they which are of the Law be Heirs, faith is made void, and the Promise made of
none effect.

Which so fully confirms the Seed here mentioned, to whom the Promise belonged,
not to be the Carnal but Spiritual Seed, and in farther confirmation thereof,
you have these following Authors, and all of them Paedobaptists, viz.

Calvin Calvin,
upon Genesis 17.7. says, That it is manifest that the Promise understood of
Spiritual blessing, pertains not to the Carnal Seed of Abraham, but to the
Spiritual; as the Apostle himself says, Romans 4. and 9. Chap. For if you
understand the Carnal Seed, (says he) then that Promise will belong to none of
the Gentiles. but to those alone who are begotten of Abraham, and Isaac
according to the Flesh, Estius Ann. Genesis 17.7.

Ainsworth on Genesis 12.7. Ainsw.
[thy Seed] That is, all the Children of Promise, (the Elect) who only are
counted Abraham's Seed, Romans 9.7, 8. And in Christ are Heirs by Promise, as well
the Gentile^ as the Jews.

Dr. Owen Dr. Owen
in his Book called the Doctrine of Saints perseverance, in Chap. 4. arguing
from the Covenant of Grace, to prove the unchangableness of the love of God,
begins with Genesis 17.7. saying, That the effectual dispensation of the Grace of
the Covenant is peculiar t^ them only, who are the Children of Promise; the
Remnant of Abraham according to Election, with all that in al^ Nations were to
be blessed by him and his Seed Jesus Christ; Ishmael though Circumcised, was to
be put out; and not to be Heir with Isaac, and a little after he writes thus;
what blessing then was here made over to Abraham. All the blessings says he
that from God are conveyed in and by his seed Jesus Christ, i^ whom both he and
we are blessed, are wrapped therein, what they are, the Apostle tells you, Ephesians.
1.13. They are all Spiritual blessings, if perseverance, if the continuance of
the love and favor of God toward us be a Spiritual blessing, both Abraham and
all his Spiritual Seed, all faithful ones, throughout the world are blessed
with it in Jesus Christ, and if Gods continuing to be a God to them for ever,
will enforce this blessing, (being but the same thing in another expression) it
is here likewise asserted.

Amesius Amesius.
de Praedest. Chap, 8. Ser. 6. says, There are many of the Seed of Abraham, to
whom the word of Promise does not belong, as Ishmael and Ishmaelites. But if
so, there be many of the Seed of Abraham; to whom the word of Promise does not
belong: Then the rejection of many Jews who are of the Seed of Abraham does not
make void the word of Promise. From whence may we not safely conclude, that if
the natural Posterity of Abraham, were not within the Covenant of Grace by
virtue of the Promise, Genesis 17.7, Then much less are our natural Posterity; but
the former is true, Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. so is the latter.

To which we might add diverse others, but let these suffice.

And from the contrary persuasion what dismal Consequences would arise. The
evil Consequences of the contrary:
For if God made his Covenant of Grace with the Posterity of Believers, as this
Doctrine asserts. Then all the Posterity of Believers should certainly have
Crace bestowed upon them; for it is the Covenant of God which does convey
Grace, Romans 4.16. 2 Cor, ^ 30. None missing of Grace from Go^ faithfulness,
which Mr. Blake does (...) confidently affirm, Mr. Bla.
P. 6. saying, The Christianity is hereditary, that as t^ Children of a Noble
man is Noble, t^ Child of a Free man Free, of a Turk Turk, and of a Jew a Jew;
so the Chi^ of a Christian is a Christian, in contr^diction not only of
Scripture, which says, we are Children of wrath b^ Nature, but of all former
and latter experience.

Then would Grace be a Birth, Pr^viledge, and Regeneration (as before tied to
Generation, contrary to J^ 3.3. and Jo. 1.12, 13.

Then must all the Posterity of Believers be saved, without you will
necessitate the Doctrine to be true, the men may fall from Grace.

Then must we tie up and confine the Grace of Gods Covenant to the Children of
Believers only, and then wha^ hope for the Children of unbeliever^ contrary to
the Experience of all Age^ For was not Grace extended to the Gentiles, who were
not the Children o^ Believers when the natural Branche^ the Children of
believing Abraham were ^ut off.

Then is the Covenant of Grace it self overthrown, concluding an Interest
without faith, Romans 4.14. deriving a Ti^le by natural Generation.

And as to the other Scripture of the 2. Acts 38, 39. Act. 2.38. answ.
urged as a Parallel to the other. It is so indeed, rightly understood, but not
at all in the sense supposed.

For first it is to be observed, that the promise there made, is the giving the
Sperit, called the promise of the Father, prophesied of by Joel 2.28. and does
follow the receiving of Christ in the Gospel, Ephesians. 1.13. Gal. 3.14. and the
obeying his commands, Acts 5.32. Therefore in the 38. Ver. Peter exhorts them
to Repentance, and faith in order to the receiving of it; because the Promise
is to them and their Children, viz. to the Jews, and to them that are afar off
to the Gentiles also, e^even as many of both as the Lord should call, therefore
the Promise is not made but upon condition of Calling, and Faith, and Baptism.

Secondly, It is remarkable that the Apostle does first exhort to Repentance,
then to Baptism, showing the order that Christ had directed to in the
Commission; neither is the Promis^ mentioned, as though of it self it gave
right to Baptism without Repentance but as a Motive why they should repent and
be baptized, that they might also as others had done, before the^ Eyes be made
partakers of the Hol^ Spirit, which the Prophets had foretold, and Christ had
promised, where in Infants [neither capable of Faith* Repentance and Calling]
are not concerned in the Text, and by Childr^^ spoken of are no other meant,
then the posterily of, the Jews, for who know not that they are so called, and
that m^ Child is my Child, though 40. or 50 years old; upon which Text Dr.
Hamond in his Resolution concerning Infa^^ Baptism, Dr. Ham
Sect. 81. has to this purpose. In the next place, says he, (...) attempted
the disproving of all Arguments brought in defense of Pedobaptis^ from Peter's
words, Acts 2.39. T^ which says the Dr. I answer, That (...) any have made use
of that unconclude^^ Argument, I have nothing to say in defense of them; I
think the practice is founded upon better Basis then so, and the word Children
there is really the posterity of the Jews, and not particularly their Infant
Children.

And Dr. Talor upon this Scripture, Dr. Tal.
Page 233. says, That the words mentioned in St. Peter's Sermon, (which are the
only Records of the Promise) are interpreted upon a weak mistake. The Promise
belongs to you and your Children, therefore Infants are actually receptive of
it in that capacity; that is, the Argument, but the Reason of it is not yet
discovered, nor ever will; for [to you and your Children] is to you and your
Posterity, to you and your Children, when they are of the same capacity, in
which you are receptive of the Promise. But he that whenever the word
[Children] is used in Scripture, shall by [Children] understand Infants, must
needs believe, that in all Israel there were no men but all were Infants, and
if that had been true, it had been the greater wonder they should overcome the
Anakims, and beat the King of Moab, and march so far, and discourse so well;
for they were all called the Children of Israel.

The fourth thing to be inquired into, is, Whether Circumcision was a Seal of
the new Covenant to the Believers, and their Seed?

To which I answer in the Negative, that it was neither a Seal to them,
Circumcision only a Seal to Abraham not to Believers, nor their Seed.
not much less a Seal to them of the new Covenant. It is true, it was a Seal,
Confirmation, or Ratification of the faith that Abraham had long before he was
Circumcised; but so could it, not be said of any Infant that had no faith. It
was a Sign put into the Flesh of the Infant; but a Sign and Seal only to
Abraham witnessing to him that he not only had a justifying faith, but to the
truth of the Promises, viz. That he should be the father of many Nations, Genesis
12.23. 2dly. The father of the faithful, Rom 4.11. Heir of the World, Romans
4.13. That in hi^ all the Families of the Earth should (...) blessed, viz. in
Christ proceeding from him which was no ways true of any Infant that ever was
Circumcised; for none had before their Circumcision such a faith, that entitled
them to such singular Promises; the scope in that place in the 4. Romans being to
show, That Abraham himself was not justified by Works, no not by Circumcision,
but by faith which he had, long before he was Circumcised, and so but a Seal or
Confirmation of that faith which he had before, and to assure him of the truth
of those special Promises, made to him and his Seed both Carnal and Spiritual.

And to which purpose you have both Chrysostom and Theophylact, Chrysostom. and
The.
as Mr. Lawr. P. 168. viz. It was called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith;
because it was given to Abraham as a Seal and Testimony of that Righteousness,
which he had acquired by faith: Now this seems to be the privilege of Abraham
alone, and not to be transferred to others, as if Circumcision in whom ever it
was, were a Testimony of Divine Righteousness; for as it was the privilege of
Abraham, that he should be the Father of all the faithful, as well Circumcised
as uncircumcised, being already the father of all uncircumcised, having faith
in Uncircumcision, he received first the sign of Circumcision, that he might be
the father of the Circumcised. Now because he had this privilege, in respect
of the Righteousness which he had acquired by faith, therefore the sign of
Circumcision was to him a Seal of the Righteousness of faith: But to the rest
of the Jews it was a sign that they were Abraham 's Seed; but not a Seal of the
Righteousness of faith, as all the Jews also were not the fathers of many
Nations.

Secondly, Much less was Circumcision a Seal of the new Testament, as before;
for nothing is a Seal thereof, but the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13.4.30.

Thirdly, Neither is Baptism more then Circumcision called a Seal; It i^
called a Figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. And (...) is a sign as before: But a sign and
figure proper only to men of understanding, representing Spiritual things and
Mysteries: And not as Circumcision, which was a sign not improper for Infants;
because it left a signal impression in their flesh to be remembered all their
days, but so cannot Baptism be to any Infants.

5. Circumcision not administered only to believers and their seed
The fifth thing to be examined it, Whether Circumcision was administered to
Believers as Believers, and to their See^ after them; as such, to which
Baptism was to Correspond.

It is answered by no means; for it was an Ordinance, which by the institution
belonged to all the natural Lineage, and posterity of Abraham good or bad,
without any such limitation, as was put upon Baptism, If thou believe with
all thy Heart thou may, Acts 8. or any such qualification to an Infant
capable to receive it, that he should have a believing Parent; but will you
deny Abraham to be a believing Parent? and was not he a Father to them all?
What then! he was a public common Father, which reaches not the case in hand;
for he was no such father to them; neither have they any other in his stead,
therefore the Analogy holds not; yet if they had would it avail? for that
Privilege would not stand the natural Children of Abraham in any stead to
admit them to Baptism; which though they claimed upon that account, Mat. 3.
John rejects them upon it calling them a Generation of Vipers, bidding them
bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and which only would give them
admittance to the Baptism of Repentance, and that it was not enough to say
they had Abraham for their father. And to the same purpose does our Savior
tell Nicodemus a Mr. in Israel, that without the new Birth his Birth-priviledge
would not avail him in the Gospel-priviledges, Joh. 3. and with more severity
does he tell the Jews, that however they bore up themselves, as the Sons of
Abraham, yet without believing in Christ, who could only make them free, 6.
Baptism came not in the room, place, and use of Circumcision. 1. Not in the
room and stead
they were Bondslaves to sin, and the Children of the Devil.

The sixth thing to be searched after is, Whether Baptism did succeed in the
Room, Place and use of Circumcision. To which I answer by no means, for the
following Reasons.

1. Not in the room and stead.

1. Because then only Males, not Females, would be baptized; because no other
Circumcised, but all believing women, as well as men, were to be baptized, Acts
8.12, 16.14.15.

2. Because then some, not all Believers, should be baptized; because not only
women, as before, were not admitted; but all Believers out of Abraham's Family,
to whom he was a Spiritual father; because he was a Believer before he was
Circumcised, Romans 4.11, 12. Whereas all Believers according to the Commission
were to be baptized.

3. Because then the Circumcised needed not to have been baptized, if they had
been already sealed with the new Covenant-seal: But Christ himself, and all his
Apostles, and so many of the Churches were Circumcised, yet nevertheless were
baptized.

2. Not to the ends and uses 2. Not to the ends and uses.
neither as suggested upon the following grounds.

1. Because Circumcision was a sign of Christ to come in the flesh; and
Baptism, that he was already come in the flesh, witnessing to his Incarnation,
Death, Burial, and Resurrection.

2. Circumcision was to be a partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile; but
Baptism testified the contrary, viz. That Barbarian, Scythian, Bond and Free,
Jew and Gentile, Male or Female, were all one in Christ. Cornelius the Gentile
must be baptized, and have the Spirit given to witness, that nothing must be
called common or unclean, where God had purified the Heart by believing.

3. Circumcision initiated the Carnal Seed into the Carnal Church, and gave
them right to the Carnal Ordinances; but Baptism was to give the Spiritual
Seed an orderly entrance into the Spiritual Church, and a right to partake of
the Spiritual Ordinances.

4. Circumcision was to be a Bond and Obligation to keep the whole Law of
Moses's; but Baptism witnessed that Moses Law was made void, and that only
Christ's ^aw was to be kept.

5. Circumcision was administered to all Abraham's natural Seed, without any
profession of Faith; Repentance or Regeneration; whereas Baptism to be
administered to the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, was only upon profession of
Faith, Repentance and Regeneration, and which appears more fully by the
following Instances compared.

1. Because a Carnal Parent, and a fleshly begetting by the the Legal
Birth-priviledge, gave right to Circumcision; whereas a Spiritual begetting by
a Spiritual Parent, gave only a true right to Baptism.

2. Because a Legal, Ecclesiastical, Typical Holiness (when Land, Mountains,
Houses, Birds, Beasts, and Trees were holy) qualified for Circumcision; whereas
only Evangelical and Personal Holiness was a meet qualification for Baptism.

3. Because Strangers and Servants bought with Money, and all ignorant Children
of Eight days old, yea Trees were capable of Circumcision; whereas only men of
understanding that were capable to believe with all their Heart, and to give an
account thereof with their mouths, were to be esteemed capable Subjects of
Baptism.

6. Circumcision was to be a sign of Temporal Blessings and Benefits to be
enjoyed in the Land of Canaan; whereas Baptism was to be a sign (as before) of
many Spiritual benefits, viz. Remission of sins, Justification, Sanctification
here, and Eternal Salvation hereafter.

It is granted there are in some things an Analogy betwixt the one and the
other, both signifying Heart-Circumcision, and an initiating into the Church,
though as a different Church; so different Subjects, and Church Members, upon
different grounds, and to different ends, as before, and in a far different
manner; one to be done in a private House, and by a private Hand, and the other
in some public place, and by the hand of some public Minister appointed by
the Church to administer the same.

But now because there is some Analogy in some things, is there therefore
ground to conclude, it comes into the room, stead, and use thereof? by no
means; for by the same Argument we may as well conclude, that it comes in the
room and stead of the Ark, Manna, Rock, etc. And from such like Arguments drawn
from Analogies what Jewish Rites may not by our wits be introduced, to the
countenancing the Papists in their High Priesthood, National Churches, Orders
of Priesthood, Tithes, and all other their innumerable Rites and Ceremonies,
that without any Institution of Christ, or pretense of new Testament-authority,
they have intr^duced or imposed upon the account of Analogy with old Testament-
Rites and Services. Concerning which you have the Lord Brooks in his Treatise
of Episcopacy, L Brooks
P. 100 saying very well, viz. That the Analogy which Baptism now has with
Circumcision in the old Law, is a fine rati^nal Argument to illustrate a Point
well proved before; but I somewhat doubt (says he) whether it be proof enough
for that which some would prove by it, since (besides the vast difference in
the Ordinance) the persons to be Circumcised are stated by a positive Law, so
express that it leaves no place for Scruple; but it is far otherwise in
Baptism, where all the designation of Persons fit to be partakers, for ought I
know, is only such as believe; for this is the qualification which with
exactest search I find the Scripture requires in Persons to be baptized, and
this it seems to require in all such Persons; now how Infants can be properly
said to believe, I am not yet fully resolved.

And very full and most excellently you have to this point Dr. Tailor, Dr. Tail
p. 228. Who says, That the Argument from Circumcision is invalid upon
infinite considerations: Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Commandment
go along with them, or some express to signify such to be their purpose: For
the Deluge of Waters, and the Ark of Noah, were a Figure of Baptism said
Peter; and if therefore the Circumstances of one should be drawn to the other,
we should make Baptism a Prodigy, rather than a Rite; the Paschal Lamb was a
Type of the Eucharist, which succeeds the other, as Baptism does to
Circumcision; but because there was in the manducation of the Paschal Lamb no
prescription of Sacramental drink, shall we thence conclude that the Eucharist
is to be administered but in one kind? And even in the very Instance of this
Argument, supposing a Correspondency of Analogy between Circumcision and
Baptism, yet there is no Correspondence of Identity; for although it were
granted, that both of them did consign the Covenant of faith, yet there is
nothing in the Circumstance of Childrens being Circumcised that so concerns
that Mystery, but that it might very well be given to Children, and yet
Baptism only to men of Reason; because Circumcision left a Character in the
flesh, which being imprinted upon Infants, did its work to them when they came
to age, and such a Character was necessary, because there was no word added to
the Sign; but Baptism imprints nothing that remains on the Body, and if it
leaves a Character at all, it is upon the Soul, to which also the word is
added, which is as much a part of the Sacrament, as the Sign it self: for both
which Reasons it is requisite, that the Parties Baptized should be capable of
Reason, that they may be capable both of the word of the Sacrament, and the
impress made upon the Spirit; since therefore the Reason of this Parity does
wholly fail, there is nothing left to infer a necessity of complying in this
Circumstance of a^e, any more then in the other Annexes of the Type; then the
Infants must also precisely be Baptized upon the Eighth day, and Females must
not be baptized, because not Circumcised; but it were more proper, if we would
understand it right, to prosecute the Analogy from the Type to the Antitype by
way of Letter and Spirit and signification: and as Circumcision figures
Baptism, so also the adjuncts of the Circumcision, shall signify something
Spiritual in the adherences of Baptism; and therefore as Infants were
Circumcised, so spirial Infants shall be Baptized, which is Spiritual
Circumcision; for therefore Babes had the Ministry of the Type, to signify
that we must, when we give our names to Christ become Children in malice, and
then the Type is made complete, etc. Thus far the Dr.

7. Whether the not Baptizing Infants makes the privilege under the Gospel
less then under the Law, who had then Circumcision.

7 Not baptizing of Infants, makes not Gospel-Priviledges less then Legal.
To which I answer, not at all, for the Reasons following.

1. Because they were not Circumcised, because they were Children of Believers,
or Sealed with a new Covenant Seal, as being in the new Covenant thereby, as
before proved; but upon the account of a Birth-priviledge as being of the
natural Lineage and Seed of Abraham, as a Typical shadowy thing; all whose
posterity were to he marked therewith, to distinguish them from the Nations,
and to keep that Line clear, from whence Christ according to the Flesh should
come, and to oblige them to keep the Law, etc. But no such thing in the Gospel;
the Body and Substance being come, the Shadow was to vanish and pass away, no
common Father then but Christ, and if Christ's, then Abraham's Seed, and Heirs of
Promise, no Birth privilege, but the new Birth; therefore to go back to the
national Birth privilege, is so far from being a Privilege, that it i^ a
Bondage rather, to return to the Type and Shadow, the Antitype and Substance
being come.

2. Neither ought such a thing to be any more esteemed the loss of a
Privilege, then our not enjoying literally a Holy Land, City, Temple, a
succession of a High Priest, and a Priesthood by Generation or Lineal descent,
(for y^u know their Children were Priests successively in their Generation, a
^evite begat a Priest or Minister, as well as the other Tribes begat
Church Members) since all those Types are Spiritualised to us the Believers
under the Gospel, who are now the Holy Nation, the Holy City and Temple, the
Royal Priesthood, and all Church Members by Regeneration, not Generation.
Therefore we are so far from being loosers by the Bargain, that as far as
Christ exceeds Moses and Aaron, the Gospel, the Law, the Antitype, the Type,
the Spiritual Birth, the Carnal, the Extent of all Nations, the Confines of
Judea; so far are we better, and not worse.

Nor thirdly, if it should be taken for granted, that Circumcision was a Seal
of the new Covenant belonging to all the Children of Israel, then would not the
Baptizing of the Children of Believers answer it; Neither amount to so great a
Privilege, no^ be equivalent to it, for these Reasons.

First, there were all the Families and Tribes of Israel (and all Pros^lyted
strangers) with their Children without distinction of good or bad, to be
Circumcised: But here only one of a City, or two of a Tribe; for Believers are
but thin sown, and the Children of unbelievers, and wicked men are to receive
no such benefit in the judgment of so many.

And Secondly, you ^ould be very short in another respect, as being at an utter
uncertainty when you had a right Subject; for if the Parent was a Hypocrite, or
no Elect Person, which is out of your reach to understand. you cannot know
whether the Child be fit for Baptism; for the Seed of a wicked man you must
not meddle with by any means, whereas there was not the least doubt or scruple
in Israel as to the Subject; for the Father being Circumcised, it was an
infallible mark they were right.

And Thirdly, neither can the Child (when he is grown up) have any certain
knowledge, that such a Ceremony has past upon him in Infancy, he having no
Infallible mark thereof; whereas the Circumcised Infant had an indelible
Character and mark in his flesh, to assure him that he had received that Rite.

By all which demonstrations you may understand; that we loose no Privilege
under the Gospel for not Baptizing our Infants, though they were Circumcised
under the ^aw.

CHAP. IV. Wherein is made manifest, that the Ordained Ceremony of Baptism is
in this of Infants altered and changed, and another Rite introduced, quite
contrary both to the signification of the Word, nature of the Ordinance, and
manifest practice thereof; not only in the Apostles time, but many Ages after,
as confessed by Parties themselves.
The Ceremony of Baptism is by dipping.
THat the manner and Ceremony of Baptism ought to be by dipping or plunging the
whole Body under Water, and not by sprinkling or pouring a little Water on the
Face or Head, as has commonly been used, especially since the Subjects have
been changed from Men to Babes, is thus made good, viz.

First, First, from the signification of the word,
from the proper and genuine signification of the word so well agreeing with
the ends and use of Baptism, the Ceremony to the Substance, Sign to the thing
signified.

The word we call Baptism, and the Latins Baptismus, is no other then the
Greek word it self (...) [being so retained all along, as Gomarus observes in
the Latin Church] and in plain English is nothing else but to dip, plunge, or
cover all over.

The Truth whereof will more fully appear from our best Greek Lexicons, and by
the observation of our most eminent Critics.

Scapula and Stephens, Scapula and Steph.
two as great Masters of the Greek Tongue as we have any, (and also great
defenders of Infants Baptism) do tell us in their Lexicons, that (...), from
(...) signifies m^rgo, imergo, submergo, obrue, item tingo, quod fit
immergendo, inficere, imbuere, viz. To dip, plunge, overwhelme, put under,
cover over, to die in Color, which is done by plunging.

Grotius Grotius.
tells us, it signifies to dip over Head and Ears.

Pasor, Pasor
an Immersion, Dipping, or Submersion.

Vossius, Vossius.
that it implies a washing the whole body.

Mincaus Mincaeus
in his Dictionary, That (...) is in the Latin Baptismus, in the Dutch Doopsel
or Doopen, ^nglish Baptism or Baptime, viz. to Dive or Duc^ in Water, and the
same with the Hebrew (...) to dip.

Leigh, Leigh.
in his Critica Sacra, says, its native and proper signification is to dip
into Water, or to plunge under Water, for which he Cites these Scriptures,
where so used, viz. Mat. 3.6. Acts 8.38. And that it is taken from a Dyers Fat,
and imports a Dying, or giving a fresh Color, and not a bare washing only,
Rev. 19.13. And for which he quotes Casaubon, Bucan, Bullinger, Zanchy,
Spanhemius. He says withal, That Beza and some others will have it signify
washing, and which sense Erasmus opposed, affirming, that it was my otherwise
so, then by Consequence; for the proper signification was such a dipping or
plunging, as Dyers use for Dying of Clothes.

Mr. Daniel Rogers in his Treatise of Sacraments, 1. P. C. 8. P. 177. says,
Mr. Dan. Rogers.
That the Minister is to dip in Water, as the meetest Act, the word (...) notes
it; for the Greeks wanted not other words to express any other Act besides
dipping if the Institution could bear it. What resemblance of the Burial or
Resurrection of Christ is in sprinkling? All Antiquity and Scripture, says he,
confirm that way.

Dr. Tailor in his Rule of Consc. Lib. 3. Chapter 4. Dr. Tail
If you would attend to the proper signification of the word, Baptism
signifies plunging in Water, or dipping with washing.

Mr. Joseph Mede in his Diatribe on Titus 3.2. says, M. Mede
That there was no such thing as Sprinkling or Rantisme used in Baptism in the
Apostles days; nor many ages after them.

I might add many more, Dr. Ham
but shall conclude with that observable Remark that Dr. Hammond gives us
hereon in his Annotations, viz. upon Jo. 13.10. Telling us, That (...)
signifies an Immersion, or was^ing the whole Body, and which answers to the
Hebrew word (...) used for dipping in the Old Testament: And therefore upon
Mat. 3.1. tells us, That John Baptized in a River, viz. Jordan, Mark. 1.5. in a
confluen^^ of much Wuter, as Aenon, Joh. 3.23. Because it is added, there was
much Water, upon which account he says That as the Greeks called the Lakes
where they used to wash (...) so the Ancients called their Baptisterio^s or the
Vessels containing their Baptism^ Water, Columbethras, viz. swmiming (...)
diving places, being made very large wit^ partitions for Men and Women. And
upon Mark 7.4. tells us, That the Washing or Baptizing of Cups, Vessels, Bed^,
etc. was no other then a putting them i^ to the Water all over, rinsing them.

I have carefully examined all the places in the Old Testament, where the word
Dipping or Baptizing is mentioned, and do find it is expressed by the Hebrew
word (...) as Mincaeus and Dr. Hamond observes, and which always signifies to
dip, (the word rendered washing being by another word) as the following
Scriptures will inform you, Genesis 37.31. Exodus 12.22. Lev. 4.6, 17.14.6.16.51.
Lev. 9 9. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Joh. 3.5. Number. 16.18. 2 King. 5.14. which are all the
places I can find the word used in, in the Old Testament.

The word generally used for washing in the Hebrew is (...) which signifies
such a washing as takes away filth from persons or things, by swilling,
rinsing or rubbing, as Buxtorfius and Leigh, and which answers to all the
three words for washing that we meet with in the Greek, viz. (...) a washing of
the Body, (...) the Hands, and (...) Clothes, as Stephens says in his
Thesaurus, which word you find in very many places in the Old Testament, as
Exodus 30.19, 20. Exodus 25. Lev. 14.8, 9.16.24. etc. which signification and
sense of the word is emphatically confirmed to us by the several Metaphors used
by the Holy Spirit in Scripture in allusion hereto, viz. for Persons to be
plunged into great sufferings, they are said to be Baptized therein, Mark
10.38. And so for persons that were endued with great measures of the Spirit,
they are said to be Baptized therewith, Acts. 1.5. The Children of Israel being
encompassed with the Cloud over their Head, and the divided Sea on both sides
were said to be Baptized in the Cloud and Sea, 1 Cor 10. And Baptized persons
are said to be de^d and buried, in allusion to putting men into the Earth, and
covering them therewith, none of which can hold good by sprinkling.

2. From the Scripture practice.
Secondly, It appears to be so from the practice and usage we find hereof in
Scripture, and the opinion of the learned upon it.

First, in the Story of Christ's Baptism we read, Mat. 3.5. Mat. 3.5
That Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be Baptized of him, and
Ver. 16. And when he was Baptized he went up straight way out of the Water.

C jetan.
The learned Cajetan upon the place, says Christ ascended out of the Water;
therefore Christ was Baptized by John, not by sprinkling, or by pouring Water
upon him, but by Immersion, that is, by dipping or plunging in the Water,

A second Scripture considerable is that of Joh, 3.23. John 3.23.
And John was Baptizing in Aenon near Salim. (and the Reason why he pitched upon
this place, is given) because there was much Water there.

Piscator Piscator.
upon the place says (...) signifies many Rivers, as (...) in the Singular
number signifies the River of Jordan; this, says he, is mentioned to signify
the Ceremony of Baptism which John used in dipping or plunging the whole Body
of Man standing in the River, whence says, Christ being Baptized by John in
Jordan, is said to ascend out of the Water.

Calvin Calvin.
upon these words, says, That from this place you may gather, that John and
Christ administered Baptism by plunging the whole body into the Water.

A Third Scripture worthy our notice, Acts 2.36.
is Acts 8.36, 38. As they went on their way, they came unto a certain Water,
and the Eunuch said, see here is Water, and they went both down into the Water,
both Philip and the Eunuch, and he Baptized him, and when they were come up out
of the Water: upon which place.

Calvin Calvin.
says, We see what fashion the Ancients had to administer Baptism; for they
plunged the whole Body into the Water: The use is now says he, that the
Minister casts a few drops of Water only upon the Body, or upon the Head.

A Fourth Scripture we shall mention, is Rom, 6.4. Romans 6.4
Buried with him in Baptism, where the Apostle elegantly alludes to the
Ceremony of Baptizing in our death, and Resurrection with Christ.

Cajetan Cajetan.
upon the place. says, Thus we are Buried with him by Baptism into death: By
our Burying he declares our Death from the Ceremony of Baptism; because he who
is Baptized is put under the Water, and by this carries a similitude of him
that is Buried, who is put under the Earth Now because none are Buried but dead
men, from this very thing that we are Buried in Baptism, we are assimulated to
Christ buried, or when he was Buried.

Tilenus Tilenus.
in his disputation, P. 886, 889, 890. A learned Protestant Writer gives a most
remarkable Testimony in the Case: Baptism, says he, i^ the first Sacrament of
the New Testament instituted by Christ in which with a most Pat and Exact
Analogy between the Sign and the thing signified, those that are in Covenant
are by the Minister washed in Water. The outward Rite in Baptism is Three old,
1. Immersion into the Water; 2. Abiding under the Water; 3. Resurrection out of
the Water: The form of Baptism, viz. Internal and Essential, is no other then
the Analogical proportion which the signs keep with the things signified
thereby: For the properties of the Water in washing away the defilements of the
Body, do in a most suitable similitude set forth the efficacy of Christ's Blood
in blotting out of sins; so dipping into the Water does in a most lively
similitude set forth the mortification of the old man; and rising out of the
Water, the Vivication of the new, The same plunging into the Water holds forth
to us that horrible Gulf of Divine Justice, in which Christ for our sins sake
(which he took upon him) was for a while in a manner swallowed up. Abiding
under the Water, how little a while soever, denotes his descent into Hell, even
the very deepest of lifelesness, while lying in the sealed and guarded
Sepulcher, he was accounted as one dead: Rising out of the Water, holds out to
us a lively similitude of that Conquest which this dead man g^t ever Death,
which he vanquished in his own Den, (as it were) that is, the Grave. In like
manner therefore (says he) it is meet, that we being Baptized into his Death,
and buried with him, should rise also with him, and so go on in a new Life,
Romans 6.3, 4. Col. 2.12.

Bish. Jew
Bishop Jewel in his Apology, P. 308. Brings the Council of Worms, determining
the manner of Baptism, viz. That the dipping into the Water is the going down
into Hell, (or the Grave) and that the coming out of the Water, is the
Resurrection.

And most remarkable is the Testimony that Mr. Baxter himself gives to this
Truth, Mr. Bax.
wherein he also owns the changing of the Ceremony in his third Argument
against Mr. Blake, in these words, viz.

Quoadmodum, To the manner says he, it is commonly confessed by us to the
Anabaptists, (as our Commentators declare) that in the Apostles time the
Baptized were dipped over head in Water; and that this signifies their
profession both of believing the Burial and Resurrection of Christ, and of
their own present renouncing the World and Flesh, or dying to sin, and living
to Christ, or rising again to newness of Life. or being buried and risen again
with Christ, as the Apostle expounds in the forecited Texts of Col. 2. and
Romans 6. And though, says he, we have thought it lawful to disuse the manner
of dipping, and to use less Water; yet we presume not to change the use and
signification of it: So then he that signally professes to die, and rise again
in Baptism with Christ, does signally profess saving Faith and Repentance; but
this do all they that are baptized according to the Apostles practice. Thirdly,
from the use of the Ancients, and the confessed Change thereof, since this Rite
of dipping in Baptism is confirmed.

Daille Daille.
on the Fathers 2d. Book, P. 148. says, That it was a Custom heretofore in the
Ancient Church, to plunge those they baptized over Head and Ears in the Water,
as says he, Tertullian in his Third Book de Cor. Mil. Cyprian in his 7. Ep. P.
211. Epiphanius Pan. 30. P. 128. and others testify. And this, says he, is
still the practice both of the Greek and the Russian Church at this day, as
Cassander de Bapt. P. 193. And yet, says he, notwithstanding this Custom,
which is both so Ancient and so universal, is now abolished by the Church of
Rome; and this is the reason (says he) That the Muscovites say, that the
Latins are not rightly and duly Baptized; because they are wont not to use
this Ancient Ceremony in their Baptism.

Walfrid Strabo.
Walfridus Strabo de Reb. Eccles. Tells us, that we must know, at the first
Believers were Baptized simply in Floods and Fountains.

Mr. Fox Mr. Fox.
tells us in his Acts and Monuments, Part. 1. P. 138. out of Fabian Cap. 119,
120. That Austin and Paulinus did in the 7th. Century Baptize here in England
great multitudes in the River Trent, and the River Swol; where note by the way,
says Mr. Fox, it followed there was no use of Fonts. The like also as you will
here after find, Germainus and Lupus the two French Evangelists, did in the
fifth Century Baptize multitudes in the River Allin near Chester.

Hierem. Pa. Con.
Hieremias Patr. of Constantinople ad Thelo. Wit^bergenses Resp. 11. C. 4.
says, The Ancients Baptized not by sprinkling the Baptized with Water with
their hands, but by Immersion, following the Evangelist, who came up out of the
Water; therefore did he descend, which must needs be Immersion, and not
Aspersion.

Zepperus Zepperus
de Sacramentis, from the Annotation and Etymology of the word it does appear
what was of old the Custom of administering Baptism, which though we have
changed into rantising or sprinkling.

Dr. Tailor in his Rule of Conscience, Dr. Tail.
B. 3. C. 4. P. 644, 645. The Ancient Church did not in their Baptism sprinkle
Water with their Hand, but did Immerge; and therefore we find in the Records
of the Church, That the Persons to be Baptized were quite naked, as it is to be
seen in many places, particularly in the Mystagogy Chat. of St. Cyril, and many
others, (as you have before in the second Chapter of this Part from Vossius P.
133.)

And this of Immersion was of so sacred an account in their esteem, that they
did not esteem it lawful to receive him into the Clergy, who had been only
sprinkled in Baptism as the Epistle of Cornelius to Fabianus of Antioch,
Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 43. It is not lawful that he who is sprinkled in his Bed by
reason of sickness, should be admitted to Holy Orders, doubting whether such a
sprinkling should be called Baptism.

And therefore Magnus in his Epistle questions, whether they are to be esteemed
right Christians, who are only sprinkled, and not dipped in Water.

And that Chrysostom says, That the old man is buried and drowned in the
Immersion under Water; and when the Baptized Person is afterward raised up
from the Water, it represents the Resurrection of the new man to newness of
life.

And therefore concludes, that the contrary Custom being not only against
Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy and Mystical signification of the
Sacrament, is not to be complied with.

Marq. of VVorcest
The Church of Rome confesses by a Learned Pen, the Marquis of Worcester in his
Certam Relig. That she changed dipping the Party Baptized over Head and Ears
into sprinkling upon the Face.

Until the Th^rd Century we find not any that upon any consideration did admit
of sprinkling. The first we meet with is Cyprian, in his Epistle to Magnus,
What Clinical Baptism.
Lib. 4. Ep. 7. where he pleads for the Baptizing of the sick by sprinkling,
and not by dipping or pouring, called the Clinical Baptism, Magdib. Cen. 3.
Chapter 6. P. 126. As also for the sprinkling of new Converted Prisoners in the
Prison House: And which by degrees afterward they brought in use for sick
Children also, and then afterward all Children.

Aquinas, Scotus, and others of the Schoolmen conclude, that dipping is most
agreeable to the Institution; but admit that in case of necessity, viz. when
either many are to be baptized, scarcity of Water, or sickness, and weakness,
they may sprinkle. Vossius, P. 38.

All which Arguments from the Genuine Sense of the Word, Nature of the
Ordinance, Usuage of the Ancients, were excellently inculcated by the learned
Dr. Tillotson, in a Sermon Preached at his Lecture in Michaels Cornhill London,
April 15. 1673. from Romans 6 4. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism
into Death, proving from thence, That Dipping or plunging was the proper
Ceremony and Rite in the Ordinance; and how naturally Arguments did arise from
that Sign in Baptism, to enforce Holiness and Mortification the thing
signified thereby.

Object. But the word (...), which you so much stand upon, signifies if not to
sprinkle, yet not only to dip and overwhelme, but also to wash, as Mark 7.4.
The washing of Hands, Cups, Pots, Vessels, Beds, and Tables, which we hope you
will grant may be done without dipping or plunging in Water.

Answ. That Baptism in a sense is washing I no ways doubt; for you cannot dip
a thing, but you may be said to wash it; therefore in allusion hereto, it is
said, Acts 22. Arise and be bapzed, and wash away thy sins, and Tit. 3. The
washing of Regeneration, and Heb. 10. Bodies washed with pure Water. And so in
dipping of Clothes they wash them. And so here by dipping of unclean Hands,
Pots, Cups, Vessels and Beds; for Tables are not there, the word being (...),
which as in your Margent signifies a Bed, but never a Table, [as a Learned
Critic observes] they are also washed.

Object. But Hands, Cups Vessels and Beds may be washed, though not dipped.

Answ. It is true they may (though not from this Scripture, the word being
(...)) for though all dipping is washing, yet all washing is not dipping in a
proper sense, (for Water sprinkled or poured upon a thing, may be so called in
an improper sense) though it is a very unusual thing so to deal with unclean
Hands, Beds or Vessels: And I presume you will account her but a Slut, and give
her no thanks for her pains, that having unclean Hands, Vessels, Beds, or
Clothes to wash, does only sprinkle or pour a little water upon them, as though
that would serve the turn; and does not our familiar experience tell us, that
to dip our dirty hands in Water, rinsing them, is the most effectual way to
wash them, and that sprinkling or pouring a little water will not do the
business. Therefore are we to take washing here in this 7. Mark 4. to be
dipping in a proper sense as the word imports, and as most agreeable to known
Custom and Use, for neither the word (...) to wash, nor (...) to pour, (...) to
sprinkle, are ever taken to dip or baptize; nor is the word (...) simply taken
for washing, by pouring or sprinkling that I can find.

The diverse washings mentioned Heb. 9.10. may well be explained from Lev. 1.9,
13. and 6.27, 28. and 15.6. Exodus 30.19. to be such as was done by baptizing in
water, not sprinkling with, or pouring water upon.

And in the 2 Kings 5.10. the Prophet bids Naaman go and wash in Jordain seven
times, and accordingly Ver. 14. it is said in obedience hereto, and in
explanation of that kind of washing the Prophet intended, he went and Baptized
himself seven times in Jordain.

Therefore for any to shun the proper true Genuine sense, and build a practice
upon an uncouth, indirect, unusual, and at best an Allegorical sense, is no
other then as the Proverb is, To leave the Kings High way, and to take Hedge
and Ditch

And besides, if you will follow the Allusion, do you not wash all that is
unclean, whether of Hands, Cup, Vessel, or Bed; but the whole man is all
unclean, every Member, and every Part; therefore all and every Part ought to be
washed, and not the Head and Face only, as you expect to have all your sins
washed away, and every Member cleansed by Faith in Christ's Blood; As well as in
this Figure, to represent that as every Member has lived to sin, should here
also die, be buried, raised and quickened spiritually with Christ, in firm
assurance of Christ's Resurrection, and confident expectation of the whole man's
being to be raised and glorified in the Resurrection of the Just. And to which
purpose we have Dr. Goodwin, M. Good.
in his support of faith, P. 54. very excellently, viz. That the eminent thing
signified and represented in Baptism, is not simply the blood of Christ, as it
washes us from our sins; but there is a farther representation therein of
Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection in the Baptized, being first buried
under water, and then rising out of it, and this is not in a bare conformity to
Christ, but in a representation of a Communion with Christ in that his Death
and Resurrection* Therefore it is said, (We are buried with him in Baptism)
and whrein we are risen with him, etc. And moreover, here it is that the answer
of a good Conscience, which is made the inward effect of this Ordinance of
Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. Is there also attributed to Christ's Resurrection, as the
thing signified and represented in Baptism, and as the cause of that answer of
a good Conscience, even Baptism does now also save us, etc.

As for the Cavils of unseemliness and hazarding of health to the weak,; they
are as the fruits of Carnal wisdom, unbelief, and shunning the Cross, so no
other then to reproach the wisdom of Christ, that so ordained, and himself so
practiced, telling us that (however the world may call it undecent) that it is
a comely thing therein to follow him in the fulfilling of Righteous^ess. And as
for that of unseemliness they that have or shall see the decency of the
Practice, will sufficiently vindicate it from such a Calumney, and be able to
convince Mr. Baxter, or any other Cavilers of their unchristian slanders of
that kind (already touched.) And for hazard of Health to the Weak, the
Constant, Known Experience does amply refute that vain Imagination and
Suggestion.

CHAP. V. Wherein you have an account of several Mischiefs, Absurdities, and
Contradictions that are justly to be charged upon the Practice.
I. BY its altering Christ's Order in the Commission, Mat. 28.19. where in
teaching Repentance and Faith, are required always to precede or go before
Baptism, which this makes to proceed or follow after altogether.

II. By its changing the Subjects of Christ's appointment, viz. Men and Women of
Knowledge and Understanding capable to Evidence Faith and Repentance for
ignorant unconverted Babe^ that know neither good nor evil, their right hand
from their left.

III. By frustrating all the Holy and Spiritual Ends of the Ordinance which you
have before at large, viz. to be a Sign of present Regeneration, a dying,
burying, and rising with Christ, to be the answer of a good Conscience, to be a
mutual stipulation or contract then and there entered into betwixt God and the
Party, as well as a visible entrance into the Church, all which as applied to a
poor Ignorant Infant, are but mockshews, and utterly insignificant and invalid

IV. By its inverting the Order and manner from dipping the whole Man, into
sprinkling or pouring a little Water upon the Head or Face, contrary to the
Sense of the Word, Nature of the Ordinance, and constant Usage of the Primitive
times, as confessed by Parties themselves, obliging thereby the Administrator to
tell a lie in the name of the Lord, saying he does Baptize, when he does but
Rantize.

V. By introducing so much Error and false Doctrine into the world, viz.

1. That it was to take away Original sin.

2. To work Grace and Regeneration, and to effect Salvation by the Work done

3. That it was an Apostolical Tradition.

4. That Children have Faith, and are Disciples of Christ.

5. That all Children of Believers are in the Covenant of Grace, and faederally
Holy.

VI. By defiling and polluting the Church, viz.

1. By bringing false Matter therein, who are no Saints by Calling, being
neither capable to perform duties, nor enjoy Privileges.

2. By laying a foundation of much ignorance and profaneness.

3. By confounding World and Church together which Christ has separated,
bringing the World into the Church, and turning the Church into the World.

VII. By introducing and establishing many Humane Traditions and Inventions of
Antichrist together with it; as Gossips or Sureties, Bishoping or Confirmation,
Chrysme. Exorcisme, Confignation, etc. profaning thereby so solemn an
Ordinance, taking Gods name in vain, and making his Commandments void.

VIII. By being such a makebate, such a Bone of Contention; and that amongst
themselves too that own it, as well as with those that oppose it: For what
Divisions and Sub-divisions are there amongst them both, as to Subject, Time,
Order, Circumstances, what endless strifes about Women's baptizing, and whether
Bastards, or the Children of Apostates, Heathens, or Excommunicated persons
should be baptized.

IX. By being an occasion to stir up much bitter hatred, wrath, strife, enmity
and persecution against those that oppose it. Oh how have they been loaded with
Calumney and Reproaches as the vilest of Men, and how in all Ages have they
been followed with Stripes, Imprisonments, Confiscations, yea Death it self, as
the Historical Part informs you.

X. By confirming hereby the whole Antichristian Interest, as made good in the
Preface.

XI. By ushering in great Absurdities, Absurdities.
viz.

1. That persons may have Regeneration and Grace before Calling.

2. That Persons may be visible Church Members before Conversion.

3. That Persons may Repent, believe, and be Baptized, and saved by the Faith
of another.

4. That Types and Shadows are profitable, after the Antitype and Sub^tance is
come, introducing thereby the Legal Birth-priviledge, the Carnal Seed, the
Typical Holiness, the National Church, etc. to the reviving Judaisme, and
outing Christianity.

5. That the better to exclude believers Baptism, new Church-Covenants are
invented to enter into the Visible Church by, instead thereof, especially
amongst those that own Infants Baptism, yet deny them the right of
Church Membership.

XII. By the manifold Contradictions Contradi^tions:
that attend the Practice.

1. By asserting, that Baptism is a Symbol of present Regeneration wrought,
and yet apply it to ignorant unconverted Babes, so incapable of regeneration,
as Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. Joh. 1.12, 13. And as so well defined by Dr. Owen in
his Theo. l. 6. c. 4 p. 480. viz. To be a Renovation, new Creation,
Vivification, opening blind Eyes, raising from Death to Life, etc.

2. That it truly figures and represents a Death, Burial, and Resurrection, and
yet do nothing but sprinkle or pour a little Water on the Face.

3. That Faith and Repentance is r^quired in Persons to be baptized, an^ that
it is ridiculous, yea impious an^ profane to do it without, and yet co^fess
that Children, to whom they apply it, have neither.

4. That it is the declaration of the Spiritual Marriage, the stipulation that
is mutually entered into betwixt God and the Believer, and yet assign it to
Subjects as incapable of either, as Stocks or Stones, Bells or Church-walls,
that yet Antichrist makes capable Subjects thereof, as well as Infants.

5. That the Baptismal Covenant enters into the Visible Church, and yet deny
the Church Members the Privileges thereof, or separate from them without any
warrantable cause showed, or orderly proceeding either against them, or they
that do own them as such.

6. That separate from Rome as the false Church, and yet own their Baptism the
Foundation Stone thereof: And others that pretend separation from National and
Parish Churches, and to disown the baptizing the Children of all, good and bad,
with the sinful Ceremonies attending it, yet if Papist or Protestant either,
upon their Terms tender to their fellowship, they are received without
Renouncing their sinful Baptism and performing it in the way they judge right.

7. That they own the Doctrine of Perseverance, and d^sown falling from Grace,
yet baptize all the Children of Believers, because they conclude them in the
Covenant of Grace, yet afterward teach them Conversion, and in Case of
unbelief reject them as Reprobates.

And to all which you may familiarly add by your daily observation, which
Chapter we shall conclude with these high expressions of Dr. Tailor, Dr. Tail
in his Lib. Pro. P. 244. And therefore whoever will pertinaciously persist in
this opinion of the Paedobaptists, and practice it accordingly, they pollute
the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant: They dishonor and make a Pagentry of
the Sacrament: They ineffectually represent a Sepulture into the Death of
Christ, and please themselves in a Sign without effect, making Baptism like
the Fig Tree in Gospel, full of Leaves, but no Fruit; and they invocate the
Holy Ghost in vain, doing as if one should call upon him to illuminate a Stone
or a Tree.

CHAP. VI. Wherein the nullity and utter insignificancy of Infants Baptism is
made appear.
THat it is no way safe for any to rest contented with that Baptism which they
received in their Infancy, may appear, because such their Baptism is a mere
nullity, an insignificant nothing, in respect to the New Testament Ordinance of
Baptism; and the reason is plain, because there is that wanting in it which is
so essential to true Baptism.

For first, Neither right matter nor form.
there is as the right Subject of Baptism wanting, so the true External form
is wanting also, as practiced with us: For the External form as before showed
is not sprinkling, or pouring a little Water upon the Head or Face, but a
dipping the whole person under Water, and raising him up again, to figure out
death, burial and Resurrection, as before.

If then matter and form be wanting; which is Essential to its being, it must
needs be a nullity, for what is more essential to the being of a thing then
matter and form, and how is it possible to define Baptism, or any thing else,
where they are wanting; and which is such a difficiency in that or any thing
else that makes it a nonentity, or a mere nullity.

Object. But it is said there was the right words of Baptism, it was done in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Answ. So there was also in baptizing of Bells and Churches, which in your
judgment is so far from making it a right Ordinance, the true Subject being
wanting, that it is no less then a profanation thereof, and a miserable taking
of the name of God in vain.

And farther to demonstrate and illustrate this point, you know it is generally
owned, that Baptism is no other then our mystical Marriage, as being the
solemnization of a mutual consent and striking of a Covenant (the essentials of
Marriage) betwixt Christ ^^d a believer, Mr. Bax.
as Mr. Baxter ^^ly owns and acknowledges in his 9. Argument to Mr. Blake,
saying, I conclude, Christ has appointed no Baptism, but what is for a
visible Marriage of the Soul to himself, (as Protestants says he ordinarily
confess) therefore he has appointed no Baptism, but for those that profess to
take Jesus Christ ^o be their Husband, and to give up themselves to him as his
Spouse.

Now mutual consent in Marriage is so essential an Ingredient, that without it
there is no Marriage, being as Beza says, the formal cause thereof, because
only Consent makes the Marriage, as says the Lawyers; so that if there should
be only the consent of one Party, it is but like a bargain wherein only one
side is agreed; for as well known there is no Covenant, where no Consent.

And just so it is in the Case of Infants Baptism; for if you dip an Infant
without Consent or Understanding, (that indeed is capable of neither) it no
more makes Baptism then a bargain, a bargain, though one side only be agreed,
or if made with an Infant, or an Idiot, or then a forced bed is lawful
Matrimony; for as Mr. Baxter before (...) ingeniously confesses, That for
persons to be baptized without such a professed Contract, is a Baptism not of
Christ's appointment, and that being done without Repentance and Faith, i^ an
impious profanation, yea ridiculous says Mr. Calvin, as before.

And in Confirmation of this weighty point of nullity, we are yet farther
beholding to Mr. Baxter, who is pleased in his Christian Directory amongst the
many Cases of Conscience to give (...) the discussion of this, and which in P.
817. you will find managed after this sort, viz.

Q. 41. Are they really baptized, who are baptized according to the English
Liturgy, and Canons, where the Parent seems excluded, and those to consent
for the Infant which have ^o power to do it?

Answ. I find (says he) some puzzled with this doubt, whether all our Infants
Baptism be a mere nullity; for say they, the outward washing without
Covenanting with God, is no more Baptism then the Body of Corpse is a Man, the
Covenant i^ the chief essential part in Baptism: And he that was never entered
into Covenant with God, was never Baptized. But Infants according to the
Liturgy are not entered into Covenant with God, which they would prove thus.
They that neither ever Covenanted by themselves, or any authorized person for
them were never entered into Covenant with God; (for that is no act of theirs
which is done by a stranger that has no power to do it) but etc. -- That they
did it not themselves, is undeniable: That they did it not by any person
empowered by God to do it for them, we prove; first because God fathers are the
persons [by whom] the Infant is said to promise; but Godfathers have no Power
from God, 1. Not by Nature, 2. Not by Scripture. Secondly, because the Parents
are not only included as Covenanters, but prositively excluded, 1. In that the
whole Office of Covenanting for the Child from first to last is laid on others;
2. In that the 29. Canon says, [No Parent shall be urged to be present nor
admitted to answer (...) Godfather for his own Child] by ^^^ch the Parent is
excluded: Therefore our Children are all unbaptized, to which he is pleased to
answer to this purpose.

Mr. Bax. Answer.
That though the Parents be absent, who yet may if he please be silently
present, yet his consent is supposed, because he chooses the Sponsors, and
gives the Minister notice before hand; and though my judgment be, that they
should be the principal Covenanters for the Child expressly, yet the want of
that expresness will not make us unbaptized persons.

Now whether Mr. Baxter herein has not most amply confirmed, and not at all
answered the Scruple, let all men judge.

For first, if it be so as scrupled, and by him not denied; 1. That the entering
Covenant with God, it so the Essential part of Baptism, that without it, it is
not.

2. That Children cannot.

3. That the Sureties (either by the Law of God or Nature ought not.

4. That the Parent by the Canon Law must not.

How then is it possible, (which our learned Casuist would impose upon us) that
a Parents ^^pposed Consent can create a power in another to do a thing, which
neither the Law of God nor Nature enjoy us, for approves.

And therefore have we not good and substantial ground from this Argument to
conclude, That for as much as Children by the Liturgy are baptized without any
covenanting with God, either by themselves or others, (authorized by God
thereto) therefore their Baptism, is a mere nullity.

And as to his saying, [ Dictator and Oracle like] that a Parent has a
Covenanting Power for his Child inherent in him, and which he may confer upon
another: It is but begging the Question in both parts, and no less then
opposing the Canon, but especially a contradicting the whole Current of
Scripture.

As to the Humane invention of Gossips or Sureties for Children and Bells, etc.
you have before at large treated of, both as to their Original and Use; and
also how sinful and ridiculous by the Bishop of Down, P. 91, 92.

Which Chapter therefore I shall conclude with the words of Mr. L. a person of
great learning and moderation, as generally esteemed in his book of Baptism,
upon this Point, P. 359. And the Patrons of Baptism I hope will pardon me; If
what Chamier affirms of Baptism, not given by a right Minister, I with more
Equity and Reason affirm here. That it is not a Sacrament, but a rash mockery
or deceiving, by no ^^ans to be endured in the Church.

CHAP. VII. Wherein there is an account of some eminent witness that has been
born against Infants Baptism from first to last.
THe first we shall mention is that excellent Testimony Tertullian bore against
it, Tertul.
upon the first appearance of it in the 3. Century, in his Book de Baptism
Cap. 18. Wherein he disswades from the practice by such like Arguments as
these, viz.

First, From the mistake of the Scripture usually brought to enforce it, which
was afterward called the Scripture Canon for Baptism, viz. Mat. 19.14. Suffer
little Children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven, etc.

It is true says he, the Lord says, D^ not forbid them to come to me. Let
them come therefore when they grow Elder, when they learn, when they are taught
why they come; let them be made Christians when they can know Christ.

Secondly, From the weightiness of the Ordinance which ought not to be trifled
with: For, says he, they that do understand the weight of Baptism, will
rather fear the attaining it, then the deferring it.

Thirdly, From the sinfulness of such a Practice: So rashly, says he, to give
such Holy things to Dogs, and to cast such Pearls before Swine, and so headily
to partake of other men's sins.

Fourthly, From the absurdity of it, To refuse to commit Earthly and Secular
things to their trust by reason of their incapacity, and yet to commit to, and
entrust them with Heavenly and Spiritual things.

Fifthly, From the folly of exposing of Witnesses, Who by death may not only
frustrate their Promises but be disappointed through the evil disposition of
them they so largely undertake for, Mag. Cen. 3. c 6. 125.

Sixthly, From the consideration that the Adult were the only proper Subjects
of Baptism; because, says he, Fasting, Confession, Prayer, Profession,
Renouncing the Devil and (...) Works is called for from them. Coron. Mil. 124.

The Witness Born by the Donatists.
THe second we shall mention is the Witness that the Novations and Donatists
gave against it, 2. Novations and Donatists Austin.
as Austins 3. and 4. Books against the Donatists does demonstrate, wherein he
manageth the Argument for Infants Baptism against them with great zeal,
enforcing it by several Arguments, but especially from Apostolical Tradition,
and cursing with great bitterness they that should not embrace it.

And therefore Osiander Osiander
in his Epit. Genesis 16. P. 175. says, That our modern Anabaptists were the same
with the Donatists of old.

And Fuller Fuller.
in his Ecclesiastical History, l. 5. p. 229. says, That the Anabaptists are
the Donatists new dipped.

And in farther Confirmation thereof, Pope Innocent I. the first Institutor and
Imposer of Infants Baptism, did banish th^^ People (called Cath^ri) out of
Rome, as Socrates Socrates.
l. 7. c. 9. We put the Donatists and Novations together, because they did so
well agree in Principle, Cryspin.
as Cryspins French Hist. P. 17. [out of Albaspinaus upon Optat. Milevitanus
Observat. 20.] tells us, saying, That they hold together in the following
things, viz.

First, For purity of Church Members, by offering, that (...) ought to be
admitted into Churches, but such as were visibly true Believers, and re^^
Saints.

Secondly, For the purity of Church Discipline, as the Application of Church
Censures, and keeping out such as had Apostatised or scandalously sinned.

Thirdly, They both agreed in asserting the Power, Rights and Privileges of
particular Churches, against Antichristian encroachments of Presbiters, Bishops
and Synods.

Fourthly, That they baptized again those whose first Baptism they had ground
to doubt.

Eckbert.
Eckbertus and Emericus, two great opposers of the Waldenses, for denying
Baptism to Children, (as afterward you will find) do assert, That the new
Cathari or Puritans, ( which they called the Waldenses) do conform to the
Doctrine and manners of the old Cathari, viz. the N^vations.

And Paul Perin Perin.
in h^s History of the Waldenses, tells us, That the Fratricelli, or little
Brethren, another name given to the Waldenses, were time out of mind in Italy
and Dalmatia, and were the Offspring of the Novations persecuted and driven
from Rome about 400. and why for their purity in Communion, were also called
Cathari.

And as for Cassanders Reason in his Epistle to the D. of Cleve, why the
Donatists did not disown Infants Baptism, mentioned also by Mr. G^bb^t, I
conceive has no weight at all in it, viz. because the 6 Council of Carthage
decreed, That all that returned from the D^nat^^^s, should be received ^^to the
Catholic Church without Rebaptisation, th^^gh ^aptized in Infancy; which is
b^^ (...) supposition at ^^st that they might be baptized in Infancy, o^ they
might not, and c^^ signify nothing against all the former Evide^^^^.

^bje^^s. But the N^vations and Do^^^is^s, were by Popes and Councels adjudged
and dealt with as Heretics.

Answ. So were the Waldenses, as you will hear none more, and so have ^een the
Christians in all a^es, therefore all that have heen so Censured, ought not so
to be esteemed, Paul himself tells us, That in the way they called Heresy, so
worshipped be the God of his Fathers. And indeed what part of the purest Gospel
way and worship has escaped this Censure.

Neither does is follow, if Christians should err, or mistake themselves in
some things, that therefore they must be rejected as Heretics in others.

I could enumerate several gross errors and mistakes of Austin himself, (their
great opposer) as they are ^^corded amongst his Navi, m^st be therefore be
esteemed (...) Heretic.

But as to the Nova^^us and D^natists, (so much one in principle and pra^ti^e)
however adjudged by Popes and Councils, I (...) find they (...) other then a
very Holy People, ^^^^cially the Novations, whose great Crime was, that they
pressed after purity in worship, and to separate, (...) you have heard, from
Antichristian defilement, and therefore called Puritans or Cathari, concerning
whom Socrates, Scholastious speaks so honorably, and so largely vindicates
from the Calumnies cast upon them, defending them to be a holy, zealous,
sincere, faithful People.

The Witness born by the Ancient Britains.
THe next we shall mention, 3. Britains.
is that witness we find born by the Old Britains, (of whose Antiquity and
Purity in Christianity, you have a more particular account in the following
History) who having as you will find, received the Christian Doctrine and
Worship from the Apostles time, did entirely keep thereto, cleaving to the
Scriptures, utterly renouncing all Romish Traditions, and Superstitions,
especially the Remains of them, that after the Roman and Saxon invasions,
inhabited Wales; to whom Austin the Monk, the ^^gate of Pope Gregory about the
year 604. did address in two Assemblies, that he procured upon the Borders of
Wales, to engage them as he had done many of the Saxons, to embrace the Romish
Rites, especially in Christening Children, and keeping Easter. But in as much
as they utterly refused to be seduced by him therein; he not only threatened
their ruin, but accomplished the same in a short time after.

Concerning which Mr. Fox Fox:
in his Martyrology, P. 153, 154. 1. Part, tells us, That Austin having charged
them to Preach with him to the English, and that they should among themselves
form certain Rites and Vsages in theer Church, especially for keeping their
Easter- Tide, and Baptizing after the manner of Rome, and for which he quotes
Bid, Polichron, Huntingdon, Jornalenses, and Jeff Monmouth, and Fabian, Fabian.
5. Part Chapter 119. etc. Fabian expresses himself thus, Fol. 125. Part 5. viz.
Then he said to them, since you will not assent to my Hosts generally, assent
you to me, especially in that things. The first is, that you keep Easter i^ d^^
form and time as it is Ordained. The second, that you give Christendom t^
Children. And the third, that you Preach to the Saxons, as I have i^ h^^^^ed
you: And all the other debate I shall s^ffer you to amend, and reform amongst
your selves; but says he they would not thereof. To whom then Austin spoke and
said, That if they would not take Peace with their Brethren, they should
receive War with their Enemies: And if they disdained to Preach with them the
way of Life to the English Nation, they should suffer by their hands the
revenge of Death; and which Austin accomplisheth accordingly, by bringing the
Saxons upon them to their utter ruin, as you will hear afterward at large.
And thereupon says Fabian, That Faith that had endured in Britain for near 400
years, became near e^ti^^^ through all the Land.

And that the Churches in Britain did oppose the baptizing of Infants, and
assert and practice that of Believers, is farther manifest by these following
Arguments.

1. Because as you will find in the Histor^ that they received the Scriptures, the
C^^istia^ Faith, Doctrine and Discipline from the Apostles and A^^^tick
Churches, who had no such things the baptizing of Infants amongst them, as you
have largely heard.

2. Because it appears they so fully pr^^ed, and faithfully adhered to the
Scriptures both for Doctrine and Discipline, wherein no such thing is to be
found, as also you have understood, and as is confessed.

3. Because they did so vehemently reject Humane Traditions in the Worship of
God, especially all Romish Innovations, Rites and Ceremonies, this (...) before
undeniably appearing to cou^e from Romes Ordination and Imposition.

4. Because Constantine the Great, the Son of Constance, and the famous Helena,
(both eminent Christians) born in Britain in the year 305. was not baptized
till he was aged, as before, a clear proof, that the Christians in Britain in
those days did not baptize their Children.

5. Because of the Correspondency and Unity that were betwixt the French
Christians, after called the Waldenses, and them, who had Colleges like them,
communicated in the Ministry with them, both in preaching and baptizing, viz.
Germanus and Lupu^, two famous French Men, sent for to help against the
Pelagian Herisie, who were not only useful and serviceable to suppress that
error, but were Instrumental to convert many, and did Bapti^e great Multitudes
amongst them upon confession of Faith in the River Allin near Chester.

And lastly, another Argument why they did not baptize Children in Britain,
because Austin himself, the Romish Emissary, was himself so raw and ignorant in
the Rite, when he came best into Britain, as appears by that Question, which he
amongst others writ from thence to Pope Gregory to be resolved in, viz. how
long the baptizing of a Child might be deferred (there being no danger of
death) in his 10th. Interogatory, Ex decreto Greg. 1. Lib. Council. Th^^. 2.

The Witness born by the Waldenses.
4. Waldenses.
THe next we shall produce, is the most eminent Testimony that was born by the
Waldenses, those French Christians, who are so very famous in Story, for the
defense of the Gospel against Antichristian Usurpations, that the learned Usher
in his Book of the state and succession of the Christi^^ Church, does trace its
succession through them in a distinction from, and opposition to that of the
Papacy, the Romish Church, and who amongst other of Christ's Ordinances, (that
they defended and witnessed too, to death, and banishment, and bonds) that of
Baptizing Believers in opposition to that of Infants, was you will find by
plentiful Evidence none of the least.

Leaving the History of this famous People, as to the Names they are known by
in Story, their Original, Growth, Excellency, and Suffering, till the
Conclusion, we proceed to demonstrate to you what witness they gave unto this
great truth, in the ^articulars following, viz.

1. In their public Confession of ^aith.

2. In the particular Witness that some of their principal men bare thereto.

3. In the more general Witness born by the Body of the People, as appears by
Decrees of Councils, the Decretal P^^stl^^, and General Edicts given forth
against the whole Party for the (...).

4. In the Footsteps that we find thereof in the several Countries, where they
have heretofore Imprinted the same.

The first is the Witness we find hereof in their public Confessions of Faith,
viz.
1. In their Confessions of Faith. P. Perin
IN their Ancient Confession of Faith bearing Date 1120. Article 1^^ They say
we acknowledge no other Sacraments but Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, P.
Perin 87.

And in Article 28. of another Confession. That God does not only instru^^ us
by his word, but has also Ordaine^ certain Sacraments to be joined with it; as
a means to unite us unto, and to make us partakers of his benefits, and that
there are only two of them belonging in Common to all the Members of the Church
under the New Testament, viz. Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, Morland. 1.
B. Chapter 4. 67. And in another very Ancient Confession of Faith,

Article 7. We do believe that in the Sacrament of Baptism, Water is the
Visible and External Sign which repr^sents unto us that (which by the Invisible
virtue of God operating) is within (...) viz. The Renovation of the Spirit,
(...) the mortification of our Members in (...) Christ, by which also we are
received into the holy Congregation of the (...) of God, there protesting and
declaring openly our Faith and amendment (...) Life, P. Perin P. 89.

Vignier Vignier.
in his Ecclesiastical History; (...) They expresl^ declare to receive (...)
Canon of the Old and New Testa^ent, and to reject all Doctrines which ^re not
their foundations in it, or are (...) any thing contrary unto it. Therefore all
the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome they condemn and abo^inate,
saying she is a Den of Thieves, ^^d the Apocaliptical Harlot, Usher P. 374.

And in their Ancient Confession, Article 11d We esteem for an abomination, and
as Antichristian all Humane Inventions, as a trouble and prejudice to the
liberty of the Spirit; and in their Ancient Catechism you have these further
Principles about Tradition and Humane Inventions, as you find them in P. Perin
de Doct. de Vaud. Live. 1. 168, 169. When Humane Traditions are observed for
Gods Ordinances, then is he worshipped in vain, as the Prophet (...) affirms,
Chapter 19. And our Savi^^^ himself alleges, Mat. 19. And whi^^ done when Grace
is attributed on the B^^^^^^al Ceremonies, and Persons enjoined to partake of
Sacraments with^^^ Faith and Truth.

But the Lord charge his to take he^^ of such false Prophets, to separate,
avoid and withdraw from them, Mat. 16.^^ to the 23. Psalm. 26.5. 2 Cor. 6.1^ 2
These. Rev. 18. And --

In their Ancient Treatise concern^^^ Antichrist, Writ 1120. They say th^^
(...) attributes the Regeneration of the (...) Spirit unto the ^^ad outward w^^
Baptizing Children into their Faith, (...) teaching that thereby Baptism and
R^generation must be had, grounding the^^in all his Christianity, which is
against the Holy Spirit, P. Perin Lib. 3. 267.

^he second is the Witness we find born hereto by several of their most eminent
leading men. 2. By their leading Men.

THe first we begin with is the famous Beringarius 1. Beringarius.
of Turain in ^n^^n, one of their Barbes, as M^r^^.

Who in the 11. Century did so emi^^^^ly and learnedly oppose
Transub^^^tiation, and other Popish Innova^^^^, and for which he was persecuted
(...) above 30. years, by no less then (...) Popes, viz. Leo the IX. Nic. II.
^^x. II. Greg. VII. and prosecuted by (...) desperate persecuters, viz.
Gui^^^^d, Algerius, F^lbertus, Heldibrand, after Greg. VII. and Lunifrank
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sentenced in no less then four Councils, as the
Magd^burgs tell us, viz. The 1st. Lateran, the Vercellans, the Thureus, and 2d.
Lateran, as Cen. 12. P. 454, 456, 457.

Who with his Witness against the r^^al presence does also testify against t^^
other of Baptizing of Children.

The Magdiburg Cent. 11. C^. 15. 1. 240. tell us, That Beringarius did i^ the
time of Leo the IX about the ye^^ 1049. publicly maintain his Heresies, which
they set down to be denying Tra^substantiation, and Baptism to litt^^ ones,
under five Heads, which La^^franck Archbishop of Canterbury, (...) his Book
called Scintillaris answer^^ large; and as to that of his denying i^fants
Baptism, he answers by say^^^ he does thereby oppose the general Doctr^^^ and
Universal consent of the Church, P. 243.

Cassander Cassand.
in his Epistle to the D^^^ of Cl^^^, says, That Guitmund Bl^^^ of Averse does
affirm, that with the (...) presence in the Eucharist, he did (...) Baptism to
little ones, though not (...) latter so publicly as the former, kn^^^^ (as he
says) that the Ears of the (...) of men would not brook that blasph^^^.

In the Bibliotheca Patrum, P^^^^ at Paris, Durand. Epistle to H. 1.
P. 43. It is Recorded, T^^ Durandus Bishop of Leodienses, hear^ that Henry I.
King of France, had called a Council to suppress the Heresies o^ Brow^^ Bishop
of Austen, and Berringari^^ of T^^rionenses writes a large Epistle ^o him to
this purpose; first to applaud ^is wisdom in the calling of that Coun^^^ to
suppress those pernicious Doctrines of the old Heresies now modernly revived,
which had filled all Ears through France and Germany.

Then Secondly, mentions the same to be, first, the affirming the Eucharist ^o
be not the real Body, but a Shadow ^^d Figure rather of the Body of Christ; ^^d
Secondly, the denying, and as much (...) in them lay the destroying the
Bap^^sme of Infants.

Then Thirdly, shows the necessity of the Councils severity against them,
^specially against the Bishop of Bruno, those influence in his Capacity might
be of so evil Consequence, and therefore advises, that they should not be
suffered so much as to speak in the Council; And lastly, endeavors to confute
the said opinions, viz. the first from several. Authorities of the Ancients, as
Leo, Ambrose, Hillary, Cyril, Basil; and the second concerning Infants
Baptism. From a single quotation out of Au^^^^ against the Donatists, Lib. 4.
which Epistle you have at large in the said ^ib. Pat.

Mr. Clark M. Clark
in his Mar^^rology, t^ (...), That God raised up Beringari^ who boldly and
faithfully Preached, and witnessed to the Truth against the Romish Errors;
whereupon the Gospelers w^^ called Berringari^^ for about 100 years after.

Math. Paris says, That Berringarius had drawn all France, Italy and England
to his opinion, 1087.

Dr. Usher D. Usher
tells in in the Succession of the Church, P. 252. out of Thun^^^ That Bruno
Archbishop of Tryer^ did expel several of the Berringarian Sect, that had
spread his Doctrine in several of those Belgic Countries, and that several of
them upon Examination did say, That Baptism did not profit Children to
Salvation, (...) (says h^) the Auth^^ of the Acts of Bruno (found in the Lord
C^^e^^ Library of Clapton) does ^^stifi^.

But (...) to B^rin^^ri^^, it is objected (...) said, That ^e did recant and
re^oke hi^ opinion, a^ appea^^ by the R^^^^tation it self Recorded by Gr^^^^^^.

To which I ^^swer in the words of a learned Man ^^prest in Crispius Crispin.
French History, fol. ^1. That if he did through frailty recant and deny the
truth, it was (...) other then Peter did before him, who ^it repented of that
evil, and so did Ber^^garius too.

And write against his own Rec^^^^^^ so viola^^ly extorted from him; for most
conclude he lived some time after, and dyed in his former profession, a man of
great worth and goodness, as his Epilaph by his Scholar Heldebert Bishop of
Tryers discovers, mentioned by Malms^^ry. P. 1. 14.

Vir v^re sapiens and part beat^^ ab omni,
Qui C^^lo^ anima corpore ditat hu^um.
Post obitum vivam sicum, sicum qui^scum.
Nec sciat melior sors mea sort sua.
He was a Man was blessed on every part.
The Earth has his Body the Heavens his Heart.
My wish shall be that at that my end.
My Soul may rest with this my Friend.
The second eminent Witness we meet with amongst the Waldenses, w^^ t^^^ famo^^
Peter Bruis of Tholo^s^, P. Bruis
another of their renowned Barbes, who pu^lickly and most successfully Preached
the Gospel in that City, and the Provinces round about it for about 20. years,
wi^^ for his opposing the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, was apprehended,
impris^^ed, and b^rnt in the Fields of Sir Giles near Tholo^^e, about the year
1136. whose Doctrine and Positions, for which he suffered, we have Recorded by
the Magdib. C^^t. 12. 843. and L. Osiander Osiander.
Cent. 12. 262. And amongst which we find these about Baptism; First, That
Infants are mith^^ to be sword, nor to be baptized by the Faith of another, all
being to be bapti^ed, and expect to be saved by their own proper faith.

Secondly, That Baptism without proper faith saves not.

Those two Positions, says Osiander ( the Lutheran) have no Error in them, the
Papists being rather to be condemn^d, who deny Infants to have proper faith.

Thirdly, That little Children that are under age, and without understanding,
that are brought to Baptism, are not saved thereby.

Fourthly, That those that are Baptized in their Infancy, after they are come
to understanding, are to be Baptized again, and which is not to be esteemed
Rebaptisation, but right Baptism.

These two says Osiander are Heretical and Anabaptistical. Cen. 12. l. 3. p.
262.

All which, with his assertions about Transubstantiation, worshipping of Images,
Purgatory, etc. are distinctly and at large answered, by Peter Cluniensos,
Peter Cluniens.
whereof the Magdiburgs do give a particular account: And also you have the
said Peter ( writing to three Bishops in France about this time) saying, That
neither Temples nor Alt^rs are made by these People, neither are Crosses
worshipped, but rather broken, and trodden underfoot; the Mass is esteemed an
abomination, and that the benefits of the living did not profit the dead, etc.
And that this Heresy of the Pe^ro Brusians was received in the Gali^
Norbonc^s^^, complaining that the People were Rebaptized, the Churches, Altars
and Crosses prophain'd, ^le^^ (...) in Lent, y^^ upon Good Friday it self.

This Peter Bruis was supposed to have written the Treatise of Antichrist,
whereof you have some account in the History, and so eminent and worthy a
Person, that for many years the Waldenses were called Petro Brus^ians.

The next we shall mention is the famous Arnoldus, Arnold.
or rather the Arnoldeses, there being three of that name.

Pridieux
The first, viz. Arnoldus of Bri^ia, was in the second, Lateran Council with
Peter Bruis Censured for the Heresy of rejecting Infants Baptism,
Church-buildings, and the Adoration of the Cross. Pride. Introduct. to H^st
Latin Councils, P. 23.

The said Arnoldus was in the year 1155. as says Usher Usher.
out of Gerhohus, at Rome put to death, being first hanged, then his Body
burnt, and his Ashes flung into Tyber, least the People of Rome following his
Doctrine, should adore him.

Another eminent Man of this name, (and one of the Waldensian Barbes also) whom
Eckber^^^, a^ Usher tells us, P. 292. calls the Arch-Catheri or Puritans was
with two of his Associates, v^z. Mar^^llyus and Theodoricus, who with him
managed a public dispute at Cologne, against one Eckberius, were burnt,
Arnold, and Eight more of his Disciples at Cologne, August 2. 1163. And
Theodoricus and Marsellyus afterward at Bunnae near Cologne. Eckbertus says,
That the Principal Argument they brought against Infants Baptism, was Christ's
Commission, Mat. 28 19. Mark 16.15, 16.

We read also of another Arnold, who in the time of Honorius II. 1124. was
burnt at Rome for witnessiing against the Pride, Pomp, and Luxury of the
Priests, as Pride. in his Introduction, and Baronius in his Anals 1124. Balaeus
says he was an English Man.

The Waldensian Sect were also called Arnoldists, as Bishop Usher and P. Perin
tells us after their names,

Another eminent Person we meet with, witnessing to this great Truth, Heneric.
was one Henricus, a great Friend and Colleague of P. Bruis 's, whose Doctrines
and Positions are also recorded by the Magdiburgs, under 11. Heads; the first
whereof was den^ing Baptism to Children, Cent 12. 843. which Bernard Bernard.
at large endeavors to answer, and confute, telling us, That Infants are to be
baptized upon the Faith of the Church.

The same Bernard in his Epistle to Heldes^ns^s, Earl of St. Giles, says, The
Henerici (for so they called his followers) did deny Holy days, Sacraments,
Churches and Priests, complaining that the Children of Christians were excluded
the Life of Christ, whilst they denied them the Grace of Baptism, and not
suffered them to partake of Gra^e and Salvation thereby.

Cassander Cassand.
in his Epistle before his Book of Baptism, says, that Peter Bruis, and Henry
his Disciple and Colegue, were great Propagators of the Error of denying
Baptism to little ones, affirming that it did only belong to the Adult.

Thirdly, By the People themselves suffering for the same.
in the Witness born not only by some particular men, but by the Body of the
people, as appears by Decrees of Councils, decretal Epistles, and Edicts
given forth against them, as well as the Testimony of many learned Writers.
DR. Usher Dr. Vsh.
out of the Fragments of the History of Acquitane, written by P. Pithao, P. 81,
82. tells us, That in the time of Robert King of France, that they of
Acquitaine and Toulouse, (principal places of the Waldenses) did deny Baptism
(for so they called denying Baptism to little ones) the Sign of the Cross, the
real presence in the Eucharist, and other Rites of the Church, and that many of
them were Sentenced by Council and burnt.

Dr. Usher also tells us out of Papir Masson in his French Annals, That 14.
Citizens of Orleans in the Reign of King Robert, were convicted of the same
Heresy, for denying baptismal Grace, and the real presence, and were all burnt
alive, and that the names of three of the chief of them were Herbert, ^isius
and Stephen.

Dr. Usher tells us, That in the time of the Emperor Henry II. 1017. many of
this Sect were about Mediolanenses fined and banished as he tells us, Antonius
in his History, 2. Tit. 15. Chap. 23. informs.

And also out of Radulp. Ard Homil. tells us, That in Germany, under the Reign
of Henry IV. about 1054 several of this People, whom they called the Manchean
Sect, and the Reason of it you will understand afterward, did inhabit the
Country of Aganenses, who denied Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Altar.

P. Leo IX
Pope Leo the IX. in his Decretal Epistle to the Bishop of Acquitaine, ( a
Principal, Place of their abode) about the year 1050. Commands; that Young
Children should be Baptized, because of Original sin.

Pope Gregory VII. decreed 1070. That th^^e young Children whose ^^^o^t^ are
absent or unknown, should according to the Tradition of the ^^^^ers be Baptized.

Bernard Bernard.
Abhor of Clara^el, in the 12 Century, in his 66. Sermon in C^^itio^
complained, That the Cathari did deride them, because they baptized ^^^^^^s,
and prayed for the dead, and ^sserted ^urgatory; and that the Soul as so^^ as
it departed out of the Body, went to Salvation or Damnation.

Eckbertus a great Dr. about the same time, Eckber.
in his Sermon against the Cathari, says, That they say concerning the
baptizing of Children, that through their incapacity it nothing profited them
the Salvation, and that Baptism ought to be deferred till they come to years
of discretion, and that then only they ought to be baptized, when they can with
their own months make a profession of Faith, and desire it, and which he
largely endeavo^^ds, to confute in that Sermon, Bib. P^t. 2. To^. fol. 99. 106.

Erbrardus another great Dr. of this time, says, Erbrard
That the Cathari do deny Baptism to Children, because they want
understanding; and therefore spends his 6. Chapter to confute them; the Title
of which is, Children which cannot speak ought to be Baptized; and concludes
thus: By this therefore we find that we ought to call little ones to faith by
Baptism. Bib. Pat. Tom. 4. P. 1108.

Ermengendus. Ermengendus.
another great writer of this Age, in his Book contra Waldenses, proves Infants
Baptism (which he says they deny) by two Scriptures, namely Mat. 19.14.
Suffer little Children to come to me, etc. And 1 Cor. 15. Baptized for the
dead; whence he thus reasons. If they of old baptized the Living for the Dead,
for their Eternal Salvation, though they neither received it, nor were capable
thereof; how much more does the faith of the Gossips avail for Spiritual Grace
and Salvation, in the baptizing the persons of the little o^^s themselves Bib.
Pat. Tom 4.

Dr. Vsh
Dr. Usher in his foresaid Book of the S^ccession of the Church, P. 292. tells
us out of Decretal, Lib. 5. Tit. 6 c. 10. That Pope Alexander the III. in the
Turonensi^n Synod, held 1163. touching the Albigenses, made the following
Canon, viz.

To damn that Heresy, Alex III Turonensian Canon.
that had so infected as a Canker, all those parts about Gascogne, requiring
the Clergy of every sort to give their utmost diligence to detect and suppress
it, and to require all upon penalty of Excommunication, not only to refuse
harboring of them, but to avoid all civil Communion and Converse with them;
and if taken by any Catholic Princes, that they be Imprisoned, and their Goods
and Estates confiscated

And in as much as multitudes under pre^ence of sojourning together in one
Mansion house, ( which was very much the Custom of the Waldenses to do) do
under that Color carry on their Errors in such Cohabitations, that all such
Conventicles should deligently be searched out; and if found, to be proceeded
with by Canonical severity.

And further the said Dr. Usher tells us out of Hovedens Annals, fol. 319.
Hoved.
That the said Pope Alexander III. did (...) the year 1176. The better to
extirpate the Albigenses, send a Cardinal and three Bishops, as Commissioned
Inquisitors against them, under the names of the Cridentes, Lyonists, Patrinos,
Bonhomes, or Manichees, (of the Reason of which names you will understand
afterward) with a Creed to put to them for the better discovering of them, in
which these following are some of the Articles, Inquisitors Creed.
viz. We believe we cannot be saved except we eat the body of Christ, and which
is not so, except Consecrated in a Church by a Priest: We believe that none are
saved, except they are baptized; and that Children are saved by Baptism, and
that Baptism is to be performed by a Priest in the Church, Hovend. Annals 319.
6.

In the same year Pope Alexander, calls another Gallican Council, to convince
and condemn the Albigensian Heresy.

Alex. III his Canon in the Galican. Council.
In the Third Canon, whereof they say they do convince and judge them of
Heresy for denying Baptism to Children, or that they are to be saved thereby,
urging Arguments from Christ's d^ing for all, and from the Circumcising of
Infants of old; for their baptizing, and affirming, that the Faith of the
Gossips is sufficient to baptize upon, etc. which you have at large in the Book
of Decretals.

Two years after, as says Mat. Paris, Mat. Paris.
viz. 1178. Cardinal Chrysoginus, i^ sent Inquisitor to suppress the Heretic
about Toulouse, that had evil Sentiments about the Sacraments, in which
Inquisition many of them were persecuted, and amongst the rest Roger ^^^^es.

Also the same Pope Alexander III. Alex. III his Canon in the Lateran Council.
in the year 1179. In the general Lateran Council condemns the Waldensian or
Catharian Heresy; and in the 27. Canon Anatham^tiseth the Cathari, etc.
dwelling in Gascogne, Albi, and other Parts about Toulouse, and amongst the
rest of their Heresies, for denying Baptism to Children, and or their contempt
of all the Sacraments, Decret.

Favin, Favin.
in his History of Navarre, P. 2^0. says, That the Albego^s do esteem the
baptizing of Infants superstitious.

In the year 1181. P Lucius his Canon in the Verone Council.
P. Lucius held his general Council at Verone in the time of Fred. I. Wherein
the Albigensian Sect. and Heresy were damned, and Anatha^atized under the
names of Cathari, Patrini, Humiliati, poor people of Lions, Arnoldists, for
during to Preach without Apostolical Approbation, or mission publicly or
privately, and for teaching otherwise about the Eucharist, Baptism,
Confession, Marriage, and other Sacraments of the Church, then the Church of
Rome Preaches and observes, Decret. Lib. 5. Tit. 6. de Heret. c. 11. 126.
confirmed by Urban the III. 1185. Coelestin. 3. 1192. In 3. 1200. as Favin
Hist. P. 290.

P. Innocent III. his Decretal Ep.
Pope Innocent the III. about the year 1199. writes his Decretal Epistle to the
Bishop of Aries, (the principal City in Provence) respecting the Albigensian
Sect, to which Barronius in his Annals writes this Preamble; and which is also
expressed by Spondanus in his Epitome, 981. 1199. viz. Amongst the Arlatenses
were Heretics, (says he) who excluded Infants from Baptism, counting them
incapable of that Heavenly Privilege: Therefore did Innocent write this
excellent Epistle to the Arch Bishop of Arles, to confute and confound them;
which he recites at large (as it is also found both in Gratian, and the Book of
the Decretals.

Wherein having given many Arguments to enforce the baptizing of Infants, he
makes this Decree, viz. That since Baptism is come in the room of
Circumcision; therefore no^ alone the Elder, but also the young Children, which
of themselves nei-neither believe nor understond, shall be Baptized, and in
their Baptism Original sin shall be forgiven them.

And then after the Epistle, Baronius Baronius
adds, This Innocent writ in a time of great Immergensy concerning the
Sacrament of Baptism, which, says he, the poor People of Lions, those
Albigensian Anabaptists did deny.

After this he sent a great number of Friars in imitation of the Albigensian
Barbes to go up and down those Countries to preach and dispute amongst them;
Dominicus, Benedict, and Francis being in the Head of them. Then after them
many Legates, and Inquisitors upon Inquisitors; after them a Crusado of Armed
Men, which he supplied from time to time from all Parts, and continued a bloody
War against them all his days; but yet could neither vanquish nor suppress
them; who by the help of strong Allies, the Kings of England and Spain, Earl of
Toulouse and F^ix, were enabled in a defensive way to maintain the War against
his mighty Armies that came against them, a Hundred Thousand at a time; and by
which me^n^ as Dr. Usher Usher.
observes, P. 266. That as the persecution about Stephen by that dispersion
proved much for the furtherance of the Gospel in other Parts of the world, so
was i^ here; for those that were not so fit for the War, went up and down with
more freedom into most Parts of Europe. ^nsomuch that Aeneas, Silvas, Aeneus,
Silvas.
afterward Pope Pius the II. in his 16. Chap. confesses in these words. Nec
ull^s vel Romanorum, Pontificium Decret^, vel Christianarum armis deleri
potuiss^. That neither the Decrees of Popes, nor Armies of Christians could
exterpate.

Having produced to you so much Evidence to this Point, I conceive it not
unseasonable before I proceed farther, to present to you what I meet with from
Mr. Baxier Mr. Bax.
upon it, who

In his plain Scripture Proof, p. 157. is pleased to tell us, That for his pa^^
he cannot find in his small Read^ng, that any one Divine, or party of m^n, did
certainly oppose or deny Infant^ Baptism, for many Hundred years after Christ.

And again, p. 261. That the World may now see what a Cause you put such a face
upon, when you cannot bring the least proof so much as of one Man, (much less
Societies, and least of all godly Societies) that did once oppose or deny
Infants Baptism from the Apostles days, till about Luthers time.

And yet farther, p 266. I am fully satisfied, that you cannot show me any
Society (I think not one man) that ever opened their mouth against Baptism of
Infants till about 200. years ago, or thereabouts, which confirms me much that
it is from the Apostles time, or else some one would have been found as an
opposer of it.

Though with what Evidence and Truth these confident assertions, and severe
reflections are made, (in respect to what has, and is farther to be said
hereto) is recommended to his own, and the consideration of the impartial
Reader.

And Mr. Cobbet in, P. 200. says, That the Doctrine of Paedobaptisme was never
ex professo, opposed by any Orthodox Church or Christian in time of old as far
as I can learn.

By their Disciples in several Countries.
Lastly from the footsteps we find of this Truth in the several Countries and
Places, where the Waldenses had heretofore Imprinted it, as appears by the
following Instances.
1. Germany.
1. FRom what we find hereof in Germany, where (by what you will find hereafter)
the Waldenses were so conversant, that their itinerant Ministers could Travel
through the whole Empire, and lie every night at a friends House. Du Plessis D^
lessis
in his Mystery of Iniquity, P. 403. says, They are spread abroad in Germany
and France, as that their footsteps are to be discerned throughout the course
of History.

In which Country we find, yea and and in most parts thereof, Multitude^ of
this persuasion down to the 16. Century; as may appear not only by the
oppositions made against those persuasions, by the Popish Party, but by the
Protestants also; witness not only ^he writings of Bar^nius, Cassander, Eckius,
Gres^^^^^ in contradiction and ^^^^ty thereto; but the several Canons of the
Council of Trent, and the Catechism of Pope Pius Quin^us, respecting that of
Infants Baptism, print^d and annexed with the same Decretals to be read in
every Parish (by the Popish.]

But by the several disputations, Anabaptists in all parts in Germany.
writings, and opposition made by the Protestant party also; yea, and that from
those that were called chief of the ^^formation, viz. by Regius at Ausburg
about 1516. Luther in Saxony 1522. Micarius in Thuringia 1525. Zwingli^^ i^
Zwitzerland 1529. Brentius in S^^via 1530 Calvin at Geneva 1537. J^nius about
Limburg and Heidlburg 1570. and Multitude of Anabaptists in Basil, Vlme,
Ausburg, against whom O^^l^mpagius disputed, 1527. 29. As Clark in his Lives,
and their respective works manifest.

Whereby it is evident they had a being in those parts before Luthers time; for
it cannot rationally be supposed, that they should all of a sudden be so spread
over so great a Territory as the upper Germany; and therefore cannot be
concluded to be other then the Remain^ and Offspring of those that the
Waldenses had instructed in those times.

But in the next place we do not only find them in the upper, 2. Hollan.
but lower Germany, being spread all over the L^w-Countries.

Cassand. rep^rts well of Anabaptists.
Cassander in his Epistle to the Duke of Cleve, tells us, That the Anabaptists
of the Belgic and lower Germany, are followers of Menno Simonis, and since of
Theodoricus, in both whom were Tokens of a godly mind, and whose Disciples seem
to err more out of ignorance then malice, and therefore, says he, are more
worthy an amendment, then persecution and perdition.

Anab. called Mennists from Menno. Cloppenb.
From the said Menno the Anabaptists in Holland are called Mennists to this day.

Cloppenburg in his Epistle to his Gangrea^e, says, The Troops of Anabaptists
that dwell in Friezland, although they trouble not the Common Wealth, yet they
suffer not the pure reformed Churches to be edified without daily conflicts.

Beza in his Epistle to the Gallabelgick Churches at Embden, says, Beza 's
honorable Testimony of Anabt.
Many of the Anabaptists are good men, Servants of God, Martyrs of Christ, and
our most dear Brethren. Hornbeck p 364.

Vossius in his Book de Baptismo, The learned Zwingerius writ for Anab.
fol. 175. tells us, That the learned Zwingerius in his Book de Baptism, fol.
63. did maintain, that Children were incapable of Baptism through unbelief,
and that it did only belong to the Adult.

He also tells us, Erasmus a favourer of Anabapt.
That Erasmus of ^^tterdam himself seemed not much to differ from him, who
would have all Parents either to baptize in Infancy, or to defer it till they
were of years, provided that they did carefully educate, them in the Doctrine
of Faith, and train them up in good Manners.

Therefore Bell^rmine says of him, 3. Bohemia and M^rav.
That he was not only a friend to them, but had sowed the Seeds of Anabaptisme.

In the next place we find, that as P. Perin tells us, That the Waldenses of
old were dispersed, and their Doctrines taught in Bohemia, Moravia, and
Austria; so there also till they were expelled by the Emperor about 50 years
since were several Anabaptist Churches to be found.

Scultet.
Scultetus in his Annals upon 1528. tells us, That the Brethren in Bohemi^, and
many godly Men in that time were Rebaptized, not that they did favor the many
Errors ^harged upon the Anabaptists; Anabab. a nick name.
but they saw not (they say) how otherwise to separate themselves from the
pollutions of the world, not owning a Rebaptisation, because they esteemed the
former a mere nullity, and unlawful

And farther tells us, That their Martrology mentions, That one of their
sufferers in the year 1553. being asked whether he was Rebaptized, answered,
That he knew no Anabaptist; for being ^nce baptized, was as much as the Word of
God required.

Baltazar Hu^bmer a Dr. in Waldshu^t, a great preacher of this way in Bohemia
and Moravia, Dr. Hubmer and Wife Mart.
whom Osiander calls a Phanatick, and gross Anabaptist, was taken Prisoner with
his Wife, by the Emperors command, who was himself burnt at Vienna in Austria,
and his Wife drowned, for Heretics in the year 1528.

But that which is most considerable in the Account we have to give of Bohemi^,
is what we meet with in the History of Bohemia, writ by Commenius, p. ^^4.
Comenius Hist. of the Anabapt. of Morav.
who giving an account of the distresses that befell them upon the deseat of
Frederick by the Emperors Forces at Prag^^, tell us, That when the Enemy
resolved to exercise their cru^lty against us, they began the year after the
victory with the Anabaptists in Moravia, who possessing about 45. Lived in
Colleges
Houses or Colleges, (many Families dwelling together in them) having all
things managed in partnership, in a public, Stock or in common, according to
their Custom, lived peaceably under their own Discipline, troublesome or
grievous to none, but beneficial to all by their Trades and Callings.

They banished, says he, these first in the year 1622. about Autumn, being
forced to leave their Houses, Lands and Vineyards, though the time of Vintage
was at hand, and carrying the weaker fort with them in some Hundreds of Carts,
went in great Troops into the neighboring Countries of Hungaria and
T^^nsilyania, where he says they could find fit, Seats for themselves, and
whereby they avoided th^se evils that were afte^ to be suffered by (...) that
were left behind And that ^b^se were of the Stock that had been instructed by
the Waldenses of old, may appear by this Custom of living together in Houses or
Colleges, which w^^ their Custom, as Bishop Usher Usher.
in the state of the Church tells us, p. 292. maintaining themselves by their
Manufactures. And living so together, not only for the benefit and comfort of
their ^o^^^ having the better opportunity for Religious service, 4. Hung.
eying also that primitive pattern, Act. 4. But to free themselves more from
observation and persecution which flocking together from several parts might
occasion.

In which way upon good information I find they continue together in H^^garia,
Transylvania, Poland, and some parts of Germany to this day.

Concerning whom a Hungarian Scholar, that about 5, or 6. years since came from
those parts, and had lived amongst them, gave the within a f^^ days this
particular account; That he himself knew four Colleges of them in those Parts,
viz. two in the lower Hungary, one at a place called Coso^^^, and another at
Turk^s Hida, and in the upper Hungary another famous College in a place called
Saras Patack, in which Town he himself lived, (as he told me) and knew the
People very well, and that there were near 100. Families in that College, who
are reputed a very Holy, Harmless, Innocent People, and that they do support
themselves by their Manufactures, brought into one Joynt-stock, Eat altogether
in one great Hall, Worship God together twice a day, each several Manufacture,
being rainged together both as to their Work-Rooms, Lodging^, and Table in the
common Hall, having p^blick Officers to manage all their Affairs, and Schools
for their Children.

In Transylvania he says he knows another, at a place called Alvinez. 5.
Transylvania.
All which, as he says, are the remains of those that came out of Moravia and
Bohemia about 50. years since. I understand that near Heidlberg in the
Palatinate, there is another great College, consisting of near 100. Families,
and that in Prusia there are others of them also.

V^ssius in his Book de Baptismo, P. 177. tell^ us, That the Ministers in
Transylvania do reject Infants Baptism, and Baptize only upon profession; but
he withal says, That many of them are infected with Socinianisme; though this
Hungarian Gentleman tells me, That the Colleges are very free from that
infection.

6. Poland
And farther, That this Truth was spread in Poland (where the Wald^^ses as you will
afterward find had much to do) appears from what we find out of John a Lasco,
the Polonian Baron, in his Book de Sacramentis, where he tells, That the
Anabaptists do refuse to Baptize their Chldren, because they neither do believe
nor understand the Spiritual Mystery thereof, and say there is no ground from
Circumcising Children under the Law, to Baptize them under the Gospel; because
say they there is a Command for the one, and none for the other; and that God
had other ways to save the Children that dyed in their Infancy, then by such
external Ceremonies: And that neither by Circumcision were Children to ^e saved
of old; for then would the ^^mules as well as the Males have been enjoined the
fame, and that it was God^ Covenant of Grace, and no onward Rite or Ceremony
that were to be leaned ^^on to effect the same, to all which as an ^^^my to
their persuasion, he largely replye^ in the said Book. He also in his Theologia
Muscovitica, P. 157. (...) us, That the Ministers of these fraternities in
Poland, do for the most part live single lives, though under no public vows or
constraint, admitting Marriage to any that desire the same, and that they live
very pious lives, as Dr. Usher, P. 363.

A farther and mo^e particular account of the state of these Churches in all
these parts, I doubt not shortly to give you, having lately written into
Germany to a learned and very intelligent person, now (as I hear) writing a
History of them.

And lastly in England it self, 7. Engl.
where several of the Waldenses (and then Disciples out of France, Germany and
Holland had recourse, and) have left us some Prints of their footsteps, viz
Rainard L^^^ard, a famous Waldensian Barbe, was an Evangelist sent into
England, as P. Perin and Morland, P. 184. and whose Disciples were called
Lo^^ards, and imprisoned in that Tower in Paul's Church, known by the name of
Lollards Tower to this day, and which was a Sect. so hated by the Popish Rulers
both in Church and State, that they put a Clause into the Oaths of all
Magistrates, especially Sheriffs and Parliament Men, utterly to exterpate and
root them up, and which form of Oath continued till King James's time.

In Henry II. Time, there were 30. of the Walde^sian Sect taken at Oxford, and
marked with a Key in their Foreheads, and every one forbidden to relieve them,
whereby they perished for want of Sustenance, as Hollingshead in his Cron, and
Bishop Usher in his State of the Church.

In Henry VIII. Time in the year 1528. Seven Dutch Anabaptists that came over
with Anne a Cleve, were apprehended and imprisoned, of whom five bore the
Faggot and recanted, and two of them, a Man and a Woman, were burnt in
Smithfield. Stows Cron. 576.

And again in Henry VIII. Time 1535. Twenty Two Anabaptists were apprehended,
and Ten of them put to Death, F^^ Act. Mon. V. 2. P. 315.

In Queen Mary's Time, about the Year 1^57. we find Anabaptists Imprisoned,
giving the following grounds against Infants Baptism, viz. 1. Because
Antiscriptural. 2. Because commanded by the Pope. 3. Because Christ commanded
teaching ^o go before Baptism, Pox's Acts Mon. V. 3. P. 606.

In Queen Elizabeth's time, in the Year 1575. A Congregation of Anabaptists
were taken at their Meeting within Allgate, Twenty Seven of whom were
Imprisoned, and of them Four recanted, Two were burut in Smithfield, and the
rest were banished, Stows Cron. 676.

In the 16 Year of King James 1618. That excellent Dutch Piece called a very
plain and well grounded Treatise concerning Baptism, that with so much
Authority both from Scripture and Antiquity, proves the Baptizing of Believers,
and disproves that of Infants, was printed in English.

Since when (especially in the last 30. or 40. years) many have been the
Conferences, that have past, and many the Treatises that have been written Pro
and ^on upon that Subject, and many have been the Sufferings both in old and
new Englands that people of that persuasion have undergone, whereby so much
Light has broken forth therein, that not only very many learned men have been
convinced thereof, but very many Congregations of Baptists have been, and are
dally gathered in that good old way of the Lord, that has so long lain under
so much obloquy and reproach, and been buried under so much Antichristian
Rubbish in these Nations.

There are two material Objections that I conceive it will be necessary to
obviate, viz. First, That Concerning the German Anabaptists. The miscarriages
of the German Anabapt. examined and the reproach from thence reflected upon the
way removed.
And Secondly, Concerning some of the Waldensian Confession, the (...) seem to
own the Baptizing of Infants.

To the first, What has been more frequent in these latter Times then to
reflect some gros^ miscarriages of some that went under the name of Anabaptists
in Luthers days, upon the whole profession ever since.

To which I would (say these few things, That take it for granted that things
were so (...) mat^^^ of Fact, that many Anabaptist did prove for horribly
wicked, a^ Sp^^hanti^s, Sl^^den. Osiander and others do report; yet how
unreasonable and uncharitable would it be to render all the people either in
those times or since to be such Persons also, and to judge an Error in the
Principle from the Error in Conversation of some that have professed it; for by
the same Rule may not the purest State of the Church both in the Old and New
Testament be sensured and judged, who had their Chora's, Judases, and
Diatrophes amongst them: But that others that owned that Principle were Men of
another Spirit, both in that as well as former and latter times you have most
ample and authentic Testimony from their greatest Enemies; witness that
honorable Caracter that Rainerius the bloody Inquisitor gives of them in those
days, P. 14. of those in France, Cassander, Bellarmine, Anabaptists well
reported. of.
and Baronius, P. 22. of those in Germany Mr. Baxter himself, one of their
severest Enemies in these Nations, yet has done himself and his opposites that
Right as to witness to the Innocence of their conversation; which you may
please to read in his own words, in his Book called the Defense of the Prin. of
Love, P. 7 viz. That Anabaptists are Godly Men that differ from us in a Point
so difficult, that many of the Papists and Prelatists have maintained, that it
is not determined in Scripture, but depends upon the Tradition of the Church.
And I know as good and sober men of that mind, as of theirs that are most
against them, and that he once motioned Terms of Concord to the Anabaptists,
and was in as hopeful a way for peace with them, as with most others. And in
his late large Book called a Christian Directory, he is pleased to say P. 827.
That Anabaptists may not only be admitted to Church Communion, but may be
tolerated in their practice also. 1. Because they agree with us in all Points
absolutely necessary to Communion, 2. That the Ancient Christians had liberty
either to Baptize, on to let them stay till Age, as they thought best. And
therefore Tertullian and Nazianzen speak against have: And Augustine, and many
Children of Christian Parents were baptized at Age, [and if so, what greater
Argument against Apostolical Tradition.] And 3. That the Controversy is of so
great difficulty, that is in all such Cases none that differ be tolerated, we
may not live together in the World or Church but endlesly excommunicate or
persecute one another.

But in the next place I think it will not be unnecessary, being upon this
Point, to give you some account from the best Authors of the matter of fact it
self, that has occasioned so much blunder in the world; The Rusticks War.
concerning which you must understand there are two things especially reflected
upon, viz. First those many insurrections and disturbances that happened in
Isuria and Swe^ia by times for the space of 22. y^^rs, viz. from 1502. to 1525
called the Clowns or Rusticks War, wherein Munzer and several other Anabaptists
were concerned in Luthers time.

And the other, those horrible thing; that are spoken of to have been in the
City of Munster in Westphalia, from the years 1532. to 1536. by J^. a Layden,
Mathias, Gniperdoling, etc.

As to that of the Clowns War, Baronius
I find in Baronius's Annals, that in the year 1502. there was a Conspiracy of
Husbandmen against the Bishops and Canons, which was called the Rustic League,
which began from two Rusticks, of which Conspiracy the principal Article was,
That they should shak^ off every Yo^e, and in imitation of the Helvetians
should recover their liberty. Which beginning s^ith Osia^der, Cent. 16. P. ^^4.
were the ^^^ludi^m of that great sedition of the Rustick^ which was in its
vigor, 1525.

Gnodol.
Gnodoliu^ ^n his History of the Rusticks in Germany in the year 1525. Lib. 1.
says, That in Swe^^^, where they first began, they did openly signify, that
they were not Gospellers, nor did flow together for the Gospels sake, Upon the
account of Civil and Religious Liberty.
but because of Exactions. The first Boars that rose were against Count
Ly^si^^, to whom after an infinite number of Rusticks did join themselves,
crying up Gospel-Liberty after, as well as Civil, in both which they were so
oppressed, by their Lords and Bishops (which Spanhemius himself, in his Diatro^e
Misteria, refer^ to Luthers Book of Christian Liberty, as the occasion taken by
them.)

Bish Jew
Bishop Jewel in Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, Part 4. Chap
1. Divi^^^n^ to Harding to his upbraiding the reformation, saying, What became
of the Hundred Thousand Boares of Germany, consumed by by the Sword of the
Nobility for that their Sedition and Rebellion? answers him thus. The Boares of
Germany, of whom you speak, for the greatest part, were Adversaries unto
Luther, and understood no part of the Gospel, but conspired together, as they
said against the cruelty and tyranny of their Lords, as they had done 22. years
before in the Conspiracy called Liga Sotularia; the partners of which
Conspiracy had for their word the Vergin Mary, and in honor of her were bound
to say five Ave Mary's every day, Papists as well as Protestants engaged in the
Rustic War
and touching those latter Rebels, Luther writ against them. It is true, Munzer
was a busy man in Thu^ingia, and stirred up the People disposed to tumults by
reason of oppression.

Osiander Osiander.
gives us in the 16 Century P. 36, 37, etc. the Twelve Demands of the Rusticks
comprehending their Civil and Spiritual Liberties, wherein people of all
persuasions concerned themselves; which was no other then their Neighbors the
Switzers had successively undertaken before them: And had Geneva, where they
did the like, or any of the famous Men amongst the Cantons miscarryed in their
attempt, they and their Religion too might have fallen under as much obloquy,
as the chiefest of those people did in their defeat, which the Papasts you find
nevertheless do reflect upon the whole Reformation, and that upon as good
grounds as the Protestants have since reflected upon the Anabaptists; because
there were some of their persuasion concerned in that attempt for freedom.

The first rise of the troubles in Munster.
And as to the other at Munster in 1532. etc. It is manifest both by Spanhaemius
and Osiander, that the first stirs in that City was about the Protestant
Reformation, the Synod siding with Mr. Rotomon, and others of the Ministers
against the Papists, and their Bishop and Canons that opposed them to Arms, and
this before the coming in of Jo, Mathias, and Jo. Becold of Leyden: In the
latter part of the Siege (as they say) monstrous wickedness and villainy by
horrid Pride, Good ground to question the Munster Stories.
Tyranny, and Luxury in their Communities, was perpetrated by them.

Though I must needs say as to the truth thereof there is good ground to doubt.

First, Written either by inveterate Papists.
Because the things are either written by the malicious Papists, their Morat^
old Enemies, and who have said as bad things of Luther and Calvin themselves,
representing them no less Monsters and Devils then these poor People, just as
they used to deal with the Waldenses of old, whereof Dr. Usher gives us a large
account in ^he State of the Church, or else by some of their most inveterate
Enemies the Protestants, Or envious Protestants.
who were willing to take up and improve such reprorts, to blast not only the
whole party of the Anabaptist, but their Principles also; against whom they so
vehemently contended: And alas! how far good men may be transported by
prejudice or malice in this kind, we need not go far for Instances: For if Mr.
Edwards in his Gangrea^^ be to be believed (which it may be other Nations do
that have got it) what Monsters of Men has he represented the Independents and
Anabaptist to be: Or Mr. Baxter himself to be credited in that horrid Calumney
of the Anabaptists, Baptizing naked in these Countries, mentioned P. 134. What
unnatural Brutes would they be esteemed; by which we may guess, if matter of
fact cannot better be told amongst our selves at home, what may we expect of it
abroad at such a distance.

Because of the Community of Goods that they always held.
And besides, there was secondly another thing by which people in all Ages took
an occasion to mis represent this people, which was found amongst them at
Munster, and that was that Community of Goods, casting their Estates into one
common Stock; which says Hornbeck in his Summa Contraversiarum, P. 334. was
the first thing that Becaldus and Gerardus endeavored amongst them in the year
1533. and was the same thing that Osiander tells us Munzerius did in Mulhusium
in Thuringia in the Rustic Tumults 1524. and no other then the Waldenses did
so much practice of old in their Communities, and their Disciples do to this
day both in Poland, Hungaria, Transylvania, and many parts in Germany living in
Colleges in that very way, as you have heard, and will understand more thereof
in the Historical part, and which Custom they observed partly out of
convenience, and partly out of Conscience, respecting the Example, Acts 4.34.
And from hence they took occasion to reproach the Waldenses of old, as though
with their Stocks and Food they had their Women in common too, and from hence
also I persuade my self much of this Clamou^ of the Munster business did arise.

But though if it should be taken for granted that some Anabaptists in Germany
did turn Ranters, and were given up to such desperate Course^ as reported of
them, can that justly be reflected upon the Principle, and upon the Innocent in
other parts of the world, that hate and abhor all such ways and courses.

The other Objection as to the Waldensia^ confession in favor for Infants
Baptism: The other Objection concerning the Waldendensians answered
It is very true that Mr. Baxter, Mr. Marshal, and others beat themselves high
against those that assert the Waldensians, were against Infants Baptism from
two passages.

The first is in that confession that was presented to Ladislaus King of
Bohemia 1508. by his Subjects. and afterward presented to Ferdinand 1535. The
Confession to K Ladislaus, not by the Waldens.
Wherein in the 12. Article they say that they teach, That Children are to be
baptized unto Salvation, and to the consecrated to Christ according to hia word
suffer little Children, etc. In answer whereto we need to say nothing but what
is contained in the very Title it self; saying that they were falsely called
Waldenses justifying themselves from that aspersion, being not of their
Tenants, which you may take in their own words, viz. Lo petit tropel de le
Christians appella per falce nom falsae meant pani^^r^ Ovaldes. Osiander tells
us, That the professors there were a mixed People, some that only separated from
Rome in the business of the Cup, called the Calextines. The other the Hussites
that went farther then they, and the Thabarites that were more through for
Reformation, and more especially did comprehend those they called the Brethren
or Picards, Three sorts of professors in Bohemi^.
many of whom did oppose the Baptism of Infants; but the other two, and the
greatest part of the professors in that Nation did own it, as appears by this
their profession, which does not at all weaken our assertion for I presume it
will not be denied, that all the 45. Colleges belonging to Bohemia and
Moravia, containing many Thousands, were of another persuasion, this being of
so late a Date as the 16. Century.

The other is a passage in that piece called the Spiritual Almanac, owning
that they did Baptize their Children, which was written, as supposed, by George
Moril about 1530. one of the Ministers sent by the Waldenses of Provence to
Occolompadius, Bucer and Capito, to advise with them, being at that time in a
very declining Condition, and to that degree so, that very many of them could
satisfy themselves with going to Mass, and other their Antichristian
A^ominations to save themselves provided they kept their Hearts right with God:
For which provarication Oecolampadius in his Letter Dated 1530. and sent them
back by George Morel, (recorded at large by P. Perin) sharply rebukes and
condemns them, and for which they promised reformation, and to suite themselves
according to the Documents they received from them, which for the most part
since they have done, there being little or no difference between the French
and German Protestants, The Waldenses in France much declined from their
Pristine purity.
especially those that own Calvin's way, being most of them shrunk up, (more is
the pity) into little more then a bare form; little of the old purity, or power
being to be found amongst them, which I conceive cannot at all weaken or
enervate their old Confession, practice and witness, confirmed with so great
Authority, and for so many Ages together. Neither would I be thought to assert
such a universal Harmony; but that it is possible there might be some difference
amongst some of them, even in this particular, as there were many differences
betwixt the Calvinists and Luthera^s; but I profess to you ingeniously amongst
all my search, excepting these two passages of so late a date, I find none.

And I must confess I cannot think it reasonable, that any of them that lived
up to their Principles could embrace such a thing; for they were so zealously
exact, none more for the Letter of the Scriptures, founding all thereon, and
rejecting whatever they found not contained therein, whereas this practice by
Confession of all sides is not to be found in the Letter of Scripture, and none
more severe rejecters of Traditions, and Popish Traditions also, whereof this
is such a principal one Thus have we gone through the Waldensian Story, and
witness, evidencing a concurring Testimony to this great Truth from first to
last.

By all which you see by plentiful Evidence, that Christ has not been without
his witnesses in every Age, not only to defend and assert the true, but to
impugn, and to reject (yea even to death it self) the false Baptism. The
succession of Believers Baptism
Insomuch that we are not left without good Testimony of a Series of
succession, that by Gods Providence has been kept a foot of this Great
Ordinance of Believers Baptism even since the first times.

And in as much as the Ancient Britains, and the Waldenses have so large a
share in this witness, we think it not inconvenient to join the History of the
Antiquity and Purity of their Christianity hereto.

FINIS.
THE History of Christianity AMONGST The Ancient Britains and Waldenses;
Discovering the Antiquity, Purity and Progress thereof; With their great
Sufferings for the same by Popish Antichristian Tyranny and Cruelty.
THe Ancient Britains and Waldenses, having born so early and large a part
among the Eminent and Faithful Witnesses that have stood up for Christ and his
Truths, against Antichrist and his Abominations. I conceive, it may neither be
unseasonable, nor altogether unacceptable to give you a brief Historical
account of their Christianity, from our best and most approved Authors, whereby
it may be manifested, That the Gospel, and the Truths thereof, did flourish in
Power and Purity in these Western parts of the World, as received from the
purest Times, and were so far from being beholden to the Romish Harlot for
Gospel Light and Truth, as she lyingly and vain gloriously boasts, saying,
Where was your Religion, Ministry, Churches, Ordinances before Luther? That she
has all along not only been the abominable Corrupter and Contaminater of the
Gospel, and all the parts thereof; But the malicious and murderous Persecutor
of all that have sincerely embraced and professed the same: A Consideration not
unworthy the present juncture, wherein so much of her poisonous Infection is so
afresh cast about: And which you will find is no small Antidote and Preservative
the worthy Usher prescribes against it, in his excellent Piece called, The
Succession and State of the Church: Renouncing any the least Succession from
whorish Rome, but from these faithful Churches.

The filthiness of whose Fornications, shall in due time be more and more
detected: and that however she may dream of fitting still as a Queen and as the
Lady and Mistress of the Nations, yet must she certainly fall both Mother and
Daughter, those that help, and those that are helped, yea, as a Millstone into
the Sea^: for strong is the Lord God that will judge her. When that Doxology,
Rev. 19.1, 2. must be sung by all the Servants of God, that fear his Name, both
small and great, Allelujah; Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto
the Lord our God. For true and righteous are his Judgments, for he has ^udged
the great Whore, who did c^^rupt ^he Earth with her Fornications, and has
avenged the Blood of his S^^^ants at her hand, Amen. Allelujah.

The First we begin with is our Countrymen, the Ancient Britains, Of the
Britains.
concerning whom little is to be found from their own Writers, either before,
or some Ages after Christ, who either through Ignorance or Sloth, writ nothing;
or if they did, were by the Revolutions of Time devoured.

The most we find is from Strangers, especially the Romans, their first
Conquerors: Whose Writings tell us what a Barbarous, Salvage People they found
them, with their Naked Bodies, and Painted Skins (from whence as Speed says,
Why called Brita^ns.
their name of Britains came, viz. from Brit, Paint; and Tain, a Region.) And
so inhumane, that they offered Man's Flesh in their Sacrifices, and kept their
Women in Common: But afterward as the Gospel came and prevailed amongst them,
they cast away their Heathenish Abominations; and which was so sincerely
embraced by them, and took such deep Rooting amongst them, that they became
Instrumental, in several Ages, to Convert, and Conquer their Conquerors to it;
viz. Both Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans.

Of the Gospels first Entrance and Progress, we have the follo^ing account from
the best Authors we meet with; viz. The First I shall mention, giving any
account hereof, is our Countreyman Gildas, called by Balaeus, Bodonjcus, or
Sapiens, the best and most Authentic of all the Ancient- Brit^in Historians,
who (in his Book called, De Victoria Aurelii Ambrosii) affirms, That Britain
received the Gospel under Tiberius the Emperor, under whom Christ suffered,
and that many Evangelists were sent from the Apostles themselves into this
Nation, and that they came first out of France, about the Year 63. and who were
the first Planters of the Gospel in this Nation. And again in his Book called
De Excidio Britaniae, says, That the Precepts of Christ, though they were
received but lukewarmly of the Inhabitants in general, yet they remained
entirely with some, less sincerely with others, until the ninth year of the
Persecution under Dioclesian the Emperor, which was abou 290. in the third
Century.

Out of an Ancient Book of the Antiquities of England, as Mr. Fox, p. 139.
Elutherius Epistle to King Lucius.
Part. 1. tells us, we find the Epistle of Eleutherius written to Lucius, the
King of Britain, Anno 169. [in answer to his] recorded; By which we
understand, that Lucius had embraced the Faith of Christ, who wrote it seems to
Elutherius, f r the Roman Laws to govern by, who in his said Epistle, as you
may read at large, you have to this purpose; viz. You have received, through
Gods Mercy, in the Realm of Britany, the Law and Faith of Christ you have with
you within the Realm, both the parts of the Scriptures; out of them, by Gods
Grace, with the Council of your Realm, take ye a Law, and by that Law, through
Gods sufferance, rule your Kingdom of Britain, etc.

Tertul.
Tertullian in his Book contra Judaeos, There are places of the Britains (says
he) which were unaccessible to the Romans, but yet subdued to Christ.

Origin Origin.
in his fourth Hom. on Ezekiel. says, The power of God our Savior, is even with
them which in Britain are divided from the World.

Magdib.
Magdiburg. Cent. 3. Cap. 2. p. 6. We doubt not to affirm, That the Churches of
the Island of Britain, did also remain in this Age.

Balaeus Balaeus.
Cent 1. fol. 37. says, That the British Churches received the Nicen
Confession of Faith against the Arians, whence it was that Basil, Chrysostom,
and others of the Greek Fathers make such frequent and great mention of the
British Isles, their reception of the Gospel, and the Divine sense they had of
the Power thereof,
that their Churches also were exactly constituted according to Christ's pattern.

Jeffry of Monmouth in his Book, Jeffr. of Monmou.
de Britanorum Gestis, Lib. 8. c. 4. tells us, That in the Country of the
Britains, Christianity flourished, which never decayed, even from the Apostles
Time; amongst whom, says he, was the preaching of the Gospel, sincere
Doctrine, and living Faith, and such Form of Worship, as was delivered to the
Christian Churches by the Apostles themselves; and that they, even to Death it
self, withstood the Romish R^tes and Ceremonies, and that about the Year 448
the English Saxons began to possess Britany, and that about 593, they having
made a complete Conquest of the Britains, began to settle their Heptarchy; That
in 596 Gregory, Bishop of Rome, sent Austin the Monck into England, to bring
the Saxons into a Conformity to the Church of Rome: For as long as the British
Churches possessed the Country, they kept themselves sound in the Faith, and
pure in the Worship, Order, and Discipline of Christ, as it was delivered to
them from the Apostles, or their Evangelists.

That they were great Opposers of the Church of Rome, the ancient Barde
Taliessyence Taliessyence.
in his Welsh Verses, recorded by Bid, and translated by Fuller in his
Ecclesiastical History, 1. Book, does testify, viz. Woe be to the Priest yborne,
That will not cleanly weed his Corn,
And preach his Flock among.
Woe be to that Shepherd, I say,
That will not watch his Fold always,
As to his Office does belong.
Woe be to him that does not keep
From Romish Wolves his Sheep
With Staff and Weapon strong.


That about the beginning of the Seventh Century, Austin endeavored to reduce
the Britains, as well as the Saxons, to a Conformity with the Church of Rome;
at which time the old Britains were principally in Wales, where Bangor on the
North, and Care-Leon on the South were the two principal Seats, both for
Learning and Religion; In Bangor was a College containing 2100 Christians, who
dedicated themselves to the Lord, to serve him in the Ministry, as they became
capable; To whom was attributed the Name of the Monks of Bangor. Yet did they
no ways accord with the Popish Monks of that, or the following Age: For they
were not reduced to any Ecclesiastical Order, but were for the most part
Laymen, who labored with their Hands, married and followed their Callings;
only some of them, whose Spirits the Lord fi^ted and inclined to his more
immediate Service, devoted themselves to the study of the Scriptures, and other
holy Exercises, in order to the work of the Ministry: Who sent forth many
useful Instruments, Fuller, Lib. 1. p. 40. Balaeus, Cent. 1. c. 70. Many of
whom Austin got to a Council he kept about Worcestershire, where he propounded
to them the embracing the Romish Rites, and to join with him in Preaching and
Administering in their way, which they refused. Then (as Rob. Fabian Fabian.
in his 5th Part, c. 119. fol. 125. tells us, He said to them, Since you will
not assent to my Hests generally, assent you to me specially in three things.
The First in your keeping Easter- D^ (...) Form and Time as it is ordered. The
Second, That you give Christendom to Children. And the Third, That you Preach
to the Saxons, as I have exhorted you. And all the other debate, I shall suffer
you to amend and reform amongst your selves. But, says he, they would not
thereof. To whom then Austin said, That if they would not take peace with their
Brethren, They should receive war with their Enemies; And if they disdained to
preach with them the way of Life to the English Nation, they should suffer by
their hands the revenge of Death: And which Austin accomplishod accorddingly,
by bringing the Saxons upon them, to their utter ruin. And thereupon, says
Fabian, that Faith that had endured in Britain for near 400 Years, became near
extinct throughout the Land.

An account of the Destruction of that famous Monastery of Bangor and those
worthy Christians inhabiting the same, you have thus briefly from Humphrey
Lloyd, Humph. Lloyd.
the learned Welsh Antiquary, in his Breviary of Britain, p. 70, 71. as
follows;

In Denby- Shire, says he, near the Castle of Holt, is seen the Rubbish and
Relics of the Monastery of Bangor, while the glory of the Britains
flourished; In the same were 2100 Monks, very well ordered and learned, divided
into seven parts, daily serving God, amongst whom those that were simple and
unlearned, by their handy labor, provided Meat, and Drink, and Apparel for the
Learned, and such as applied themselves to their studies, and if any thing was
remaining, they divided it unto the Poor. That place sent forth (says he) many
hundred of excellently well-learned Men, amongst whom it also vomited forth to
the World, Pelagius. And afterward, by the Envy and Malice of Austin, that
arrogant Monck, and the most cruel execution of his Minister Ethelfred. Those
worthy Men were destroyed, the whole House, from the very Foundation, together
with their Library (more precious than Gold) was razed down, and demolished by
fire and sword.

And hence it is manifest, that this bloody Massacres of those glorioas
Witnesses of Christ did arise from their Christian Courage and Zeal against
those Antichristian impositions of the Romish Church.

The History of Christianity amongst the Ancient Waldenses.
Of the W^^^^^ses.
THe other Historical Account we are to give you, is that of the Waldenses, that
eminent and famous Christian People, who have not only given so large a
Testimony to the truth before treated; but by the Learned Usher, and many of
our Protestant-Writers, are owned to have been the true Church, and from whom
the Protestants do derive, in Opposition to the Papacy: Concerning whom, the
better to preserve the savor of their precious Memory,

We shall observe in their Story, this following Method, viz.

1. Give you an account of their several Names they are known by in History. 2.
Their Original and Antiquity. 3. Their excellent and worthy Conversations; as
testified by their greatest Enemies. 4. The Progress and Success of the Gospel
in their hands and the Methods thereof. 5. Their (...) it (...) W tness
against, and great Sufferings under Antichrist, as I have collected them out of
the best Historians, both of their own and others. Though as to their own
Records (as Perin and Morland inform us) the Papists have used no small
industry to raze and obliterate, as they have had the opportunity; though in
spite of their utmost malice of that kind, Providence has preserved something
from themselves.

First, As to the Names, Their Names in Story.
by which they are known and distinguished in History, you will find to be
various; viz. Sometimes from the Places and Countries of their abode; Sometimes
from their Men of Name; sometimes from Reproach and Slander.

1. From the Places of their abode, 1. From the places of abode.
therefore called Lyonists, or the poor People of Lions, from that City or
County of Lions in France.

Albigenses, from the City Albi in Languedoc; Tholouzions, from the City
Tholous in the same Province; Arletenses, from the City Arles, the chief Seat
of the Kings of Burgundy in Province; Picards, from Picardy; Lumbards, from
Lumbardy in Italy; Gazars, either from a City, so call, in Languedock, or from
the word of disgrace, signifying Execrable.

2. From their principal Leaders.
Sometimes by some of their Principal Leaders; as Waldenses, as many suppose
from one Waldo a Citizen of Lions; though others suppose upon another account,
because they were so called long before his time, as appears by the Book of
Claudius Seiscelius a Councellor to Charles the Great, in the 8th Century, who
mentions them by that Name, in his Book Advers. Waldenses, who though a good
man, and in many things holding with them, yet in some things against them,
which was 260 Years before Waldo's time.

Beringarians.
Sometimes they are called Beringarians, from the famous Beringarius, one of
their Barbs, or Elders; sometimes Petro Brusians, from that worthy Martyr Peter
Bruis; sometimes Arnoldists, from Arnold, another eminent Barb. and Martyr;
sometimes Henericans, from Henericus; sometimes Ioseplests, from Joseph;
Lolarde, from Lolard another of their eminent Barbs.

3. From Nicknames.
Sometimes by Nicknames, or terms of Disgrace, viz. The Apostolici, or
Apostolic men, The Cathart, or Puritans, the old name of reproach, by which
the Novatians and Donatists were called in the 4th Cent. Perfectionists,
because they pressed after Holiness. Publicanos, because they said, they were
sent to publish the Gospel. The Fratracili, or the little Brethren; and
Fraticelli, viz. Shifting Companions. Passagenes, from their Itinerat
Preachings. Credentes, the Believers. The Humiliati, the humble Men. The
Bon-homes, the good Men. Siccars, Cut-purses. Gazars, Execrable.

Turlupins, because like Wolves they inhabited. Woods, Caves, and Mountains.

Sometimes from slanderous, lying Reflections.

As the Paterines, as though they only worshipped the Father, but refused to
adore the Son; because they would not fall down to the Host, nor give reverence
to their Breaden God. And from like reason also Arians, as denying thereby the
Divinity of Christ. Manichees, because they denied the Civil Magistrates
Authority to depend upon the Popes, as men asserting therefore two Principles.
Deuyers of Baptism, because they denied that of Bapt. of Infants, and their
Inventions to be Christ's Ordinance. Denyers of Marriage, because they disowned
that to be one of the Sacraments, and that many of their Barbs lived single
Lives.

Secondly, As to their Original and Antiquity which you will find to be very
Ancient.

The Antiquity of their Christianity.
Eusebius tells us in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 5. p. 74. That there
were Churches of them in those parts of France, under Antonius Verus the
Emperor, An. 179. recording there a large Epistle written by them, and as a
Preamble thereto, he makes this following Inscription, Of the Martyrdom of
Saints, and cruel Persecution in France, under Anton. Verus the Emperor.

It was the Country of France, wherein the Theater of this Wrestling,
beforementioned lay, whose chief Cities and most frequented, in respect of the
rest in the same Region, are Lions and Viena, by both which Cities the River
Rhodonus does run, compassing that whole Country: The holy Churches there sent
their Letter touching their Martyrs, unto the Churches throughout Asia and
Phrygia, making relation of their affairs, after this manner: The Servants of
Christ inhabiting Vienna and Lions, Cities of France, unto the Brethren
throughout Asia and Phrygia, having with us the same Faith and Hope of
Redemption; Peace, and Grace, and Glory from God the Father, and Christ Jesus
our Lord be multiplied.

Which excellent Epistle they mention at large, and which also you may read in
the Book of Martyrs.

In the Preface to the French Bible, Morland.
and the first that ever was Prnted, they say, That they have always had the
full enjoyment of that Heavenly truth, contained in the Holy Scriptures, ever
since they were enriched with the same by the Apostles themselves, having in
fair Manuscripts preserved the entire Bible in their Native Tongue, from
Generation to Generation, Morland Hist. p. 14.

Rainerius, Rainerius
one of their grand Persecutors, and chief Inquisitor, in the time of Pope
Innocent the Third, in the thirteenth Century, gives this account of their
Antiquity. Among all the Sects which are, or ever were, thereis none more
pernicious to the Church of God than that of the Poor People of Lions.

First, Because it is of a longer duration, some say it has remained from the
time of Pope Sylvester, some from the times of the Apostles.

Theodore Belvedre, Balvedre.
another of the Popish Missionaries, says, that That Religion (which he calls
Heresy) has been always in the Valleys of Angrogna, in his Book De Pro.
Fide, p 37.

Beza Beza.
affirms in his Book, History des Homes illustres, That the Waldenses were so
called from their abode in the Valleis and straiter parts of the Alps, where
they had from a long time retired themselves, and one may say, they were the
Relics of the Pure, Primitive, Christian Churches; Some of them were called,
The Poor Men of Lions, who as some men have judged had for their Head a
Merchant of Lions named John, and surnamed Waldo; but herein they abuse
themselves, because on the contrary this John was so named, being one of the
Waldenses.

Scultetus.
The Waldenses in their Letter to Ocolampadius affirm, That their Churches had
continued down in constant Succession from the Apostles times, so Scultetus
Anal. in Anno 1530. p. 295.

Beza, Beza
as Peter Perin, c. 6. tells us, That the Seed of the most Ancient Christian
Church, That was and has been most miraculously preserved in the midst of the
Darkness and Errors which have been hatched by Satan in these later times. And
farther tells us, That Constance upon the Revelations shows, that the
Reformation of the Church in the West parts of the World, began in France, and
that from their source it spread it self through the rest of Europe.

In the next place you have some account of their Conversation, Of their
Conversation.
given by their Enemies themselves.

Rainerius, Reinerius
the Inquisitor aforesaid, says thus of them, That whereas all others procure
horror by their blasphemies against God, this of the Lyonists, has a greater
appearance of Piety, in as much as they live uprightly before men, and put
their trust in God in all things, and observe all the Articles of the Creed;
only they blaspheme the Church of God, and hold it in contempt, and therein
they are easily believed of the People.

And again Jacob de Riberia Secretary to the King of France, in his Collections
of Toulouse, has these words, viz. The Waldenses, or Lugdenses, have continued
a long time; the first place they lived in was in Narbone in France, and in the
Diocese of Albie, etc. who disputed of Religion more subtly than all others:
were after admitted by the Priests to Teach publicly, not for that they
approved their Opinion, but because they were not comparable to them in Wit. In
so great honor was the Sect of these men, that they were both exempted from
all Charges and Impositions, and obtained more benefit by the Wills and
Testaments of the Dead, than the Priests: A man would not hurt his enemy, if he
should meet him upon the way, accompanied with one of these Heretics; in so
much that the safety of all men seemed to consist in their protection. Du
Plessis Mist. Iniquit. p. 331.

Amongst the Rules and Directions Reinerius gives to discover these Heretics
by (as he calls them) these are written by him, as you will find them in the
Bib. Pat. printed at Paris, 1624.

Reinerius.
Heretics, says he, are known by Words and Manners; They are in Manners
composed and modest, no pride in Apparel, because they are therein neither
costly nor sordid. They transact their affairs without lying, fraud, and
swearing, being most upon Handicrafts Trades: Yea their Doctors, or Teachers
are Weavers and Shoomakers, who do not multiply Riches, but content themselves
with necessary things: These Lyonists are very chaste and temperate both in
Meats and Drinks, who neither haunt Taverns or Stews; They ^o much curb their
Passians, they are always either working, teaching, or learning, etc. very
frequent in their Assemblies and Worships, etc. They are very modest and
precise in their words, avoiding Scurrility, Detraction, Levity and Falsehood.
Neither will they say so much as Verily, Truly, nor such like, as bordering too
much upon Swearing, as they conceive; but they usually say, Yea and Nay.

Claudius, Claudius.
Archbishop of Turin, in his Treatise against the Waldenses, gives this
Testimony of them, That as touching their Lives and Manners they have been
always sound, and unreproveable, without reproach or scandal amongst men,
giving themselves, to their power, to the observation of the Commandments of
God, Perins H^st. p 40.

The Cardinal Baronius Baronius.
attributes to the Waldenses of Toulouse, the Title of good men, and that they
were a peaceable People, Baron. Tom. 12. An. 1176. 835. However, he elsewhere
(says Perin) imputes unto them sundry Crimes, and that very falsely.

The Lord Hailon.
Bernard de Girard, Lord of Haillon, says in his Histor. of France, Lib. 10.
The Waldenses have been charged with wicked things they are not guilty of
because, says he, they stirred the Popes and great Men of the World to hate
them for the Liberty of their Speech, which they used in condemning the Vices
and dissolute Behavior of Princes and Ecclesiastical persons.

Viret, Viret.
Lib. 4. c. 13. p. 249. speaks of the Waldenses as follows,

The Papists, says he, have imposed great Crimes, and that very wrongfully,
upon those Ancient, Faithful People, commonly called Waldenses, or the poor
People of Lions, whose Doctrine makes appear, That the Pope is Antichrist, and
that his Doctrine is nothing else but Humane Traditions, contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ Jesus; For which cause they have dealt against them, as the
Ancient Panims did against the Christians, accusing them that they killed their
own Children in their Assemblies.

Many more Evidences might be brought from their Enemies, who have been
enforced, by the force of Truth it self, to give most honorable reports of
them; But let this suffice.

The next thing we shall acquaint you with, The Progress of the Gospel amongst
them.
is the great Progress and Success of their Doctrine.

Bullinger tells us, That not only throughout France, but Italy, Germany,
Poland, Bohemia, and other Countries and Kingdoms of the World, the Waldenses
have made profession of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Bullin. in the Preface to
his Sermons.

Rainerius Rainerius
says, That another thing that makes this Sect more considerable than all
others, is because it is more general; For there is not any Country almost,
whereinto this Sect has not crept.

Math. Paris M. Paris.
says, in his History of the Life of Henry the 3d in the year 1223. That the
Waldenses had goodly Churches in Bulgaria, Croatia, Dalmatia and Hungaria.

George Mrel in his Memorials, p. 54. asserts, That notwithstanding all the
bloody Persecutions, that attended the Waldenses, That in the Year 1160. There
was in those days above eight hundred thousand Persons, that made profession of
the Faith of the Waldenses.

The Sea of Histories Sea of History.
tells us, That in the Year. 1315. there was in the County of Passau, and about
Bohemia, to the number of fourscore Thousand Persons, that made Profession of
the Faith of the Waldenses.

Le Sieur de Popeliniere Popleniere.
has set down in his History, That the Religion of the Waldenses has spread
it self almost in all parts of Europe, even amongst the Polonians, etc. And
that after the Year 1100 they have always sowed their Doctrine, little
differing from that of the Modern Protestant, and maugre all the Powers and
Potentates that have opposed t^emselves against them, they have defended it to
this day.

Rainer.
Rainerius says, That in his time there were Churches of them in
Constantinople, Philadelphia, Sclavonia, Bulgaria, and Digonicia, and in
Albania, Lombardy, Milain, and in Romagnia, Venice, Florence, etc.

Vignier Vignie^.
says, That after the Persecution of Picardy, that they were dispersed abroad
in Livonia and S^rmatia.

Trithemius Trith^m
recounts, That they confessed in those times, that the number of the Waldenses
was so great, that they could go from Cologne to Milan, and lodge themselves
with Hosts of their own Profession, and that they had Signs upon their Houses
and Gates, whereby they might know them.

In the Year 1200. they were in such a manner multiplied, that they possessed at
home the Cities of Toulouse, Apamies, Montauban, Vill^mur, St. Antoin, Puech
Laurence, Castres, Lambs, Carcasonen, Beziers, Narbonne, Beaucaire, Avignion,
Tarascon, the Count Venicin, in Dauphine, Crest Arnaud, and Monteil Amar. And
had many great Lords who took part with them, as Ea^l Raimiand of Toulouse, and
the Earl of Foix, the Vicount Beziers, Gaston Lord of Berne, Earl of Carmaine,
and Earl of Brigor; The Kings also of Arragon and England too, d^d many times
defend their Cause, by reason of their Alliance with Earl Ra^miand, Hologary in
the History of Foix.

The means they used to propagate the Gospel.
The means by which Truth came to be so propagated by them, were principally
these; First, By the diligent care they had to instruct their Youth in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, and to train them up in the Nurtriture, Fear and
Admonition of the Lord, as the Nurseries, Seminaries, and Seed-plots of Grace
and Truth.

Secondly, The industrious Care and Pains they took, not only to beget
Ministerial Abilities, but the due improvement made thereof, by those engaged
therein, in all parts and places whither they were sent.

And Thirdly, By the violent Persecutions of them, whereby they came to be
dispersed into most parts of the World, that old way, That Knowledge and Truth
was propagated in the Primitive Times.

1. By diligently instructing the Youth.
The First means blessed for the increase of Knowledge, was the Care and Pains
they took in the Catechizing of their Youth, instructing them in the Knowledge
of the Scriptures. P. Perrin.
Perrin in his Second Book, p. 16. And in this it was, says he, P. Perrin.
that they have been blessed of God, above all Christian People throughout
Europe, insomuch that their Infants were hardly weaned from their Mothers
Breasts, but their Parents took a singular Care and Diligence to instruct them
in the Christian Faith and Doctrine, until they were able to confound the
Ancient and the Learned. And of which you have a very pregnant Instance out of
Vessember, Vessember.
in his Oration touching the Waldenses, who tells us, The Bishop of Cavaillon,
in the time of the great Persecution against the Waldenses of Merindal in
Provence, first sent a Monck among them, to convert them; who returned so
convinced himself, that he confessed, he had not so much profited in his whole
life in the Scriptures, as he had done in those few days of Conference with
them. The Bishop not being satisfied with this trial, sent a Company of young
Doctors that came lately from Sorbonne, to confound them by the Subtilty of
their Question; But one there was among the rest, that said at his return, with
a loud voice, That he had learned more touching the Doctrine necessary to
Salvation, in attending to the Answers of the little Children of the Waldenses
in their Catechisings, than in all the Disputations of Divinity which he had
ever heard in Paris. Then the Bishop sent for the Children themselves, and
caused them in the face of a great Assembly to be interrogated, and to Question
one with another, and which was done with that Grace, and Gravity, and
Understanding, that it was marvelous to hear: to the confounding the Doctors
and Learned Men then present. The Story whereof you may read at large in Fox
Martyrol. 2 Book, p. 194.

And thus it was that every Family was as it were a College, to instruct into
the true Learning, that makes wise to Salvation, and furnishes to every good
Word and Work, and which was the Seed-plot to their Ministry.

Rainarius Rainarius
tells us, That they had the Old and New Testament in the Vulgar Tongue, and
that they Teach and Learn it so well, That he had seen and heard, he said, a
Country Clown recount all Job, word for word; and diverse others, that could
perfectly deliver all the New Testament; And that Men and Women, little and
great, day and night cease not to Learn and to Teach.

Secondly, 2. By improving their Ministry.
As to the way of their Ministry, That special means appointed by God to beget
Faith, and increase Knowledge, you have it briefly set forth by P. Perrin, as
he had extracted it out of their ancient Manuscripts, viz. All those who are to
be received as Pastors amongst us, while they remain with their Brethren, are
to entreat our People to receive them into the Ministry, as likewise that they
would please to pray to God for them, that they may be made worthy of so great
a Charge; and this they are to do, to give a Proof, or Evidence of their
Humility. We also appoint them their Lectures, and set them their Tasks, that
they may get by heart, not only all the New Testament, but a great part of the
Old, viz. The Writings of Solomon, David, and the Prophets; And afterward
having a good Testimonial, and being well approved of, they are received with
Imposition (or laying on of Hands) and Preaching. He that is received the last,
ought to do nothing without the permission of him that was received before him;
and in like sort, the former ought to do nothing without the consent of his
Associate. Our daily Food, and that Raiment wherewith we are covered, we have
ministered and given to us freely, sufficient for us, by the good people whom we
Teach and Instruct.

Their Ministers were called Barbes or Unkles, as Fox, 186. Or as some suppose,
because bearded Men, Elders or Fathers. Vignier.
Of these some were married, to manifest thereby their approbation of the state
of Matrimony; others kept themselves single for conveniences sake, forasmuch as
they were oft^times obliged to remove and shift their Habitations and Abodes;
and as occasion required, to undertake long and tedious Voyages, for the
propagating of the Gospel, in remote and far Countries, with whom they had a
particular and constant Correspondence; namely into Bohemia, Germany, Calabria
and Lumbardy, whither the abovesaid Barbes went by turns as Iteneraries, to
visit their Brethren there, and to preach the Gospel of Christ amongst them,
having not only Houses of their own to entertain their Barbes, but Schools also
in diverse Countries. Vign. Mem. p. 15.

Morland.
Those Barbes who remained at home in the Valleys (besides their officiating
and laboring in the work of the Ministry) took upon them the disciplining and
instructing of the Youth, especially those who were appointed for the Ministry,
in Grammar, Logic, Moral Philosophy and Divinity. Moreover the greatest part
of them gave themselves to the study of Physic and Surgery, and herein they
excelled (as their Histories tell us) to admiration, thereby rendering
themselves most able and skilful Physicians, both of Soul and Body. Others of
them deal in diverse Mechanic Arts, in imitating of Paul, who was a
Tent-maker, and Christ himself, who was a Carpenter. Once in the Year they use
to have a general Meeting in the Month of September, to treat of their affairs.
Taken out of an Ancient Italian Manuscript, as you have it, Morlands Hist. 1
Book, 8. c. p. 183.

Bucer, Bucer.
p. 159. says, Besides Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, they have a
certain College of Men excelling in Prudence and Gravity of Spirit, whose
office it is to admonish and correct offending Brethren, to compose such as
disagreed, and judge in their Causes.

And again in Morlands Morland.
Hist. p. 179. Their Ministry were through Gods grace endued with excellent
Spirits, and were for the most part, a Generation of humble, holy, and harmless
Men, of meek, peaceable and quiet Tempers, exceeding painful in their Calling,
and carefully watching over their Flock committed to their charge. Laboring
faithfully in the Lords Vineyard, and employing their whole Time and Talents
for turning Souls unto Righteousness, which they did with much Labor,
Watchings, and Fastings; by suffering many Buffetings, Stripes, and
Imprisonments, yea and many times by Death it self; Sealing (...) Truths they
Preached to others with ^^^ir own Blood: In sum, they were men ^ortified to all
the Pomp, Glories, and Riches, to all the Pleasures, Honors, and Preferments
that this World could afford them; having their Conversations as Strangers,
Pilgrims, and Sojourners here bilow, conforming themselves, as near as they
could, to the Scripture-pattern and Example of the Apostles, and proportionable
thereto were their Labors blessed, and succeeded to admiration in all places
where they came.

Perin H^st. p. 16. Their Pastors, says he, did not only content themselves to
exhort them on the Sabbath- days, but went all the Week to instruct them in
their Villages, Preaching also in the Fields to the keepers of the flocks.

The other way whereby the Gospel was thus promoted and spread, 3. By their
great Sufferings.
was by the great Sufferings and Persecutions that attended them, especially
from the 12th Century downwards; For till then, as observed by Fox, Usher, and
others, there was more Calmness and Serenity, Satan being as it were bound, as
they conceived; and the Reason thereof a Learned Pen observes to be, That
Antichrist till about this time was not arrived to his (...), or perfect
stature, having now attained as well a Temporal as Spiritual Sovereignty; his
temporal Advantages accrued most to him by the Donation of Pipin and Charles
the Great, etc. And his Spiritual not only by the Establishment of the several
Orders of the Regular Monks and Friars, viz. The Benedictines, Franciscans, and
Dominicans, which much advanced and strengthened the Popish Usurpations; But the
Ratification of the Canon Law about this time collected by Gratian, as also the
Sophistical School Divinity now begun by Lombard, Aquinas, and Albertus Magnus
that gave no small addition thereto. Now it was they durst cope with Kings and
Emperors for Sovereignty, and assert their Bloody Idolatrous Masses, Images,
Breaden God, with all Force, Cruelty, and Violence imaginable.

Against whose Pride, Pomp, Idolatry, and Antichristian Usurpation, does the
Lord raise up these his Witnesses, even these poor, mean, contemptible People,
who by asserting and maintaining Christ's Ministry and Ordinances, according to
the Simplicity and Plainess of the Scriptures, faithfully do oppose, impugn and
confront all the Popish Traditions, Usurpations, and Inventions, in all their
Grandeur. And so it may be said, That against the Beast and his Armies does the
Lamb and his Army oppose themselves.

The Waldenses now standing up with a loud Voice, do call upon all to come out
of Babylon, to have no Fellowship or Communion with her; detecting her to be
that Abomination that was to sit in the Temple of God, and that should corrupt
the Earth with her Filthiness; And about this time it was that that most
excellent Piece touching Antichrist was brought forth by them, which deserves
to be written in Letters of Gold, supposed to be written by Peter Bruis, the
famous French Martyr, and which has been preserved in all Ages since, by the
Waldenses in the Alps, whence Perin tells us he received it, and which he has
Printed at large, Par. 3. Lib. 3. c. 1. An Extra^t of their Treatise of
Antichrist.
In which Treatise we have Antichrist described to be the Mystery of Iniquity,
or a Lie under the cloak of Truth.

2. It is said, That this Antichrist is not one single Person, but a
Confederacy of Iniquity, in opposition to Christ, etc.

3. This Contrariety of Antichrist to Christ, consists, (1.) In his Wordly
Wisdom. (2.) His Pharisaical Religion. (3.) Managing Spiritual Power by Secular
Tyranny, Riches, Dignity, etc. (4.) By filling up the Churches of Christ with
carnal Worldlings.

4. That the perfection of Antichrist consists in a full Usurpation of the
Authority of Christ, according to 2 These. 2.4.

5. That the work of Antichrist is to change Truth into Error, and Error into
Truth. (2.) To rob Christ of his Merits, etc. (3.) Placing Sanctification of
the Spirit in externals, and Grace and Salvation in the work done. (4.)
Neglecting Discipline. (5.) By maintaining Unity by Tyranny.

6. The Subterfuges of Antichrist are laid open, and its Causes.

7. The moving Causes and Scriptures loudly calling to come out from, and not
to touch her, etc.

By such like Exasperations did the Popes, whose Interest and Grandeur was thus
struck at, come forth now with all the Subtilty, Malice, and Revenge, that Hell
and their Devilish Natures could invent, and that by several Methods and
Stratagems to crush and suppress Truth; which the more they endeavored, the
more it throve and got ground, and encreast in the Nations; The Blood of the
Martyrs proving the Seed of the Church.

Whose cunning, murderous Designs were much after this sort; the seve^al ways
of their perse^utions
First, The ^he better to discover their Persons and Principles, they sent
forth Missionaries in all points to imitate them, in a plain, humble way to go
up and down afoot amongst them, to dispute with them, to preach to them, to
gain upon them; of this sort was Francis, Dominick, and Benedict, for whose
excellent Service then, they have since Sainted, and set up Orders in their
Names, in imitation of the poor People of Lions, or as they would be thought,
in an Apostolic guise: But when that would not do, when they could neither
flatter, dispute, nor preach them out of the Truth, then they.

Secondly came forth with Synodical Censures, Condemnations, Anathema's and
Curses, Popes Bulls and Decretals, with Emperors Statutes, Decrees, and
Injunctions. But they nothing prevailing,

Thirdly, They sent our their Inquisitors, empowered and commissioned to
Examine, Censure and Condemn, and to deliver up to the Secular Powers to all
manner of Tortures and cruel Deaths, which they exercised with great Severity,
but all in vain.

Fourthly, They betook themselves to Surprises and Massacres, and to stir up
Kings and Princes to raise Armies, to suppress, and root up this Generation,
and by Fire and Sword to lay waste their Cities and Countries; which they did
with great Devastation, especially in Province, Daulphine, Languedoc; But the
effect was, as they drove them out of one Country and Place, they went into
others; and where ever they came, they still met with the same measure from
that spirit: But God carried them through wonderfully, so that they could
rejoice and glory in their Tribulations, that they were accounted worthy to
suffer for Christ's sake, and whose titles of Honor, as they say in the
Preface of their Bible, were Injured, Reproached, Fugitives, Forsaken,
Despised, Abandoned, Excommunicated, Anathematized, Confiscated, Imprisoned,
Tortured, Banished, publicly disgraced, wearing Miters in Derision, spit upon,
shown upon Scaffolds, their Ears cut off, their Flesh plucked off with Pincers,
drawn with Horses, dragged up and down, broyled, roasted, stoned to Death,
burnt, drowned, beheaded, dismembered, and other like glorious and honorable
Titles, they say, of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But the more they designed to suppress Truth by these means, the more it
thrive; These worthy Confessors being found Overcomers by the Blood of the
Lamb, and word of their Testimony, not loving their Lives unto the Death; as it
was experienced in the several Countries, in the several Ages hereafter
mentioned, as at large is given you in P. Perrins Hist. Viz.

The Sufferings of the Waldenses Churches in Dauphine, in the 12, 13, 14, and
15 Cent. Chap. 3.

Their Sufferings in Pi^dmont in the 14, 15, 16 Cent. chapter 4.

Their Sufferings in the Marquisate de Saluces, 16, 17 Cent. c. 5.

Their Sufferings in the New Lands, 16 Cent. c. 6.

Their Sufferings in Calabria, 14. and 16. Cent. c. 7.

Their Sufferings in Province, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, Cent. c. 8.

Their Sufferings in Bohemia, 15 Cent. c. 9.

Their Sufferings in Austria, 14, and 15. Cent. c. 10.

Their Sufferings in Germany, 13, 14, 15. Cent. c. 11.

Their Sufferings in England, 12, 13 Cent. c. 12.

Their Sufferings in Flaunders, 13 Cent. ^ 13.

Their Sufferings in Poland, 12, 14. Cent. Chap. 14.

Their Sufferings in Paris, 13, 14. Cent. c. 15.

Their Sufferings in Italy, 13, 14, 15. Cent. Chap. 16.

Their Sufferings in Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclavonia, Constantinople, Greece,
Philadelphia, Digonicia, Livonia, Sarmatia, Bulgaria, in the 13. Cent. c. 17.

Their Sufferings in Spain. 13. C. c. 18.

Their Sufferings by the cruel Wars managed against them by Pope Innocent the
Third for eighteen Years together, in conjunction with many Kings and Princes,
in the 13 Cent. together with other Wars carried on by other Popes and Kings of
France and Spain in the 13 and 14 Cent. with the wonderful detriment that
accrued also to the Enemy, who lost sometimes an Hundred Thousand Men at a
Siege, you have largely set forth in Perrin's Hist. of the Albigenses, in 2
Books. Their Sufferings at Merindal and Cabriers by Fox, p. 201. vol. 2. Their
late Sufferings in our time by the Duke of Savoy, in the Valleys of Piedmont,
1655. is largely set forth by Sir Samuel Morland, who was the Agent sent with
the English Contribution.

Having thus finished the Historical Account of these Eminent Worthies, I
cannot but again remember you, That this was the People that bore so great a
witness for Believers, and so firmly opposed Infants Baptism, as by so many
Arguments in the Seventh Chapter is made good to you.

A Postscript.
UPon the closing of my Papers, Mr. Bunions Book in Answer to Mr. Paul's coming
to hand [called Differences about Baptism no Far to Communion] defending
still, That Churches may and ought to hold Fellowship with Unbaptised Persons.

I took my self concerned, having briefly hinted to his former, to give some
short return to this also, leaving his manifold Absurdities, Contradictions,
unbrotherly Tauntings and Reflections, Contemptions, traducings the wisdom of
Christ, and his holy Appointments, to be called to account by that hand, that
has so well begun to reckon with him.

The little that I shall do herein, is not to trace him in his Meanders, or to
answer his Reflections with Reflections, but in a few things to discover, how
he has darkened Counsel by words without Knowledge, and whilst he pretends
Brotherly love, violates the very Law of Charity, and under pretense of
pleading for Truth, introduces heinous Error, and fundamentally mistakes
himself in both his Books.

Five of Six of which Fundamental Mistakes are here detected, and which, I
conceive, may be as full an Answer to both his Books, as if Volumes were
written thereto* For according to the Maxim, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri
potest per panciora; In vain we do that by much, which may be done by less:
which therefore take as follows, viz.

Mr. Bunians Fundamental Mistakes.

1. Asserts Principles without Scripture to warrant them
First, By asserting that for a Principle and Practice in the Worship of God,
that has neither footing nor Foundation in the Word of God, and for which
neither Precept nor Example is produced to warrant it.

A Presumption, then which as nothing can savor more of Ignorance and Folly,
Isai. 8.20. Jer. 8.9. so nothing more dangerous and destructive to Religion it
self, as Mark 7.7, 8, 9.

Secondly, 2. Positively contradicts Scripture Precepts and Practice
In so positively thwarting and contradicting not only the Wisdom and Authority
of Christ in his Commission, who enjoynes Baptism to be the next thing after
Faith and Conversion, Matthew. 28.19.

But the constant Practice of the Saints in obedience to it. As for instance,
Acts 2.41. it is said, Then (viz. immediately) they that gladly received his
Word were baptized, and the same Day added, and so continued in Fellowship, and
breaking of Bread, etc. Where you have the direct Order kept, 1. Teaching. 2.
Baptizing. Then 3. Church Fellowship, and Breaking of Bread, which is the
standing Directory to the Worlds end, and not Teaching, Church Fellowship, and
then B^ptisme after.

So Acts 22.16. Ananias exhorts Paul, after his Confession, to arise and be
baptized, with a Why tarriest thou? Though he had eaten nothing of three days,
Acts 9.9. being a Duty that admits not of Delays. It was not, Arise, and go and
break Bread with the Church, but, Arise and be Baptized in the first place.

And therefore the Jailor, Act. 16.33. must after his conversion, straitway,
yea, in that same hour of the night, without further delay, be baptized, as a
thing not to be neglected for a moment.

And so also Cornelius in Acts 10.47. though he was Baptized so eminently with
the Spirit, yet must forthwith be commanded to be baptized with Water, a thing
by no means to be deserred, as Peter's words imply, who upon his seeing him so
filled with the Spirit, says, Can any man forbid Water that these should not
be Baptized, etc. No sure, no man of Knowledge or Conscience, can do it, or will
admit of delays therein.

And the reason hereof is plain, Because this was the Listing, Espousing,
Covenanting, Ingrafting, Implanting Ordinance; Believers being expressly said
hereby to be planted into Christ, Gal. 3.27. and Baptized into Christ, Romans
6.3. And which Baptizing and Planting into Christ, is no other but an Orderly
entering into the Visible Church, or Body of Christ, as so fully expressed, 1 Cor.
12.12. An Order faithfully to be observed as a Fundamental Practice, Heb. 6.2.
and which must be kept, Ephesians. 2.21. and duly regarded, 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. upon the
severe penalties threatened, Mat. 5.19. 2 John 9. Act. 3.22, 23.

And which lies so full and clear in the Scriptures, that it has obtained an
universal Consent by most that have owned the Christian Religion, and in any
Form professed the same, whether Papists, Protestants, Independants, Baptists.
In so much that Mr. Baxter himself in his plain Scripture proof, p. 126. says,
That if any shall be so impudent as to say, it is not the meaning of Christ,
that Baptizing should immediately follow Discipling, they are confuted by the
constant Example of Scripture. So that, says he, I dare say, this will be out
of doubt with all rational, considerate, impartial Christians.

So that Mr. Bunian, in his opposing this Principle, may well be said, Not only
not to please God, but to be contrary to all men. And whose return to Mr. Paul
hereupon is so ridiculous, that it may not be unworthy your knowledge, as
witnessing either his egregious Ignorance, or Self-condemnation therein, which
I shall give you in his own words, p. 98. who first sets down Mr. P. Question,
viz. Whether your Principle and Practice is not equally against others, as well
as us, viz. Episcopal, Presbyterians, and Independants, who are also of our
side for our practice, though they differ with us about the subject of Baptism,
( viz. 1. to Baptize, then to Communicate) Do you delight to have your hand
against every man?

Bun. Ans.
B. Answ. I own Water Baptism to be Gods Ordinance, but I make no Idol of it.
Where you call now the Episcopal to side with you, and also the Presbyterian,
etc. You will not find them easily persuaded to conclude with you against me,
they are against your manner of Dipping, as well as Subject of Water Baptism;
neither do you, for all you flatter them, agree together in all but the
Subject; Do you allow their Sprinkling? Do you allow their Signing with the
Cross? Why then have you so stoutly an hundred times over condemned these
things as Antichristian? I am not against every man, though by your abusive
Language you would set every one against me; but am for Union, Concord and
Communion with Saints as Saints, and for that cause I wrote my Book.

This is that he calls his Answer; but let all the world judge, whether he has
so much as once taken the least notice of the Question.

Mr. Paul tells him, his Principle and Practice opposes all those named as us,
viz. Who do own with us as a principle, that Baptism should precede
Church Fellowship; and therefore in their sense of Baptism (which is not in the
Question, either as to Subject or Circumstance) do practice it accordingly, not
admitting any Unbaptised Person into their Fellowship. And the truth whereof,
if Mr. Bunian doubt, besides their Writings, I could give him some late
instances of grown persons, not Sprinkled in Infancy, that must not be admitted
upon account of their Saintship into Fellowship, till they had Water sprinkled,
or poured upon their faces, and that by some that he has leaned upon as
Patrons.

But what does he reply to this, how does he acquit himself from this
Singularity, so differing in Principle and Practice from all? They differ from
you in the manner, as well as the subject. I am not against every man -- but am
for Union, Concord and Communion with Saints. But would any Child, that could
say any thing for it self, have made a more ignorant Return; therefore you may
judge of the rest by it. But to the next.

3. That Ignorance absolves from Sins of Omission and Commission.
A Third Fundamental Mistake is his presumptuous asserting all along, That
Ignorance does absolve both from the Sin of Omission and Commission, and which
not only justifies the neglect of the true, but the Exercise of false Worship;
and not only bears out in rejecting of Christ's, but the embracing of
Antichrists appointments; and that not only to give a Dispensation to the
parties themselves thus transgressing, but to the Congregation also that shall
Receive and bear with them. A Rule, if observed, what corrupt Doctrine or
Practice might not be introduced thereby? And which may pass for as good
Doctrine, as theirs of old, if they could but say Corbon, they might be set
free from their dutiful Obligation to their Parents, 4 By decrying
Institutions, by crying up Moral Precepts.
Mark 7.11.

A Fourth is, That under pretense of crying up Obedience to the X.
Commandments, or moral Precepts, he takes the boldness to decry and trample
under foot Christ's instituted Worship, as though it were possible to be guilty
of false Worship and Idolatry, and not violate the first and second
Commandment. Did not such daring Presumption cost Israel dear, in their
following the Rebellions Inventions of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin? and what was that helnous provetation, but the perverting the
right way of the Lord, by changing part of his Instituted Worship.

A Fifth is, 5. That the Churches to whom the Epistles were written, were not
all baptized
His asserting that the Churches in the New Testament, to whom the Epistles
were written, were not all Baptized; to the vacating all the holy Exhortations
and spiritual Obligations inferred and enforced from the same, almost in every
Epistle: and which he grounds upon his vain Imagination, That because it is
said, Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. And Romans 6.3. Know you not, that so many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, were baptized into his Death; implying that the words so many,
import that some were not.

Not considering that the S^^p^ and the Argument from the words, which do
necessarily enforce another sense; and that such a sense, as he would put upon
them, is altogether groundless and unreasonable: as for instance, in Gal. 3.27.
He tells them that they are all the Children of God, baptized into Christ. For
the Apostle having said verse. 26. That they were all the Children of God, he in
the next words gives the reason of what he had said; for they had put on Christ
by Baptism.

But now if their putting on of Christ in Baptism was to be esteemed as a
proof of their Relation to God as Children, as the Apostle, you see, makes it
to be, Then that which he gives in by way of Reason and proof that they were
all the Children of God by Faith, would fall shor^ of ^his end, if only a part
of the Members of their Churches had been Baptized, and not all.

And so in like manner in that other Text, he presses a general Duty, viz.
Mortification and Vivification, from a general and universal Practice,
otherwise those Duties would not in this Am^^ent concern the Unbaptised. And by
as good Argument may we conclude, that because the Apostle commands, that as
many Servants a^ are under the yoke, should count their own Masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of God be not blasphemed; That some Servants, by the
same inference might be under the yoke, and some not, and that some must honor
their Masters, and some might choose.

Sixthly, By his declaring so often, 6. That Baptism is no Church-Ordinance.
and so positively, That Baptism is not a Church-Ordinance, whereby he bears
up himself exceedingly in his Notion: To which I would say, It must either be
an Ordinance lest by Christ for the Church to manage and order, or to the
World, for I know no medium: But that he left no such holy Appointment to be
managed by the ignorant profane World, but to the Church only, I thus prove.
1. Because he has committed the Ministry to them to Teach and Convert, which
must precede Baptism, and qualify for it. 2. That to the Church belongs
ordinarily to receive the account of such Conversion, that it may be better
understood, whether the Party desiring Baptism, does believe with all the
heart; and that he has brought forth fruits meet for Repentance, before he be
baptized with the Baptism of it. 3. That to them belongs the appointing of the
Administrators and faithful Witnesses to see it orderly performed; otherwise
Women, Apostates, or any, as some hold, may do it: God is a God of Order, and
not of Confusion. And all things are to be done to Edification. 4. Because it
is an entrance and door into the Visible Church, as has been amply in the
foregoing Treatise proved, and the foregoing Scriptures evidence, and which is
so clear, says Mr. Baxter, that they must deny Scripture that deny it. It is
true (as Mr. Paul affirms) that Persons entered into the Visible Church hereby,
are by consent admitted into particular Congregations, where they may claim
their Privileges due to Baptized Believers, being orderly put into the Body,
and put on Christ by their Baptismal Vow and Covenant, for by that public
Declaration of consent is the Marriage and solemn Contract made betwixt Christ
and the Believer in Baptism, as before at large. And if it be propostrous and
wicked for a Man and Woman to cohabite together, and to enjoy the Privileges
of a Marriage-state, without the passing of that public Solemnity; So it is no
less disorderly upon a Spiritual account, for any to claim the Privileges of a
Church, or be admitted to the same till the passing of this Solemnity by them.

But it is not done in the Church? No more is Visiting the Sick, or anointing
with Oil, are they not therefore Church-Ordinances?

If any desire further Satisfaction upon this Argument, they may peruse two
Treatises, one written by Mr. Allen, called, Baptismal Abuses discovered,
Disproving the Lawfulness of Infants, and verity of Believers Baptism, with the
irregularity of mixed Communion, Baptized and Unbaptised, written 1653. The
other by Mr. Lamb, called Truth prevailing against the fiercest opposition,
upon the same subject, the same Year, both answering Mr. John Goodwin opposing
the same. And which are done with that Judgment, strength of Argument, and
Authority of Scripture, that notwithstanding they have both of them personally
declined those Truths, so zealously and understandingly pleaded for by them,
and gone back to that they therein call Humane Tradition, Will Worship, and
Idolatry, fulfilling Dan. 11.35. Pro. 28.4^ Gal. 2.18. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Yet
will their Books, not only live as a Witness for God, and his reproached
Truths, but as a living Testimony against themselves, in their unreasonable and
unrighteous Departure from the same, (without Repentance) to all Generations.

FINIS.

