Sr Martin Mar-all, OR, THE Feignd Innocence: A COMEDY. As it was Acted at His
HIGHNESS the DUKE of YORK'S THEATER.

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange. 1608.

Prologue.
FOols, which each man meets in his Dish each day,
Are yet the great Regalio's of a Play;
In which to Poets you but just appear,
To prize that highest which cost them so dear:
Fops in the Town more easily will pass;
One story makes a statutable Ass,
But such in Plays must be much thicker sown,
Like yolks of Eggs, a dozen beat to one.
Observing Poets all their walks invade,
As men watch Woodcocks gliding through a Glade:
And when they have enough for Comedy,
They stow their several Bodies in a Pie:
The Poet's but the Cook to fashion it,
For, Gallants, you your selves have found the wit.
To bid you welcome would your bounty wrong,
None welcome those who bring their Cheer along.
The Names of the Persons.
Lord Dartmouth. In love with Mrs. Christian. Mr. Moody. The Swash-buckler. Sir
Martin Mar-all. A Fool. Warner. His Man. Sir John Swallow. A Kentish Knight.
Lady Dupe. The old Lady. Mrs. Christian. Her young Niece. Mrs. Millisent. The
Swash-bucklers Daughter. Rose. Her Maid. Mrs. Preparation. Woman to the old
Lady. Other Servants, Men and Women. A Carrier. Bailiffs.

The SCENE Covent Garden.

THE Feignd Innocence: OR Sir MARTIN MARRALL.
ACT. I.
Enter Warner solus.
Warn. WHere the Devil is this Master of mine? he is ever out of the way when
he should do himself good. This it is to serve a Coxcomb, one that has no more
brains than just those I carry for him. Well! of all Fopps commend me to him
for the greatest; he is so opinion'd of his own Abilities, that he is ever
designing somewhat, and yet he sows his Stratagems so shallow, that every Daw
can pick'em up: from a plotting Fool the Lord deliver me. Here he comes, O! it
seems his Cousin's with him, then it is not so bad as I imagined.

Enter Sir Martin Marral, Lady Dupe.
La. Dupe. I think 'twas well contrived for your access to lodge her in the
same house with you.


Sir Mart. It Is pretty well I must confess.


Warn. Had he plotted it himself, it had been admirable

[aside.
La. Dupe. For when her Father Moody writ to me to take him Lodgings, I so
ordered it, the choice seemed his, not mine.


Sir Mart. I have hit of a thing my self sometimes, when wiser Heads have
missed it -- But that might be mere luck.


La. Dupe. Fortune does more than Wisdom.


Sir Mart. Nay, for that you shall excuse me;
I will not value any man's Fortune at a rush,
Except he have Wit and Parts to bear him out.
But when do you expect 'em?

La Dupe. This Tide will bring them from Gravesend.
You had best let your man go as from me,
And wait them at the Stairs in Durham-yard.

Sir Mart. Lord, Cousin, what a do is here with your Counsel!
As though I could not have thought of that my self.
I could find in my heart not to send him now -- stay a little
-- I could soon find out some other way.

Warn. A minute's stay may lose your business.


Sir Mart. Well, go then, -- but you must grant, if he had stayed, I could have
found a better way, -- you grant it.


La Dupe. For once I will not stand with you. --
[Exit Warner. It Is a sweet Gentlewoman this Mrs. Millisent, if you can get her.

Sir Mart. Let me alone for plotting.


La Dupe. But by your favor, Sir, it is not so easy,
Her Father has already promised her:
And the young Gentleman comes up with 'em:
I partly know the man, -- but the old Squire is humoursome,
He Is stout, and plain in speech and in behavior;
He loves none of the fine Town-tricks of breeding,
But stands up for the old Elizabeth way in all things.
This we must work upon.

Sir Mart. Sure! you think you have to deal with a Fool, Cousin?

[Enter Mrs. Christian.
La Dupe. O my dear Neice, I have some business with you.

[Whispers.
Sir Mart. Well, Madam, I Will take one turn here in the Piazza's;
A thousand things are hammering in this head;
It Is a fruitful Noddle, though I say it.
[Exit Sir Martin.
La Dupe. Go thy ways for a most conceited Fool. -- But to our business,
Cousin: you are young, but I am old, and have had all the Love-experience that
a discreet Lady ought to have; and therefore let me instruct you about the Love
this rich Lord makes to you.


Chr. You know, Madam, he is Married, so that we cannot work upon that ground of
Matrimony.


La Dupe. But there are advantages enough for you, if you will be wise and
follow my advice.


Chr. Madam, my Friends left me to your care, therefore I will wholly follow
your Counsel with secrecy and obedience.


La Dupe. Sweet-heare, it shall be the better for you another day: well then,
this Lord that pretends to you is crafty and false, as most men are, especially
in Love; -- therefore we must be subtle to meet with all his Plots, and have
Countermines against his Works to blow him up.


Chr. As how, Madam?


La Dupe. Why, Girl, he will make fierce Love to you, but you must not suffer him
to ruffle you, or steal a kiss: but you must weep and sigh, and say you will tell
me on it, and that you will not be used so; and play the innocent just like a
Child, and seem ignorant of all.


Chr. I warrant you 'Ile be very ignorant, Madam.


La Dupe. And be sure when he has tows'd you, not to appear at Supper that
night, that you may fright him.


Chr. No, Madam.


La Dupe. That he may think you have told me.


Chr. I Madam.


La. Dupe. And keep your Chamber, and say your head aches:


Chr. O, most extremely, Madam.


La Dupe. And lock the door, and admit of no night-visits: at Supper I Will ask
where is my Cousin, and being told you are not well, I Will start from the Table to
visit you, desiring his Lordship not to incommode himself; for I will presently
wait on him again.


Chr. But how, when you are returned, Madam?


La Dupe. Then somewhat discomposed, I Will say, I doubt the Meazles or Smallpox
will seize on you, and then the Girl is spoiled; saying, Poor thing, her
Portion is her Beauty and her Virtue; and often send to see how you do, by
whispers in my Servants ears, and have those whispers of your health returned
to mine: if his Lordship thereupon asks how you do, I will pretend it was some
other thing.


Chr. Right, Madam, for that will bring him further in suspense.


La Dupe. A hopeful Girl! Then will I eat nothing that night, feigning my
grief for you; but keep his Lordship Company at Meal, and seem to strive to put
my passion off, yet show it still by small mistakes.


Chr. And broken Sentences.


La. Dupe. A dainty Girl! and after Supper visit you again, with promise to
return strait to his Lordship: but after I am gone send an Excuse, that I have
given you a Cordial, and mean to watch that night in person with you.


Chr. His Lordship then will find the Prologue of his trouble, doubting I have
told you of his ruffling.


La. Dupe. And more than that, fearing his Father should know of it, and his
Wife, who is a Termagant Lady: but when he finds the Coast is clear, and his
late ruffling known to none but you, he will be drunk with joy.


Chr. Finding my simple Innocence, which will inflame him more.


La. Dupe. Then what the Lyon's skin has failed him in, the Foxes subtlety must
next supply, and that is just, Sweetheart, as I would have it; for crafty
Folks treaties are their advantage: especially when his passion must be
satisfied at any rate, and you keep shop to set the price of Love: so now you
see the Market is your own.


Chr. Truly, Madam, this is very rational; and by the blessing of Heaven upon
my poor endeavors, I do not doubt to play my part.


La. Dupe. My blessing and my prayers go along with thee.

Enter Sir John Swallow. Mrs. Millesent, and Rose her Maid.
Chr. I believe, Madam, here is the young Heiress you expect, and with her he
who is to marry her.


La. Dupe. However I am Sir Martins Friend, I must not seem his Enemy.


Sir John. Madam, this fair young Lady begs the honor to be known to you.


Mill. My Father made me hope it, Madam.


La. Dupe. Sweet Lady, I believe you have brought all the Freshness of the
Country up to Town with you.

[They salute.
Mill. I came up, Madam, as we Country-Gentlewomen use, at an Easter-Term, to
the destruction of Tarts and Cheese-cakes, to see a New Play, buy a new Gown,
take a Turn in the Park, and so down again to sleep with my Forefathers.


Sir John. Rather, Madam, you are come up to the breaking of many a poor Heart,
that like mine will languish for you.


Chr. I doubt, Madam, you are indisposed with your Voyage; will you please to
see the Lodgings your Father has provided for you?


Mill. To wait upon you, Madam.


La. Dupe. This is the door, -- there is a Gentleman will wait you immediately
in your Lodging, if he might presume on your Commands.

[In whisper.
Mill. You mean Sir Martin Marrall: I am glad he has entrusted his passion with
so discreet a person.

[In whisper.
La. Dupe. Sir John, let me entreat you to stay here, that my Father may have
intelligence where to find us.


Sir John. I shall obey you, Madam.

[Exeunt Women. Enter Sir Martin,
Sir John. Sir Martin Marrall! most happily encountered! how long have you been
come to Town?


Sir Mart. Some three days since, or thereabouts: but I thank God I am very
weary on it already.


Sir John. Why, what is the matter, man?


Sir Mart. My villainous old luck still follows me in gaming, I never throw the
Dice out of my hand, but my Gold goes after 'em: if I go to Picquet, though it
be but with a Novice in it, he will picque and repicque, and Capot me twenty
times together: and which most mads me, I lose all my Sets when I want but one
of up.


Sir John. The pleasure of play is lost, when one loses at that unreasonable
rate.


Sir Mart. But I have sworn not to touch either Cards or Dice this half year.


Sir John. The Oaths of losing Gamesters are most minded; they foreswear play
as an angry Servant does his Mistress, because he loves her but too well.


Sir Mart. But I am now taken up with thoughts of another nature; I am in love,
Sir.


Sir John. That Is the worst Game you could have played at, scarce one Woman in
an hundred will play with you upon the Square: you venture at more uncertainty
than at a Lottery: for you set your heart to a whole Sex of Blanks. But is your
Mistress Widow, Wife, or Maid?


Sir Mart. I can assure you, Sir, mine is a Maid;
The Heiress of a wealthy Family,
Fair to a Miracle.

Sir John. Does she accept your service?


Sir Mart. I am the only person in her favor.

[Enter Warner
Sir John. Is she of Town or Country?


Warn. aside. How Is this?


Sir Mart. She is of Kent, near Canterbury.


Warn. What does he mean? this is his Rival --

[Aside.
Sir John. Near Canterbury say you? I have a small Estate lies thereabouts, and
more concernments than one besides.


Sir Mart. I Will tell you then, being at Canterbury;
It was my Fortune once in the Cathedral Church --

Warn. What do you mean, Sir, to entrust this man with your Affair thus? --


Sir Mart. Trust him? why, he is a friend of mine.


Warn. No matter for that; hark you a Word Sir. --


Sir Mart. Prithee leave fooling: -- and as I was saying -- I was in the Church
when I first saw this fair one.


Sir John. Her Name, Sir, I beseech you.


Warn. For Heaven's sake, Sir, have a care?


Sir Mart. Thou art such a Coxcomb. -- Her name's Millisent.


Warn. Now, the Pox take you Sir, what do you mean?


Sir John. Millisent say you? that is the name of my Mistress.


Sir Mart. Lord! what luck is that now! well Sir, it happened, one of her
Gloves fell down, I stooped to take it up; And in the stooping made her a
Complement. --


Warn. The Devil cannot hold him, now will this thick-skull'd Master of mine
tell the whole story to his Rival --


Sir. Mart. You Will say, 'twas strange Sir; but at the first glance we cast on
one another, both our hearts leaped within us, our Souls met at our Eyes, and
with a tickling kind of pain slid to each others breast, and in one moment
settled as close and warm, as if they long had been acquainted with their
lodging. I followed her somewhat at a distance, because her Father was with her.


Warn. Yet hold Sir -- --


Sir Mart. Saucy Rascal, avoid my sight; Must you tutor me? So Sir, not to
trouble you, I inquired out her Father's House, without whose knowledge I did
Court the Daughter, and both then and often since coming to Canterbury, I
received many proofs of her kindness to me.


Warn. You had best tell him too, that I am acquainted with her Maid, and
manage your love underhand with her.


Sir Mart. Well remembered in faith, I thank thee for that, I had forgot it I
protest! my Valet de Chamber, whom you see here with me, grows me acquainted
with her Woman --


Warn. O the Devil. --


Sir Mart. In fine Sir, this Maid being much in her Mistresses favor, so well
solicited my Cause, that in fine I gained from fair Mistress Millisent an
assurance of her kindness, and an engagement to marry none but me.


Warn. It Is very well! you have made a fair discovery! --


Sir John. A most pleasant Relation I assure you: you are a happy man Sir! but,
What occasion brought you now to London?


Sir Mart. That was in expectation to meet my Mistress here; she writ me word
from Canterbury, she and her Father shortly would be here.


Sir John. She and her Father, said you Sir?


Warn. Tell him Sir, for Heavens sake tell him all --


Sir Mart. So I will Sir, without your bidding: her Father and she are come up
already, that is the truth on it, and are to lodge by my Contrivance in you
House; the Master of which is a cunning Rascal as any in Town -- him I have
made my own, for I lodge there.


Warn. You do ill, Sir, to speak so scandalously of my Landlord.


Sir Mart. Peace, or I Will break your Fool's head, -- So that by his means I
shall have free egress and regress when I please Sir -- without her Fathers
knowledge.


VVarn. I am out of patience to hear this. --


Sir John. Methinks you might do well, Sir, to speak openly to her Father.


Sir Mart. Thank you for that in faith, in speaking to old Moody I may soon
spoil all.


Warn. So now he has told her Father's name, it is past recovery.


Sir John. Is her Fathers name Moody say you?


Sir Mart. Is he of your acquaintance?


Sir John. Yes Sir, I know him for a man
Who is too wise for you to overreach;
I am certain he will never marry his Daughter
To you.

Sir Mart. Why, there is the jest on it:
He shall never know it: it is but your
Keeping of my Counsel; I Will do as much for you mun --

Sir John. No Sir, I Will give you better; trouble not your self about this Lady;
her affections are otherwise engaged to my knowledge -- hark in your Ear -- her
Father hates a Gamester like a Devil: I Will keep your Counsel for that too.


Sir Mart. Nay but this is not all dear Sir John.


Sir John. This is all I assure you: only I will make bold
To seek your Mistress out another Lodging --
[Ex. Sir John.
Warn. Your Affairs are now put into an excellent posture, Thank your
incomparable discretion -- this was a Stratagem my shallow wit could never have
reached, to make a Confident of my Rival.


Sir Mart. I hope thou art not in earnest man! is he my Rival?


Warn. 'Slife he has not found it out all this while! well
Sir for a quick apprehension let you alone.

Sir Mart. How the Devil came thou to know ont? and
Why the Devil did thou not tell me ont?

Warn. To the first of your Devil's I answer, her Maid Rose told me on it: to
the second I wish a thousand Devils take him that would not hear me.


Sir Mart. O unparalleled Misfortune!


Warn. O unparrellell'd ignorance! why he left her Father at the waterside,
while he lead the Daughter to her Lodging, whither I directed him; so that if
you had not labored to the contrary, Fortune had placed you in the same House
with your Mistress, without the least suspicion of your Rival or of her Father:
but, it is well, you have satisfied your talkative humor: I hope you have some
new project of your own to set all right again: for my part I confess all my
designs, for you are wholly ruined; the very foundations of 'em are blown up.


Sir Mart. Prithee insult not over the Destiny of a poor undone Lover, I am
punished enough for my indiscretion in my despair, and have nothing to hope for
now but death.


Warn. Death is a Bug-word, things are not brought to that extremity, I^l cast
about to save all yet.

Enter Lady Dupe.
La. Dupe. O, Sir Martin! yonder has been such a stir within, Sir John, I fear,
smoaks your design, and by all means would have the old man remove his Lodging;
pray God your man has not played false.


Warn. Like enough I have: I am Coxcomb sufficient to do it, my Master knows
that none but such a great Calf as I could have done it, such an overgrown
Ass, a self-conceited Idiot as I. --


Sir. Mart. Nay, Warner, --


Warn. Pray, Sir, let me alone: -- what is it to you if I rail upon my self?
now could I break my own Loggar-head.


Sir. Mart. Nay, sweet Warner.


Warn. What a good Master have I, and I to ruin him: O Beast! --


La Dupe. Not to discourage you wholly, Sir Martin, this storm is partly over.


Sir Mart. As how, dear Cousin.


La D. When I heard Sir John complain of the Landlord, I took the first hint of
it, and joined with him, saying, if she were such an one, I would have nothing
to do with him: in short I ratled him so well, that Sir John was the first who
did desire they might be lodged with me, not knowing that I was your Kinswoman.


Sir Mart. Pox on it, now I think on it, I could have found out this my self. --


Warn. Are you there again, Sir? -- now as I have a Soul --


Sir Mart. Mum, good Warner, I did but forget my self a little, I leave my self
wholly to you, and my Cousin; get but my Mistress for me and claim what ever
reward you can desire.


Warn. Hope of reward will diligence beget,
Find you the Money, and I Will find the wit.
[Exeunt.
ACT. II.
Enter Lady Dupe, and Mrs. Christian.
Chr. IT happened Madam, just as you said it would,
But was he so concerned for my feigned sickness?

La. D. So much that Moody and his Daughter, our new Guests, took notice of the
trouble, but the Cause was kept too close for Strangers to divine.


Chr. Heaven grant he be but deep enough in love, and then --

La. D. And then thou shall distill him into Gold my Girl.
Yonder he comes, I Will not be seen: -- you know
Your Lesson, Child.
[Exit.
Chr. I warrant you.
[Enter Lord Dartmouth.
Lord. Pretty Mistress Christian,
How glad am I to meet you thus alone!

Chr. O the Father! what will become of me now?

Lord. No harm I warrant you, but why are you so fraid?

Chr. A poor weak innocent Creature as I am, Heaven of his mercy, how I quake
and tremble! I have not yet clawed off your last ill usage, and now I feel my
old fit come again, my Ears tingle already, and my back shuts and opens; I,
just so it began before.


Lord Nay, my sweet Mistress, be not so unjust
To suspect any new attempt:
I am too penitent for my last fault,
So soon to sin again. --
I hope you did not tell it to your Aunt.

Chr. The more Fool I, I did not.

Lord. You never shall repent your goodness to me,
But may not I presume there was some little
Kindness in it, which moved you to conceal my
Crime?

Chr. Methought I would not have mine Aunt angry with you for all this earthly
good;

But yet I Will never be alone with you again.


Lord. Pretty Innocence! let me sit nearer to you:
You do not understand what love I bear you.
I vow it is so pure -- --
My Soul's not sullied with one spot of sin:
Were you a Sister or a Daughter to me,
With a more holy Flame I could not burn.

Chr. Nay, now you speak high words -- I cannot understand you.


Lord. The business of my life shall be but how to make your Fortune, and my
care and study to advance and see you settled in the World.


Chr. I humbly thank your Lordship.

Lord. Thus I would sacrifice my Life and Fortunes,
And in return you cruelly destroy me.

Chr. I never meant you any harm, not I.

Lord. Then what does this white Enemy so near me?
Touching her hand Glov'd. Sure it is your Champion, and you arm it thus to bid
defiance to me.

Chr. Nay, fie my Lord, in faith you are to blame.
Pulling her hand away.
Lord. But I am for fair Wars, an Enemy must first be searched for privy Armor
ever we do engage.

(Pulls at her glove
Chr. What does your Lordship mean?

Lord. I fear you bear some Spells and Charms about you,
And, Madam, that is against the Laws of Arms.

Chr. My Aunt charged me not to pull off my Glove for fear of Sun-burning my
hand.


Lord. She did well to keep it from your eyes, but I will thus preserve it.

(bugging her bare hand.
Chr. Why do you crush it so? nay, now you hurt me, nay -- if you squeeze it
never so hard -- there is nothing to come out on it -- fie -- is this loving one
-- What makes you take your breath so short?


Lord. The Devil take me if I can answer her a word,
All my Senses are quite employed another way.

Chr. Never stir, my Lord, I must cry out --

Lord. Then I must stop your mouth -- this Ruby for a Kiss -- that is but one
Ruby for another.


Chr. This is worse and worse.

Lady within. Why Niece, where are you Niece?

Lord. Pox of her old moldy Chops.

Chr. Do you hear, my Aunt calls? I shall be hanged for staying with you -- let
me go my Lord.

[Gets from him. Enter Lady Dupe.
La. D. My Lord, Heaven bless me, what makes your Lordship here?

Lord. I was just wishing for you Madam, your Niece and I have been so laughing
at the blunt humor of your Country-Gentleman, -- I must go pass an hour with
him.

[Ex. Lord.
Chr. You made a little too much haste;
I was just exchanging a Kiss for a Ruby.

Lad. No harm done; it will make him come on the faster:
Never sull-gorge an Hawk you mean to fly:
The next will be a Neck-lace of Pearl I warrant you.

Chr. But what must I do next?

La Dupe. Tell him I grew suspicious, and examined you
Whether he made not Love; which you denied.
Then tell him how my Maids and Daughters watch you;
So that you tremble when you see his Lordship.

Chr. And that your Daughters are so envious, that they would raise a false
report to ruin me.


La. D. Therefore you desire his Lordship,
As he loves you, of which you are confident,
Hence-forward to forbear his Visits to you.

Chr. But how if he should take me at my Word?

La. D. Why, if the worst come to the worst, he leaves you an honest woman, and
there is an end on it: but fear not that, hold out his messages, and then he will
write, and that is it my Bird which you must drive it to: then all his Letters
will be such Extacies, such Vows and Promises, which you must answer short and
simply, yet still ply out of 'em your advantages.


Chr. But, Madam! he is in the house, he will not write.

La. D. You Fool -- he will write from the next Chamber to you. And rather than
fail, send his Page-Post with it upon a Hobbyhorse: -- then grant a Meeting,
but tell me of it, and I Will I revent him by my being there, he will curse me, but
I care not.

When you are alone, he will urge his lust, which answer you with sorn and anger.
-- --


Chr. As thus an't please you, Madam?
What? Does he think I will be damned for him?
Defame my Family, ruin my Name,
To satisfy his pleasure?

La Dupe. Then he will be profane in's Arguments,
Urge Natures Laws to you.

Chr. By'r Lady, and those are shrewd Arguments;
But I am resolved I Will stop my Ears.

La Dupe. Then when he sees no other thing will move you,
He Will sign a portion to you before hand:
Take hold of that, and then of what you will.
[Exeunt. Enter Sir John, Mrs. Millisent, and Rose.
Sir John. Now fair Mrs. Millisent, you see your Chamber, Your Father will be
busy a few minutes, and in the mean time permits me the happiness to wait on
you. --


Mill. Methinks you might have chose us better Lodgings,
This house is full; the other we saw first, was more convenient.

Sir John. For you perhaps, but not for me:
You might have met a Lover there, but I a Rival.

Mill. What Rival?

Sir John. You know, Sir Martin, I need not name it to you.

Mill. I know more men besides him.

Sir John. But you love none besides him: Can you deny your affection to him?


Mill. You have vexed me so, I will not satisfy you.

Sir John. Then I perceive I am not likely to be so much obliged to you as I
was to him.


Mill. This is Romance, -- -- I Will not believe a word on it. --

Sir John. That Is as you please: however it is believed,
His wit will not much credit your choice.
Madam, do justice to us both; pay his ingratitude and folly with your scorn;
my service with your Love.
By this time your Father stays for me: I shall be discreet enough to keep
this fault of yours from him;
The Lawyers wait for us to draw your Jointure:
And I would beg your pardon for my absence,
But that my Crime is punished in it self.
[Exit.
Mill. Could I suspect this usage from a favored Servant!

Rose. First hear Sir Martin e're you quite condemn him;
Consider it is a Rival who accused him.

Mill. Speak not a word in his behalf: --
Methought too, Sir John called him Fool.

Rose. Indeed he has a rare way of acting a Fool, and does it so naturally, it
can be scarce distinguished.


Mill. Nay, he has wit enough, that is certain.

Rose. How blind Love is!
Enter Warner.
Mill. How now, what is his business?
I wonder after such a Crime,
If his Master has the face to send him to me.

Rose. How durst you venture hither?
If either Sir John or my old Master see you.

VVarn. Pish! they are both gone out.

Rose. They went but to the next street; ten to one but they return and catch
you here.


VVarn. Twenty to one I am gone before, and save'um a labor.

Mill. What says that Fellow to you? what business can he have here?


VVarn. Lord, that your Ladyship should ask that question, Knowing whom I serve!


Mill. I Will hear nothing from your Master.

VVarn. Never breathe, but this anger becomes your Ladyship most admirably; but
though you will hear nothing from him, I hope I may speak a word or two to you
from my self, Madam.


Rose. 'T was a sweet Prank your Master played us: a Lady's well helped up that
trusts her Honor in such a persons hands: to tell all so, -- and to his Rival
too.

Excuse him if thou can.

(Aside.
VVarn. How the Devil should I excuse him? thou know he is the greatest Fop
in Nature --

(Aside to Rose.
Rose. But my Lady does not know it; if she did --

Mill. I Will have no whispering.

Warn. Alas, Madam, I have not the confidence to speak out,
Unless you can take mercy on me.

Mill. For what?

Warn. For telling Sir John you loved my Master, Madam.
But sure I little thought he was his Rival.

Rose. The witty Rogue has taken't on himself.
[Aside.
Mill. Your Master then is innocent.

Warn. Why, could your Ladyship suspect him guilty?
Pray tell me, do you think him
Ungrateful, or a fool?

Mill. I think him neither.

Warn. Take it from me, you see not the depth of him.
But when he knows what thoughts you harbor of him,
As I am faithful, and must tell him, --
I wish he does not take some pet, and leave you.

Mill. Thou art not mad I hope, to tell him on it;
If thou do, I Will be sworn, I Will forswear it to him.

Warn. Upon condition then you will pardon me,
I Will see what I can do to hold my tongue.

Mill. This Evening in S. James' Park I Will meet him.
(Knock within)
Warn. He shall not fail you, Madam.

Rose. Some body knocks -- Oh Madam, what shall we do!
It Is Sir John, I hear his voice.

Warn. What will become of me?

Mill. Step quickly behind that Door,
To them Sir John.
(He goes out.
Mill. You Have made a quick dispatch, Sir.

Sir John. We have done nothing, Madam, our Man of Law was not within, -- --
but I must look some Writings.


Mill. Where are they laid?

Sir John. In the Portmanteau in the Drawing Room.
(Is going to the Door.)
Mill. Pray stay a little, Sir. --

Warn. at the Door. He must pass just by me; and if he sees me, I am but a dead
man.


Sir John. Why are you thus concerned? why do you hold me?

Mill. Only a word or two I have to tell you.
It Is of importance to you. --

Sir John. Give me leave. -- --

Mill. I must not before I discover the Plot to you.

Sir John. What Plot?

Mill. Sir Martins Servant, like a Rogue, comes hither
To tempt me from his Master, to have met him.

Warn. at the Door. Now would I had a good Bag of Gunpowder at my Breech to
ram me into some hole.


Mill. for my part I was so startled at the Message,
That I shall scarcely be my self these two days.

Sir John. Oh that I had the Rascal! I would teach him
To come upon such Errands.

Warn. Oh for a gentle Composition now!
An Arm or Leg I would give willingly.

Sir John. What Answer did you make the Villain?

Mill. I over-reached him clearly, by a Promise
Of an appointment of a place I named,
Where I never meant to come: but would have had
The pleasure first to tell you how I served him.

Sir John. And then to chide your mean suspicion of me,
Indeed I wondered you should love a Fool.
But where did you appoint to meet him?

Mill. In Grayes-Inn Walks.

Warn. By this Light, she has put the change upon him!
O sweet Womankind, how I love thee for that heavenly gift of lying!

Sir John. For this evening I will be his Mistress;
He shall meet another Penelope then he suspects.

Mill. But stay not long away.

Sir John. You over-joy me, Madam.
[Exit.
Warn. entering. Is he gone, Madam?

Mill. As far as Grayes-Inn Walks: now I have time
To walk the other way, and see thy Master.

VVarn. Rather let him come hither: I have laid
A Plot shall send his Rival far enough from watching him ever long.

Mill. Art thou in earnest?

VVarn. It Is so designed, Fate cannot hinder it.

Our Landlord where we lie, vexed that his Lodgings should be so left by Sir
John, is resolved to be revenged, and I have found the way.

You Will see the effect on it presently.


Rose. O Heavens! the door opens again, and Sir John is returned once more.

Enter Sir John.
Sir John. Half my business was forgot; you did not tell me when you were to
meet him. Ho! What makes this Rascal here?


VVarn. It Is well you're come, Sir, else I must have left untold a Message I
have for you.


Sir John. Well, What Is your business, Sirrah?

VVarn. We must be private first; It Is only for your ear.

Rose. I shall admire his wit, if in this plunge he can get off.

VVarn. I came hither, Sir, by my Masters order. --

Sir John. I Will reward you for it, Sirrah, immediately.

VVarn. When you know all, I shall deserve it, Sir;

I came to sound the Virtue of your Mistress; which I have done so cunningly, I
have at last obtained the promise of a meeting. But my good Master, whom I must
confess more generous than wise, knowing you had a passion for her, is resolved
to quit: And, Sir, that you may see how much he loves you, sent me in private
to advise you still to have an eye upon her actions.


Sir John. Take this Diamond for thy good news;
And give thy Master my acknowledgments:

Warn. Thus the World goes, my Masters, he that will cozen you, commonly gets
your good will into the bargain.

[Aside.
Sir John. Madam, I am now satisfied of all sides; first of your truth, then of
Sir Martins friendship.

In short, I find you two cheated each other,

Both to be true to me.


Mill. Warner is got off as I would wish, and the Knight overreach'd.
Enter to them the Landlord disguised like a Carrier.
Rose. How now! What would this Carrier have?

VVarn. This is our Landlord whom I told you of; but keep your Countenance. --

(Aside to her.
Landl. I was looking here-away for one Sir John Swallow; they told me I might
hear news of him in this House.


Sir John. Friend, I am the man: What have you to say to me?


Landl. Nay, 'Faith Sir, I am not so good a Schollard to say much,
But I have a Letter for you in my Pouch:
There Is plaguey news in it, I can tell you that.

Sir John. From whom is your Letter?

Landl. From your old Uncle Anthony.

Sir John. Give me your Letter quickly.

Landl. Nay, soft and fair goes far. -- Hold you, hold you.
It is not in this Pocket.

Sir John. Search in the other then; I stand on Thorns.

Land. I think I feel it now, this should be who.

Sir John. Pluck it out then.

Land. I Will puck out my Spectacles and see first.

(Reads. To Mr. Paul Grimbard -- Apprentice to --

No, that is not for you, Sir, -- that is for the Son of the Brother of the
Nephew of the Cousin of my Gossip Dobson.


Sir John. Prithee dispatch; do thou not know the Contents on it?


Landl. Yes, as well as I do my Pater Noster.

Sir John. Well, What Is the business on it?

Landl. Nay, no great business; it is but only that your Worships Father's dead.


Sir John. My loss is beyond expression! how died he?

Landl. He went to bed as well to see to as any man in England,
And when he awakened the next morning. --

Sir John. What then?

Landl. He found himself stark dead.

Sir John. Well, I must of necessity take orders for my Father's Funeral, and
my estate; Heaven knows with what regret I leave you, Madam.


Mill. But are you in such haste, Sir? I see you take all occasions to be from
me.


Sir John. Dear Madam, say not so, a few days will, I hope, re^^^n me to you.

To them Sir Martin. Noble Sir Martin, the welcomest man alive!

Let me embrace my Friend.


Rose. How untowardly he returns the salute! Warner will be found out.

[aside.
Sir John. Well friend! you have obliged me to you eternally.

Sir Mart. How have I obliged you, Sir? I would have you to know I scorn your
words; and I would I were hanged, if it be not the farthest of my thoughts.


Mill. O cunning Youth, he acts the Fool most naturally.
Were we alone, how would we laugh together?
[aside.
Sir John. This is a double generosity,
To do me favors and conceal 'um from me;
But honest Warner here has told me all.

Sir Mart. What has the Rascal told you?

Sir John. Your plot to try my Mistress for me -- you understand me, concerning
your appointment.


Warn. Sir, I desire to speak in private with you.

Sir Mart. This impertinent Rascal, when I am most busy, I am ever troubled
with him.


Warn. But it concerns you I should speak with you, good Sir.

Sir Mart. That Is a good one in faith, thou know breeding well, that I should
whisper with a Serving-man before company.


Warn. Remember, Sir, last time it had been better --

Sir Mart. Peace, or I Will make you feel my double Fists; If I don't fright him,
the saucy Rogue will call me fool before the Company.


Mill. That was acted most naturally again.
[aside.
Sir John. to him. But what needs this dissembling, since you are
Resolved to quit my Mistress to me?

Sir Mart. I quit my Mistress! that is a good one in faith.

Mill. Tell him you have forsaken me.
(aside.
Sir Mart. I understand you, Madam, you would save
A quarrel; but in faith I Am not so base:
I Will see him hanged first.

Warn. Madam, my Master is convinced, in prudence
He should say so: but Love o'remasters him;
When you are gone perhaps he may.

Mill. I Will go then: Gentlemen, your Servant;
I see my presence brings constraint to the Company.
Exeunt Mill. Rose.
Sir John. I Am glad she is gone; now we may talk more freely;
For if you have not quitted her, you must.

Warn. Pray, Sir, remember your self; did not you send me of a message to Sir
John, that for his friendship you had left Mistress Millisent.


Sir Mart. Why, what an impudent lying Rogue art thou!

Sir John. How Is this! has Warner cheated me?

Warn. Do not suspect it in the least: you know, Sir,
It was not generous before a Lady,
To say he quitted her.

Sir John. O! was that it?

Warn. That was all: say, Yes good Sir John -- or I Will swinge you.

[aside
Sir Mart. Yes, good Sir John.

Warn. That Is well, once in his life he has heard good counsel.

Sir Mart. Heigh, Heigh, what makes my Landlord here? he has put on a Fools
Coat I think to make us laugh.


Warn. The Devil's in him; he is at it again; his folly's like a sore in a
surfeited Horse; cure it in one place, and it breaks out in another.


Sir Mart. Honest Landlord in faith, and what make you here?

Sir John. Are you acquainted with this honest man?

Landl. Take heed what you say, Sir.
[To Sir Martin softly.
Sir Mart. Take heed what I say, Sir, why? who should I be afraid of? of you,
Sir? I say, Sir, I know him, Sir; and I have reason to know him, Sir, for I am
sure I lodge in his House, Sir, -- nay never think to terrify me, Sir; it is my
Landlord here in Charles Street, Sir.


Land. Now I expect to be paid for the News I brought him.

Sir John. Sirrah, did not you tell me that my Father --

Land. Is in very good health, for ought I know, Sir; I beseech you to trouble
your self no farther concerning him.


Sir John. Who set you on to tell this lie?

Sir Mart. I, who set you on Sirrah? this was a Rogue that would cozen us both;
he thought I did not know him: down on your marribones and confess the truth:
have you no tongue you Rascal?


Sir John. Sure it is some silenced Minister: he is grown so sat he cannot speak.


Land. Why, Sir, if you would know, 'twas for your sake I did it.


Warn. For my Masters sake! why you impudent Varlet, do you think to 'scape us
with alye?


Sir John. How was it for his sake?

Warn. 'Twas for his own, Sir; he heard you were the occasion the Lady lodged
not at his House, and so he invented this lie; partly ^o revenge himself of
you; and partly, I believe, in hope to get her once again when you were gone.


Sir John. Fetch me a Cudgel prithee.

Land. O good Sir! if you beat me I shall run into oil immediately,


Warn. Hang him Rogue; he is below your anger: I Will maul him for you -- the
Rogue's so big, I think 'twill ask two days to beat him all over.

[Beats him.
Land. O Rogue, O Villain Warner! bid him hold
And I Will confess, Sir.

Warn. Get you gone without replying: must such as you be prating?

[Beats him out. Enter Rose. Sir, Dinner waits you on the Table.
Sir John. Friend will you go along, and take part of a bad Repast?


Sir Mart. Thank you; but I am just risen from Table.

Warn. Now he might fit with his Mistress, and has not the wit to find it out.


Sir John. You shall be very welcome.

Sir Mart. I have no stomach, Sir.

Warn. Get you in with a vengeance: you have a better stomach than you think
you have.

[Pushes him.
Sir Mart. This hungry Diego Rogue would shame me;
He thinks a Gentleman can eat like a Servingman.

Sir John. If you will not, adieu dear Sir;
In any thing command me.
[Exit.
Sir Mart. Now we are alone; have NOT I carried matters bravely, Srrah.


Warn. O yes, yes, you deserve Sugar Plums; first for Your quarrelling with Sir
John; then for discovering your Landlord, and lastly for refusing to dine with
your Mistress: All this is since the last reckoning was wiped out.


Sir Mart. Then why did my Landlord disguise himself, to make a Fool of us?


Warn. You have so little Brains, that a Penn'orth of Butter melted under 'um,
would set 'um afloat: he put on that disguise to rid you of your Rival.


Sir Mart. Why, Was not I worthy to keep your counsel then?

Warn. It had been much at one: you would but have drunk the secret down; and
pissed it out to the next company.


Sir Mart. Well, I find I am a miserable man: I have lost my Mistress, and may
thank my self for it.


Warn. You Will not confess you are a fool, I warrant.

Sir Mart. Well I am a fool, if that will satisfy you: but
What am I the nearer for being one?

Warn. O yes, much the nearer; for now Fortune's bound to provide for you; As
Hospita's are built for lame people, because they cannot help themselves.

Well; I have yet a project in my pate.


Sir Mart. Dear Rogue, What is it?

Warn. Excuse me for that: but while it is set a working
You would do well to scrue your self into her
Fathers good opinion.

Sir Mart. If you will not tell me, my mind gives me I shall discover it again.


Warn. I Will lay it as far out of your reach as I can possible.
-- For secrets are edged Tools;
And must be kept from Children and from Fools.
(Exeunt.
ACT. III.
Enter Rose and Warner meeting.
Rose. YOur Worship's most happily encountered.

VVarn. Your Ladiship's most fortunately met.

Rose. I was going to your Lodging.

VVarn. My business was to yours.

Rose. I have something to say to you that --

VVarn. I have that to tell you --

Rose. Understand then --

VVarn. If you will hear me --

Rose. I believe that --

VVarn. I am of opinion that --

Rose. Prithee hold thy peace a little till I have done.

VVarn. Cry you mercy, Mistress Rose, I Will not dispute your ancient privileges
of talking.


Rose. My Mistress, knowing Sir John was to be abroad upon business this
Afternoon, has asked leave to see a Play: and Sir John has so great a
confidence of your Master, that he will trust nobody with her, but him.


VVarn. If my Master gets her out, I warrant her, he shall show her a better
Play than any is at either of the Houses -- here they are: I Will run and prepare
him to wait upon her.

(Exit. Enter Old Moody, Mistress Millesent, and Lady Dupe.
Mill. My Hoods and Scarfs there, quickly.

La. Send to call a Coach there.

Mood. But what kind of man is this Sir Martin, with whom you are to go?


La. A plain downright Country Gentleman, I assure you.

Mood. I like him much the better for it.
For I hate one of those you call a man of the Town,
One of those empty fellows of mere outside:
They Have nothing of the true old English manliness.

Rose. I confess, Sir, a Woman's in a sad condition, that has nothing to trust
to, but a Perriwig above, and a well-trim'd shoe below.

To them Sir Martin.
Mill. This, Sir, is Sir John's friend, he is for your humor, Sir, He is no
man o'th 'Town, but bred up in the old Elizabeth way of plainness.


Sir Mart. I, Madam, your Ladyship may say your pleasure of me.

To them Warner.
Warn: How the Devil got he here before me! It Is very unlucky I could not see
him first --


Sir Mart. But, as for Painting, Music, Poetry, and the like, I Will say this of
my self --


Warn: I Will say that for him, my Master understands none of 'um, I assure you,
Sir.


Sir Mart. You impudent Rascal, hold your Tongue: I must rid my hands of this
fellow; the Rogue is ever discrediting me before Company.


Moody. Never trouble yourself about it, Sir, for I like a man that --


Sir Mart. I know you do, Sir, and therefore I hope you will think never the
worse of me for his prating: for, though I do not boast of my own good parts --


Warn. He has none to boast of, upon my faith, Sir.

Sir Mart. Give him not the hearing, Sir; for, if I may believe my friends,
they have flattered me with an opinion of more --


Warn. Of more than their flattery can make good, Sir; -- it is true he tells
you, they have flattered him; but, in my Conscience he is the most downright
simple natured creature in the world.


Sir Mart. I shall consider you here after Sirrah; but I am sure in all
Companies I pass for a Vertuoso.


Mood. Vertuoso! What Is that too? is not Virtue enough without O so?


Sir Mart. You have Reason, Sir!

Mood. There he is again too; the Town Phrase, a great Compliment I wiss; you
have Reason, Sir; that is, you are no beast, Sir.


Warn. A word in private: Sir; you mistake this old man; he loves neither
Painting, Music, nor Poetry; yet recover your self, if you have any brains.

(aside to him.
Sir Mart. Say you so? I Will bring all about again I warrant you -- I beg your
pardon a thousand times Sir; I vow to Gad I am not Master of any of those
perfections; for in fine. Sir, I am wholly ignorant of Painting, Music, and
Poetry; Only some rude escapes -- -- but, in fine, they are such, that, In
fine, Sir --


Warn. This is worse than all the rest.
(aside.
Mood. By Coxbones one word more of all this Gibberish, and old Madge shall fly
about your ears: What is this in fine he keeps such a coil with too?


Mill. It Is a Phrase a-la-mode, Sir, and is used in conversation now, as a
whiff of Tobacco was formerly, in the midst of a discourse, for a thinking
while.


La. In plain English, in fine, is in the end, Sir.

Mood. But by Coxbones there is no end on it me thinks: If thou will have a
foolish word to lard thy lean discourse with, take an English one when thou
speak English; as So Sir, and Then Sir, and so forth; it is a more manly kind
of nonsense: and a Pox of In fine, for I Will hear no more on it.


Warn. He Is gravelled, and I must help him out.
(Aside. Madam, there is a Coach at Door to carry you to the Play.

Sir Mart. Which House do you mean to go to?

Mill. The Dukes, I think.

Sir Mart. It is a damned Play, and has nothing in it.

Mill. Then let us to the Kings.

Sir Mart. That Is e'ne as bad.

Warn. This is past enduring.
(aside. There was an ill Play set up, Sir, on the Posts, but I can assure you
the Bills are altered since you saw 'um, and now there are two admirable
Comedies at both Houses.


Mood. But my Daughter loves serious Plays.

Warn. They are Tragi-Comedies, Sir, for both.

Sir Mart. I have heard her say she loves none but Tragedies.

Mood. Where have you heard her say so, Sir?

Warn. Sir you forget your self, you never saw her in your life before.

Sir Mart. What not at Canterbury, in the Cathedral Church there? this is the
impudentest Rascal --


Warn. Mum, Sir --

Sir Mart. Ah Lord, what have I done! as I hope to be saved, Sir, it was before
I was aware; for if ever I set eyes on her before this day -- I wish --


Mood. This fellow is not so much fool, as he makes one believe he is.


Mill. I thought he would be discovered for a wit: this it is to over act ones
part!

(aside.
Mood. Come away Daughter I will not trust you in his hands; there is more in it
than I imagined.

Exeunt Moody, Mill. Lady, Rose.
Sir Mart. Why do you frown upon me so, when you know your looks go to the
heart of me; what have I done besides a little lapsus linguae?


Warn. Why, who says you have done any thing? you, a mere Innocent.


Sir Mart. As the Child's that be born in my intentions, If I know how I have
offended my self any more than in one word. --


Warn. But don't follow me however -- I have nothing to say to you.


Sir Mart. I Will follow you to the worlds end, till you forgive me.

Warn. I am resolved to lead you a Dance then.
[Exit running.
Sir Mart. The Rogue has no mercy in him, but I must mollify him with money.

Exit. Enter old La. Truly my little Cousin's the aptest Scholar, and takes our
loves lessons so exactly that I joy to see it: she has got already the Bond of
two thousand pounds sealed for her Portion, which I keep for her; a pretty good
beginning: it is true, I believe he has enjoyed her, and so let him; Mark
Anthony wooed not at so dear a price.

To her Chr. O Madam, I fear I am breeding!


La. A taking Wench! but it is no matter; have you told any body?

Chr. I have been venturing upon your foundations, a little to dissemble.


La. That Is a good Child, I hope it will thrive with thee, as it has with me:
Heaven has a blessing in store upon our endeavors.


Chr. I feigned my self sick, and kept my bed; my Lord, he came to visit me,
and in the end I disclosed it to him in the saddest passion.


La. This frighted him, I hope, into a study how to cloak your disgrace, lest
it should have vent to his Lady.


Chr. It Is true; but all the while I subt'ly drove it, that he should name you
to me as the fittest instrument of the concealment; but how to break it to you,
strangely does perplex him: he has been seeking you all o'r the house;
therefore I Will leave your Ladyship, for fear we should be seen together.

(Exit.
La. Now I must play my part.
Nature, in Women, teaches more than Art.
Enter Lord.
Lord. Madam, I have a Secret to impart.
A sad one too, and have no friend to trust but only you.

La. Your Lady or your Children sick?

Lord. Not that I know.

La. You seem to be in health,

Lord. In body, not in mind.

La. Some scruple of Conscience, I warrrant; my Chaplain shall resolve you.


Lord. Madam, my Soul's tormented.

La. O take heed of despair, my Lord!

Lord. Madam, there is no Medicine for this siekness, but only you; your
friendship's my safe Haven, else I am lost and shipwrack'd.


La. Pray tell me what it is.

Lord. Could I express it by sad sighs and groans,
Or drown it with my self in Seas of Tears,
I should be happy, would, and would not tell.

La. Command whatever I can serve you in,
I will be faithful still to all your ends, provided they be just and virtuous.

Lord. That word has stopped me.

La. Speak out, my Lord, and boldly tell what it is.

Lord. Then in obedience to your Commands; your Cousin is with Child.


La. Which Cousin?

Lord. Your Cousin Christian's here in the house.

La. Alas then she has stolen a Marriage, and undone her self: Some young
Fellow, on my Conscience, that is a Beggar; Youth will not be advised; well, I Will
never meddle more with Girls; One is no more assured of 'um than Grooms of
Mules, they will strike when least one thinks on it: but pray your Lordship, what
is her choice then for an Husband?


Lord. She is not married that I know of, Madam.

La. Not married! it is impossible, the Girl does sure abuse you. I know her
Education has been such, the flesh could not prevail; therefore she does abuse
you, it must be so.


Lord. Madam, not to abuse you longer, she is with Child, and I the unfortunate
man who did this most unlucky act.


La. You! I Will never believe it.

Lord. Madam, it is too true; believe it, and be serious how to hide her shame;
I beg it here upon my knees.


La. Oh, oh, oh. --
[She faints away.
Lord. Who Is there? Whose there? help, help, help.
Enter two Women, Rose, Penelope.
1 VVom. O merciful God, my Lady's gone!

2 VVom. Whither?

1 VVom. To Heaven, God knows, to Heaven.

Rose. Rub her, rub her; fetch warm Clothes.

2 VVom. I say, run to the Cabinet of Quintessence; Gilberts Water, Gilberts
Water.


1 Wom. Now all the good Folks of heaven look down upon her.

Mill. Set her in the Chair.

Rose. Open her mouth with a Dagger or a Key; pour, pour,
Where Is the Spoon?

2 Wom. She stirs, she revives, merciful to us all, what a thing was this!
speak, Lady, speak.


La. So, so, so.

Mill. Alas, my Lord, How came this fit?

Lord. With Sorrow, Madam.

La. Now I am better: Bess, you have not seen me thus.

1 Wom. Heaven forefend that I should live to see you so again.

La. Go, go, I Am pretty well; withdraw into the next Room but be near I pray,
for fear of the worst.

(They go out. -- My Lord, sit down near me I pray, I Will strive to speak a few
words to you, and then to Bed, -- nearer, my voice is faint. -- My Lord, Heaven
knows how I have ever loved you; and, Is this my reward? Had you none to abuse
but me in that unfortunate fond Girl that you know was dearer to me than my
life? this was not love to her, but an inveterate malice to poor me. Oh, oh. --

(Faints again.
Lord. Help, help, help.
All the Women again.
1 Wom. This fit will carry her: alas it is a Lechery!

2 Wom. The Balsom, the Balsom!

1 Woman. No no, the Chemistry Oil of Rosemary: hold her up, and give her Air.


Mill. Feel whether she breathes, with your hand before her Mouth.


Rose. No, Madam, it is Key-cold.

1 VVom. Look up, dear Madam, if you have any hope of Salvation!


2 VVom. Hold up your finger, Madam, if you have any hope of Fraternity. O the
blessed Saints that hear me not, take her Mortality to them.


La. Enough, so, it is well, -- withdraw, and let me rest a while; only my dear
Lord remain.


1 VVom. Pray your Lordship keep her from swebbing.
(Exeunt Women.
Lord. Here humbly once again, I beg your pardon and your help.


La. Heaven forgive you, and I do: stand up, my Lord, and sit close by me: O
this naughty Girl! but did your Lordship win her soon?


Lord. No, Madam, but with much difficulty.

La. I Am glad on it; it showed the Girl had some Religion in her, all my
Precepts were not in vain: but you men are strange tempters; good my Lord,
where was this wicked act then first committed?


Lord. In an out-room upon a Trunk.

La. Poor Heart, what shift Love makes! Oh she does love you dearly, though to
her ruin! and then what place, my Lord?


Lord. An old waste Room, with a decayed Bed in it.

La. Out upon that dark Room for deeds of darkness! and that rotten Bed! I
wonder it did hold your Lordships vigor: but you dealt gently with the Girl.
Well, you shall see I love you: for I will manage this business to both your
advantages, by the assistance of Heaven I will; good my Lord help, lead me out.

[Exeunt.
Warner, Rose.
Rose. A mischief upon all Fools! do you think your Master has not done wisely?
first to mistake our old man's humor, then to dispraise the Plays; and lastly,
to discover his Acquaintance with my Mistress: my old Master has taken such a
Jealousy of him, that he will never admit him into his sight again.


Warn. Thou make thy self a greater Fool than he by being angry at what he
cannot help -- I have been angry with him too; but these friends have taken up
the quarrel. --

(Shows Gold. Look you he has sent these Mediators to mitigate your wrath: here
are twenty of 'um have made a long Voyage from Guinny to kiss your hands: and
when the Match is made, there are an hundred more in readiness to be your
humble Servants.


Rose. Rather then fall out with you, I Will take u'm; but I confess it troubles
me to see so loyal a Lover have the heart of an Emperor, and yet scarce the
brains of a Cobbler.


Warn. Well, what device can we two beget betwixt us, to separate Sir John
Swallow and thy Mistress?


Rose. I cannot on the sudden tell; but I hate him worse than foul weather
without a Coach.


VVarn. Then I Will see if my project will be luckier than thine. Where are the
Papers concerning the Jointure I have heard you speak of?


Rose. They lie within in three great Bags, some twenty Reams of Paper in each
Bundle, with six lines in a sheet: but there is a little Paper where all the
business lies.


VVarn. Where is it? Can thou help me to it?

Rose. By good chance he gave it to my custody before he set out for London.
You came in good time, here it is, I was carrying it to him; just now he sent
for it.


Warn. So, this I will secure in my Pocket: when thou art asked for it, make
two or three bad faces, and say, 'twas left behind: by this means he must of
necessity leave the Town, to see for it in Kent.

Enter Sir John, Sir Martin, Mrs. Mill.
Sir John. It Is no matter, though the old man be suspicious; I knew the story
all beforehand; and since then you have fully satisfied me of your true
friendship to me -- Where are the Writings?

[To Rose.
Rose. Sir, I beg your pardon; I thought I had put 'um up amongst my Ladies
things, and it seems in my haste I quite forgot 'um, and left 'um at Canterbury.


Sir John. This is horribly unlucky! Where do you think you left 'um?


Rose. Upon the great Box in my Ladies Chamber; they are safe enough I Am sure.


Sir John. It must be so -- I must take Post immediately:
Madam, for some few days I must be absent;
And to confirm you, friend, how much I trust you,
I leave the dearest Pledge I have on Earth,
My Mistress, to your care.

Mill. If you loved me, you would not take all occasions to leave me thus!


Warn aside. Do, go to Kent, and when you come again, Here they are ready for
you.

[Shows the Paper.
Sir Mart. What Is that you have in your hand there.
Sirrah?

Warn. Pox, What ill luck was this! What shall I say?

Sir Mart. Sometimes you have tongue enough, what, are you silent?


Warn. It Is an Account, Sir, of what Money you have lost since you came to Town.


Sir Mart. I Am very glad on it: now I Will make you all see the severity of my
Fortune, -- give me the Paper.


Warn. Heaven! What does he mean to do? it is not fair writ out, Sir;


Sir John. Besides, I am in haste, another time, Sir. --

Sir Mart. Pray, oblige me, Sir, -- -- it is but one minute: all people love to
be pitty'd in their Misfortunes, and so do I: will you produce it, Sirrah?


Warn. Dear Master!

Sir Mart. Dear Rascal! am I Master or you? you Rogue!

Warn. Hold yet, Sir, and let me read it: -- you cannot read my hand.


Sir Mart. This is ever his way to be disparaging me, -- but I Will let you see,
Sirrah, that I can read your hand better than you your self can.


Warn. You Will repent it, there is a trick in it, Sir. --

Sir Mart. Is there so, Sirrah? but I Will bring you out of all your Tricks with
a Vengeance to you. --

[Reads. How now! What Is this? A true particular of the Estate of Sir John
Swallow Knight, lying and situate in, etc.


Sir John. This is the very Paper I had lost: I Am very [Takes the glad on it, it
has saved me a most unwelcome journey, -- (Paper. but I will not thank you for
the Courtesy, which now I find you never did intend me -- this is Confederacy,
I smoke it now -- Come, Madam, let me wait on you to your Father.


Mill. Well, of a witty man, this was the foolishest part that ever I beheld.

(Exeunt Sir John, Millisent, and Rose.
Sir Mart. I am a Fool, I must confess it, and I am the most miserable one
without thy help, -- but yet it was such a mistake as any man might have made.


Warn. No doubt on it.

Sir Mart. Prithee chide me! this indifference of thine wounds me to the heart.


Warn. I care not.

Sir Mart. Will thou not help me for this once?

Warn. Sir, I kiss your hands, I have other business.

Sir Mart. Dear Warner!

Warn. I am inflexible.

Sir Mart. Then I am resolved I Will kill my self.

Warn. You are Master of your own Body.

Sir Mart. Will you let me damn my Soul?

Warn. At your pleasure, as the Devil and you can agree about it.


Sir Mart. Do You see the points ready? Will you do nothing to save my life?


Warn. Not in the least.

Sir Mart. Farewell, hard-harted Warner.

Warn. Adieu soft-headed Sir Martin.

Sir Mart. Is it possible?

Warn. Why don't you dispatch, Sir? Why all these Preambles?


Sir Mart. I Will see thee hanged first: I know thou won'dst have me killed, to
get my Clothes.


Warn. I knew it was but a Copy of your Countenance; people in this Age are not
so apt to kill themselves.


Sir Mart. Here are yet ten Pieces in my Pocket, take 'em, and let us be friends.


Warn. You know the Eas'ness of my Nature, and that makes you work upon it so.
Well, Sir, -- for this once I cast an Eye of pity on you, -- but I must have
ten more in hand, before I can stir a foot.


Sir Mart. As I am a true Gamester, I have lost all but these, -- but if
thou wilt lend me them, I Will give 'em thee again.


VVarn. I Will rather trust you till to morrow;
Once more look up, I bid you hope the best.
Why should your folly make your Love miscarry,
Since men first play the Fools, and then they marry?
[Exeunt.
ACT. IV.
Enter Sir Martin and Warner.
Sir Mart. BUT are they to be married this day in private, say you?


Warn. It Is so concluded, Sir, I dare assure you.

Sir Mart. But why so soon, and in private?

Warn. So soon to prevent the designs upon her; and in private, to save the
effusion of Christian Money.


Sir Mart. It strikes to my heart already; in fine, I am a dead man. -- Warner.


Warn. Well, go your ways, I Will try what may be done. Look if he will stir now;
your Rival and the Old man will see us together, we are just below the Window.


Sir Mart. Thou can not do it.

Warn. On the peril of my twenty pieces be it.

Sir Mart. But I have found a way to help thee out, trust to my wit but once.


Warn. Name your wit, or think you have the least grain of wit once more, and
I Will lay it down for ever.


Sir Mart. You are a saucy masterly Companion, and so I leave you.

[Exit.
Warn. Help, help, good People, Murder, Murder!
Enter Sir John and Mood.
Sir John and Moody, How now, what is the matter?

Warn. I am abused, I am beaten, I am lamed for ever.

Mood. Who has used thee so?

Warn. The Rogue my Master.

Sir John. What was the Offense?

Warn. A trifle, just nothing.

Sir John. That Is very strange.

Warn. It was for telling him he lost too much at Play; I meant him nothing but
well, Heaven knows, and he in a cursed damned humor would needs revenge his
losses upon me: A' kicked me, took away my money, and turned me off; but if I
take it at his hands --


Mood. By Cox nowns it was an ill-natured part, nay, I thought no better could
come on it, when I heard him at his Vow to Gads, and in fines.


Warn. But if I live I Will cry quittance with him: he had engaged me to get Mrs.
Millisent your Daughter for him; but if I do not all that ever I can to make
her hate him, a great Booby, an overgrown Oafe, a conceited Bartlemew. --


Sir John. Prithee leave off thy Choler, and hear me a little: I have had a
great mind to thee a long time, if thou think my Service better than his,
from this minute I entertain thee.


Warn. With all my heart, Sir, and so much the rather, that I may spite him
with it. -- This was the most propitious Fate. --


Mood. Propitious! and Fate! what a damned Scander-bag-Rogue art thou to talk
at this rate! hark you, Sirrah, one word more of this Gibberish, and I Will set
you packing from your new Service; I Will have neither Propitious nor Fate come
within my doors. -- --


Sir John. Nay, pray Father. --

Warn. Good old Sir be pacified I was pouring out a little of the dregs that I
had left in me of my former Service, and now they are gone, my stomachs clear
of 'em.


Sir John. This Fellow is come in a happy hour; for now, Sir, you and I may go
to prepare the License, and in the mean time he may have an Eye upon your
Daughter.


Warn. If you please I Will wait upon her till she is ready, and then bring her to
what Church you shall appoint.


Mood. But, Friend, you will find she will hang an Arse, and be very loath to come
along with you, and therefore I had best stay behind, and bring her my self.


Warn. I warrant you I have a trick for that, Sir, she knows nothing of my
being turned away: So I Will come to her as from Sir Martin, and under pretense
of carrying her to him, conduct her to you,


Sir John. My better Angel --

Mood. By the mess 'twas well thought on; well Son, go you before, I Will speak
but one word for a Dish or two at Dinner, and follow you to the Licence-Office.
Sirrah -- stay you here -- till my return.

[Ex. Sir John and Moody.
VVarn. solus. Was there ever such a lucky Rogue as I! I had always a good
opinion of my wit, but could never think I had so much as now I find. I have
now gained an opportunity to carry away Mistress Millisent for my Master, to
get his Mistress by means of his Rival, to receive all his happiness, where he
could expect nothing but misery: after this exploit I will have Lilly draw me
in the Habit of a Hero, with a Laurel on my Temples, and an Inscription below
it, This is Warner the flower of Servingmen.

Enter Messenger.
Mess. Pray do me the favor to help me to the speech of Mr. Moody.


VVarn. What Is your business?

Mess. I have a Letter to deliver to him.

Warn. Here he comes, you may deliver it your self to him.

Mess. Sir, a Gentleman met me at the Corner of the next Street, and bid me
give this into your own hands.


Mood. Stay friend, till I have read it.

Mess. He told me, Sir, it required no Answer.
(Ex. Mess.
Mood. reads. Sir, permit me, though a stranger, to give you counsel; some
young Gallants have had intelligence, that this day you intend privately to
Marry your Daughter, the rich Heiress; and in fine, above twenty of them have
dispersed themselves to watch her going out: therefore put it off, if you will
avoid mischief, and be advised by

Your unknown Servant.


Mood. By the Mackings, I thought there was no good in it, when I saw in fine
there; there are some Papishes, I Will warrant, that lie in wait for my Daughter,
or else they are no Englishmen, but some of your French Outalion-Rogues; I owe
him Thanks however, this unknown Friend of mine, that ^old me on it. Warner, no
Wedding to day, Warner.


Warn. Why, What Is the matter. Sir?

Mood. I say no more, but some wiser than some, I Will keep my Daughter at home
this Afternoon, and a fig for all these Outalians.

[Exit Moody.
Warn. So, here is another Trick of Fortune as unexpected for bad, as the other
was for good. Nothing vexes me, but that I had made my Game Cock-sure, and then
to be back-gammon'd: it must needs be the Devil that writ this Letter, he owed
my Master a spite, and has paid him to the purpose: and here he comes as merry
too, he little thinks what misfortune has befal'n him, and for my part I am
ashamed to tell him.

[Enter Sir Martin laughing.]
Sir Mart. Warner, such a Jest, Warner.
[Laughs again.
Warn. What a Murrain is the matter, Sir?
Where lies this Jest that tickles you?

Sir Mart. Let me laugh out my langh, and I Will tell thee.

(Laughs again.
Warn. I wish you may have cause for all this mirth.

Sir Mart. Hereafter, Warner, be it known unto thee, I will endure no more to
be thy May game: thou shal't no more dare to tell me, I spoil thy projects, and
discover thy designs; for I have played such a Prize, without thy help, of my
own Motherwit ('it is true I am hasty sometimes, and so do harm; but when I have
a mind to show my self, there is no man in England, though I say it, comes near
me as to point of imagination) I Will make thee acknowledge I have laid a Plot
that has a Soul in it.


Warn. Pray, Sir, keep me no longer in ignorance of this rare Invention.


Sir. Mart. Know then, Warner, that when I left thee, I was possessed with a
terrible fear, that my Mistress should be married: well, thought I to my self,
and must'ring up all the Forces of my Wit, I did produce such a stratagem.


Warn. But what was it?

Sir Mart. I feigned a Letter as from an unknown Friend to Moody, wherein I
gave him to understand, that if his Daughter went out this Afternoon, she would
infallibly be snapt by some young Fellows that lay in wait for her.


Warn. Very good.


Sir Mart. That which follows is yet better; for he I fent assures me, that in
that very nick of time my Letter came, her Father was just sending her abroad
with a very foolish rascally fellow that was with him.


Warn. And did you perform all this a'gods name? could you do this wonderful
miracle without your soul to the Devil for his help?


Sir Mart. I tell thee man I did it, and it was done by the help of no Devil,
but this familiar of my own brain; how long would it have been e're thou
could have thought of such a project? Martin said to his man, Who Is the Fool
now?


VVarn. Who Is the fool? why who use to be the fool? he that ever was since I
knew him, and ever will be so!


Sir Mart. What a Pox? I think thou art grown envious, not one word in my
commendations?


VVarn. Faith Sir, my skill is too little to praise you as you deserve; but if
you would have it according to my poor ability, you are one that had a knock in
your Cradle, a conceited lackwit, a designing Ass, a hair-brained Fop, a
confounded busi^ brain, with an eternal Wind mill in it; this in short, Sir, is
the Contents of your Panegyric.


Sir Mart. But what the Devil have I done, to set you thus against me?


VVarn. Only this, Sir, I was the foolish rascally fellow that was with Moody,
and your Worship was he to whom I was to bring his Daughter.


Sir Mart. But how could I know this? I am no Witch.


VVarn. No, I Will be sworn for you, you are no Conjurer.
Will you go Sir?

Sir Mart. Will you hear my justifications?


VVarn. Shall I see the back of you? speak not a word in your defense.

[Shoves him.
Sir Mart. This is the strangest luck now --

(Exit.
VVarn. I Am resolved this Devil of his shall never weary me, I will overcome
him, I will invent something that shall stand good in spite of his folly. Let
me see --

Enter Lord.
Lord. Here he is -- I must venture on him, for the tyranny of this old Lady is
unsupportable, since I have made her my confident, there passes not an hour but
she passes a pull at my Pursestrings; I sha'l be ruined if I do not quit my
self of her suddenly: I find now, by sad experience, that a Mistress is much
more chargeable than a Wife, and after a little time too, grows full as dull
and insignificant. Mr. Warner! have you a mind to do your self a courtesy,
and me another?


VVarn. I think, my Lord, the Question need not be much dissputed, for I have
always had a great service for your Lordship, and some little kindness for my
self.


Lord. What, if you should propose Mistress Christian as a Wife to your Master?
you know he is never like to compass the other.


VVarn. I cannot tell that my Lord --


Lord. 500 l. are yours at the day of marriage.


VVarn. 500 l. it is true, the temptation is very sweet, and powerful; the Devil
I confess has done his parr, and many a good Murder and Treason have been
committed at a cheaper rate; but yet --


Lord. What yet --


Warn. To confess the truth, I am resolved to bestow my Master upon that other
Lady (as difficult as your Lordship thinks it) for the honor of my wit is
engaged in it: will it not be the same to your Lordship were she marred to any
other?


Lord. The very same.


Warn. Come my Lord, not to dissemble with you any longer, I know where it is
that your Shoe wrings you: I have observed something in the House, betwixt some
parties that shall be nameless: and know that you have been taking up Linen at
a much dearer rate, than you might have had it at any Drapers in Town.


Lord. I see I have not danced in a Net before you.


Warn. As for that old Lady, whom Hell confound, she is the greatest Jill in
Nature, cheat is her study, all her joy to cosen, she loves nothing but her
self, and draws all lines to that corrupted center.


Lord. I have found her out, though late: first, I Will undertake I never enjoyed
her Neice under the rate of 500 l. a time; never was Woman's flesh held up so
high: every night I find out for a new Maidenhead, and she has sold it me as
often as ever Mother Temple, Bennet, or Gifford, have put off boiled Capons for
Quails and Partridges.


Warn. This is nothing to what Bills you will have when she is brought to Bed,
after her hard bargain, as they call it; then crammed Capons, Pea-hens, Chickens
in the grease, Pottages, and Frigacies, Wine from Shatling, and La-fronds, with
New-River, clearer by six pence the pound than ever God Almighty made it; then
Midwife -- Dry-Nurse -- Wet-Nurse -- and all the rest of their Accomplices,
with Cradle, Baby-Clouts, and Bearing-Cloaths -- Possets, Cawdels, Broth,
Jellies, and Gravies; and behind all these, Glisters, Suppositers, and a
barbarous Pothecaries Bi^l, more inhumane than a Tailors.


Lord. I sweat to think on it.


Warn. Well, my Lord! cheer up! I have found a way to rid you of it all, within
a short time you shall know more; yonder appears a young Lady whom I must needs
speak with, please you go in and prepare the old Lady and your Mistress.


Lord. Good luck, and 500 l. attend thee.

(Exit. Enter Millisent and Rose above.
Mill. I am resolved I Will never marry him!


Rose. So far you are right, Madam.


Mill. But, how to hinder it, I cannot possibly tell? for my Father presses me
to it, and will take no denial: would I knew some way --


Warn. Madam, I Will teach you the very nearest, for I have just now found it out,


Rose. Are you there, Mr. Littleplot?


Warn. Studying to deserve thee, Rose, by my diligence for thy Lady; I stand
here, methinks, just like a wooden Mercury, to point her out the way to
Matrimony.


Rose. Or, Serving-man-like, ready to carry up the hot meat for your Master,
and then to fall upon the cold your self.


VVarn. I know not what you call the cold, but I believe I shall find warm work
on it: in the first place then I must acquaint you, that I have seemingly put
off my Master, and entered my self into Sir John's service.


Mill. Most excellent!


VVarn. And thereupon, but base --

[Enter Moody
Mill. Something he would tell us, but see what luck's here!


Mood. How now, Sirrah? are you so great there already?


Mill. I find my Father's jealous of him still!


Warn. Sir, I was only teaching my young Lady a new Song, and if you please you
shall hear it.

SINGS. Make ready fair Lady to night,
And stand at the Door below,
For I will be there
To receive you with care,
And to your true Love you shall go.

Mood. Ods bobs this is very pretty.


Mill. I, so is the Lady's Answer too, if I could but hit on it.

SINGS. And when the Stars twinckle so bright,
Then down to the Door will I creep,
To my Love will I fly,
E're the jealous can spy,
And leave my old daddy asleep.

Mood. Bodikins I like not that so well, to cosen her old Father; it may be my
own case another time.


Rose. Oh Madam! yonder is your Persecutor returned.

Enter Sir John.
Mill. I Will into my Chamber to avoid the sight of him as long as I can; Lord!
that my old doting Father should throw me away upon such an Ignoramus, and deny
me to such a Wit as Sir Martin.

[Ex. Mill. and Rose from above.
Mood. O Son! here has been the most villainous Tragedy against you.


Sir John. What Tragedy? has there been any blood shed since I went?


Mood. No blood shed, but, as I told you, a most damnable Tragedy.


Warn. A Tragedy! I Will be hanged if he does not mean a Stratagem.


Mood. Jack Sauce! if I say it is a Tragedy, it shall be a Tragedy in spite of
you, teach your Grandam how to piss -- what -- I hope I am old enough how to
spout English with you Sir?


Sir John. But what was the reason you came not after me?


Mood. 'T was well I did not, I Will promise you, there were those would have
made bold with Mistress Bride; an' if she had stirred out of doors, there were
Whipsters abroad in faith, Padders of Maiden-heads, that would have trussed her
up, and picked the lock of her affections, ever a man could have said, what is
this: but by good luck I had warning of it by a friends Letter.


Sir John. The remedy for all such dangers is easy, you may send for a Parson,
and have the business dispatched at home.


Mood. A match, in faith, do you provide a Domine, and I Will go tell her our
resolutions, and hearten her up against the day of battle.

[Exit.
Sir John. Now I think on it, this Letter must needs come from Sir Martin; a
Plot of his, upon my life, to hinder our marriage.


Warn. I see, Sir, you will still mistake him for a Wit; but I am much deceived,
if that Letter came not from another hand.


Sir John. From whom I prithee?


Warn. Nay, for that you shall excuse me, Sir, I do not love to make a breach
betwixt persons that are to be so near related.


Sir John. Thou seem to imply that my Mistress was in the Plot,


Warn. Can you make a doubt on it? do you not know she ever loved him, and can
you hope she has so soon forsaken him? you may make your self miserable, if you
please, by such a marriage.


Sir John. When she is once mine, her Virtue will secure me.


Warn. Her Virtue!


Sir John. What, do you make a mock on it?


Warn. Not I, I assure you, Sir, I think it no such jesting matter.


Sir John. Why, is she not honest?


Warn. Yes in my conscience is she, for Sir Martin's Tongue's no slander.


Sir John. But does she say to the contrary?


Warn. If one would believe him, which for my part I do not, he has in a manner
confessed it to me.


Sir John. Hell and Damnation!


Warn. Courage, Sir, never vex your self, I Will warrant you it is all a Lie.


Sir John. But how shall I be 'sut'd it is so?


Warn. When you are married you will soon make trial, whether she be a Maid or no?


Sir John. I do not love to make that Experiment at my own cost.


VVarn. Then you must never marry.


Sir John. I, but they have so many tricks to cheat a man, which are entay'ld
from Mother to Daughter through all Generations, there is no keeping a Lock for
that Door for which every one has a Key.


Warn. As for Example, their drawing up their breaths with Oh! you hurt me, can
you be so cruel? then the next day she steals a Visit to her Lover, that did
you the Courtesy beforehand, and in private tells him how she cozened you;
twenty to one but she takes out another Lesson with him to practice the next
night.


Sir John All this while miserable I must be their May Game.


VVarn. It Is well if you escape so; for commonly he strikes in with you, and
becomes your friend.


Sir John. Deliver me from such a friend that stays behind with my Wife, When I
gird on my Sword to go abroad.


Warn. I, there is your man, Sir; besides he will be sure to watch your haunts,
and tell her of them, that if occasion be, she may have wherewithal to
recriminate: at least she will seem to be jealous of you, and who would suspect
a jealous Wife?


Sir John. All manner of ways I am most miserable.


Warn. But if she be not a Maid when you marry her, she may make a good Wife
afterward, it is but imagining you have taken such a man's Widow.


Sir John. If there were all; but the Man will come and claim her again.


Warn. Examples have been frequent of those that have been wanton, and yet
afterward take up.


Sir John. I, the same thing they took up before.


Warn. The truth is, an honest simple Girl that is ignorant of all things,
makes the best Matrimony: There is such pleasure in instructing her, the best
is, there is not one Dunce in all the Sex; such a one with a good Fortune --


Sir John. I, but where is she, Warner?


Warn. Near enough, but that you are too far engaged.


Sir John. Engaged to one that has given me the earnest of Cuckoldom
beforehand?


VVarn. What think you then of Mrs Christian here in the house? There Is 5000 l.
and a better penny.


Sir John. I, but is she Fool enough?


Warn. She Is none of the wise Virgins, I can assure you.


Sir John. Dear Warner, step into the next Room, and inveigle her out this way,
that I may speak to her.


Warn. Remember above all things, you keep this Wooing secret; if he takes the
least wind, old Moody will be sure to hinder it.


Sir John. Do thou think I shall get her Aunts Consent?


Warn. Leave that to me.

[Exit Warner.
Sir John. How happy a man shall I be, if I can but compass this! and what a
Precipice have I avoided! then the revenge too is so sweet to steal a Wife
under her Fathers nose, and leave 'um in the lurch who has abused me; well,
such a Servant as this, Warner, is a Jewel.

Enter Warner and Mrs. Christian to him.
Warn. There she is, Sir, now I Will go to prepare her Aunt.


Sir John. Sweet Mistress, I am come to wait upon you.


Chr. Truly you are too good to wait on me.


Sir John. And in the Condition of a Suitor.


Chr. As how, forsooth?


Sir John. To be so happy as to marry you.


Chr. O Lord, I would not marry for any thing!


Sir John. Why? it is the honest end of Womankind.


Chr. Twenty years hence, forsooth: I would not lie in bed with a man for a
world, their beards it will so prickle one.


Sir John. Pah, -- What an innocent Girl it is, and very child! I like a Colt
that never yet was backed; for so I shall make her what I list, and mould her
as I will; Lord! her innocence makes me laugh my Cheeks all wet. -- Sweet Lady
--

[Aside.
Chr. I Am but a Gentlew man, forsooth.


Sir John. Well then, sweet Mistress, if I get your Friends consent sha'l I
have yours?


Chr. My old Lady may do what she will, forsooth, but by my truly, I hope she
will have more care of me, then to marry me yet; Lord bless me, what should I
do with a Husband?


Sir John. Well, Sweetheart, then instead of wooing you, I must woo my old
Lady.


Chr. Indeed, Gentleman, my old Lady is married already: cry you mercy
forsooth, I think you are a Knight.


Sir John. Happy in that Title only to make you Lady.


Chr. Believe me, Mr. Knight, I would not be a Lady, it makes Folks proud, and
so humerous, and so ill Huswifes, forsooth.


Sir John. Pah, -- she is a Baby, the simplest thing that ever yet I knew; the
happiest man I shall be in the world; for should I have my wish, it should be
to keep School, and teach the bigger Girls, and here in one my wish it is
absolved.

Enter Lady Dupe.
La. Dupe. By your leave, Sir: I hope this noble Knight will make you happy,
and you make him.


Chr. What should I make him?

(Sighing.
La. Dupe. Marry, you shall make him happy in a good Wife.


Chr. I will not marry, Madam.


La. Dupe. You Fool!


Sir John. Pray, Madam, let me speak with you, on my Soul it is the pretti'st
innocent'st thing in the world.


La. Dupe. Indeed, Sir, she knows little besides her work and her Prayers; but
I Will talk with the Fool.


Sir John. Deal gently with her, dear Madam.


La. Dupe. Come, Christian, will not you marry this noble Knight?


Chr. Yes, yes, yes. --

[sobbingly.
La. Dupe. Sir, it shall be to night.


Sir John. This Innocence is a Dowry beyond all price.

[Exeunt Old Lady and Mrs. Christian. Enter Sir Martin and Sir John, musing.
Sir Mart. You are very melancholy methinks, Sir.


Sir John. You are mistaken, Sir.


Sir Mart. You may dissemble as you please, but Mrs. Millisent lies at the
bottom of your Heart.


Sir John. My Heart, I assure you, has no room for so poor a Trifle.


Sir Mart. Sure you think to wheedle me, would you have me imagine you do not
love her?


Sir John. Love her! why should you think me such a Sot? love a Prostitute, and
infamous person!


Sir Mart. Fair and soft, good Sir John.


Sir John. You see I am no very obstinate Rival, I leave the field free to you:
go on, Sir, and pursue your good Fortune, and be as happy as such a common
Creature can make thee.


Sir Mart. This is Hebrew-Greek to me; but I must tell you, Sir, I will not
suffer my Divinity to be profaned by such a Tongue as yours.


Sir John. Believe it; what'er I say I can quote my Author for.


Sir Mart. Then, Sir, whoever told it you, ly'd in his Throat, do you see, and
deeper than that do you see, in his stomach, and his guts do you see: tell me she is
a common person! he is a Son of a Whore that said it, and make him eat his
words, though he spoke 'em in a pr^vy-house.


Sir John. What if Warner told me so? I hope you will grant him to be a competent
Judge in such a business.


Sir Mart. Did that precious Rascal say it? -- Now I think on it I Will not
believe you: in fine, Sir, I Will hold you an even Wager he denies it.


Sir John. I Will lay you ten to one, he justifies it to your face.


Sir Mart. I Will make him give up the Ghost under my fist, if he does not deny
it.


Sir John. I Will cut off his Ears upon the Spot, if he does not stand to it.

Enter Warner.


Sir Mart. Here he comes in Pudding-time to resolve the question: come hither,
you lying Varlet, hold up your hand at the Bar of Justice, and answer me to
what I shall demand.


Warn. What a Goodier is the matter, Sir?


Sir Mart. Thou Spawn of the old Serpent, fruitful in nothing but in lies!


VVarn. A very fair beginning this.


Sir Mart. Did thou dare to cast thy Venom upon such a Saint as Mrs.
Millisent, to traduce her Virtue, and say it was adulterate?


VVarn. Not guilty my Lord.


Sir Mart. I told you so.


Sir John. How, Mr. Rascal! have you forgot what you said but now concerning
Sir Martin and Mrs. Millisent? I Will stop the Lie down your Throat, if you dare
deny't.


Sir Mart. Say you so! are you there again in faith?


Warn. Pray pacify your self, Sir, 'twas a Plot of my own devising.


Sir Mart. Leave off your winking and your pinking, with a Horse-pox to ye, I Will
understand none of it; tell me in plain English the truth of the business: for
an'you were my own Brother, you should pay for it: belie my Mistress! what a
Pox do you think I have no sense of Honor?


Warn. What the Devil's the matter w'ye? either be at quiet, or I Will resolve to
take my heels, and be gone.


Sir Mart. Stop Thief there! what did you think to escape the hand of Justice?

[Lays hold on him. The best on it is, Sirrah, your heels are not altogether so
nimble as your tongue,

[Beats him.
Warn. He p! Murder! Murder!


Sir Mart. Confess, you Rogue, then.


Warn. Hold your hands, I think the Devil's in you, -- I tell you it is a device
of mine.


Sir. Mart. And have you no body to devise it on but my Mistress, the very Map
of Innocence?


Sir John. Moderate your anger, good Sir Martin.


Sir Mart. By your patience, Sir, I Will chastise him abundantly.


Sir John. That Is a little too much, Sir, by your favor, to beat him in my
presence.


Sir Mart. That Is a good one in faith, your presence shall hinder me from
beating my own Servant.


VVarn. O Traitor to all sense and reason! he is going to discover that too.


Sir Mart. An'I had a mind to beat him to Mummy, he is my own, I hope.


Sir John. At present I must tell you he is mine, Sir.


Sir Mart. Hey-day! here is fine juggling!


Warn. Stop yet, Sir, you are just upon the brink of a Precipice.


Sir Mart. What is it thou meanest now? -- -- a Lord! my mind mis-gives me I
have done some fault, but would I were hanged if I can find it out.

[Aside.
Warn. There Is no making him understand me.


Sir Mart. Pox on it, come what will, I Will not be faced down with a Lie; I say
he is my man.


Sir John. Pray remember your self better; did not you turn him away for some
fault lately, and laid a Livery of black and blue on his back before he went?


Sir Mart. The Devil of any fault, or any black and blue that I remember:
either the Rascal put some Trick upon you, or you would upon me.


Sir John. O, ho, then it seems the cudgelling and turning away were pure
invention; I am glad I undestand it.


Sir Mart. In fine, it is all so damned a Lie. -- --


Warn. Alas! he has forgot it, Sir, good Wits, you know, have bad Memories.


Sir John. No, no, Sir, that shall not serve your turn, you may return when you
please to your old Master, I give you a fair discharge, and a glad man I am to
be so rid of you: were you thereabouts in faith? what a Snake I had enterta^n'd
into my bosom? fare you well, Sir, and lay your next Plot better between you, I
advise you.

[Exit Sir John.
VVarn. Lord, Sir, how you stand! as you were nip'd i'th'head: have you done
any new piece of Folly, that makes you look so like an Ass?


Sir Mart. Here Is three pices of Gold yet, if I had the heart to offer it thee.

(Holds the Gold afar off trembling.
Warn. Noble Sir, what have I done to deserve so great a Liberality; I confess
if you had beaten me for my own fault, if you had utterly destroyed all my
projects, then it might ha'bin expected that ten or twenty pieces should have
been offered by way of recompense or satisfaction. -- --


Sir Mart. Nay, on'you be so full o'your Flowts, your Friend and Servant; who
the Devil could tell the meaning of your signs and tokens, an'you go to that?


Warn. You are no Ass then?


Sir Mart. Well, Sir, to do you service, do you see, I am an Ass in a fair way;
will that satisfy you?


Warn. For this once produce those three pieces, I am contented to receive that
inconsiderable tribute, or make'em six and I Will take the fault upon my self.


Sir Mart. Are we Friends then? if we are, let me advise you. --


Warn. Yet advising. --


Sir Mart. For no harm, good Warner: but pray next time make me of your
Council, let me enter into the business, instruct me in every point, and then
if I discover all, I am resolved to give over affairs, and retire from the
world.


Warn. Agreed, it shall be so; but let us now take breath a while, then on again.
For though we had the worst, those heats were past,
We Will whip and spur, and fetch him up at last.
(Exeunt.
ACT. V.
Enter Lord, Lady Dupe, Mistress Christian, Rose, and Warner.
Lord. YOur promise is admirably made good to me, that Sir John Swallow should
be this night married to Mrs. Christian; instead of that, he is more deeply
engaged than ever with old Moody.


Warn. I cannot help these ebbs and flows of fortune.


La. Dupe. I am sure my Niece suffers most in it, he is come off to her with a
cold Complement of a mistake in his Mistress's Virtue, which he has now found
out, by your Masters folly, to be a Plot of yours to separate them.


Chr. To be forsaken when a woman has given her consent!


Lord. It Is the same scorn, as to have a Town rendered up, and afterward
slighted.


Rose. You are a sweet youth, Sir, to use my Lady so, when she depended on you;
is this the faith of Valet de Chamber? I would be ashamed to be such a
dishonor to my pro^ession; it will reflect upon us in time, we shall be ruined
by your good example.


Warn. As how my dear Lady Embassadress?


Rose. Why, they say the Women govern their Ladies, and you govern us: so if
you play fast and loose, not a Gallant will bribe us for our good wills; the
gentle Guiny will now go to the Ordinary, which used as duly to steal into our
hands at the stair-foot as into Mr. Docto^s at parting.


Lord. Night's come, and I expect your promise.


La. D. Fail with me if you think good, Sir.


Chr. I give no more time.


Rose. And if my Mistress go to bed a Maid to night.


VVarn. Hey dey! you are dealing with me, as they do with the Banquers, c^ll in
all your debts together; there is no possibility of payment at this rate, but
I Will coin for you all as fast as I can, I assure you.


La. Du. But you must not think to pay us with false Money, as you have done
hitherto.


Rose. Leave off your Mountebank tricks with us, and fall to your business in
good earnest.


VVarn. Faith, and I will Rose; for to confess the truth, I am a kind of a
Mountebank, I have but one Cure for all your Diseases, that is, that my Master
may marry Mrs. Millisent, for then Sir John Swallow will of himself return to
Mrs. Christian.


Lord. He says true, and therefore we must all be helping to that design.


Warn. I Will put you upon something, give me but a thinking time. In the first
place, get a Warrant and Bailifs to arrest Sir John Swallow upon a promise of
marriage to Mrs. Christian.


Lord. Very good.


La. Du. We'll all swear it.


Warn. I never doubted your Ladyship in the least, Madam -- for the rest we
will consider hereafter.


Lord. Leave this to us

[Ex. Lord. La. Du. Mill. Chr.
Warn. Rose where is thy Lady?


Mill. What have you to say to her?


Warn. Only to tell you, Madam, I am going forward in the great work of
projection.


Mill. I know not whether you will deserve my thanks when the work's done.


Warn. Madam, I hope you are not become indifferent to my Master.


Mill. If he should prove a fool after all your crying up his wit, I shall be a
miserable woman.


VVarn. A fool! that were a good jest in faith: but how comes your Ladyship to
suspect it?


Rose. I have heard, Madam, your greatest Wits have ever a touch of madness and
extravagance in them, so perhaps has he.


VVarn. There Is nothing more distant than wit and folly, yet like East and
West, they may meet in a point, and produce actions that are but a hairs
breadth from one another.


Rose. I Will undertake he has wit enough to make one laugh at him a whole day
together: He Is a most Comical person,


Mill. For all this I will not swear he is no fool, he has still discovered all
your plots.


Warn. O Madam, that is the common fate of your Machivilians, they draw their
Designs so subtle, that their very fineness breaks them.


Mill. However I Am resolved to be on the sure side, I will have certain proof
of his wit before I marry him.


Warn. Madam, I Will give you one, he wears his clothes like a great Sloven, and
that is a sure sign of wit, he neglects his outward parts; besides, he speaks
French, sings, dances, plays upon the Lute.


Mill. Does he do all this, say you?


Warn. Most divinely, Madam.


Mill. I ask no more, then let him give me a Serenade immediately; but let him
stand in the view, I Will not be cheated,


Warn. He shall do it Madam: but how, the Devil knows -- for he sings like a
Scritch-Owle, and never touched the Lute.


Mill. You Will see it performed?


Warn. Now I think on it, Madam, this will but retard our enterprise.


Mill. Either let him do it, or see me no more.


Warn. Well, it shall be done, Madam; but where is your Father? will not he over
hear it?


Mill. As good hap is, he is below stairs, talking with a Seaman, that has
brought him news from the East Indies.


Warn. What concernment can he have there?


Mill. He had a Bastard-Son there, whom he loved extremely: but not having any
news from him these many year's concluded him dead; this Son he expects within
these three days.


Warn. When did he see him last?


Mill. Not since he was seven years old.


Warn. A sudden thought comes into my head to make him appear before his time;
let my Master pass for him, and by that means he may come into the House
unsuspected by her Father, or his Rival.


Mill. According as he performs his Serenade, I Will talk with you -- make haste
-- I must retire a little,

[Ex. Mill. from above.
Rose. I Will instruct him most rarely, he shall never be found out; but in the
mean time, what will thou do with a Serenade?


VVarn. Faith, I am little non-plus'd on the sudden, but a warm consolation
from thy lips, Rose, would set my wits a working again.


Rose. Adieu, Warner.

[Exit. Rose.
Warn. Inhumane Rose, adieu. Blockhead Warner, into what a Praemunire have thou
brought thy self; this it is to be so forward to promise for another -- but to
be Godfather to a Fool, to promise and vow he should do any thing like a
Christian. --

Enter Sir Martin.
Sir Mart. Why, how now Bu^ly, in a Brown Study? for my good I warrant it;
there is five shillings for thee, what, we must encourage good wits sometimes.


Warn. Hang your white pelf: sure, Sir, by your largess you mistake me for
Martin Parker, the Ballad-Maker; your covetousness has offended my Muse, and
quite dulled her.


Sir Mart. How angry the poor Devil is? in fine thou art as chollerick as a
Cook by a Fireside.


Warn. I am overheated, like a Gun, with continual discharging my wit: 'slife,
Sir, I have rarifi'd my brains for you, till they are evaporated; but come,
Sir, do something for your self like a man, I have engaged you shall give to
your Mistress a Serenade in your proper person: I Will borrow a Lute for you.


Sir Mart. I Will warrant thee I Will do it man.


VVarn. You never learned, I do not think you know one stop.


Sir Mart. It Is no matter for that, Sir, I Will play as fast as I can, and never
stop at all.


Warn. Go to, you are an invincible Fool I see; get up into your Window, and
set two Candles by you, take my Landlords Lute in your hand, and fumble on it,
and make grimmaces with your mouth, as if you sung; in the mean time. I Will play
in the next Room in the dark, and consequently your Mistress, who will come to
her Balcone over against you, will think it to be you; and at the end of every
Tune, I Will ring the Bell that hangs between your Chamber and mine, that you may
know when to have done.


Sir Mart. Why, this is fair Play now, to tell a man beforehand what he must
do; Gramercy in faith, Boy, now if I fail thee --


Warn. About your business then, your Mistress and her M^id appear already:
I Will give you the sign with the Bell when I am prepared, for my Lute is at hand
in the Barbers Shop.

[Exeunt. Enter Millisent, Rose, with a Candle by 'em above.
Rose. We shall have rare Music.


Mill. I wish it prove so; for I suspect the Knight can neither p'ay nor sing.


Rose. But if he does, you're bound to pay the Music, Madam.


Mill. I Will not believe it, except both my Ears and Eyes are Witnesses.


Rose. But it is night, Madam, and you cannot see'em; yet he may play admirably
in the dark.


Mill. Where Is my Father?


Rose. You need not fear him, he is still employed with that same Seaman, and I
have set Mrs. Christian to watch their discourse, that betwixt her and me
Warner may have wherewithal to instruct his Master.


Mill. But yet there is fear my Father will find out the Plot.


Rose. Not in the least, for my old Lady has provided two rare disguises for
the Master and the Man.


Mill. Peace, I hear them beginning to tune the Lute.


Rose. And see, Madam, where your true Knight Sir Martin is placed yonder like
Apollo, with his Lute in his hand and his Rays about his head.

Sir Martin appears at the adverse Window, a Tune played; when it is done,
Warner rings, and Sir Martin holds. Did he not play most excellently, Madam?


Mill. He played well, and yet methinks he held his Lute but untowardly.


Rose. Dear Madam, peace; now for the Song. The SONG.
BLind Love to this hour
Had never like me, a Slave under his power.
Then blessed be the Dart
That he threw at my heart,
For nothing can prove
A joy so great as to be wounded with love.
My Days and my Nights
Are filled to the purpose with sorrows and frights;
From my heart still I sigh
And my Eyes are never dry,
So that Cupid be praised,
I am to the top of Love's happiness raised.
My Soul's all on fire.
So that I have the pleasure to dote and desire,
Such a pretty soft pain
That it tickles each vein,
It Is the dream of a smart,
Which makes me breathe short when it beats at my heart:
Sometimes in a Pet,
When I am despised, I my freedom would get;
But straight a sweet smile
Does my anger beguile,
And my heart does recall,
Then the more I do struggle, the lower I fall.
Heaven does not impart
Such a grace as to love unto every ones heart;
For many may wish
To be wounded and miss:
Then blessed be loves Fire,
And more blessed her Eyes that first taught me desire.


The Song being done, Warner rings again; but Sir Martin continues fumbling, and
gazing on his Mist ess.
Mill. A pretty humored Song -- but stay, methinks he plays and sings still,
and yet we cannot hear him. -- Play louder. Sir Martin, that we may have the
fruits on it.


Warn. peeping. D ath! this abominable Fool will spoil all again. Dam him, he
stands making his Grimaces yonder, and he looks so earnestly upon his Mistress,
that he hears me not.

[Rings again.
Mill. Ah, ah! have I found you out, Sir? now as I live and breathe, this is
pleasant, Rose, -- his man played and sung for him, and he, it seems, did not
know when he should give over.

[Millisent and Rose laugh.
Warn. They have found him out, and laugh yonder as if they would split their
sides. Why Mr. Fool, Oaf, Coxcomb, will you hear none of your names?


Mill. Sir Martin, Sir Martin, take your Man's counsel, and keep time with your
Music.


Sir Mart. peeping. Hah! what do you say. Madam? how does your Ladyship like my
Music?


Mill. O most heavenly! just like the Harmony of the Spheres that is to be
admired, and never heard.


Warn. You have ruined all by your not leaving off in time.


Sir Mart. What the Devil wou^d you have a man do when my hand is in! well of my
conscience I think there is a fate upon me.

[Noise within.
Mill. Look, Rose, what is the matter.


Rose. It Is Sir John Swallow pursued by the Bailiffs, Madam, according to our
Plot; it seems they have dogged him thus late to his Lodging.


Mill. That Is well! for though I begin not to love this Fool; yet I am glad I
shall be rid on him.

(Ex. Millisent, Rose. Enter Sir John pursued by three Bailiffs over the Stage.
Sir Mart. Now I Will redeem all again, my Mistress shall see my Va our, I m
resolved on it, Villains, Rogues, Poultroons! what? three upon one? in fine,
I Will be with you immediately.

(Exit.
Warn. Why, Sir, are you stark mad? have you no grain of sense left? he is gone!
now is he as earnest in the quarrel as Cokes among the Puppets; it is to no
purpose whatever I do for him.

Exit Warner. Enter Sir John and Sir Martin (having driven away the Bailiffs)
Sir Martin flourishes his Sword,
Sir Mart. Victoria! Victoria! what heart, Sir John, you have received no harm,
I hope?


Sir John Not the least, I thank you Sir for your timely assistance, which I
will requite with any thing but the resigning of my Mrs -- Dear Sir Martin, a
good night.


Sir Mart. Pray let me wait upon you in Sir John.


Sir John. I can find my way to Mrs. Millcsent without you, Sir, I thank you.


Sir Mart. But pray, what were you to be arrested for?


Sir John. I know no more than you; some little debts perhaps I left unpaid by
my negligence: once more good night, Sir.

(Exit.
Sir Mart. He Is an ungrateful Fellow; and so in fine, I shall tell him when I
see him next -- Monsieur --

(Enter Warner. Warner, A propos! I hope you will applaud me now, I have defeated
the Enemy, and that in sight of my Mistress; Boy, I have charmed her in faith
with my Valor.


Warn. I, just as much as you did e'n now with your Music; go, you are so
beastly a fool, that a Chiding is thrown away upon you.


Sir Mart. Fool in your face, Sir; call a man of Honor, Fool, when I have just
achieved such an Enterprise -- Gad now my blood's up, I am a dangerous person,
I can tell you that, Warner.


Warn. Poor Animal, I pity thee.


Sir Mart. I grant I am no Musician, but you must allow me for a Sword-man, I
have beat 'em bravely; and in fine, I am come off unhurt, save only a little
scratch i'th'head.


Warn. That Is impossible, thou have a Scull so thick, no Sword can pierce it;
but much good may 't do you, Sir, with the fruits of your Valor: you rescued
your Rival when he was to be arrested on purpose to take him off from your
Mistress.


Sir Mart. Why, this is ever the Fate of ingenuous men; nothing thrives they
take in hand.

[Enter Rose.
Rose. Sir Martin, you have done your business with my Lady, she will never look
upon you more; she says, she is so well satisfied of your Wit and Courage, that
she will not put you to any further trial.


Sir Mart. Warner, is there no hopes, Warner?


Warn. None that I know.


Sir Mart. Let Us have but one civil Plot more before we part.


Warn. It Is to no purpose.


Rose. Yet if he had some golden Friends that would engage for him the next
time --


Sir Mart. Here Is a Jacobus and a Carolus will enter into Bonds for me.


Rose. I Will take their Royal words for once.

[She fetches two disguises.]
Warn. The meaning of this, Dear Rose.


Rose. It Is in pursuance of thy own invention, Warner; a child which thy wit
has begot upon me: but let us lose no time, Help! help! dress thy Master, that
he may be Anthony, old Moody's Bastard, and thou his, come from the East Indies.


Sir Mart. Hey-tarock it -- now we shall have Roses device too, I long to be at
it, pray let us hear more on it.


Rose. Old Moody you must know in his younger years, when he was a
Cambridge-Scholar, made bold with a Towns-mans Daughter there, by whom he had a
Bastard whose name was Anthony, whom you Sir Martin, are to represent.


Sir Mart. I warrant you, let me alone for Tony: but pray go on, Rose.


Rose. This Child in his Fathers time he durst not own, but bred him privately
in the Isle of Ely, till he was seven years old, and from thence sent him with
one Bonaventure a Merchant for the East Indies:


VVarn. But will not this over-burden your memory, Sir?


Sir Mart. There Is no answering thee any thing, thou think I am good for
nothing.


Rose. Bonaventure died at Surat within two years, and this Anthony has lived
up and down in the Moguls Country unheard of by his Father till this night, and
is expected within these three days: now if you can pass for him, you may have
admittance into the house, and make an end of all the business before the other
Anthony arrives.


Warn. But hold, Rose, there is one considerable point omitted; what was his
Mother's name?


Rose. That indeed I had forgot; her name was Dorothy, Daughter to one
Draw-water a Vintner at the Rose.


Warn. Come, Sir, are you perfect in your Lesson? Anthony Moody born in
Cambridge, bred in the Isle of Ely, sent into the Moguls Country at seven years
old with one Bonaventure a Merchant, who dyed within two years; your Mothers
name Dorothy Draw-water, the Vintners Daughter at the Rose.


Sir Mart. I have it all ad unguem -- what do think I Am a Sot? but stay a
little, how have I lived all this while in that same Country?


Warn. What Country? -- Pox, he has forgot already --


Rose. The Moguls Country.


Sir Mart. I, I, the Moguls Country! what the Devil, any man may mistake a
little; but now I have it perfect: but what have I been doing all this while in
the Moguls Country? He Is a Heathen Rogue, I am afraid I shall never hit upon
his name.


Warn. Why, you have been passing your time there, no matter how.


Rose. Well, if this passes upon the Old man, I Will bring your business about
again with my Mistress, never fear it; stay you here at the door, I Will go tell
the Old man of your arrival.


Warn. Well, Sir, now play your part exactly, and I Will forgive all your former
errors. --


Sir Mart. Hang'em, they were only slips of Youth -- how peremptory and
domineering this Rogue is! now he see's I have need of his service: would I
were out of his power again, I would make him lie at my feet like any Spaniel.

Enter Moody, Sir John, Lord, Lady Dupe, Millisent, Christian, Rose.
Mood. Is he here already, say thou? which is he?


Rose. That Sun-burn'd Gentleman.


Mood. My dear Boy Anthony, do I see thee again before I dye? welcome, welcome.


Sir Mart. My dear Father, I know it is you by instinct; for methinks I am as
like you as if I were spit out of your mouth.


Rose. Keep it up I beseech your Lordship.

[Aside to the Lord.
Lord. He Is wondrous like indeed.


La. Dupe. The very image of him.


Mood. Anthony, you must salute all this Company: this is my Lord Dartmouth,
this my Lady Dupe, this her Niece Mrs. Christian.

[He salutes them.
Sir Mart. And that is my Sister, methinks I have a good resemblance of her too:
honest Sister, I must need kiss you Sister.


Warn. This fool will discover himself, I foresee it already by his carriage to
her.


Mood. And now Anthony, pray tell's a little of your Travels.


Sir Mart. Time enough for that, forsooth Father, but I have such a natural
affection for my Sister, that methinks I could live and dye with her: give me
thy hand sweet Sister.


Sir John. She Is beholding to you, Sir.


Sir Mart. What if she be Sir, what is that to you Sir?


Sir John. I hope, Sir, I have not offended you?


Sir Mart. It may be you have, and it may be you have not, Sir; you see I have
no mind to satisfy you, Sir: what a Devil! a man cannot talk a little to his
own flesh and blood, but you must be interposing with a murrain to you.


Mood. Enough of this, good Anthony, this Gentleman is to marry your Sister.


Sir Mart. He marry my Sister: ods foot, Sir, there are some Bastards, that
shall be nameless, that are as well worthy to marry her, as any man; and have
as good blood in their veins.


Sir John. I do not question it in the least, Sir.


Sir Mart. It Is not your best course, Sir; you marry my Sister! what have you
seen of the world, Sir? I have seen your Hurricanos, and your Calentures, and
your Eclipticks, and your Tropic Lines, Sir, an'you go to that, Sir.


Warn. You must excuse my Master, the Sea's a little working in his brain, Sir.


Sir Mart. And your Prester John's of the East Indies, and your Great Turk of
Rome and Persia,


Mood. Lord, what a thing it is to be Learned, and a Traveller! Bodikins it
makes me weep for joy; but, Anthony, you must not bear your self too much upon
your Learning, Child.


Mill. Pray Brother be civil to this Gentleman for my sake.


Sir Mart. For your sake, Sister Millisent, much may be done, and here I kiss
your hand on it.


Warn. Yet again stupidity?


Mill. Nay, pray Brother hands off, now you are too rude.


Sir Mart. Dear Sister, as I am a true East India Gentleman --


Mood. But pray Son Anthony, let us talk of other matters and tell me truly,
had you not quite forgot me? and yet I made woundy much of you when you were
young.


Sir Mart. I remember you as well as if I saw you but yesterday: A fine
grey-headed -- grey-bearded old Gentleman as ever I saw in all my life.


Warn. aside. Grey-bearded old Gentleman! when he was a Scholar at Cambridge.


Mood. But do you remember where you were bred up?


Sir Mart. O yes, Sir, most perfectly, in the Isle -- stay -- let me see, oh --
now I have it -- in the Isle of Silly.


Mood. In the Isle of Ely, sure you mean?


Warn. Without doubt he did, Sir, but this damned Isle of Silly runs in's head
ever since his Sea-Voyage.


Mood. And your Mothers name was -- come pray let me examine you -- for that
I Am sure you cannot forget.


Sir Mart. Warner! what was it Warner?


Warn. Poor Mrs. Dorothy Draw water, if she were now alive, what a joyful day
would this be to her?


Mood. Who the Devil bid you speak, Sirrah?


Sir Mart. Her name, Sir, was Mrs. Dorothy Draw-water.


Sir John. I Will be hanged if this be not some Cheat.


Mill. He makes so many stumbles, he must needs fall at last.


Mood. But you remember I hope where you were born?


Warn. Well, they may talk what they will of Oxford for an University, but
Cambridge for my money.


Mood. Hold your tongue you Scanderbag Rogue you, this is the second time you
have been talking when you should not.


Sir Mart. I was born at Cambridge, I remember it as perfectly as if it were
but yesterday.


Warn. How I sweat for him! he is remembering ever since he was born.


Mood. And who did you go over with to the East Indies?


Sir Mart. Warner!


Warn. 'T was a happy thing, Sir, you lighted upon so honest a Merchant as Mr.
Bonaventure, to take care of him.


Mood. Saucy Rascal! this is past all sufferance.


Rose. We are undone Warner, if this discourse go on any further.


Lord. Pray, Sir, take pity of the poor Gentleman, he has more need of a good
Supper, than to be asked so many Questions.


Sir John. These are Rogues, Sir, I plainly perceive it; pray let me ask him
one question -- which way did you come home, Sir?


Sir Mart. We came home by Land, Sir.


Warn. That is, from India to Persia, from Persia to Turkey, from Turkey to
Germany, from Germany to France.


Sir John. And from thence, over the narrow Seas on Horseback.


Mood. It Is so, I discern it now, but some shall smoke for it. Stay a little
Anthony, I Will be with you presently.

Ex. Mood.
Warn. That wicked old man is gone for no good, I Am afraid, would I were fairly
quit of him.

[aside,
Mill. aside. Tell me no more of Sir Martin, Rose, he wants natural sense, to
talk after this rate; but for this Warner, I am strangely taken with him, how
handsomely he brought him off?

[Enter Moody with two Cudgels.
Mood. Among half a score tough Cudgels I had in my Chamber, I have made choice
of these two as best able to hold out.


Mill. Alas! poor Warner must be beaten now for all his wit, would I could bear
it for him.


Warn. But to what end is all this preparation, Sir?


Mood. In the first place, for your Worship, and in the next, for this
East India Apostle, that will needs be my Son Anthony.


Warn. Why do you think he is not?


Mood. No, thou wicked Accomplice in his designs, I know he is not


Warn. Who, I his Accomplice? I beseech you, Sir, what is it to me, if he
should prove a Counterfeit; I assure you he has cozened me in the first place.


Sir John. That Is likely, in faith, cozen his own Servant?


Warn. As I hope for mercy, Sir, I am an utter stranger to him, he took me up
but yesterday, and told me the story word for word as he told it you.


Sir Mart. What will become of us two now? I trust to the Rogues wit to bring
me off.


Mood. If thou would have me believe thee, take one of these two Cudgels, and
help me to lay it on soundly.


Warn. With all my heart.


Mood. Out you Cheat, you Hypocrite, you Imposter! do you come hither to cozen
an honest man?

[Beats him
Sir Mart. Hold, hold, Sir.


Warn. Do you come hither with a lie to get a Father, Mr. Anthony of East India?


Sir Mart. Hold you inhumane Butcher.


Warn. I Will teach you to counterfeit again, Sir.


Sir Mart. The Rogue will murder me.

(Ex. Sir Mart.
Mood. A fair riddance of 'em both: let us in and laugh at 'em

(Exeunt. Enter again Sir Martin, and Warner.
Sir Mart. Was there ever such an affront put upon a man, to be beaten by his
Servant?


Warn. After my hearty salutations upon your backside, Sir, may a man have
leave to ask you, what news from the Moguls Country?


Sir Mart. I wonder where thou had the impudence to move such a question to
me, knowing how thou have used me.


Warn. Now, Sir, you may see what comes of your indiscretion and stupidity: I
always gave you warning of it, but for this time I am content to pass it by
without more words, partly, because I have already corrected you, though not so
much as you deserve.


Sir Mart. Do thou think to carry it off at this rate, after such an injury?


Warn. You may thank your self for it; nay 'twas very well I found out that way,
otherwise I had been suspected as your Accomplice.


Sir Mart. But you laid it on with such a vengeance, as if you were bearing of
a Stock Fish.


VVarn. To confess the truth on it, you had angered me, and I was willing to
evaporate my choler; if you will pass it by so, I may chance to help you to
your Mistress: no more words of this business, I advise you, but go home and
grease your back.


Sir Mart. In fine, I must suffer it at his hands; for if my shoulders had not
paid for this fault, my purse must have sweat blood for it: the Rogue has got
such a hank upon me --


Warn. So, so, here is another of our Vessels come [Enter Rose. in after the
storm that parted us: what comfort, Rose, no Harbor near?


Rose. My Lady, as you may well imagine, is most extremely incensed against Sir
Martin; but she applauds your ingenuity to the Skies. I Will say no more, but
thereby hangs a Tale.


Sir Mart. I am considering with my self about a Plot, to bring all about again.


Rose. Yet again plotting! if you have such a mind to it, I know no way so
proper for you as to turn Poet to Pugenello.


Warn. Hark! is not that Music in your house?

Music plays.
Rose. Yes Sir John has given my Mistress the Fiddles, and our Old Man is as
jocund yonder, and does so hug himself to think how he has been revenged upon
you.


Warn. Why, he does not know 'twas we, I hope?


Rose. It Is all one for that.


Sir Mart. I have such a Plot; I care not, I will speak an'I were to be hanged
for it -- shall I speak, dear Warner? let me now, it does so wamble within me,
just like a Clyster, in faith law, and I can keep it no longer for my heart.


Warn. Well, I am indulgent to you; out with it boldly in the name of Nonsense.


Sir Mart. We two will put on Vizards, and with the help of my Lordland, who
shall be of the party, go a Mumming there, and by some device of dancing, get
my Mistress away unsuspected by 'em all.


Rose. What if this should hit now, when all your projects have failed, Warner?


Warn. Would I were hanged if it be not somewhat probable: nay, now I consider
better on it -- exceeding probable, it must take, it is not in Nature to be
avoided.


Sir Mart. O must it so, Sir! and who may you thank for it?


Warn. Now am I so mad he should be the Author of this device. How the Devil,
Sir, came you to stumble on it?


Sir Mart. Why should not my brains be as fruitful as yours or any man's?


Warn. This is so good, it shall not be your Plot, Sir, either disown it, or I
will proceed no further.


Sir Mart. I would not lose the credit of my Plot to gain my Mistress: the
Plot's a good one, and I Will justify it upon any ground of England; an'you will
not work upon it, it shall be done without you.


Rose. I think the Knight has reason.


Warn. Well, I Will order it however to the best advantage: hark you, Rose.

[whispers.
Sir Mart. If it miscarry by your ordering, take notice it is your fault, it is
well invented I Will take my Oath on it.


Rose. I must in to 'em, for fear I should be suspected; but I Will acquaint my
Lord, my old Lady, and all the rest who ought to know it, with your design.


Warn. We'll be with you in a twinkling: you and I, Rose, are to follow our
Leaders, and be paired to night --


Rose. To have, and to hold, are dreadful words, Warner; but for your sake I Will
venture on 'em.

(Exeunt. Enter Lord, Lady Dupe, and Christian.
La. Dupe. Nay! good my Lord be patient.


Lord. Does he think to give Fiddles and Treatments in a house where he has
wronged a Lady? I Will never suffer it.


La. Dupe. But upon what ground will you raise your quarrel?


Lord. A very just one, as I am her Kinsman.


La. Dupe. He does not know yet why he was to be arrested; try that way again.


Lord. I Will hear of nothing but revenge.

(Enter Rose.
Rose. Yes, pray hear me one word, my Lord, Sir Martin himself has made a Plot.


Chr. That Is like to be a good one.


Rose. A Fool's Plot may be as lucky as a Fools's Handsel; it is a very likely
one, and requires nothing for your part, but to get a Parson in the next room,
we'll find work for him.


La. Dupe. That shall be done immediately; Christian, make haste, and send for
Mr. Ball the Nonconformist, tell him here are two or three Angels to be earned.


Chr. And two or three Possets to be eaten: may I not put in that, Madam?


La. Dupe. Surely you may.

[Exit Christian.
Rose. Then for the rest -- it is only this -- Oh! they are here! pray take it
in a whisper: my Lady knows of it already.

Enter Moody, Sir John, Millisent.
Mill. Strike up again, Fiddle, I Will have a French Dance.


Sir John. Let Us have the Brawls.


Mood. No, good Sir John, no quarrelling among Friends.


La. Dupe. Your Company is like to be increased, Sir; some Neighbors that
heard your Fiddles are come a mumming to you.


Mood. Let 'em come in, and we will be Jovy; an' I had but my Hobbyhorse at home
-- --


Sir John. What, are they Men or Women?


La. Dupe. I believe some Prentices broke loose.


Mill. Rose! go and fetch me down two Indian gowns and Vizard-masks -- you and
I will disguise too, and be as good a Mummery to them as they to us.

(Exit Rose.
Mood. That will be most rare.

Enter Sir Martin, Warner; Landlord disguised like a Tony.
Mood. O here they come! Gentlemen Maskers you are welcome -- He signs for a
Dance I believe; you are welcome, Mr. Music, strike up, I Will make one as old
as I am.

[Warner signs to the Music for a Dance.]
Sir John. And I Will not be out.

(Dance.
Lord. Gentlemen Maskers, you have had the Frolic, the next turn is mine;
bring two Flute-glasses and some stools, Ho, we'll have the Ladies health.


Sir John. But why stools, my Lord?


Lord. That you shall see: the humor is, that two men at a time are hoysted
up; when they are above, they name their Ladies, and the rest of the Company
dance about them while they drink: this they call the Frolic of the Altitudes.


Mood. Some High-lander's invention, I Will warrant it.


Lord. Gentlemen-maskers, you shall begin.

(They hoyst Sir Mart. and Warn.)
Sir John. Name the Ladies.


Lord. They point to Mrs. Millisent and Mrs. Christian, A Lou's Touch! Touch!


Mood. A rare toping health this: come Sir John, now you and I will be in our
altitudes.

While they drink the Company dances) and sings: they are taken down.
Sir John. What new device is this tro?


Mood. I know not what to make on it.


Sir John to Tony. Pray, Mr. Fool, where is the rest o'your Company? I would
fain see 'em again.

When they are up, the Company dances about 'em: then dance off. Tony dances a
fig.
Landl. Come down and tell 'em so, Cudden:


Sir John. I Will be hanged if there be not some Plot in it, and this Fool is set
here to spin out the time.


Mood. Like enough! undone! undone! my Daughters's gone, let me down, Sirrah.


Landl. Yes, Cudden.


Sir John. My Mistress is gone, let me down first.

(He offers to pull down the stools.)
Landl. This is the quickest way, Cudden.


Sir John. Hold! hold! or thou will break my neck.


Landl. And you will not come down, you may stay there, Cudden.

[Exit Landlord dancing.
Mood. O Scanderbag Villains!


Sir John. Is there no getting down?


Mood. All this was long of you Sir Jack.


Sir John. 'Twas long of your self to invite them hither.


Mood. O you young Coxcombs, to be drawn in thus!


Sir John. You old Sot you, to be caught so sillily!


Mood. Come but an inch nearer, and I Will so claw thee.


Sir John. I hope I shall reach to thee.


Mood. And 'twere not for thy wooden breast-work there.


Sir John. I hope to push thee down from Babylon.

Enter Lord, Lady Dupe, Sir Martin, Warner, Rose, Millisent veiled, Landlord.
Lord. How, Gentlemen! what quarrelling among your selves!


Mood. Coxnowns! help me down, and let me have fair play, he shall never marry
my Daughter.


Sir Mart. leading Rose. No I Will be sworn that he shall not, therefore never
repine, Sir, for Marriages you know are made in Heaven: in fine, Sir, we are
joined together in spig't of Fortune.


Rose pulling off her mask. That we are indeed, Sir Martin, and these are
Witnesses; therefore in fine never repine, Sir, for Marriages you know are made
in Heaven.


Omn. Rose!


Warn. What, is Rose split in two? sure I have got one Rose!


Mill. I, the best Rose you ever got in all your life.

Pulls off her mask.
Warn. This amazeth me so much, I know not what to say or think.


Mood. My Daughter married to Warner!


Sir Mart. Well, I thought it impossible any man in England should have over
reached me: sure Warner there was some mistake in this: prithee Billy let us go
to the Parson to set all right again, that every man may have his own before
the matter go 100 far.


Warn. Well, Sir! for my part I will have nothing farther to do with these
Women, for I find they will be too hard for us, but e'n sit down by the loss,
and content my self with my hard fortune: But, Madam, do you ever think I will
forgive you this, to cheat me into an Estate of 2000 l. a year?


Sir Mart. And I were as thee, I would not be so served Warner!


Mill. I have served him but right for the cheat he put upon me, when he
persuaded me you were a Wit -- now there is a trick for your trick, Sir.


Warn. Nay, I confess you have outwitted me.


Sir John. Let me down, and I Will forgive all freely.

They let him down.
Mood. What am I kept here for?


Warn. I might in policy keep you there, till your Daughter and I had been in
private, for a little consummation: But for once, Sir, I Will trust your good
nature.

[Takes him down too.
Mood. And thou were a Gentleman it would not grieve me!


Mill. That I was assured of before I married him, by my Lord here.


Lord. I cannot refuse to own him for my Kinsman, though his Father's
sufferings in the late times has ruined his Fortunes.


Mood. But yet he has been a Serving-man.


Warn. You are mistaken, Sir, I have been a Master, and besides there is an
Estate of 800 l. a year, only it is mortgaged for 6000 l.


Mood. Well, we'll bring it off, and for my part, I am glad my Daughter has
missed in fine, there.


Sir John. I will not be the only man that must sleep without a Bedfellow to
night, if this Lady will once again receive me.


La. Dupe. She Is yours, Sir.


Lord. And the sam Parson, that did the former execution, is still in the next
Chamber; what with Cawdels Wine, and Quidding, which he has taken in abundance,
I think he will be able to wheedle two more of you into matrimony.


Mill. Poor Sir Martin looks melancholy! I am half afraid he is in love.


Warn. Not with the Lady that took him for a Wit, I hope.


Rose. At least, Sir Martin can do more than you Mr. Warner, for he can make me
a Lady, which you cannot my Mistress.


Sir Mart. I have lost nothing but my Man, and in fine, I shall get another.


Mill. You Will do very well, Sir Martin, for you will never be your own Man, I
assure you.


Warn. For my part I had loved you before if I had followed my inclination.


Mill. But now I am afraid you begin of the latest, except your love can grow
up like a Mushrome at a nights warning.


Warn. For that matter never trouble your self, I can love as fast as any man,
when I am nigh possession; my love falls heavy, and never moves quick till it
comes near the Center; he is an ill Falconer that will unhood before the quarry
be in sight.

Love's an high mettal'd Hawk that beats the Air,

But soon grows weary when the Game's not near.


Epilogue.
AS Country Vicars, when the Sermon's done,
Run hudling to the Benediction;
Well knowing, though the better sort may stay,
The Vulgar Rout will run unblest away:
So we, when once our Play is done, make haste
With a short Epilogue to close your taste.
In thus withdrawing we seem mannerly,
But when the Curtain's, down we peep and see
A Jury of the Wits who still stay late,
And in their Club decree the poor Plays fate;
Their Verdict back is to the Boxes brought,
Thence all the Town pronounces it their thought.
Thus, Gallants, we like Lilly can foresee,
But if you ask us what our doom will be,
We by to morrow will our Fortune cast,
As he tells all things when the Year is past.
FINIS.

