Love Triumphant; OR, NATURE will PREVAIL.

Love Triumphant; OR, NATURE will PREVAIL. A Tragi - Comedy. As it is Acted at
the Theater Royal, By Their MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

Quod optanti Divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies, en, attulit ultro.
Virg. Written by Mr. DRYDEN.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. 1694.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Salisbury, etc.
My Lord,
THIS Poem being the last which I intend for the Theater, ought to have the
same Provision made for it, which Old Men make for their youngest Child, which
is commonly a Favorite: They who were born before it carry away the Patrimony
by Right of Eldership. This is to make its Fortune in the World; and since I
can do little for it, Natural Affection calls upon me to put it out, at least,
into the best service which I can procure for it. And as it is the usual
practice of our decayed Gentry, to look about them for some Illustrious Family,
and there endeavor to fix their young Darling, where he may be both well
Educated, and Supported: I have herein also followed the Custom of the World,
and am satisfied in my Judgment, that I could not have made a more Worthy
Choice. It Is true, I am not vain enough to think that any thing of mine can in
any measure be worthy of Your Lordship's Patronage: and yet I should be ashamed
to leave the Stage, without some acknowledgement of your former Favors, which
I have more than once experienced. Besides the Honor of my Wife's Relation to
Your Noble House, to which my Sons may plead some Title, though I cannot; You
have been pleased to take a particular notice of me, even in this lowness of my
Fortunes, to which I have voluntarily reduced my self: and of which I have no
reason to be ashamed. This Condescension, my Lord, is not only becoming of Your
Ancient Family, but of Your Personal Character in the World. And if I value my
self the more for your Indulgence to me, and your Opinion of me; it is because
any thing which you like, ought to be considered as something in it self. And
therefore I must not undervalue my present Labors, because I have presumed to
make you my Patron. A Man may be just to himself, tho he ought not to be
partial. And I dare affirm, that the several Manners which I have given to the
Persons of this Drama, are truly drawn from Nature; all perfectly distinguished
from each other. That the Fable is not injudiciously contrived; that the turns
of Fortune are not managed unartfully; and that the last Revolution is happily
enough invented. Aristotle, I acknowledge, has declared, that the Catastrophe
which is made from the change of Will is not of the first Order for Beauty: but
it may reasonably be alleged, in defense of this Play, as well as of the Cinna
(which I take to be the very best of Corneille's) that the Philosopher who made
the Rule, copied all the Laws, which he gave for the Theater, from the
Authorities and Examples of the Greek Poets, which he had read: And from their
Poverty of Invention he could get nothing but mean Conclusions of wretched
Tales: where the mind of the chief Actor was for the most part changed without
Art or Preparation; only because the Poet could not otherwise end his Play. Had
it been possible for Aristotle to have seen the Cinna, I am confident he would
have altered his Opinion; and concluded, that a simple change of Will might be
managed with so much Judgment, as to render it the most agreeable, as well as
the most surprising part of the whole Fable: Let D'acier, and all the rest of
the Modern Critics, who are too much Bigoted to the Ancients, contend never
so much to the contrary. I was afraid that I had been the Inventor of a new
sort of designing, when in my Third Act, I make a discovery of my Alphonso's
true Parentage. If it were so, what wonder had it been, that Dramatick Poetry,
tho a limited Art, yet might be capable of receiving some Innovations for the
better. But afterward I casually found, that Menander and Terence, in the
Heautontimoroumenos, had been before me; and made the same kind of discovery in
the same Act. As for the Mechanic Unities, that of Time is much within the
compass of an Astrological Day, which begins at Twelve, and ends at the same
hour the Day following. That of Place is not observed so justly by me, as by
the Ancients; for their Scene was always one, and almost constantly some
Public Place. Some of the late French Poets, and amongst the English, my most
Ingenious Friend, Mr. Congreve, have observed this Rule strictly; though the
Place was not altogether so public as a Street. I have followed the Example of
Corneille, and stretched the Latitude to a Street and Palace, not far distant
from each other in the same City. They who will not allow this Liberty to a
Poet, make it a very ridiculous thing, for an Audience to suppose themselves,
sometimes to be in a Field, sometimes in a Garden, and at other times in a
Chamber. There are not indeed so many Absurdities in their Supposition, as in
ours; but it is an Original Absurdity, for the Audience to suppose themselves to
be in any other place, than in the very Theater, in which they sit; which is
neither Chamber, nor Garden, nor yet a Public Place of any Business, but that
of the Representation. For my Action, it is evidently double; and in that I have
most of the Ancients for my Examples. Yet I dare not defend th^^ way by Reason,
much less by their Authority: for their Actions, though double, were of the
same Species; that is to say, in their Comedies two Amors: And their Persons
were better linked in Interests than mine. Yet even this is a fault which I
should often practice, if I were to write again; because it is agreeable to the
English Genius. We love variety more than any other Nation; and so long as the
Audience will not be pleased without it, the Poet is obliged to humor them. On
condition they were cured of this public Vice, I could be content to change my
Method, and gladly give them a more reasonable Pleasure. This Digression, my
Lord, is not altogether to the purpose of an Epistle Dedicatory: Yet it is
expected that somewhat should be said even here, in relation to Criticisme; at
least in Vindication of my Address, that you may not be desired to Partronize a
Poem which is wholly unworthy of your Protection. Tho, after all, I doubt not
but some will liken me to the Lover in a Modern Comedy, who was combing his
Peruke, and setting his Cravat before his Mistress; and being asked by her,
when he intended to begin his Court? replied, he had been doing it all this
while. Yet thus it happens, my Lord, that Self will come into all Addresses of
this Nature, tho it is the most unmannerly word of the World in civil
Conversation, and the most ungrateful to all Hearers. For which reason, I, who
have nothing to boast of, but my Misfortunes, ought to be the first to banish
it. Especially since I have so large a Field before me, as Your Inborn
Goodness, Your Evenness of Temper, Your Humility in so ample a share of Fortune
as you possess; Your Humanity to all Men, and Your Kindness to your Friends:
Besides Your Natural and Acquired Endowments, and Your Brotherly Love to Your
Relations. Notus in Fratres animo Paterno, was the great Commendation which
Horace gave to one of his Patrons: And it is that Praise which particularly
Crowns your other Virtues. But here, my Lord, I am obliged in common Prudence
to stop short; and to cast under a Veil some other of your Praises, as the
Chemists use to shadow the Secret of their great Elixir; lest if it were made
public, the World should make a bad use of it. To enjoy our own Quiet, without
disturbing that of others, is the practice of every Moral Man: And for the
rest, to live cheerfully and splendidly, as it is becoming of Your Illustrious
Birth, so it is likewise to thank God for his Benefits in the best manner. It Is
unnecessary to wish you more Worldly Happiness, or Content of Mind, than you
enjoy: But the continuance of both, to Your Self, and Your Posterity, is
earnestly desired by all who have the Honor to be known to You, and more
particularly by,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient and most Humbly Devoted Servant, JOHN
DRYDEN.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Betterton.

AS when some Treasurer lays down the Stick;
Warrants are Signed for ready Money thick:
And many desperate Debentures paid;
Which never had been, had his Lordship staid:
So now, this Poet, who forsakes the Stage,
Intends to gratify the present Age.
One Warrant shall be Signed for every Man;
All shall be Wits that will; and Beaux that can:
Provided still, this Warrant be not shown,
And you be Wits, but to your selves alone.
Provided too; you rail at one another:
For there is no one Wit, will allow a Brother.
Provided also; that you spare this Story,
Damn all the Plays that e're shall come before ye.
If one by chance prove good in half a score,
Let that one pay for all; and Damn it more.
For if a good one escape among the Crew,
And you continue Judging as you do;
Every bad Play will hope for Damning too.
You might Damn this, if it were worth your pains,
Here Is nothing you will like; no fustian Scenes,
And nothing too of -- you know what he means.
No double Entendres, which you Sparks allow;
To make the Ladies look they know not how;
Simply as 'twere; and knowing both together,
Seeming to fan their Faces in cold Weather.
But here is a Story which no Books relate;
Coined from our own Old Poet's Addle-pate.
The Fable has a Moral too, if sought:
But let that go; for upon second Thought,
He fears but few come hither to be Taught.
Yet if you will be profited, you may;
And he would Bribe you too, to like his Play.
He Dies, at least to us, and to the Stage,
And what he has, he leaves this Noble Age.
He leaves you first, all Plays of his Inditing,
The whole Estate, which he has got by Writing.
The Beaux may think this nothing but vain Praise,
They Will find it something; the Testator says:
Tor half their Love, is made from scraps of Plays.
To his worst Foes, he leaves his Honesty;
That they may thrive upon it as much as he.
He leaves his Manners to the Roaring Boys,
Who come in Drunk, and fill the House with noise.
He leaves to the dire Critiques of his Wit,
His Silence and Contempt of all they Writ.
To Shakespeare's Critique, he bequeaths the Curse,
To find his faults; and yet himself make worse.
A precious Reader in Poetique Schools,
Who by his own Examples damns his Rules.
Last for the Fair, he wishes you may be,
From your dull Critiques, the Lampooners free.
Though he pretends no Legacy to leave you,
An Old Man may at least good wishes give you.
Your Beauty names the Play; and may it prove,
To each, an Omen of Triumphant Love.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
VEramond, King of Arrragon, Represented by Mr. Kynnaston. Alphonso, his
supposed Son, Mr. Betterton. Garcia, King of Navarre, Mr. Williams. Ramirez,
King of Castile, Mr. Alexander. Sancho, Carlos, Two Colonels, Mr. Dogget. Mr.
Powell. Lopez, An old Courtier, Mr. Underhill.
WOMEN.
Ximena, Queen of Arragon, BY Mrs. Betterton. Victoria, Eldest Daughter to the
King and Queen, Mrs. Barry. Celidea, Her Sister, Mrs. Bracegirdle. Dalinda,
Daughter to Lopez, Mrs. Montfort. A Nurse, with two Children, Mrs. Kent.
SCENE SARRAGOSSA in Spain.

Love Triumphant; OR, NATURE will PREVAIL. A Tragi - Comedy.
ACT I. SCENE I.
At the Drawing up of the Curtain, Veramond King of Aragon appears: Ximena the
Queen by him: Victoria their eldest Daughter on the Right Hand; and Celidea
their younger Daughter on the left: Courtiers stand attending in File on each
side of the Stage. The Men on one hand, the Ladies on the other. Amongst the
Men, Don Lopez, amongst the Women, Dalinda his Daughter. The Scene is supposed
a Presence Chamber. Vera. NOW the long Wars betwixt Castile and Arragon
Are ended in the ruin of our Foes.
And fierce Ramirez, the Castilian King,
Who tugged for Empire, with our WarlikeSon,
In single Combat taken, adds his Laurels
To the young Victor's Brow: Our tender Maids
And trembling Children, shall with Scorn behold
The haughty Captive, who had made his Vaunts
To lay their Dwellings level; and with Salt
To sow the place, where Sarragossa stood.

Xime. Processions, Prayers, and Public Thanks to Heaven,

Were fit to be decreed.

Vera. Your Sex is ever foremost in Devotion.
But for our brave Confederate, young Navarre,
He shall receive the Prize reserved within
My Breast; and such a one,
His Youth and Valor have right-well deserved.

Xime. I hear he comes along with our Alphonso,
And next our Son, did best.

Vera. Perhaps as well:
Alphonso's Action was indeed more Glorious,
To buckle with a King in single Fight,
And take him Prisoner; but his fiery temper
Still hurries him to daring rash Attempts.

Xime. Alphonso is Impetuous, but he is Noble;
He will not take one Atome from Navarre
Of what is his Right, nor needs he.

Vera. If he should --


Xime. You take too bad Impressions of your Son.


Vera. No more, Ximena, for I hear their Trumpets
Proclaim their Entry: And our own their Welcome.

[Trumpets from each side of the Stage. Enter Alphonso and Garcia, hand in
hand. After them, the Prisoner K. Ramirez alone: Then the two Colonels, Sancho
and Carlos: After them, other Officers of the Army. Veramond advances to meet
them: The Queen and the two Princesses follow him. Alphonso first kneels to his
Father and Mother, and immediately runs to salute his Sister Victoria tenderly;
then slightly salutes Celidea, and returns to Victoria. In the mean time
Veramond embraces Don Garcia, who afterward kisses the Queen's hand. Vera. The
Triumphs of this Day, auspicious Prince,
Proclaim themselves Your Gift, to us and Arragon:
From you they are derived; to you return;
For what we are, you make us.

Gar. May Heaven and your brave Son, and, above all,
Your own prevailing Genius, guard your Age
From such another Day of doubtful Fate:
But if it comes, then Garcia will be proud
To be again the Foil of Great Alphonso.

Vera. It might, and well it had become my Son
[Looking about for Alphonso. To speak your words; But you are still before him,
As in the Fight you were.

Xime. Turn to your Father, and present your Duty;
[Pulling Alphonso by the sleeve. He thinks himself neglected, and observes ye.

Here Garcia, after bowing to the King and Queen, goes to the two Princesses
and salutes them. After a little dumb Courtship, he leads out Victoria and
Celidea, the Ladies follow; Alphonso observes it with discontent, and then
turns to his Father. Alphon. I saw you, Sir, engaged in Ceremonies,
And therefore thought I might defer this Office,
To give you time for decent Thanks to Garcia.

Vera. You rather went where more affection called ye.


Alphon. I may have been too slack in outward show,
But when your Service, and my Honor called,
None was more forward in the fighting part.

Vera. The rugged Business of the War is over:
Softness and Sweetness, and a gentler Air
Would make a mixture, that would temper well
That inborn Fierceness of your boiling Mind.

Alph. I stand corrected, Sir, and let me tell ye now,
That sweetness which so well you have advised,
Fortune has put in your own hand to practice
Upon this Royal Soldier; till we fought
[ Showing Ramirez. Your Equal, now your Prisoner of the War;
And once, (alas! that still it is not so)
The Partner of your Thoughts, and Bosom Friend.

Xime. (aside.) Heaven that inspired thee with this Pious thought,
Add Virtue and Persuasion to thy words,
And bend my stubborn Lord.

Vera. Say, have you more to speak on his behalf?


Alphon. Much more, his fair Behavior in the War,
Not plundering Towns, nor burning Villages;
His Bravery of Mind, his Dauntless Courage,
When Hand to Hand, he made me stoop beneath
His weighty blows, and often forced to doubt
The Fortune of my Youth, against his Age.

Vera. Proceed, proceed, for this is but to say,
That thou were almost worsted in the Combat.

Alphon. I have already said much more, than needs
To move a Noble Mind;
Such as my Father's is, or ought to be.

Vera. Come, let me hear my Duty from my Son.


Alphon. If more be wanting on so plain a Theme,
Think on the slippery State of Humane Things,
The strange vicissitudes, and sudden turns
Of War, and Fate recoiling on the Proud,
To crush a Merciless and Cruel Victor.
Think there are bounds of Fortune, set above;
Periods of Time, and progress of Success,
Which none can stop before the appointed limits,
And none can push beyond.

Ximena. He Reasons justly, Sir.


Alphon. Ramirez is an Honorable Foe,
Use him like what he is, and make him yours.

Vera. By Heaven I think,
That when you cop'd with him in single Fight,
You had so much ado to Conquer then,
You fear to engage him in a second Combat.

Alphon. The World knows how I Fought:
But Old Men have Prerogative of Tongue,
And Kings of Power, and Parents that of Nature.
Your Pardon, Royal Sir.

Vera. I give it you;
Your Battle now is paid at the full price.

[ Ximena whispers Alphonso for a moment. Alphon. Fear not, I curb my self.


[ To Ximena. Ramir. (to Veram.) Your Son has mentioned Honorable Terms.
Propose 'em Veramond, and for his sake
(So much his Valor and rare Courtesy,
Have wrought upon my Soul,) I will accept 'em.

Vera. Who gave you leave.
To speak of Terms, or even to speak at all?

Ramir. And who should give me liberty of speaking,
But Heaven, who gave me Speech?

Veram. How dares my Captive
Assume this boldness to his Conqueror?

Ramir. You have not Conquered me, you could not, Veramond;
It Is to Alphonso's Arms that I am Prisoner.

Veram. Under my Auspices Alphonso fought,
He led my Forces.

Ramir. Yes, and made 'em too
By his Example, else they never had Conquered.

Veram. A Bargain! A plain Compact! A Confederacy!
Betwixt my Son and thee, to give me part,
Of what my better Stars, make all my own.

Alphon. Sir, I must speak --


Veram. Dare not, I charge thee, dare not.


Alphon. Not vindicate my Honor?
By Heaven I will, to all the World, to you;
My Honor is my own, and not derived
From this frail Body, and this Earth you gave me;
But that Aetherial Spark, which Heaven inspired,
And kindled in my New Created Soul.
You tell me, I have bargained with Ramirez,
To make his Ransom cheap.

Vera. To make it nothing,
To rob thy Father of his Victory,
And, at my cost, oblige my Mortal Foe;
Fool, do thou know the value of a Kingdom?

Alphon. I think I do, because I won a Kingdom.


Veram. And know not how to keep it.


Ramirez. What Claim have you? What Right to my Castile?


Veram. The Right of Conquest, for when Kings make War;
No Law betwixt two Sovereigns can decide,
But that of Arms, where Fortune is the Judge,
Soldiers the Lawyers, and the Bar the Field.

Alphon. But with what Conscience can ye keep that Crown,
To which, ye claim no Title but the Sword?

Vera. Then ask that question of thy self, when thou
Thy self art King; I will retain my Conquest;
And if thou art so mean, so poor of Soul,
As to refuse thy Sword in keeping it;
Then Garcia's Aid;
Whose share of Honor, in that Glorious day,
Was more than thine; during my Life, shall Guard it,
And at my Death, shall Heir it.

Alphon. Don Garcia is indeed a Valiant Prince,
But this large Courtesy, this over-praise
You give his Worth, in any other Mouth,
Were Villainy to me.

Ximena. That was too much Alphonso, show the Reverence
That Sons should bear to Fathers.

Alphon. (to her.) Did I not say in any other Mouth,
The King excepted still?

Ramir. Had I a Son; a Son like your Alphonso,
The Pride of War, and Darling of the Field;
I should not thus receive him, nor detract
From such High Actions: Let me tell you, Sir,
(For I who felt his Arm, can best report him;)
There lives not one, who breaths this Vital Air,
That e're could boast, he made Ramirez bend,
Before Alphonso undertook the Task.

Veram. Confederacy again! How they enhance
Their mutual worth, and bandy Fame betwixt 'em,
Into each other's hand. --
[Looks on Ramirez, and starts back. What Is this I see?
Nay, now I wonder not, the Captive prates
With so secure presumption to his King,
Well may he brave me, while his murdering Sword
Sits as before, insulting on his side,
Who gave thee back that weapon?

Alphon. I, who took it.


Vera. A careful Son, to trust a Foe with Arms
So near his Father.
Haste, disarm the Prisoner.

Alphon. E're you dishonor me, first hear me speak;
I took his Royal Word, to be my Prisoner;
And on his Honor, I restored his Sword,
Because I thought, that mark of Sovereign Justice
And Awful Power, should not for one short moment
Be wanting to a Monarch.

Vera. Then when he lost the Power, he lost the Claim,
And marks of Sovereign Right:
Nor without my Consent, could thou dispose
Of him, or of his Sword, or of his Life:
Once more disarm him: What, am I betrayed?
[Guards look amazed, but stir not. Have I no Subject left?

Xime. Submit, Alphonso.
I, who am partial to you, must condemn
This Carriage as undutious to your Father.

Ramir. (to Alphon.) Brave Prince, too warmly you assert my Cause,
Though it is indeed the common Cause of Kings:
But to prevent what ills on my account
May hence ensue betwixt a Son and Parent,
Take here the Sword, you trusted in my Hands,
Which you alone could take -- Now, Veramond,
[Presents his Sword to Alphonso. Dispose of old Ramirez as thou please;
[He presents it sullenly to Veramond, who puts it into the hand of an Officer.
Secure thy Hate, Ambition, and thy Fear,
And give Ramirez Death, who scorns a Life
Which he must owe to thee.

Vera. (to the Guards.) Go bear him to the Castle; at more leisure
His Doom shall be decreed.

Ramir. When e're it comes it is welcome, only this
(If Enemies be suffered to request)
Forgive the Imprudent Zeal thy Son has shown
On my behalf, and take him to thy Bosom:
A noble Temper shines even through his faults,
And gilds them into Virtues.

Vera. Take him hence --


[Ramirez is led off by Sancho and Carlos, and followed by the Guards. Alphonso
looking frowningly. The rest stay. Alphon. (aside.) How I abhor this base
Inhumane Act!
But Patience! he is my Father.

Veram. Thus all his Praises, are thy Accusations,
And even that very Sword,
Punish me Heaven, if I believe not so,
Is far less dangerous in his Hand than thine.

Xime. Forgive the hasty Sallies of his Youth.


Vera. He never loved me.


Alphon. You never gave me cause.


Xime. ( to Alphon.) Come, you both loved,
But both were jealous of each other's kindness.
His silence shows, he longs to pardon you.
And did not you, my Lord, observe Alphonso,
[Turning to Veram. How, though at first he could not rule his Passion?
Not at the very first, for that is impossible
To hasty blood, like his and yours, my Lord;
Yet in the second moment, he repented,
As soon as Thought had leisure to be born.

Veram. For ought I see, you do him better Office
Than he desires, Ximena.

Alphon. (kneeling.) Sir, your Pardon;
And if you please, your Love.

Vera. Receive the first,
The last as you deserve.

Re-enter Don Garcia, with Victoria, Celidea, and the Ladies. Veramond sees 'em
at a distance. Vera. This had not been thus easily o're-past,
But that I see Don Garcia with your Sisters;
A fair occasion offers you this hour
To cancel your Offenses; mark, and take it.

The K Q. and Alphonso entertain Garcia in dumb show, while Victoria and
Celidea speak at a distance. Celid. What think you, Sister, of this Youthful
Hero?


Victo. Our dear Alphonso?


Celid. No; I mean Navarre.


Victo. As of a Valiant Prince; what would you more?


Celid. Methinks you give him a short Commendation;
Yet all his Applications were to you.

Victo. I minded not his words.


Celid. He made a warm beginning of a Love.


Victo. It seems my thoughts were otherwise employed.


Celid. Neither your thoughts, nor eyes could be employed
Upon a Nobler Object.

Victo. That Is your Judgment.


Celid. His every Action, nay, his every Motion
Were graceful, and becoming his high Birth.

Victo. All of a piece, and all like other Men:
He seems to me a common kind of Creature,
One that may pass among a crowd of Courtiers
And not be known for King.

Celid. Sure you forget the Troops he brought our Father;
Besides his Personal Valor in the Fight.

Victo. You more forget Alphonso's greater Actions,
When the young Hero, yet unfledged in Arms,
Made the tough Age of bold Ramirez bend:
He fought like Mars, descending from the Skies,
And looked like Venus rising from the Waves.

Celid. Navarre had done the same; 'twas Fortune's fault
That showed him not Ramirez.

Victo. You are too young to judge of Men or Merits;
You praise the Vulgar Flight a Faulcon makes,
When Jove's Imperial Bird, that bears the Thunder,
Is towering far above him.

Re-enter Carlos, Sancho, and the rest of the Officers. Vera. Are my Commands
performed?


Carlos. With all exactness.


Vera. Approach Victoria, and you Celidea,
That in your presence I may pay some part
Of what I owe your brave Deliverer.

Celid. We cannot show too much of Gratitude.


Vera. Victoria, what say you?


Victo. He did the Duty of a brave Allie:
I do not know the War, nor dare I load
His modesty with larger Commendations.

Garci. Even those are much too large, when given by you,
To whom my Soul, with all my future Service,
Are with Devotion offered.

Vera. I have indeed disclosed to her alone
The important Secret of the intended Match.
And that perhaps has made her fear to praise
A Prince who shortly is to be her own.

Alphon. (aside.) Oh Heavens! what bode these words?


[The Queen and Celidea show amazement, Alphonso and Victoria discontent. Vera.
Now therefore I declare the wished alliance;
Ximena, you may give your Daughter joy;
And you your Sister, of the Imperial Crown
[ To Celid. Which Garcia puts on our Victoria's Head.
Your share, Alphonso, in this happy day
[ To Alphon. Is not the least, nor will you be the last
TO applaud my worthy choice of such a Son.

Alphon. A sudden damp has seized my Vital Spirits;
I see but through a mist, and hear far off:
Nay, trouble not your selves, a little time
Of needful rest, and solitary thought,
Will mend my health, till when excuse my presence.

[Exit Alphonso, and looks back on Victoria. Xime. (aside.) He Is much
disturbed, a sickness of the Soul;
Or I mistake, he does not like this Marriage.
Assist us, Heaven, if I divine aright,
And prosper thy own work.

Vera. (aside.) I like not this,
But must dissemble, till I clear my doubts.
Fortune, brave Prince, has given us this allay;
[ To Garci. Our Joys were else too full:
An hour of sleep will bring him back restored;
Mean time we may withdraw.

Garci. (to Victo.) Come, my fair Mistress, by your Father's leave
I seize this precious Gage.

Victo. Then thank my Father;
He may dispose of all things but my Heart,
And that is my own -- ( aside.) -- Alas! I wish it were.

[Exeunt Vara. Xime. Celid. Garci. Victo. and all the Courtiers. Men and Women.
The Guards follow: San. and Carl. remain. San. Good news, Cartos, the old Jew
is dead.


Carl. What Jew?


Sanch. Why the rich Jew, my Father.

He Is gone to the Bosom of Abraham his Father, and I, his Christian Son, am
left sole Heir. Now do I intend to be monstrously in love.


Carl. With whom, Colonel?


Sanch. That Is not yet resolved, Colonel; but with one of the Court Ladies. You
may stand a Man's Friend, Carlos, in such a business.


Carl. You may depend on me, Sancho, because my dependence is on you: You got
Plunder in the Battle; while I was hacked and hewed, and almost laid asleep in
the damned Bed of Honor.


Sanch. Nay, I confess I am a lucky Rogue, for I was born with a Caul upon my
Head.


Carl. I Am sure I came bare enough into the World, and live as barely in it.


Sanch. Make me but lustily in love, and I Will adopt thee into my Fortune; but
thou stand'st shall I, shall I, till all the Ladies are out of sight: Here,
take that Billet Doux which I have pulled out by chance from amongst twenty,
that I always wear about me for such occasions.


Carl. But to which of 'em shall I deliver it?


Sanch. Even to her thou can first overtake. Nay, do not lose thy time in
looking on it, there is no particular Direction, Man; Fortune ever superscribes
my Letters to the Fair Sex; I let her alone to find me out a handsome Mistress;
and let me alone to make her kind afterward.


Carl. But suppose I should happen to deliver it to my own Mistress, for she
was in the presence with her Father.


Sanch. Then I suppose thou will be the first that shall repent it, for she
will certainly fall in Love with me.

[ Lopez and Dalinda re-enter, and walk softly over the Stage. Look, there is
one of 'em already; my Heart beats at the very sight of her; this must and
shall be she, by Cupid.


Carl. And by Venus the very she I love.


Sanch. Prithee no more words then, for Fate will have it so.


Carl. (aside.) I know it is impossible for her Father to receive him, or her to
love him, and yet his good Fortune, and my Rascally three penny Planet, make me
suspicious without Reason: But hang Superstition, I Will draw such a Picture of
him, as shall do his business.


Sanch. Now will I stand by Incognito, like some mighty Potentate, and see my
own Embassy delivered.


[ Carlos overtakes Lopez and Dalinda just going off, and salutes them. Lop.
Cozen Carlos, you are welcome from the Wars; I think I saw you in the Show to
day.


Carl. The Ceremony hindered me from paying my respects; but I made haste, you
see --


Lop. I hope you will no more be a Stranger to my House, than you have been
formerly: Your Mistress here will be proud to entertain you; and then you shall
tell me the whole Expedition: I love Battles wonderfully, when a Man may hear
'em without Peril of his Person.


Sanch. (aside.) Nothing of my Letter all this while;
Why, when Carlos?

[Whispering aloud to him. Carlos. (aside.) Now I dare not but deliver it,
because he sees me.

Don Lopez, I have a foolish kind of Petition to you.


[ To Lopez. Lop. Why do you call it a foolish Petition?


Carl. Because I bring it from a Fool. There Is a Friend of mine, of a plentiful
Fortune, that is desperately in Love with your Fair Daughter, Dalinda; and has
Commanded me, by your permission, to deliver this Letter to her.


Lopez. A Rich Man's Letter may be delivered.


[ Carlos gives her the Letter. Dalinda. What Is here? A Note without a
Superscription.
[She seems to Read. As I Live, a Bill of Exchange for 200 Pistols,
Charged upon a Banker, and payable to the Bearer;
An accomplished Cavalier, I warrant him; He writes finely, and in the best
manner.


Carlos. (aside.) There Is the Covetous Sex, at the first Syllable,

The Fool's good Planet begins to work already; but I shall stop its Influence.


Lop. Good Cozen Colonel; what manner of Man is my Son-in-Law, that may be?


Carl. Do You see that sneaking Fellow yonder?


Lop. Who, that Gallant Cavalier?


Dalind. I wish it were no worse.


Carl. Plague, ye make me mad betwixt ye. His outside's Tawdry, and his
inside's Fool. He Is an Usurer's Son, and his Father was a Jew.


Dalind. No matter for all that, he is Rich.


Carlos. He was begot upon the Wife of a desperate Debtor, Out of pure good
Husbandry, to save something: He Is Covetous by the Father's side; A Blockhead
by the Mother's; And a Knave by both.


Lopez. I see nothing like your description of him, at this distance.

Call him hither, I would fain speak with him.


Carl. Come hither, Don Sancho, and make good the Character
I have given of you.

[ Sancho comes up, and salutes 'em awkwardly. Lop. Cavalier, I shall be glad
to be better known to you.


Sanch. ( to Carlos.) You see I have Luck in a Bag, Carlos.


Carlos. (aside.) Ay, in a Bag of Money, I see it to my sorrow.

Try his Wit, Signior, you will find him as heavy as Lead.


[Aside to Lopez. Lop. (to Sanch.) So his Money be Silver, I care not.
Come Cavalier, what say you to my Daughter?

Sanch. Why, I say, I was resolved to Love the first Fair Lady that I met.


Dalind. Oh Lord, Sir!


Carlos. (to Lopez.) Do but mark his Breeding.


Lop. I like him never the worse for his Plain-Dealing.


Dalin. Bluntness, methinks, becomes a Soldier.


Carlos. (aside.) How Naturally Old Men take to Riches, and Women to Fools.


Lopez. (to Sanch.) You have made a Noble Declaration of your Love, Sir,
With a handsome Present of two hundred Pistols.

Sanch. What, I hope I have not mistaken Papers, and sent you my Letter of
Exchange for 200 Pistols, charged upon the Banker Porto Carrero: Pray return
that Letter, Madam; and I Will look out for another, that shall Treat only of dry
Love, without those terrible Appendixes.


Dalind. Why, did not ye intend this for me, Cavalier?


Sanch. No, you shall hear me rap out all the Oaths in Christendom, that I am
wholly Innocent of this Accusation.


Dalind. Come, you belly your Noble Nature; look upon me again Cavalier, ( she
makes the Doux Yeux to him.)

And then Examine your own Heart,
If you meant it not to me.

Sanch. Nay, I confess my Heart beats a charge toward ye: (To Carl.) And yet
Two Hundred Pistols, is a swinging Sum for one kind Look, Carlos!


Carlos. (to him.) A Damnable hard Pennyworth! hold you there, Don Sancho.


[ Dalinda looks upon him again, more sweetly. Sanch. She has two Devils in her
Eyes, that last Ogle was a lick-penny. Well, Madam, I Dedicate those fair Two
Hundred Pistols, to your more fair Hand: And now you have Received 'em, I meant
'em to you.


Dalind. And, in requital, I receive you for my Servant, Cavalier.


Carlos. (aside.) Damn him for his awkward Liberality, he is always Covetous,

But when it is to do me a mischief.


Lopez. (to Dalind.) He Is come on again, my Heart was almost at my Mouth.

Now, Mrs. Minion, let me take you to task in private.
[Draws her aside a little. What hope have you, of the Conde Don Alonzo De
Cardona?

Dalind. Little or none; a bare possibility. You know what has passed betwixt
us.


Lop. But suppose he should renew his Love; had you rather Marry that Rich Old
Conde; or, this poor Young Rogue, Don Carlos?


Dalind. This Poor Young Rogue, if you please, Father.


Lop. I thought as much, good Madam; but to come closer to the present
Business, betwixt Don Carlos and Don Sancho, That is to say, a Poor Young Wit,
and a Rich Young Fool; put the Case Gentlewoman, which of them would you choose?


Dalind. If it were not for mere Necessity, I have a kind of a loathing to a
Fool.


Lopez. The more Fool you, Madam.


Dalind. Would you have a Race of Booby Grandsons?


Lopez. That Is as your Conscience serves ye; I say only, that your Husband
shall be a Fool, I say, not your Childrens Father shall be one.


Sancho. (to Carlos.) This is a plaguey long whisper, I do not like it.

And yet now I think on it, my left Eye itches, some good luck is coming toward
me.


Lopez. (to them.) I Will be short and pithy with ye, Don Sancho, I think they
call ye? If out of my abundant Love, I should bestow my Dutiful Daughter on
you, what kind of Husband would you make?


Sanch. Husband, Sennor? Why, none at all. None of my Predecessors were ever
Married: My Father and my Mother never were, and I will not be the first of my
Family that shall degenerate; I thought my 200 Pistols would have done my
business with Dalinda, and a little winking Money with you.


Lop. What, would you make me a Pimp to my own Daughter?


Dalind. And imagine my Chastity could be corrupted with a petty Bribe.


Sanch. Nay, I am not so obstinate neither, against Marriage; Carlos gave me
this wicked Counsel, on purpose to banish me; and in revenge to him, I will
Marry.


Lop. I hope you will ask her leave first?


Sanch. Phoo! I take that for granted; no Woman has the power to resist my
Courtship.


Lop. Suppose then, as before supposed; what kind of Husband would you make?


Sanch. Then to deal roundly with you; I would run a rambling my self, and
leave the drudgery of my House to her management: All things should go at Sixes
and Sevens, for Sancho; In short, Sennor, I will be as Absolute, as the Great
Turk, and take as little care of my People, as a Heathen God.


Lop. Now, Don Carlos, what say you?


Carlos. (aside.) I Will fit 'em for a Husband:

( To Lopez) Why, Sennor, I would be the most careful Creature of her Business;
I would inspect every thing, would manage the whole Estate to save her the
trouble; I would be careful of her Health, by keeping her within doors; she
should neither give nor receive Visits; nor kneel at Church among the Fops,
that Look one way, and Pray another.


Dalind. Oh abominable!


Lopez. Why, thou ungrateful Fellow! would thou make a Slave of my Daughter?
And leave her no Business; that is to say, no Authority in her own House?


Dalind. Ay, and to call Fine Young Gentlemen Fops too? To lock me up from
Visitants, which are the only Comfort of a Disconsolate, Miserable, Married
Woman!


Lopez. And 'twere not for fear thou should beat me, I could find in my Heart
to beat thee. Don Sancho I have an Olla at home, and you shall be welcome to
it. Farewell Kinsman.


[ To Carlos. [ Exeunt Lopez, and Sancho, leading out Dalinda. Carlos. Now, If
I had another Head, I could find in my Heart, to run this Head against that
wall. Nature has given me my Portion in Sense, with a Pox to her, and turned me
out into the wide World to starve upon it. She has given Sancho an empty
Noddle; but Fortune in revenge has filled his Pockets: just a Lord's Estate in
Land and Wit. Well, I have lost Dalinda; and something must be done to
undermine Sancho in her good Opinion: Some pernicious Counsel must be given
him: He is my Prince, and I am his Statesman; and when our two Interests come
to clash, I hope to make a mere Monarch of him: And my Hunger is somewhat in my
way to quicken my Invention.

Want whets the Wit, it is true; but Wit not blessed
With Fortune's Aid, makes Beggars at the best.
Wit is not fed, but sharpn'd with Applause,
For Wealth is solid Food, and Wit but hungry Sause.

Exit. ACT II. SCENE I.
The Scene is a Bedchamber, a Couch prepared, and set so near the Pit that the
Audience may hear. Alphonso enters with a Book in his hand, and sits; reads to
himself a little while: Enter Victoria, and sits by him, then speaks. Victo. IF
on your Private Business I intrude,
Forgive the excess of Love that makes me rude:
I hope your sickness has not reached your Heart;
But come to bear a suffering Sister's part:
Yet, lest I should offend you by my stay,
Command me to depart, and I obey.

Alphon. The Patient who has passed a sleepless night,
Is far less pleased with his Physician's sight:
Welcome thou pleasing, but thou short Reprieve;
To ease my Death, but not to make me live.
Welcome, but welcome as a Winter's Sun,
That rises late, and is too quickly gone.

Victo. You are the Star of Day, the public Light:
And I am but your Sister of the Night:
Eclipsed when you are absent from my sight.

Alphon. Death will for ever take me from your Eyes;
But grieve not you, for when I Set, you Rise.
Don Garcia has deserved to be your Choice,
And it is a Brother's Duty to rejoice.

Victo. And yet methought you gave him not your Voice.


Alph. You saw a sudden Sickness left me weak;
I had no Joy to give, nor Tongue to speak:
And therefore I withdrew, to seek Relief
In Books, the fruitless Remedies of Grief.

Victo. But tell me what Philosopher you found
To cure your Pain?

Alph. The fittest for my Wound;
Who best the gentle Passions knows to move;
Ovid, the soft Philosopher of Love:
His Love Epistles for my Friends I chose;
For there I found the Kindred of my Woes.

Victo. His Nymphs the Vows of Perjured Men deplore;
One in the Woods, and one upon the Shore:
All are at length forsaken or betrayed;
And the false Hero leaves the faithful Maid.

Alphon. Not all: for Linus kept his Constancy:
And one, perhaps, who more resembled me.

Victo. That Letter would I view: in hope to find
Some Features of the Fair that rules your Mind.

Alph. Read, for the guilty Page is doubled down:
The Love too soon will make the Lover known.
[Giving her the Book. Read, if you dare, and when the Crime you see,
Accuse my cruel Fate, but pity me.

Victo. (aside.) It Is what I feared, the unhappy Canace!
Read you; for to a Brother 'twas designed,
[To him. And sent him by a Sister much too kind.
Alphonso takes the Book, and reads. Why did thy Flames beyond a Brother's move?
Why loved I thee with more than Sister's Love?
[He looks upon her, and she holds down her Head. He reads again. My Cheeks no
longer did their Color boast:
My Food grew loathsome, and my Strength I lost:
Still, e're I spoke, a sigh would stop my Tongue:
Short were my slumbers, and my Nights were long.
I knew not from my Love those Griefs did grow:
Yet was, alas! the thing I did not know.
[She looks on him, and he holds down his Head. Forced at the last, my shameful
pain I tell.

Victo. No more: We know our mutual Love too well.


[Both look up, and meet each others Eyes. Alph. Two Lines in reading had
escaped my sight:
Shall I go back, and do the Poet right?

Victo. Already we have read too far, I fear:
But read no more than Modesty may bear.
Alphonso reading. For I loved too, and knowing not my wound,
A secret Pleasure in thy Kisses found.
[He offers to kiss her, and she turns her Head away. May we not represent the
Kiss we read?

Victo. Alphonso, no: Brother, I should have said!
Alphonso reading again. When half denying, more than half content,
Embraces warmed me to a full Consent:
Then, with tumultuous Joys, my Heart did beat:
And Guilt that made 'em Anxious, made 'em Great.

[She snatches the Book, and throws it down, then rises and walks, he rises
also. Victo. Incendiary Book, Polluted Flame,
Dare not to tempt the Chaste Victoria's Fame.
I love, perhaps, more than a Sister should:
And Nature prompts; but Heaven restrains my Blood.
Heaven was unkind, to set so strict a Bound:
And Love would struggle to forbidden Ground.
Oh let us gain a Parthian Victory;
Our only way to conquer, is to fly.

Alph. No more, Victoria; tho my Love aspires
More high than yours, and fiercer are my Fires:
I cannot bear your looks; new Flames arise
From every Glance; and kindle from your Eyes.
Pure are the Beams which from those Suns you dart;
But gather blackness from my sooty Heart:
Then let us each with hasty steps remove;
Nor spread Contagion, where we meant but Love.

Victo. Hear Heaven and Earth, and witness to my Vows;
And Love, thou greatest Power that Nature knows;
This Heart, Alphonso, shall be firmly thine;
This Hand shall never with another join.
Or if by force my Father makes me wed;
Then Death shall be the Bridegroom of my Bed.
Now let us both our shares of Sorrow take;
And both be wretched for each others sake.

Alph. By those relentless power^ that rule the Skies;
And by a greater Power, Victoria's Eyes,
No Love but yours shall touch Alphonso's Heart;
Nor Time, nor Death, my vowed Affections part.
Nor shall my hated Rival live to see
That hour which envious Fate denies to me.
Now seal we both our Vows with one dear Kiss.

Victo. No, it is a hot, and an incestuous Bliss!
Let both be satisfied with what we swore;
I dare not give it, lest I give you more.

[Exit Victoria looking back on him, and he gazing on her. Alph. Oh Raging,
Impious, and yet hopeless Fire;
Not daring to possess what I desire.
Condemned to suffer what I cannot bear;
Tortured with Love, and Furious with Despair.
Of all the Pains which wretched Mortals prove,
The fewest Remedies belong to Love:
But ours has none: for if we should enjoy,
Our fatal Cure must both of us destroy.
Oh Dear Victoria, cause of all my Pain!
Oh Dear Victoria, whom I would not gain!
Victoria, for whose sake I would survive:
Victoria, for whose sake I dare not live.

Enter Garcia with Attendants. The two Princes salute, but Alphonso very
coldly. Garci. I come to show my grief for your Distemper:
For if my Noble Brother saw my Heart,
There should you find a Plain, a Holy Friendship,
Unmixt with Interest, equally partaking
Of what affects you, both of good and ill.

Alphon. I thank you; but my Malady increases
At your approach; I have no more to say,
But wish you better health than I can boast;
And to my self a lonely Privacy.

Garci. I find I am not welcome to your sight:
But know not from what cause.

Alphon. (angrily.) My surest Remedy is in your absence:
It Is hard my Lodgings cannot be my own;
But importuned with Visits, undesir'd;
And therefore, I must tell you, troublesome.

Garci. It Is an odd way of entertaining Friends.
But since I find you discomposed with sickness,
That shall excuse your Humors; where I go
I hope for better Welcome.

Alphon. Sir, I must ask whom you pretend to visit?


Garci. My Mistress, Prince.


Alphon. Your Mistress! who is that Mistress?


Garci. What need I name Victoria?


Alphon. Who? my Sister?


Garci. Whom else could you imagine?


Alphon. Any other.


Garci. And why not her?


Alphon. Because I know not if she will admit you.


Garci. Her Father has allowed it.


Alph. But not she;
Or if both have, yet my consent is wanting.
You take upon you in a Foreign Kingdom,
As if you were at home in your Navarre.

Garci. And you, methinks,
As if you had no Father, or no King.
Farewell, I will not stay.

Alphon. You shall not go:
Thus as I am, thus single, thus unarmed,
And you with Guards attended --

Gar. You Teach me to forget the Rule of Manners.


Alph. I mean to Teach you better.


[As Garcia is going to pass by him, Alphonso runs to one of his Attendants,
and snatches his Sword away, then steps between Garcia and the Door. Enter
Veramond and Ximena, Attended. Vera. What means this rude Behavior in my Court?
As if our Arragon were turned to Thrace;
Unhospitable to her Guests, and thou
Alphonso, a Lycurgus.

Alphon. He would pass
Without my Sister's leave, into her Lodgings.
By Heaven, if this be suffered to proceed,
The next will be, to Treat the Royal Maid
As coursly, as she were some Suburb Girl.

Gar. ( to Vera.) Had I not your Permission, Sir?


Vera. You had.
But these, Alphonso, are thy Ruffian Manners.
How dare thou, Boy, to break my Orders,
And then asperse thy Sister with thy Crime?

Alphon. She said his Presence was unpleasing to her.


Vera. Come, thou bely'st her Innocence and Duty:
She did not, durst not, say it.

Alph. If she did not,
I dare, and will maintain to all the World,
That Garcia, is not worthy of my Sister.

Vera. Not worthy?


Alphon, No; I say once more, not worthy.


Garcia. Not in my self; for who deserves Victoria?
But, since her Royal Father bids me hope,
Not less unworthy than another Prince.
(To Ver.) And none, with your permission, Sir, shall dare
To interpose, betwixt my Love and Me.

Alph. Sure a less Price than our Infanta's Bed,
Might pay thee for thy Mercenary Troops.

Vera. Peace, Insolent, too long I have endured
Thy Haughty Soul, untamed and turbulent:
But, if I Live, this shall not pass unpunisht;
Darkness and Chains, are Medicines for a Madman.

Ximena. My Lord, I humbly beg you, spare your Son;
And add not Fury to a Raging Fire.
He soon will recollect his scattered Reason;
Which Heat of Youth, and Sickness, and Fatigues,
Have dissipated in his boiling Blood.
Give him but time, and then his Temperate Humor
Will soon return into the Native Channel;
And, unoppos'd, be calm.

Vera. No, never more:
The Moon has roul'd above his Head, and turned it;
As Peals of Thunder sow'r the generous Wine.
(To Alph.) Hence from my Presence thou, no more my Son.

Ximena. If he be Mad, be Madness his excuse;
And Pardon Nature's Error, not his own.

Vera. Ximena, you have fonded him to this;
I Prophesied; and now it is come to pass.

Gar. Perhaps, I interrupted him too rudely:
And since I caused, my self, that ill Reception,
Forgive our mutual Faults.

Vera. You shall prevail;
Though he deserves not such an Intercessor:
(To Alphon.) Retire, Alphonso, to your inmost Lodgings;
And there enclose your self, and mourn your Crimes:
Be this your last Relapse; the next is Fatal.

Alphon. I will retire.
But, if I am a Madman, as you say;
And as I half believe, expect no Cure,
But in Alphonso's Death.

[ Alphonso goes in. Ximena. (aside.) It works apace:
But whither it will tend, Heaven only knows.

[ Veramond sees the Book upon the Ground, and takes it up. Vera. This Book he
left; go bear it after him.
Yet stay, I know not why, but somewhat prompts me
To Read this folded Page.
(To Garcia.) Go, Royal Youth,
I would my self conduct you to Victoria:
But Lovers need no Guide to their Desires:
And Love no Witness, but himself Requires.

[Exeunt the King and Queen one way, with their Attendants, and Don Garcia with
his, another. The SCENE, A Street. Enter Carlos, before Don Lopez his Door.
Carlos. That Is the Door of Lopez, and Sancho must come out this way; now Fool
sit fast, for thou shall not want for pestilent Advice: But first, I must know,
how far thou have proceeded with the Father and the Daughter, that I may know
what Drugs I must prepare, for the present Condition of my Patient; oh, the
Door opens already, and he bolts out single, as I wished.


Enter Sancho, picking his Teeth. Sancho. What, Carlos, you have Dined before
me; but, it may be, you have not fared so well.


Carlos. The best part of your Entertainment, I suppose, was the Dessert of the
Fair Dalinda after Dinner; and how, and how, go Matters?


Sancho. Better than thou would have 'em, thou would have put a spoke in my
Wheel, I know it.


Carlos. No, Fortune always sets those of your Admirable Understanding
uppermost; but remember, Dalinda was once mine, however.


Sancho. Thou would not have me give the Box away, when I have thrown Seven?
Come, set upon it what thou dare, and I Will give thee leave to do thy worst.


Carlos. You are very confident of your good Luck.


Sancho. Thou know, I have a perpetual ascendant over thee.


Carl. And you are sure to carry her?


Sanch. She is fond of my Person; she ogled me all Dinner time; she put her
foot under the Table, and trod upon mine; and if these are not certain Symptoms
of Passion, the Devil's in Womankind.


Carl. And her Father?


Sanch. The goodest Old Man; he drank my Health to his Daughter; and I, to
comply with my Obligation, answered the Challenge; there I think I was with her
again.


Carl. You have no more to do but to take out a License.


Sanch. Indeed I have her License for it.


Carl. What, quibbling too in your Prosperity? If you let another I shall be
enraged. But you have not told me that her Father is consenting.


Sanch. In a manner: But --


Carl. But what; is he not absolutely yours?


Sanch. There Is a small demur upon the matter; in short, he hit me in the Teeth
with a damnable Rich Old Conde; who, I find, has been dabbling with this
Covetons Old Huncks; but, bating him, Don Lopez tells me I shall be the
welcomest Man alive.


Carl. Do you know that Conde's Name?


Sanch. Don something de Cardona, whom the Devil confound.


Carl. My old Acquaintance; he charged with me in the Battle, but what became
of him I know not; if he be the Man, despair betimes, Sancho, he will revenge my
Quarrel, and carry her in spite of you.


Sanch. I am cunning, you know; and I believe he named that cursed Conde, only
to draw me on the faster.


Carl. And do you think a Gentleman can succeed against a Conde, with a Woman?


Sanch. Why not?


Carl. No more than a Conde against a Duke, and so upwards.

Abandon her, I say.


Sanch. No; I am resolute.


Carl. To be the Shoeing-horn for the Conde?


Sanch. I confess, I would not be the Shoeing-horn to draw him on.


Carl. No; for that is to be a Pimp for him.


Sanch. Right; therefore I will leave her.


Carl. Then go back; and quarrel with her and her Father; Go, I say,
immediately before your Virtue cools.


Sanch. I Will give 'em their own, I Will warrant 'em: what, make a Shoeing-horn of
a Man of Honor?


[ Exit Sancho. Carl. (alone.) If the Conde be in Love, then why should Lopez
admit of Sancho for a Suitor; if not, the Fool is in the right, that it was
only feigned to draw him on. However, my advice will strike on both sides; for
if Sancho quarrels he is discarded, and for the Conde -- stay a little -- What
if I should play this Conde? I know him, and can Mimmick him exactly, it is but
a Jest if I am discovered; and if the Conde loves her, and she him, then I
marry her in his shape -- Oh, they are coming out to quarrel in the open Air;
for the House is grown too hot for 'em; but I dare not stay to see the Battle,
for fear of getting blows on both sides.


[ Exit Carlos. Enter Lopez, Dalinda, and Sancho. Lopez. I Will wait upon you out
of my House, however.


Sanch. Father-in-Law, that might have been, no more Ceremonies, I Will be no
Shoeing-horn for any Man.


Lop. You would not be my Daughter's hinderance?


Sanch. There Is no more to be said on it; but either a Bargain, or no Bargain.


Lop. A Bargain, if the Conde comes not on.


Sanch. Then as he comes on, I must go off, with a Pox to you; and to your
Daughter.


Dalind. At least it shall not be a Pox of your giving.


Sanch. The Conde's Pox take you then; that is an Honorable Pox descended in a
right Line from Don Rodoric the Goth, I Will warrant you.


Lop. Indeed, if your Estate were as great as his --


Sanch. Nay, for that matter I can drop Gold with him, as little as I care for
her.


Dalind. But then his Title?


Sanch. I have more Gold yet, to weigh down his Parchment. And then my Wit
against a Conde's Wit, that is for Overplus; for tho I say it --


Lop. Who should not say it.


Sanch. Yet I do say it, and will say it, especially as Lords go now: Come,
there is no more to be said, Lopez; but take back your Trumpery, I mean your
Daughter; or I Will send for the Scavenger with a Dung Cart.


Lop. This is insufferable: and by this Honorable Beard --


Sanch. Which I Will pull off by handfuls, if you swagger --


Lop. (aside to Dalinda.) What shall we do with this Madman, Daughter?


Dalind. You should send for an Alguazile to order him, if I were sure that the
Conde would come on again; but since that is uncertain, go in, Father, and let
me alone with him, if I make him your Son-in-Law, that is Punishment sufficient
for him.


Lop. Well, Cavalier, you may chance to hear of me.


[ Exit Lopez. Sanch. Yes, and of your Daughter too, in the next Lampoon, I
doubt not -- ( To Dalinda.) Why don't you follow him? What do you and I
together, Madam Countess?


Dalind. Nay, I know not.


Sanch. Nor I neither.


Dalind. I hope you will not beat me.


[She looks languishingly upon him. Sanch. I cannot tell that -- Thou have a
damnable kind of lear that would provoke me to something -- I say not what,


Dalind. Beat me with my own hand, if I deserve it, there it is for you.


[Gives him her hand, and squeezes his. Sanch. If I should beat thee now, as
thou have deserved richly, I could make thee satisfaction.


Dalind. Indeed, they say an old Man should never beat a young Woman, because
he cannot make her satisfaction.


Sanch. Abominable Chuck. If I did not hate thee mortally, I could be content
to love thee for a quarter of an hour, or so -- Why, what is here to do? You are
at your old tricks again: Prithee, sweet Devil, do not ogle me, nor squeeze my
Palm so feelingly, thou dear Infernal, do not.


Dalind. Why, do I hurt you?


Sanch. No, but thou ticklest me to the very Heart Strings, most wickedly.


Dalind. You command me then to leave you?


[Seems to be going. Sanch. Not command you neither, not absolutely.


Dalind. I go then --


Sanch. Then I do command thee -- I mean, to stay a little longer. Thou have
fired my blood most horribly, with that squeezing; have not thou the Itch?
speak, Damnation, I think I have got the Infection of thee --


[He shakes his hands. Dalind. I Will go and comfort my poor old Father, for the
Affront you gave him.


Sanch. No, Perverseness; I Will make thee stay, in very spite of thy proud Sex
I Will humble thee.


Dalind. But was not you a grievous Man to use him so? You shall tell me, or I
break your Fingers.


Sanch. Not a word, to save thee from Perdition; I am as dumb as a Heathen
Oracle.


Dal. Then I must squeeze it out of you --


[Pressing his hand again. Sanch. Ah, ah, it runs through me like Wild Fire --


[Panting. Dal. Did not Carlos give you this naughty Counsel?


San. I should not answer thee, I know it. Heartlykins, this is just cramping a
Man when he is asleep, to make him tell his Dream; let go my hand, and Carlos
did not advise me, but hold it, and he did; now will you be at quiet with me?


Dal. Not, till you promise me to be Friends with my Father.


San. Well, confound thee, I am Friends with him.


Dal. And to banish Carlos for an Evil Counselor.


San. Upon condition, you will discharge the Count from seeing you.


Dal. No Conditions, either surrender upon Discretion, or I Will put you to the
Sword.


San. Pox on thee, for being so Tyrannical, but I cannot help my self, and
therefore I totally submit.


Dal. Now then, you shall perceive how Gracious a Princess I intend to be; my
Father dotes upon this Count, but I despise him.


San. That Is a good Girl; for Love of me, I Will warrant you.


Dal. You think I cokes you now.


San. No, I know my own Merit too well for that.


Dal. Then do what I advise you; my Father has not often seen this Count; what
if you should pass for him?


San. Hum, I do not apprehend thee.


Dal. A Man of your Wit, and be so stupid; you shall counterfeit the Count.


Sanch. Counterfeit the Count, that is a pure quibble, but I can make no more
on it.


Dal. He Is an Old Fellow, and a Fool; now, you shall take upon you to be this
Count, to deceive my Father; and I Will keep your Counsel, and Teach you how to
Represent him.


San. Oh, now I understand you; but it is impossible for me to counterfeit a
Fool.


Dal. I Will warrant you, trust Nature.


San. A Man of my Sense, can never hide his Parts.


Dal. No, but you may show 'em; go back to your Lodgings, I Will provide you
Clothes, and send you Directions in Writing, how to behave your self before my
Father -- One word more, be sure you manage this in private, and shut out
Carlos, lest he should discover our Intriegue.


San. Well, I will strive for once to get the better of my Wit, and play the
Natural as naturally as I can, but you had better come your self and Teach me,
for you have put me in a pure way of taking your Instructions.


[ Exit Sancho. Dalind. (alone.) When I consider what has passed between the
Count and me, there is little Reason to believe, a Man should put on a foul
Shirt again, when he has put it off already, and has change of Linen by him;
however, my Father shall know nothing of this Disguise, for he that sold my
first Maidenhead to the Lord, may sell my second to the Fool; and that would be
too much in Conscience, that a Woman once in twice, should not have the Letting
her own Freehold; and therefore, I will have the Selling of my self, and
Sancho, shall have the refusal of the Bargain.


Wise Heaven, in pity to the Sex, designed
Fools, for the last Relief of Womankind.
Two Married Wits, no quiet can enjoy:
Two Fools together would the House destroy.
But Providence, to level Humane Life,
Made the Fool Husband, for the Witty Wife.
[ Exit Dalinda. ACT III. SCENE I.
The Scene, Victoria's Chamber. Enter Alphonso, with Music. A Song is Sung:
when it is beginning, Victoria Enters. Song of Jealousy.
1.
WHat State of Life can be so blessed
As Love, that warms a Lover's Breast?
Two Souls in one, the same desire
To grant the Bliss, and to require!
But if in Heaven a Hell we find,
It Is all from thee,
O Jealousy!
It Is all from thee,
O Jealousy!
Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousy,
Thou Tyrant of the Mind!
2.
All other ills, tho sharp they prove,
Serve to refine, and perfect Love:'
In absence, or unkind disdain,
Sweet Hope relieves the Lover's pain:
But ah, no Cure but Death we find,
To set us free
From Jealousy:
O Jealousy!
Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousy,
Thou Tyrant of the Mind.
3.
False, in thy Glass all Objects are,
Some set too near, and some too far:
Thou art the Fire of endless Night,
The Fire that burns, and gives no Light.
All Torments of the Damned we find
In only thee
O Jealousy!
Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousy,
Thou Tyrant of the Mind!
[Exeunt Musicians. Alphon. IT IS true, my Tyrant Father has confined me;
But Love, who traverses the World at will,
Who knows not Awe, nor Law, nor Parentage,
Has broke my Tedder, and enlarged my bounds.

Vict. Retire betimes, the Court is full of Eyes;
As Eagles sharp, fatal as Basilisques;
Who Live on Looking, and who See to Death.

Alphon. I come but to depart, and go for ever:
Because denied the common Rights of Nature;
Which the First Brother, and First Sister had.
Why, were not you and I that Happy Pair?
But Nature doats with Age.

Vict. What-e're it be, it is past redress, Alphonso.


Alphon. But then, shall Gareia take thee in his Arms?
Glutted with Joys, which I would dye to Taste:
No, let me stab the Wretch in every Vein;
And leave him dry of Pleasure, e're we part.

Vict. Alphonso, no, you cannot Kill Don Garcia,
But you declare the Cause, and own your Love.

Alphon. And what care I, what after Ages say
Alphonso did, to make Alphonso Happy?
But oh, you Love; and would preserve his Life
To be for ever his.

Vict. My Dearest Brother:
I Hate your Rival, and I Dye for you.
All but my Spotless Honor shall be yours.

Alphon. By Heaven! but that word Heaven comes cross my Thoughts --


Vict. Beware; for by my own, I guess your Passion. You would I fear --


Alphon. Enjoy my Heaven one moment. --


Vict. And part with it for ever: Think on that.


Alphon. That moment were Eternity in little:

A mighty Sum, but taken on content;
To save the tedious telling over and over.

Vict. Oh, we are too long together.


Alphon. Fear you that?


Vict. I ought to fear it; but I trust my Virtue.
Depart, my Soul, I will not ask you whither;
For fear, I should Repent of my Repentance;
And follow you to Death.

Alphon. I go, Victoria:
But Love's cold Fit of Jealousy returns;
You must not be Don Garcia's; Swear, you will not.

Vict. I Swear I will not, by my own consent.


Alphon. You may be forced; oh, cursed Jealousy,
Thou Bastard Son of Love, unlike thy Father,
Why do thou still Torment me?

Vict. Trust my Honor.


Alphon. That may be chaft into a warmth, Victoria.
Talk, Seeing, Touching, are Incendiaries.
And these may mount your Young Desires, like Straw
To meet the Jett that draws you.

Vict. Trust my Love.


Alphon. I Swear I trust it, but I fear your Beauty:
It Is a fair Fruit that hangs upon the Bough:
Tempts and is Tempted.

Vict. It Is indeed a Fruit;
Seen and desired of all, while yet unpull'd,
But can be gathered by one only Hand.

Alphon. That one, is Garcia; still the Fit returns;
I wish my Jealousy could quench my Love.

Vict. It cannot, if I measure yours by mine:
Or if extinguished, like a trail of smoke
From a Wax Taper, soon would light again.

Alphon. It Is so, for when I say I will not Love,
Then I Love most: Farewell my only Joy,
I go to hide me from the World and you.

Victo. As when the Sun is down,
His Light is clipped into a thousand Stars,
So your sweet Image, tho you shine not on me,
Will guild the horror of the Night, and make
A pleasing Scene of solitary Grief.

Enter Veramond and Ximena, he with an Ovid in his hand. Vera. How dare thou,
Rebel, thus provoke my Patience, Beyond all sufferance, and transgress thy
Bounds?


Alphon. When Kings and Fathers, on their Sons and Subjects Exact intolerable
things to bear,

Nature and Self-defence dispense with Duty.


Vera. Oh Heaven, what horrid Sin have I committed!
That I was punished to beget this Son?

Alph. I could ask Heaven another Question too;
But that it is not so decent: In few words,
Hither I came to take my latest leave
Of dear Victoria, then depart for ever.
And buried in some solitary Cave,
Forgetting and forgotten, end my Days.

Vera. It Is what thou have deserved: perform thy Penance.


Ximen. So hard a Sentence for so small a Fault?
Are you a Father, Sir?

Vera. Is he a Son?
Thou know not his Offense.
But mark the glowing Blood, the guilty Flush
Upon Victoria's Face, and read it there.

Ximen. I know not what you mean.


Vera. Victoria, speak

And clear your self -- She answers not a word.
Nay then my fears are true, on both sides guilty.

Victo. (aside.) It Is found; and we are lost.


Vera. But what needs more Conviction: Know you this?
[Shewing the Ovid to Alphonso. This Book the Tutor of Incestuous Love?
The Page is doubled down, and points thee to thy Crime.
I feared, before, from every rolling glance;
How quick they shot upon thy Sister's Face:
And she received them all, like smoking Flax;
Confessed the Fire, and answered to the Flame.

Vict. I Love my Brother, and avow that Fire:
His Love to me, has raised his Noble Thoughts
To Brave Achievements, for your Crown and you.
For Love's the Steel, that strikes upon the Flint:
Gives Coldness Heat, exerts the hidden Flame;
And spreads the Sparkles round, to warm the World.

Vera. Oh Heavens, she makes a Merit of her Crime.
Victoria, I would yet think better of thee,
And therefore dare I not enquire too far;
Willing to doubt the Guilt I fear to find.
Depart, and Answer not.
[ Exit Victoria. For thee, whom I abhor to call my Son,
[ To Alphonso. And wish thou were a Stranger to my Blood --

Ximena. (aside.) That was a happy hint; I must improve it.


Vera. One way, and only one, remains to clear thee:
If, with a Holy Fire, thou Love thy Sister,
Aspiring but to Fame, not sinking down
Into the abyss of Lust unnatural,
Consent that she may be Don Garcia's Wife;
Else give the Lie to all thy fair Pretenses;
And stand exposed a Monster of Mankind:
Foul as the Fiends, which fell from Heaven's high Towers,
Fall thou from Empire so; and from my sight;
Depart, Accursed for ever.

Alph. Gladly I leave you; but shall go more lightly,
If eased of this your dreadful Imprecation:
O! let me go unloaded with your Curse;
And I will bless you for my Banishment.

Vera. So may that Blessing or that Curse overtake thee, As thou Obey'st or
Disobey'st my Will.


Alph. Guiltless of Sin, with Conscience to my Friend,
I go, to shun that fatal Hour, that shows me
Victoria Married, and Alphonso lost.

[He's going. Ximena. Stay yet, Alphonso; for one moment stay:
For somewhat, if I durst, I have to speak,
Which would at least take half thy load away;
And free thy shoulders from the weight of Sin.

Vera. Ximena, dare thou hope to palliate Incest,
And gild so black a Crime?

Ximena. I gild it not; but if I prove it none,
You may be kind, Alphonso may be happy,
And these Domestic Jarrs, for ever cease.

Vera. Explain your self.


Ximena. Afford me then your Patience.
A mighty Secret labors in my Soul,
And like a rushing Stream breaks down the Dam;
This day must give it vent, it rests in you
To make it end in a Tempestuous Night,
Or in a Glorious Evening.

Vera. No more Preface.


Ximena. You wonder at Alphonso's haughty Carriage, His fiery Temper, and his
awless Mind.


Vera. Too true, Ximena.


Ximena. And he wonders more
At your harsh Nature, and your rugged usage,
On each side unbecoming Son and Father;
And yet the cause of both is to be found.
But e're I farther shall proceed to speak;
Command your Royal Prisoner to be brought;
For I must be confronted with Ramirez:
And in his Presence tell you wondrous things;
Which if he vouch not, let Ximena Dye.

Vera. I sent for him to hear his final Doom:
And think he waits without.
Admit the Prisoner.
[He goes to the Door and speaks. Enter Ramirez, Guarded. Now, Sir, is yet your
Haughty Soul resolved
To quit your empty Title for your Freedom?

Ximena. Ramirez, answer not, to raise his Passion:
For now the important Secret of our Lives
Must come to Public view; and on that hinge
Depends thy Crown, thy Liberty, and Life,
My Honor and thy Son's.

Alpho. (aside.) What means my Mother?


Vera. A Son, Ramirez?


Ram. Yes, a Son I had.


Vera. He Dyed an Infant here in Saragossa.


Ram. A living Son I have; and since the Queen
Is pleased to expose my Life,
Before a Judge so prejudiced as you:
Undaunted in the Face of Death I speak;
And claim Alphonso mine.

Vera. There needs no more; I spare thee all the rest:
My Wife's Adultery, thy foul Interloping;
My own Dishonor, and that Bastard's Birth.

Ximena. Injurious words, unfitting you to speak;
And me, my Lord, and those concerned to hear.

Alph. (to Vera.) Though I would give what e're the Sun beholds
Not to be yours; yet, when my Mother's Fame
Is questioned, none shall wrong her Innocence:
Nor shall Ramirez go
Unpunisht for that Infamous Aspersion.

Ramir. Alphonso, Peace, your Father bids you Peace.


Vera. Then, what am I?


Ramir. His Foster-Father.


Vera. Impudently said:
And yet I hope it is true; so much I hate him,
That I could buy the Public Scorn, to be
An Alien to his Blood.

Ximena. Have patience, Sir;
And you shall have your wish, on cheaper Terms,
But hear me speak.

Vera. Good Heaven, then give me patience.


Ximena. When you and brave Ramirez, then your Friend,
Me and my Sister Married, four full Years
We passed in Barren Wedlock, Childless both;
Ramirez, you remember, brought his Queen
To Saragossa on a friendly Visit:
Then as we both were Married on one day;
We both Conceived together.

Vera. I observe it:
That when Ramirez came, you both Conceived.
Mark that; and if thou have the Face, proceed.

Ximena. My Lord, I dare;
You took me once aside; and as your Rage
Inspired your Soul, spoke thus; Ximena, know
That if the Fruit thou bear, be not a Son,
Henceforth, no more my Queen, we part for ever.
The word was hard, I bore it as I could;
I Prayed, and Heaven in pity heard my Vows:
Two Boys in one fair Morning were disclosed;
By me, and by my Sister.
And both the Fathers equally were Blessed.

Vera. Say one was Blessed with two; and speak more truly.


Ximena. Forbear this Language, Sir; or I am Dumb;
It seems that you deserved not him you had:
For, in sev'n days, Heaven Ravished your Alphonso;
My Sister's little Veramond survived,
And she is a Living Witness of this Truth.
Great was my Grief; but greater was my Fear,
From your (alas) too much experienced Anger.
Thus low reduced, and urged by anxious Thoughts,
Of what I might expect from your unkindness.
Now speak, Ramirez; and relate the rest;
For my Tongue falters, and denies its Office;
So much I fear my Lord should take offense.

Ramir. Then like, or disapprove it, thus it was.
She told my Wife and me this mournful Story,
Her Fears for thy Resentment for thy loss,
If by misfortune it should reach thy Ears:
Begged Secrecy, and then Implored our Aid,
To substitute the Living for the Dead;
And make our Veramond pass for thy Alphonso.
A hard Request, but with compassion moved,
At length, 'twas granted.

Vera. Is this true, Ximena?


Ximen. So Heaven and you forgive my Pious Fraud, As what he says is certain.


Alph. Oh Joyful News, Oh Happy Day; too good
To end in Night, -- My Father, and my King.
[Runs to Ramirez, kneels to him, and kisses his Hand. My Soul foreknew you
with a sure presage
Of Native Duty, and Instinctive Love.

Ramir. Arise, my Son.


Vera. You own him then?


Ramir. I do.


Vera. A welcome riddance;
Mean time, in prospect of a double Crown,
You gave the Sparrow leave to brood upon
The Cuckoo's Egg.

Ramir. The advantage was to you;
He proved his Blood upon me when we fought.
Fierce Eagles never procreate fearful Doves:
I sent him word he was my Son, before
The Battle, but the Hand of Fate was in it:
The Note miscarried, and we blindly met.

Ximena. Past Accidents imbitter both your Minds.
Think forwards on your mutual Interests;
Alphonso Loves Victoria:
I saw it in the Seeds, before disclosed
To other Eyes; connived at it, approved it.

Vera. A most commodious Mother!


Ximena. Blame me not;
Guilt there was none, but in their apprehension:
And both their Virtues barred ill consequences.
Now take the blessed occasion by the foretop;
And, on their Marriage found a lasting Peace.

Ramir. A trivial Accident begot this War.
Some paltry bounds of ill distinguished Earth;
A clod that lay betwixt us unascertain'd;
And Royal Pride, on both sides, drew our Swords:
Thus Monarchs quarrel, and their Subjects bleed.
Remove your Landmarks, set 'em where you please:
Stretch out your Arragon on my Castile;
And be once more my Brother.

Alph. I implore it:
And prostrate, beg your Pardon, and your Grace;
I have offended in my Proud Behavior;
But make Victoria mine, and what your Son
In Duty wanted, by your Son-in-Law
Shall doubly be supplied.

Ximena. What, would you more?


Vera. (to her.) Are you the Mediatrix of this Peace?


Ximen. It well becomes the sostness of my Sex;
To mediate for sweet Peace, the best of Blessings,
And like a Sabine Wife, to run betwixt
Relations lifted Swords.

Vera. A rare Chaste Sabine, you!
To save the Adulterer of thy Husband's Bed:
See there Alphonso's Father, that Old Goat,
Who on, Two Sisters propagated Lust:
And Got two Children, for himself and me.
Suppose thee Chaste, a favorable Guess
To any of thy Sex, these are my Foes.
(To Ramirez.) Thou first, the former sharer of my Sheets:
A King without a Kingdom, thine is Conquered;
And Garcia with Victoria shall enjoy it.

Ramirez. So monstrously you wrong your Wife and me --


Vera. No more, my Will is Law.


Ramir. So Tyrants say.


Vera. I will not hear thee speak, conduct him hence;
And stew him in the Dungeon's depth with Toads.
[The Guards carry off Ramirez. (To Alphon.) For thee the worthy Son of such a
Father --

[Walks by himself. Ximen. (to Alphon.) It Is desperate now; and I with
ill-timed zeal,
Have hastn'd your destruction.

Alphonso. (to her.) You have Saved me.


Vera. (aside.) Say I should put the ungrateful Wretch to Death,
He Is thought my Son, and whilst so thought, it is dangerous.
Imprison him; the People might Rebel:
He Is Popular, and I am ill-Belov'd.
Then Banish him, that is best, but yet unsafe:
He may with Foreign Aid Reconquer all.
I Will venture that, with Garcia to my Friend;
He shall recall his Troops, mine are at hand
And ready pressed for Service.

[He comes to Alph. and Ximena. Ximen. Now the storm --


Vera. (To Alph.) Thy Doom's resolved: too gentle for thy Crimes:
I spare thy Life, depart to Banishment;
To morrow leave the Realm, this day the Town:
And like the Scapegoat driven into the Desert,
Bear all ill Omens with thee.

Alph. Proud of my Exile, with erected Face,
I leave your Court, your Town, and your Dominions.
Pleased that I Love, at least without a Crime;
Lighter by what I lost: I tread in Air
Unhappy, but Triumphant in despair.

[Exit Alphonso. Vera. Behold how haughtily he strides away,
Lofty and bold; as if not Banished hence,
But seeking for some other place to Reign.
I think he cannot hope; but lest he should,
Victoria soon shall be Don Garcia's Bride.
(To Ximen.) Go, Madam, for I know you are in haste,
To greet your Daughter with this goodly News.
Tell her, Alphonso is no more my Son.
But tell her too, he shall not be her Husband.
Bid her prepare her self to Wed Navarr:
Whether by force or by consent, I care not:
To morrow shall determine that Affair.
Nor shall my Will be frustrate, or delayed:
Kings are not Kings, unless they be obeyed.

[Exeunt Ambo. The Scene is in the Street, before Lopez's House. Enter Sancho,
Habited like Don Alonzo de Cardona. Dalinda meeting him. Dalin. I watched your
coming at the Window, and told my Father: He Is coming out to welcome you.


Sanch. But if I chance to break out into a little Wit sometimes, you will excuse
my frailty.


Dalin. Pugh, you are so suspicious of your self, and have so little reason
for it: be as witty as you can; I fear you not.


Enter Don Lopez, and salutes him. Lop. Noble Conde, you are welcome from the
Wars: and who did best in the Battle, I beseech your Honor?


Sanch. Why, next my Honor, one Colonel Sancho did best.


Lop. Who, Sancho? he is little better than a Coxcomb.


Sanch. Nay, he has too much Wit; if he had as much Grace, 'twou'd be better
for him.


Lop. But he is your Lordship's Rival in my Daughter.


Sanch. Is he so? then make much of him, Old Gentleman.


Lop. You would not have me prefer him to your Excellency?


Sanch. Faith, you can hardly choose amiss betwixt us two; he is my other self,
Man.


Lop. I make a vast difference betwixt you.


Sanch. That shall be a very good Jest between you and me another time.


Dalin. (aside.) The Fool's too much a Fool, he is going to discover himself, if
I prevent it not. ( To Lopez.) Make haste, Father, and put him upon the Point,
or he will give me up to Sancho.


Lop. Let Sancho be no Fool, since your Lordship pleases, for he is not bound
to make my Daughter any satisfaction, as you are.


Sanch. And satisfaction she shall have: What, I hope you don't think I am an
Eunuch?


Dal. (aside.) Oh Heaven! I shall be ruined between them, I forgot to instruct
my Father not to meddle with that Point. ( To Lopez.) Say no more of it, I
beseech you, Sir.


Lop. (to her.) It Is for thy good; let me alone: You know you have injured the
poor Girl, my Lord.


Sanch. Not to my Remembrance, Sennor; You and I may have quarreled, I confess,
and I think I may have given you some hard words to day.


Dal. (aside.) Now has he forgotten he is my Lord, and is harping upon the
Quarrel he had with him as Sancho: this must end in my Destruction.


Lop. Your Lordship and I can have had no Quarrel to day, for I have not seen
you this Twelvemonth.


Sanch. That Is true; now I remember my self, you have not.


Lop. But that you have wronged my Daughter is manifest.


Dal. (to Sanch.) Sir, I must needs speak a word with you in private; if you
love me, confess you have enjoyed me; for I told my Father so on purpose to
make him the more condescending to the Match.


San. (to her.) A word to the Wise, I understand you; Now you shall see me top
upon the old Fellow.

( To Lopez.) Well, Sennor, I will not stand with you for a Night's Lodging with
your Daughter; I acknowledge I have been a little familiar with her, or so: but
to make her amends I will marry her, and consummate with her most abundantly.


Lop. Then all shall be set right, and the Man shall have his Mare again.


Enter Carlos habited like Sancho. Lop. What, another Don Alonzo? this is
Prodigious!


Carl. (aside, seeing Sancho.) Bless me, the Post is taken up already, and the
true Count is here before me.


Dal. (aside.) This is not my Conde: but some other Counterferfeit. ( To
Sancho.) You are as true a Count as he: Stand to your Likeness.


Sanch. Would I were out of my Likeness.


[Sneaking back. Dal. Put forward, Man, I Will second you.


Sanch. But what a Devilish high Back he has gotten too, he will carry me away a
pick a pack, that is certain.


Carl. (aside.) I find him now: by their whispering, and by his aukwardness,
this must be Sancho; and I Will outface him.

( To Lopez.) Sennor Don Lopez, I am come by your Permission, to renew my
Addresses to your fair Daughter.


Lop. Your Lordship is most welcome.


Sanch. Whose Lordship?


Lop. Why, one of your Lordships; I know not which; for by your Backs you are
both my Lords: That Is as you two can agree the matter.


Sanch. (to Carlos.) Sirrah, where did you steal that Back of mine?


Carl. Sirrah, I was born with it; but what He Cammel has your Mother been
dealing withal, that you are begotten in my Resemblance?


Sanch. What, I hope you will not pretend to pafs for the true Conde?


Carl. I am Don Alonzo de Cardona.


Sanch. And so am I.


Carl. If you stay a little longer, I Will stretch your Bones till you are as
straight as an Arrow.


Sanch. Do not provoke me; I am mischievously bent.


Carl. Nay, you are bent enough in Conscience, but I have a bent Fist for
Boxing.


Sanch. And I have a straight Foot for Kicking.


[They come up to each other. Lop. Here will be Bloodshed immediately; hold
Noblemen both; will ye be content that I should examine ye; and then stand to
my award which is the true Conde.


Sanch. Well, to save Christian Blood, I will.


Carl. And to save Jewish Blood, that is your Blood, Sirrah, I am contented too.


Lop. ( to Carlos.) What Command had you, my Lord, in the last Battle?


Carl. I had none; I was a Volunteer, and Charged with Honorable Colonel
Carlos in the Fight.


Lop. ( to Sancho.) And what Command had your Lordship there?


Sanch. I had none neither; and I charged with that Rogue, Carlos.


Lop. (aside.) So far they are both right, as I have heard.
( To Sancho.) And what became of you afterward?

Sanch. Now I am posed; for Carlos told me he knew nothing of the Count
afterward: Sennor, I do not well remember what became of me, for I was in a
very great Passion; but I did prodigious things, that is certain.


Carl. ( to Lop.) Sennor, you may see he is a Counterfeit, because he knows
nothing of himself; but I, the true Conde, was trodden under the Horses Feet,
and lay for dead above half an hour.


Sanch. Well; and now I remember my self, I was laid for dead too for just
about half a year.


Lop. ( to Dalind.) This is the wrong Lord, he can say nothing but what the
other Lord has said before him.


Dalin. Then he is the likelier to be the true Conde, for he is a Fool, Father.


Carl. You see, Sennor, he does not remember what became of him, as I said
before.


Sanch. How would you have a Man remember, when he was laid for dead?


Carl. But I recovered, Rogue, and pursued the Enemy.


Sanch. And I recovered, and pursued 'em too, for above an hundred miles
together, at full speed.


Lop. That Is farther than you needed by three score miles; for it is but forty
from the place of Battle to the City.


Carl. Yes, at full speed upon the same Horse, and never drew Bit neither.


Sanch. ( to Dalin.) Help me, dear Dalinda! I am Bogg'd, you see.


Dalin. (to him.) That Is with pursuing your Enemies too far; but I Will help you
out again -- ( To Lopez.) Pray, Sir, let me examine 'em a little.


Lop. You Will make nothing of that first Conde.


Dalin. Yes, a Son-in-Law, I warrant you.

( To them.) Which of you two promised me Marriage?

Both. I did.


Dalin. ( to Carl.) And did you enjoy me?


Carl. Heaven forbid, Madam: what, before Marriage?


Dalin. ( to Sanch.) And what did you?


Sanch. I did enjoy her, so I did: and there I was before you, for a false
Conde as you are.


Carl. Speak for your self, Madam, and clear your Reputation, from that
scandalous Companion.


Dalin. (with her Fan before her face.) I must confess the true Conde has
enjoyed me; the more my Frailty.


Lop. The matter mends on that side.


Sanch. Now Good man Goose-cap, who is the most a Man of Honor, he who has
enjoyed a fair Lady, or he who has only lickt his Lips, and gone without her?


Carl. (aside.) I see she takes his part; this is all a Lie contrived betwixt
'em.


Enter a Messenger. Mess. ( to Dalind.) Madam, I am sent to you on a sad Errand
from the late Conde Don Alonzo, who was killed in the last Battle.


Lop. You are mistaken, Friend; for here he stands alive, and well.

[Pointing to Sancho. And for fear of failing, here is a Counterpart of him.


[Pointing to Carlos. Mess. Do not abuse your self, Sennor; neither of these is
the true Conde: I took him from under the Horses Feet, and he had only life
enough to say, Remember me to my fair Dalinda.


Lop. (to Sanch.) What does your Lordship say to this?


Sanch. He was fairly killed, I must confess: but I can give you a better
account of his Lordship afterward.


Lop. You? why, who are you?


Sanch. Nay, I am he too.


Mess. You see he is a Counterfeit; and so is the other.


Lop. It Is too true.


Dal. Did the Conde leave me nothing in his Will?


Mess. Not a Cross, Madam.


Dalin. There Is the same Payment for your News; be gone, poor Fellow.


[Exit Messenger. Carl. At least I have the satisfaction that he is discovered
as well as I am.

[Throwing off some part of his Disguise. Now, Sancho, you are welcome to the
discovery of your fine Intrigue.


Lop. Then, Sancho, I make good my word to you; since the Conde is dead, you
stand fairest for my Daughter; and you, Cousin Carlos, with your Wit and your
Poverty, are in Statu Quo: Come away, Son-in-Law, and leave the forsaken Lover
to make himself a Willow Garland.


[ Exeunt Sancho, Lopez, and Dalinda. Carl. Yet if I could hinder Sancho from
marrying her, I should make my self some satisfaction. I Will think on it farther;
and something comes into my head already.


[Stands musing. Enter Alphonso. Alph. Now Carlos, what make you here in this
Disguise? I have been looking for you at least half an hour.


Carl. Only a Masquerade, Sir, an innocent Diversion in times of Peace.


Alph. No, Carlos, these are times of War, not Peace: I must abruptly tell you
what is past:

I am Ramirez Son, not Veramond's.
I love Victoria, and for her am banished.

Carl. Just my own condition: I have had a Revolution in my small Affairs too;
I am banished, and going to look for the next commodious Tree to make a wry Face
upon it.


Alph. I know you Brave; and if you love me still,
Follow my Fortune; yours shall be my Care,
Our Army lies Encamped without the Walls:
Your Regiment is Quartered in the Town:
I think I can with ease Revolt the Troops,
Because they love me; and with their Assistance,
Release my Father; and redeem my Mistress:
While you and yours, at an appointed Signal,
Procure me Entrance.

Carl. Right; and force the Gate. --


Alph. That Is all I ask: I think my self as worthy
To wed Victoria, as this Foreign Prince:
But if you find Reluctance to this Action,
Now speak, that I may seek some other Friend.

Carl. No, Sir; I shall never break with you for so small a matter as a
Rebellion, I warrant you for my Soldiers, they will never flinch, when there is a
Town to Plunder.


Alph. The Signal and the Time shall be concerted:
Victoria be the Word --
That happy Name our bold Attempt shall bless;
And give an Omen of assured Success.

[Exeunt severally. ACT IV. SCENE I.
The Scene a Street; with a Temple at a distance. Enter Garcia, with a Letter
in his Hand; Ximena and Celidea. Garcia. MAY I believe you, it is Victoria's
Hand?
For it is a strange Request.

Ximen. So may it move your Noble Mind to pity,
As what the Paper tells you is most true.
She gave it me; and with a thousand sighs,
Begged me to recommend her Life, her Love,
And all her hopes of Happiness to you.

Garc. To break my Marriage off, renounce her Bed,
To stand excluded from my promised Bliss,
And as my proper Act to do all this?
Disdainful, Faithless, and Ungrateful Maid!

Celid. Disdainful and Ungrateful; but not Faithless.
Because she never vowed nor promised Love;
But only to Alphonso.

Xime. They loved not as a Brother and a Sister,
But as the Fair and Brave each other Love.
For sympathy of Souls inspired their Passion.

Gar. That sympathy which made him Love Victoria,
Has caused the same effect of Love in me.

Celid. But not in her: She Loved him first, my Lord;
And you Besieged a Town already his.
As you for her, others may Dye for you;
And plead that Argument to hope your Love,
If the same Reason hold.

Gar. No doubt it would,
Were not my Soul already prepossest.

Celid. So is Victoria's Soul, for her Alphonso.
And that is her Plea for Constancy to him.

Gar. My Reason is convinced, but not my Passion.
For I must Love, and Loving must Enjoy.

Celid. Others must not Enjoy, and yet must Love.


Xime. You cannot Wed Victoria but by force:
And force can only make her Person yours.
Think what a fatal Doom you pass on her,
To make your self half happy.

Gar. When she is mine
I will pursue her with so dear a Passion,
So chafe her coldness with my warm Embraces,
That she shall melt at length, hard as she is;
And run like stubborn Metal.

Celid. No, my Lord,
Victoria is not formed of Steel, but Marble,
Which is not made to melt, but flies the Fire;
And neither yields nor softens to the flames.
Gain her Esteem at least, her Love is hopeless.

Gar. Esteem, a scanty, mean Reward of Passion,
That pays not half the value of the loss.

Celid. Pay Scorn, with Scorn, and make Revenge a Pleasure;
So Generous Minds should do, and so should I;
What needs there more,
You see who Loves you not -- And --

Xime. And she would say, you may behold who Loves you;
But Maiden Bashfulness has tied her Tongue:
Look on her Eyes, they speak.

Celid. ( softly.) A Language which they never spoke before.


Xime. Mark how she whispers, like a Western wind
Which trembles through the Forest; she, whose Eyes
Meet ready Victory where e're they glance;
Whom gazing Crowds admire, whom Nations Court,
And (did her Praise become a Mother's Mouth)
One who could change the Worship of all Climates,
And make a New Religion where she comes;
Unite the differing Faith of all the World;
To Idolize her Face.

Gar. And well she may:
Her Eyes, her Lips, her Cheeks, her Shape, her Features,
Seem to be drawn by Love's own Hand; by Love
Himself in Love; but oh, it is now too late,
My Eyes have drank a Poison in, before;
A former Basilisk has seen me first.
Yet know, Fair Princess, if there were a part
In all my Breast, that could receive a wound,
Your Eyes could only give it.

Celid. So helpless Friends, when safe themselves a-shoar,
Behold a Vessel driven against a Rock,
They Sigh, they Weep, they Counsel, and they Pray,
They stretch their unassisting Hands in vain,
But none will plunge into the raging Main,
To save the sinking Passenger from Death.

Xime. Already see the Joyless Bride appears;
Grief, Rage, Disdain, Distraction and Despair
Are equal in my Daughters different Fates:
In one, to be constrained to be your Wife;
In one, to be refused.

Enter Veramond and Victoria; led as to Marriage, a Train follows; and after it
a Guard. Celid. Great Nature break thy Chain, that Links together
The Fabric of this Globe, and make a Chaos
Like that within my Soul; Oh Heaven unkind
That gives us Passions, strong and unconfined;
And leaves us Reason for a vain Defense;
Too Powerful Rebels, and too weak a Prince.

[ Garcia, Ximena, Celidea, mix with the Train, which walk as in Procession,
toward the Temple. Enter on the sudden Alphonso and Carlos at the head of
their Party; the Soldiers attack the Guards, and King; and drive 'em off the
Stage: Alphonso fights with Garcia, grapples with him and gets him under; in
the mean time Ximena, Victoria, and Celidea, retire to a corner of the Stage:
when Garcia is fallen Celidea runs, and kneels to Alphonso. Celid. Oh spare
him, spare the Noble Garcia's Life:
Or take the Forfeit in the loss of mine.
How happy should I be to dye for him,
Who will not live for me!

Alph. (to Garcia.) Rise, and be safe:
If you have any Thanks to pay, reserve 'em
To give this Royal Maid.

Gar. ( rising.) You Would been more kind
To take my Life, for I would throw it off;
Dishonored as I am, it is worn to Rags,
Not worth a Prince's wearing.

[Exit Garcia followed by Celidea. Re-enter Veramond disarmed, and led by
Carlos. Vera. Ungrateful Traitor!


Alph. Hold thy peace, Old Man:
I do not love t'insult on thy Misfortunes.
Tho thou have brought this Ruin on thy self.

Vera. Avenging Heaven --


Alph. I prithee curse me not,
Because I held thee for my Father once.

Vera. Then would I were thy Father, that my Curse Might take the surer place,
and --


Alph. Guard him hence;
But use no Violence to his Royal Person:
Call back the Soldiers, Carlos, from the Spoil.
I have my wish in having my Victoria,
And would no more of him, nor what is his.

[ Carlos restores to Veramond his Sword, with Respect, and conducts him off;
Ximena follows him: Alphonso waits on them to the Door, and returns. Vict. What
have you done, Alphonso?


Alph. What I ought.
Obtained the Glorious Prize for which I fought;
Redeemed you from a Father's Tyranny;
And from a hated Rival set you free.
Remove, my Fair, from this unhappy place;
The Scene of Sorrows, Sufferings, and Disgrace:
To my Victorious Camp with me remove:
The Scene of Triumph, and Rewarded Love.

Vict. Mars has been present with your Arms to day,
But Love and Hymen have been far away:
You forced me from a Rival's Power, I know;
But then you forced me from a Father's too.

Alph. What words are these! I feel my Vital Heat
Forsake my Limbs, my curdl'd Blood retreat:
Too much amazed to speak, in this Surprise,
With silent Grief, on yours I fix my Eyes:
To learn the reasons of your Change from thence;
To read your cruel Doom, and my Offense.

Vict. Your Arms, and Glorious Action, I approve:
Esteem your Honor, and Embrace your Love.

Alph. My Soul recovers, as a gentle Shower
Refreshes and revives a drooping Flower.
I Am yours so much, so little am my own;
Your Smiles are Life; and Death is in your Frown.

Vict. But oh, a hard request is yet behind;
Which, for my sake, endure with equal Mind:
Your Debt of Honor you have cleared this day;
But mine of Duty, still remains to pay:
Restore my Liberty, and let me go
To make a full Discharge of all I owe.

Alph. What Debts but those of Love have you to clear?
Are you not free, are you not Sovereign here?
And were you not a Slave, before I broke
Your fatal Chains, and loosed you from the Yoke?

Vict. It Is trne, I was; but that Captivity,
Tho hard to bear, was more becoming me.
A Slave I am; but Nature made me so,
Slave to my Father, not my Father's Foe:
Since, then, you have declared me Free, this hour
I put my self within a Parent's Power.

Alph. Cruel Victoria! would you go from hence,
And leave a desolate, despairing Prince?
Is this the Freedom you demand from me;
Are these the Vows, and this the Constancy?
Put off the Mask: for I too well perceive
Whom you resolve to love, and whom to leave:
Go, teach me at my own Expense, to find
What change a day can make in Womankind.

Vict. Think not a day, or all my Life, can make
Victoria's Heart her steadfast Love forsake:
I plighted you my Faith: and I renew
My Vows once more, to love but only you.

Alph. You vowed no time our Fortune should divide:
And well 'twas kept, like all your Vows beside;
When even this hour you went to be a Bride.

Vict. I went; but was securely first prepared:
For this was my Redemption or my Guard.
[Pulls out a Dagger. Let this your causeless Jealousy remove;
And learn no more to doubt Victoria's Love.

Alph. That satal Proof I never did desire.


Vict. And yet a Proof more fatal you require.
Which would, with Infamy, my Name pursue;
To fly my Father, and to follow you.

Alph. Your Love you forfeit, if you go away.


Vict. I forfeit my Obedience if I stay.


Alph. You may transfer your Duty, and be mine.


Vict. Yes, when my Father shall his Claim resign:
For when the Nuptial Knot our Love assures;
All that was his before, is, after, yours.

Alph. Then, when you vowed your Love, you falsely swore.


Vict. I love you much, but love my Honor more.


Alph. You hate my Rival, yet you take the way
To make you his inevitable Prey.

Vict. Beasts fear not more to be the Hunter's Spoil.


Alph. Then sure you would not run into the Toil.
How ill your Actions with your Words agree!

Vict. This Friend is still at hand to set me free.


[Holding up the Dagger. Alph. Let me not live to see that Fatal Hour:
Rather return into your Father's Power.
Rather return into his Arms again,
For whom your Lost Alphonso you disdain.
If one must dye, to set your Honor free,
You have already cast the Lot on me.
Death is my only way to clear my Fame;
Which must be Branded with a Coward's Name,
If basely I resign Victoria's Charms,
And tamely give you to my Rival's Arms.

Vict. To give me to my Father is no Crime.


Alph. It Is still the same; your Father gives you him.
Ungrateful Woman!

Vict. More ungrateful Man!
More than I ought I give, and all I can:
But if my Duty I prefer to you,
Be satisfied with all that Love can do.

Alph. Not satisfied; but yet your Will shall be
Like Fates inviolable Law to me.
Since my Unhappy Stars will have it so,
Depart from hence, and leave your Father's Foe.
Go then; but quickly go; for while you stay,
As on a Rack I find my self decay;
And every Moment looks a part of me away.

Vict. I wish I with my Duty could dispense:
Heaven knows how loath I am to part from hence:
So, from the Seal is softened Wax disjoined:
So, from the Mother Plant, the tender Rind:
But take the latest Pledge that Love can give;
Have Courage; and for your Victoria Live.

[She offers him her Hand, he Kisses it: Exit Victoria, he Looking after her.
Enter Ramirez, Attended by Carlos, Ramirez Embraces Alphonso. Ram. Prop of my
Age, and Pattern of my Youth,
But such as far excels the Original;
Ten Thousand Blessings on thee, for this Deed.

Alph. Heaven and my Fate speak other Language to me;
No Blessings, none, but millions of their Curses,
Like burning Glasses, with contracted Beams,
Are pointed on my Head.

Ram. What words are these, on this Auspicious Day!


Alph. Oh fly me, fly me, Sir.
Lest the Contagion of my Woes,
Pollute my Father's Joys; Victoria's gone,
And with her, went Alphonso's Life, and Soul.

Ram. You had her in your Power; and were too easy.


Alph. Or rather she too cruel.
Her Duty forced her hence, in scorn of Love.

Ram. You must resume your Arms;
And force her Father's Will, to make her yours.
Why, like a Woman, stand you thus complaining,
Born to the Strength, and Courage of a Man?
Rouse up your Spirits to a just Revenge:
Like Lightning wastful, and like Thunder loud.
Rivers of Blood shall run about the Town;
For which you were so lavish of your own.
Garcia shall Dye; and, by his Death, remove
The cause of Jealousy, and Injured Love.
The King himself, the ungrateful King, shall fall;
Of all our Ills, the cursed Original.

Alph. Beseech you, Sir, no more.


Ram. Your Reason, Son?


Alph. For you have given my Soul so large a swing,
That it bounds back again with double force:
Only because you carried it too far.
You Have set an Image of so vast destruction
Before my sight, that Reason shuns the approach;
And dares not view the fearful precipice.

Ram. Is Vengeance, which is said so sweet a Morsel
That Heaven reserves it for its proper Taste,
Is it so soon dis-relisht?

Alph. What have the People done? The Sheep of Princes,
That they should perish for the Shepherd's Fault?
They bring their yearly Wool, to cloth their owners,
And yet when bare themselves, are culled for Slaughter.
Should I do this, what could the Wolf do more,
Than what the Master did?

Ram. Then Garcia, must he escape?


Alph. It Is true, I had him at my Mercy once;
I should have Killed him then, or once forgiven,
Should spare him now.

Ram. (aside.) His Noble Soul relents!

Alph. But then I give Victoria to his Arms;
And make my own Destruction my own Act --
That fires my Blood again -- yet if she Love him,
Is Killing him she Loves, the way to gain her?
No, let him Live -- But Veramond shall Dye;
Who, when he was my Father as he thought,
When I deserved his Love; then hated me.

Ram. (aside.) Oh! now the Tempest drives another way.

Alph. No more deliberation, there it goes:
I Will Kill him first, to satisfy my Vengeance:
And then to Atone her Anger, Kill my self.

[Seems going hastily. Ram. Hold, hold, Alphonso, Heaven and Earth and I,
Who have a Father's Title to your Life,
Forbid that Parricide.

Alph. Would you refuse a Madman leave to Sleep?
It Is Sleep must cure me, and that Sleep is Death.

Ram. A Madman must be cooled, to make him Sleep.
I have prepared a gentle Opiat for you,
One Moment's Patience, and I will infuse it:
You see me dispossessed of all my State --

Alph. Yes, to my Grief: and to enhance that Grief,
It Is to my Sword, my Father ows his Ruin.

Ram. And it is that only Sword that can restore me.
It must, and ought: you owe it to your Duty.

Alph. Duty was what Victoria urged to me:
I hate that fatal word, because she used it;
And for a Cruel Father, left her Love.

Ram. Could she do that, for Veramond, a Tyrant,
Which you refuse to me?
The Conquering Troops of Arragon are yours:
You are their Life, their Idol, and their Soul.
Conduct me Home, and with their Aid Restore me;
And that once done, we shall not need to Treat,
For Veramond himself will send; and sue
For that Alliance, which his Pride now scorns.

Alph. Long e're that time, Victoria will be Garcia's:
Her Father will not lose one moment's space,
To gratify his Vengeance with my Ruin:
If I would force him, this must be the time:
Which since I now refuse, it is lost for ever.
Hear then; and take it as my last resolve;
Lead you the Troops: you need not fear their Faith:
The Guilt of their Rebellion make 'em yours.
With them, and with your own, Restore your self.

Ram. Then what becomes of you?


Alph. No matter what.
Provide your self of some more worthy Heir.
For I am lost, beyond Redemption lost;
Farewell the Joys of Empire from this moment:
Farewell the Honors of the dusty Field;
Here lay I down this Instrument of Death.
[Vngirds his Sword, and lays it down. And may it gird some Happier Soldier's
side:
For nothing it could gain, can countervail
To me, the loss of my Victoria's Love.
Your Blessing, and farewell --

[Kneels. Ram. Alas, I fear some fatal Resolution
Is harbored in your Soul: if thus you leave me,
My Mind forbodes, we never more shall meet.

Alph. Give not so black an Omen to this parting.
For we may meet again, if Heaven thinks fit --
A Beam of Comfort, like the Moon through Clouds,
Gilds the brown Horror, and directs my way.
Blast not my purpose, by refusing leave,
Nor ask the means: but know I will not Dye
Till I have proved the extremest Remedy.
And, if Unarmed, I go to tempt my Fate:
Think my despair is from Victoria's Hate.

[Exit Alphonso. Ram. I might have used the Power Heaven gives to Parents,
And hindered his departure:
But somewhat of Divine controlled my Tongue;
For Hero's Souls, irregular to us,
Yet move like Planets in their proper Sphere;
Performing even course,
In Paths uneven to beholders Eyes. --
[Pauses a little. (To Carlos) His words, mysterious as they were, imported,
Some desperate Design, which I must watch,
And therefore dare not lead the Forces far:
But Camp'd without the Town at some small distance;
TO expect the Issue, and prevent his Death.

Carlos. Sir, what Orders give you? for you are now our General.


Ram. Follow, and you shall know --


[Exit Ramirez. Carl. Follow! whither? No Plunder when the Town was fairly
taken, there is a hopeful General to follow; the Son and Father are both gone
away, without providing for me, who betrayed the City to 'em; a fine
Encouragement for Virtue; Well, these Monarchs make no more of us Soldiers,
when their turn is served, than we make of our old battered Horses; to put us
off for Stallions, is the best that can become of us: and those indeed are my
present Circumstances: Dalinda will none, and Sancho is just mounting; if I get
not between, and thrust him off: for which purpose I have insinuated to him
that I have left Dalinda for his sake, and am upon another Scent, -- Yonder he
comes: This, and another Lie which I have ready coined, will go near to spoil
his Market.


Enter Sancho. Sanch. Well, Carlos, the Hurly Burly's quite over; I met Ramirez
marching off the Army; and just afterward appeared a Fellow in a Fool's Coat
on Horseback, with three Trumpets; Herod, I think they called him; or some
such Jewish Name.


Carl. A Herald at Arms you mean.


Sanch. It may be so; but I should have taken him for some Pardonner, for he
scattered Indulgences by handfuls to the People, but only they paid nothing for
'em.


Carl. But did he Proclaim nothing?


Sanch. Oh, yes; and now I remember, he began his Speech with, O Yes, too; he
Proclaimed a General Pardon to all Rebels, of which number, you know, you and
I, Carlos, were two Ringleaders.


Carl. Then farewell Ramirez, even trudge on by your self, for there is an end
of my Expedition; I will lay down my Arms like a Dutiful Subject; and submit to
his Majesty when I can rebel no longer.


Sanch. Very good; and try the other touch for Dalinda, will you?


Carl. You know I have quitted her for your sake, and now am altogether for --
Let me see, what Lady am I for?


Sanch. Pump, pump, Carlos; for that is to be invented yet.


Carl. Only out of my Head a little: It Is the dead Count's Sister; a great
Fortune since her Brother died, but somewhat homely: She has already made some
Advances to me, or else I lie.


Sanch. And will you say To Have and to Hold, with an ugly Woman?


Carl. Yes, and For Better for Worse, that is, for Virgin or for Whore, as you
will, Sancho; who are listing your self into the Honorable Company of Cuckolds.


Sanch. What, a Hero as I am, to be a Cuckold?


Carl. Do not disdain your Calling; Julius Caesar was one before you: The Count
has had her by her own Confession; so she is a Nobleman's Dowager for your
Comfort.


Sanch. Pugh, she denied it afterward; that was but a Copy of her Countenance.


Carl. What if it prove a Copy of the Conde's Countenance, do yout think she
had not a Bastard by him?


Sanch. That was only a Plot betwixt us to cheat her Father.


Carl. Did her Father know nothing of it?


Sanch. Not a Syllable.


Carl. Then when he believed you to be the Count, how came he to charge you
with enjoying her?


Sanch. That is something to the purpose; but now I think on it, it is nothing
neither; it is but asking her the Question, and I know she will satisfy me.


Carl. And you are resolved to take her word?


Sanch. Rather than yours; for you may have a mind to have a lick at the
Honey-pot your self.


Carl. Farewell; you know I have other business upon the Stocks.


[Seems going out. Sanch. Stay, Carlos; I Am afraid you know something more of
this bawdy business than you confess.


Carl. Fecks, not I.


Sanch. Fecks! what a sneaking Oath is that for a Man of Honor? Swear me
bloodily like a Soldier, if you would be believed.


Carl. Without Swearing, I believe her honest; therefore make sure of her
immediately.


Sanch. That is, take a Rival's Counsel, and make sure of being an Antedated
Cuckold.


Carl. If you will not believe me, I cannot help it; but marry Dalinda, and be
happy; for I may prevent you, if you make not haste.


Sanch. Thou have cheated me so often, that I cannot credit one Syllable thou
say.


Carl. (going out.) Then take your Fortune.

[ Carlos pulls out his Handkerchief to wipe his Face, and drops a Letter.
Yonder comes Dalinda; I know her by her Trip. I Will watch their Greeting.


[Exit. Sanch. The Rogue's malicious, and would have me marry her in spite;
besides he is off and on at so Devilish a rate, a Man knows not where to have
him: Well, I am resolved in the first place not to follow the Rogue's Counsel,
I will not marry her because he advised me to it; and yet I will marry her
because he counseled me not to marry her: Hey day, I will marry her, and I will
not marry her: what is the meaning of this, Friend Sancho? That Is taking the
Rogue's advice one way or the other.

[Sees the Letter, and takes it up. What, has he dropped a Letter! To whom is it
directed? to Don Carlos D'Ybarra, that is himself.

Mutters, as reading to himself. Dalinda's Fair. and a Fortune; but marry her
not; for to my knowledge (Pox confound him for his knowledge) she has had a --
(What A -- Mr. Friend?) why, a Bastard, by the late Conde: (Ay, I thought as
much.) But his Sister Leonora is in Love with you.

Damn it, I Will read no more: It agrees with what he first told me; and
therefore it must be all Orthodox: Here she comes too, just in the nick of my
Revenge; but I shall be very Laconnick with her.


Enter Dalinda. Dal. Now Servant.


Sanch. Now Cockatrice.


Dal. You're pretty familiar --


Sanch. So have you been --


Dal. With your Mistress.


Sanch. With the Conde, of Whoring Memory.


Dal. A fine Salutation!


Sanch. A final parting.


Dal. What Is the meaning of this! will you come in?


Sanch. Will you go in?


Dal. Come, look upon me.


[She makes the Doux Yeux to him. Sanch. I have no Eyes.


Dal. Then I must take you by the Hand.


[She offers, and he pulls back. Sanch. I have no Hands neither.


Dal. How Is this! I have been but too kind --


Sanch. Yes, to the Conde.


Dal. Pugh, that was a Jest, you know.


Sanch. It Is turned to earnest.


Dal. You know 'twas of my Conception.


Sanch. And of your bringing forth too.


Dal. What did I bring forth?


Sanch. A Bastard.


Dal. Oh Impudent!


Sanch. Woman.


Dal. What Proof have you of that Scandal?


Sanch. This, with a Pox to ye.

[Throws her the Letter. [Exit. Patience, oh ye Gods!


[She takes up the Note, and as she is reading it, Re-enter Carlos. Carl. Much
good may do you with your Note, Madam; now I think I am Revenged at full; your
Cully has forsaken you.


Dal. Well, I did not expect this from you, Cozen Carlos.


Carl. What did you take me for? King Log in Aesop's Fables, for you to insult
me, and play at leap Frog over me? Did not you forsake me for a Fool?


Dal. But was not this a terrible Revenge of yours? must you needs show him the
Letter which has ruined my Reputation, and lost my Fortune? Am I the first
frail Creature, that had the Misfortune of two Great Bellies, and yet
afterward, was Decently Married, and passed for a Virgin?


Carl. Nay, don't aggravate the Matter: consult your Note, and you^ find but
one Bastard charged upon you; you see I was not for laying loaders.


Dal. A great Courtesy to bate me one, as if that was not enough to do my
Business.


Carl. Well, suppose I should discover this Contrivance of mine; and set all
right again?


Dal. (aside.) Contrivance; oh Heaven! I Have undone my self, by confessing all
too soon.


Carl. If I should prove you Innocent, you would prove ungrateful?


Dal. No, you know I always Loved you.


Carl. You Have shown it most abundantly, in choosing Sancho!


Dal. You speak more truly than you think: I have shown it. For, since I must
confess the Truth to you, I am no Fortune: my Father, though he bears it high to
put me off, has Mortgaged his Estate: We keep Servants for show, and when we
should pay their wages, pick a Quarrel with their Service, and turn 'em off
Pennyless. There Is neither Sheet nor Shirt in the whole Family; the Lodging
Rooms are furnished with Loam: and bare Mattresses are the Beds. The Dining
Room, plays the Hypocrite for all the House; for all the Furniture is there:
when Strangers Dine with us, we Eat before the Servants, and then they Fast;
but when we Dine alone, it is all a muss: They scramble for the Victuals, before
it is served up, and then we Fast.


Carl. The Spirit of Famine comes upon me, at the very description of it.


Dal. Now, since neither you nor I have Fortunes, what should we do together,
unless we should turn Canibals, and Eat up one another? But if you would make
up this foul Business, and help me to that Rich Fool Sancho, I say no more, But
--


Carl. But thou would be kind to me; speak out; for I dare not trust thee;
you are such a Woman.


Dal. You should. --


Carl. What should I?


Dal. Why, you should --


Carl. Well, well, I will believe thee, tho my Heart misgives me plaguily. And
therefore, in the f^^st place, I beg your pardon for the Scandal I have laid
upon you: In the next, I restore your Virginity, and take away your Bastard.


Dal. And you will tell Sancho 'twas a forged Letter.


Carl. No doubt on it; for I wrote it to my self; and out of Revenge invented
the whole Story.


Dal. But suppose, Dear Cozen; that Sancho should not believe all this to be
your Invention; and should still suspect the Letter to be true?


Carl. I can easily convince him, by Writing the same Hand again, in which that
Letter was Indicted.


Dal. That Is an excellent Expedient; but do it now; for a Woman can never be
cleared too soon.


Carl. But when you are cleared, you will forget your Promise to me --


Dal. But if I am not cleared, I cannot Marry him; nor be put in a way to keep
my Promise. Come, I Will hold my Hand, Write upon it, I always carry Pen and Ink
about me.


Carl. Let me Seal my Affection first:

[Kisses her Hand. Now, what should I write?


Dal. Only these words at the bottom of the Note, in the same Character.

This Letter was wholly forged by me, Carlos.


[He Kneels and Writes. Carl. There it is -- [Gives it her, she puts it in her
Pocket. But now tell me truly; what made you confess a couple of Bastards, have
you indeed been dabbling?


Dal. Who, I confess it! Oh thou Impudent Fellow! I only soothed thee up in thy
Villainy, to make thee betray thy own Plot. I confessed seemingly, to make thee
confess really. Heaven and thy own Conscience, know I did.


[Seems to weep. Carl. But when you're Married, you will remember your Promise?


Dal. What Promise?


Carl. That I should --


Dal. Should what?


Carl. Must I tell you?


Dal. No, I Will tell you; I said you should; and so you shall, be cozened in
your Expectation.


Carl. I foreboded this; and yet was Fool enough to trust thee; give me back my
Letter.


Dal. What, deliver up my Evidence, that is the Testimony of my Virtue, and thy
Wickedness.


Carl. I Will search your Petticoat.


Dal. Dare but touch my Petticoat, and I Will cry out a Rape against thee.


Carl. Oh thou Eve of Genesis; thou would have Tempted the Serpent, if thou
have bin there.


Dal. The next News you hear, is of my Wedding; be Patient, and you shall be
Invited to the Dinner.


Carl. I say no more, but I Will go Home and Indite Iambicks; thou shall not want
for an Epithalamium; I Will do thy business in Verse.


[Exit. Dal. My Comfort is, I have done your Business in Prose, already.

The Wittiest Men, are all but Women's Tools,
It Is our Prerogative, to make 'em Fools.
For one Sweet Look, the Rich, the Beaux, the Braves,
And all Mankind, run headlong to be Slaves.
Ours is the Harvest which those Indians mow;
They Plough the Deep; but we Reap what they Sow.

[Exit. ACT V. SCENE I.
The SCENE, Lopez's House. Sancho, Lopez, Dalinda. Carlos meeting them. Carl.
GIve you Joy Mr. Bridegroom and Mrs. Bride, you see I have accepted your
Invitation.


Sanch. And thou art welcome, as a Witness of my Triumph.


Carl. I could tell Tales, that would spoil your Appetite, both to your Dinner
and your Bride: You think you are married to a vast Fortune.


Dal. A better, perhaps, than you imagine.


Lop. For if Sancho looks into his Writings, he will find that my Estate was
mortgaged to his Father.


Sanch. Then would I had looked into my Writings before I had looked so far into
your Daughter.


Dal. My Father's Fortune will be yours at last: and I have but redeemed it for
you.


Sanch. I Am sure I Am married without Redemption!


Carl. You must take the good and the bad together; he that keeps a tame Cat
must be content to be scratcht a little.


Dal. The Count's Sister, I hope, has Claws for you too.


Carl. That was invented only in hopes of you, Dalinda: tho now I thank my
Stars that I have missed you: for two Wits without Fortunes, would be like two
Milstones without Corn betwixt 'em; they would only grind upon one another, and
make a terrible noise, but no Meal would follow.


Enter a Nurse leading a Boy and a Girl. Nurse. Madam, here are two poor
Orphans, that hearing you are married, come to dine with you.


Dal. (aside.) My two Bastards! I am undone: what shall I do with 'em?


Lop. (aside.) The Devil take my damned Grandchildren for their unseasonable
Visit.


Sanch. Welcome, welcome: They Are come a mumming to grace my Wedding, I Will
warrant you.


Carl. I begin to suspect they come to Sup and Lodge as well as Dine here.


Lop. (to Nurse.) There Is two Pistols for you; take 'em away, and bring 'em
again to Morrow Morning.


Nurse. Thank your Honor: Come away, Children; but first I must deliver a Note
to this Gentleman: Don Carlos, I Am sure you remember me.


[Gives him a Note. Carl. Did not you wait on Donna Leonora, the Conde's Sister?


Nurse. Have you forgotten Ynez the faithful Trustee of your Affection? Read
your Letter; there is better News than you deserve.


[ Carlos reads his Letter to himself. Dal. (to Nurse.) Steal away, dear Nurse,
while he is reading, and there is more Money for you; fear not, you shall be duly
paid; for I am married to one who can provide for them.


Nurse. (to her.) Well, I Will keep your Credit: but remember.


[Exit Nurse with the Children. Carl. (after Reading.) Poor loving Creature,
she is even too Constant; I could never have expected this from her: Look you
here, you shall see I have no reason to envy your Fortune, Sancho.

[Looks about him. How now, what is become of the Nurse and the two Children?


Dal. They would have been but too troublesome Guests, and are gone away.


Carl. By your Favor I shall make bold to call 'em back again.


[ Exit Carlos. Dal. ( to Lopez.) Oh Barbarous Villain! he will discover all.


Lop. The best on it is, you're already married.


Dal. But we have not Consummated; I could have so wheedled Mr. Bridegroom to
Night, that e're to Morrow Morning he should have forgiven me.


Re-enter Carlos with Nurse and Children. Carl. Come, Nurse, no more mincing
Matters; your Lady's Orders in my Letter must be obeyed: I must find a Father
and Mother for the Children in this Company.


Sanch. Whose pretty Children are these, Carlos, that you are to provide for?


Carl. Even your Bride's, Sancho, at your service: Children, do your Duty to
your Mother.


Children. (kneeling.) Mamma, your Blessing.


Sanch. Hey day, what is here to do? Are these the Issue of your Body, Madam
Bride?


Carl. Yes; and they are now your Children by the Mother's side: The late Conde
presents his Service to you, with these two Pledges of his Affection to your
Wife.


Sanch. Is it even thus, Dalinda?


Lop. Christian Patience, Son-in-Law.


Sanch. Christian Patience! I say Pagan Fury: This is enough to make me turn
Jew again, like my Father of Hebrew Memory.


Carl. You may make your Assault, Colonel, without danger; the breach is
already made to your hands.


Sanch. Ay, the Devil take him that stormed it first.


Carl. Speak well of the Dead.


Dal. (kneeling.) And forgive the Living.


Sanch. Oh Dalinda! no more Dalinda, but Daliah the Philistine: Could you find
none but me to practice on?


Carl. Sooner upon you than upon any Man; for Nature has put a Superscription
upon a Fool's Face, and all Cheats are directed thither.


Lop. There Is no recalling what is past and done.


Sanch. You never said a truer word, Father-in-Law; it is done, indeed, to my
Sorrow.


Carl. If you could undo it, Sancho, it were something; but since you cannot,
your only Remedy is to do it again.


Sanch. That Is true: But the Memory of that damned Conde is enough to turn ones
Stomach to her: Do you remember what a Devilish hunch Back he had when you and
I played him?


Carl. For that Reason you may be sure she will loath the thought of him.


Sanch. Do you think so, Carlos?


Dal. How can I do otherwise, when I have in my Arms so handsome, so sweet, and
so charming a Cavalier as you?


Sanch. Well, I am I know not howish; she has a delicious Tongue of her own,
and I begin to mollify.


Carl. Do, Sancho: Faith, you have held it out too long, in Conscience, for so
slight a quarrel; this is nothing among great Ladies, Man; how many Fathers
have I known that have given their Blessings to other Men's Children: Come,
bless 'em, bless 'em, honest Daddy: Kneel down, Children.


Children. (kneeling.) Your Blessing, Pappa.


[Children cry. Sanch. It goes against the grain to give it them.


Carl. For shame, Sancho, take 'em up: you will break their pretty Hearts else:
'twou'd grieve a Man's Soul to see 'em weep thus.


Sanch. Ay, they learnt that trick of their Mother; but I cannot be obdurate,
the fault was none of theirs, I Am sure.

[Crying. Heaven even bless you, and I Will provide for you: Nay, and it shall go
hard, but I Will get you some more Play-Fellows: if your Mother be as Fruitful as
she used to be.


Lop. Why this is at it should be.


Dal. Heaven Reward you; and I Will study Obedience to you.


Sanch. They say, Children are great Blessings; if they are, I have two great
Blessings ready gotten to my hands.


Carl. For your Comfort, Marriage they say, is Holy.


Sanch. Ay, and so is Martyrdom, as they say; but both of 'em are good for just
nothing, but to make an end of a Man's Life.


Lop. Cheer up, Son-in-Law, your Children are very towardly, you see they can
ask Blessing already.


Dal. If he does not like 'em, he may Get the next himself.


Carl. I will not trouble the Company, with Reading my Letter from the Dead
Count's Sister; It Is enough to tell you, that I Loved her once, and forsook
her, because she was then no Fortune: but she has been kinder to me, than I
deserve: and has offered me her Brother's Estate in Dowry with her.


Dal. Which I hope you will accept.


Carl. Yes, and release you of a certain Promise to me, without explaining. She
only recommended to me her Brother's Children by Dalinda. And I think I have
taken a decent care in providing them a Rich Father.


Sanch. I always Loved a Harlot, and now I have one of my own, I Will even take
up with her; for my Youth is going; and my days of Whoring, I mean emphatical
Whoring, are almost over: but for once, we'll have a Frolic; come Offspring,
can either of you two Dance?


1 Child. Yes, forsooth Father, and my Sister can Sing too like a little Angel.


Sanch. Then foot it featly; that you may say hereafter, you remember when your
Mother was first Married, and Danced at her Wedding.


Carl. Hold a little; you may remember too, Madam Bride, that I promised you an
Epithalamium: 'Twas meant a Satire; but Fortune has turned it to a Jest; I have
given it to the Musicians, and brought 'em along with me; strike up, Gentlemen.


[The Dance is first, then the Song, the last words of which are Sung while the
Company is going out, and the Music Plays before them. Song: By Mr. Congreve.
1.
HOW Happy's the Husband, whose Wife has been tried!
Not Damned to the Bed of an Ignorant Bride?
Secure of what is left, he never misses the rest,
But where there is enough, supposes a Feast;
So foreknowing the Cheat,
He escapes the Deceit,
And in spite of the Curse, resolves to be Blessed.
2.
If Children are Blessings, his Comfort's the more,
Whose Spouse has been known to be Fruitful before;
And the Boy that she brings ready made to his Hand,
May stand him instead, for an Heir to his Land,
Should his own prove a Sot,
When he is Lawfully Got,
As when e're it is so, if he don't, I Will be hanged.
Song for a GIRL.
1.
YOung I am, and yet unskilled
How to make a Lover yield:
How to keep, or how to gain,
When to Love; and when to feign:
2.
Take me, take me, some of you,
While I yet am Young and True;
E're I can my Soul disguise;
Heave my Breasts, and roll my Eyes.
3.
Stay not till I learn the way,
How to Lie, and to Betray:
He that has me first, is blessed,
For I may deceive the rest.
4.
Could I find a blooming Youth;
Full of Love, and full of Truth,
Brisk, and of a janty mien,
I should long to be Fifteen.
[Exeunt Omnes. A Royal Chamber is discovered, by drawing the former Scene;
Veramond, Garcia, Ximena, Victoria, Celidea, with a full Train of Courtiers and
Guards; amongst the Crowd, Ramirez Disguised, with some of his Party. Vera. (to
Vict.) No more delays, but go.

Ximen. This is Inhumane,
To press her to a Marriage made by Force.
At least allow your self and her this day,
That each of you may think, and one may change.

Vera. You mean the Times or Accidents may change,
And leave her for Alphonso.

Ximen. Your Enemies are but without your Gates,
And soon they may return: forbear for fear.

Vera. The sooner then
I must prevent the effect of their return.
What now remains, but to complete my Vows,
And Sacrifice to Vengeance?

Ximen. Your own Daughter!


Vera. Even her, my self, and all the World together.


Vict. Can you refuse me one poor day to Live?


Vera. Obey me, and be Blessed; if not, Accursed.
A Father's Curse has wings, remember that;
Through this World and the next, it will pursue thee;
And sink thee down, for ever.

Vict. It Is enough,
I know how far a Daughter owes Obedience;
But Duty has a bound like other Empires:
It reaches but to Life, for all beyond it
Is the Dominion of another World,
Where you have no Command.
For you, Don Garcia,
You know the Power a Mistress ought to have;
But since you will be Master, take your Hour,
The next is mine.

Gar. I grant the Debt of Service which I owe you:
But it is a Sum too vast to pay at sight.
If now you call it in, I must be Bankrupt
To all my future Bliss.

Vict. I find by you,
The Laws of Love, are like the Laws of Heaven;
All know, but few will keep 'em -- To the Temple,
Where I my self am Victim.

Enter Alphonso, Unarmed; all seem Amazed. Alph. Stay, Veramond.


Vera. (aside.) Alphonso here! then all my Hopes are blasted.
The Town is his, and I once more a Slave.

Alph. Dismiss thy fears and tremble not, Old Man,
I neither come with purpose, nor with Power
T'avenge my wrongs, but single and unarmed:
This Head is necessary to thy Peace,
And to Victoria's violated Vows:
Who, while I Live, can never be Don Garcia's.
Take then this odious Life; securely take it,
And glut thy Vengeance with Alphonso's Blood.
Behold the Man who forced thee in thy Strength,
In thy Imperial Town made thee a Captive.
Now give thy Fury scope: Revenge the Affront,
And show more pity not to spare my Life,
Than I in sparing thine.

Ximen. (to Celidea.) Oh boundless Courage, or extreme Despair!


Celid. (to her.) I tremble for the event; see the King reddens.
The Fear which seized him at Alphonso's sight,
And left his Face forsaken of his Blood,
Is vanished now;
And a new Tide returns upon his Cheeks:
And Rage and Vengeance sparkle in his Eyes.

Vera. (aside.) All things are hushed; no noise is in the Streets;
Nor shouts of Soldiers, nor the cries of Matrons,
To speak a Town in plunder -- Then I take
(To Alph.) A Traytor's Counsel once, and thou shall Die;
Condemned by thy own Sentence, go to Death;
Nor shall thy seeming Generosity,
And feigned assurance, save thee; it is despair,
To see thy frustrate Hopes, that brought thee hither;
To meet my just Revenge.

Alph. Yes, I will Dye, because I choose to Dye.
Which had I not desired, I had not come
Unarmed, Unguarded, and alone, to tempt
Thy known Ingratitude, and barbarous hate.
Boast not the advantage, which thou hold'st of me,
But know thy self for what thou art; no more
Than the mean Minister of my despair.

Vera. Whether to Heaven's Jnstice, or thy Choice,
I owe this happy Hour of sweet Revenge,
I Will not be wanting to the wished occasion.

Vict. You shall not Dye alone, my dear Alphonso,
Tho much I blame this desperate Enterprise:
You should have stayed, to see
The Event of what I promised to perform:
For had I been so base to be another's,
That baseness might have cured your ill-plac'd Love.
But this untimely rashness, makes you Guilty,
Both of your Fate, and mine.

Alph. While I believed
My Life was precious to my dear Victoria,
I valued and preserved it for her sake.
But when you broke from your Deliv'rer's Arms,
To put your self into a Tyrant's Power;
I threw a worthless, wretched Being from me;
Abandoned first by you.

Vict. Oh Cruel Man!
Where, at what moment did that Change begin,
With which you tax my Violated Vows?
I left your Lawless Power, to put my self
Into a Father's Chains, my Lawful Tyrant.
If this be my upbraided Crime, even this,
On that occasion, would I do once more.
But, could I, with my Honor safe, have stayed
In your dear Arms, bear witness Heaven and Earth,
Nor Threats, nor Force, nor Promises, nor Fears
Should take me from your Love.

Alph. Oh, I believe you.
Vanish my fears, and causeless Jealousies;
Live my Victoria: for your self, not me;
But let the unfortunate Alphonso Dye;
My Death will glut your Cruel Father's Rage;
When I am gone, and his Revenge complete,
Pity perhaps may seize a Parent's Mind;
To free you from a hated Lover's Arms.

Celid. (to Ximen.) Speak Mother, speak: my Father gives you time,
He stands amazed, irresolute, and dumb:
Like the still Face of Heaven before a Storm;
Speak, and Arrest the Thunder e're it rowls.

Ximen. I stand suspected: but you, Celidea,
The Favorite of his Heart, his Darling Child,
May speak, and ought, your Interest is concerned:
For if Alphonso Dye, your hopes are lost.
I see your Father's Soul, like glowing Steel
Is on the Anvil; strike, while yet he is hot:
Turn him, and ply him, set him straight betimes,
Lest he for ever warp.

Celid. I fear, and yet would speak; but will he hear me?


Ximen. For what is all this silence, but to hear?
Bring him but to calm Reasoning, and he is gained.

Celid. Then Heaven inspire my Tongue --
Sir, Royal Sir --
He hears me not; he lifts not up his Eyes:
But fixed upon the Pavements looks the way
That points to Death.
[She pulls him. Oh hear me, hear me, Father.
Have you forgot that dear indulgent Name,
Never before in vain pronounced by me?

Vera. Ha! who disturbs my Thoughts?


Celid. (kneeling.) It Is Celidea.
Alas I would relieve you, if I durst;
If ever I offended, even in Thought,
Or made not your Commands
The bounds of all my Wishes, and Desires,
Bid me be dumb, or else permit me Speech.

Vera. Oh rise, my only unoffending Child,
Who reconciles me to the Name of Father!
Speak then; but not for her, and less for him.

Celid. Perhaps I would accuse 'em, not defend;
For both are Guilty, dipped in equal Crimes:
And are obnoxious to your Justice both.

Vera. True, Celidea; thou confirm'st my Sentence;
It Is just Alphonso Dye.

Ximen. (aside.) Forgive her, Heaven! she aggravates their Faults;
And pushes their destruction.

Celid. Speak Alphonso:
Can you deny, when Royal Veramond,
Then thought your Father, and by you so deemed,
When he required your Captive, old Ramirez,
And ordered his Confinement; did you well
Then to control the Pleasure of that King,
Under whose just Commands you Fought and Conquered?

Alph. I did not well: but heat of boiling Youth,
And ill-weigh'd Honor, made me disobey.

Vera. That Cause is gained; for he confesses Guilt.
Proceed, most equitable Judge, proceed.

Celid. (to Alph.) Next I reproach you, with a worse Rebellion.
The King's first Promise to Don Garcia made,
You dared to oppose: forbad his fair Addresses;
Then made a Ruffian Quarrel with that Prince.
And last, were guilty of Incestuous Love.
I will not load my Sister with Consent;
But, in strict Virtue, listening to a Crime,
And not rejecting, is it self a Crime.

Vict. Is this a Sister's Office? Peace for shame:
We Loved without transgressing Virtues bounds;
We fixed the limits of our tenderest Thoughts;
Came to the verge of honor, and there stopped:
We warmed us by the Fire; but were not scorcht:
If this be Sin, Angels might Love with less;
And mingle Rays of Minds, less pure than ours.
Our Souls enjoyed; but to their Holy Feasts,
Bodies on both sides, were forbidden Guests.

Celid. Now help me, Father; or our Cause is lost:
For much I fear their Love was innocent.

Vera. With my own Troops Alphonso seized my Person;
In my own Town, to my perpetual Shame:
Pass on to that; and strike the Traitor Dead.

Celid. Yes, Proud Alphonso, you were banished hence;
Your Father was confined; and doomed to Death;
The Beauty you Adored was made another's.
How durst you, then, attempt t'avenge your wrongs,
And force your Mistress from your Rival's Arms?
Rather than Dye contented, as you ought.

Alph. Even for those very Reasons you allege.


Ximen. (aside.) At last I find her drift.


Vera. Thou Justifiest, and not Accusest him.


Celid. Patience, good Father, and hear out the rest.
[To Alph. Thought you, because you bravely Fought, and Conquered
For Royal Veramond, nay, saved his Life,
And set him free, when you had Conquered him,
Only because he was Victoria's Father,
Thought you for such-slight Services as these,
That he should spare you now? O Generous Madman,
To give your Head to one, who never forgave.

Vera. (aside.) Oh, she stings me.


Celid. And you, Don Garcia, witness to this Truth:
You were his hated Rival, fairly vanquished;
And yet he spared your Life.

Garc. At your request:
I owe it to you both.
That he dismissed my Sister, 'twas her Fault:
I charge it not on him; but 'twas his Folly.
A Capital Fool he was, in that last Error;
For which he justly stands Condemned to Death.
Your Sentence, Royal Sir?

Vera. That he should Live;
Should Live Triumphant over Veramond,
And should Live Happy in Victoria's Love --
Oh, I have held as long as Nature could;
Convinced in Reason, obstinate in Will;
I saw the Pleader's aim, found her design,
I longed to be overcome, and yet resisted.
What have I done against thee, my Alphonso?
And what have thou not done for Veramond?

Ximen. Oh fortunate Event!


Vict. Oh happy Day!


Alph. Oh unexpected Bliss, and therefore double!


Vera. ( to Alph.) Can you forgive me, yes, I know you can:
Alphonso can forgive Victoria's Father.
But yet, in pity, Pardon not too soon:
Punish my Pride a while;
And make me linger for so great a Good.
Lest ecstasy of Joy prevent the Blessing;
And you, instead of Pardon, give me Death.

[He offers to kneel to Alphonso: Alphonso tales him up, and kneels himself.
Alph. Oh let me raise my Father from the ground!


Vera. (rising.) It Is your peculiar Virtue, my Alphonso,
Always to raise me up.

Alph. Here let me grow, till I obtain your Grace:
My Life has been, one Universal Crime;
And you, like Heaven, accepting short Repentance,
Forgive my length of Sins.

Vera. (raising him.) Let us forget from whence offense began.
But since to fave my shame, thou will be Guilty,
Impute thy hate for me, to sure instinct;
That showed thee thy True Father in my Foe;
Now Grafted on my Stock, be Son to both.
(turning to Garc.) To you, Don Garcia, next.

Garc. Before you speak;
Permit me, Sir, to assume some little Merit
In this days Happiness; your Promise made
Victoria mine --

Alph. What then?


Garc. Nay, hear me out.
He kept his Royal Word; he gave her me;
I lost her, when I fell beneath your Sword.
Or if I have a Title, I resign it,
And make her yours.

Alph. I take her as your Gift.


Garc. (to Vera.) Make me but Blessed in Celidea's Love;
She saved my Life, and hers it is for ever.
It Is pity she who gained another's Cause,
Should lose her own.

Vera. (presenting Celidea.) She Is yours.


Celid. My Joys are full.


Vict. And mine o're-flow.


Alph. And mine are all a Soul can bear, and Live.


Vera. Then seek we out Ramirez;
To make him Partner of this happy day;
That gives him back his Crown, and his Alphonso.

Ram. Behold me here, unsought: with some few Friends;
[Taking off his Vizard. (Resolved to Save my Son, or Perish with him)
Thus far I traced, and followed him, unknown,
And here have waited, with a beating Heart,
To see this blessed Event.

Vera. Just like the winding up of some Design,
Well formed, upon the crowded Theater.
Where all concerned surprizingly are pleased;
And what they wish, see done. Lead to the Temple;
Let Thanks be paid; and Heaven be praised no less
For private Union, than for public Peace.

Epilogue.
NOW, in Good Manners, nothing should be sed
Against this Play, because the Poet's dead.
The Prologue told us of a Moral here:
Would I could find it, but the Devil knows where.
If in my Part it lies, I fear he means
To warn us of the Sparks behind our Scenes:
For if you will take it on Dalinda's Word,
It Is a hard Chapter to refuse a Lord.
The Poet might pretend this Moral too,
That when a Wit and Fool together woo;
The Damsel (not to break an Ancient Rule,)
Should leave the Wit, and take the Wealthy Fool.
This he might mean, but there is a Truth behind,
And since it touches none of all our Kind,
But Masks and Misses; faith, I Will speak my Mind.
What, if he Taught our Sex more cautious Carriage,
And not to be too Coming before Marriage:
For fear of my Misfortune in the Play,
A Kid brought home upon the Wedding day:
I fear there are few Sancho's in the Pit,
So good as to forgive, and to forget;
That will, like him, restore us into Favor,
And take us after on our good Behavior.
Few, when they find the Money Bag is rent,
Will take it for good Payment on content.
But in the Telling, there the difference is,
Sometimes they find it more than they could wish.
Therefore be warned, you Misses and you Masks,
Look to your hits, nor give the first that asks.
Tears, Sighs, and Oaths, no truth of Passion prove,
True Settlement alone, declares true Love.
For him that Weds a Puss, who kept her first,
I say but little, but I doubt the worst:
The Wife that was a Cat may mind her house,
And prove an Honest, and a Careful Spouse;
But faith I would not trust her with a Mouse.
FINIS.

