THE Indian Emperor, OR, THE CONQUEST OF MEXICO BY THE SPANIARDS. Being the
Sequel of the Indian Queen. By JOHN DRYDEN Esquire

Dum relego scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerno
Me quoque, qui feci, judice, digna lini.
Ovid. LONDON, Printed by I. M. for H. Herringman at the Sign of the Blew
Anchor in the Lower walk of the New Exchange. 1667.

To the most Excellent and most Illustrious Princess ANNE, Duchess of
Monmouth, Countess of Bucclugh, etc.
May it please your Grace,
THE favor which Heroic Plays have lately found upon our Theaters has been
wholly derived to them, from the countenance and approbation they have received
at Court. The most eminent persons for Wit and Honor in the Royal Circle
having so far owned them, that they have judged no way so fit as Verse to
entertain a Noble Audience, or to express a noble passion. And amongst the rest
which have been written in this kind, they have been so indulgent to this Poem,
as to allow it no inconsiderable place. Since, therefore, to the Court I owe
its fortune on the Stage, so, being now more publicly exposed in Print, I
humbly recommend it to your Graces Protection, who by all knowing persons are
esteemed a Principal Ornament of the Court. But though the rank which you hold
in the Royal Family, might direct the Eyes of a Poet to you, yet your beauty
and goodness detain and fix them: High Objects, it is true, attract the sight;
but it looks up with pain on Craggy Rocks and Barren Mountains, and continues
not intent on any object, which is wanting in shades and greens to entertain
it. Beauty, in Courts, is so necessary to the young, that those who are without
it, seem to be there no other purpose then to wait upon the triumphs of the
fair; to attend their motions in obscurity, as the Moon and S^ars do the Sun by
day, or at best to be the refuge of those hearts which others have despised;
and, by the unworthiness of both, to give and take a miserable comfort. But as
needful as beauty is, Virtue, and Honor are yet more: the reign of it without
their support is unsafe and short like that of Tyrants. Every Sun which looks
on Beauty wastes it; and, when once it is decaying, the repairs of Art are of as
short continuance, as the after Spring, when the Sun is going farther off.
This, Madam, is its ordinary Fate; but yours which is accompanied by Virtue, is
not subject to that common destiny. Your Grace has not only a long time of
Youth to flourish in, but you have likewise found the way by an untainted
preservation of your Honor, to make that perishable good more lasting. And if
Beauty like Wines could be preserved, by being mixed and embodied with others
of their own natures, then your Graces would be immortal, since no part of
Europe can afford a parallel to your Noble Lord, in masculine Beauty, and in
goodliness of shape. To receive the blessings and prayers of mankind, you need
only be seen together; we are ready to conclude that you are a pair of Angels
sent below to make Virtue amiable in your persons, or to sit to Poets when they
would pleasantly instruct the Age, by drawing goodness in the most perfect and
alluring shape of Nature. But though Beauty be the Theme, on which Poets love
to dwell, I must be forced to quit it as a private praise, since you have
deserved those which are more public. For Goodness and Humanity, which shine
in you, are Virtues which concern Mankind, and by a certain kind of interest
all people agree in their commendation, because the profit of them may extend
to many. It Is so much your inclination to do good that you stay not to be
asked; which is an approach so nigh the Deity, that Humane Nature is not
capable of a nearer. It Is my Happiness that I can testify this Virtue of your
Graces by my own experience; since I have so great an aversion from soliciting
Court Favors, that I am raady to look on those as very bold, who dare grow
rich there without desert. But I beg your Graces pardon for assuming this
Virtue of Modesty to my self, which the sequel of this discourse will no way
justify. For in this address I have already quitted the character of a modest
Man, by presenting you this Poem as an acknowledgment, which stands in need of
your protection; and which ought no more to be esteemed a Present, then it is
accounted bounty in the Poor, when they bestow a Child on some wealthy Friend,
who will better breed it up. Offsprings of this Nature are like to be so
numerous with me, that I must be forced to send some of them abroad; only this
is like to be more fortunate then his Brothers, because I have landed him on a
Hospitable shore. Under your Patronage Montezuma hopes he is more safe than in
his Native Indies: and therefore comes to throw himself at your Graces feet;
paying that homage to your Beauty, which he refused to the violence of his
Conquerours. He begs only that when he shall relate his sufferings, you will
consider him as an Indian Prince, and not expect any other Eloquence from his
simplicity, then what his griefs have furnished him withal. His story is,
perhaps the greatest, which was ever represented in a Poem of this nature; (the
action of it including the Discovery and Conquest of a New World.) In it I have
neither wholly followed the truth of the History, nor altogether left it: but
have taken all the liberty of a Poet, to add, alter, or diminish, as I thought
might best conduce to the beautifying of my work. It being not the business of
a Poet to represent truth, but probability. But I am not to make the
justification of this Poem, which I wholly leave to your Graces mercy. It Is an
irregular piece if compared with many of Corneilles, and, if I may make a
judgment of it, written with more Flame then Art; in which it represents the
mind and intentions of the Author, who is with much more Zeal and Integrity,
then Design and Artifice,

MADAM, Your Graces most Obedient And most Obliged Servant, JOHN DRYDEN.
October the 12* 1667.
Connection of the Indian Emperor, to the Indian Queen.
THE Conclusion of the Indian Queen, (part of which Poem was writ by me) left
little matter for another Story to be built on, there remaining but two of the
considerable Characters alive, (viz.) Montezuma, and Orazia; thereupon the
Author of this, thought it necessary to produce new persons from the old ones;
and considering the late Indian Queen, before she loved Montezuma, lived in
clandestine Marriage with her General Traxalla; from those two, he has raised a
Son and two Daughters, supposed to be left young Orphans at their Death: On the
other side, he has given to Montezuma and Orazia, two Sons and a Daughter; all
now supposed to be grown up to Men's and Women's Estate; and their Mother Orazia
(for whom there was no further use in the story) lately dead.

So that you are to imagine about Twenty years elapsed since the Coronation of
Montezuma; who, in the Truth of the History, was a great and glorious Prince;
and in whose time happened the Discovery and Invasion of Mexico by the
Spaniards; under the conduct of Hernando Cortez, who, joining with the
Taxallan-Indians, the inveterate Enemies of Montezuma, wholly Subverted that
flourishing Empire; the Conquest of which, is the Subject of this Dramatique
Poem.

I have neither wholly followed the story nor varied from it; and, as near as I
could, have traced the Native simplicity and ignorance of the Indians, in
relation to Europaean Customs: The Shipping, Armor, Horses, Swords, and Guns
of the Spaniards, being as new to them as their Habits, and their Language.

The difference of their Religion from ours, I have taken from the Story it
self; and that which you find of it in the first and fifth Acts, touching the
sufferings and constancy of Montezuma in his Opinions, I have only illustrated,
^ot altered from those who have written of it.

The Names of the Persons Represented.
Indians Men,
Montezuma, Emperor of Mexico. Odmar, his Eldest Son. Guyomar, his Younger
Son. Orbellan, Son to the late Indian Queen by Traxalla. High Priest of the
Sun.
Women,
Cydaria, Montezuma's Daughter. Almeria Alibech Sisters; and Daughter to the
late Indian Queen.
Spaniards,
Cortez, the Spanish General. Vasquez Pizarro Commanders under him.
The Scene MEXICO and two Leagues about it. Prologue.
ALmighty Critiques! whom our Indians here
Worship, just as they do the Devil, for fear.
In reverence to your power I come this day
To give you timely warning of our Play.
The Scenes are old, the Habits are the same,
We wore last year, before the Spaniards came.
Our Prologue, the old-cast too --
For to observe the new it should at least
Be spoke, by some ingenious Bird or Beast.
Now if you stay, the blood that shall be shed
From this poor Play, be all upon your head.
We neither promise you one Dance, or show,
Then Plot and Language they are wanting too:
But you, kind Wits, will th^se light faults excuse:
Those are the common frailties of the Muse;
Which who observes he buys his place too dear:
For it is your business to be couz'ned here.
These wretched spies of wit must then confess
They take more pains to please themselves the less.
Grant us such Iudg^s, Phoebus we request,
As still mistake themselves into a jest;
Such easy Judges, that our Poet may
Himself admire the fortune of his Play.
And arrogantly, as his fellows do,
Think ^e writes well, because he pleases you.
This he conceives not hard to bring about
If all of you would join to help him out.
Would each man take but what he understands,
And leave the rest upon the Poets hands.
THE Indian Emperor.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
The Scene a pleasant Indian Country. Enter Cortez, Vasquez, Pizarro, with
Spaniards and Indians of their party. Cort. ON what new happy Climate are we
thrown,
So long kept secret, and so lately known;
As if our old world modestly withdrew,
And here, in private, had brought forth a new!

Vasq. Corn, Wine, and Oil are wanting to this ground,
In which our Countries fruitfully abound:
As if this Infant world, yet un-array'd,
Naked and bare, in Natures Lap were laid.
No useful Arts have yet found footing here;
But all untaught and salvage does appear.

Cort. Wild and untaught are Terms which we alone
Invent, for fashions differing from our own:
For all their Customs are by Nature taught,
But we, by Art, unteach what Nature taught.

Piz. In Spain our Springs, like Old Men's Children, be
Decayed and withered from their Infancy:
No kindly showers fall on our barren earth,
To hatch the seasons in a timely birth.
Our Summer such a Russet Livery wears,
As in a Garment often died appears.

Cort. Here nature spreads her fruitful sweetness round,
Breaths on the Air and broods upon the ground.
Here days and nights the only season be,
The Sun no Climat does so gladly see:
When forced from hence* to view (...) parts, he mourns:
Takes ^ittle journies and makes quick returns*

Vasq. Methinks we wall^ in dreams on fairy Land,
Where golden Ore lies mixed with common sand;
Each downfall of a flood the Mountains pour,
From their rich bowels rolls a silver shower.

Cort. Heaven from all ages wisely did provide
This wealth, and for the bravest Nation hide,
Who with four hundred foot and forty horse,
We boldly go a New found World to force.

Piz. Our men, though Valiant, we should find too few,
But Indians join the Indians to subdue,
Taxallan, shook by Montezumas. powers,
Has to resist his forces, called in ours.

Vasq. Rashly to arm against so great a King
I hold not safe, nor is it fit to bring
A War, without a fair defiance made.

Piz. Declare we first our quarrel: then Invade.
My self, my Kings Ambassador, will go;
Speak Indian Guide, how far to Mexico?

Indi. Your eyes can scarce so far a prospect make,
As to discern the City on the Lake.
But that broad Caus-way will direct your way,
And you may reach the Town by noon of day.

Cort. Command a party of our Indians out,
With a strict charge not to engage, but scout;
By noble ways we Conquest will prepare,
First offer peace, and that refused make war.

Exeun^ SCENE II.
A Temple, and the high Priest with other Priests. To them an Indian. Ind.
Haste Holy Priest it is the Kings command.

High Pr. When gets he forward?

Ind. -- He is near at hand.

High Pr. The Incense is upon the Altar placed,
The bloody Sacrifice already past.
Five hundred Captives saw the rising Sun,
Who lost their light ere half his race was run.
That which remains we here must celebrate;
Where far from noise, without the City gate,
The peaceful power that governs love repairs,
To feast upon soft vows and silent prayers.
We for his Royal presence only stay,
To end the rights of this so solemn day:

Exit Indian. Enter Montezuma; his eldest Son Odmar; his Daughter Cydaria,
Almeria, Alibech, Orbellan, and Train. They place themselves. Callib. On your
birth day, while we sing
To our Gods and to our King,
Her, among this beauteous quire,
Whose perfections you admire,
Her, who fairest does appear,
Crown her Queen of all the year.
Of the year and of the day,
And at her feet your Garland lay.

Odm. My Father this way does his looks direct,
Heaven grant he give it not where I suspect.

Montezuma rises, goes about the Ladies, and at length stays at Almeria and
bows. Mont. Since my Orazia's death I have not seen
A beauty so deserving to be Queen
As fair Almeria.

Alm. -- Sure he will not know
To her Brother and Sister aside. My birth I to that injured Princess owe,
Whom his hard heart not only love denied,
But in her sufferings took unmanly pride.

Alib. Since Montezuma will his choice renew,
In dead Orazia's room electing you,
'Twill please our Mothers Ghost that you succeed
To all the glories of her Rivals bed.

Alm. If news be carried to the shades below,
The Indian Queen will be more pleased, to know
That I his scorns on him, that scorned her, pay.

Orb. Would you could right her some more noble way.

She turns to him who is kneeling all this while. Mont. Madam, this posture is
for Heaven designed,
[Kneoling. And what moves Heaven I hope may make you kind.

Alm. Heaven may be kind, the Gods uninjur'd live,
And crimes below cost little to forgive.
By thee, Inhumane, both my Parents died;
One by thy sword, the other by thy pride.

Mont. My haughty mind no fate could ever bow,
Yet I must stoop to one that scorns me now:
Is there no pity to my sufferings due?

Alm. As much as what my mother found from you.

Mont. Your mothers wrongs a recompense shall meet,
I lay my Scepter at her Daughters feet.

Alm. He, who does now my least commands obey,
Would call me Queen, and take my power away.

Odm. Can he hear this, and not his Fetters break?
Is love so powerful, or his soul so weak?
I Will fright her from it, Madam, though you see
The King is kind, I hope your modesty
Will know, what distance to the Crown is due.

Alm. Distance and modesty prescribed by you?

Odm. Almeria dares not think such thoughts as these.

Alm. She dares both think and act what thoughts she please.
It Is much below me on his Throne to sit;
But when I do, you shall petition it.

Odm. If, Sir, Almeria does your bed partake,
^ ^ourn for my forgotten mothers sake.

Mont. When Parents loves are ordered by a Son,
Let streams prescribe their fountains where to run.

Odm. In all I urge I keep my duty still,
Not rule your reason, but instruct your will.

Mont. Small use of reason in that Prince is shown,
Who follows others, and neglects his own.

Almeria to Orbellan and Alibech, who are this while whispering to her. Alm.
No, he shall ever love, and always be
The subject of my scorn and cruelty.

Orb. To prove the lasting torment of his life,
You must not be his Mistress, but his Wife.
Few know what care, an Husbands peace destroys,
His real griefs, and his dissembled joys.

Alm. What mark of pleasing vengeance could be shown*
If I to break his quiet lose my own?

Orb. A brothers life upon your love relies,
Since I do homage to Cydarias eyes:
How can her Father to my hopes be kind
If, in your heart, he no example find.

Alm. To save your life I Will suffer any thing,
Yet I Will not flatter this tempestuous King;
But work his stubborn soul a nobler way,
And, if he love, I Will force him to obey.
I take this Garland, not as given by you,
to Montez. But as my merit, and my beauties due.
As for the Crown that you, my slave, possess,
To share it with you would but make me less.

Enter Guyomar hastily. Odm. My brother Guyomar! methinks I spy
Have in his steps, and wonder in his eye.

Mont. I sent thee to the frontiers, quickly tell
The cause of thy return, are all things well?

Guy. I went, in order, Sir, to your command,
To view the utmost limits of the land:
To that Sea shore where no more world is found,
But foaming billows breaking on the ground,
Where, for a while, my eyes no object met
But distant skies that in the Ocean set:
And low hung clouds that dipped themselves in rain
To shake their fleeces on the earth again.
At last, as far as I could cast my eyes
Upon the Sea, somewhat, methought did rise
Like bluish mists, which still appearing more,
Took dreadful shapes, and moved toward the shore.

Mont. What forms did these new wonders represent?

Guy. More strange than what your wonder can invent.
The object I could first distinctly view
Was tall straight trees which on the waters flew,
Wings on their sides instead of leaves did grow,
Which gathered all the breath the winds could blow.
And at their roots grew floating Palaces,
Whose out-bow'd bellies cut the yielding Seas.

Mont. What Divine Monsters, O ye gods, were these
That float in air and fly upon the Seas!
Came they alive or dead upon the shore?

Guy. Alas, they lived too sure, I heard them roar:
All turned their sides, and to each other spoke,
I saw their words break out in fire and smoke.
Sure it is their voice that Thunders from on high,
Or these the younger brothers of the Sky.
Deaf with the noise I took my hasty flight,
No mortal courage can support the fright.

High Pr. Old Prophecies foretell our fall at hand,
When bearded men in floating Castles Land,
I fear it is of dire portent.

Mont. -- Go see
What it fore-shows, and what the gods decree.
Mean time proceed we to what rites remain,
Odmar, of all this presence does contain,
Give her your wreath whom you esteem most fair.

Odm. Above the rest I judge one beauty rare,
And may that beauty prove as kind to me
He gives Alibech the wreath. As I am sure fair Alibech is she.

Mont. You Guyomar must next perform your part.

Guy. I want a Garland, but I Will give a heart:
My brothers pardon I must first implore,
Since I with him fair Alibech adore.

Odm. That all should Alibech adore it is true,
But some respect is to my birthright due.
My claim to her by Eldership I prove.

Guy. Age is a plea in Empire, not in Love.

Odm. I long have staid for this solemnity
To make my passion public.

Guy. -- So have I.

Odm. But from her birth my soul has been her slave,
My heart received the first wounds that she gave:
I watched the early glories of her Eyes,
As men for day break watch the eastern Skies.

Guy. It seems my soul then moved the quicker pace,
Yours first set out, mine reached her in the race.

Mont. Odmar, your choice I cannot disapprove;
Nor justly Guyomar, can blame your love.
To Alibech alone refer your suit,
And let her sentence finish your dispute.

Alib. You think me Sir a Mistress quickly won,
So soon to finish what is scarce begun:
In this surprise should I a judgment make,
It Is answering Riddles ere I Am well awake:
If you oblige me suddenly to choose,
The choice is made, for I must both refuse.
For to my self I owe this due regard
Not to make love my gift, but my reward,
Time best will show whose services will last.

Odm. Then judge my future service by my past.
What I shall be by what I was, you know,
That love took deepest root which first did grow.

Guy. That love which first was set will first decay,
Mine of a fresher date will longer stay.

Odm. Still you forget my birth.

Guy. -- But you, I see,
Take care still to refresh my memory.

Mont. My Sons, let your unseemly discord cease,
If not in friendship live at least in peace.
Orbellan, where you love bestow your wreath.

Orb. My love I dare not, even in whispers breath.

Mont. A virtuous Love may venture any thing:

Orb. Not to attempt the Daughter of my King*

Mont. Whither is all my former fury gone?
Once more I have Traxalla's chains put on,
And by his Children am in triumph led,
Too well the living have revenged the dead!

Alm. You think my brother born your enemy,
He Is of Traxalla's blood, and so am I.

Mont. In vain I strive,
My Lyon-heart is with Loves toyls beset,
Struggling I fall still deeper in the net.
Cydaria your new lovers Garland take,
And use him kindly for your Fathers ^ake.

Cyd. So strong an hatred does my nature sway,
That spite of duty I must disobey.
Besides you warned me still of loving two,
Can I love him already loving you?

Mont. How now --
Enter a Guard hastily. You look amazed as if some sudden fear
Had seized your hearts, is any danger near?

1 Guard. Behind the covert where this Temple stands,
Thick as the shades, there issue swarming bands
Of ambush'd men, whom, by their arms and dress,
To be Taxcallan Enemies I guess.

Another Enters. 2 Guard. The Temple, Sir, is almost compast round,

Mont. Some speedy way for passage must be found.
Make to the City by the Postern Gate,
I Will either force my Victory, or Fate;
A glorious death in arms I Will rather prove,
Than stay to perish tamely by my Love.

An Alarm within, Enter Montez. Odm. Guy. Alib. Orb. Cyd. Alm. as purs^ed by
Taxallans. Mont. No succor from the Town?

Odm. -- None, none is nigh.

Guy. We are enclosed and must resolve to dye.

Mont. Fight for revenge now hope of life is past,
But one stroke more and that will be my last.

Enter Cortez, Vasquez, Pizarro, to the Taxallans, Cort. stays them, just
falling on. Cort. Contemned? my orders broke even in my sight!
To his Indians Did I not strictly charge you should not fight?

Ind. Your choler, General, does unjustly rise,
To see your Friends pursue your Enemies;
The greatest and most cruel foes we have
Are these whom you would ignorantly save,
By ambush'd men, b^hind their Temple laid,
We have the King of Mexico betrayed.

Cort. Where banished Virtue, will thou show thy face
If treachery infects thy Indian race!
Dismiss your rage, and lay your weapons by:
Know I protect them, and they shall not dye.

Ind. O wondrous mercy shown to foes distressed!

Cort. Call them not so, when once with odds oppressed,
Nor are they Foes my clemency defends,
Until they have refused the name of Friends:
Draw up our Spaniards by themselves, then Fire
To Vasq. Our Guns on all that do not straight retire.

Ind. O mercy, mercy, at thy feet we fall,
Ind. kneeling. Before thy roaring gods destroy use all;
See we retreat without the least reply,
The Taxallans retire. Keep thy gods silent, if they speak we dye.

Mont. The fierce Taxallans lay their weapons down,
Some miracle in our relief is shown.

Guy. These bearded men, in shape and color be
Like those I saw come floating on the Sea.

Mont. kneels to Cort. Mont. Patron of Mexico and god of Wars,
Son of the Sun, and brother of the Stars.

Cort. Great Monarch, your devotion you misplace.

Mont. Thy actions show thee born of Heavenly Race.
If then thou art that cruel god, whose eyes
Delight in Blood, and Humane Sacrifice,
Thy dreadful Altars I with Slaves will store,
And feed thy nostrils with hot reeking gore;
Or if that mild and gentle god thou be,
Who do mankind below with pity see,
With breath of incense we will glad thy heart,
But if like us, of mort^l seed thou art,
Presents of choicest Fowls, and Fruits I Will bring,
And in my Realms thou shall be more then King.

Cort. Monarch of Empires, and deserving more
Then the Sun sees upon your Western shore;
Like you a man, and hither led by fame,
Not by constraint but by my choice I came;
Ambassador of Peace, if Peace you choose,
Or Herald of a War if you refuse.

Mont. Whence or from whom do thou these offers bring?

Cort. From Charles the Fifth, the Worlds most Potent King.

Mont. Some petty Prince, and one of little fame,
For to this hour I never heard his name:
The two great Empires of the World I know,
That of Peru, and this of Mexico;
And since the earth none larger does afford,
This Charles is some poor Tributary Lord.

Cort. You speak of that small part of earth you know,
But betwixt us and you wide Oceans flow,
And watery deserts of so vast extent,
That passing hither, four Full Moons we spent.

Mont. But say, what news, what offers do thou bring
From so remote, and so unknown a King?

Wh^l^ Vasq. speaks* Cort. (...) the Ladies and goes to them entertaining
Cydaria with Courtship (...). Vasq. Spain's mighty Monarch, to whom Heaven
thinks fi^
That all the Nations of the Earth submit,
In gracious ^lemency, does condescend
On these conditions to become your Friend.
First, that of him you shall your Scepter hold,
Next, you present him with your useless Gold:
Last, that you leave those Idols you implore,
And one true Deity with him adore.

Mont. You speak your Prince a mighty Emperor,
But his demands have spoke him Proud, and Poor;
He proudly at my freeborn Scepter flies,
Yet poorly begs a metal I despise.
Gold thou may take, whatever thou can find,
Save what for sacred uses is designed:
But, by what right pretends your King to be
This Sovereign Lord of all the World, and me?

Piz. The Sovereign Priest, --
Who represents on Earth the power of Heaven,
Has this your Empire to our Monarch given.

Mont. Ill does he represent the powers above,
Who nourishes debate not Preaches love;
Besides what greater folly can be shown?
He gives another what is not his own.

Vasq. His power must needs unquestioned be below,
For he in Heaven an Empire can bestow.

Mont. Empires in Heaven he with more ease may give,
And you perhaps would with least thanks receive;
But Heaven has need of no such Viceroy here,
It self bestows the Crowns that Monarchs wear.

Piz. You wrong his power as you mistake our end,
Who came thus far Religion to extend.

Mont. He who Religion truly understands
Knows its extent must be in Men, not Lands.

Odm. But who are those that truth must propagate
Within the confines of my Fathers state?

Vasq. Religious Men, who hither must be sent
As awful guides of Heavenly Government;
To teach you Penance, Fasts, and Abstinence,
To punish Bodies for the Souls offense.

Mont. Cheaply you sin, and punish crimes with ease,
Not as the offended, but the offenders please.
First injure Heaven, and when its wrath is due,
Your selves prescribe it how to punish you.

Odm. What numbers of these Holy Men must come?

Piz. You shall not want, each Village shall have some;
Who, though the Royal Dignity they own,
Are equal to it, and depend on none.

Guy. Depend on none! you treat them sure in state,
For it is their plenty does their pride create.

Mont. Those ghostly Kings would parcel out my power,
And all the fatness of my Land devour;
That Monarch sits not safely on his Throne,
Who bears, within, a power that shocks his own,
They teach obedience to Imperial sway,
But think it sin if they themselves obey.

Vasq. It seems then our Religion you accuse,
And peaceful homage to our King refuse.

Mont. Your gods I slight not, but will keep my own,
My Crown is absolute, and holds of none;
I cannot in a base subjection live,
Nor suffer you to take, though I would give.

Cort. Is this your answer Sir?

Mont. -- This as a Prince,
Bound to my Peoples and my Crowns defense,
I must return, but, as a man by you
Redeemed from death, all gratitude is due.

Cort. It was an act my Honor bound me to,
But what I did were I again to do,
I could not do it on my Honors score,
For Love would now oblige me to do more.
Is no way left that we may yet agree?
Must I have War, yet have no Enemy?

Vasq. He has refused all terms of Peace to take.

Mont. Since we must fight, hear Heavens, what Prayers I make,
First, to preserve this Ancient State and me,
But if your doom the fall of both decree,
Grant only he who has such Honor shown,
When I am dust, may fill my empty Throne.

Cort. To make me happier than that wish can do,
Lies not in all your gods to grant but you;
Let this fair Princess but one minute stay,
A look from her will your obligements pay.

Exe^uteunt Mont. Odm. Guy. Orbel. Alm. and Alib. Mont. to Cyd. Your duty in
your quick return be shown,
Stay you, and wait my Daughter to the Town.

To his Guards. Cyd. is going, but turns and looks back upon Cortez, who is
looking on her all this while. Cyd. My Father's gone, and yet I cannot go,
Sure I have something lost or left behind!

Aside. Cort. Like Travelers that wander in the Snow,
I on her beauty gaze till I am blind.

Aside. Cyd. Thick breath, quick pulse, and heaving of my heart,
All signs of some unwonted change appear:
I find my self unwilling to depart,
And yet I know not why I would be here.
Stranger you raise such storms within my breast,
That when I go, if I must go again;
I Will tell my Father you have robbed my rest,
And to him of your injuries complain.

Cort. Unknown, I swear those wrongs were which I wrought,
But my complaints will much more just appear,
Who from another world my freedom brought,
And by your conquering Eyes have lost it here.

Cyd. Where is that other world from whence you came?

Cort. Beyond the Ocean, far from hence it lies.

Cyd. Your other world, I fear, is then the same
That souls must go to when the body dies.
But what is the cause that keeps you here with me?
That I may know what keeps me here with you?

Cort. Mine is a love which must perpetual be,
If you can be so just as I am true.

Enter Orb. Orb. Your Father wonders much at your delay.

Cyd. So great a wonder for so small a stay!

Orb. He has commanded you with me to go.

Cyd. Has he not sent to bring the stranger too?

Orb. If he to morrow, dares in fight appear,
His high placed Love, perhaps may cost him dear.

Cort. Dares -- that word was never spoke to Spaniard yet,
But forfeited his Life that gave him it;
Have quickly with thy pledge of safety hence,
Thy guilt's protected by her innocence.

Cyd. Sure in some fatal hour my Love was born,
So soon o'rcast with absence in the morn!

Cort. Turn hence those pointed glories of your Eyes,
For if more charms beneath those Circles rise,
So weak my Virtue, they so strong appear,
I shall turn ravisher to keep you here.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT II.
SCENE, The Magitians Cave.
Enter Montezuma, High Priest. Mont. NOT that I fear the utmost Fate can do,
Come I the event of* doubtful War to know,
For Life and Death are things indifferent,
Each to be chose as either brings content;
My motive from a Nobler cause does spring,
Love rules my heart, and is your Monarchs King;
I more desire to know Almeria's mind,
Then all that Heaven has for my state designed.

High Pr. By powerful Charms which nothing can withstand,
I Will force the Gods to tell what you demand.

Charm, Thou Moon, that aid'st us with thy Magic might,
And yea small Stars, the scattered seeds of light,
Dart your pale beams into this gloomy place,
That the sad powers of the Infernal race
May read above what is hid from Humane Eyes,
And in your walks, see Empires fall and rise.
And ye Immortal Souls, that once were Men,
And now resolved to Elements again,
That wait for Mortal frames in depths below,
And did before what we are doomed to do;
Once, twice, and thrice, I wave my Sacred wand,
Ascend, ascend, ascend at my command.

An Earthy Spirit rises. Spir. In vain, O mortal men your Prayers implore
The aid of powers below, that want it more:
A God more strong, who all the gods commands,
Drives us to exile from our Native Lands;
The Air swarms thick with wandering Deities,
Which drowsily like humming Beetles rise
From our loved Earth, where peacefully we slept,
And far from Heaven a long possession kept.
The frighted Satyrs that in Woods delight,
Now into Plains with pricked up Ears take flight;
And scudding thence, while they their horn-feet ply
About their Syres the little Silvans cry.
A Nation loving Gold must rule this place,
Our Temples Ruin, and our Rites Deface:
To them, O King, is thy lost Scepter given,
Now mourn thy fatal search, for since wise Heaven
More ill then good to Mortals does dispense,
It is not safe to have too quick a sense.

Descends. Mont. Mourn they who think repining can remove
The firm decrees of those that rule above;
The brave are safe within, who still dare dye,
When e're I fall I Will scorn my destiny.
Doom as they please my Empire not to stand,
I Will grasp my Scepter with my dying hand.

High Pr. Those Earthy Spirits black and envious are*
I Will call up other gods of form more fair:
Who Visions dress in pleasing Colors still,
Set all the good to show, and hide the ill.
Kalib ascend, my fair-spoke ^ervant rise,
And sooth my Heart with pleasing Prophecies.

Kalib ascends all in White in the shape of a Woman and Sings. Kalib. I looked
and saw within the Book of Fate,
Where many days did lower,
When lo one happy hour
Leapt up, and smiled to save thy sinking State;
A day shall come when in thy power
Thy cruel Foes shall be;
Then shall thy Land be free,
And thou in Peace shall Reign:
But take, O take that opportunity,
Which once refused will never come again.

Descends. Mont. I shall deserve my Fate if I refuse
That happy hour which Heaven allots to use;
But of my Crown thou too much care do take,
That which I value more, my Lov's at stake.

High Pr. Arise ye subtle Spirits that can spy,
When Love is entered in a Females eye;
You that can read it in the midst of doubt,
And in the midst of frowns can find it out;
You that can search those many cornered minds,
Where Woman's crooked fancy, turns, and winds;
You that can Love explore, and truth impart,
Where both lie deepest hid in Woman's heart,
Arise. --

The Ghosts of Traxalla and Acacis arise, they stand still and point at Montez.
High Pr. I did not for these Ghastly Visions send,
Their sudden coming does some ill portend:
Begone, -- begone, -- they will not dis-appear,
My Soul is seized with an unusual fear.

Mont. Point on, point on, and see whom you can fright,
Shame and Confusion seize these shades of night;
Ye thin and empty forms am I your sport?
They smile. If you were flesh --
You know you durst not use me in this sort.

The ghost of the Indian Queen rises betwixt the Ghosts with a Dagger into her
Breast. Mont. Ha!
I feel my Hair grow stiff, my Eye Balls roll,
This is the only form could shake my Soul.

Ghost. The hopes of thy succesless Love resign,
Know Montezuma, thou art only mine;
For those that here on Earth their passion show,
By death for Love, receive their right below.
Why do thou then delay my longing Arms?
Have Cares, and Age, and Mortal life such Charms!
The Moon grows sickly at the sight of day,
And early Cocks have summoned me away:
Yet I Will appoint a meeting place below,
For there fierce winds over dusky Valleys blow,
Whose every puff bears empty shades away,
Which guidless in those dark Dominions stray.
Just at the entrance of the Fields below,
Thou shall behold a tall black Poplar grow,
Safe in its hollow trunk I will attend,
And seize thy Spirit when thou do descend.

Descends. Mont. I Will seize thee there, thou Messenger of Fate,
Would my short Life had yet a shorter date!
I Am weary of this flesh which holds us here,
And dastards manly Souls with hope and fear;
These heats and colds still in our breasts make War,
Agues and Fevers all our passions are.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Cydaria, Alibech, Betwixt the two Armies. Alib. Blessings will Crown your Name
if you prevent
That Blood, which in this Battle will be spent;
Nor need you fear so just a fute to move,
Which both becomes your duty and your Love.

Cyd. But think you he will come? their Camp is near,
And he already knows I wait him here.

Alib. You are too young your power to understand,
Lovers take wing upon the least command;
Already he is here.

Enter Cort. and Vasq. to them. Cort. Methinks like two black storms on either
hand,
Our Spanish Army and your Indians stand;
This only space betwixt the Clouds is clear,
Where you, like day, broke loose from both appear.

Cyd. Those closing Skies might still continue bright,
But who can help it if you will make it night?
The Gods have given you power of Life and Death,
Like them to save or scatter with a breath.

Cort. That power they to your Father did dispose,
'T was in his choice to make us Friends or Foes.

Alib. Injurious strength would rapine still excu^e,
By offering terms the weaker must refuse;
And such as these your hard conditions are,
You threaten Peace, and you invite a War.

Cort. If for my self to Conquer here I came,
You might perhaps my actions justly blame.
Now I am sent, and am not to dispute
My Princes orders, but to execute.

Alib. He who his Prince so blindly does obey,
To keep his Faith his Virtue throws away.

Cort. Monarchs may err, but should each private breast
Judge their ill Acts, they would dispute their best.

Cyd. Then all your care is for your Prince I see,
Your truth to him out-weighs your love to me;
You may so cruel to deny me prove,
But never after that, pretend to Love.

Cort. Command my Life, and I will soon obey,
To save my Honor I my Blood will pay.

Cyd. What is this Honor that does Love control?

Cort. A raging fit of Virtue in the Soul;
A painful burden which great minds must bear,
Obtained with danger, and possessed with fear.

Cyd. Lay down that burden if it painful grow,
You Will find, without it, Love will lighter go.

Cort. Honor once lost is never to be found.

Alib. Perhaps he looks to have both passions Crowned:
First dye his Honor in a Purple Flood,
Then Court the Daughter in the Father's Blood.

Cort. The edge of War I Will from the Battle take,
And spare her Father's Subjects for her sake.

Cyd. I cannot Love you less when I Am refused,
But I can dye to be unkindly used;
Where shall a Maids distracted heart find rest,
If she can miss it in her Lovers breast!

Cort. I till to morrow will the fight delay,
Remember you have conquered me to day.

Alib. This grant destroys all you have urged before,
Honor could not give this, or can give more;
Our Women in the foremost ranks appear,
March to the Fight, and meet your Mistress there,
Into the thickest Squadrons she must run,
Kill her, and see what Honor will be won.

Cyd. I must be in the Battle, but I Will go
With empty Quiver, and unbended Bow;
Not draw an Arrow in this fatal strife,
For fear its point should reach your Noble life.

Cort. No more, your kindness wounds me to the death,
Honor be gone, what art thou but a breath!
I Will live, proud of my infamy and shame,
Graced with no Triumph but a Lovers name;
Men can but say Love did his reason blind,
And Love's the noblest frailty of the mind,
Draw off my Men, the War's already done.

Piz. Your orders come too late, the Fight's begun,
The Enemy gives on with fury led,
And fierce Orbellan combats in their head.

Cort. He justly fears a Peace with me would prove
Of ill concernment to his haughty Love;
Retire, fair Excellence, I Will go to meet
New Honor, but to lay it at your feet.

Exeunt Cort. Vasq. Piz. Enter Odm. and Guy. to Alib. and Cyd. Odm. Now, Madam,
since a danger does appear
Worthy my Courage, though below my Fear,
Give leave to him who may in Battle dye,
Before his Death to ask his destiny.

Guy. He cannot Dye whom you command to Live,
Before the Fight you can the Conquest give;
Speak where you will place it?

Alib. -- Briefly then to both,
One I in secret Love, the other Loath;
But where I hate, my hate I will not show,
And he I Love, my Love shall never know;
True worth shall gain me, that it may be ^ed,
Desert, not fancy, once a Woman led.
He that in fight his courage shall oppose
With most success against his Countries Foes,
From me shall all that recompense receive
that Valor Merits, or that Love can give:
It Is true my hopes and fears are all for one,
But hopes and fears are to my self alone,
Let him not shun the danger of the strife,
I but his Love, his Country claims his Life.

Odm. All obstacles my Courage shall remove.

Guy. Fall on, fall on.

Odm. -- For Liberty,

Guy. -- For Love.

Exeunt the Women follewing. SCENE Changes to the Indian Country.
Enter Mont. attended by his Indians. Mont. Charge, charge, their ground the
faint Taxallans yield,
Bold in close Ambush, base in open Field:
The envious Devil did my Fortune wrong,
Thus Fought, thus Conquered I when I was young.
Exit.
Alarm, Enter Cort. Bloody. Cort. Furies pursue these false Taxallans Flight,
Dare they be Friends to us and dare not Fight?
What Friends can Cowards be, what hopes appear
Of help from such, that where they hate show fear!

Enter Piz. Vasquez. Piz. The Field grows thin, and those that now remain,
Appear but like the shadows of the Slain.

Vasq. The fierce old King is vanished from the place,
And in a cloud of dust pursues the Chase.

Cort. Their eager Chase disordered does appear,
Command our Horse to charge them in the rear;
To Piz. You to our old Castillian Foot retire,
To Vasq. Who yet stand firm, and at their backs give Fire.

Exeunt severally. Enter Odm. and Guy. meeting each other. Odm. Where have thou
been since first the Fight began,
Thou less then Woman in the shape of Man?

Guy. Where I have done what may thy Envy move,
Things worthy of my Birth, and of my Love:

Odm. Two bold Taxallans with one Dart I slew,
And left it sticking ere my Sword I drew.

Guy. I sought not Honor on so base a Train,
Such Cowards by our Women may be Slain;
I felled along a Man of Bearded face,
His Limbs all covered with a Shining case:
So wondrous hard, and so secure of wound,
It made my Sword, though edged with Flint, rebound.

Odm. I killed a double Man, the one half lay
Upon the ground, the other ran away.

Guns go off within. Enter Mont. out of breath, with him Alib. and an Indian.
Mont. All Is lost --
Our Foes with Lightning and with Thunder Fight,
My Men in vain shun death by shameful Flight;
For death's Invisible come winged with Fire,
They hear a dreadful noise and straight expire.
Take, gods, that Soul ye did in spite create,
And made it great to be unfortunate:
Ill Fate for me unjustly you provide,
Great Souls are Sparks of your own Heavenly Pride,
That lust of power we from your god-heads have,
You Are bound to please those Appetites you gave.

Enter Vasq. and Piz. with Spaniards. Vasq. Pizarro, I have hunted hard to day,
Into our toyls the noblest of the prey;
Seize on the King, and him your Prisoner make,
While I in kind revenge, my taker take.

Piz. with two goes to Attaque the King, Vasq. with another to seize Alib. Guy.
Their danger is alike, whom shall I free?

Odm. I Will follow Love.

Guy. -- I Will follow Piety.

Odm. retreats from Vasq. with Alib off the stage, Guy. Fights for his Father.
Guy. Fly Sir, while I give back that life you gave,
Mine is well lost, if I your life can save.

Mont. Fights off, Guy. making his retreat, stays. Guy. It Is more than Man can
do to escape them all,
Stay, let me see where noblest I may fall.

He runs at Vasq. is seized behind and taken. Vasq. Conduct him off,
And give command he strictly guarded be.

Guy. In vain are guards, Death sets the Valiant free.
Exit Guy with Guards.
Vasq. A Glorious day! and bravely was it Fought,
Great fame our General in great dangers sought;
From his strong Arm I saw his Rival run,
And in a crowd, the unequal Combat, shun.

Enter Cortez leading Cidaria, who seems crying, and begging of him. Cort. Man's
force is fruitless, and your gods would fail
To save the City, but your Tears prevail;
I Will of my Fortune no advantage make,
Those Terms they had once given, they still may take.

Cyd. Heaven has of right all Victory designed,
Where boundless power dwells in a will confined;
Your Spanish Honor does the World excel.

Cort. Our greatest Honor is in loving well.

Cyd. Strange ways you practice there to win a Heart,
Here Love is Nature, but with you it is Art.

Cort. Love is with us, as Natural as here,
But fettered up with customs more severe;
In tedious Courtship we decla^e our p^i^,
And ere we kindness find, first meet disdain.

Cyd. If Women Love they needless pains endure,
Their Pride and Folly but delay their Cure.

Cort. What you mis-call their Folly, is their care,
They know how fickle common Lovers are:
Their Oaths and Vows are cautiously believed,
For few there are but have been once deceived.

Cyd. But if they are not trusted when they vow,
What other marks of passion can they show?

Cort. With Feasts, and Music, all that brings delight,
Men treat their Ears, their Pallats, and their Sight.

Cyd. Your Gallants sure have little Eloquence,
Failing to move the Soul, they Court the Sense,
With Pomps, and Trains, and in a crowd they Woe,
When true Felicity is but in two;
But can such Toys your Women's passion move?
This is but noise and tumult, it is not Love.

Cort. I have no reason, Madam, to excuse
Those ways of Gallan^ry I did not use;
My Love was true and on a Nobler score.

Cyd. Your Love! Alas! then have you Loved before!

Cort. It Is true I Loved, but she is Dead, she is Dead,
And I should think with her all Beauty Fled;
Did not her fair resemblance live in you,
And by that Image, my first Flames renew.

Cyd. Ah happy Beauty whosoever thou art!
Though dead thou keep'st possession of his Heart;
Thou make me jealous to the last degree,
And art my Rival in his Memory;
Within his Memory, ah, more then so,
Thou Liv'st and Triumph'st ore Cydaria too.

Cort. What strange disquiet has uncalm'd your breast,
Inhumane fair, to rob the dead of rest!
Poor Heart!
She slumbers deep, deep in her silent Tomb,
Let her possess in Peace that narrow Room.

Cyd. Poor-heart he pities and bewails her death,
Some god, much hated soul, restore thy breath
That I may kill thee, but some ease 'twill be,
I Will kill my self for but resembling thee.

Cort. I dread your anger, your disquiet fear,
But blows from hands so soft who would not bear?
So kind a passion why should I remove?
Since jealousy but shows how well we Love.
Yet jealousy so strange I never knew,
Can she who Loves not me disquiet you?
For in the Grave no Passions fill the Breast,
It Is all we gain by Death to be at rest.

Cyd. That she no longer Loves brings no relief,
Your Love to her still lives, and that is my grief.

Cort. The object of desire once taken away,
It Is then not Love, but pity that we pay.

Cyd. It Is such a pity I should never have,
When I must lie forgotten in the Grave;
I meant to have obliged you when I died,
That after me you should Love none beside,
But you are false already.

Cort. -- If untrue,
By Heaven my falsehood is to her, not you.

Cyd. Observe sweet Heaven, how falsely he does Swear,
You said you Loved me for resembling her.

Cort. That Love was in me by resemblance bred,
But shows you cheered my sorrows for the Dead.

Cyd. You still repeat the greatness of your grief.

Cort. If that was great, how great was the relief?

Cyd. The first Love still the strongest we account.

Cort. That seems more strong which could the first surmount:
But if you still continue thus unkind,
Whom I Love best, you by my Death shall find.

Cyd. If you should dye my death should yours pursue,
But yet I am not satisfied you are true.

Cort. Hear me, ye gods, and punish him you hear,
If ought within the World, I hold so dear.

Cyd. You would deceive the gods and me, she is dead,
And is not in the World, whose Love I dread,
Name not the world, say nothing is so dear.

Cort. Then nothing is, let that secure your fear.

Cyd. It Is Time must wear it off, but I must go.
Can you your constancy in absence show?

Cort. Mis-doubt my constancy and do not try,
But stay and keep me ever in your eye.

Cyd. If as a Prisoner I were here, you might
Have then insisted on a Conqu'rours right,
And stayed me here; but now my Love would be
The effect of force, and I would give it free.

Cort. To doubt your Virtue or your Love were sin;
Call for the Captive Prince and bring him in.
Enter Guyomar. bound and sad. You look, Sir, as your Fate you could not bear,
[ To Guyomar. Are Spanish Fetters then so hard to wear?
Fortune's unjust, she ruins often the Brave,
And him who should be Victor, makes the Slave.

Guy. Son of the Sun, my Fetters cannot be
But Glorious for me, since put on by thee;
The ills of Love, not those of Fate I fear,
These I can brave, but those I cannot bear;
My Rival Brother, while I Am held in Chains,
In freedom reaps the fruit of all my Pains.

Cort. Let it be never said, that he whose breast
Is filled with Love, should break a Lovers rest;
Haste, lose no time, your Sister sets you Free,
And tell the King, my Generous Enemy,
I offer still those terms he had before,
Only ask leave his Daughter to adore.

Guy. Brother, that Name my breast shall ever own,
He embraces him. The Name of Foe be but in Battles known;
For some few days all Hostile Acts for bear,
That if the King consents, it seem not fear;
His Heart is Noble, and great Souls must be
Most sought and Courted in Adversity.
Three days I hope the wished success will tell.

Cyd. Till that long time. --

Cort. -- Till that long time, farewell.

Exeunt severally. ACT III.
SCENE, Chamber Royal.
Enter Odmar and Alibech. Odm. THE gods fair Alibech had so decreed,
Nor could my Valor against fate succeed;
Yet though our Army brought not Conquest home,
I did not from the Fight inglorious come:
If as a Victor you the brave regard,
Succesless Courage then may hope reward,
And I returning safe, may justly boast
To win the prize which my dead Brother lost.

Enter Guyomar behind him. Guy. No, no, thy Brother lives, and lives to be
A Witness, both against himself and thee;
Though both in safety are returned again,
I blush to ask her Love for vanquished Men.

Odm. Brother, I Will not dispute, but you are brave,
Yet I was free, and you it seems a Slave.

Guy. Odmar,'ti^ true, that I was Captive led
As publicly is known, as that you fled;
But of two shames if she must one partake,
I think the choice will not be hard to make.
Freedom and Bondage in her choice remains,
Dare thou expect she will put on thy Chains?

Guy. No, no, fair Alibech, give him the Crown,
My Brother is returned with high Renown.
He thinks by Flight his Mistress must be won,
And claims the prize because he best did run.

Alib. Your Chains were glorious, and your Flight was wise,
But neither have overcome your Enemies:
My secret wishes would my choice decide,
But open Justice bends to neither side.

Odm. Justice already does my right approve,
If him who Loves you most, you most should Love.
My Brother poorly from your aid withdrew,
But I my Father left to succor you.

Guy. Her Country she did to her self prefer,
Him who Fought best, not who Defended her;
Since she her interest for the Nations waved,
Then I who saved the King, the Nation saved;
You aiding her, your Country did betray,
I aiding him, did her commands obey.

Odm. Name it no more, in Love, there is a time
When dull Obedience is the greatest Crime;
She to her Countries use resigned your Sword,
And you kind Lover, took her at her word;
You did your Duty to your Love prefer,
Seek your reward from Duty, not from her.

Guy. In acting what my Duty did require,
'Twas hard for me to quit my own desire,
That Fought for her, which when I did subdue,
'Twas much the easier task I left for you.

Alib. Odmar a more then common Love has show^
And Guyomar's was greater, or was none;
Which I should choose some god direct my breast,
The certain good, or the uncertain best:
I cannot choose, you both dispute in vain,
Time and your future Acts must make it plain;
First raise the Siege, and set your Country free,
I not the Judge, but the reward will be.

Enter Montezuma talking with Almeria and Orbellan. Mont. Madam, I think with
reason I extol
The Virtue of the Spanish General;
When all the gods our Ruin have foretold,
Yet generously he does his Arms withold,
And offering Peace, the first conditions make.

Alm. When Peace is offered it is too late to take;
For one poor loss to stoop to terms like those,
Were we overcome what could they worse impose?
Go, go, with homage your proud Victors meet,
Go lie like Dogs, beneath your Masters Feet.
Go and beget them Slaves to dig their Mines,
And groan for Gold which now in Temples shines;
Your shameful story shall record of me,
The Men all crouch'd, and left a Woman free.

Guy. Had I not Fought, or durst not Fight again,
I my suspected Counsel should refrain:
For I wish Peace, and any terms prefer
Before the last extremities of War.
We but exasperate those we cannot harm,
And Fighting gains us but to dye more warm:
If that be Cowardice, which dares not see
The insolent effects of Victory;
The rape of Matrons, and their Childrens cries,
Then I am fearful, let the Brave advise.

Odm. Keen cutting Swords, and Engines killing far,
Have prosperously begun a doubtful War;
But now our Foes with less advantage Fight,
Their strength decreases with our Indians Fright.

Mont. This Noble Vote does with my wish comply,
I am for War.

Alm. -- And so am I,

Orb. -- And I.

Mont. Then send to break the truce, and I Will take care
To cheer the Soldiers, and for Fight prepare.

Exeunt Mont. Odm. Guy. Alib* Alm. It Is now the hour which all to rest allow,
And Sleep sits heavy upon every brow;
In this dark silence softly leave the Town,
Guyomar return: and hears them. And to the Generals Tent, it is quickly known,
Direct your steps: you may dispatch him strait,
Drowned in his Sleep, and easy for his Fate:
Besides the truce will make the Guards more slack.

Orb. Courage which leads me on, will bring me back:
But I more fear the baseness of the thing,
Remorse, you know, bears a perpetual sting.

Alm. For mean remorse no room the Valiant finds,
Repentance is the Virtue of weak minds;
For want of judgment, keeps them doubtful still,
They may repent of good who can of ill;
But daring Courage makes ill actions good,
It Is foolish pity spares a Rivals Blood;
You shall about it straight. --

Exeunt Alm. Orb. Guy. -- Would they betray
His sleeping Virtue, by so mean a way!
And yet this Spaniard is our Nations Foe,
I wish him dead -- but cannot wish it so;
Either my Country never must be freed,
Or I consenting to so black a deed.
Would Chance had never led my steps this way,
Now if he dies I Murder him, not they;
Something must be resolved e're it is too late,
He gave me freedom, I Will prevent his Fate.
Exit Guyomar.
SCENE II. A Camp.
Enter Cortez alone in a Nightgown. Cort. All things are hushed, as Natures
self lay dead,
The Mountains seem to nod their drowsy head;
The little Birds in dreams their Songs repeat,
And sleeping Flowers, beneath the night-dew sweat;
Even Lust and Envy sleep, yet Love denies
Rest to my Soul, and slumber to my Eyes.
Three days I promised to attend my Doom,
And two long days and nights are yet to come:
It Is sure the noise of some Tumultuous Fight,
Noise within. They break the truce, and sally out by Night.

Enter Orbellan flying in the dark, his Sword drawn. Orb. Betrayed! pursued! Oh
whither shall I fly?
See, fee, the just reward of Treachery;
I Am sure among the Tents, but know not where,
Even night wants darkness to secure my fear.

Comes near Cortez who hears him. Cort. Stand, who goes there?

Orb. -- Alas, what shall I say!
Aside. A poor Taxallan that mistook his way,
To him. And wanders in the terrors of the night.

Cort. Soldier thou seem afraid, whence comes thy flight?

Orb. The insolence of Spaniards caused my fear,
Who in the dark pursued me entering here.

Cort. Their Crimes shall meet immediate punishment,
But stay thou safe within the Generals Tent.

Orb. Still worse and worse.

Cort. -- Fear not but follow me,
Upon my Life I Will let thee safe and free.

Cortez Leads him in, and returns. To him Vasquez, Pizarro and Spaniards with
Tor^hes. Vasq. O Sir, thank Heaven, and your brave Indian Friend
That you are safe, Orbellan did intend
This night to kill you sleeping in your Tent,
But Guyomar, his trusty Slave has sent,
Who following close his silent steps by night
Till in our Camp they both approached the light,
Cried seize the Traitor, seize the Murderer,
The cruel Villain fled I know not where,
But far he is not, for he this way bent.

Piz. The enraged Soldiers seek, from Tent to Tent,
With lighted Torches, and in Love to you,
With bloody Vows his hated life pursue.

Vasq. This Messenger does since he came relate,
That the old King, after a long debate;
By his imperious Mistress blindly led,
Has given Cydaria to Orbellan's Bed.

Cort. Vsquez, the trusty Slave with you retain,
Retire a while, I Will call you back again. Exeunt Vasquez, Pizarro.

Cortez at his Tent Door. Cort. Indian come forth, your Enemies are gone,
And I who saved you from them, here alone;
You hide your Face, as you were still afraid,
Dare you not look on him that gave you aid?

Enter Orbellan holding his Face aside. Orb. Moon slip behind some Cloud, some
Tempest rise
And blow out all the Stars that light the Skies,
To shroud my shame.

Cort. -- In vain you turn aside,
And hide your Face, your Name you cannot hide;
I know my Rival and his black design.

Orb. Forgive it as my passions fault, not mine.

Cort. In your excuse your Love does little say,
You might how e're have took a fairer way.

Orb. It Is true my passion small defense can make,
Yet you must spare me for your Honors sake;
That was engaged to set me safe and free.

Cort. 'T was to a Stranger, not an Enemy:
Nor is it prudence to prolong thy breath,
When all my hopes depend upon thy death --
-- Yet none shall tax me with base perjury,
Something I Will do, both for my self and thee;
With vowed revenge my Soldiers search each Tent,
If thou art seen none can thy death prevent;
Follow my steps with silence and with haste.

They go out, the Scene changes to the Indian Country, they return. Cort. Now
you are safe, you have my out-guards past.

Orb. Then here I take my leave.

Cort. -- Orbellan, no,
When you return you to Cydaria go,
I Will send a Message.

Orb. -- Let it be expressed,
I am in haste.

Cort. -- I Will write it in your Breast. -- Draws.

Orb. What means my Rival?

Cort. -- Either Fight or Dye,
I Will not strain Honor to a point too high;
I saved your Life, now keep it if you can,
Cydaria shall be for the bravest Man;
On equal terms you shall your Fortune try,
Take this and lay your flint-edg'd weapon by;
Give him a Sword. I Will arm you for my Glory, and pursue
No Palm, but what is to manly Virtue due.
Fame with my Conquest, shall my Courage tell,
This you shall gain by placing Love so well.

Orb. Fighting with you ungrateful I appear.

Cort. Under that shadow thou would hide thy fear:
Thou would possess thy Love at thy return,
And in her Arms my easy Virtue scorn.

Orb. Since we must Fight, no longer let us delay,
The Moon shines clear, and makes a paler day.

They Fight, Orbellan is wounded in the Hand, his Sword falls out of it. Cort.
To Courage, even of Foes, there is pity due,
It was not I, but Fortune vanquished you*
Throws his Sword again. Thank me with that, and so dispute the prize,
As if you Fought before Cydarias eyes.

Orb. I would not poorly such a gift requi^e,
You gave me not this Sword to yield, but Fight;
But see where yours has forced its bloody way,
He strives to hold it, but cannot. My wounded Hand my Heart does ill obey.

Cort. Unlucky Honor that controul'st my will!
Why have I vanquished, since I must not Kill?
Fate sees thy Life lodged in a brittle Glass,
And looks it through, but to it cannot pass.

Orb. All I can do is frankly to confess,
I wish I could, but cannot love her less;
To swear I would resign her were but vain,
Love would recall that perjured breath again;
And in my wretched case 'twill be more just
Not to have promised, then deceive your trust.
Know, if I Live once more to see the Town,
In bright Cydaria's Arms my Love i will crown.

Cort. In spite of that I give thee Liberty,
And with thy person leave thy Honor free;
But to thy wishes move a speedy pace,
Or Death will soon overtake thee in the Chase.
To Arms, to Arms, Fate shows my Love the way,
I Will force the City on thy Nuptial day.

Exeunt several* SCENE III. Mexic^.
Enter Montezuma, Odmar, Guyomar, Almeria. Mont. It moves my wonder that in two
days space,
This early Famine spreads so swift a pace.

Odm. It Is, Sir, the general cry, nor seems it strange,
The face of plenty should so swiftly change;
This City never felt a Siege before,
But from the Lake received its daily store,
Which now shut up, and Millions crowded here,
Famine will soon in multitudes appear.

Mont. The more the number still the greater shame.

Alm. What if some one should seek immortal Fame
By ending of the Siege at one brave blow?

Mont. That were too happy!

Alm. -- yet it may be so,
What if the Spanish General should be slain?

Guy. Just Heaven I hope does other-ways ordain,

[Aside. Mont. If slain by Treason I lament his death.

Enter Orbellan and whispers his Sister. Odm. Orbellan seems in have and out of
breath.

Mont. Orbellan welcome, you are early hear,
A Bridegrooms have does in your looks appear.

Almeria Aside to her Brother. Alm. Betrayed! no, 'twas thy Cowardice, and Fear,
He had not 'scap'd with Life had I been there;
But since so ill you act a brave design,
Keep close your shame, Fate make the next turn mine.

Enter Alibech, Cydaria. Alib. O Sir, if ever pity touched your breast,
Let it be now to your own blood expressed:
In tears your beauteous Daughter drowns her sight,
Silent as dews that fall in dead of night.

Cyd. To your commands I strict obedience owe,
And my last Act of it I come to show;
I want the Heart to dye before your Eyes,
But Grief will finish that which Fear denies.

Alm. Your will should by your Fathers precept move.

Cyd. When he was young he taught me truth in Love.

Alm. He found more Love then he deserved, it is true,
And that it seems, is lucky too to you;
Your Fathers Folly took a headstrong course,
But I Will rule yours, and teach you Love by force.
Enter Messenger. Arm, Arm, O King, the Enemy comes on,
A sharp assault already is begun;
Their Murdering Guns play fiercely on the Walls.

Odm. Now Rival, let us run where Honor calls,

Guy. I have discharged what gratitude did owe,
And the brave Spaniard is again my Foe.

[Exeunt Odmar and Guyomar. Mont. Our walls are high, and multitudes defend
Their vain attempt must in their ruin end;
The Nuptials with my presence shall be graced.

Alib. At least but stay 'till the assault be past.

Alm. Sister, in vain you urge him to delay,
The King has promised, and he shall obey.
Enter Second Messenger. From several parts the Enemy's repel'd,
One only quarter, to the assault does yield.
Enter Third Messenger. Some Foes are entered, but they are so few
They only Death, not Victory pursue.

Orb. Hark, hark they shout!
From Virtues rules I do, too meanly swerve:
I by my Courage will your Love deserve.

Mont. Here in the heart of all the Town I Will stay:
And timely succor where it wants, convey.

A Noise within. Enter Orbell. Indians driven in, Cortez after them, and one or
two Spaniards. Cort. He Is found, he is found, degenerate Coward, stay:
Night saved thee once thou shall not escape by day.

[ Kills Orbellan. Orb. -- O I am Killed -- Dies.

Enter Guyomar and Odmar Guy. Yield Generous Stranger and pre^^
Why choose you death in this unequal

He is beset. Almeria And Alibech falls on Orbellans body. Cort. What nobler
Fate could any Lover meet,
I fall revenged, and at my Mistress feet?

They fall on him and bear him down, Guyomar takes his Sword. Alib. He Is past
recovery; my Dear Brother^ Slain:
Fates head was in it, and my care is vain.

Alm. In weak complaints you vainly wast your breath:
They are not Tears that can revenge his Death,
Dispatch the Villain strait.

Cort. -- The Villains Dead:

Alm. Give me a Sword and let me take his Head.

Mont. Though, Madam, for your Brothers loss I grieve,
Yet let me beg, --

Alm. -- His Murderer may Live?

Cyd. 'Twas his Misfortune, and the Chance of War.

Cort. It was my purpose, and I killed him fair;
How could you so unjust and cruel prove
To call that Chance that was the act of Love?

Cyd. I called it any thing to save your Life:
Would he were living still, and I his Wife;
That wish was once, my greatest misery:
But it is a greater to behold you dye.

Alm. Either command his Death upon the place,
Or never more behold Almeria's face.

Guy. You by his Valor, once from Death were freed:
Can you forget so Generous a deed?

[ To Montezuma. Mont. How Gratitude and Love divide my breast!
Both ways alike my Soul is robbed of rest.
But -- let him Dye, -- can I his Sentence give?
Ungrateful must he Dye by whom I Live?
But can I then Almeria's Tears deny!
Should any Live whom she commands to Dye?

Guy. Approach who dares: he yielded on my word;
And as my Prisoner, I restore his Sword;
[Gives his Sword. His Life concerns the safety of the State,
And I Will preserve it for a calm debate.

Mont. Dare thou Rebel false and degenerate Boy,
That being which I gave, I thus destroy.

Offers to kill him, Odmar steps between. Odm. My Brothers blood I cannot see
you spill,
Since he prevents you but from doing ill:
He is my Rival, b^t his Death would be
For him too glorious, and too base for me.

Guy. Thou shall not Conquer in this noble strife:
Alas, I meant not to defend my Life:
Strike, Sir, you never pierced a Breast more true:
It Is the last Wound I e're can take for you.
You see I Live but to dispute your will;
Kill me, and then you may my Prisoner Kill.

Cort. You shall not, Generous Youths, contend for me:
It is enough that I your Honor see,
But that your Duty may noble mishtake,
I will my self your Father's Captive make:
When he dares strike I am prepared to fall:
The Spaniards will revenge their General.

Gives his Sword to Montezuma. Cyd. Ah you too hastily your Life resign,
You more would Love it if you valued mine!

Cort. Dispatch me quickly, I my Death forgive,
I shall grow tender else, and wish to Live;
Such an infectious Face her sorrow wears,
I can bear Death, but not Cydaria's Tears.

Alm. Make haste, make haste, they merit Death all three:
They for Rebellion, and for Murder he.
See, fee, my Brother's Ghost hangs hovering there,
Over his warm Blood, that steems into the Air,
Revenge, Revenge it cries.

Mont. -- And it shall have;
But two days respite for his Life I crave:
If in that space you not more gentle prove;
I Will give a Fatal proof how well I Love.
(...) when you Guyomar, your Prisoner take;
(...) him in the Castle on the Lake:
(...) that small time, I shall the Conquest gain
Of these few Sparks of Virtue that remain:
Then all who shall my headlong passion see,
Shall curse my Crimes, and yet shall pity me.

[Exeunt omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE, A Prison.
Enter Almeria and an Indian they speak entering. Ind. A Dangerous proof of my
respect I show.

Alm. Fear not, Prince Guyomar shall never know:
While he is absent let us not delay?
Remember it is the King thou do obey.

Ind. See where he sleeps.

[ Cortez appears Chained and laid asleep. Alm. -- Without my coming wait:
And on thy Life secure the Prison Gate. --
She plucks out a Dagger and approaches him. Spaniard awake: thy Fatal hour is
come:
Thou shall not at such ease receive thy Doom.
Revenge is sure, though sometimes slowly paced,
Awake, awake, or sleeping sleep thy last.

Cort. Who names Revenge?

Alm. -- Look up and thou shall see.

Cort. I cannot fear so fair an Enemy.

Alm. No aid is near, nor can thou make defense:
Whence can thy Courage come?

Cort. -- From Innocence.

Alm. From Innocence? let that then take thy part,
Still are thy looks assured, -- have at thy Heart:
[Hold up the D^gg^ I cannot kill thee; sure thou bear some Charm,
[Goes ba^^ Or some Divinity holds back my Arm.
Why do I thus delay to make him Bleed,
[Asi^^. Can I want Courage for so brave a Deed?
I Have shook it off; my Soul is free from fear,
[Comes against. And I can now strike any where, -- but here:
His scorn of Death how strangely does it move!
A mind so haughty who could choose but Love!
[Goes off. Plead not a Charm, or any gods command,
Alas, it is thy heart that holds thy hand:
In spite of me I Love, and see too late
My Mothers Pride must find my Mothers Fate:
-- Thy Country's Foe, thy Brother's Murderer,
For shame, Almeria, such mad thoughts forbear:
I w'onnot be if I once more come on,
[coming on again. I shall mistake the Breast, and pierce my own.

[Comes with her Dagger down. Cort. Does your revenge maliciously forbear
To give me Death, till it is prepared by fear?
If you delay for that, forbear or strike,
Foreseen and sudden death are both alike.

Alm. To show my Love would but increase his Pride:
They have most power who most their passions hide.
[Aside. Spaniard, I must confess I did expect
You could not meet your Death with such neglect;
I will defer it now, and give you time:
You may Repent, and I forget your Crime.

Cort. Those who repent acknowledge they did ill:
I did not unprovoked your Brother Kill.

Alm. Petition me, perhaps I may forgive.

Cort. Who begs his Life does not deserve to Live.

Alm. But if it is given you will not refuse to take?

Cort. I can Live gladly for Cydaria's sake.

Alm. Does she so wholly then possess your mind?
What if you should another Lady find,
Equal to her in birth, and far above
In all that can attract, or keep your Love,
Would you so dote upon your first desire
As not to entertain a Nobler Fire?

Cort. I think that person hardly will be found,
With Gracious form and equal Virtue Crowned:
Yet if another could precedence claim,
My fixed desires could find no fairer Aim.

Alm. Dull ignorance, he cannot yet conceive:
To speak more plain shame will not give me leave.
[Aside, -- Suppose one loved you whom even Kings adore:
[To him Who with your Life, your Freedom would restore,
And add to that the Crown of Mexico:
Would you for her, Cydaria's Love fore-go?

Cort. Though she could offer all you can invent,
I could not of my Faith, once vowed repent.

Alm. A burning blush has covered all my face:
Why am I forced to publish my disgrace?
What if I Love, you know it cannot be,
And yet I blush to put the case 'twere me.
If I could Love you, with a flame so true
I could forget what hand my Brother slew? --
-- Make out the rest, -- I am disordered so
I know not farther what to say or do:
-- But answer me to what you think I meant.

Cort. Reason or Wit no answer can invent:
Of words confused who can the meaning find?

Alm. Disordered words show a distempered mind.

Cort. She has obliged me so, that could I choose,
I would not answer what I must refuse.

[Aside. Alm. -- His mind is shook, -- suppose I loved you, speak,
Would you for me Cydaria's Fetters break?

Cort. Things meant in Jest, no serious answer need.

Alm. But put the case that it were so indeed.

Cort. If it were so, which but to think were Pride,
My constant Love would dangerously be tried:
For since you could a Brothers death forgive,
He whom you save for you alone should live:
But I the most unhappy of mankind,
E're I knew yours, have all my Love resigned:
It Is my own loss I grieve, who have no more;
You go a begging to a Bankrupts door.
Yet could I change, as sure I never can,
How could you Love so Infamous a Man?
For Love once given from her, and placed in you,
Would leave no ground I ever could be true.

Alm. You cons^rued me aright, -- I was in Jest:
And by that offer meant to sound your breast;
Which since I find so constant to your Love,
Will much my value of your worth improve.
Spaniard assure your self you shall not be
Obliged to quit Cydaria for me:
It Is dangerous though, to treat me in this sort,
And to refuse my offers, though in sport.
Exit Almeria.
Cort. In what a strange Condition am I left,
Cort. solus. More then I wish I have, of all I wish bereft!
In wishing nothing we enjoy still most;
For even our wish is, in possession lost:
Restless we wander to a new desire,
And burn our selves by blowing of the Fire:
We toss and turn about our Feverish will,
When all our ease must come by lying still:
For all the happiness Mankind can gain
Is not in pleasure, but in rest from pain.

Goes in and the Scene closes upon him. SCENE II. Chamber Royal.
Enter Montezuma, Odmar, Guyomar, Alibech. Mont. My Ears are deaf with this
impatient crowd:

Odm. Their wants are now grown Mutinous and loud:
The General's taken, but the Siege remains;
And their last Food our dying Men sustains.

Guy. One means is only left, I to this hour,
Have kept the Captive from Almeria's power:
And though by your command she often sent
To urge his doom, do still his death prevent.

Mont. That hope is past: him I have often assayl'd,
But neither threats nor kindness have prevailed;
Hiding our wants, I offered to release
His Chains, and equally conclude a Peace:
He fiercely answered I had now no way
But to submit, and without terms obey:
I told him, he in Chains demanded more
Then he imposed in Victory before:
He sullenly replied, he could not make
These offers now; Honor must give, not take.

Odm. Twice have I sallyed, and was twice beat back:
What desperate course remains for us to take!

Mont. If either Death or Bondage I must choose,
I Will keep my Freedom, though my life I lose.

Guy. I Will not upbraid you that you once refused
Those means, you might have then with Honor used:
I Will lead your Men, perhaps bring Victory:
They know to Conquer best, who know to Dye.

[ Exeunt Montezuma, Odmar. Alib. Ah me, what have I heard! stay Guyomar,
What hope you from this Sally you prepare?

Guy. A death, with Honor for my Countries good:
A death, to which your self designed my blood.

Alib. You heard, and I well know the Towns di^tress,
Which Sword and Famine both at once oppress:
Famine so fierce, that what is denied Man's use
Even deadly Plants, and Herbs of poisonous juice
Wild hunger seeks; and to prolong our breath,
We greedily devour our certain death:
The Soldier in the assault of Famine falls;
And Ghosts not Men are watching on the walls.
As Callow Birds --
Whose Mother's killed in seeking of their prey,
Cry in their Nest, and think her long away;
And at each leaf that stirs, each blast of wind,
Gape for the Food which they must never find:
So cry the people in their misery.

Guy. And what relief can they expect from me?

Alib. While Monte^uma sleeps, call in the Foe:
The Captive General your design may know:
His Noble heart, to Honor ever true,
Knows how to spare as well as to subdue.

Guy. What I have heard I blush to hear: and grieve
Those words you spoke I must your words believe;
I to do this! I, whom you once thought brave,
To sell my Country, and my King Enslave?
All I have done by one foul act deface,
And yield my right to you by turning base?
What more could Odmar wish that I should do
To lose your Love, then you persuade me to?
No, Madam, no, I never can commit
A deed so ill, nor can you suffer it:
It Is but to try what Virtue you can find
Lodged in my Soul.

Alib. I plainly speak my Mind;
Dear as my Life my Virtue I Will preserve:
But Virtue you too scrupulously serve:
I loved not more then now my Countries good,
When for it is service I employed your Blood:
But things are altered, I am still the same,
By different ways still moving to one fame;
And by dis-arming you, I now do more
To save the Town, then arming you before.

Guy. Things good or ill by circumstances be,
In you it is Virtue, what is Vice in me.

Alib. That ill is pardoned which does good procure.

Guy. The good's uncertain, but the ill is sure.

Alib. When Kings grow stubborn, slothful, or unwise,
Each private man for public good should rise;
As when the Head distempers does endure,
Each several part must join to effect the cure.

Guy. Take heed, Fair Maid, how Monarchs you accuse:
Such reasons none but impious Rebels use:
Those who to Empire by dark paths aspire,
Still plead a call to what they most desire;
But Kings by free consent their Kingdoms take,
Strict as those Sacred Ties which Nuptials make;
And what e're faults in Princes time reveal,
None can be Judge where can be no Appeal.

Alib. In all debates you plainly let me see
You love your Virtue best, but Odmar me:
Go, your mistaken Piety pursue:
I Will have from him what is denied by you;
With my Commands you shall no more be graced,
Remember, Sir, this trial was your last.

Guy. The gods inspire you with a better mind;
Make you more just, and make you then more kind:
But though from Virtues rules I cannot part,
Think I deny you with a Bleeding Heart:
It Is hard with me what ever choice I make;
I must not merit you, or must forsake:
But in this straight, to Honor I Will be true,
And leave my Fortune to the gods and you.

Enter a Messenger Privately. Mess. Now is the time; be aiding to your Fate;
From the Watchtower, above the Western Gate,
I have discerned the Foe securely lie,
Too proud to fear a beaten Enemy:
Their careless Chiefs to the cool Grottoes run,
The Bowers of Kings, to shade them from the Sun.

Guy. Upon thy life disclose thy news to none;
I Will make the Conquest or the shame my own.

[ Exit Guyomar and Messenger. Enter Odmar. Alib. I read some welcome message
in his Eye,
Prince Odmar comes: I Will see if he will deny.
Odmar I come to tell you pleasing News,
I beg a thing your Brother did refuse.

Odm. The News both pleases me and grieves me too;
For nothing, sure, should be denied to you:
But he was blessed that might commanded be;
You never meant that happiness to me.

Alib. What he refused your kindness might bestow,
But my Commands, perhaps, your burden grow.

Odm. Could I but live till burdensome they prove,
My Life would be immortal as my Love.
Your wish, e're it receive a name I grant.

Alib. It Is to relieve your dying Countries want;
All hopes of succor from your Arms is past,
To save us now you must our Ruin haste;
Give up the Town, and to oblige him more,
The Captive General's liberty restore.

Odm. You speak to try my Love, can you forgive
So soon, to let your Brother's Murderer live?

Alib. Orbellan, though my Brother, did disgrace
With treacherous Deeds, our Mighty Mothers Race;
And to revenge his Blood, so justly spilt,
What is it less then topartake him guilt?
Though my Proud Sister to revenge incline,
I to my Country's good my own resign.

Odm. To save our Lives our Freedom I betray --
-- Yet since I promised it I will obey;
I Will not my Shame nor your Commands dispute:
You shall behold your Empire's absolute.
[ Exit Odmar.
Alib. I should have thanked him for his speedy grant;
And yet I know not how, fit words I want:
Sure I am grown distracted in my mind,
That joy this grant should bring I cannot find:
The one, denying, vexed my Soul before;
And this, obeying, has disturbed me more:
The one, with grief, and slowly did refuse,
The other, in his grant, much haste did use:
-- He used too much -- and granting me so soon,
He has the merit of the gift undone:
Methought with wondrous fase, he swallowed down
His forfeit Honor, to betray the Town:
My inward choice was Guyomar before,
But now his Virtue has confirmed me more --
-- I rave, I rave, for Odmar will obey,
And then my promise must my choice betray.
Fantastic Honor, thou have framed a toil
Thy self, to make thy Love thy Virtues spoil*
[ Exit Alibech.
SCENE III.
A pleasant Grotto discovered: in it a Fountain spouting; round about it
Vasquez, Pizarro, and other Spaniards lying carelessly un-arm'd, and by them
many Indian Women, one of which Sings the following Song. SONG.
Ah fading joy, how quickly art thou past?
Yet me thy ruin haste:
As if the cares of Humane Life were few
We seek out new:
And follow Fate that does too fast pursue.
See how on every bough the Birds express
In their sweet notes their happiness.
They all enjoy, and nothing spare;
But on their Mother Nature lay their care:
Why then should Man, the Lord of all below
Such troubles choose to know
As none of all his Subjects undergo?
Hark, bark, the Waters fall, fall, fall;
And with a Murmuring sound
Dash, dash, upon the ground,
To gentle slumbers call.
After the Song two Spaniards arise and Dance a Saraband with Castanieta's: at
the end of which, Guyomar and his Indian'^ enter, and e're the Spaniards can
recover their Swords, feiz^ them. Guy. Those whom you took without in Triumph
bring,
But see these straight conducted to the King.

Piz. Vasquez, what now remains in these extremes?

Vasq. Only to wake us from our Golden Dreams.

Piz. Since by our shameful conduct, we have lost
Freedom, Wealth, Honor, which we value most,
I wish they would our Lives a Period give:
They Live too long who Happiness outlive.

[ Spaniards are led out. 1 Ind. See, Sir, how quickly your success is spread:
The King comes Marching in the Armies head.

Enter Montezuma, Alibech, Odmar, Discontented. Mont. Now all the gods reward
and bless my Son:
[Embracing. Thou have this day, thy Fathers Youth outdone.

Alib. Just Heaven such Happiness upon him shower,
Till it confess it is will beyond it is power.

Guy. The heavens are kind, the gods propitious be,
I only doubt a Mortal Deity:
I neither Fought for Conquest, nor for Fame,
Your Love alone can recompense my Flame.

Alib. I gave my Love to the most brave in War;
But that the King must Judge.

Mont. -- It Is Guyomar.

[Souldiers shout, A Guyomar, etc. Mont. This day your Nuptials we will
Celebrate;
But guard these haughty Captives till their Fate:
Odmar, this night to keep them be your care,
To morrow for their Sacrifice prepare.

Alib. Blot not your Conquest with your Cruelty.

Mont. Fate says we are not safe unless they Dye:
The Spirit that foretold this happy day,
Bid me use Caution, and avoid delay:
Posterity be juster to my Fame:
Nor call it Murder, when each private Man
In his defense may justly do the same:
But private persons more then Monarchs can:
All weigh our Acts, and what e're seems unjust,
Impute not to Necessity, but Lust.

[ Exeunt Montezuma, Guyomar, and Alibech. Odm. Lost and undone! he had my
Fathers voice,
And Alibech seemed pleased with her new choice:
Alas, it was not new! too late I see
Since one she hated, that it must be me. --
-- I feel a strange Temptation in my will
To do an action, great at once and ill:
Virtue ill treated, from my Soul is fled;
I by Revenge and Love am wholly led:
Yet Conscience would against my rage Rebel --
-- Conscience, the foolish pride of doing well^
Sink Empire, Father Perish, Brother Fall,
Revenge does more then recompense you all.
-- Conduct the Prisoners in --
Spaniards, you see your own deplored Estate:
What dare you do to reconcile your Fate?

Enter Vasquez, Pizarro. Vasq. All that Despair, with Courage joined can do.

Odm. An easy way to Victory I Will show:
When all are Buried in their Sleep or Joy,
I Will give you Arms, Burn, Ravish, and Destroy;
For my one share one Beauty I design,
Engage your Honors that she shall be mine.

Piz. I gladly Swear.

Vasq. -- And I; but I request
That, in return, one who has touched my breast,
Whose name I know not, may be given to me.

Odm. Spaniard it is just; she is yours who e're she be.

Vasq. The night comes on: if Fortune bless the bold
I shall possess the Beauty.

Piz. I the Gold.

[Exeunt Omnes, SCENE IV. A Prison.
Cortez discovered, bound by one Foot, Almeria talking wi^h him. Alm. I come
not now your constancy to prove,
You may believe me when I say I Love.

Cort. You have too well instructed me before,
In your intentions to believe you more.

Alm. I Am justly plagued by this your unbelief,
And am my self the cause of my own grief*
But to beg Love, I cannot stoop so low;
It is enough that you my passion know:
It Is in your choice; Love me, or Love me not,
I have not yet my Brother's Death forgot.

Lays hold on the Dagger. Cort. You Menace me and Court me in a breath:
Your Cupid looks as dreadfully as Death.

Alm. Your hopes, without, are vanished into smoke:
Your Captains taken, and your Armies broke.

Cort. In vain you urge me with my miseries:
When Fortune falls high Courages can rise.
Now should I change my Love, it would appear
Not the effect of gratitude, but fear.

Alm. I Will to the King, and make it my Request,
Or my Command that you may be releast;
And make you Judge, when I have set you free,
Who best deserves your passion, I, or she.

Cort. You tempt my Faith so generous a way,
As without guilt might constancy betray:
But I Am so far from meriting esteem,
That if I Judge, I must my self Condemn;
Yet having given my worthless heart before,
What I must not possess I Will still adore;
Take my devotion then this humbler way;
Devotion is the Love which Heaven we pay.

[Kisses her hand. Enter Cydaria. Cyd. May I believe my Eyes! what do I see!
Is this her Hate to him, his Love to me!
It Is in my Breast she sheaths her Dagger now.
False Man, is this the Faith? is this the Vow?

[To him. Cort. What words, dear Saint, are these I hear you use?
What Faith, what Vows are these which you accuse?

Cyd. More cruel then the Tiger over his spoil;
And falser then the Weeping Crocodile:
Can you add Vanity to Guilt, and take
A Pride to hear the Conquests which you make?
Go publish your Renown, let it be said
You have a Woman, and that Loved, betrayed.

Cort. With what injustice is my Faith accused?
Life, Freedom, Empire, I at once refused;
And would again ten thousand times for you.

Alm. She Will have too great content to find him true;
And therefore since his Love is not for me,
I Will help to make my Rivals misery.
[Aside. Spaniard, I never thought you false before:
[To him. Can you at once two Mistresses adore?
Keep the poor Soul no longer in suspense,
Your change is such as does not need defense.

Cort. Riddles like these I cannot understand!

Alm. Why should you blush? she saw you kiss my hand.

Cyd. Fear not, I will, while your first Love's denied,
Favor your shame, and turn my Eyes aside;
My feeble hopes in her deserts are lost:
I neither can such power nor beauty boast:
I have no tie upon you to be true
But that which loosned yours, my Love to you.

Cort. Could you have heard my words!

Cyd. -- Alas, what needs
To hear your words, when I beheld your deeds?

Cort. What shall I say! the Fate of Love is such,
As still it sees too little or too much.
That act of mine which does your passion move
Was but a mark of my Respect, not Love.

Alm. Vex not your self excuses to prepare:
For one you love not is not worth your care.

Cort. Cruel Almeria take that life you gave;
Since you but worse destroy me, while you save.

Cyd. No, let me dye, and I Will my claim resign;
For while I live, methinks you should be mine.

Cort. The Bloodiest Vengeance which she could pursue,
Would be a triffle to my loss of you.

Cyd. Your change was wise: for had she been denied,
A swift Revenge had followed from her Pride:
You from my gentle Nature had no Fears,
All my Revenge is only in my Tears.

Cort. Can you imagine I so mean could prove,
To save my Life by changing of my Love?

Cyd. Since Death is that which Nat'rally we shun,
You did no more then I, perhaps, had done.

Cort. Make me not doubt, Fair Soul, your constancy;
You would have died for Love, and so would I.

Alm. You may believe him; you have seen it proved.

Cort. Can I not gain belief how I have Loved?
What can thy ends, Inhumane Creature be:
Can he who killed thy Brother live for thee?

[A noise of Closhing of Swords. [Vasquez within, Indians against him. Vasq.
Yield Slaves or dye; our Swords shall force our way.

[within. Ind. We cannot, though o'^e-powr'd, our trust betray.

[within. Cort. It Is Vasquez voice, he brings me Liberty,

Vasq. In spite of Fate I Will set my General Free:
[within. Now Victory for us, the Town's our own.

Alm. All-hopes of safety and of love are gone:
As when some dreadful Thunderclap is nigh,
The winged Fire shoots swiftly through the Sky,
Strikes and Consumes e're scarce it does appear,
And by the sudden ill, prevents the fear:
Such is my state in this amazing woe;
It leaves no power to think, much less to do:
-- But shall my Rival Live, shall she enjoy
That Love in Peace I labored to destroy?

[Aside. Cort. Her looks grow black as a Tempestuous wind;
Some raging Thoughts are rolling in her mind.

Alm. Rival, I must your jealous Thoughts remove,
You shall, hereafter, be at rest for Love.

Cyd. Now you are kind.

Alm. -- He whom you Love is true*
But he shall never be possessed by you.

[Draws her Dagger, and runs toward her. Cort. Hold, hold, ah Barbarous Woman!
fly, oh fly!

Cyd. Ah pity, pity, is no succor nigh!

Cort. Run, run behind me, there you may be sure*
While I have Life I will your Life secure*

[ Cydaria gets behind him. Alm. On him or thee light Vengeance any where:
[She stabs and hurts him. -- What have I done? I see his blood appear!

Cyd. It Streams, it streams from every Vital part:
Was there no way but this to find his Heart?

Alm. Ah! Cursed Woman, what was my design!
At least this Weapon both our Blood shall join.

[Goes to stab her self, and being within his reach he snatches the Dagger.
Cort. Now neither Life nor Death are in your power.

Alm. Then sullenly I Will wait my Fatal hour.

Enter Vasquez and Pizarro with drawn Swords. Vasq. He Lives, he Lives.

Cort. -- Unfetter me with speed;
Vasquez, I see you troubled that I bleed:
But it is not deep, our Army I can head.

Vasq. You to a certain Victory are led;
Your Men all Armed, stand silently within*
I with your Freedom, did the work begin.

Piz. What Friends we have, and how we came so strong,
We Will softly tell you as we March along.

Cort. In this safe place let me secure your fear:
[ To Cydaria* No Clashing Swords, no Noise can enter here.
Amidst our Arms as quiet you shall be
As Halcyons Brooding on a Winter Sea.

Cyd. Leave me not here alone, and full of fright,
Amidst the Terrors of a Dreadful night:
You judge, alas, my Courage by your own,
I never durst in Darkness be alone:
I beg, I throw me humbly at your Feet. --

Cort. You must not go where you may dangers meet.
The unruly Sword will no distinction make:
And Beauty will not there give Wounds but take.

Alm. Then stay and take me with you; though to be
A Slave to wait upon your Victory.
My Heart unmoved, can Noise and Horror bear:
Parting from you is all the Death I fear.

Cort. Almeria, '^is enough I leave you free:
You neither must stay here, nor go with me.

Alm. Then take my Life, that will my rest restore:
It Is all I ask for saving yours before.

Cort. That were a Barbarous return of Love.

Alm. Yet leaving it you more inhumane prove:
In both extremes I some relief should find:
Oh either hate me more, or be more kind.

Cort. Life of my Soul do not my absence Mourn:
But cheer thy Heart in hopes of my return.
[ To Cydaria. Thy Noble Father's Life shall be my care;
And both thy Brothers I Am obliged to spare.

Cyd. F^te makes you Deaf while I in vain implore,
My Heart forebodes I never shall see you more:
I have but one request, when I am Dead
Let not my Rival to your Love succeed.

Cort. Fate will be kinder then your Fears foretell;
Farewell my Dear.

Cyd. -- A long and last farewell:
-- So eager to employ the cruel Sword;
Can you not one, not one last look afford!

Cort. ^ melt to Womanish Tears, and if I stay,
I find my Love my Courage will betray;
Yo^ Tower will keep you safe, but be so kind
To your own Life that none may entrance find.

Cyd. Then lead me there --
[He leads her. For this one Minute of your Company,
I go methinks, with some content to Dye.

[ Exeunt Cortez, Vasquez, Pizarro, Cydaria* Alm. Farewell, O too much Loved,
since Loved in vain!
[Sola. What Dismal Fortune does for me remain!
Night and Despair my Fatal Footsteps guide;
That Chance may give the Death which he denied.
[Exit.
[Cortez, Vasquez, Pizarro, and Spaniards, return again. Cort. All I hold dear,
I trust to your defense;
[ To Pizarro. ^uard her, and on your Life, remove not hence.

[ Exeunt Cortez, and Vasquez. Piz. I Will venture that --
The gods are good; I Will leave her to their care,
Steal from my Post, and in the Plunder share.
[Exit.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
The Chamber Royal, an Indian Hamock discovered in it. Enter Odmar with
soldiers, Guyomar, Alibech, bound. Odm. FAte is more just then you to my
desert,
And in this Act you blame, Heaven takes my part.

Guy. Can there be Gods, and no Revenge provide?

Odm. The gods are ever of the Conquering side:
She Is now my Queen, the Spaniards have agreed
I to my Fathers Empire shall succeed.

Alib. How much I Crowns contemn I let thee see,
Choosing the younger and refusing thee.

Guy. Were she Ambitious, she would disdain to own
The Pageant Pomp of such a Servile Throne:
A Throne which thou by Parri^ide do gain,
And by m^st base submission must retain.

Alib. I L^v'd thee not before, but, Odmar, know
That now I hate thee and despise thee too.

Odm. With too much Violence you Crimes pursue,
Which if I Acted 'twas for Love of you:
This, if it teach not Love, may teach you Fear:
I brought not Sin so far, to stop it here.
Death in a Lovers Mouth, would sound but ill:
But know, I either must enjoy, or Kill.

Alib. Bestow, base Man, thy idle Threats elsewhere:
My Mothers Daughter knows not how to Fear.
Since, Guyomar, I must not be thy Bride,
Death shall enjoy what is to thee denied.

Odm. Then t^ke thy wish. --

Guy. Hold, Odmar, hold: --
My right in Alibech I will resign;
Rather then see her Dye, I Will see her thine.

Alib. In vain thou would resign, for I will be,
Even when thou leave me, Constant still to thee:
That shall not save my Life: will thou appear
Fearful for her who for her self wants Fear?

Odm. Her Love to him shows me a surer way:
I by her Love, her Virtue must betray:
[Aside. Since, Alibech, you are so true a Wife;
[To her. It Is in your power to save your Husbands Life:
The gods, by me, your Love and Virtue try:
For both will suffer if you let him Dye.

Alib. I never can believe you will proceed
To such a Black and Execrable Deed.

Odm. I only threatened you; but could not prove
So much a Fool to Murder what I Love:
But in his Death, I some advantage see:
Worse then it is I Am sure it cannot be.
If you consent, you with that gentle Breath
Preserve his Life: I Will not behold his Death.

[Holds his Sword to his breast. Alib. What shall I do!

Guy. -- What are your thoughts at strife
About a ransom to preserve my Life?
Though to save yours I did my Interest give,
Think not when you were his I meant to Live.

Alib. O let him be preserved by any way:
But name not the soul price that I must pay.

[ To Odmar. Odm. You would and would not, I Will no longer stay.

[Offers again to Kill him. Alib. I yield, I yield, but yet e're I am ill,
An innocent desire I would fulfill:
With Guyomar I one Chaste Kiss would leave,
The first and last he ever can receive.

Odm. Have what you ask: that Minute you agree
To my desires, your Husband shall be free.

[They unbind her, she goes to her Husband. Guy. No, Alibech, we never must
embrace:
He turns from her. Your guilty kindness why do you mis-place?
It Is meant to him, he is your private Choice:
I was made yours but by the public Voice.
And now you leave me with a poor pretense,
That your ill Act is for my life's defense.

Alib. Since there remains no other means to try,
Think I am false; I cannot see you dye.

Guy. To give for me both Life and Honor too
Is more, perhaps, then I could give for you.
You have done much to cure my Jealousy,
But cannot perfect it unless both Dye:
For since both cannot Live, who stays behind
Must think the other fearful, or unkind.

Alib. I never could propose that Death you choose;
But am like you, too jealous to refuse.
[Embracing him. Together dying, we together show
That both did pay that Faith that both did owe.

Odm. It then remains I act my own design:
Have you your wills, but I will first have mine.
Assist me Soldiers. --

[They go to bind her, she cries out. Enter Vasquez, two Spaniards. Vasq. Hold,
Odmar, hold, I come in happy time
To hinder my Misfortune, and your Crime.

Odm. You ill return the kindness I have shown.

Vasq. Indian, I say desist.

Odm. -- Spaniard, be gone.

Vasq. This Lady I did for my self design:
Dare you attempt her Honor who is mine?

Odm. Your'e much mistaken; this is she whom I
Did with my Father's loss, and Countries buy:
She whom your promise did to me convey,
When all things else were made your common prey*

Vasq. That promise made excepted one for me;
One whom I still reserved, and this is she.

Odm. This is not she, you cannot be so base*

Vasq. I Love too deeply to mistake the Face:
The Vanquished must receive the Victors Laws.

Odm. If I am Vanquished I my self am Cause.

Vasq. Then thank your self for what you undergo.

Odm. Thus Lawless Might does Justice overthrow.

Vasq. Traitors, like you, should never Justice name.

Odm. You owe your Triumphs to that Traitors shame.
But to your General I Will my right refer.

Vasq. He never will protect a Ravisher:
His Generous Heart will soon decide our strife;
He to your Brother will restore his Wife.
It rests we two our claim in Combattry,
And that with this fair prize, the Victor fly.

Odm. Make haste,
I cannot suffer to be long perplexed:
Conquest is my first wish, and Death my next.

[They Fight, the Spaniards and Indians Fight. Alib. The gods the Wicked by
themselves overthrow:
All Fight against us now and for us too!

[Vnbinds her Husband. [The two Spaniards and three Indians kill each other,
Vasquez Kills Odmar, Guyomar runs to his Brothers Sword. Vasq. Now you are
mine; my greatest Foe is slain.

[ To Alibech. Guy. A greater still to Vanquish does remain.

Vasq. Another yet!
The Wounds I make but sow new Enemies:
Which from their Blood, like Earth-born-brethren rise.

Guy. Spaniard take breath: some respit I Will afford,
My Cause is more advantage then your Sword.

Vasq. Thou art so brave -- could it with Honor be,
I Would seek thy Friendship, more then Victory.

Guy. Friendship with him whose hand did Odmar kill!
Base as he was, he was my Brother still:
And since his Blood has washed away his guilt,
Nature asks thine for that which thou have spilt.

[They Fight a little and breath, Alibech takes up a Sword and comes on. Alib.
My weakness may help something in the strife.

Guy. Kill not my Honor to preserve my Life:
[Staying her. Rather then by thy aid I Will Conquest gain,
Without defense I poorly will be slain.

[She goes back, they Fight again, Vasquez falls. Guy. Now, Spaniard, beg thy
Life and thou shall live.

Vasq. I scorn to ask thee what thou can not give:
My breath goes out, and I am now no more;
Yet her I Loved, in Death I will adore.

[Dyes. Guy. Come, Alibech, let us from hence remove:
This is a night of Horror, not of Love.
From every part I hear a dreadful noise:
The Vanquished Crying and the Victor's Joys.
I Will to my Father's aid and Countries fly;
And succor both, or in their Ruin Dye.

[Exeunt SCENE II. A Prison.
Montezuma, Indian High Priest bound, Pizarro, Spaniards with Swords drawn, a
Christian Priest. Piz. Thou have not yet discovered all thy store.

Mont. I neither can nor will discover more:
The gods will Punish you, if they be Just;
The gods will Plague your Sacrilegious Lust.

Chr. Priest. Mark how this impious Heathen justifies
His own false gods, and our true God denies:
How wickedly he has refused his wealth,
And hid his Gold, from Christian hands, by stealth:
Down with him, Kill him, merit Heaven thereby.

Ind. High Pr. Can Heaven be Author of such Cruelty?

Piz. Since neither threats nor kindness will prevail,
We must by other means your minds assail;
Fasten the Engines; stretch 'um at their length,
And pull the straightened Cords with all your strength.

[They fasten them to the rack, and then pull them. Mont. The gods, who made me
once a King, shall know
I still am worthy to continue so:
Though now the subject of your Tyranny,
I Will Plague you worse then you can punish me.
Know I have Gold, which you shall never find,
No Pains, no Tortures shall unlock my Mind.

Chr. Pr. Pull harder yet; he does not feel the rack.

Mont. Pull till my Veins break, and my Sinews crack.

Ind. High Pr. When will you end your Barbarous Cruelty?
I beg not to escape, I beg to Dye.

Mont. Shame on thy Priesthood that such prayers can bring:
Is it not brave to suffer with thy King?
When Monarchs suffer, gods themselves bear part;
Then well may thou, who but my Vassal art:
I charge thee dare not groan, nor show one sign,
Thou at thy Torments do the least repine.

Ind. High. P. You took an Oath when you received your Crown,
The Heavens should pour their usual Blessings down;
The Sun should shine, the Earth it is fruits produce,
And naught be wanting to your Subjects use:
Yet we with Famine were oppressed, and now
Must to the yoke of Cruel Masters bow.

Mont. If those above, who made the World, could be
Forgetful of it, why then blam'st thou me?

Chr. Pr. Those Pains, O Prince, thou suffer now are light
Compared to those, which when thy Soul takes flight,
Immortal, endless, thou must then endure:
Which Death begins, and Time can never cure.

Mont. Thou art deceived: for whensoe're I Dye,
The Sun my Father bears my Soul on high:
He lets me down a Beam, and mounted there,
He draws it back, and pulls me through the Air:
I in the Eastern parts, and rising Sky,
You in Heaven's downfall, and the West must lie.

Chr. Pr. Fond man, by Heathen Ignorance mis^ed,
Thy Soul destroying when thy Body's Dead:
Change yet thy Faith, and buy Eternal rest.

Ind. High Pr. Dye in your own: for our Belief is best*

Mont. In seeking happiness you both agree,
But in the search, the paths so different be,
That all Religions with each other Fight,
While only one can lead us in the Right.
But till that one has some more certain mark,
Poor humane kind must wander in the dark;
And suffer pains, eternally below,
For that, which here, we cannot come to know.

Chr. Pr. That which we worship, and which you believe,
From Natures common hand we both receive:
All under various names, Adore and Love
One power Immense, which ever rules above.
Vice to abhor, and Virtue to pursue,
Is both believed and taught by us and you:
But here our Worship takes another way.

Mont. Where both agree it is there most safe to stay:
For what is more vain then Public Light to shun,
And set up Tapers while we see the Sun?

Chr. Pr. Though Nature teaches whom we should Adore*
By Heavenly Beams we still discover more.

Mont. Or this must be enough, or to Mankind
One equal way to Bliss is not designed.
For though some more may know, and some know less,
Yet all must know enough for happiness.

Chr. Pr. If in this middle way you still pretend
To stay, your Journey never will have end.

Mont. However, 'twas better in the midst to stay,
Then wander farther in uncertain way.

Chr. Pr. But we by Martyrdom our Faith avow.

Mont. You do not more then I for ours do now.
To prove Religion true --
If either Wit or Sufferings would suffice,
All Faiths afford the Constant and the Wise:
And yet even they, by Education swayed,
In Age defend what Infancy obeyed.

Chr. Pr.. Since Age by erring ^hild-hood is misled,
Refer your self to our Un-erring Head.

Mont. Man and not err! what reason can you give?

Chr. Pr. Renounce that carnal reason, and believe.

Mont. The Light of Nature should I thus betray,
'Twere to wink hard that I might see the day.

Chr. Pr. Condemn not yet the way you do not know;
I Will make your reason judge what way to go.

Mont. It Is much too late for me new ways to take,
Who have but one short step of life to make.

Piz. Increase their Pains, the Cords are yet too slack.

Chr. Pr.. I must by force, convert him on the Rack.

Ind. High Pr. I faint away, and find I can no more:
Give leave, O King, I may reveal thy store,
And free my self from pains I cannot bear.

Mont. Think thou I lie on Beds of Roses here,
Or in a Wanton Bath stretched at my ease?
Dye, Slave, and with thee, dye such thoughts as these.

[High Priest turns aside and dies* Enter Cortez attended by Spaniards, he
speaks entering. Cort. On pain of death kill none but those that fight;
I much repent me of this bloody night:
Slaughter grows murder when it goes too far,
And makes a Massacre what was a War:
Sheath all your weapons and in silence move,
It Is sacred here to Beauty and to Love.
Ha --

[ Sees Mo^tezuma. Cort. What dismal sight is this, which takes from me
All the delight that waits on Victory!
[Runs to take him off the Rack. Make haste: how now, Religion do you Frown?
Haste holy Avarice, and help him down.
Ah Father, Father, what do I endure
[ Embracing Montezuma. To see these Wounds my pity cannot Cure!

Mont. Am I so low that you should pity bring,
And give an Infants Comfort to a King?
Ask these if I have once unmanly groaned;
Or ought have done deserving to be moan'd*

Cort. Did I not charge thou should not stir from hence?
[ To Pizarro. But Martial Law shall punish thy offense.
And you*
[To the Chr. Priest. Who sawcily, teach Monarchs to obey,
And the wide World in narrow Cloisters sway;
Set up by Kings as humble aids of power,
You that which bred you, Viper-like devour,
You Enemies of Crowns.

Chr. Pr. -- Come, let us away,
We but provoke his fury by our stay.

Cort. If this go free, farewell that discipline
Which did in Spanish Camps severely shine:
Accursed Gold, it is thou have caused these crimes;
Thou turn'st our Steel against thy Parent Climes!
And into Spain wilt fatally be brought,
Since with the price of Blood thou here art bought.

[ Exeunt Priest and Pizarro. [Cortez kneels by Montezuma and weeps. Cort. Can
you forget those Crimes they did commit?

Mont. I Will do what for my dignity it fit:
Rise, Sir, I Am satisfied the fault was thei^s:
Trust me you make me weep to see your Tears:
Must I cheer you?

Cort. Ah Heavens!

Mont. -- You're much to blame;
Your grief is cruel, for it shows my shame,
Does my lost Crown to my remembrance bring:
But weep not, you and I Will be still a King.
You have forgot that I your Death designed,
To satisfy the Proud Almeria's mind:
You, who preserved my Life, I doomed to Dye.

Cort. Your Love did that, and not your Cruelty.

Enter a Spaniard. Span. Prince Guyomar the Combat still maintains,
Ou^ Men retreat, and he their ground regains:
But once encouraged by our Generals sight,
We boldly should renew the doubtful Fight.

Cort. Remove not hence, you shall not long attend:
To Montezuma. I Will aid my Soldiers, yet preserve my Friend.

Mont. Excellent Man!
[ Exit Cortez, etc. But I, by living, poorly take the way
To injure Goodness, which I cannot pay.

Enter Almeria. Alm. Ruin and Death run Armed through every Street;
And yet that Fate I seek I cannot meet:
What guards Misfortunes are!
Such is the infectious strength of Misery,
Death that strikes all, yet seems afraid of me.

Mont. Almeria's here: oh turn away your Face!
Must you be witness too of my disgrace?

Alm. I am not that Almeria whom you knew,
But want that pity I denied to you:
Your Conqueror, alas, has Vanquished me;
But he refuses his own Victory:
While all are Captives, in your Conquered State,
I find a wretched freedom in his hate.

Mont. Could thou thy Love on one that scorned thee lose?
He saw not with my Eyes who could refuse:
Him that could prove so much unkind to thee,
I never will suffer to be kind to me.

Alm. I am content in Death to share your Fate;
And dye for him I love with him I hate.

Mont. What shall I do in this perplexing straight!
My tortured Limbs refuse to bear my weight:
Endeavoring to walk and not being able. I cannot go to Death to set me free:
Death must be kind, and come himself to me.

Alm. I Have thought upon it: I have Affairs below,
[Alm. musing. Which I must needs dispatch before I go:
Sir, I have found a place, where you may be,
[To him. (Though not preserved) yet like a King dye free:
The General left your Daughter in the Tower,
We may a while resist the Spaniards power,
If Guyomar prevail, --

Mont. -- Haste then, and call;
She Will hear your Voice, and answer from the Wall.

Alm. My voice she knows and fears, but use your own,
And to gain entrance, feign you are alone.

[Almeria steps behind. Mont. Cydaria!

Alm. -- Louder.

Mont. -- Daughter!

Alm. -- Louder yet.

Mont. Thou can not, sure, thy Father's voice forget.

[He knocks at the door, at last Cydaria looks over the Zoty. Cyd. Since my
Love went, I have been frighted so,
With Dismal Groans, and Noyses from below:
I durst not send my Eyes abroad, for fear
Of seeing dangers, which I yet but hear.

Mont. Cydaria!

Cyd. -- Sure it is my Father calls.

Mont. -- Dear Child make haste;
All hope of succor, but from thee is past:
As on the sand the frighted Traveller
Sees the high Sea come rolling from a far,
The Land grow short, he mends his weary pace,
While Death behind him covers all the place:
So I by swi^t misfortunes am (...)
Which on each oth^^ (...) ^ike Waves renewed,

Cyd. Are you alone

Mont. -- I am.

Cyd. -- I Will strait descend;
Heaven did you here for both our safeties send.

[ Cydaria descends and opens the door, Almeria rushes betwixt with Montezuma.
Cyd. Almeria here! then I am lost again.

[Both thrust. Alm. Yield to my strength, you struggle but in vain:
Make haste and shut, our Enemies appear.

[Cortez and Spaniards appear at the other end. Cyd. Then do you enter, and let
me stay here.

[ As she speaks, Almeria oevr-powers her* thrusts her in, and shuts. Cyd. Oh
Heavens!

Cort. Sure I both heard her voice and saw her face,
She Is like a Vision, vanished from the place:
Too late I find my absence was too long;
My hopes grow sickly, and my fears grow strong.

[ He knocks a little, then Montezuma, Cydaria, Almeria appear above. Alm. Look
up, look up, and see if you can know
Those whom, in vain, you think to find below.

Cyd. Look up and see Cydaria's lost estate.

Mont. And cast one look on Montezuma's Fate.

Cort. Speak not such dismal words as wound my Ear:
Nor name Death to me when Cydaria's there.
Despair not, Sir, who knows but Conquering Spain
May part of what you lost restore again?

Mont. No, Spaniard, know, he who to Empire born,
Lives to be less, deserves the Victors scorn:
Kings and their Crowns have but one Destiny:
Power is their Life, when that expires they dye.

Cyd. What Dreadful Words are these!

Mont. -- Name Life no more;
It Is now a Torture worse then all I bore:
I Will not be bribed to suffer Life, but dye
In spite of your mistaken Clemency.
I was your Slave, and I was used like one;
The Shame continues when the Pain is gone:
But I Am a King while this is in my Hand, --
[His Sword. He wants no Subjects who can Death Command:
You should have tied him up, to have Conquered me,
But he is still mine, and thus he sets me free.

[Stabs himself. Cyd. Oh my dear Father!

Cort. -- Haste, break open the door.
[The Soldiers break open the first door, and g^^in. We shall have time enough
to take our way,
'Ere any can our Fatal Journey stay.

Mont. Already mine is past: O powers divine
Take my last thanks; no longer I repine:
I might have lived my own mishaps to Mourn,
While some would Pity me, but more would Scorn!
For Pity only on fresh Objects stays:
But with the tedious sight of Woes decays.
Still less and less my boiling Spirits flow;
And I grow stiff as cooling Metals do:
Farewell Almeria. --

[Dyes. Cyd. -- He Is gone, he is gone,
And leaves poor me defenseless here alone.

Alm. You shall not long be so: prepare to Dye,
That you may bear your Father Company.

Cyd. Oh name not Death to me; you fright me so,
That with the Fear I shall prevent the blow:
I know your Mercy's more, then to destroy
A thing so young, so Innocent, as I.

Cort. Whence can proceed thy cruel thirst of Blood,
Ah Barbarous Woman? Woman! that is too good,
Too mild for thee: there is pity in that name,
But thou have lost thy pity, with thy shame.

Alm. Your cruel words have pierced me to the Heart;
But on my Rival, I Will revenge my smart.

Cort. Oh stay your hand! and to redeem my fault,
I Will speak the Kindest words --
That Tongue e're uttered, or that Heart e're thought.
Dear -- Lovely -- Sweet --

Alm. These words offend me more,
You act your kindness on Cydaria's score.

Cyd. For his dear sake let me my Life receive.

Alm. Fool, for his sake alone you must not Live:
Revenge is now my Joy; he is not for me,
And I Will make sure he never shall be for thee.

Cyd. But what is my Crime?

Alm. -- It Is Loving where I Love.

Cyd. Your own example does my act approve.

Alm. It Is such a Fault I never can forgive.

Cyd. How can I mend, unless you let me live?
I yet am Tender, Young, and full of Fear,
And dare not Dye, but fain would tarry here.

Cort. If Blood you seek, I will my own resign:
O (...) her Life, and in exchange, take mine.

(...). The Love you show but hastes her Death the more.

Cort. I Will run, and help to force the inner door.

[Is going in haste. Alm. Stay, Spaniard, stay, depart not from my Eyes:
That moment that I lose your sight, she dies.
To look on you I Will grant a short Reprieve.

Cort. O make your gift more full, and let her Live:
I dare not go; and yet how da^e I stay!
Her I would save, I murder either way.

Cyd. Can you be so hard-hearted, to destroy
My ripening hopes, that are so nea^ to joy?
I just approach to all I would possess:
Death only stands 'twixt me and happiness.

Alm. Your Father, with his Life, has lost his Thro^e:
Your Countries Freedom and Renown is gone.
Honor requires your Death: you must obey.

Cyd. Do you dye first; and show me then the way:

Alm. Should you not follow* my Revenge were lost.

Cyd. Then rise again, and Fright me with your Ghost.

Alm. I will not trust to that, since Death I choose,
I Will not leave you that Life which I (...):
If Death's a pain 'twill not (...) me;
And if it is nothing, it is no more to thee.
But hark! the noise increases from behind,
They Are near, and may prevent what I designed:
Take, there is a Rival's gi^t. --

[Stabs her. Cort. Perdition (...) thee for so Black a Deed.

Alm. Blame not an Act that did from Love proceed:
I Will thus Revenge thee with this Fatal blow;
[Stabs her self. Stand fair, and let my Heart-blood on the flow.

Cyd. Stay Life, and keep me in the cheerful Light;
Death is too Black, and dwells in too much Night.
Thou leave me, Life, but Love supplies thy part,
And keeps me warm by ling^ing in my Heart:
Yet dying for him, I thy claim remove;
How dear it costs to Conquer in my Love!
Now strike: that thought I hope, will arm my Breast.

Alm. Ah, with what differing passions am I pressed!

Cyd. Death, when far off, did terrible appear;
But looks less dreadful as he comes more near.

Alm. O Rival, I have lost the power to kill,
Strength (...) forsook my Arm, and Rage my will:
I must surmount that Love which thou have shown:
Dying for him is due to me alone.
Thy weakness shall not boast the Victory,
Now thou shall live, and dead I Will Conquer thee:
Soldiers assist me down.

[Exeunt from above l^d by Soldiers, and enter both led by Cortez. Cort. Is
there no dang^r then?

[ To Cydaria. Cyd. -- You need not fear
My Wound, I cannot dye when you are ne^r.

Cort. You for my sake, Life to Cydaria give:
[ To Almeria. And I could dye for you, if you might Live.

Alm. Enough, I dye content, now you are kind;
Killed in my Limbs, reviving in my Mind:
Come near, Cydaria, and forgive my Crime.
[Cydaria starts back. You need not fear my rage a second time:
I Will bathe your Wounds in Tears for my Offense:
That Hand which made it makes this Recompense.
[Ready to join their hands. I would have joined you, but my Heart's too high:
You will, too soon, possess him when I dye.

Cort. She Faints, O softly set her down.

Alm. -- It Is past!
In thy Loved Bosom let me breathe my last.
Here in this one short Moment that I Live,
I have what e're the longest Life could give. --

[Dyes. Cort. Farewell, thou Generous Maid: even Victory
Glad as it is, must lend some Tears to thee:
Many I dare not shed, lest you believe --
[ To Cydaria. I Joy in you less then for her I Grieve.

Cyd. But are you sure she is dead?
I must embrace you fast, before I know
Whether my Life be yet secure or no:
Some other hour I will to Tears allow;
But having you, can show no sorrow now.

Enter Guyomar and Alibech bound with Soldiers. Cort. Prince Guyomar in bonds!
O Friendship's shame!
It makes me blush to own a Victors name.

[ Vnbinds him, Cydaria, Alibech. Cyd. See, Alibech, Almeria lies there:
But do not think 'twas I that Murdered her.

[Alibech kneels and Kisses her Dead sister Cort. Live, and enjoy more then
your Conqueror:
To Guyomar. Take all my Love, and share in all my power.

Guy. Think me not proudly rude, if I forsake
Those Gifts I cannot with my Honor take:
I for my Country Fought, and would again,
Had I yet left a Country to maintain:
But since the Gods decreed it otherwise,
I never will on its dear Ruins rise.

Alib. Of all your Goodness leaves to our dispose,
Our Liberty's the only gift we choose:
Absence alone can make our Sorrows less;
And not to see what we can never redress.

Guy. Northward, beyond the Mountains we will go,
Where Rocks lie covered with Eternal Snow;
Thin Herbage in the Plains, and Fruitless Fields,
The Sand no Gold, the Mine no Silver yields:
There Love and Freedom we will in Peace enjoy;
No Spaniards will that Colony destroy.
We to our selves will all our wishes grant;
And nothing coveting, can nothing want.

Cort. First your Great Father's Funeral Pomp provide:
That done, in Peace your Generous Exiles guide.
While I loud thanks pay to the powers above,
Thus doubly Blessed, with Conquest, and with Love.

[Exeunt* FINIS.
EPILOGUE BY A Mercury.
TO all and singular in this full meeting,
Ladies and Gallants, Phoebus sends me greeting.
To all his Sons by what e're Title known,
Whether of Court, of Coffee-house, or Town;
From his most mighty Sons, whose confidence
Is placed in lofty sound, and humble sense,
Even to his little Infants of the Time
That Write new Songs, and trust in Tune and Rhyme.
Be It known that Phoebus (being daily grieved
To see good Plays condemned, and bad received,)
Ordains your judgment upon every Cause,
Henceforth be limited by wholesome Laws.
He first thinks fit no Sonnettier advance
His censure, farther then the Song or Dance.
Your Wit Burlesque may one step higher climb,
And in his sphere may judge all Doggrel Rhyme:
All proves, and moves, and Loves, and Honors too:
All that appears high sense, and scarce is low.
As for the Coffee-wits he says not much,
Their proper business is to Damn the Dutch*
For the great Dons of Wit --
Phoebus gives them full privilege alone
To Damn all others, and cry up their own.
Last, for the Ladies, it is Apollo's will,
They should have power to save, but not to kill:
For Love and He long since have thought it fit,
Wit live by Beauty, Beauty reign by Wit.

