A POEM UPON THE DEATH OF His Late Highness, OLIVER, Lord Protector OF ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.

Written by Mr. Dryden.

LONDON, Printed for William Wilson; and are to be sold in Well-Yard, near
Little St. Bartholomew's Hospital, 1659.

HEROIC STANZA'S, Consecrated to the Memory of His HIGHNESS, OLIVER, Late Lord
PROTECTOR OF THIS COMMONWEALTH, etc. Written after the Celebrating of his
Funeral.
I.
AND now it is time; for their officious haste,
Who would before have born him to the Sky,
Like eager Romans, ever all Rites were past,
Did let too soon the sacred Eagle fly.
II.
Though our best Notes are Treason to his Fame,
Joined with the loud Applause of public Voice;
Since Heaven, what Praise we offer to his Name,
Has rendered too Authentic by its Choice.
III.
Though in his Praise no Arts can liberal be,
Since they, whose Muses have the highest flown,
Add not to his Immortal Memory;
But do an Act of Friendship to their own.
IV.
Yet it is our Duty, and our Interest too,
Such Monuments as we can build, to raise;
Lest all the World prevent what we should do,
And claim a Title in him by their Praise.
V.
How shall I then begin, or where conclude,
To draw a Fame so truly Circular?
For in a Round, what Order can be showed,
Where all the Parts so equal perfect are?
VI.
His Grandeur he derived from Heaven alone,
For he was great ever Fortune made him so;
And Wars, like Mists that rise against the Sun,
Made him but greater seem, not greater grow.
VII.
No borrowed Bays his Temples did adorn,
But to our Crown he did fresh Jewels bring;
Nor was his Virtue poisoned, soon as born,
With the too early Thoughts of being King.
VIII.
Fortune (that easy Mistress of the Young,
But to her ancient Servants coy and hard)
Him, at that Age, her Favorites ranked among,
When she her best-lov'd Pompey did discard.
IX.
He, private, marked the Faults of others Sway,
And set as Sea-marks for himself to shun;
Not like rash Monarchs, who their Youth betray,
By Acts their Age too late would wish undone.
X.
And yet Dominion was not his Design;
We owe that Blessing not to him, but Heaven,
Which to fair Acts unsought Rewards did join,
Rewards that less to him, than us, were given.
XI.
Our former Chiefs, like Sticklers of the War,
First sought t'inflame the Parties, then to poise:
The Quarrel loved, but did the Cause abhor;
And did not strike to hurt, but make a noise.
XII.
War, our Consumption, was their gainful Trade;
We inward bled, whilst they prolonged our Pain;
He fought to end our Fighting, and assayed
To stench the Blood by breathing of the Vein.
XIII.
Swift and resistless through the Land he passed,
Like that bold Greek, who did the East subdue;
And made to Battles such Heroic Haste,
As if on Wings of Victory he flew.
XIV.
He fought secure of Fortune, as of Fame;
Till by new Maps, the Island might be shown,
Of Conquests which he strewn wherever he came,
Thick as the Galaxy with Stars are sown.
XV.
His Palms, tho under Weights they did not stand,
Still thrived; no Winter could his Laurels fade:
Heaven in his Portraict showed a Work-man's Hand,
And drew it perfect, yet without a Shade.
XVI.
Peace was the Prize of all his Toil and Care,
Which War had banished, and did now restore:
Bolognia's Walls thus mounted in the Air,
To seat themselves more surely than before.
XVII.
Her Safety, rescued Ireland, to him owes;
And treacherous Scotland, to no Interest true,
Yet blessed that Fate which did his Arms dispose,
Her Land to civilize, as to subdue.
XVIII.
Nor was he like those Stars which only shine,
When to pale Mariners they Storms portend:
He had his calmer Influence, and his Mien
Did Love and Majesty together blend.
XIX.
It Is true, his Countenance did imprint an Awe,
And naturally all Souls to his did bow;
As Wands of Divination downward draw,
And point to Beds where Sovereign Gold does grow.
XX.
When past all Offerings to Pheretrian Jove,
He Mars deposed, and Arms to Gowns made yield;
Successful Counsels did him soon approve,
As fit for close Intrigues as open Field.
XXI.
To suppliant Holland he vouchsafed a Peace,
Our once bold Rival in the British Main,
Now tamely glad her unjust Claim to cease,
And buy our Friendship with her Idol, Gain.
XXII.
Fame of th'asserted Sea, through Europe blown,
Made France and Spain ambitious of his Love;
Each knew that Side must conquer, he would own;
And for him fiercely, as for Empire, strove.
XXIII.
No sooner was the French-Man's Cause embraced,
Than the light Monsieur the grave Don out-weigh'd:
His Fortune turned the Scale, where ever 'twas cast,
Tho Indian Mines were in the other laid.
XXIV.
When absent, yet we conquered in his Right;
For tho some meaner Artist's Skill were shown,
In mingling Colors, or in placing Light;
Yet still the fair Designment was his own.
XXV.
For from all Tempers he could Service draw;
The Worth of each, with its Alloy, he knew;
And, as the Confident of Nature, saw
How she Complections did divide, and brew.
XXVI.
Or he their single Virtues did survey,
By Intuition, in his own large Breast,
Where all the rich Idea's of them lay,
That were the Rule and Measure to the rest.
XXVII.
When such Heroic Virtue Heaven sets out,
The Stars, like Commons, sullenly obey;
Because it drains them, when it comes about;
And therefore is a Tax they seldom pay.
XXVIII.
From this high Spring, our Foreign Conquests flow,
Which yet more glorious Triumphs do portend;
Since their Commencement to his Arms they owe,
If Springs as high as Fountains may ascend.
XXIX.
He made us Freemen of the Continent,
Whom Nature did like Captives treat before:
To nobler Preys the English Lion sent,
And taught him first in Belgian Walks to roar.
XXX.
That old unquestioned Pirate of the Land,
Proud Rome, with Dread, the Fate of Dunkirk heard;
And trembling, wished behind more Alps to stand,
Although an Alexander were her Guard.
XXXI.
By his Command we boldly crossed the Line,
And bravely fought where Southern Stars arise:
We traced the far-fetched Gold unto the Mine,
And that which bribed our Fathers, made our Prize.
XXXII.
Such was our Prince, yet owned a Soul above
The highest Acts it could produce to show:
Thus poor Mechanic Arts in Public move,
Whilst the deep Secrets beyond Practice go.
XXXIII.
Nor died he when his Ebbing Fame went less,
But when fresh Laurels courted him to live:
He seemed but to prevent some new Success,
As if above what Triumphs Earth could give.
XXXIV.
His latest Victories still thickest came,
As near the Center, Motion does increase;
Till he, pressed down by his own weighty Name,
Did, like the Vestal, under Spoils decease.
XXXV.
But first, the Ocean, as a Tribute, sent
That Giant-Prince of all her Watery Herd;
And th'Isle, when her protecting Genius went,
Upon his Obsequies loud Sighs conferred.
XXXVI.
No Civil Broils have since his Death arose,
But Faction now, by Habit, does obey;
And Wars have that Respect for his Repose,
As Winds for Halcyons, when they breed at Sea.
XXXVII.
His Ashes in a Peaceful Urn shall rest,
His Name a great Example stands to show,
How strangely high Endeavors may be blessed,
Where Piety and Valor jointly go.
FINIS.

