THE ASSIGNATION: OR, Love in a Nunnery. As it is ACTED, At the THEATER ROYAL.

Written by JOHN DRYDEN Servant to His MAJESTY.

Successum dea dira negat --
Virg. LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1673.

TO MY MOST HONORED FRIEND Sir CHARLES SEDLEY, Baronet.
Sir,
THe Design of Dedicating Plays, is as common and unjust, as that of desiring
Seconds in a Duel. It Is engaging our Friends (it may be) in a senceless
quarrel, where they have much to venture, without any concernment of their own.
I have declared thus much beforehand, to prevent you from suspicion, that I
intend to interest either your judgment or your kindness, in defending the
Errors of this Comedy. It succeeded ill in the representation, against the
opinion of many the best Judges of our Age, to whom you know I read it e're it
was presented publicly. Whether the fault was in the Play it self, or in the
lameness of the Action, or in the number of its Enemies, who came resolved to
damn it for the Title, I will not now dispute: that would be too like the
little satisfaction which an unlucky Gamester finds in the relation of every
cast by which he came to lose his Money. I have had formerly so much success,
that the miscarriage of this Play was only my giving fortune her revenge: I
owed it her; and she was indulgent that she exacted not the payment long
before. I will therefore deal more reasonably with you, than any Poet has ever
done with any Patron: I do not so much as oblige you for my sake to pass two
ill hours in reading of my Play. Think, if you please, that this Dedication is
only an occasion I have taken to do my self the greatest honor imaginable
with Posterity; that is, to be recorded in the number of those Men whom you
have favored with your Friendship and esteem. For, I am well assured, that
besides the present satisfaction I have, it will gain me the greatest part of
my reputation with after-Ages, when they shall find me valuing my self on your
kindness to me: I may have reason to suspect my own credit with them, but I
have none to doubt of yours. And they who perhaps would forget me in my Poems,
would remember me in this Epistle.

This was the course which has formerly been practiced by the Poets of that
Nation who were Masters of the Universe. Horace and Ovid, who had little reason
to distrust their Immortality; yet took occasion to speak with honor of
Virgil, Varius, Tibullus, and Propertius their Contemporaries: as if they
sought in the testimony of their Friendship a farther evidence of their fame.
For my own part, I, who am the least amongst the Poets, have yet the fortune to
be honored with the best Patron, and the best Friend. For, (to omit some Great
Persons of our Court, to whom I am many ways obliged, and who have taken care
of me, even amidst the Exigencies of a War,) I can make my boast to have found
a better Maecenas in the person of my Lord Treasurer Clifford, and a more
Elegant Tibullus in that of Sir Charles Sedley. I have chosen that Poet to whom
I would resemble you, not only because I think him at least equal, if not
superior to Ovid in his Elegies: nor because of his quality for he was (you
know) a Roman Knight as well as Ovid: but for his Candor, his Wealth, his way
of Living, and particularly because of this testimony which is given him by
Horace, which I have a thousand times in my mind applied to you. Non tu Corpus
eras sine pectore; Dii tibi formam,
Dii tibi divitias dederant, artemque fruendi.
Quid voveat dulci Nutricula majus Alumno
Quam sapere, and fari possit quae sentiat, and cui
Gratia, forma, valetudo contingat abunde;
Et mundus victus, non deficiente crumena?
Certainly the Poets of that Age enjoyed much happiness in the Conversation and
Friendship of one another. They imitated the best way of Living, which was to
pursue an innocent and inoffensive Pleasure; that which one of the Ancients
called Eruditam voluptatem. We have, like them, our Genial Nights; where our
discourse is neither too serious, nor too light; but always pleasant, and for
the most part instructive: the raillery neither too sharp upon the present, nor
too censorious on the absent; and the Cups only such as will raise the
Conversation of the Night, without disturbing the business of the Morrow. And
thus far not only the Philosophers, but the Fathers of the Church have gone,
without lessening their Reputation of good Manners, or of Piety. For this
reason I have often Laughed at the ignorant and ridiculous Descriptions which
some Pedants have given of the Wits (as they are pleased to call them:) which
are a Generation of Men as unknown to them, as the People of Tartary or the
terra Australis are to us. And therefore as we draw Giants and Anthropophagi in
those vacances of our Maps, where we have not Traveled to discover better; so
those wretches Paint leudness, Atheism, Folly, ill-Reasoning, and all manner of
Extravagances amongst us for want of understanding what we are. Oftentimes it
so falls out, that they have a particular picque to some one amongst us; and
then they immediately interest Heaven in their quarrel: As it is an usual trick
in Courts; when one designs the ruin of his Enemy, to disguise his malice with
some concernment of the Kings: and to revenge his own cause, with pretense of
vindicating the Honor of his Master. Such Wits as they describe, I have never
been so unfortunate to meet in your Company: but have often heard much better
Reasoning at your Table, than I have encountered in their Books. The Wits they
describe, are the Fops we banish: for Blasphemy and Atheism, if they were
neither Sin nor Ill Manners, are Subjects so very common, and worn so
Thredbare, that people who have sense avoid them, for fear of being suspected
to have none. It calls the good Name of their Wit in question, as it does the
Credit of a Citizen when his Shop is filled with Trumperies, and Painted Titles
in stead of Wares: we conclude them Bancrupt to all manner of understanding:
and, that to use Blasphemy, is a kind of applying Pigeons to the Soles of the
Feet: it proclaims their Fancy as well as judgment, to be in a desperate
condition. I am sure for your own particular, if any of these Judges had once
the happiness to converse with you, to hear the Candor of your Opinions; how
freely you commend that wit in others, of which you have so large a Portion
your self; how unapt you are to be censorious; with how much easiness you speak
so many things, and those so Pointed, that no other Man is able to excel, or
perhaps to reach by Study; they would, in stead of your Accusers, become your
Proselites. They would reverence so much good Sense, and so much good Nature in
the same person: and come, like the Satyr, to warm themselves at that Fire, of
which they were ignorantly afraid, when they stood at distance. But, you have
too great a Reputation to be wholly free from Censure: it is a fine which
Fortune sets upon all extraordinary persons, and from which you should not wish
to be delivered till you are dead. I have been, used by my Critiques much more
severely, and have more reason to complain, because I am deeper taxed for a
less Estate. I am ridiculously enough accused to be a contemner of
Universities, that is in other words, an Enemy of Learning: without the
Foundation of which I am sure no Man can pretend to be a Poet. And if this be
not enough, I am made a Detractor from my Predecessors, whom I confess to have
been my Masters in the Art. But this latter was the accusation of the best
Judge, and almost the best Poet in the Latin Tongue. You find Horace
complaining, that for taxing some Verses in Lucilius, he himself was blamed by
others, though his Design was no other than mine now, to improve the Knowledge
of Poetry: and it was no defense to him, amongst his Enemies, any more than it
is for me, that he Praised Lucilius where he deserved it; Pagina laudatur
eadem. It Is for this reason I will be no more mistaken for my good meaning: I
know I honor Ben Johnson more than my little Critiques, because without vanity
I may own, I understand him better. As for the Errors they pretend to find in
me, I could easily show them that the greatest part of them are Beauties: and
for the rest, I could recriminate upon the best Poets of our Nation, if I could
resolve to accuse another of little faults, whom at the same time I admire for
greater Excellencies. But I have neither concernment enough upon me to write
any thing in my own Defense, neither will I gratify the ambition of two
wretched Scriblers, who desire nothing more than to be Answered. I have not
wanted Friends, even amongst Strangers, who have defended me more strongly,
than my contemptible Pedant could attacque me. For the other: he is only like
Fungoso in the Play, who follows the Fashion at a distance, and adores the
Fastidius Brisk of Oxford. You can bear me witness, that I have not
consideration enough for either of them to be angry: Let Maevius and Bavius
admire each other, I wish to be hated by them and their Fellows, by the same
reason for which I desire to be loved by you. And I leave it to the world,
whether their judgment of my Poetry ought to be preferred to yours; though they
are as much prejudiced by their Malice, as I desire you should be led by your
Kindness, to be partial to, Sir,

Your most Humble and most Faithful Servant John Dryden.

Prologue.
PRologues, like Bells to Churches, toul you in
With Chimeing Verse; till the dull Plays begin:
With this sad difference though, of Pit and Pue;
You damn the Poet, but the Priest damns you.
But Priests can treat you at your own expense:
And, gravely, call you Fools, without offense.
Poets, poor Devils, have never your Folly shown
But, to their cost, you proved it was their own.
For, when a Fop's presented on the Stage,
Straight all the Coxcombs in the Town engage:
For his deliverance, and revenge they join:
And grunt, like Hogs, about their Captive Swine.
Your Poets daily split upon this shelfe:
You must have Fools, yet none will have himself.
Or, if in kindness, you that leave would give,
No man could write you at that rate you live:
For some of you grow Fops with so much haste,
Riot in nonsense, and commit such waste,
'Twould Ruin Poets should they spend so fast.
He who made this, observed what Farces hit,
And durst not disoblige you now with wit.
But, Gentlemen, you overdo the Mode:
You must have Fools out of the common Rode.
The unnatural strained Buffoon is only taking:
No Fop can please you now of Gods own making.
Pardon our Poet if he speaks his Mind,
You come to Plays with your own Follies lined:
Small Fools fall on you, like small showers, in vain:
Your own oiled Coats keep out all common rain.
You must have Mamamouchi, such a Fop
As would appear a Monster in a Shop:
He Will fill your Pit and Boxes to the brim,
Where, Ram'd in Crowds, you see your selves in him.
Sure there is some spell our Poet never knew,
In hullibabilah da, and Chu, chu, chu.
But Marabarah sahem most did touch you,
That is: Oh how we love the Mamamouchi!
Grimace and habit sent you pleased away:
You damned the Poet, and cried up the Play.
This thought had made our Author more uneasy,
But that he hopes I Am Fool enough to please ye:
But here is my grief; though Nature joined with art,
Have cut me out to act a Fooling Part;
Yet, to your praise, the few wits here will say,
'Twas imitating you taught Haynes to Play.
Persons Represented.
By Duke of Mantoua Major Mohun. Prince Frederick his Son Mr. Kynaston.
Aurelian a Roman Gentleman Mr. Heart. Camillo his Friend Mr. Burt. Mario
Governor of Rome Mr. Cartwright. Ascanio, Page of Honor to the Prince Mrs.
Reeve. Benito, Servant to Aurelian Mr. Haynes. Valerio, Confident to the Duke
Fabio, Servant to Mario Sophronia, Abbess of the Torr'di Specchi. Mrs. James.
Lucretia, a Lady designed to be a Nun Mrs. Marshall. Hippolita, a Nun Mrs.
Knep. Laura Sisters, Neeces to Mario Mrs. Bowtel. and Violetta Sisters, Neeces
to Mario Mrs. Cox.
Scene, ROME.

THE ASSIGNATION: OR, Love in a Nunnery.
SCENE ROME. A Great Glass Placed. Enter Benito, with a Guittar in his hand.
Benito bowing to the Glass. SAve you, sweet Signior Benito; by my faith I am
glad to see you look so bonily to day: Gad, Sir, every thing becomes you to a
miracle! your Perruke, your Clothes, your Hat, your Shoo-tyes; and, Gad, Sir,
let me tell you, you become every thing; you walk with such a grace, and you
bow so pliantly --


Aurelian within. Benito, Where are you, Sirrah?


Ben. Sirrah! That my damned Master should call a man of my extraordinary
indowments, Sirrah! A man of my indowments? Gad, I ask my own pardon, I mean, a
person of my indowments; for a man of my parts and tallents, though he be but a
Valet de Chamber, is a person; and, let me tell my Master -- Gad, I frown too,
as like a person as any Jack-Gentleman of them all; but, Gad, when I do not
frown, I am an absolute beauty: whatever this Class says to the contrary: and,
if this Glass deny it, it is a base, lying Glass, so I Will tell it to its face,
and kick it down into the bargain.


Aurelia within. Why Benito, How long shall we stay for you?


Ben. I come, Sir. What the Devil would he have? But, by his favor, I Will first
survey my Dancing, and my Singing. He plays on the Guittar, and Dances and
Sings to the Glass. I think that was not amiss: I think so. Gad, I can Lays
down the Guittar. Dance, and play no longer, I am in such a rapture with my
self. What a villainous base fate have I? with all these excellencies, and a
profound wit, and yet to be a Serving-man!


Enter Aurelian and Camillo. Aur. Why, you Slave, you Dog, you Son of twenty
Fathers, am I to be served at this rate eternally? A pox o'your conceited
coxcomb.


Camillo. Nay, prithee, Aurelian, be not angry.


Aur. You do not know this Rogue, as I do, Camillo. Now, by this Guittar, and
that great looking-glass, I am certain how he has spent his time. He courts
himself every morning in that Glass, at least an hour: there admires his own
person, and his parts, and studies postures and grimaces, to make himself yet
more ridiculous, than he was born to be.


Came. You wrong him sure.


Aur. I do; for he is yet more fool than I can speak him: I never sent him on a
message, but he runs first to that Glass, to practice how he may become his
errand. Speak, Is this a lie, Sirrah?


Ben. I confess, I have some kindness for the mirror.


Aur. The mirror! there is a touch of his Poetry too, he could not call it a
Glass. Then the Rogue has the impudence to make Sonnets, as he calls 'em; and,
which is a greater impudence, he sings 'em too: there is not a Street in all
Rome which he does not nightly disquiet with his villainous Serenades: with that
Guittar there, the younger brother of a Cittern, he frights away the Watch; and
for his Violin, it squeaks so lewdly, that Sir Tibert in the gutter mistakes
him for his Mistress. It Is a mere Cat-call.


Came. Is this true Benito?


Ben. to Came. aside. My Master, Sir, may say his pleasure; I divert my self
sometimes with hearing him: Alas, good Gentleman, it is not given to all
persons to penetrate into Men's parts and qualities; but I look on you, Sir, as
a man of judgment, and therefore you shall hear me play and sing.


He takes up the Guittar and begins. Aur. Why, you invincible Sot you, will
nothing mend you? Lay't down, or --


Ben. to Camillo. Do ye see, Sir, this Enemy to the Muses? he will not let me
hold forth to you. Lays down the Guittar. O Envy, and Ignorance, Whither will
you! -- But, Gad, before I Will suffer my parts to be kept in obscurity --


Aur. What will you do, Rascal?


Ben. I Will take up the Guittar, and suffer heroically.


He Plays, Aure. Kicks. Aur. What? Do you Mutiny?


Ben. Ay, do, kick till your toes ache; I Will be baffled in my Music by never a
foot in Christendom.


Aur. I Will put you out of your time, with a vengeance to you.


As Aurelian kicks harder, Benito sings faster, and sometimes cries out. Came.
holding Aur. Nay, then it is time to stickle. Hold, Aurelian, prithee spare
Benito, you know we have occasion for him.


Aur. I think that was well kicked.


Ben. And I think that was well Sung too.


Came. Enough, Aurelian.


Ben. No, Sir; let him proceed to discourage virtue, and see what will come
on it.


Came. Now to our business: but we must first instruct Benito.


Aur. Be ruled by me, and do not trust him: I prophecy he will spoil the whole
affair; he has a Worm in's head as long as a Conger, a brain so barren of all
sense, and yet so fruitful of foolish plots, that if he does not all things his
own way, yet at least he will ever be mingling his designs with yours, and go
halves with you, so that what with his ignorance, what with his plotting, he will
be sure to ruin you, with an intention to serve you. For my part I had turned
him off long since; but that my wise Father, commanded me the contrary.


Came. Still you speak, as if what we did were choice, and not necessity: you
know their Uncle is suspicious of me, and consequently jealous of all my
Servants; but if we employ yours, who is not suspected, because you are a
stranger; I doubt not to get an Assignation with the younger Sister.


Aur. Well, use your own way, Camillo: but if it ever succeed, with his
management --


Came. You must understand then, Benito, that this old Signior Mario, has two
Neeces, with one of which I am desperately in Love, and --


Ben. aside to him, I understand you already, Sir, and you desire Love
reciprocal: Leave your business in my hands, and, if it succeed not, think me
no wiser than my Master.


Came. Pray take me with you. These Sisters are great Beauties and vast
Fortunes; but, by a Clause in their Fathers Will, if they Marry without their
Uncles Consent, are to forfeit all. Their Uncle, who is covetous, and base to
the last degree, takes advantage of this Clause, and under pretense of not
finding fit Matches for them, denies his consent to all who love 'em.


Ben. Denies 'em marriage: very good, Sir.


Came. More than this, he refuses access to any Suitor, and immures 'em in a
mean appartment on the garden side, where he barbarously debars 'em from all
humane Socitey.


Ben. Uses them most barbarously: Still better and better.


Came. The younger of these Sisters, Violetta, I have seen often in the Garden,
from the Balcony in this Chamber, which looks into it, have diverse times shot
Tickets on the point of an Arrow, which She has taken, and by the signs she
made me I find they were not ill received.


Ben. I Will tell you now, just such an Amor as this had I once with a young
Lady, that --


Aur. Quote your self again, you Rogue, and my feet shall renew their
acquaintance with your Buttocks.


Came. Dear Benito, take care to convey this Ticket to Violetta: I saw her just
now go by to the next Chapel; be sure to stand ready to give her Holy Water,
and slip the Ticket into the hand of her Woman Beatrix; And take care the elder
Sister Laura sees you not, for she knows nothing of our Amor.


Ben. A word to the wise. Have you no Service to Laura? To Aurelian.


Aur. None that I shall trouble you withal: I Will see first what returns you
make from this Voyage, before I put in my venture with you. Away; be gone, Mr.
Mercury.


Ben. I fly, Mr. Jupiter. Exit.


Aur. This Lady Laura I have seen from your Balcone, and was seen by her:
methought, too, she looked with a languishing eye upon me, as who should say,
Are you a man, and have no pity for a poor distressed Virgin? For my part, I
never found so much disposition in my self to Love any woman at first sight:
handsome she is, of that I am certain.


Came. And has Wit, I dare assure you; but I have not heard she has admitted of
any Gallantry.


Aur. Her hour is not come yet; she has not met with a man to Love: when that
happens (as I am resolved to push my fortune) you shall see that, as her love
warms, her virtue will melt down, and dissolve in it; for there is no such Baud
to a woman, as her own wit is.


Came. I look upon the Assignation, as certain: Will you promise me to go? You
and Benito shall walk in the Garden, while I search the Nymph within the shade;
one thing I had forgot to tell you, that our General of the Church, the Duke of
Mantoua, and the Prince his Son, are just approaching the Gates of Rome: Will
you go see the Ceremony of their Entrance?


Aur. With all my heart. They say, he has behaved himself gallantly against the
French, at their return from Naples: besides, I have a particular knowledge of
young Prince Frederick, ever since he was last at our Venetian Carnival.


Came. Away, then, quickly; least we miss the Solemnity.


Exeunt. Enter Laura, and Violetta striving about a Letter, which Laura holds.
Vio. Let it go, I say:


Lau. I say, let you go.


Vio. Nay, sweet Sister Laura.


Lau. Nay, dear Violetta, it is in vain to contend, I am resolved I Will see it.
Plucks the Paper from Violetta.


Vio. But I am resolved you shall not read it. I know not what authority this
is which you assume, or what privilege a year or two can give you, to use this
Sovereignty over me.


Lau. Do you rebel young Gentlewoman? I Will make you know I have a double right
over you: one, as I have more years; and the other as I have more wit.


Vio. Though I am not all Air and Fire, as you are, yet that little wit I have,
will serve to conduct my Affairs, without a Governess.


Lau. No, Gentlewoman, but it shall not: are you fit at Fifteen to be trusted
with a Maidenhead? It Is as much your betters can manage at full twenty.

For it is of a nature so subtle,
That, if it is not Luted with care
The Spirit will work through the Bottel,
And vanish away into Air.
To keep it, there is nothing so hard is,
'Twill go betwixt waking and sleeping,
The Simple too weak for a guard is,
And no Wit would be plagued with the keeping.

Vio. For ought I see, you are as little to be trusted with your Madness, as I
with my Simplicity; and therefore pray restore my Letter.


Lau. reading it. What Is here? An humble Petition for a private Meeting? Are
you twittering at that sport already, Mistress Novice?


Vio. How! I a Novice, at ripe Fifteen? I would have you to know, that I have
killed my Man before I was Fourteen, and now am ready for another execution.


Lau. A very forward Rose-bud: you open apace, Gentlewoman. I find indeed your
desires are quick enough; but where will you have cunning to carry on your
business with decency and secrecy? Secrecy, I say, which is a main part of
chastity in our Sex. Where wit, to be sensible of the delicacies of Love? the
tenderness of a farewell-sigh? for an absence? the joy of a return? the zeal of
a pressing-hand? the sweetness of little quarrels, caused, and cured, by the
excess of Love? and, in short, the pleasing disquiets of the Soul, always
restless, and wandering up and down in a paradise of thought, of its own making?


Vio. If I understood not thus much before, I find you are an excellent
instructor, and that argues you have had a feeling of the cause in your time
too, Sister.


Lau. What have I confessed before I was aware! She Will find out my inclination
to that stranger, whom I have only seen, and to whom I have never spoken --
Aside. No, good Violetta, I never was in Love; all my experience is from Plays
and Romances: But who is this man, to whom you have promised an Assignation?


Vio. You Will tell my Uncle.


Lau. I hate my Uncle more than you do.


Vio. You know the man, it is Signior Camillo: his Birth and Fortunes are equal
to what I can expect; and he tells me his intentions are Honorable.


Lau. Have I not seen him lately in his Balcone, which looks into our Garden,
with another handsome Gentleman in his Company, who seems a stranger?


Vio. They are the same. Do you think it a reasonable thing, dear Laura, that
my Uncle should keep us up so strictly, that we must be beholden to heresay, to
know a young Gallant is in the next house to us?


Lau. It Is hard, indeed, to be mewed like Hawks, and never Manned: to be locked
in like Nuns here.


Vio. They that look for Nuns flesh in me shall be mistaken.


Lau. Well, What answer have you returned to this Letter?


Vio. That I would meet him at eight this evening, in the close walk in the
Garden, attended only by Beatrix my Woman.


Lau. Who comes with him?


Vio. Only his friend's Man Benito; the same who brought me the Letter which
you took from me.


Lau. Stay, let me think a little. Do Camillo, or this Benito, know your Maid
Beatrix?


Vio. They have never talked with her; but only seen her.


Lau. It Is concluded then; you shall meet your Servant, but I Will be your
Beatrix: I Will go in stead of her, and counterfeit your waiting woman: in the
dark I may easily pass for her: By this means I shall be present to instruct
you; for you are yet a Callow Maid: I must teach you to Peck a little, you may
come to Prey for your self in time.


Vio. A little teaching will serve my turn: if the old one left me to my self,
I could go near to get my Living.


Lau. I find you are eager, and Baiting to be gone already, and I Will not hinder
you when your hour approaches. In the mean time go in, and sigh, and think
fondly, and ignorantly of your approaching pleasures:

Love, in young hearts, is like the must of Wine;
It Is sweetest then; but elder it is more fine. Exeunt.

ACT. II. SCENE I.
The Front of a Nunnery. Prince Frederick, Aurelian, Camillo, and Ascanio the
Princes Page. Fred. MY Fathers' ancient, and may repose himself, if he pleases,
after the Ceremony of his Entrance; but we, who are younger, should think it a
sin, to spend any part of daylight in a Chamber. What are your ways of living
here?


Came. Why Sir, we pass our time, either in conversation alone, or in Love
alone, or in Love and Conversation together.


Fred. Come, explain, explain, my Counsel learned in the Laws of Living.


Came. For conversation alone; that is either in going to Court, with a Face of
Business, and there discoursing of the affairs of Europe, of which, Rome, you
know, is the public Mart; or, at best, meeting the Vertuosi, and there,
wearying one another with rehearsing our own works, in Prose and Poetry.


Fred. Away with that dry method, I will have none on it. To the next.


Came. Love alone, is either plain wenching, where every Curtizan is your
Mistress, and every Man your Rival; or else, what is worse, plain whining after
one Woman: that is, walking before her door by day, and haunting her street by
night, with Guittars, dark Lanthorns, and Rondaches.


Aur. Which, I take it, is, or will be our case, Camillo.


Fred. Neither of these will fit my humor: if your third prove not more
pleasant, I shall stick to the old Almaine recreation; the Divine bottel, and
the bounteous glass, that tuned up old Horace to his Odes.


Aur. You shall need to have no recourse to that; for Love, and Conversation
will do your business: that is, Sir, a most delicious Curtizan, I do not mean
downright Punk, but Punk of more than ordinary sense in Conversation: Punk in
Ragou, Punk who plays on the Lute, and Sings; and, to sum up all, Punk who
Cooks and Dresses up her self, with Poynant Sauce, to become a new Dish every
time she is served up to you.


Fred. This I believe, Aurelian, is your method of living, you talk of it so
savorily.


Aur. There is yet another more insipid sort of Love and Conversation: as for
example, look you there, Sir; the Pointing to the Nunnery Courtship of our
Nuns. They talk prettily; but, a Pox on'em, they raise our appetites, and then
starve us. They are as dangerous as cold Fruits without Wine, and are never to
be used but where there are abundance of Wenches in readiness, to qualify 'em.


Came. But yet they are ever at hand, and easy to come by; and if you will believe
an experienced sinner, easiness in Love is more than half the pleasure of it.


Fre. This way of chatting pleases me; for debauchery, I hate it; and, to Love,
is not in my nature, except it be my Friends. Pray, What do you call that
Nunnery.


Came. It Is a House of Benedictines, called the Torre di Specchi, where only
Ladies of the best Quality are Professed.


Lucretia and Hippolita appear at the Grates. Aur. Look you yonder, Sir, are
two of the pretty Magpies, in white and black: if you will lull your self into
a Platonic Dream you may: but, consider your sport will be but dull, when you
play without Stakes.


Fred. No matter, I Will fool away an hour of Courtship; for I never yet was
engaged in a serious love, nor I believe can be. Farewell, Gentlemen; at this
time I shall dispense with your attendance: nay, without Ceremony, because I
would be incognito.


Came. Come then, Aurelian, to our own affairs.


Exeunt Aur. and Camillo. The Prince and Ascanio approach. Fred. to Lu. For
what Crime, fair Creature, were you condemned to this perpetual Prison?


Luc. For Chastity and Devotion, and two or three such melancholy virtues:
they first brought me hither, and now must keep me company.


Fred. I should rather have guessed it had been Murder, and that you are
veiled, for fear of doing more mischief wirh those Eyes: for, indeed, they are
too sharp to be trusted out of the Scabbard.


Luc. Cease, I beseech you, to accuse my Eyes, till they have done some
execution on your heart.


Fred. But I am out of reach, perhaps.


Luc. Trust not to that; they may shoot at a distance, though they cannot
strike you near at hand.


Fred. But, if they should kill, you are never the better: there is a Grate
betwixt us, and you cannot fetch in the dead Quarry.


Luc. Provided we destroy the Enemy, we do not value their dead bodies: but
you, perhaps, are in your first error, and think we are rather Captives than
Warriors; that we come like Prisoners to the Grate, to beg the Charity of
Passengers for their love.


Fre. to Ascanio. Inquire as dexterously as you can, what is the Name and
Quality of this Charming Creature.


Luc. to Hip. Be sure, if the Page approaches you, to get out of him his
Masters Name. The Prince and Lucretia seem to talk.


Hip. to Asca. By that short whisper which I observed you took with your
Master, I imagine, Mr. Page, you come to ask a certain question of me.


Asca. By this thy question, and by that whisper with thy Lady, (O thou Nymph
of Devotion!) I find I am to impart a secret, and not to ask one: therefore,
either confess thou art yet a mere Woman under that Veil, and by consequence
most horribly inquisitive, or thou shall lose thy longing, and know nothing of
my Master.


Hip. By my Virginity, you shall tell first.


Asca. You Will break your Oath, on purpose to make the forfeit.


Hip. Your Master is called --


Asca. You Lady is Yclip'd --


Hip. For decency, in all matters of Love, the Man should offer first, you know.


Asca. That needs not, when the Damsel is so willing.


Hip. But I have sworn not to discover first, that her Name is Madam Lucretia;
fair, as you see, to a Miracle, and of a most charming conversation; of Royal
blood, and Niece to his Holiness; and, if she were not espoused to Heaven, a
Mistress for a Sovereign Prince.


Asca. After these Encomiums, 'twere vain for me to praise my Master: he is
only poor Prince Frederick, otherwise called the Prince of Mantoua; liberal,
and valiant, discreet and handsome, and, in my simple judgment, a fitter
Servant for your Lady, than his old Father, who is a Sovereign.


Hip. Dare you make all this good you have said of your Master?


Asca. Yes, and as much more of my self to you.


Hip. I defy you upon it, as my Lady's Second.


Asca. As my Masters, I accept it. The time?


Hip. Six this evening.


Asca. The place?


Hip. At this Grate.


Asca. The Weapons?


Hip. Hands, and it may be Lips.


Asca. It Is enough: expect to hear from me.


They withdraw and whisper to their Principals. After the Whisper. Fred. to
Luc. Madam, I am glad I know my enemy; for since it is impossible to see, and
not admire you, the name of Lucretia is the best excuse for my defeat.


Luc. Persons, like Prince Frederick, ought not to assault Religious Houses; or
to pursue Chastity and Virtue to their last retreat.


Fred. A Monastery is no retreat for Chastity; it is only a hiding place for bad
faces, where they are thrust in Crowds together, like heaps of rubbish out of
the way, that the world may not be peopled with deformed persons, and that such
who are out of Play themselves, may pray for a blessing on their endeavors,
who are getting handsome Children: and carrying on the work for public benefit.


Luc. Then you would put off Heaven with your leavings, and use it like them
who play at Cards alone, take the Courts for your selves, and give the refuse
to the Gentleman.


Fred. You mistake me, Madam; I would so contrive it, that Heaven and we might
be served at once: we have occasion for Wit and Beauty; now Piety and Ugliness
will do as well for Heaven; that plays at one Game, and we at another, and
therefore heaven may make its hand with the same Cards that we put out.


Luc. I could easily convince you if the argument concerned me; but I am one of
those, whom, for want of wit and beauty, you have condemned to Religion: and
therefore am your humble Servant to Pray for your handsome Wife and Children.


Fred. Heaven forbid, Madam, that I should condemn you, or indeed any handsome
woman, to be Religious. No, Madam; the occasions of the World are great and
urgent for such as you: and, for my part, I am of opinion, that it is as great
a Sin for a Beauty to enter into a Nunnery, as for an ugly woman to stay out of
it.


Luc. The Cares of the World are not yet upon you; but as soon as ever you come
to be afflicted with Sickness, or visited with a Wife, you will be content I
should pray for you.


Fre. Any where, rather than in a Cloister; for, truly, I suppose, all your
Prayers there will be how to get out of it; and, upon that supposition, Madam,
I am come to offer you my service for your redemption. Come, faith, be
persuaded, the Church shall lose nothing by it: I Will take you out, and put in
two or three Crooked Apostles in your place. Bell rings within.


Luc. Hark, the Bell rings, I must leave you: it is a summons to our Devotion.


Fred. Will you leave me for your Prayets, Madam? You may have enough of them
at any time, but remember you cannot have a Man so easily.


Luc. Well, I Will say my Beads for you, and that is but Charity, for I believe I
leave you in a most deplorable condition.


Exeunt Women. Fred. Not deplorable neither, but a little altered: if I could be
in Love, as I am sure I cannot, it should be with her, for I like her
conversation strangely.


Asca. Then, as young as I am, Sir, I am beforehand with you; for I am in Love
already. I would fain make the first proof of my Manhood upon a Nun: I find I
have a mighty grudging to Holy Flesh.


Fred. I Will ply Lucretia again, as soon as ever her Devotion's over. Methinks
these Nuns divide their time most admirably: from Love to Prayers; from Prayers
to Love: that is, just so much Sin, just so much Godliness.


Asca. Then I can claim that Sister's Love by merit:
Half Man, half Boy; for her half Flesh, half Spirit. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
A Street. Aurelian and Camillo. Aur. I Will proceed no farther, if Benito goes:
I know his folly will produce some mischief.


Came. But Violetta desired me, in her Note, to bring him, on purpose to pass
the time with her Woman Beatrix.


Aur. That objection is easily removed: I Will supply Benito's place; the
darkness will prevent discovery, and, for my discourse, I Will imitate the half
Wit, and patched breeding of a Valet de Chamber.


Came. But how shall we get rid of him?


Aur. Let me alone for that.


Enter Benito. Ben. Come, Are we ready, Gallants? the Clock's upon the stroke
of Eight.


Aur. But we have altered our resolution: we go another way to night.


Ben. I hope you have not broke my Assignation.


Aur. Why do you hope so?


Ben. Because my reputation is engaged in it: I'ave stipulated upon my honor
that you shall come.


Aur. I shall beat you if you follow me. Go, Sirrah, and adjourn to the great
looking-glass, and let me hear no more from you till to morrow morning.


Ben. Sir, my fidelity, and, if I may be so vain, my discretion may stand you
in some stead.


Aur. Well, come along then, they are brave Fellows who have challenged us, you
shall have fighting enough, Sir.


Ben. How, Sir, Fighting?


Aur. You may escape with the loss of a Leg, or an arm, or some such transitory
limb.


Ben. No, Sir; I have that absolute obedience to your commands, that I will
bridle my courage, and stay at home. Exit.


Came. You took the only way to be rid of him. There Is the wall: behind yond
pane of it we'll set up the Ladder. Exeunt.


SCENE III.
A Night-piece of a Garden. Enter Laura and Violetta. Vio. Remember your
waiting-womans part, Laura.


Lau. I warrant you, I Will wait on you by night as well as I governed you by day.


Vio. Hark, I hear footsteps; and now, methinks, I see something approaching
us.


Lau. They are certainly the Men whom we expect.


Enter Aurelian and Camillo. Came. I hear Women's voices.


Aur. We are right, I warrant you.


Came. Violetta, my Love!


Vio. My dear Camillo!


Came. O speak those words again: my own name never sounded so sweetly to me, as
when you spoke it, and made me happy by adding Dear to it.


Vio. Speak softly then. I have stolen these few minutes from my watchful Uncle
and my Sister, and they are as full of danger as they are of love. Something
within me checks me too, and says, I was too forward in ventring thus to meet
you.


Came. You are too fearful rather, and fear's the greatest enemy to Love.


Vio. But night will hide my blushes, when I tell you I love you much, or I had
never trusted my virtue and my person in your hands.


Came. The one is sacred, and the other safe; but this auspicious minute is our
first of near converse. May I not hope that favor, which strangers, in
civility, my claim even from the most reserved?


Kisses her hand. Vio. I fear you will censure me.


Came. Yes, as the blessed above tax heaven for making them so happy. They walk
farther off.


Aur. stepping toward Lau. Damsel of darkness, advance, and meet my flames.


Lau. stepping forward. Right trusty Valet, heard, but yet unseen, I have
advanced one step on reputation.


Aur. Now, by laudable custom, I am to love thee vehemently.


Lau. We should do well to see each other first: You know it is ill taking Money
without light.


Aur. O, but the coin of Love is known by the weight only, and you may feel it
in the dark: Besides, you know it is Prince-like to Love without seeing.


Lau. But then you may be served as Princes are sometimes.


Aur. Let us make haste however, and dispatch a little Love out of the way: we
may do it now with ease, and save our selves a great deal of trouble, if we
take it in time, before it grows too fast upon our hands.


Lau. Fie, no; let us Love discreetly, we must manage our passion, and not love
all our love out at one meeting, but leave some for another time.


Aur. I am for applying the Plaster whilst the wound is green, 'twill heal the
better. Takes her by the hand.


Lau. Let go my hand: What crime has the poor wretch committed that you press
it thus? I remember no mischief it has done you.


Aur. O it is a heinous malefactor, and is pressed by Law, because it will
confess nothing. Come, withdraw a little farther, we have urgent business with
one another.


Lau. 'Twere a shame to quit my ground upon the first charge; yer if you please
to take truce a little, I will consent to go behind the Lovers, and listen with
you.


Aur. I wonder you deferred the Proposition so long. I were neither true Valet,
nor you true Woman if we could not Eves-drop.


They retire behind the other two, who come forward upon the Stage. Came.
kissing Violetta's hand. Give me another yet, and then --


Vio. And then will you be satisfied?


Came. And then I Will ask a thousand more, and never be satisfied. Kisses are but
thin nourishment, they are too soon digested, and hungry Love craves more.


Vio. You feed a Wolf within you.


Came. Then feast my Love with a more solid diet. He makes us now a Misers
Feast, and we forbear to take our fill. The silent night, and all these downy
hours were made for Lovers: Gently they tread, and softly measure time, that no
rude noise may fright the tender Maid, from giving all her soul to melting
joys.


Vio. You do not love me; if you did, you would not
Thus urge your satisfaction in my shame;
At best, I see you would not love me long,
For they who plunder do not mean to stay.

Came. I haste to take possession of my own.

Vio. E're Heaven and holy vows have made it so?

Came. Then witness Heaven, and all these twinkling Stars --

Vio. Hold, hold; you are distempered with your love:
Time, place, and strong desires now swear, not you.

Came. Is not Love love without a Priest and Altars?
The Temples are inanimate, and know not
What Vows are made in them; the Priest stands ready
For his hire, and cares not what hearts he couples,
Love alone is marriage.

Vio. I never will receive these Midnight Vows;
But when I come hereafter to your Arms,
I Will bring you a sincere, full, perfect bliss,
Then you will thank me that I kept it so,
And trust my faith hereafter.

Lau. There Is your destiny, Lover mine: I am to be honest by infection; my Lady
will none you see.


Aur. Truth is, they are a lost couple, unless they learn grace by our example.
Come, shall we begin first, and shame them both Takes her by the hand again.


Lau. You Will never be warned of this hand, Benito.


Aur. Oh, it is so soft, as it were made on purpose to take hearts, and handle
them without hurting. These Taper fingers too, and even joints, so supple, that
methinks I mould 'em as they pass through mine: nay, in my conscience, the it
be nonsense to say it, your hand feels white too.


Lau. Methinks yours is not very hard, for a Serving-mans: but where, in the
name of wonder, have you learned to talk so courtly? you are a strange Valet de
Chamber.


Aur. And you are as strange a Waiting Woman: you have so stabbed me with your
Repartees to night, that I should be glad to change the weapon to be revenged
on you.


Lau. These, I suppose, are fragments which you learned from your wild Master
Aurelian: many a poor woman has passed through his hands, with these very
words. You treat me just like a Servingman, with the cold Meat which comes from
your Masters Table.


Aur. You could never have suspected me for using my Masters wit, if you had
not been guilty of purloining from your Lady. I am told, that Laura, your
Mistresses Sister, has wit enough to confound a hundred Aurelians.


Lau. I shall do your commendations to Laura for your complement.


Aur. And I shall not fail to revenge my self by informing Aurelian of yours.


Enter Benito with a Guittar. Ben. The poor souls shall not lose by the
bargain, though my foolish gadding Masters have disappointed them. That Ladder
of ropes was doubtless left there by the young Lady in hope of them.


Vio. Hark, I hear a noise in the Garden.


Lau. I fear we are betrayed.


Came. Fear nothing, Madam, but stand close.


Ben. Now, Benito, is the time to hold forth thy tallent, and to set up for thy
self. Yes, Ladies, you shall be Serenaded, and when I have displayed my gifts,
I Will retire in Triumph over the Wall, and hug my self for the adventure. He
fums on the Guittar.


Vio. Let us make haste, Sister, and get into Covert, this Music will raise
the House upon us immediately.


Lau. Alas, we cannot, the damned Musician stands just in the door where we
should pass.


Ben. Singing. Eveillez vous, Belles endormies;
Eveillez vous: car il est jour:
Mettez la tete a la fenestre
Vous entendrez parler d'amour.

Aur. aside to Came. Camillo, this is my incorrigible rogue; and I dare not call
him Benito, for fear of discovering my self not to be Benito.


Came. The alarm's already given through the house. Ladies, you must be quick:
secure your selves, and leave us to shift.

Exeunt Women. Within. This way, this way.


Aur. I hear'em coming; and, as ill luck will have it, just by that quarter
where our Ladder is placed.


Came. Let us hide in the dark walk till they are past.


Aur. But then Benito will be caught, and being known to be my man, will betray
us.


Ben. I hear some in the Garden: Sure they are the Ladies, that are taken with
my melody. To It again Benito; this time I will absolutely inchant 'em. Fums
again.


Aur. He Is at it again. Why Benito, Are you mad?


Ben. Ah, Madam! Are you there? this is such a favor to your poor unworthy
Servant.

Sings. But still between kissing Amyntas did say,
Fair Phillis look up, and you will turn night to day.

Aur. Come away, you unsufferable rascal, the House is up, and will be upon us
immediately.


Ben. O Gemini, Is it you Sir?
Within. This way; follow, follow.

Aur. Leave your scraping and croaking, and step with us into this Arbor.


Ben. Scraping and Croaking! 'Sfoot, Sir, either grant I sing and play to a
Miracle, or I Will justify my Music, though I am caught, and hanged for it.


Enter Mario and Servants. Mar. Where is this Serenading Rascal? If I find
him, I Will make him an example to all midnight Caterwaulers, of which this
Fiddler is the lewdest.


Ben. O that I durst but Play my Tune out to convince him! Soul of harmony! Is
this lewd?


Plays and Sings softly. Came. Peace, dear Benito: We must flatter him.


Ben. Singing softly. Mettez la tete: the Notes which follow are so sweet, Sir,
I must sing 'em, though it be my ruin -- Parler d' amor. Laura and Violetta in
the Balcone.


Lau. Yes, we are safe, Sister; but they are yet in danger.


Vio. They are just upon 'em:


Lau. We must do something: Help, help; Thieves, thieves; we shall be murdered.


Mar. Where? Where are they?


Lau. Here, Sir, at our Chamber door, and we are run into the Balcone for
shelter: Dear Uncle, come and help us.


Mar. Back again quickly: I durst have sworn they had been in the Garden. It Is
an Ignis fatuus I think that leads us from one place to another. Exeunt Mar.
and Servants.


Vio. They are gone. My dear Camillo, make haste, and preserve your self.


Came. May our next Meeting prove more propitious.


Aur. to Benito. Come, Sirrah, I shall make you sing another note when you are
at home.


Ben. Such another word, and I Will sing again.


Aur. Set the Ladder, and mount first, you Rogue.


Ben. Mount first your self, and fear not my delaying:
If I am caught, they will spare me for my playing.
Sings as he goes off. Vous entendrez parler d'amour. Exeunt omnes.

ACT. III. SCENE I.
The Front of the Nunnery. Hip. IAscanio, and Hippolita at the Grate.
See you have kept touch, Brother,

Asca. As a man of honor ought, Sister, when he is challenged: and now,
according to the Laws of Duel, the next thing is to strip, and, in stead of
seconds, to search one another.


Hip. We'll strip our hands, if you please, Brother; for they are the only
weapons we must use.


Asca. That were to invite me to my loss, Sister; I could have made a full meal
in the World, and you would have me take up with hungry commons in the
Cloister. Pray mend my fare, or I am gone.


Hip. O, Brother, a hand in a Cloister, is fare like flesh in Spain, it is
delicate, because it is scarce. You may be satisfied with a hand, as well as I
am pleased with the Courtship of a Boy.


Asca. You may begin with me Sister, as Milo did, by carrying a Calfe first,
you may learn to carry an Ox hereafter: In the mean time produce your hand, I
understand Nuns-flesh better than you imagine: give it me, you shall see how I
will worry it. She gives her hand. Now Could not we thrust out our lips, and
contrive a Kiss too?


Hip. Yes, we may; but I have had the experience of it: it will be but half
flesh, half Iron.


Asca. Let Us try however.


Hip. Hold, Lucretia is here.


Asca. Nay, if you come with odds upon me, it is time to call Seconds. Ascanio
Hems.


The Prince and Lucretia appear. Luc. Sir, though your Song was pleasant, yet
there was one thing amiss in it, that was your Rallying of Religion.


Fred. Do you speak well of my Friend Love, and I Will try to speak well of your
friend Devotion.


Luc. I can never speak well of Love: 'twas to avoid it that I entered here.


Fred. Then, Madam, you have met your Man: for, to confess the truth to you, I
have but counterfeited Love to try you; for I never yet could love any Woman:
and, since I have seen you, and do not, I am certain now I shall escape for ever.


Luc. You are the best man in the World, if you continue this resolution* Pray,
then, let us vow solemnly these two things: the first, to esteem each other
better than we do all the world besides; the next, never to change our amity to
love.


Fre. Agreed Madam: shall I kiss your hand on it?


Luc. That Is too like a Lover: or, if it were not, the narrowness of the Grate
will excuse the ceremony.


Hip. No, but it will not, to my knowledge: I have tried every bar many a fair
time over, and, at last, have found out one where a hand may get through, and
be gallanted.


Luc. giving her hand. There, Sir; it is a true one.


Fre. kissing it. This, then, is a Seal to our perpetual friendship; and a
defyance to all Love.


Luc. That seducer of virtue.


Fre. That disturber of quiet.


Luc. That madness of youth.


Fre. That dotage of old age.


Luc. That enemy to good humor.


Fre. And, to conclude all, that reason of all unreasonable actions


Asca. This Doctrine is abominable, do not believe it Sister.


Hip. No, if I do, Brother, may I never have comfort from sweet youth at my
extremity.


Luc. But remember one article of our friendship, that though we banish Love,
we do not Mirth, nor Gallantry; for I declare, I am for all extravagancies, but
just loving.


Fre. Just my own humor; for I hate gravity and melancholy next to love.


Asca. Now it comes into my head, the Duke of Mantoua makes an entertainment to
night in Masquerade: if you love extravagancy so well, Madam, I Will put you into
the head of one; lay by your Nun-ship for an hour or two, and come amongst us
in disguise.


Fre. My Boy is in the right, Madam. Will you venture?
I Will furnish you with Masking-habits.

Hip. O my dear Sister, never refuse it: I keep the Keys you know, I Will
warrant you well' return before we are missed. I do so long to have one fling
into the sweet World again before I die. Hanged, at worst, it is but one sin
more, and then we'll repent for all together.


Asca. But if I catch you in the World, Sister, I Will make you have a better
opinion of the Flesh and the Devil for ever after.


Luc. If it were known, I were lost for ever.


Fre. How should it be known? you have her on your side, there, that keeps the
Keys: and, put the worst, that you are taken in the World; the World's a good
World to stay in; and there are certain occasions of waking in a morning, that
may be more pleasant to you than your Matins.


Luc. Fie, Friend, these extravagancies are a breach of Articles in our
Friendship: but well, for once, I Will venture to go out; Dancing and Singing are
but petty transgressions.


Asca. My Lord, here is company approaching: we shall be discovered.


Fred. Adieu then, jusqu'a revoir; Ascanio shall be with you immediately, to
conduct you.


Asca. How, Will you disguise, Sister? Will you be a Man, or a Woman?


Hip. A Woman, Brother Page, for life: I should have the strangest thoughts if
I once wore Breeches.


Asca. A Woman, say you? Here Is my hand, if I meet you in place convenient,
I Will do my best to make you one. Exeunt.


Enter Aurelian and Camillo. Came. But, Why thus melancholy, with Hat pulled
down, and the hand on the Region of the Heart, just the reverse of my Friend
Aurelian, of happy memory?


Aur. Faith, Camillo, I am ashamed on it, but cannot help it.


Came. But to be in Love with a Waiting Woman! with an eater of Fragments, a
Simperer at lower end of a Table, with mighty Golls, rough-grain'd, and red
with Starching, those discouragers and abettors of elevated love!


Aur. I could Love Deformity it self, with that good humor. She who is armed
with Gayety and Wit, needs no other Weapon to conquer me.


Came. We Lovers are the great Creators of wit in our Mistrisses. For Beatrix,
she a mere utterer of Yes and No, and has no more Sense than what will just
dignifie her to be an arrant waiting woman: that is, to lie for her Lady, and
take your Money.


Aur. It may be then I found her in the exaltation of her wit; for, certainly,
women have their good and ill days of talking, as they have of looking.


Came. But, however, she has done you the courtisy to drive out Laura: and so
one Poison has expelled the other.


Aur. Troth, not absolutely neither; for I dote on Laura's beauty, and on
Beatrix's wit: I am wounded with a forked Arrow, which will not easily be got
out.


Came. Not to lose time in fruitless complaints, let us pursue our new
contrivance, that you may see your two Mistresses, and I my one.


Aur. That will not now be difficult: this plot's so laid, that I defy the
Devil to make it miss. The Woman of the house, by which they are to pass to
Church, is bribed; the Ladies are, by her, acquainted with the design; and we
need only to be there before them, and expect the prey, which will undoubtedly
fall into the net.


Came. Your Man is made safe, I hope, from doing us any mischief.


Aur. He has disposed of himself, I thank him, for an hour or two: the Fop
would make me believe that an unknown Lady is in love with him, and has made
him an Assignation.


Came. If he should succeed now, I should have the worse opinion of the Sex for
his sake.


Aur. Never doubt but he will succeed: your brisk Fool that can make a Leg, is
ever a fine Gentleman among the Ladies, because he is just of their tallent, and
they understand him better than a Wit.


Came. Peace, the Ladies are coming this way to the Chapel, and their Jailer
with 'em: let 'em go by without saluting, to avoid suspicion; and let us go off
to prepare our Engine.


Enter Mario, Laura, and Violetta. Aur. I must have a look before we go. Ah,
you little Divine rogue! I Will be with you immediately.

Exeunt Aur. and Came.
Vio. Look you, Sister, there are our Friends, but take no notice.


Lau. I saw them. Was not that Aurelian with Camillo?


Vio. Yes.


Lau. I like him strangely. If his person were joined with Benito's Wit, I know
not what would become of my poor heart.


Enter Fabio, and whispers with Mario. Mar. Stay, Neeces, I Will but speak a word
with Fabio, and go with you immediately.


Vio. I see, Sister, you are infinitely taken with Benito's wit; but I have
heard he is a very conceited Coxcomb.


Lau. They who told you so, were horribly mistaken: you shall be judge your
self, Violetta; for, to confess frankly to you, I have made him a kind of an
appointment.


Vio. How! Have you made an Assignation to Benito? A Serving-man! a
Trencher-carrying Rascal!


Lau. Good words, Violetta! I only sent to him from an unknown Lady near this
Chapel, that I might view him in passing by, and see if his person were
answerable to his conversation.


Vio. But how will you get rid of my Uncle?


Lau. You see my project; his man Fabio is bribed by me, to hold him in
discourse.


Enter Benito, looking about him. Vio. In my conscience this is he. Lord, what
a Monster of a Man is there! With such a VVorkiday-rough-hewn face too! for,
faith, Heaven has not bestowed the finishing upon it.


Lau. It Is impossible this should be Benito; yet he stalks this way: from such
a piece of animated Timber, sweet Heaven deliver me.


Benito aside. This must of necessity be the Lady who is in Love with me. See,
how she surveyes my Person! Certainly one Wit knows another by instinct. By
that old Gentleman, it should be the Lady Laura too. Hum! Benito, thou art made
for ever.


Lau. He has the most unpromising Face, for a Wit, I ever saw; and yet he had
need have a very good one, to make amends for his face. I am half cured of him
already.


Ben. What means all this Surveying, Madam? you bristle up to me, and wheel
about me, like a Turkey-cock that is making Love: Faith, How do you like my
Person, ha?


Lau. I dare not praise it, for fear of the old Complement, that you should
tell me, It Is at my service. But, pray, Is your Name Benito?


Ben. Signior Benito, at your service, Madam.


Lau. And have you no Brother, or any other of your Name, one that is a Wit,
attending on Signior Aurelian?


Ben. No, I can assure your Ladyship: I my self am the only wit who does him
the honor, not to attend him, but to bear him company.


Lau. But sure it was another you, that waited on Camillo in the Garden, last
night.


Ben. It was no other Me, but me Signior Benito.


Lau. It Is impossible.


Ben. It Is most certain.


Lau. Then I would advise you to go thither again, and look for the wit which
you have left there, for you have brought very little along with you: your
voice, methinks, too, is much altered.


Ben. Only a little over-strain'd, or so, with Singing.


Lau. How slept you, after your adventure?


Ben. Faith, Lady, I could not sleep one wink, for Dreaming of you.


Lau. Not sleep for Dreaming! When the place falls, you shall be
Bull-master-General at Court.


Ben. Et tu Brute! Do you mistake me for a Fool too? then, I find there is one
more of that opinion besides my Master.


Vio. Sister, look to your self, my Uncle's returning.


Lau. I am glad on it; he has done my business: he has absolutely cured me.
Lord, that I could be so mistaken!


Vio. I told you what he was.


Lau. He was quite another thing last night: never was Man so altered in four
and twenty hours. A pure Clown, mere Elementary earth, without the least spark
of Soul in him!


Ben. But, tell me truly, Are not you in Love with me? Confess the truth: I
love plain-dealing: you shall not find me refractory.


Lau. Away, thou Animal; I have found thee out for a high and mighty fool, and
so I leave thee.


Mar. Come, now I am ready for you; as little Devotion, and as much good
Huswifery as you please: take example by me; I assure you no body debauches me
to Church, except it be in your Company. Exeunt.


Manet Benito* Ben. I am undone for ever: What shall I do with my self? I Will
run into some Desert, and there I Will hide my opprobrious head. No, hanged, I
will not neither; all Wits have their failings sometimes, and have the fortune to
be thought fools once in their lives. Sure this is but a copy of her
countenance; for my heart's true to me, and whispers to me, she loves me still:
well, I Will trust in my own merits, and be confident.


A noise of throwing down water within. Enter Mario, Fabio, Laura, and
Violetta. Lau. shaking her Clothes, Oh Sir, I am wet quite through my Clothes,
I am not able to endure it.


Vio. Was there ever such an insolence?


Mar. Send in to see who lives there: I Will make an example of them.


Enter Frontona. Fab. Here Is the Woman of the House her self, Sir.


Fron. Sir, I submit, most willingly, to any punishment you shall inflict upon
me; for, though I intended nothing of an affront to these sweet Ladies, yet I
can never forgive my self the misfortune of which I was the innocent occasion.


Vio. O I am ready to faint away.


Fron. Alas, poor sweet Lady, she is young and tender, Sir: I beseech you, give
me leave to repair my offense, with offering my self, and poor House, for her
accommodation.


Ben. I know that Woman: there is some villainous Plot in this, I Will lay my life
on it. Now, Benito, cast about for thy credit, and recover all again.


Mar. Go into the Coach, Neeces, and bid the Coachman drive apace. As for you,
Mistress, your smooth Tongue shall not excuse you.


Lau. By your favor, Sir, I Will accept of the Gentlewoman's civility; I cannot
stir a step farther.


Fro. Come in, sweet Buds of Beauty, you shall have a Fire in an inner Chamber,
and if you please to repose your self a while, Sir, in another Room, they shall
come out, and wait on you immediately.


Mar. Well, if it must be so.


Fron. whispering the Ladies. Your Friends are ready in the Garden, and will be
with you as soon as we have shaken off your Uncle.


Ben. A Cheat, a cheat, a rank one; I smell it, old Sir, I smell it.


Mar. What Is the matter with the Fellow? Is he distracted?


Ben. No, it is you are more likely to be distracted; but that there goes some
wit to the being mad, and you have not the least grain of wit to be gulled thus
grossly.


Fron. What does the fellow mean?


Ben. The Fellow means to detect your villainy, and to recover his lost
reputation of a Wit.


Fron. Why, Friend, What villainy? I hope my house is a civil house.


Ben. Yes, a very civil one; for my master lay in of his last Clap there, and
was treated very civilly to my knowledge.


Mar. How Is this, How Is this?


Fron. Come, you are a dirty Fellow, and I am known to be a person that --


Ben. Yes, you are known to be a person that --


Fron. Speak your worst of me, What person am I known to be?


Ben. Why, if you will have it, you are a little better than a procuress: you
carry messages betwixt party and party, and, in one word Sir, she is as arrant a
Fruit-woman as any is about Rome.


Mar. Nay, if she be a Fruit-woman, my Neeces shall not enter into her doors.


Ben. You had best let them enter, you do not know how they may fructify in her
house, for I heard her with these Ears whisper to'm, that their Friends were
within call.


Mar. This is palpable, this is manifest; I shall remember you, Lady Fruiterer,
I shall have your baskets searched when you bring Oranges again. Come away,
Neeces; and thanks honest Fellow for thy discovery. Exeunt Mario and Women.


Ben. Hah couragio: Il Diavolo e morto. Now I think I have tickled it; this
discovery has re-instated me into the Empire of my wit again. Now, in the pomp
of this achievement, will I present my self before Madam Laura, with a Behold,
Madam, the happy restoration of Benito.

Enter Aurelian, Camillo, and Frontona, overhearing him. Oh, now, that I had
the Mirror, to behold my self in the fullness of my glory! and, oh, that the
domineering Fop my Master were in presence, that I might triumph over him! that
I might even contemn the wretched wight, the mortal of a grovelling Soul, and of
a debased understanding.

He looks about him and sees his Master. How the Devil came these three
together? nothing vexes me but that I must stand bare to him, after such an
enterprise as this is.


Aur. Nay, put on, put on again, sweet Sir; Why should you be uncovered before
the Fop your Master? the wretched wight, the mortal of a grovelling Soul.


Ben. Ay, Sir, you may make bold with your self at your own pleasure: But for
all that, a little bidding would make me take your Counsel and be covered, as
Affairs go now.


Aur. If it be lawful for a man of a debased understanding to confer with such
an exalted wit, pray what was that glorious achievement which rapt you into
such an ecstasy?


Ben. It Is a sign you know well how matters go, by your asking me so
impertinent a question.


Aur. putting off his Hat to him. Sir, I beg of you, as your most humble
Master, to be satisfied.


Ben. Your Servant, Sir; at present I am not at leisure for conference. But
hark you, Sir, by the way of friendly advice, one word, henceforward tell me no
more of the adventure of the Garden, nor of the great Looking-glass --


Aur. You mean the Mirror.


Ben. Yes, the Mirror; tell me no more of that, except you could behold in it a
better, a more discreet, or a more able face for stratagem, than I can, when I
look there.


Aur. But, to the business; What is this famous enterprise?


Ben. Be satisfied, without troubling me farther, the business is done, the
Rogues are defeated, and your Mistress is secured: if you would know more,
demand it of that Criminal, Pointing to Frontona. and ask her how she dares
appear before you, after such a signal treachery, or before me, after such an
overthrow?


Fron. I know nothing, but only that, by your Masters Order, I was to receive
the two Ladies into my house, and you prevented it.


Ben. By my Master's Order? I Will never believe it. This is your stratagem, to
free your self, and defraud me of my reward.


Came. I Will witness what she says is true.


Ben. I am deaf to all asseverations that make against my honor.


Aur. I Will swear it then. We two were the two Rogues, and you the discoverer of
our Villainy.


Ben. Then, woe, woe, to poor Benito! I find my abundance of wit has ruined me.


Aur. But come a little nearer: I would not receive a good office from a
Servant, but I would reward him for his diligence.


Ben. Virtue, Sir, is its own reward: I expect none from you.


Aur. Since it is so, Sir, you shall lose no further time in my service:
henceforward pray know me for your humble Servant; for your Master I am
resolved to be no longer.


Ben. Nay, rather than so, Sir, I beseech you let a good honest sufficient
beating atone the difference.


Aur. It Is in vain.


Ben. I am loath to leave you without a guide.


Aur. He Is at it again, do you hear, Camillo?


Came. Prethy, Aurelian, be molify'd, and beat him.


Fron. Pray, Sir, hear reason, and lay't on, for my sake.


Aur. I am obdurate.


Came. But, What will your Father say, if you part with him?


Aur. I care not.


Ben. Well, Sir, since you are so peremptory, remember I have offered you
satisfaction, and so long my conscience is at ease: what a Devil, before I'lll
offer my self twice to be beaten, by any Master in Christendom, I Will starve,
and that is my resolution, and so your Servant that was Sir. Exit.


Aur. I am glad I am rid of him; he was my Evil Genius, and was always
appearing to me, to blast my undertakings: Let me send him never so far off,
the Devil would be sure to put him in my way, when I had any thing to execute.
Come, Camillo, now we have changed the Dice, it may be we shall have better
fortune.


SCENE. II.
Enter the Duke of Mantoua in Masquerade, Frederick, Valerio, and others. On
the other side Enter Lucretia, Hippolita, and Ascanio. Luc. to Asca. The Prince
I know already, by your description of his Masking-habit; but, Which is the
Duke his Father?


Asca. He whom you see talking with the Prince, and looking this way. I believe
he has observed us.


Luc. If he has not, I am resolved we'll make our selves as remarkable as we
can: I Will exercise my tallent of Dancing.


Hip. And I mine of Singing.


Duke to Frederick. Do you know the Company which came in last?


Fred. I cannot possibly imagine who they are: at least I will not tell you --
Aside.


Duke. There Is something very uncommon in the Air of one of them.


Fred. Please you, Sir, I Will discourse with her, and see if I can satisfy your
Highness.


Duke. Stay, there is a Dance beginning, and she seems as if she would make one.

SONG and DANCE.
Long betwixt Love and fear Phillis tormented,
Shunned her own wish yet at last she consented:
But loath that day should her blushes discover,
Come gentle Night She said,
Come quickly to my aid,
And a poor Shamefaced Maid
Hide from her Lover.
Now cold as Ice I am, now hot as Fire,
I dare not tell my self my own desire;
But let Day fly away, and let Night have her:
Grant ye kind Powers above,
Slow hours to parting Love,
But when to Bliss we move,
Bid 'em fly faster.
How sweet it is to Love when I discover,
That Fire which burns my Heart, warming my Lover;
It Is pity Love so true should be mistaken:
But if this Night he be
False or unkind to me,
Let me dye ere I see
That I Am forsaken.
After the Dance. My curiosity redoubles, I must needs hale that unknown
Vessel, and enquire whither she is bound, and what freight she carries.


Fred. She Is not worth your trouble, Sir: she will either prove some common
Courtizan in disguise, or at best, some homely person of Honor, that only
dances well enough to invite a sight of her self, and would look ill enough to
fright you.


Duke. That Is maliciously said; all I see of her is charming, and I have reason
to think her face is of the same piece, at least I Will try my fortune.


Fred. What an unlucky accident is this! If my father should discover her,
she is ruined: if he does not, yet I have lost her conversation to night.


Duke approaches Lucretia. Asca. It Is the Duke himself who comes to court you.


Luc. Peace, I Will fit him; for I have been informed to the least title of his
actions since he came to Town.


Duke to Lucretia. Madam, the Duke of Mantoua, whom you must needs imagine to
be in this company, has sent me to you, to know what kind of face there is
belonging to that excellent shape, and to those charming motions which he
observed so lately in your Dancing.


Luc. Tell his Highness, if you please, that there is a Face within the Masque,
so very deformed, that if it were discovered, it would prove the worst Vizor of
the two; and that, of all Men, he ought not to desire it should be exposed,
because then something would be found amiss in an entertainment which he has
made so splendid and magnificent.


Duke. The Duke I am sure would be very proud of your complement, but it would
leave him more unsatisfied than before, for he will find in it so much of
Gallantry, as, being added to your other graces, will move him to a strange
temptation of knowing you.


Luc. I should still have the more reason to refuse him; for 'twere a madness,
when I had charmed him by my motion and converse, to hazard the loss of that
conquest by my eyes.


Duke aside. I am on fire till I discover her.
At least, Madam, tell me of what Family you are.

Luc. Will you be satisfied if I tell you I am of the Colonne; you have seen
Iulia of that House.


Duke. Then you are she.


Luc. Have I not her Stature most exactly?


Duke. As near as I remember.


Luc. But, by your favor, I have nothing of her shape; for, if I may be so
vain to praise my self, she is a little thicker in the shoulders, and, besides,
she moves ungracefully.


Duke. Then you are not she again.


Luc. No not she: but you have forgotten Emilia of the Ursini, whom the Duke
saluted yesterday at her Balcone, when he entered. Her Air and Motion --


Duke. Are the very same with yours. Now I am sure I know you.


Luc. But there is too little of her to make a Beauty: my stature is much more
advantageous.


Duke. You have cozened me again.


Luc. Well, I find at last I must confess my self. What think you of Eugenia
Beata? the Duke seemed to be infinitely pleased last night, when my Brother
presented me to him at the Belvedere.


Duke. Now I am certain you are she; for you have both her stature, and her
motion.


Luc. But, if you remember your self a little better, there is some small
difference in our wit: for she has indeed the Air and Beauty of a Roman Lady,
but all the dullness of a Dutch-woman.


Duke. I see, Madam, you are resolved to conceal your self, and I am as fully
resolved to know you.


Luc. See which of our resolutions will take place.


Duke. I come from the Duke, and can assure you he is of an humor to be obeyed.


Luc. And I am of an humor not to obey him. But, Why should he be so curious?


Duke. If you would have my opinion, I believe he is in love with you.


Luc. Without seeing me?


Duke. Without seeing all of you: Love is love, let it wound us from what part
it please; and if he have enough from your shape and conversation, his business
is done, the more compendiously, without the face.


Luc. But the Duke cannot be taken with my conversation, for he never heard me
speak.


Duke aside. 'Slife, I shall discover my self. Yes, Madam, he stood by,
incognito, and heard me speak with you: but --


Luc. I wish he had trusted to his own courtship, and spoke himself; for it
gives us a bad impression of a Princes wit, when we see fools in favor about
his person.


Duke. What ever I am, I have it in Commission from him to tell you, He Is in
Love with you.


Luc. The good old Gentleman may dote, if he so pleases; but love, and fifty
years old, are stark nonsense.


Duke. But some men, you know, are green at fifty.


Luc. Yes, in their understandings.


Duke. You speak with great contempt of a Prince, who has some reputation in
the world.


Luc. No; it is you that speak with contempt of him, by saying he is in love at
such an Age.


Duke. Then, Madam, it is necessary you should know him better for his
reputation: and, that shall be, though he violate the Laws of Masquerade, and
force you.


Fred. I suspected this, from his violent temper. Aside. Sir, the Emperor's
Ambassador is here, in Masquerade, and I believe this to be his Lady: it were
well if you inquired of him, before you forced her to discover.


Duke. Which is the Ambassador?


Fred. That farthermost. Duke retires farther.


Fred. to Luc. Take your opportunity to escape, while his back is turned, or
you are ruined. Ascanio, wait on her.


Luc. I am so frighted, I cannot stay to thank you.


Exeunt Luc. Asca. and Hippolita. Duke to Fred. It Is a mistake, the Ambassador
knows nothing of her: I Am resolved I Will know it of her self, ere she shall
depart. Ha! Where is she? I left her here.


Fred. aside. Out of your reach, Father mine, I hope.


Duke. She has either shifted places, or else slipped out of the Assembly.


Fred. I have looked round: she must be gone, Sir.


Duke. She must not be gone, Sir. Search for her every where: I will have her.


Fred. Has she offended your Highness?


Duke. Peace, with your impertinent questions. Come hither, Valerio.


Valerio. Sir?


Duke. O, Valerio, I am desperately in love: that Lady, with whom you saw me
talking, has -- But I lose time; she is gone; haste after her; find her; bring
her back to me.


Val. If it be possible.


Duke. It must be possible; the quiet of my life depends upon it.


Val. Which way took she?


Duke. Go any way, every way; ask no questions: I know no more, but that she
must must be had. Exit Valerio.


Fred. Sir, the assembly will observe, that --


Duke. Damn the assembly, it is a dull insignificant crowd, now she is not here:
break it up, I Will stay no longer.


Fred. aside. I hope she is safe, and then this fantastic love of my Fathers
will make us sport too morrow. Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Lucretia, Ascanio, Hippolita. Luc. Now, that we are safe at the gate of our
Covent, methinks the adventure was not unpleasant.


Hip. And now that I am out of danger, Brother, I may tell you what a Novice
you are in love, to tempt a young Sister into the wide World, and not to show
her the difference betwixt that and her Cloister: I find I may venture safely
with you another time.


Asca. O, Sister, you play the Brazen-head with me; you give me warning when
Time's past; but that was no fit opportun^^y: I hate to snatch a morsel of
Love, and so away; I am for a set-meal, where I may enjoy my full gust; but
when I once fall on, you shall find me a brave man upon occasion.


Luc. It Is time we were in our Cells. Quick, Hippolita, where is the Key?


Hip. Here, in my pocket -- No, it is in my other Pocket -- Ha -- it is not
there, neither. I am sure I put it in one of them.


Luc. What should we do, if it should be lost now?


Hip. I have searched my self all over, and cannot find it.


Asca. A woman can never search her self all over; let me search you, Sister.


Luc. Is this a time for Raillery? Oh, sweet heaven! speak comfort quickly;
Have you found it?


Here Ascanio slips away. Exit. Hip. Speak you comfort, Madam, and tell me you
have it, for I am too sure that I have none on it.


Luc. O unfortunate that we are! day's breaking; the handycrafts shops begin to
open. Clock strikes.


Hip. The Clock strikes two: within this half hour we shall be called up to our
Devotions. Now, good Ascanio -- Alas he is gone too! we are left miserable, and
forlorn.


Luc. We have not so much as one place in the Town for a Retreat.


Hip. O, for a Miracle in our time of need! that some kind good-natured Saint
would take us up, and heave us over the Wall into our Cells.


Luc. Dear Sister, Pray; for I cannot: I have been so sinful, in leaving my
Cloister for the World, that I am ashamed to trouble my Friends above to help
me.


Hip. Alas, Sister, with what face can I Pray, then! Yours were but little
vanities; but I have sinned swingingly, against my Vow; yes, indeed, Sister, I
have been very wicked; for I wished the Ball might be kept perpetually in our
Cloister, and that half the handsome Nuns in it might be turned to Men, for the
sake of the other.


Luc. Well, if I were free from this disgrace, I would never more set foot
beyond the Cloister, for the sake of any Man.


Hip. And here I Vow, if I get safe within my Cell, I will not think of Man
again these seven years.


Ascanio Reenters. Asca. Hold, Hippolita, and make no more rash Vows: if you
do, as I live, you shall not have the Key.


Hip. The Key! why, Have it you, Brother?


Luc. He does but mock us: I know you have it not, Ascanio.


Asca. Ecce signum; Here it is for you.


Hip. O, sweet Brother, let me kiss you.


Asca. Hands off, sweet Sister; you must not be forsworn: you vowed you would
not think of a man these seven years.


Hip. Ay, Brother, but I was not so hasty, but I had wit enough to cozen the
Saint to whom I vowed; for you are but a Boy, Brother, and will not be a Man
these seven years.


Luc. But, Where did you find the Key, Ascanio?


Asca. To confess the truth, Madam, I stole it out of Hippolita's Pocket, to
take the Print of it in Wax; for, I Will suppose, you will give my Master leave to
wait on you in the Nunnery-garden, after your Abbess has walked the Rounds.


Luc. Well, well, good morrow: when you have slept, come to the Grate for a
Letter to your Lord. Now will I have the headache, or the Meagrim, or some
excuse, for I am resolved I Will not rise to Prayers.


Hip. Pray, Brother, take care of our Masking-habits, that they may be
forthcoming another time.


Asca. Sleep, sleep, and dream of me, Sister: I Will make it good, if you dream
not too unreasonably.


Luc. Thus dangers in our Love make joys more dear;
And Pleasure's sweetest, when it is mixed with fear. Exeunt.

ACT. IV. SCENE I.
A Dressing-Chamber. The Masking-habits of Lucretia and Hippolita laid in a
Chair. Fred. and Ascanio. Fred. I Never thought I should have loved her. Is It
come to this, after all my boastings and declarations against it? Sure I loved
her before, and did not know it, till I feared to lose her: there is the reason.
I had never desired her, if my Father had not. This is just the longing of a
Woman: she never finds the appetite in her self, till she sees the Meat on
another Plate. I Am glad however, you took the impression of the Key; but 'twas
not well to fright them.


Asca. Sir, I could not help it; but here is the effect on it: the Workman sat
up all night to make it. Gives a Key


Fred. This Key will admit me into the Seraglio of the Godly. The Monastery has
begun the War, in Sallying out upon the World, and therefore it is but just that
the World should make Reprizals on the Monastery.


Asca. Alas, Sir, you and Lucretia do but skirmish; it is I and Hippolita that
make the War: it is true, opportunity has been wanting for a Battle, but the
forces have been stoutly drawn up on both sides. As for your concernment, I
come just now from the Monastery, and have Orders from you Platonic Mistress
to tell you, she expects you this evening in the Garden of the Nunnery;
withal, she delivered me this Letter for you.


Fred. Give it me,


Asca. O, Sir, the Duke your Father!


The prince takes the Letter, and thinking to put it up bastily, drops it.
Enter Duke. Duke. Now, Frederick! not abroad yet?


Fred. Your last nights entertainment left me so weary, Sir, that I over-slept
my self this morning.


Duke. I rather envy you, than blame you: our sleep is certainly the most
pleasant portion of our lives. For my own part, I spent the night waking, and
restless.


Fred. Has any thing of moment happened to discompose your Highness?


Duke. I Will confess my follies to you: I am in love with a Lady I saw last
night in Masquerade.


Fred. It Is strange she should conceal her self.


Duke. She has, from my best search; yet I took exact notice of her Masking
habit, and described it to those whom I employed to find her.


Fred. aside. 'Sdeath, it lies there unremov'd; and, if he turns himself, full
in his eye. Now, now 'twill be discovered.


Duke. For 'twas extremely remarkable. I remember very well 'twas a loose long
Robe, streaked black and white, girt with a large Silver Ribband, and the Vizor
was a Moor's Face.


Fred. Running to the Chair where the Habits are, sits down. Sir, I beg pardon
of your Highness for this Rudeness, I am -- O, Oh --


Duke. What Is the Matter?


Fred. I am taken so extremely ill of the sudden, that I am forced to sit before
you.


Duke. Alas, What Is your distemper?


Fred. A most violent griping, which pulls me together on a heap.


Duke. Some cold, I fear, you took last night. Runs to the Door. Who waits
there? Call Physicians to the Prince.


Fred. Ascanio, remove these quickly.


Ascanio takes away the habits, and Exit. Duke returning. How do you find your
self?


Fre. arising. Much better. Sir: that which pained me is removed: as it came
unexpectedly, so it went as suddenly.


Enter Valerio. Duke. The Air, perhaps, will do you good. If you have health,
you may see those Troops drawn out, which I design for Millan.


Fred. Shall I wait your Highness?


Duke. No, leave me here with Valerio; I have a little business, which
dispatched, I Will follow you immediately. Well, What success, Valerio? Exit
Frederick.


Val. Our endeavors are in vain, Sir: there has been inquiry made about all
the Palaces in Rome, and neither of the Masking-habits can be discovered.


Duke. Yet, it must be a Woman of Quality. What Paper's that at my foot?


Val. taking up the Letter. It Is Sealed, Sir, and directed to the Prince.


Duke, taking the Letter. It Is a Woman's hand. Has he got a Mistress in Town so
soon? I am resolved to open it, though I do not approve my own curiosity. Opens
and Reads it. Now my fear is over, I can laugh at my last nights adventure: I
find that at Fifty all Men grow incorrigible, and Lovers especially; for,
certainly, never any Creature could be worse treated than your Father, ( How Is
this, Valerio? I am amazed) and yet the good, old, out of fashion Gentleman
heard himself Raillied, and bore it with all the patience of a Christian
Prince. (Now it is plain, the Lady in Masquerade is a Mistress of my Son's, and
the undutiful wretch was in the Plot to abuse me.) Ascanio will tell you the
latter part of our misfortune, how hardly we got into the Cloister, (A Nun too!
Oh, the Devil!) when we meet next, pray provide to laugh heartily, for there is
subject sufficient for a plentiful fit, and fop enough to spare for another time

Lucretia.





Val. Lucretia! now the Mystery is unfolded.


Duke. Do you know her?


Val. When I was last at Rome, I saw her often; she is near Kinswoman to the
present Pope; and, before he placed her in this Nunnery of Benedictines, was
the most celebrated Beauty of the Town.


Duke. I know I ought to hate this Woman, because she has affronted me thus
grossly; but yet I cannot help it, I must love her.


Val. But, Sir, you come on too much disadvantage to be your Son's Rival.


Duke. I am deaf to all considerations: pr'ythee do not think of giving a
Madman Counsel: pity me, and cure me, if thou can; but remember there is but
one infallible Medicine, that is enjoyment.


Val. I had forgot to tell you, Sir, that the Governor Don Mario is without,
to wait on you.


Duke. Desire him to come in.


Enter Don Mario. Mar. I am come, Sir, to beg a favor from your Highness, and
it is on the behalf of my Sister Sophronia, Abbess of the Torr' di Specchi.


Val. Sir, she is Abbess of that very Monastery where your Mistress is enclosed.
Aside, to the Duke.


Duke. I should be glad to serve any Relation of yours, Don Mario.


Mar. Her request is, That you would be pleased to grace her Chapel this
afternoon. There will be Music, and some little Ceremony, in the Reception of
my two Neeces, who are to be placed in Pension there.


Duke. Your Neeces, I hear, are fair, and great Fortunes.


Mar. Great vexations I Am sure they are; being daily haunted by a company of
wild Fellows, who buz about my house like Flies.


Duke. Your design seems reasonable; Women in hot Countries are like Oranges in
cold: to preserve them, they must be perpetually housed. I Will bear you company
to the Monastery. Come, Valerio; this opportunity is happy beyond our
expectation. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Camillo, Aurelian. Came. He has smarted sufficiently for this offense:
pr'ythee, dear Aurelian, forgive him; he waits without, and appears penitent;
I Will be responsible for his future carriage.


Aur. For your sake, then, I receive him into grace.


Came. at the door. Benito, you may appear, your peace is made.


Enter Benito. Aur. But, it must be upon conditions.


Ben. Any conditions that are reasonable; for, as I am a Wit, Sir, I have not
eaten --


Aur. You are in the path of perdition already; that is the principal of our
Conditions, you are to be a Wit no more.


Ben. Pray, Sir, if it be possible, let me be a little Wit still.


Aur. No, Sir: you can make a Leg, and Dance; those are no Tallents of a Wit:
you are cut out for a brisk fool* and can be no other.


Ben. Pray, Sir, let me think (...) Wit, or my heart will break.


Came. That you will naturally do, as you are a Fool.


Aur. Then, no farther meddling with adventures, or contrivances of your own:
they are all belonging to the Territories of wit, from whence you are banished.


Ben. But what if my imagination should really furnish me with some --


Aur. Not a Plot, I hope?


Ben. No, Sir, no Plot; but some expedient then, to molify the word, when your
invention has failed you?


Aur. Think it a temptation of the Devil, and believe it not.


Ben. Then farewell all the happiness of my life.


Came. You know your doom, Benito, and now you may take your choice, whether you
will renounce wit, or eating.


Ben. Well, Sir, I must continue my Body at what rate soever: and the rather,
because now there is no farther need of me in your adventures; for I was
assured, by Beatrix, this morning, that her two Mistrisses are to be put in
Pension in the Nunnery of Benedictines, this afternoon.


Came. Then I am miserable.


Aur. And you have deferred the telling it till it is past time to study for
prevention.


Came. Let us run thither immediately, and either perish in it, or free them.
You Will assist me with your Sword?


Aur. Yes, if I cannot do it to more purpose, with my counsel. Let us first play
the fairest of our Game, it is time enough to snatch when we have lost it.
Exeunt.


SCENE III.
A Chapel. The Duke, Valerio, Attendants. At the other door, Laura, Violetta,
Beatrix, Mario. Instrumental and vocal Music. In the time of which, Enter
Aurelian and Camillo. After the Music, Enter Sophronia, Lucretia, Hippolita,
and other Nuns. Duke to Valeria, who had whispered to him. I needed not those
marks to know her. She Is one continued excellence; she is all over Miracle,


Soph. to the Duke. We know, Sir, we are not capable, by our Entertainments, of
adding any thing to your pleasures, and therefore we must attribute this favor
of your presence, to your piety and devotion.


Duke. You have treated me with Harmony so excellent, that I believed my self
among a quire of angels; especially, when I beheld so fair a Troop behind you.


Soph. Their Beauty, Sir, is wholly dedicated to Heaven, and is no way
ambitious of a commendation, which from your mouth might raise a pride in any
other of the Sex.


Came. I am impatient, and can bear no longer. Let what will happen --


Aur. Do you not see your ruin inevitable? Draw in a holy place! and in the
presence of the Duke!


Mar. I do not like Camillo's being here: I must cut short the Ceremony.
Whispers Sophronia,


Soph. to Lau. and Violet. Come, fair Cousins, we hope to make the Cloysteral
life so pleasing, that it may be an inducement to you to quit the wicked world
for ever.


Violetta passing by Camillo. Take that, and read it at your leisure.

Conveyes a Note into his hand. Came A Ticket, as I live, Aurelian.


Aur. Steal off, and be thankful: If that be my Beatrix with Laura, she is most
confoundedly ugly. If ever we had come to Love-work, and a Candle had been
brought us, I had fallen back from that face, like a Buck Rabbet in coupling.


Exeunt Camillo and Aurelian. Soph. Daughters, the time of our Devotion calls
us. All happiness to your Highness.


Luc. to Hip. Little thinks my venerable old Love there, that his Mistress in
Masquerade is so near him. Now do I even long to abuse that Fop-gravity again.


Hip. Methinks he looks on us.


Luc. Farewell, poor love, I am she, I am, for all my demure looks, that
treated thee so inhumanely last night.


She is going off, after Sophonia. Duke following her. Stay Lady; I would speak
with you.


Luc. Ah! (screaking.)


Soph. How now, Daughter? What Is the meaning of that undecent noise you make?


Luc. aside. If I speak to him, he will discover my voice, and then I am ruined.


Duke. If your name be Lucretia, I have some business of concernment with you.


Luc. to Soph. Dear Madam, for Heavens sake make haste into the Cloister, the
Duke pursues me on some ill design.


Soph. to the Duke. It Is not permitted, Sir, for Maids once entered into
Religion, to hold discourses here of worldly things.


Duke. But my discourses are not worldly Madam;
I had a Vision in the dead of night,
Which showed me this fair Virgin in my sleep,
And told me, that from her I should be taught
Where to bestow large Alms, and great Endowments,
On some near Monastery.

Soph. -- Stay, Lucretia,
The Holy Vision's will must be obeyed.

Exeunt Soph. cum suis. Luc. aside. He does not know me, sure; and yet I fear
Religion is the least of his business with me.


Duke. I see, Madam, Beauty will be beauty in any habit.
Though I confess, the splendour of a Court
Were a much fitter Scene for yours, then is
A Cloistered privacy.

Luc. counter-feiting her voice. The World has no temptations for a mind
So fixed, and raised above it,
This humble Cell contains and bounds my wishes.
My Charity gives you my Prayers, and that is all my
Converse with humane kind.

Duke. Since when, Madam, have the World and you been upon these equal terms
of hostility? time was you have been better friends.


Luc. No doubt I have been vain, and sinful; but, the remembrance of those
days cannot be pleasant to me now, and therefore, if you please, do not
refresh their Memory.


Duke. Their memory! you speak as if they were Ages past.


Luc. You think me still what I was once, a vain, fond, giddy creature; I see,
Sir, whether your discourses tend, and therefore take my leave.


Duke. Yes, Madam, I know you see whither my discourses tend, and therefore
'twill not be convenient that you should take your leave. Disguise your self no
farther; you are known, as well as you knew me in Masquerade.


Luc. I am not used enough to the World, to interpret Riddles; therefore, once
more, heaven keep you.


Duke. This will not do: your voice, your mien, your stature, betray you for
the same I saw last night: you know the time and place.


Luc. You were not in this Chapel; and, I am bound by vow to stir no farther.


Duke. But you had too much wit to keep that vow.


Luc. If you persist, Sir, in this raving madness,
I can bring witness of my innocence. Is going.

Duke. To save that labor, see if you know that hand, and let that justify
you. (Shows her Letter.)


Luc. What do I see! my ruin is inevitable.


Duke. You know you merit it:
You used me ill, and now are in my power.

Luc. But you, I hope, are much too noble
To destroy the Fame of a poor silly Woman?

Duke. Then, in few words, for I am bred a Soldier,
And must speak plain, it is your Love I ask:
If you deny, this Letter is produced;
You know the consequence.

Luc. I hope I do not:
For, though there are appearances against me,
Enough to give you hope I durst not shun you;
Yet, could you see my heart, it is a white Virgin-Tablet,
On which no Characters of earthly love
Were ever writ: and, 'twixt the Prince and me;
If there were any Criminal affection,
May heaven this minute --

Duke. Swear not; I believe you:
For could I think my Son had e're enjoyed you,
I should not be his Rival. Since he has not,
I may have so much kindness for my self
To wish that happiness.

Luc. You ask me what I must not grant,
Nor if I loved you would: you know my vow of Chastity.

Duke. Yet again that senceless argument?
The Vows of Chastity can never be broken,
Where Vows of secrecy are kept: those I Will swear with you.
But it is enough, at present, you know my resolution.
I would persuade, not force you to my Love;
And to that end I give you this nights respite.
Consider all, that you may fear or hope;
And think that on your grant, or your denial,
Depends a double welfare, yours and mine. Exit.

Luc. A double ruin rather, if I grant: For what can I expect from such a
Father, when such a Son betrays me! Could I think of all Mankind, that
Frederick could be base. And, with the vanity of vulgar Souls betray a Virgins
fame: one who esteemed him, and I much fear did more than barely so -- But I
dare not examine my self farther; for fear of confessing to my own thoughts, a
tenderness of which he is unworthy.


Enter Hippolita. Hip. I watched till your old Gallant was gone, to bring you
news of your young one. A mischief on these old dry Lovers, they are good for
nothing but tedious talking; Well, yonder is the Prince at the Grate; I hope I
need say no more to you.


Luc. I Will come when I have recovered my self a little.
I am a wretched creature, Hippolita; the Letter
I writ the Prince --

Hip. I know it, is fallen into his Fathers hands by accident. He Is as wretched
as you too. Well, well, it shall be my part to bring you together; and then, if
two young people that have opportunity, can be wretched and melancholy -- I Will
go before and meet Ascanio. Exit.


Luc. I am half unwilling to go, because I must be accessory to her Assignation
with Ascanio; but, for once, I Will meet the Prince in the Garden walk: I am glad
however that he is less criminal than I thought him. Exeunt.


SCENE IV.
The Nunnery-Garden. Hippolita, Ascanio, meeting Laura and Violetta. Hip. I
hear some walking this way. Who goes there?


Lau. We are the two new Pensioners, Laura and Violetta.


Hip. Go in, to your devotion: these undue hours of walking savor too much of
worldly thoughts.


Lau. Let us retire to the Arbor, where, by this time, I believe our Friends
are. Goodnight, Sister.


Hip. Good Angels guard you. Exit Laura and Violetta. Now, Brother, the coast
is clear, and we have the Garden to our selves, Do you remember how you
threatened me? but that is all one. How good soever the opportunity may be, so
long as we two resolve to be virtuous.


Asca. Speak for your self, Sister, for I am wickedly inclined. Yet, I confess,
I have some remorse, when I consider you are in Religion.


Hip. We should do very well to consider that, both of us; for, indeed, What
should young people do, but think of Goodness and Religion; especially when
they love one another, and are alone too, Brother?


Asca. A curse on it, here comes my Lord, and Lucretia. We might have
accomplished all, and been repenting by this time; yet who the Devil would have
thought they should have come so soon? -- Ah -- Sets his Teeth.


Hip. Who the Devil would have put it to the venture? This is always the fault
of you raw Pages: you that are too young, never use an opportunity; and we that
are elder can seldom get one. -- Ah! Sets her Teeth.


Enter Frederick and Lucretia. Luc. I believe, indeed, it troubled you to lose
that Letter.


Fred. So much, Madam, that I can never forgive my self that negligence.


Luc. Call it not so, 'twas but a casualty, though, I confess, the consequence
is dangerous; and therefore have not both of us reason to defy Love, when we
see a little Gallantry is able to produce so much mischief.


Fred. aside. Now cannot I, for my heart, bring out one word against this Love.


Luc. Come, you are mute, upon a Subject that is both easy and pleasant. A man
in Love is so ridiculous a creature --


Fred. Especially to those that are not.


Luc. True; for to those that are, he cannot be so: they are like the Citizens
of Bethlehem, who never find out one another Maddess, because they are all
tainted. But for such ancient Fops, as (with reverence) your Father is, What
reason can they have to be in Love?


Fred. Nay, your old Fop's unpardonable, that is certain -- But --


Luc. But What? Come, laugh at him.


Fred. But, I consider, he is my Father, I cannot laugh at him.


Luc. But, if it were another, we should see how you would insult over him.


Fred. Ay, if it were another -- And yet I don't know neither, it is no part of
good nature to insult: a man may be overtaken with a passion, or so, I know it
by my self.


Luc. How, by your self? you are not in love, I hope?
Oh that he would confess first now! Aside.

Fred. But, if I were, I should be loath to be laughed at.

Luc. Since you are not in Love, you may the better counsel me: What shall I do
with this same troublesome Father of yours?


Fred. Any thing, but love him.


Luc. But you know he has me at a Bay; my Letter is in his possession, and he
may produce it to my ruin: therefore if I did allow him some little favor, to
mollify him --


Fred. How, Madam? would you allow him Favors? I can never consent to it: not
the least look or smile; they are all too precious, though they were to save
his life.


Luc. What, Not your Father? Oh that he would confess he loved me first! Aside.


Fred. What have I done? I shall betray my self, and confess my love, to be
laughed at, by this hard-hearted Woman. Aside. It Is true, Madam, I had forgot;
he is, indeed, my Father, and therefore you may use him as kindly as you please.


Luc. He Is insensible: now he inrages me. Aside. What if he proposes to Marry
me? I am not yet professed, and 'twould be much to my advantage.


Fred. Marry you! I had rather dye a thousand deaths, than suffer it.


Luc. This begins to please me. Aside.
But, Why should you be so much my enemy?

Fred. Your enemy, Madam? Why, Do you desire it?

Luc. Perhaps I do,

Fred. Do it, Madam, since it pleases you so well.

Luc. But you had rather dye, than suffer it.

Fred. No, I have changed my mind: I Will live, and not be concerned at it.


Luc. Do you contradict your self so soon? Then know, Sir, I did intend to do
it; and I am glad you have given me advice so agreeable to my inclinations.


Fred. Heaven! that you should not find it out! I delivered your Letter on
purpose to my Father, and 'twas my business, now, to come and mediate for him.


Luc. Pray, then, carry him the news of his good success.
Adieu, sweet Prince.

Fred. Adieu, dear Madam.

Asca. Hey day! What will this come to? they have cozened one another into a
quarrel; just like friends in Fencing, a chance thrust comes, and then they
fall to it in earnest.


Hip. You and I, Brother, shall never meet upon even terms, if this be not
piec'd. Faces about, Madam, turn quickly to your Man, or by all that is
virtuous, I Will call the Abbess.


Asca. I must not be so bold with you, Sir; but, if you please, you may turn
toward the Lady, and I suppose you would be glad I durst speak to you with
more authority, to save the credit of your willingness.


Fred. Well, I Will show her I dare stay, if it be but to confront her Malice.


Luc. I am sure I have done nothing to be ashamed of, that I should need to run
away.


Asca. Pray give me leave, Sir, to ask you but one question; Why were you so
unwilling that she should be Married to your Father?


Fred. Because then, her Friendship must wholly cease.


Asca. But, you may have her Friendship, when she is Married to him.


Fred. What, when another had enjoyed her?


Asca. Victoria, Victoria, he loves you, Madam; let him deny it if he can.


Luc. Fie, fie, love me, Ascanio! I hope he would not forswear himself, when he
has railed so much against it.


Fred. I hope I may love your mind, Madam; I may Love Spiritually.


Hip. That Is enough, that is enough: let him love the mind without the body if
he can.


Asca. Ay, ay, when the love is once come so far, that Spiritual Mind will
never leave pulling, and pulling, till it has drawn the beastly body after it.


Fred. Well, Madam, since I must confess it, (though I expect to be laughed
at, after my railing against Love) I do love you all over, both Soul and Body.


Asca. Lord, Sir, What a Tygress have you provoked! you may see she takes it
to the death that you have made this declaration.


Hip. I thought where all her anger was: Why do you not rail, Madam? Why do
you not banish him? the Prince expects it; he has dealt honestly, he has told
you his Mind, and you make your worst on it.


Luc. Because he does expect it, I am resolved I Will neither satisfy him nor
you; I will neither rail nor laugh: let him make his worst of that, now.


Fred. If I understand you right, Madam, I am happy beyond either my deserts or
expectation.


Luc. You may give my words what interpretation you please, Sir, I shall not
envy you their meaning in the kindest sense. But we are near the
Jessamine-walk, there we may talk with greater freedom, because it is farther
from the House.


Fred. I wait you, Madam. Exeunt.


SCENE. V.
Aurelian with a dark Lanthorn, Camillo and Benito. Came. So, we are safe got
over into the Nunnery-Garden; for what is to come, trust Love and Fortune.


Aur. This must needs be the walk she mentioned; yet, to be sure, I Will hold the
Lanthorn while you read the Ticket.


Came. reads. I prepared this Ticket, hoping to see you in the Chapel: come
this evening over the Garden-wall, on the right hand, next the Tiber.


Aur. (We are right, I see.)


Came. Bring only your discreet Benito with you, and I will meet you, attended
by my faithful Beatrix. Violetta.


Ben. Discreet Benito! Did you hear that, Sir?


Aur. Mortify thy self for that vain thought; and, without enquiring into the
mystery of these words, which I assure thee were not meant to thee, plant thy
self by that Ladder without motion, to secure our retreat; and be sure to make
no noise.


Ben. But, Sir, in case that --


Aur. Honest Benito, no more questions: Basta is the word. Remember, thou art
only taken with us, because thou have a certain evil Demon who conducts thy
actions, and would have been sure, by some damned accident or other, to have
brought thee hither to disturb us.


Came. I hear whispering not far from us, and I think it is Violetta's voice.


Aur. to Benito. Retire to your Post; avoid, good Satan.


Exit Benito. Enter Laura with a dark Lanthorn hid, and Violetta. Came. Ours is
the honor of the Field, Madam; we are here before you.


Vio. Softly, dear friend, I think I hear some walking in the Garden.


Came. Rather, let us take this opportunity for your escape from hence; all
things are here in readiness.


Vio. This is the second time we e're have met; let us discourse, and know each
other better first: that is the way to make sure of some love beforehand; for,
as the world goes, we know not how little we may have when we are Married.


Came. Losses of opportunity are fatal, in war, you know, and Love's a kind of
warfare.


Vio. I shall keep you yet a while from close fighting.


Came. But, Do you know what an hour in Love is worth? It Is more precious than
an Age of ordinary life; it is the very Quintesence and Extract of it.


Vio. I do not like your Chemical preparation of love; yours is all Spirit, and
will fly too soon: I must see it fixed, before I trust you. But we are near the
Arbor; now our out guards are set, let us retire a little, if you please; there
we may talk more freely.


Exeunt. Aur. to Laura. My Ladies Woman, methinks you are very reserved to
night: pray advance into the Lists; though I have seen your countenance by day,
I can endure to hear you talk by night. Be cunning, and set your wit to show
which is your best commodity: it will help the better to put off that drug,
your Face.


Lau. The coursest ware will serve such customers as you are: let it suffice,
Mr. Servingman, that I have seen you too. Your face is the original of the
ugliest Vizors about Town; and for wit, I would advise you to speak reverently
of it, as a thing you are never like to understand.


Aur. Sure, Beatrix, you came lately from looking in your Glass, and that has
given you a bad opinion of all faces. But since when am I become so notorious a
fool?


Lau. Since yesterday; for the other night you talked like a man of sense: I
think your wit comes to you, as the sight of Owls does, only in the dark.


Aur. Why, When did you discourse by day with me?


Lau. You have a short memory. This afternoon, in the great street. Do you not
remember when you talked with Laura?


Aur. But what was that to Beatrix?


Lau. aside. 'Slife, I had forgot that I am Beatrix.
But, pray, When did you find me out to be so ugly?

Aur. This afternoon, in the Chapel.

Lau. That cannot be, for I well remember you were not there, Benito: I saw
none but Camillo, and his friend the handsome stranger.


Aur. aside. Curse on it, I have betrayed my self.


Lau. I find you are an Impostor; you are not the same Benito: your language
has nothing of the Serving-man.


Aur. And yours, methinks, has not much of the Waiting Woman.


Lau. My Lady is abused, and betrayed by you: but I am resolved
I Will discover who you are. Holds out a Lanthorn to him.
How? the Stranger!

Aur. Nay, Madam, if you are good at that, I Will match you there too. Holds out
his Lanthorn. O prodigy! Is Beatrix turned to Laura?


Lau. Now the question is, which of us two is the greatest cheat?


Aur. That Is hardly to be tried, at so short warning: Let Us Marry one another,
and then, twenty to one, in a Twelve Month we shall know.


Lau. Marry! Are you at that so soon, Signior? Benito and Beatrix, I confess,
had some acquaintance; but Aurelian and Laura are mere strangers.


Aur. That ground I have gotten as Benito, I am resolved I Will keep as Aurelian.
If you will take State upon you, I have treated you with Ceremony already; for
I have wooed you by Proxy.


Lau. But you would not be contented to bed me so; or give me leave to put the
Sword betwixt us.


Aur. Yes, upon condition you will remove it.


Lau. Pray let our Friends be judge of it; if you please, we'll find 'em in the
Arbor.


Aur. Content; I am then sure of the Verdict, because the Jury is bribed
already. Exeunt.


SCENE VI.
Benito meeting Frederick, Ascanio, Lucreria and Hippolita. Ben. Knowing my own
merits, as I do, it is not impossible but some of these Harlotry Nuns may love
me: Oh, here is my Master! now if I could but put this into civil terms, so as
to ask his leave, and not displease him --


Asca. I hear one talking, Sir, just by us.


Ben. I am stolen from my post, Sir, but for one minute only, to demand
permission of you, since it is not in our Articles, that if any of these Nuns
should cast an eye or so --


Fred. 'Slife, we are betrayed; but I Will make this Rascal sure.

Draws and runs at him.
Ben. Help, Murder, Murder. Runs off.


Enter Aurelian and Camillo; Laura and Violetta after them. Aur. That was
Benito's voice: we are ruined.


Came. Oh, here they are; we must make our way.


Aur. and the Prince make a Pass or two confusedly, and fight off the Stage.
The Women Schreek. Asca. Never fear, Ladies. Come on, Sir; I am your Man.


Came. stepping back. This is the Prince's Page, I know his voice, Ascanio?


Asca. Signior Camillo!


Came. If the Prince be here, it is Aurelian is engaged with him. Let us run in
quickly, and prevent the mischief.


All go off. A little Clashing within. After which they all re-enter. Fred. to
Aur. I hope you are not wounded.


Aur. No, Sir; but infinitely grieved that --


Fred. No more; 'twas a mistake: but which way can we escape, the Abbess is
coming, I see the Lights.


Luc. You cannot go by the Gate then. Ah me, unfortunate!


Came. But over the Wall you may: we have a Ladder ready. Adieu, Ladies. Curse
on this ill luck, where we had just persuaded them to go with us!


Fred. Farewell, sweet Lucretia.


Lau. Goodnight, Aurelian.


Aur. I, it might have proved a good one: Faith, shall I stay, yet, and make it
one, in spite of the Abbess, and all her Works?


Lau. The Abbess is just here; you will be caught
In the Spiritual Trap, if you should tarry.

Aur. That will be time enough when we two Marry.

Exeunt severally. ACT. V. SCENE I.
Enter Sophronia, Lucretia, Laura, Violetta. Soph. BY this, then, it appears
you all are guilty;
Only your ignorance of each others crimes
Caused first that tumult, and this discovery.
Good Heavens, that I should live to see this day!
Methinks these Holy Walls, the Cells, the Cloisters,
Should all have struck a secret horror on you:
And when, with unchaste thoughts,
You trod these lonely walks, you should have looked
The venerable Ghost of our first Foundress
Should with spread arms have met you in her Shroud,
And frighted you from Sin.

Luc. Alas, you need not aggravate our crimes,
We know them to be great beyond excuse,
And have no hope, but only from your mercy.

Lau. Love is, indeed, no plea within these Walls;
But, since we brought it hither, and were forced,
Not led by our own choice, to this strict life --

Vio. Too hard for our soft youth, and bands of love,
Which we before had knit.

Lau. -- Pity your blood,
Which runs within our veins, and since Heaven puts it
In your sole power to ruin or to save,
Protect us from the sordid avarice
Of our domestic Tyrant, who deserves not
That we should call him Uncle, or you Brother.

Soph. If, as I might, with Justice I should punish,
No penance could be rigorous enough;
But I am willing to be more indulgent.
None of you are Professed: and since I see
You are not fit for higher happiness,
You may have what you think the world can give you.

Luc. Let us adore you, Madam.

Soph. -- You, Lucretia,
I shall advise within.

Vio. -- But for us, Madam?

Soph. For you, dear Neeces, I have long considered
The injuries you suffer from my Brother,
And I rejoice it is in me to help you:
I will endeavor, from this very hour,
To put you both into your Lovers hands,
Who, by your own confession, have deserved you;
But so as (though it is done by my connivance)
It shall not seem to be with my consent.

Lau. You do an act of noble charity,
And may just heaven reward it.

Enter Hippolita and whispers Lucretia. Soph. Oh, you're a faithful Portress of
a Cloister.
What is it you whisper to Lucretia?
On your Obedience tell me.

Luc. -- Since you must know, Madam,
I have received a Courtship from the Prince
Of Mantoua. The rest Hippolita may speak.

Hip. His Page Ascanio is at the grate,
To know from him, how you had escaped this danger;
And brings with him those Habits --

Soph. I find that here has been a long commerce.
What Habits?

Luc. I blush to tell you, Madam. They were Masking Habits, in which we went
abroad.


Soph. O strange Impiety! Well, I conclude
You are no longer for Religious clothing:
You would infect our Order.

Luc. kneeling. Madam, you promised us forgiveness.

Soph. I have done; for it is indeed too late to chide.

Hip. With Ascanio, there are two Gentlemen; Aurelian and Camillo I think they
call themselves, who came to me, recommended from the Prince, and desired to
speak with Laura and Violetta.


Soph. I think they are your Lovers, Neeces.


Vio. Madam, they are.


Hip. But, for fear of discovery from your Uncle Mario, whose House you know,
joins to the Monastery, are both in Masquerade.


Soph. to Laura and Violetta. This opportunity must not be lost.
You two shall take the Masking-habits instantly,
And, in them, escape your jealous Unckle's eyes.
When you are happy, make me so, by hearing your success.

Kisses them. Exeunt Lau. and Vio. Luc. A sudden thought is sprung within my
mind,
Which, by the same indulgence you have shown,
May make me happy too. I have not time
To tell you now, for fear I lose this opportunity.
When I return from speaking with Ascanio,
I shall declare the secrets of my Love,
And crave your farther help.

Soph. In all that virtue will permit you shall not fail to find it.


Exit Lucretia. Hip. Madam, the foolish Fellow whom we took grows troublesome;
What shall we do with him?


Soph. Send for the Magistrate; he must be punished --
Yet hold; that would betray the other secret.
Let him be strait turned out, on this Condition,
That he presume not ever to disclose
He was within these walls. I Will speak with him:
Come, and attend me to him. Exit Sophronia.

Hip. You fit to be an Abbess? We that live out of the World, should at least
have the common sense of those that live far from Town; if a Peddler comes by
'em once a year, they will not let him go without providing themselves with
what they want.


Exit after Sophronia. SCENE II.
The Street. Aurelian, Camillo, Laura, Violetta: all in Masking habits. Came.
This generosity of the Abbess is never to be forgot; and it is the more to be
esteemed because it was the less to be expected.


Vio. At length, my Camillo, I see my self safe within your Arms; and yet,
methinks, I can never be enough secure of you: for, now I have nothing else to
fear, I am afraid of you; I fear your constancy: they say possession is so
dangerous to Lovers, that more of them die of Surfeits than of Fasting.


Lau. You Will be rambling too, Aurelian, I do not doubt it, if I would let you;
but I Will take care to be as little a Wife, and as much a Mistress to you, as is
possible: I Will be sure to be always pleasant, and never suffer you to be
cloyed.


Aur. You are certainly in the right: pleasantness of humor makes a Wife last
in the sweet meat, when it will no longer in the Fruit. But pray let us make
haste to the next honest Priest, that can say Grace to us, and take our
appetites while they are coming.


Came. That way leads to the Austin-Fryers, there lives a Father of my
acquaintance.


Lau. I have heard of him; he has a mighty stroke at Matrimonies, and mumbles
'em over as fast, as if he were teaching us to forget 'em all the while.


Enter Benito, and over-hears the last speech. Ben. Cappari; that is the voice
of Madam Laura. Now, Benito, is the time to repair the lost honor of thy wit,
and to blot out the last adventure of the Nunnery.


Vio. That way I hear company; let us go about by this other street, and shun
'em.


Ben. That voice I know too; it is the younger Sister, Violetta's. Now have
these two most treacherously conveyed themselves out of the Nunnery, for my
Master and Camillo, and given up their persons to those lewd Rascals in
Masquerade; but I Will prevent 'em. Help there, Thieves and Ravishers, villainous
Maskers, stop Robbers, stop Ravishers.


Came. We are pursued that way, let us take this street.


Lau. Save your selves, and leave us.


Came. We'll rather dye than leave you.


Enter at several doors Duke of Mantoua and Guards, and Don Mario and Servants,
with Torches. Aur. So, now the way is shut up on both sides. We'll dye merrily
however: -- have at the fairest.


Aurelian and Camillo fall upon the Dukes Guards, and are seized behind by
Mario 's Servants. At the drawing of Swords, Benito runs off. Duke. Are these
insolences usually committed in Rome by night? it has the fame of a
well-governed City; and methinks, Don Mario, it does somewhat reflect on you to
suffer these Disorders.


Mar. They are not to be hindered in the Carnival: you see, Sir, they have
assumed the Privilege of Maskers.


Lau. to Au. If my Uncle know us, we are ruined; therefore be sure you do not
speak.


Duke. How then can we be satisfied this was not a device of Masking, rather
than a design of Ravishing?


Mar. Their accuser is fled, I saw him run at the beginning of the scuffle; but
I Will examine the Ladies.


Vio. Now we are lost.


Duke coming near Laura takes notice of her Habit. Duke aside. It Is the same,
it is the same; I know Lucretia by her Habit: I Am sure I am not mistaken. Now,
Sir, you may cease your examination, I know the Ladies.


Aur. to Came. How the Devil does he know 'em?


Came. It Is alike to us; they are lost both ways.


Duke taking Laura aside. Madam, you may confess your self to me. Whatever your
design was in leaving the Nunnery, your reputation shall be safe. I Will not
discover you, provided you grant me the happiness I last requested.


Lau. I know not, Sir, how you could possibly come to know me, or of my design
in quitting the Nunnery; but this I know, that my Sister and my self are both
unfortunate, except your Highness be pleased to protect us from our Uncle; at
least, not to discover us.


Duke. His Holiness your Uncle, shall never be acquainted with your flight, on
Condition you will wholly renounce my Son, and give your self to me.


Lau. Alas, Sir, For whom do you mistake me?


Duke. I mistake you not, Madam: I know you for Lucretia. You forget that your
Disguise betrays you.


Lau. Then, Sir, I perceive I must disabuse you: if you please to withdraw a
little, that I may not be seen by others, I will pull off my Mask, and discover
to you that Lucretia and I have no resemblance, but only in our misfortunes.


Duke. It Is in vain, Madam, this dissembling: I protest if you pull off your
Mask, I will hide my Face, and not look upon you, to convince you that I know
you.


Enter Benito. Ben. So, now the fray is over, a man may appear again with
safety. Oh, the Rogues are caught I see, and the Damsels delivered. This was
the effect of my valor at the second hand.


Aur. Look, look, Camillo, it was my perpetual Fool that caused all this, and
now he stands yonder, lau^hing at his mischief, as the Devil is pictured,
grinning behind the Witch upon the Gallows.


Ben. to Mario. I see, Sir, you have got your Women, and I am glad on it: I took
'em just flying from the Nunnery.


Duke to Lau. You see that Fellow knows you too.


Mar. Were these Women flying from a Nunnery?


Ben. These Women? Hey day! then, it seems, you do not know they are your
Neeces.


Duke. His Neeces, say you? Take heed, Fellow, you shall be punished severely
if you mistake.


Came. Speak to Benito in time, Aurelian.


Aur. The Devil's in him, he is running down-hill full speed, and there is no
stopping him.


Mar. My Neeces?


Ben. Your Neeces? Why, Do you doubt it? I praise Heaven I never met but with
two half-wits in my life, and my Master's one of them; I will not name the other,
at this time.


Duke. I say they are not they.


Ben. I am sure they are Laura and Violetta, and that those two Rogues were
running away with 'em, and that I believe with their consent.


Vio. Sister, It Is in vain to deny our selves; you see our ill fortune pursues
us unavoidably. Turning up her Masque. Yes, Sir, we are Laura and Violetta,
whom you have made unhappy by your Tyranny.


Lau. turning up her Mask. And these two Gentlemen are no Ravishers, but --


Ben. How, no Ravishers? yes, to my knowledge, they are -- As he speaks,
Aurelian pulls off his Mask. no Ravishers, as Madam Laura was saying; but two
as honest Gentlemen as e're broke bread: My own dear Master, and so forth!


Runs to Aurelian, who thrusts him back. Enter Valerio, and whispers the Duke,
giving him a Paper, which he reads, and seems pleased. Mar. Aurelian and
Camillo! I Will see you in safe custody, and, for, these Fugitives, go, carry 'em
to my Sister, and desire her to have a better care of her Kinswomen.


Vio. We shall live yet to make you refund our Portions. Farewell Camillo;
comfort your self; remember there is but a Wall betwixt us.


Lau. And I Will cut through that Wall with Vinegar, but I Will come to you,
Aurelian.


Aur. I Will cut through the Grates with Aqua-sortis, but I Will meet you. Think of
these things, and despair and dye, old Gentleman.


Aurelian and Camillo are carried off on one side, and Laura and Violetta on
the other. Ben. All things go cross to men of sense: would I had been born with
the brains of a Shopkeeper, that I might have thriven without knowing why I
did so. Now must I follow my Master to the Prison, and, like an ignorant
Customer that comes to buy, must offer him my backside, tell him I trust to
his honesty, and desire him to please himself, and so be satisfied. Exit.


Duke to Valerio. I am overjoyed, I Will see her immediately: now my business
with Don Mario is at an end, I need not desire his company to introduce me to
the Abbess, this Assignation from Lucretia shows me a nearer way. Noble Don
Mario, it was my business when this accident happened in the street to have
made you a visit; but now I am prevented by an occasion which calls me another
way.


Mar. I receive the intention of that honor as the greatest happiness that
could befall me: in the mean time, if my attendance --


Duke. By no means, Sir, I must of necessity go in private, and therefore, if
you please, you shall omit the ceremony.


Mar. A happy even to your Highness. Now will I go to my Sister the Abbess,
before I sleep, and desire her to take more care of her Flock, or, for all our
Relation, I shall make complaint, and endeavor to ease her of her charge. Exit.


Duke. So, now we are alone, What said Lucretia?


Val. When first I p^ess'd her to this Assignation,
She spoke like one in doubt what she should do;
She demur'd much upon the decency of it,
And somewhat too she seemed to urge, of her
Engagement to the Prince: in short, Sir,
I perceived her wavering; and closed with the opportunity.

Duke. O, when women are once irresolute, betwixt the former love and the new
one, they are sure to come over to the latter: the wind, their nearest
likeness, seldom chops about to return into the old corner.


Val. In conclusion, she consented to the interview, and for the rest, I urged
it not, for I suppose she will hear reason sooner from your mouth than mine.


Duke. Her Letter is of the same tenor with her Discourse; full of doubts and
doubles, like a hunted Hare when she is near tired. The Garden, you say, is the
place appointed?


Val. It is, Sir; and the next half hour the time: but, Sir, I fear the Prince
your Son will never bear the loss of her with patience.


Duke. It Is no matter; let the young Gallant storm to night, to morrow he
departs from Rome.


Val. That, Sir, will be severe.


Duke. He has already received my commands to travel into Germany: I know it
stung him to the quick; but he is too dangerous a Rival: the Soldiers love him
too; when he is absent they will respect me more. Exeunt Guards.

But I defer my happiness too long; dismiss my Guards there.
The pleasures of old age brook no delay:
Seldom they come, and soon they fly away. Exeunt.

SCENE III.
Prince and Ascanio. Fred. It Is true, he is my Father; but when Nature
Is dead in him, Why should it live in me?
What have I done, that I am banished Rome,
The Worlds delight, and my Souls joy Lucretia,
And sent to reel with midnight Beasts in Almain?
I cannot, will not bear it.

Asca. I Am sure you need not, Sir: the Army is all yours; they wish a youthful
Monarch, and will resent your injuries.


Fred. Heaven forbid it. And yet I cannot lose Lucretia.
There Is something I would do, and yet would shun
The ill that must attend it.

Asca. You must resolve, for the time presses. She told me, this hour, she had
sent for your Father: what she means I know not, for she seemed doubtful, and
would not tell me her intention.


Fred. If she be false; -- yet, Why should I suspect her? yet, Why should I
not? she is a Woman; that includes ambition, and inconstancy: then, she is
tempted high: 'twere unreasonable to expect she should be faithful: well,
something I have resolved and will about it instantly: and if my Friends prove
faithful I shall prevent the worst.

Enter Aurelian and Camillo guarded. Aurelian and Camillo? How came you thus
attended?


Came. You may guess at the occasion, Sir; pursuing the adventure which brought
us to meet you in the Garden, we were taken by Don Mario.


Aur. And, as the Devil would have it, when both we and our Mistresses were in
expectation of a more pleasant lodging.


Fred. Faith, that is very hard, when a man has charged and prim'd, and taken
aim, to be hindered of his shoot -- Soldiers, release these Gentlemen; I Will
answer it.


Cap. Sir, we dare not disobey our Orders.


Fred. I Will stand betwixt you and danger. In the mean time take this, as an
acknowledgment of the kindness you do me.


Cap. Ay, marry, there is Rhetorique in Gold: Who can deny these arguments? Sir,
you may dispose of our prisoners as you please; we'll use your name if we are
called in question.


Fred. Do so. Goodnight good Soldiers. Exeunt Soldiers. Now, Gentlemen, no
thanks, you will find occasion instantly to reimburse me of my kindness.


Came. Nothing but want of liberty could have hindered us from serving you.


Fred. Meet me, within this half hour, at our Monastery; and if, in the mean
time, you can pick up a dozen of good Fellows, who dare venture their lives
bravely, bring them with you.


Aur. I hope the Cause is bad too, otherwise we shall not deserve your thanks:
may it be for demolishing that cursed Monastery.


Fred. Come, Ascanio, follow me. Exeunt severally.


SCENE IV.
The Nunnery-Garden. Duke, Lucretia. Luc. In making this appointment,
I go too far, for one of my profession;
But I have a divining Soul within me,
Which tells me, trust reposed in noble natures
Obliges them the more.

Duke. I come to be commanded, not to govern,
Those few soft words you sent me, have quite altered
My rugged nature; if it still be violent,
It Is only fierce and eager to obey you,
Like some impetuous flood, which Mastered once,
With double force bends backward.
The place of Treaty shows you strongest here;
For still the vanquished sues for peace abroad,
While the proud Victor makes his terms at home.

Luc. That peace, I see, will not be hard to make
When either side shows confidence of noble dealing
From the other.

Duke. And this, sure, is our case, since both are met alone.

Luc. It Is mine, Sir, more than yours.
To meet you single, shows I trust your virtue;
But you appear distrustful of my Love.

Duke. You wrong me much, I am not.

Luc. Excuse me, Sir, you keep a curb upon me:
You awe me with a Letter, which you hold
As Hostage of my Love; and Hostages
Are never required but from suspected Faith.

Duke We are not yet in terms of perfect peace;
When e're you please to seal the Articles,
Your pledge shall be restored.

Luc. That were the way to keep us still at distance;
For what we fear, we cannot truly love.

Duke. But how can I be then secure, that when
Your fear is over your love will still continue?

Luc. Make trial of my gratitude; you will find
I can acknowledge kindness.

Duke. But that were to forego the faster hold
To take a loose, and weaker.
Would you not judge him mad who held a Lion
In chains of Steel, and changed them for a twine?

Luc. But love is soft,
Not of the Lion's nature, but the Dove's;
An Iron chain would hang too heavy on a tender neck.

Duke. Since on one side there must be confidence,
Why may not I expect, as well as you,
To have it placed in me? Repose your trust
Upon my Royal word.

Luc. As it is the privilege of womankind
That men should court our Love,
And make the first advances; so it follows
That you should first oblige; for it is our weakness
Gives us more cause of fear, and therefore you,
Who are the stronger Sex, should first secure it.

Duke. But, Madam, as you talk of fear from me,
I may as well suspect design from you,

Luc. Design* of giving you my Love more freely,
Of making you a Title to my heart,
Where you by force would reign.

Duke. O that I could believe you! but your words
Are not enough disordered for true love;
They are not plain, and hearty, as are mine;
But full of art, and close insinuation:
You promise all, but give me not one proof
Of love before; not the least earnest of it.

Luc. And, What is then this midnight conversation?
These silent hours divided from my sleep?
Nay, more; stolen from my Prayers with Sacrilege,
And here transferred to you? This guilty hand,
Which should be used in dropping holy Beads,
But now, bequeathed to yours? This heaving heart,
Which only should be throbing for my sins,
But which now beats uneven time for you?
These are my arts! and these are my designs!

Duke. I love you more, Lucretia, than my Soul;
Nay, than yours too, for I would venture both
That I might now enjoy you; and if what
You ask me did not make me fear to lose you,
Though it were even my life, you should not be denied it.

Luc. Then I will ask no more.
Keep my Letter, to upbraid me with it;
To Say, when I am sullied with your Lust,
And fit to be forsaken, Go, Lucretia,
To your first love; for this, for this, I leave you.

Duke. Oh, Madam, never think that day can come!

Luc. It must, it will, I read it in your looks;
You will betray me when I Am once engaged.

Duke. If not my Faith, your Beauty will secure you.

Luc. My Beauty is a Flower upon the stalk,
Goodly to see; but, gathered for the scent,
And once with eagerness pressed to your nostrils,
The sweet's drawn out, it is thrown with scorn away.
But I am glad I find you out so soon:
I simply loved, and meant (with shame I own it)
To trust my Virgin-honour in your hands;
I asked not wealth, for hire; and, but by chance,
(I wonder that I thought on it) begged one trial,
And, but for form, to have pretense to yield,
And that you have denied me. Farewell: I could
Have loved you, and yet, perhaps, I --

Duke. O speak, speak out, and do not drown that word,
It seemed as if it would have been a kind one,
And yours are much too precious to be lost.

Luc. Perhaps -- I cannot yet leave loving you.
There 'twas. But I recalled it in my mind,
And made it false before I gave it Air.
Once more, farewell -- I wonnot;
Now I can say I wonnot, wonnot love you* Going.

Duke. You shall; and this shall be the Seal of my affection.
Gives the Letter. There, take it, my Lucretia; I give it with more joy,
Than I with grief received it.

Luc. Good night; I Will thank you for it some other time.

Duke. You Will not abuse my love?

Luc. No; but secure my Honor.

Duke. I Will force it from your hands. Lucretia runs.

Luc. Help, help, or I am ravished; help, for heavens sake.
Hippolita, Laura, and Violetta within, in several places. Within. Help, help
Lucretia; they bear away Lucretia by force.

Duke. I think there is a Devil in every corner.

Enter Valerio. Val. Sir, the design was laid on purpose for you, and all the
women placed to cry. Make haste away; avoid the shame for heavens sake.


Duke going. O, I could fire this Monastery!


Enter Frederick and Ascanio. (Frederick entering speaks as to some behind him)
Fred. Pain of your lives, let none of you presume to enter but my self.


Duke. My Son! O, I could burst with spite, and dye with shame, to be thus
apprehended! this is the baseness and cowardice of guilt: an Army now were not
so dreadful to me as that Son, over whom the right of Nature gives me power.


Fred. Sir, I am come --

Duke. To laugh at first, and then to blaze abroad
The weakness, and the follies of your Father.

Val. Sir, he has Men in Arms attending him.

Duke. I know my doom then. You have taken a popular occasion; I am now a
ravisher of chastity, fit to be made prisoner first, and then deposed.


Fred. You will not hear me, Sir.

Duke. No, I confess I have deserved my fate;
For, What had these gray hairs to do with Love?
Or, if the unseemly folly would possess me,
Why should I choose to make my Son my Rival:

Fred. Sir, you may add you banished me from Rome,
And from the light of it, Lucretia's eyes.

Duke. Nay, if thou aggravat'st my crimes, thou giv'st
Me right to justify'em: thou doubly art my slave,
Both Son and Subject. I can do thee no wrong,
Nor have thou right t'arraign or punish me:
But thou inquir'st into thy Fathers years;
Thy swift ambition could not stay my death,
But must ride post to Empire. Lead me now:
Thy crimes have made me guiltless to my self,
And given me face to bear the public scorn.
You have a guard without?

Fred. I have some friends.

Duke. Speak plainly your intent.
I love not a sophisticated truth,
With an allay of lie in it.

Fred. kneeling. This is not, Sir, the posture of a Rebel,
But of a suppliant, if the Name of Son
Be too much honor to me.
What first I purposed, I scarce know my self.
Love, Anger, and Revenge then rolled within me,
And yet, even then, I was not hurried farther
Than to preserve my own.

Duke. -- Your own! What mean you?

Fred. My Love, and my Lucretia; which I thought
In my then boiling passion, you pursued
With some injustice, and much violence;
This led me to repel that force by force.
'Twas easy to surprise you, when I knew
Of your intended visit.

Duke. -- Thank my folly.

Fred. But reason now has reassumed its place,
And makes me see how black a crime it is
To use a force upon my Prince and Father.

Duke. You give me hope you will resign Lucretia.

Fred. Ah no: I never can resign her to you;
But, Sir, I can my life: which, on my knees,
I tender, as th'attoning Sacrifice.
Or if your hand (because you are a Father)
Be loath to take away that life you gave,
I will redeem your crime, by making it
My own: So you shall still be innocent, and I
Dye blessed, and unindebted for my being.

Duke embracing him. O Frederick, you are too much a Son,
And I too little am a Father: You,
And you alone, have merited Lucretia.
It Is now my only grief,
I can do nothing to requite this virtue;
For to restore her to you
Is not an act of generosity,
But a scant, niggard Justice; yet I love her
So much, that even this little which I do
Is like the bounty of an Usurer;
High to be prized from me,
Because it is drawn from such a wretched mind.

Fred. kissing his hands. You give me now a second, better life;
But, that the gift may be more easy to you,
Consider, Sir, Lucretia did not Love you:
I fear to say never would.

Duke. You do well, to help me to overcome that difficulty:
I Will weigh that, too, hereafter. For a love,
So violent as mine, will ask long time,
And much of reason, to effect the cure.
My present care shall be to make you happy;
For that will make my wish impossible,
And then the remedies will be more easy.

Enter Sophronia, Lucretia, Violetta, Laura, Hippolita. Soph. I have, with joy,
o'reheard this happy change,
And come, with blessings, to applaud your conquest,
Over the greatest of Mankind, your self.

Duke. I hope 'twill be a full, and lasting one.

Luc. kneeling. Thus, let me kneel, and pay my thanks and duty.
Both to my Prince, and Father?

Duke. Rise, rise, too charming Maid; for yet I cannot
Call you Daughter: that first name, Lucretia,
Hangs on my lips, and would be still pronounced.
Look not too kindly on me; one sweet glance,
Perhaps, would ruin both: therefore, I Will go
And try to get new strength to bear your eyes.
Till then, Farewell. Be sure you love my Frederick,
And do not hate his Father. Exeunt Duke and Valerio.

Fred. at the door. Now, friends, you may appear.
Enter Aurelian, Camillo, Benito. Your pardon. Madam, that we thus intrude
On holy ground: your self best know it could not
Be avoided, and it shall be my care it be excused.

Soph. Though Sovereign Princes bear a privilege,
Of entering when they please within our walls,
In others, it is a crime past dispensation:
And therefore, to avoid a public scandal,
Be pleased, Sir, to retire, and quit this Garden.

Aur. We shall obey you, Madam: But, that we may do it with less regret, we
hope you will give these Ladies leave to accompany us.


Soph. They shall.
And Neeces, for my self, I only ask you
To justify my conduct to the world,
That none may think I have betrayed a trust,
But freed you from a Tyranny.

Lau. Our duty binds us to acknowledge it.

Came. And our gratitude, to witness it.

Vio. With a holy, and lasting remembrance of your favor.

Fred. And it shall be my care, either by reason to bend your Unckle's will,
or, by my Father's interest, to force your Dowry from his hands.


Ben. to Aur. Pray, Sir, let us make haste over these Walls again, these
Gardens are unlucky to me: I have lost my reputation of Music in the one of
'em, and of wit in the other.


Aur. to Lau. Now, Laura, you may take your choice betwixt the two Benito's,
and consider whether you had rather he should Serenade you in the Garden, or I
in Bed to night.


Lau. You may be sure I shall give Sentence for Benito; for, the effect of your
Serenading would be to make me pay the Music nine Months hence.


Hip. to Asca. You see, Brother, here is a General Jayle-delivery: there has
been a great deal of bustle and disturbance in the Cloister to night; enough to
distract a Soul which is given up, like me, to contemplation: and therefore, if
you think fit, I could even be content to retire, with you, into the World; and,
by way of Penance, to Marry you; which, as Husbands and Wives go now, is a
greater Mortification than a Nunnery.


Asca. No, Sister, if you love me, keep to your Monastery: I Will come now and
then to the Grate and beg you a Recreation. But I know my self so well, that,
if I had you one twelve Month in the world, I should run my self into a
Cloister, to be rid of you.


Soph. Neeces, once more farewell. Adieu, Lucretia:
My wishes and my prayers attend you all.

Luc. to Fred. I am so fearful,
That, though I gladly run to your embraces,
Yet, ventring in the World a second time,
Methinks I put to Sea in a rough storm,
With shipwracks round about me.

Fred. My Dear, be kinder to your self, and me,
And let not fear fright back our coming joys;
For we, at length, stand reconciled to fare:
And now to fear, when to such bliss we move,
Were not to doubt our Fortune, but our Love.

Epilogue.
SOme have expected from our Bills to day
To find a Satyr in our Poet's Play.
The Zealous Rout from Coleman-street did run,
To see the Story of the Friar and Nun.
Or Tales, yet more Ridiculous to hear,
Vouched by their Vicar of Ten pounds a year;
Of Nuns, who did against Temptation Pray,
And Discipline laid on the Pleasant way:
Or that to please the Malice of the Town,
Our Poet should in some close Cell have shown
Some Sister, Playing at Content alone:
This they did hope; the other side did fear,
And both you see alike are Cozened here.
Some thought the Title of our Play to blame,
They liked the thing, but yet abhorred the Name:
Like Modest Puncks, who all you ask afford,
But, for the World, they would not name that word.
Yet, if you will credit what I heard him say,
Our Poet meant no Scandal in his Play;
His Nuns are good which on the Stage are shown,
And, sure, behind our Scenes you will look for none.
FINIS.

