RELIGIO LAICI OR A Laymans Faith. A POEM. Written by Mr. DRYDEN.

Ornari res ipsa negat; contenta doceri. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at
the Iudge's Head in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street. 1682.

THE PREFACE.
A Poem with so bold a Title, and a Name prefixed, from which the handling of
so serious a Subject would not be expected, may reasonably oblige the Author,
to say somewhat in defense both of himself, and of his undertaking. In the
first place, if it be objected to me that being a Layman, I ought not to have
concerned my self with Speculations, which belong to the Profession of
Divinity; I could Answer, that perhaps, Laymen, with equal advantages of Parts
and Knowledge, are not the most incompetent Judges of Sacred things; But in the
due sense of my own weakness and want of Learning, I plead not this: I pretend
not to make my self a Judge of Faith, in others, but only to make a Confession
of my own; I lay no unhallowed hand upon the Ark; but wait on it, with the
Reverence that becomes me at a distance: In the next place I will ingenuously
confess, that the helps I have used in this small Treatise, were many of them
taken from the Works of our own Reverend Divines of the Church of England; so
that the Weapons with which I Combat Irreligion, are already Consecrated;
though I suppose they may be taken down as lawfully as the Sword of Goliath was
by David, when they are to be employed for the common Cause, against the
Enemies of Piety. I intend not by this to entitle them to any of my errors;
which, yet, I hope are only those of Charity to Mankind; and such as my own
Charity has caused me to commit, that of others may more easily excuse. Being
naturally inclined to Skepticism in Philosophy, I have no reason to impose my
Opinions, in a Subject which is above it: But whatever they are, I submit them
with all reverence to my Mother Church, accounting them no further mine, than
as they are Authorized, or at least, uncondemn'd by her. And, indeed, to secure
my self on this side, I have used the necessary Precaution, of showing this
Paper before it was Published to a judicious and learned Friend, a Man
indefatigably zealous in the service of the Church and State: and whose
Writings, have highly deserved of both. He was pleased to approve the body of
the Discourse, and I hope he is more my Friend, than to do it out of
Complaisance: It Is true he had too good a taste to like it all; and amongst some
other faults recommended to my second view, what I have written, perhaps too
boldly on St. Athanasius: which he advised me wholly to omit. I am sensible
enough that I had done more prudently to have followed his opinion: But then I
could not have satisfied my self, that I had done honestly not to have written
what was my own. It has always been my thought, that Heathens, who never did,
nor without Miracle could hear of the name of Christ were yet in a possibility
of Salvation. Neither will it enter easily into my belief, that before the
coming of our Savior, the whole World, excepting only the Jewish Nation,
should lie under the inevitable necessity of everlasting Punishment, for want
of that Revelation, which was confined to so small a spot of ground as that of
Palaestine* Among the Sons of Noah we read of one only who was accursed; and
if a blessing in the ripeness of time was reserved for Iaphet, (of whose
Progeny we are,) it seems unaccountable to me, why so many Generations of the
same Offspring, as preceeded our Savior in the Flesh, should be all involved
in one common condemnation, and yet that their Posterity should be Entitled to
the hopes of Salvation: As if a Bill of Exclusion had passed only on the
Fathers, which debarred not the Sons from their Succession. Or that so many Ages
had been delivered over to Hell, and so many reserved for Heaven, and that the
Devil had the first choice* and God the next. Truly I am apt to think, that the
revealed Religion which was taught by Noah to all his Sons, might continue for
some Ages in the whole Posterity. That afterward it was included wholly in the
Family of Sem is manifest: but when the Progenies of Cham and Iaphet swarmed
into Colonies, and those Colonies were subdivided into many others; in process
of time their Descendants lost by little and little the Primitive and Purer
Rites of Divine Worship, retaining only the notion of one Deity; to which
succeeding Generations added others: (for Men took their Degrees in those Ages
from Conquerours to Gods.) Revelation being thus Eclipsed to almost all
Mankind, the light of Nature as the next in Dignity was substituted; and that
is it which St. Paul concludes to be the Rule of the Heathens; and by which
they are hereafter to be judged. If my supposition be true, then the
consequence which I have assumed in my Poem may be also true; namely, that
Deism, or the Principles of Natural Worship, are only the faint remnants or
dying flames of revealed Religion in the Posterity of Noah: And that our Modern
Philosophers, nay and some of our Philosophisiing Divines have too much exalted
the faculties of our Souls, when they have maintained that by their force,
mankind has been able to find out that there is one Supreme Agent or
Intellectual Being which we call God: that Praise and Prayer are his due
Worship; and the rest of those deducements, which I am confident are the remote
effects of Revelation, and unatainable by our Discourse, I mean as simply
considerd, and without the benefit of Divine Illumination. So that we have not
lifted up our selves to God, by the weak Pinions of our Reason, but he has been
pleased to descend to us: and what Socrates said of him* what Plato writ, and
the rest of the Heathen Philosophers of several Nations, is all no more than
the Twilight of Revelation, after the Sun of it was set in the Race of Noah.
That there is some thing above us, some Principle of motion, our Reason can
apprehend, though it cannot discover what it is, by its own Virtue. And indeed
it is very improbable* that we who by the strength of our faculties cannot enter
into the knowledge of any Being, not so much as of our own, should be able to
find out by them, that Supreme Nature, which we cannot otherwise define, than
by saying it is Infinite; as if Infinite were definable, or Infinity a Subject
for our narrow understanding. They who would prove Religion by Reason, do but
weaken the cause which they endeavor to support: it is to take away the Pillars
from our Faith, and to prop it only with a twig: it is to design a Tower like
that of Babel, which if it were possible (as it is not) to reach Heaven, would
come to nothing by the confusion of the Workmen. For every man is Building a
several way; impotently conceipted of his own Model, and his own Materials:
Reason is always striving, and always at a loss, and of necessity it must so
come to pass, while it is exercised about that which is not its proper object.
Let us be content at last, to know God, by his own Methods; at least so much of
him, as he is pleased to reveal to us, in the sacred Scriptures; to apprehend
them to be the word of God, is all our Reason has to do; for all beyond it is
the work of Faith, which is the Seal of Heaven impressed upon our humane
understanding.

And now for what concerns the Holy Bishop Athanasius, the Preface of whose
Creed seems inconsistent with my opinion; which is, That Heathens may possibly
be saved; in the first place I desire it may be considered that it is the
Preface only, not the Creed it self, which, (till I am better informed) is of
too hard a digestion for my Charity. It Is not that I am ignorant how many
several Texts of Scripture seemingly support that Cause; but neither am I
ignorant how all those Texts may receive a kinder, and more mollified
Interpretation. Every man who is read in Church History, knows that Belief was
drawn up after a long contestation with Arrius, concerning the Divinity of our
Blessed Savior, and his being one Substance with the Father; and that thus
compild, it was sent abroad among the Christian Churches, as a kind of Test,
which whosoever took, was looked on as an Orthodox Believer. It Is manifest from
hence, that the Heathen part of the Empire was not concerned in it: for its
business was not to distinguish betwixt Pagans and Christians, but betwixt
Heriticks and true Believers. This, well considered, takes off the heavy weight
of Censure, which I would willingly avoid from so venerable a Man; for if this
Proportion, whosoever will be saved, be restrained only, to those to whom it
was intended, and for whom it was composed, I mean the Christians; then the
Anathema, reaches not the Heathens, who had never heard of Christ, and were
nothing interessed in that dispute. After all, I am far from blaming even that
Prefatory addition to the Creed, and as far from cavilling at the continuation
of it in the Liturgy of the Church; where on the days appointed, it is publicly
read: For I suppose there is the same reason for it now, in opposition to the
Socinians, as there was then against the Arrians; the one being a Heresy, which
seems to have been refined out of the other; and with how much more
plausibility of Reason it combats our Religion, with so much more caution to be
avoided: and therefore the prudence of our Church is to be commended which has
interposed her Authority for the recommendation of this Creed. Yet to such as
are grounded in the true belief, those explanatory Creeds, the Nicene and this
of Athanasius might perhaps be spared: for what is supernatural, will always be
a mystery in spite of Exposition: and for my own part the plain Apostles
Creed, is most suitable to my weak understanding; as the simplest diet is the
most easy of Digestion.

I have dwelt longer on this Subject than I intended; and longer than, perhaps,
I ought; for having laid down, as my Foundation, that the Scripture is a Rule;
that in all things needful to Salvation, it is clear, sufficient, and ordained
by God Almighty for that purpose, I have left my self no right to interpret
obscure places, such as concern the possibility of eternal happiness to
Heathens: because whatsoever is obscure is concluded not necessary to be known.

But, by asserting the Scripture to be the Canon of our Faith, I have
unavoidably created to my self two sorts of Enemies: The Papists indeed, more
directly, because they have kept the Scripture from us, what they could; and
have reserved to themselves a right of Interpreting what they have delivered
under the pretense of Infalibility: and the Fanatics more collaterally,
because they have assumed what amounts to an Infalibility, in the private
Spirit: and have detorted those Texts of Scripture, which are not necessary to
Salvation, to the damnable uses of Sedition, disturbance and destruction of the
Civil Government. To begin with the Papists, and to speak freely, I think them
the less dangerous (at least in appearance to our present State; for not only
the Penal Laws are in Force against them, and their number is contemptible; but
also their Peerage and Commons are excluded from Parliaments, and consequently
those Laws in no probability of being Repealed. A General and Uninterrupted
Plot of their Clergy, ever since the Reformation, I suppose all Protestants
believe. For it is not reasonable to think but that so many of their Orders, as
were outed from their fat possessions, would endeavor a reentrance against
those whom they account Heretics. As for the late design, Mr. Colemans
Letters, for ought I know are the best Evidence; and what they discover,
without wyre-drawing their Sense, or malicious Glosses, all Men of reason
conclude credible. If there be any thing more than this required of me, I must
believe it as well as I am able, in spite of the Witnesses, and out of a
decent conformity to the Votes of Parliament: For I suppose the Fanatics will
not allow the private Spirit in this Case: Here the Infallibility is at least
in one part of the Government; and our understandings as well as our wills are
represented. But to return to the Roman Catholics, how can we be secure from
the practice of Jesuited Papists in that Religion? For not two or three of that
Order, as some of them would impose upon us, but almost the whole Body of them
are of opinion, that their Infallible Master has a right over Kings, not only
in Spirituals but Temporals. Not to name Mariana, Bellarmine, Emanuel Sa,
Molina, Santarel Simancha, and at the least twenty others of Foreign Countries;
we can produce of our own Nation, Campian, and Doleman or Parsons, besides many
are named whom I have not read, who all of them attest this Doctrine, that the
Pope can Depose and give away the Right of any Sovereign Prince, si vel paulum
deflexerit, if he shall never so little Warpe: but if he once comes to be
Excommunicated, then the Bond of obedience is taken off from Subjects; and they
may and ought to drive him like another Nebuchadnezzar, ex hominum
Christianorum Dominatu, from exercising Dominion over Christians: and to this
they are bound by virtue of Divine Precept, and by all the ties of Conscience
under no less Penalty than Damnation. If they answer me (as a Learned Priest
has lately Written,) that this Doctrine of the Jesuits is not de fide, and that
consequently they are not obliged by it* they must pardon me, if I think they
have said nothing to the purpose; for it is a Maxim in their Church, where
Points of Faith are not decided, and that Doctors are of contrary opinions,
they may follow which part they please; but more safely the most received and
most Authorized. And their Champion Bellarmine has told the World, in his
Apology, that the King of England is a Vassal to the Pope, ratione directi
Dominii, and that he holds in Vi^^a^age of his Roman Landlord* Which is no new
claim put in for England. Our Chronicles are his Authentic Witnesses, that,
King John was deposed by the same Plea, and Philip Augustus admitted Tenant.
And which makes the more for Bellarmine, the French King was again ejected when
our King submitted to the Church, and the Crown received under the sordid
Condition of a Vassalage.

It Is not sufficient for the more moderate and well-meaning Papists, (of which
I doubt not there are many) to produce the Evidences of their Loyalty to the
late King, and to declare their Innocence in this Plot; I will grant their
behavior in the first, to have been as Loyal and as brave as they desire* and
will be willing to hold them excused as to the second, (I mean when it comes to
my turn, and after my betters; for it is a madness to be sober alone, while the
Nation continues Drunk:) but that saying of their Father Cres: is still running
in my head, that they may be dispensed with in their Obedience to an Heretic
Prince, while the necessity of the times shall oblige them to it: (for that (as
another of them tells us,) is only the effect of Christian Prudence) but when
once they shall get power to shake him off, an Heretic is no lawful King, and
consequently to rise against him is no Rebellion. I should be glad there fore,
that they would follow the advice which was charitably given them by a Reverend
Prelate of our Church; namely, that they would join in a public Act of
disowning and detesting those Jesuitick Principles; and subscribe to all
Doctrines which deny the Popes Authority of Deposing Kings, and releasing
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance: to which I should think they might
easily be induced, if it be true that this present Pope has condemned the
Doctrine of King-killing (a Thesis of the Jesuits) amongst others ex Cathedra
(as they call it) or in open consistory.

Leaving them, therefore, in so fair a way (if they please themselves) of
satisfying all reasonable Men, of their sincerity and good meaning to the
Government, I shall make bold to consider that other extreme of our Religion, I
mean the Fanatics, or Schismatics, of the English Church. Since the Bible has
been Translated into our Tongue, they have used it so, as if their business was
not to be sa'vd but to be damnd by its Contents. If we consider only them,
better had it been for the English Nation, that it had still remained in the
original Greek and Hebrew, or at least in the honest Latin of St. Jerome, than
that several Texts in it, should have been prevaricated to the destruction of
that Government, which put it into so ungrateful hands.

How many Heresies the first Translation of Tyndal produced in few years, let
my Lord Herbert's History of Henry the Eighth inform you* Insomuch that for the
gross errors in it, and the great mischiefs it occasioned, a Sentence passed
on the first Edition of the Bible, too shameful almost to be repeated. After
the short Reign of Edward the Sixth (who had continued to carry on the
Reformation, on other principles than it was begun) every one knows that not
only the chief promoters of that work, but many others, whose Consciences
would not dispense with Popery, were forced, for fear of persecution, to change
Climates: from whence returning at the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
many of them who had been in France, and at Geneva, brought back the rigid
opinions and imperious discipline of Calvin, to graffe upon our Reformation.
Which, though they cunningly concealed at first, (as well knowing how
nauseously that Drug would go down in a lawful Monarchy, which was prescribed
for a rebellious Commonwealth) yet they always kept it in reserve; and were
never wanting to themselves either in Court or Parliament, when either they had
any prospect of a numerous Party of Fanatique Members in the one, or the
encouragement of any Favorite in the other, whose Covetousness was gaping at
the Patrimony of the Church. They who will consult the Works of our venerable
Hooker, or the account of his Life, or more particularly the Letter written to
him on this Subject, by George Cranmer, may see by what gradations they
proceeded; from the dislike of Cap and Surplice, the very next step was
Admonitions to the Parliament against the whole Government Ecclesiastical: then
came out Volumes in English and Latin in defense of their Tenets: and
immediately, practices were set on foot to erect their Discipline without
Authority. Those not succeeding, Satyr and Railing was the next: And Martin
Mar-Prelate (the Marvel of those times) was the first Presbyterian Scribler,
who sanctified Libels and Scurrility to the use of the Good Old Cause. Which
was done (says my Author) upon this account; that (their serious Treatises
having been fully answered and refuted) they might compass by railing what they
had lost by reasoning; and when their Cause was sunk in Court and Parliament,
they might at least hedge in a stake amongst the Rabble: for to their ignorance
all things are Wit which are abusive; but if Church and State were made the
Theme, then the Doctoral Degree of Wit was to be taken at Billingsgate: even
the most Saintlike of the Party, though they durst not excuse this contempt and
villifying of the Government, yet were pleased, and grin'd at it with a pious
smile; and called it a judgment of God against the Hierarchy. Thus Sectaries,
we may see, were born with teeth, foul-mouthed and scurrilous from their
Infancy: and if Spiritual Pride, Venom, Violence, Contempt of Superiors and
Slander had been the marks of Orthodox Belief; the Presbytery and the rest of
our Schismatics, which are their Spawn, were always the most visible Church in
the Christian World.

It Is true, the Government was too strong at that time for a Rebellion; but to
show what proficiency they had made in Calvin's School, even Then their mouths
watered at it: for two of their gifted Brotherhood ( Hacket and Coppinger) as
the Story tells us, got up into a Pease-Cart, and harangued the People, to
dispose them to an insurrection, and to establish their Discipline by force: so
that however it comes about, that now they celebrate Queen Elizabeth's
Birth-night, as that of their Saint and Patroness; yet then they were for doing
the work of the Lord by Arms against her; and in all probability, they wanted
but a Fanatique Lord Mayor and two Sheriffs of their Party to have compassed it.

Our venerable Hooker, after many Admonitions which he had given them, toward
the end of his Preface, breaks out into this Prophetic speech. There is in
every one of these Considerations most just cause to fear, lest our hastiness
to embrace a thing of so perilous Consequence (meaning the Presbyterian
Discipline) should cause Posterity to feel those Evils, which as yet are more
easy for us to prevent, than they would be for them to remedy.

How fatally this Cassandra has foretold we know too well by sad experience:
the Seeds were sown in the time of Queen Elizabeth, the bloody Harvest ripened
in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr: and because all the Sheaves could not
be carried off without shedding some of the loose Grains, another Crop is too
like to follow; nay I fear it is unavoidable if the Conventiclers be permitted
still to scatter.

A man may be suffered to quote an Adversary to our Religion, when he speaks
Truth: and it is the observation of Meimbourg in his History of Calvinism, that
wherever that Discipline was planted and embraced, Rebellion, Civil War and
Misery attended it. And how indeed should it happen otherwise? Reformation of
Church and State has always been the ground of our Divisions in England. While
we were Papists, our Holy Father rid us* by pretending authority out of the
Scriptures to depose Princes, when we shook off his Authority, the Sectaries
furnished themselves with the same Weapons; and out of the same Magazine, the
Bible. So that the Scriptures, which are in themselves the greatest security of
Governors, as commanding express obedience to them, are now turned to their
destruction; and never since the Reformation, has there wanted a Text of their
interpreting to authorize a Rebel. And it is to be noted by the way, that the
Doctrines of King-killing and Deposing, which have been taken up only by the
worst Party of the Papists, the most frontless Flatterers of the Pope's
Authority, have been espoused, defended and are still maintained by the whole
Body of Nonconformists and Republicans. It Is but dubbing themselves the People
of God, which it is the interest of their Preachers to tell them they are, and
their own interest to believe; and after that; they cannot dip into the Bible,
but one Text or another will turn up for their purpose: If they are under
Persecution (as they call it,) then that is a mark of their Election; if they
flourish, then God works Miracles for their Deliverance, and the Saints are to
possess the Earth.

They may think themselves to be too roughly handled in this Paper; but I who
know best how far I could have gone on this Subject, must be bold to tell them
they are spared: though at the same time I am not ignorant that they interpret
the mildness of a Writer to them, as they do the mercy of the Government; in
the one they think it Fear, and conclude it Weakness in the other. The best way
for them to confute me, is, as I before advised the Papists, to disclaim their
Principles, and renounce their Practices. We shall all be glad to think them
true Englishmen when they obey the King, and true Protestants when they conform
to the Church Discipline.

It remains that I acquaint the Reader, that the Verses were written for an
ingenious young Gentleman my Friend; upon his Translation of The Critical
History of the Old Testament, composed by the learned Father Simon: The Verses
therefore are addressed to the Translatour of that Work, and the style of them
is, what it ought to be, Epistolary.

If any one be so lamentable a Critique as to require the Smoothness, the
Numbers and the Turn of Heroic Poetry in this Poem; I must tell him, that if
he has not read Horace, I have studied him, and hope the style of his Epistles
is not ill imitated here. The Expressions of a Poem, designed purely for
Instruction, ought to be Plain and Natural, and yet Majestic: for here the
Poet is presumed to be a kind of Lawgiver, and those three qualities which I
have named are proper to the Legislative style. The Florid, Elevated and
Figurative way is for the Passions; for Love and Hatred, Fear and Anger, are
begotten in the Soul by showing their Objects out of their true proportion;
either greater than the Life, or less; but Instruction is to be given by
showing them what they naturally are. A Man is to be cheated into Passion, but
to be reasoned into Truth.

TO Mr. Dryden, On his POEM, called RELIGIO LAICI.
GReat is the task, and worthy such a Muse,
To do Faith right, yet Reason disabuse.
How cheerfully the Soul does take its flight,
On Faith's strong wings guided by Reason's light?
But Reason does in vain her beams display,
Showing to the place, whence first she came, the way,
If Peter's Heirs must still hold fast the Key.
The house which many Mansions should contain,
Formed by the great wise Architect in vain,
Of Disproportion justly we accuse,
If the streight-gate still entrance must refuse.
The only free enriching Port God made
What shameful Monopoly did invade?
One Factious Company engrossed the Trade.
Thou to the distant Shore have safely sailed,
Where the best Pilots have so often failed.
Freely we now may buy the Pearl of price,
The happy Land abounds with fragrant Spice,
And nothing is forbidden there but Vice.
Thou best Columbus to the unknown World!
Mountains of Doubt that in thy way were hurld,
Thy generous Faith has bravely overcome,
And made Heaven truly our familiar home.
Let Crowds impossibilities receive,
Who cannot think, ought not to disbelieve.
Let 'em pay Tithes, and hud-wink'd go to Heaven;
But sure the Quaker could not be forgiven,
Had not the Clerk who hates Lay-policy
Found out, to countervail the Injury,
Swearing, a trade of which they are not free.
Too long has captived Reason been enslaved,
By Visions scared, and airy Phantasms braved,
Listening to each proud Enthusiastic Fool,
Pretending Conscience, but designing Rule;
Whilst Law, Form, Interest, Ignorance, Design,
Did in the holy Cheat together join.
Like vain Astrologers gazing on the Skies,
We fell, and did not dare to trust our Eyes.
It Is time at last to fix the trembling Soul,
And by thy Compass to point out the Pole;
All men agree in what is to be done,
And each Man's Heart his Table is of Stone,
Where he the God-writ Character may view:
Were it as needful, Faith had been so too.
Oh, that our greatest fault were humble Doubt!
And that we were more Just, though less Devout;
What reverence should we pay thy sacred Rhimes,
Who in these Factious too-believing Times
Have taught us to obey, and to distrust:
Yet to our selves, our King, and God, prove just.
Thou wantst not Praise from an ensuring Friend,
The Poor to Thee on double Interest lend.
So strong thy Reasons, and so clear thy Sense,
They bring, like Day, their own bright Evidence:
Yet whilst mysterious Truths to light you bring,
And heavenly things in heavenly numbers sing,
The joyful Younger Choir may clap the Wing.
To Mr. DRYDEN, on Religio Laici.
It Is nobly done, a Layman's Creed professed,
When all our Faith of late hung on a Priest;
His doubtful words like Oracles received,
And when we could not understand, believed.
,Triumphant Faith now takes a nobler course,
It Is gentle, but resists intruding force:
Weak Reason may pretend an awful sway,
And Consistories charge her to obey;
(Strange Nonsense to confine the sacred Dove,
And narrow Rules prescribe how she shall love,
And how upon the barren Waters move.)
But she rejects and scorns their proud Pretense,
And whilst those grovelling things depend on Sense;
She mounts on certain wings and flys on high,
And looks upon a dazzling Mystery,
With fixed, and steady, and an Eagle's Eye.
Great King of Verse, that do instruct and please,
As Orpheus softened the rude Savages:
And gently freest us from a double Care,
The bold Socinian, and the Papal Chair:
Thy Judgment is correct, thy Fancy young,
Thy Numbers, as thy generous faith, are strong:
Whilst through dark Prejudice they force their way,
Our Souls shake off the Night and view the Day.
We live secure from mad Enthusiasts Rage,
And fond Tradition now grown blind with Age.
Let factious and ambitious Souls repine,
Thy Reason's strong, and generous thy Design,
And allways to do well is only thine.
Tho. Creech.
Religio Laici.
DIM, as the borrowed beams of Moon and Stars
To lonely, weary, wandering Travelers,
Is Reason to the Soul: And as on high,
Those rolling Fires discover but the Sky
Not light us here; So Reason's glimmering Ray
Was lent, not to assure our doubtful way,
But guide us upward to a better Day.
And as those nightly Tapers disappear
When Day's bright Lord ascends our Hemisphere;
So pale grows Reason at Religions sight;
So dies, and so dissolves in Supernatural Light.
Some few, whose Lamp shone brighter, have been led
From Cause to Cause, to Natures secret head;
And found that one first principle must be:
But what, or who, that UNIVERSAL HE;
Whether some Soul incompassing this Ball
Unmade, unmoved; yet making, moving All;
Or various Atom's, interfering Dance
Leapt into Form, (the Noble work of Chance;)
Or this great All was from Eternity;
Not even the Stagirite himself could see;
And Epicurus Guessed as well as He:
As blindly grop'd they for a future State;
As rashly Judged Opinions of the several Sects of Philosophers concerning the
Summum Bonum.
of Providence and Fate:
But least of all could their Endeavors find
What most concerned the good of Humane kind:
For Happiness was never to be found;
But vanished from 'em, like Enchanted ground.
One thought Content the Good to be enjoyed:
This, every little Accident destroyed:
The wiser Madmen did for Virtue toil:
A Thorny, or at best a barren Soil:
In Pleasure some their glutton Souls would steep;
But found their Line too short, the Well too deep;
And leaky Vessels which no Bliss could keep.
Thus, anxious Thoughts in endless Circles roll,
Without a Center where to fix the Soul:
In this wild Maze their vain Endeavors end.
How can the less the Greater comprehend?
Or finite Reason reach Infinity?
For what could Fathom GOD were more than He.
The Deist thinks he stands on firmer ground; Systeme of Deisme.

Cries (...): the mighty Secret's found:
God is that Spring of Good; Supreme, and Best;
We, made to serve, and in that Service blessed;
If so, some Rules of Worship must be given,
Distributed alike to all by Heaven:
Else God were partial, and to some denied
The Means his Justice should for all provide.
This general Worship is to PRAISE, and PRAY:
One part to borrow Blessings, one to pay:
And when frail Nature slides into Offense,
The Sacrifice for Crimes is Penitence.
Yet, since the Effects of Providence, we find
Are variously dispensed to Humane kind;
That Vice Triumphs, and Virtue suffers here,
(A Brand that Sovereign Justice cannot bear;)
Our Reason prompts us to a future State:
The last Appeal from Fortune, and from Fate:
Where God's all-righteous ways will be declared;
The Bad meet Punishment, the Good, Reward.
Thus Man by his own strength to Heaven would soar: Of Revealed Religion.

And would not be Obliged to God for more.
Vain, wretched Creature, how art thou misled
To think thy Wit these God-like Notions bred!
These Truths are not the product of thy Mind,
But dropped from Heaven, and of a Nobler kind.
Revealed Religion first informed thy Sight,
And Reason saw not, till Faith sprung the Light.
Hence all thy Natural Worship takes the Source:
It Is Revelation what thou think Discourse.
Else, how come Thou to see these truths so clear,
Which so obscure to Heathens did appear?
Not Plato these, nor Aristotle found:
Nor He whose Wisdom Oracles renowned. Socrates.

Have thou a Wit so deep, or so sublime,
Or can thou lower dive, or higher climb?
Can Thou, by Reason, more of Godhead know
Than Plutarch, Seneca, or Cicero?
Those Giant Wits, in happyer Ages born,
(When Arms, and Arts did Greece and Rome adorn)
Knew no such Systeme: no such Piles could raise
Of Natural Worship, built on Prayer and Praise,
To One sole GOD.
Nor did Remorse, to Expiate Sin, prescribe:
But slew their fellow Creatures for a Bribe:
The guiltless Victim groaned for their Offense;
And Cruelty, and Blood was Penitence.
If Sheep and Oxen could Atone for Men
Ah! at how cheap a rate the Rich might Sin!
And great Oppressors might Heavens Wrath beguile
By offering his own Creatures for a Spoil!
Dare thou, poor Worm, offend Infinity?
And must the Terms of Peace be given by Thee?
Then Thou art Justice in the last Appeal;
Thy easy God instructs Thee to rebel:
And, like a King remote, and weak, must take
What Satisfaction Thou art pleased to make.
But if there be a Power too Just, and strong
To wink at Crimes, and bear unpunished Wrong;
Look humbly upward, see his Will disclose
The Forfeit first, and then the Fine impose:
A Mulct thy Poverty could never pay
Had not Eternal Wisdom found the way:
And with Celestial Wealth supplied thy Store:
His Justice makes the Fine, his Mercy quits the Score.
See God descending in thy Humane Frame;
The offended, suffering in the Offenders Name:
All thy Misdeeds to him imputed see,
And all his Righteousness devolved on thee.
For granting we have Sinned, and that the offense
Of Man, is made against Omnipotence,
Some Price, that bears proportion, must be paid;
And Infinite with Infinite be weighed.
See then the Deist lost: Remorse for Vice,
Not paid, or paid, inadequate in price:
What farther means can Reason now direct,
Or what Relief from humane Wit expect?
That shows us sick; and sadly are we sure
Still to be Sick, till Heaven reveal the Cure:
Itfhen Heaven's Will must needs be understood,
(Which must, if we want Cure, and Heaven, be Good)
Let all Records of Will revealed be shown;
With Scripture, all in equal balance thrown,
And our one Sacred Book will be That one.
Proof needs not here, for whether we compare
That Impious, Idle, Superstitious Ware
Of Rites, Lustrations, Offerings, (which before,
In various Ages, various Countries bore)
With Christian Faith and Virtues, we shall find
None answ'ring the great ends of humane kind
But This one Rule of Life: That shows us best
How God may be appeased, and Mortals blessed.
Whether from length of Time its worth we draw,
The World is scarce more Ancient than the Law:
Heavens early Care prescribed for every Age;
First, in the Soul, and after, in the Page.
Or, whether more abstractedly we look,
Or on the Writers, or the written Book,
Whence, but from Heaven, could men unskilled in Arts,
In several Ages born, in several parts,
Weave such agreeing Truths? or how, or why
Should all conspire to cheat us with a Lie?
Vnask'd their Pains, ungrateful their Advice,
Starving their Gain, and Martyrdom their Price.
If on the Book it self we cast our view,
Concurrent Heathens prove the Story True:
The Doctrine, Miracles; which must convince,
For Heaven in Them appeals to humane Sense:
And though they prove not, they Confirm the Cause,
When what is Taught agrees with Natures Laws.
Then for the Style; Majestic and Divine,
It speaks no less than God in every Line:
Commanding words; whose Force is still the same
As the first Fiat that produced our Frame.
All Faiths beside, or did by Arms ascend;
Or Sense indulged has made Mankind their Friend:
This only Doctrine does our Lusts oppose:
Unfed by Natures Soil, in which it grows;
Cross to our Interests, curbing Sense, and Sin;
Oppressed without, and undermined within,
It thrives through pain; its own Tormentours tires;
And with a stubborn patience still aspires.
To what can Reason such Effects assign
Transcending Nature, but to Laws Divine?
Which in that Sacred Volume are contained;
Sufficient, clear, and for that use ordained.
But stay: the Deist Objection of the Deist.
here will urge anew,
No Supernatural Worship can be True:
Because a general Law is that alone
Which must to all, and every where be known:
A Style so large as not this Book can claim
Nor ought that bears revealed Religions Name.
It Is said the sound of a Messiah's Birth
Is gone through all the habitable Earth:
But still that Text must be confined alone
To what was Then inhabited, and known:
And what Provision could from thence accrue
To Indian Souls, and Worlds discovered New?
In other parts it helps, that Ages past,
The Scriptures there were known, and were embraced,
Till Sin spread once again the Shades of Night:
What Is that to these who never saw the Light?
Of all Objections The Objection answered.
this indeed is chief
To startle Reason, stagger frail Belief:
We grant, it is true, that Heaven from humane Sense
Has hid the secret paths of Providence:
But boundless Wisdom, boundless Mercy, may
Find even for those be-wildred Souls, a way:
If from his Nature Foes may Pity claim,
Much more may Strangers who never heard his Name.
And though no Name be for Salvation known,
But that of his Eternal Sons alone;
Who knows how far transcending Goodness can
Extend the Merits of that Son to Man?
Who knows what Reasons may his Mercy lead;
Or Ignorance invincible may plead?
Not only Charity bids hope the best,
But more the great Apostle has expressed:
That, if the Gentiles, (whom no Law inspired,)
By Nature did what was by Law required;
They, who the written Rule had never known,
Were to themselves both Rule and Law alone:
To Natures plain indictment they shall plead;
And, by their Conscience, be condemned or freed.
Most righteous Doom! because a Rule revealed.
Is none to Those, from whom it was concealed.
Then those who followed Reasons Dictates right;
Lived up, and lifted high their Natural Light;
With Socrates may see their Maker's Face,
While Thousand Rubrick-Martyrs want a place.
Nor does it baulk my Charity, to find
The Egyptian Bishop of another mind:
For, though his Creed Eternal Truth contains,
It Is hard for Man to doom to endless pains
All who believed not all, his Zeal required;
Unless he first could prove he was inspired.
Then let us either think he meant to say
This Faith, where published, was the only way;
Or else conclude that, Arius to confute,
The good old Man, too eager in dispute,
Flew high; and as his Christian Fury rose
Damned all for Heretics who durst oppose.
Thus far my Charity this path has tried; Digression to the Translatour of
Father Simon's Critical History of the Old Testament.

(A much unskilful, but well meaning guide:)
Yet what they are, even these crude thoughts were bred
By reading that, which better thou have read.
Thy Matchless Author's work: which thou, my Friend,
By well translating better do commend:
Those youthful hours which, of thy Equals most
In Toys have squandered, or in Vice have lost,
Those hours have thou to Nobler use employed;
And the severe Delights of Truth enjoyed.
Witness this weighty Book, in which appears
The crabbed Toil of many thoughtfull years,
Spent by thy Author, in the Sifting Care
Of Rabbis old Sophisticated Ware
From Gold Divine; which he who well can sort
May afterward make Algebra a Sport.
A Treasure, which if Country-Curates buy,
They Junius, and Tremellius may defy:
Save pains in various readings, and Translations;
And without Hebrew make most learned quotations.
A Work so full with various Learning fraught,
So nicely pondred, yet so strongly wrought,
As Natures height and Arts last hand required:
As much as Man could compass, uninspir'd.
Where we may see what Errors have been made
Both in the Copiers and Translaters Trade:
How Jewish, Popish, Interests have prevailed,
And where Infallibility has failed.
For some, who have his secret meaning ghes'd,
Have found our Author not too much a Priest:
For Fashion-sake he seems to have recourse
To Pope, and Councils, and Traditions force:
But he that old Traditions could subdue,
Could not but find the weakness of the New:
If Scripture, though derived from heavenly birth,
Has been but carelessly preserved on Earth;
If God's own People, who of God before
Knew what we know, and had been promised more,
In fuller Terms, of Heaven's assisting Care,
And who did neither Time, nor Study spare
To keep this Book untainted, unperplext;
Let in gross Errors to corrupt the Text:
Omitted paragraphs, embroiled the Sense;
With vain Traditions stopped the gaping Fence,
Which every common hand pulled up with ease:
What Safety from such brushwood-helps as these?
If written words from time are not secured,
How can we think have oral Sounds endured?
Which thus transmitted, if one Mouth has failed,
Immortal Lies on Ages are entailed:
And that some such have been, is proved too plain;
If we consider Interest, Church, and Gain.
Oh but says one, Tradition Of the Infallibility of Tradition, in General.
set aside,
Where can we hope for an unerring Guide?
For since the original Scripture has been lost,
All Copies disagreeing, maimed the most,
Or Christian Faith can have no certain ground,
Or Truth in Church Tradition must be found.
Such an Omniscient Church we wish indeed;
'Twere worth Both Testaments, and cast in the Creed:
But if this Mother be a Guide so sure,
As can all doubts resolve, all truth secure,
Then her Infallibility, as well
Where Copies are corrupt, or lame, can tell;
Restore lost Canon with as little pains,
As truly explicate what still remains:
Which yet no Council dare pretend to do;
Unless like Esdras, they could write it new:
Strange Confidence, still to interpret true,
Yet not be sure that all they have explained,
Is in the blessed Original contained.
More Safe, and much more modest it is, to say
God would not leave Mankind without a way:
And that the Scriptures, though not every where
Free from Corruption, or entire, or clear,
Are incorrupt, sufficient, clear, entire,
In all things which our needful Faith require.
If others in the same Glass better see
It Is for Themselves they look, but not for me:
For MY Salvation must its Doom receive
Not from what OTHERS, but what I believe.
Must all Tradition Objection in behalf of Tradition; urged by Father Simon.
then be set aside?
This to affirm were Ignorance, or Pride.
Are there not many points, some needful sure
To saving Faith, that Scripture leaves obscure?
Which every Sect will wrest a several way
(For what one Sect Interprets, all Sects may:)
We hold, and say we prove from Scripture plain,
That Christ is GOD; the bold Socinian
From the same Scripture urges he is but MAN.
Now what Appeal can end the important Suit;
Both parts talk loudly, but the Rule is mute?
Shall I speak plain, and in a Nation free
Assume an honest Layman's Liberty?
I think (according to my little Skill,)
To my own Mother Church submitting still*)
That many have been saved, and many may,
Who never heard this Question brought in play.
The unlettered Christian, who believes in gross,
Plods on to Heaven; and never is at a loss:
For the Streight-gate would be made streighter yet,
Were none admitted there but men of Wit.
The few, by Nature formed, with Learning fraught,
Born to instruct, as others to be taught,
Must Study well the Sacred Page; and see
Which Doctrine, this, or that, does best agree
With the whole Tenor of the Work Divine:
And plainlyest points to Heaven's revealed Design:
Which Exposition flows from genuine Sense;
And which is forced by Wit and Eloquence.
Not that Traditions parts are useless here:
When general, old, disinteress'd and clear:
That Ancient Fathers thus expound the Page,
Gives Truth the reverend Majesty of Age:
Confirms its force, by biding every Test;
For best Authority's next Rules are best.
And still the nearer to the Spring we go
More limpid, more unsoyl'd the Waters flow.
Thus, first Traditions were a proof alone;
Could we be certain such they were, so known:
But since some Flaws in long descent may be,
They make not Truth but Probability.
Even Arius and Pelagius durst provoke
To what the Centuries preceding spoke.
Such difference is there in an oft-told Tale:
But Truth by its own Sinews will prevail.
Tradition written therefore more commends
Authority, than what from Voice descends:
And this, as perfect as its kind can be,
Rouls down to us the Sacred History:
Which, from the Universal Church received,
Is tried, and after, for its self believed.
The partial Papists would infer from hence
Their Church, The Second Objection.
in last resort, should Judge the Sense.
But first they would assume, Answer to the Objection.
with wondrous Art,
Themselves to be the whole, who are but part
Of that vast Frame, the Church; yet grant they were
The handers down, can they from thence infer
A right to interpret? or would they alone
Who brought the Present, claim it for their own?
The Book's a Common Largess to Mankind;
Not more for them, than every Man designed:
The welcome News is in the Letter found;
The Carrier's not Commissioned to expound.
It speaks it Self, and what it does contain,
In all things needful to be known, is plain.
In times o'ergrown with Rust and Ignorance,
A gainful Trade their Clergy did advance:
When want of Learning kept the Laymen low,
And none but Priests were Authorized to know:
When what small Knowledge was, in them did dwell;
And he a God who could but Read or Spell;
Then Mother Church did mightily prevail:
She parcel'd out the Bible by retail:
But still expounded what She sold or gave;
To keep it in her Power to Damn and Save:
Scripture was scarce, and as the Market went.
Poor Laymen took Salvation on Content;
As needy men take Money, good or bad:
God's Word they had not, but the Priests they had.
Yet, whatever false Conveyances they made,
The Lawyer still was certain to be paid.
In those dark times they learned their knack so well,
That by long use they grew Infallible:
At last, a knowing Age began t'enquire
If they the Book, or That did them inspire:
And, making narrower search they found, tho late,
That what they thought the Priest's, was Their Estate:
Taught by the Will produced, (the written Word)
How long they had been cheated on Record.
Then, every man who saw the Title fair,
Claimed a Child's part, and put in for a Share:
Consulted Soberly his private good;
And saved himself as cheap as ever he could.
It Is true, my Friend, (and far be Flattery hence)
This good had full as bad a Consequence:
The Book thus put in every vulgar hand,
Which each presumed he best could understand,
The Common Rule was made the common Prey;
And at the mercy of the Rabble lay.
The tender Page with horney Fists was gaul'd;
And he was gifted most that loudest baul'd:
The Spirit gave the Doctoral Degree:
And every member of a Company
Was of his Trade, and of the Bible free.
Plain Truths enough for needful use they found;
But men would still be itching to expound:
Each was ambitious of the obscurest place,
No measure ta'n from Knowledge, all from GRACE.
Study and Pains were now no more their Care;
Texts were explained by Fasting, and by Prayer:
This was the Fruit the private Spirit brought;
Occasioned by great Zeal, and little Thought.
While Crowds unlearned, with rude Devotion warm,
About the Sacred Viands buz and swarm,
The Fly-blown Text creates a crawling Brood;
And turns to Maggots what was meant for Food.
A Thousand daily Sects rise up, and dye;
A Thousand more the perished Race supply:
So all we make of Heavens discovered Will
Is, not to have it, or to use it ill.
The Danger's much the same; on several Shelves
If others wreck us, or we wreck our selves.
What then remains, but, waving each Extreme,
The Tides of Ignorance, and Pride to stem?
Neither so rich a Treasure to forgo;
Nor proudly seek beyond our power to know:
Faith is not built on disquisitions vain;
The things we must believe, are few, and plain:
But since men will believe more than they need;
And every man will make himself a Creed:
In doubtful questions it is the safest way
To learn what unsuspected Ancients say:
For it is not likely we should higher Soar
In search of Heaven, than all the Church before:
Nor can we be deceived, unless we see
The Scripture, and the Fathers disagree.
If after all, they stand suspected still,
(For no man's Faith depends upon his Will;)
It Is some Relief, that points not clearly known,
Without much hazard may be let alone:
And, after hearing what our Church can say,
If still our Reason runs another way,
That private Reason it is more Just to curb,
Than by Disputes the public Peace disturb.
For points obscure are of small use to learn:
But Common quiet is Mankind's concern.
Thus have I made my own Opinions clear:
Yet neither Praise expect, nor Censure fear:
And this unpolished, rugged Verse, I chose;
As fittest for Discourse, and nearest Prose:
For, while from Sacred Truth I do not swerve,
Tom Sternhold 's, or Tom Sha -- ll 's Rhimes will serve.
FINIS.

