Mac Flecknoe.
ALL humane things are subject to decay,
And, when Fate summons, Monarchs must obey
This Flecnoe found, who, like Augustus, young
Was called to Empire, and had governed long:
In Prose and Verse, was owned, without dispute
Through all the Realms of Nonsense, absolute.
This aged Prince now flourishing in Peace,
And blessed with issue of a large increase.
Worn out with business, did at length debate
To settle the Succession of the State:
And pond'ring which of all his Sons was fit
To Reign, and wage immortal War with Wit:
Cried, it is resolved; for Nature pleads that He
Should only rule, who most resembles me:
Sh -- alone my perfect image bears,
Nature in dullness from his tender years.
Sh -- alone of all my Sons, is he
Who stands confirmed in full stupidity.
The rest to some faint meaning make pretense,
But Sh -- never deviates into sense.
Some Beams of Wit on other souls may fall,
Strike through and make a lucid intervall;
But Sh -- 's genuine night admits no ray,
His rising Fogs prevail upon the Day:
Besides his goodly Fabric fills the eye,
And seems designed for thoughtless Majesty:
Thoughtless as Monarch Oaks, that shade the plain,
And, spread in solemn state, supinely reign.
Heywood and Sberley were but Types of thee,
Thou last great Prophet of Tautology:
Even I, a dunce of more renown than they,
Was sent before but to prepare thy way:
And coursly clad in Norwich Drugget came
To teach the Nations in thy greater name.
My warbling Lute, the Lute I whilom strung
When to King John of Portugal I sung,
Was but the prelude to that glorious day,
When thou on silver Thames did cut thy way,
With well timed Oars before the Royal Barge,
Swelled with the Pride of thy Celestial charge;
And big with Hymn, Commander of an Host,
The like was never in Epsom Blankets tossed.
Methinks I see the new Arion Sail,
The Lute still trembling underneath thy nail.
At thy well sharpened thumb from Shore to Shore
The Treble squeaks for fear, the Bases roar:
Echoes from Pissing-Ally, Sh -- call,
And Sh -- they resound from A -- Hall.
About thy boat the little Fishes throng,
As at the Morning Toast, that Floats along.
Sometimes as Prince of thy Harmonious band
Thou weild'st thy Papers in thy threshing hand.
St. Andre's feet never kept more equal time,
Not even the feet of thy own Psyche's rhyme:
Though they in number as in sense excel;
So just, so like tautology they sell,
That, pale with envy, Singleton forswore
The Lute and Sword which he in Triumph bore,
And vowed he never would act Villerius more.
Here stopped the good old Sire; and wept for joy
In silent raptures of the hopeful boy.
All Arguments, but most his Plays, persuade,
That for anointed dullness he was made.
Close to the Walls which fair Augusta bind,
(The fair Augusta much to fears inclined)
An ancient fabric, raised to inform the fight,
There stood of yore, and Barbican it hight:
A watch Tower once; but now, so Fate ordains,
Of all the Pile an empty name remains.
From its old Ruins Brothel-houses rise,
Scenes of lewd loves, and of polluted joys.
Where their vast Courts the Mother-Strumpets keep,
And, undisturbed by Watch, in silence sleep.
Near these a Nursery erects its head,
Where Queens are formed, and future Hero's bred;
Where unfledged Actors learn to laugh and cry,
Where infant Punks their tender Voices try,
And little Maximins the Gods defy.
Great Fletcher never treads in Buskins here,
Nor greater Johnson dares in Socks appear.
But gentle Simkin just reception finds
Amidst this Monument of vanished minds:
Pure Clinches, the suburbian Muse affords;
And Panton waging harmless War with words.
Here Flecknoe, as a place to Fame well known,
Ambitiously designed his Sh -- 's Throne.
For ancient Decker prophesi'd long since,
That in this Pile should Reign a mighty Prince,
Born for a scourge of Wit, and flayle of Sense:
To whom true dullness should some Psyches owe,
But Worlds of Misers from his pen should flow;
Humorists and Hypocrites it should produce,
Whole Raymond Families, and Tribes of Bruce.
Now Empress Fame had published the renown,
Of Sh -- 's Coronation through the Town.
Roused by report of Fame, the Nations meet,
From near Bun-Hill, and distant Watling-street.
No Persian Carpets spread the Imperial way,
But scattered Limbs of mangled Poets lay:
From dusty shops neglected Authors come,
Martyrs of Pies, and Relics of the Bum.
Much Heywood, Shirly, Ogleby there lay,
But loads of Sh -- almost choakt the way.
Bilk't Stationers for Yeomen stood prepared,
And H -- was Captain of the Guard.
The hoary Prince in Majesty appeared,
High on a Throne of his own Labors reared.
At his right hand our young Ascanius sat
Rome's other hope, and Pillar of the State.
His Brows thick fogs, instead of glories, grace,
And lambent dullness played around his face.
As Hannibal did to the Altars come,
Swore by his Sire a mortal Foe to Rome;
So Sh -- swore, nor should his Vow be vain,
That he till Death true dullness would maintain;
And in his father's Right, and Realms defense,
Never to have peace with Wit, nor truce with Sense.
The King himself the sacred Unction made,
As King by Office, and as Priest by Trade:
In his sinister hand, instead of Ball,
He placed a mighty Mug of potent Ale;
Love's Kingdom to his right he did convey,
At once his Scepter and his rule of Sway;
Whose righteous Lore the Prince had practiced young,
And from whose Loins recorded Psyche sprung.
His Temples last with Poppies were overspread,
That nodding seemed to consecrate his head:
Just at that point of time, if Fame not lie,
On his left hand twelve reverend Owls did fly.
So Romulus, it is sung, by Tyber's Brook,
Presage of Sway from twice six Vultures took.
The admiring throng loud acclamations make,
And Omens of his future Empire take.
The Sire then shook the honors of his head,
And from his brows damps of oblivion shed
Full on the filial dullness: long he stood,
Repelling from his Breast the raging God;
At length burst out in this prophetic mood:
Heavens bless my Son, from Ireland let him reign
To far Barbados on the Western main;
Of his Dominion may no end be known,
And greater than his Father's be his Throne.
Beyond loves Kingdom let him stretch his Pen;
He paused, and all the people cried Amen.
Then thus, continued he, my Son advance
Still in new Impudence, new Ignorance.
Success let others teach, learn thou from me
Pangs without birth, and fruitless Industry.
Let Virtuoso's in five years be writ;
Yet not one thought accuse thy toil of Wit.
Let gentle George in triumph tread the Stage,
Make Dorimant betray, and Loveit rage;
Let Cully, Cockwood, Fopling, charm the Pit,
And in their folly show the Writers wit.
Yet still thy fools shall stand in thy defense,
And justify their Author's want of sense.
Let 'em be all by thy own model made
Of dullness, and desire no foreign aid:
That they to future ages may be known,
Not Copies drawn, but issue of thy own.
Nay let thy men of wit too be the same,
All full of thee, and differing but in name;
But let no alien S -- dl -- y interpose
To lard with wit thy hungry Epsom prose.
And when false flowers of Rhethorick thou would: cull,
Trust Nature, do not labor to be dull;
But write thy best, and top; and in each line,
Sir Formal's oratory will be thine.
Sir Formal, though unsought, attends thy quill,
And does thy Northern Dedications fill.
Nor let false friends seduce thy mind to fame,
By arrogating Johnson's Hostile name.
Let Father Flecnoe fire thy mind with praise,
And Uncle Ogleby thy envy raise.
Thou art my blood, where Johnson has no part;
What share have we in Nature or in Art?
Where did his wit on learning fix a brand,
And rail at Arts he did not understand?
Where made he love in Prince Nicander's vein,
Or swept the dust in Psyche's humble strain?
Where sold he Bargains, Whip-stich, kiss my Arse,
Promised a Play and dwinled to a Farce?
When did his Muse from Fletcher scenes purloin,
As thou whole Eth'ridg do transfuse to thine?
But so transfused as Oil on Waters flow,
His always floats above, thine sinks below.
This is thy Province, this thy wondrous way,
New Humors to invent for each new Play:
This is that boasted Byas of thy mind,
By which one way, to dullness, it is inclined.
Which makes thy writings lean on one side still,
And in all changes that way bends thy will.
Nor let thy mountain belly make pretense
Of likeness; thine's a tympany of sense.
A Tun of Man in thy large Bulk is writ,
But sure you are but a Kilderkin of wit.
Like mine thy gentle numbers feebly creep,
Thy Tragic Muse gives smiles, thy Comic sleep.
With whatever gall thou sett'st thy self to write,
Thy inoffensive Satyrs never bite.
In thy fellonious heart, though Venom lies,
It does but touch thy Irish pen, and dies.
Thy Genius calls thee not to purchase fame
In keen Iambicks, but mild Anagram:
Leave writing Plays, and choose for thy command
Some peaceful Province in Acrostick Land.
There thou may wings display and Altars raise,
And torture one poor word Ten thousand ways.
Or if thou would thy different talents suit,
Set thy own Songs, and sing them to thy lute.
He said, but his last words were scarcely heard,
For Bruce and Longvil had a Trap prepared,
And down they sent thee yet declaiming Bard.
Sinking he left his Drugget robe behind,
Born upwards by a Subterranean wind.
The Mantle fell to the young Prophet's part,
With double portion of his Father's Art.

