OEDIPUS: A TRAGEDY. As it is ACTED at His Royal Highness THE DUKE's Theater.

The AUTHORS Mr. DRYDEN, and Mr. LEE.

Hi proprium decus and partum indignantur honorem
Ni teneant. -- Virgil.
Vos exemplaria Graeca,
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
Horat. LICENSED, Jan. 3. 1678/9 ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. 1679.

PREFACE.
THOUGH it be dangerous to raise too great an expectation, especially in works
of this Nature, where we are to please an unsatiable Audience, yet it is
reasonable to prepossess them in favor of an Author, and therefore both the
Prologue and Epilogue informed you, that Oedipus was the most celebrated piece
of all Antiquity. That Sophocles, not only the greatest Wit, but one of the
greatest Men in Athens, made it for the Stage at the Public Cost, and that it
had the reputation of being his Masterpiece, not only amongst the Seven of his
which are still remaining, but of the greater Number which are perished.
Aristole has more than once admired it in his Book of Poetry, Horace has
mentioned it: Lucullus, Julius Caesar, and other noble Romans, have written on
the same Subject, though their Poems are wholly lost; but Seneca's is still
preserved. In our own Age, Corneille has attempted it, and it appears by his
Preface, with great success: But a judicious Reader will easily observe, how
much the Copy is inferior to the Original. He tells you himself, that he owes
a great part of his success to the happy Episode of Theseus and Dirce; which is
the same thing, as if we should acknowledge, that we were indebted for our good
fortune, to the underplot of Adrastus, Eurydice, and Creon. The truth is, he
miserably failed in the Character of his Hero: if he desired that Oedipus
should be pitied, he should have made him a better man. He forgot that
Sophocles had taken care to show him in his first entrance, a just, a merciful,
a successful, a Religious Prince, and in short, a Father of his Country:
instead of these, he has drawn him suspicious, designing, more anxious of
keeping the Theban Crown, than solicitous for the safety of his People:
Hectored by Theseus, contemned by Dirce, and scarce maintaining a second part
in his own Tragedy. This was an error in the first concoction; and therefore
never to be mended in the second or the third: He introduced a greater Hero
than Oedipus himself: for when Theseus was once there, that Companion of
Hercules must yield to none: The Poet was obliged to furnish him with business,
to make him an Equipage suitable to his dignity, and by following him too
close, to lose his other King of Branford in the Crowd. Seneca on the other
side, as if there were no such thing as Nature to be minded in a Play, is
always running after pompous expression, pointed sentences, and Philosophical
notions, more proper for the Study than the Stage: The Frenchman followed a
wrong scent; and the Roman was absolutely at cold Hunting. All we could gather
out of Corneille, was, that an Episode must be, but not his way: and Seneca
supplied us with no new hint, but only a Relation which he makes of his
Tiresias raising the Ghost of Lajus: which is here performed in view of the
Audience, the Rites and Ceremonies so far his, as he agreed with Antiquity, and
the Religion of the Greeks: but he himself was beholding to Homer's Tiresias in
the Odysses for some of them: and the rest have been collected from
Heliodore's, AEthiopiques, and Lucan's Erictho. Sophocles indeed is admirable
every where: And therefore we have followed him as close as possibly we could:
But the Athenian Theater, (whether more perfect than ours is not now disputed)
had a perfection differing from ours. You see there in every Act a single
Scene, (or two at most) which manage the business of the Play, and after that
succeeds the Chorus, which commonly takes up more time in Singing, than there
has been employed in speaking. The Principal person appears almost constantly
through the Play; but the inferior parts seldom above once in the whole
Tragedy. The conduct of our Stage is much more difficult, where we are obliged
never to lose any considerable character which we have once presented. Custom
likewise has obtained, that we must form an under-plot of second Persons, which
must be depending on the first, and their by-walks must be like those in a
Labyrinth, which all of 'em-lead into the great Parterre: or like so many
several lodging Chambers, which have their out-lets into the same Gallery.
Perhaps after all, if we could think so, the ancient method, as it is the
easiest, is also the most Natural, and the best. For variety, as it is managed,
is too often subject to breed distraction: and while we would please too many
ways, for want of art in the conduct, we please in none. But we have given you
more already than was necessary for a Preface, and for ought we know, may gain
no more by our instructions, than that Politic Naton is like to do, who have
taught their Enemies to fight so long, that at last they are in a condition to
invade them.

Dramatis Personae.
Oedipus Mr. Betterton. Adrastus Mr. Smith. Creon Mr. Samford. Tiresias Mr.
Harris. Haemon Mr. Crosby. Alcander Mr. Williams. Diocles Mr. Norris. Pyracmon
Mr. Boman. Phorbas Mr. Gillo. Dymas AEgeon Ghost of Lajus Mr. Williams. WOMEN.
Jocasta Mrs. Betterton. Eurydice Mrs. Lee. Manto. Mrs. Evans. Priests,
Citizens, Attendants, etc. SCENE, THEBES.

PROLOGUE.
WHEN Athens all the Grecian State did guide,
And Greece gave Laws to all the World beside,
Then Sophocles with Socrates did sit,
Supreme in Wisdom one, and one in Wit:
And Wit from Wisdom differed not in those,
But as 'twas Sung inVerse, or said in Prose.
Then, Oedipus, on Crowded Theaters,
Drew all admiring Eyes and listening Ears;
The pleased Spectator shouted every Line,
The noblest, manliest, and the best Design!
And every Critic of each learned Age
By this just Model has reformed the Stage.
Now, should it fail, (as Heaven avert our fear!)
Damn it in silence, lest the World should hear.
For were it known this Poem did not please,
You might set up for perfect Salvages:
Your Neighbors would not look on you as men:
But think the Nation all turned Picts again.
Faith, as you manage matters, it is not fit
You should suspect your selves of too much Wit.
Drive not the jest too far, but spare this piece;
And, for this once, be not more Wise than Greece.
See twice! Do not pell-mell to Damning fall,
Like true born Britains, who never think at all:
Pray be advised; and though at Mons you won,
On pointed Cannon do not always run.
With some respect to ancient Wit proceed;
You take the four first Councils for your Creed.
But, when you lay Tradition wholly by,
And on the private Spirit alone rely,
You turn Fanatics in your Poetry.
If, notwithstanding all that we can say,
You needs will have your pen'worths of the Play:
And come resolved to Damn, because you pay,
Record it, in memorial of the Fact,
The first Play buried since the Woollen Act.
OEDIPUS.
ACT. I. SCENE Thebes.
The Curtain rises to a plaintive Tune, representing the present condition of
Thebes; Dead Bodies appear at a distance in the Streets; Some faintly go over
the Stage, others drop. Enter Alcander, Diocles, Pyracmon. Alc. MEthinks we
stand on Ruins; Nature shakes
About us; and the Universal Frame
So loose, that it but wants another push
To leap from off its Hindges.

Dioc. No Sun to cheer us; but a Bloody Globe
That rowls above; a bald and Beamless Fire;
His Face o're-grown with Scurf: the Sun's sick too;
Shortly he will be an Earth.

Pyr. Therefore the Seasons
Lie all confused; and, by the Heaven's neglected,
Forget themselves: Blind Winter meets the Summer
In his Midway, and, seeing not his Livery,
Has driven him headlong back: And the raw damps
With flaggy Wings fly heavily about,
Scattering their Pestilential Colds and Rheumes
Through all the lazy Air.

Alc. Hence Murrains followed
On bleating Flocks, and on the lowing Herds:
At last, the Malady
Grew more domestic, and the faithful Dog
Died at his Masters Feet.

Dioc. And next his Master:
For all those Plagues which Earth and Air had brooded,
First on inferior Creatures tried their force;
And last they seized on man.

Pyr. And then a thousand deaths at once advanced,
And every Dart took place; all was so sudden,
That scarce a first man fell; one but began
To wonder, and straight fell a wonder too;
A third, who stooped to raise his dying Friend,
Dropped in the pious Act. Heard you that groan?
[Groan within.
Dioc. A Troop of Ghosts took flight together there:
Now Death's grown riotous, and will play no more
For single Stakes, but Families and Tribes:
How are we sure we breath not now our last,
And that next minute,
Our Bodies cast into some common Pit,
Shall not be built upon, and overlaid
By half a people.

Alc. There Is a Chain of Causes
Linked to Effects; invincible Necessity
That what e're is, could not but so have been;
That Is my security.

To them, Enter Creon. Creon. So had it need, when all our Streets lie covered
With dead and dying men;
And Earth exposes Bodies on the Pavements
More than she hides in Graves!
Betwixt the Bride and Bridegroom have I seen
The Nuptial Torch do common offices
Of Marriage and of Death.

Dios. Now, Oedipus,
(If he return from War, our other plague)
Will scarce find half he left, to grace his Triumphs.

Pyr. A feeble Paean will be sung before him.

Alc. He would do well to bring the Wives and Children
Of conquered Argians, to renew his Thebes.

Creon. May Funerals meet him at the City Gates
With their detested Omen.

Dioc. Of his Children.

Creon. Nay, though she be my Sister, of his Wife.

Alc. O that our Thebes might once again behold
A Monarch Theban born!

Dioc. We might have had one.

Pyr. Yes, had the people pleased.

Creon. Come, you are my Friends:
The Queen my Sister, after Lajus's death,
Feared to lie single; and supplied his place
With a young Successor.

Dioc. He much resembles
Her former Husband too;

Alc. I always thought so.

Pyr. When twenty Winters more have grizzl'd his black Locks
He will be very Lajus.

Creon. So he will:
Mean time she stands provided of a Lajus
More young and vigorous too, by twenty Springs.
These Women are such cunning Purveyors!
Mark where their Appetites have once been pleased,
The same resemblance in a younger Lover
Lies brooding in their Fancies the same Pleasures,
And urges their remembrance to desire.

Dioc. Had merit, not her dotage, been considered,
Then Creon had been King; but Oedipus,
A stranger!

Creon. That word stranger, I confess
Sounds harshly in my Ears.

Dioc. We are your Creatures.
The people prone, as in all general ills,
To sudden change; the King in Wars abroad,
The Queen a Woman weak and unregarded;
Eurydice the Daughter of dead Lajus,
A Princess young and beauteous, and unmarried.
Methinks from these disjointed propositions
Something might be produced.

Creon. The Gods have done
Their part, by sending this commodious plague.
But oh the Princess! her hard heart is shut
By Adamantine Locks against my Love.

Alc. Your claim to her is strong: you are betrothed.

Pyr. True* in her Nonage.

Alc. But that let us removed.

Dioc. I heard the Prince of Argos, young Adrastus*
When he was hostage here. --

Creon. Oh name him not! the bane of all my hopes;
That hot-brained, headlong Warrior, has the Charms
Of youth, and somewhat of a lucky rashness,
To please a Woman yet more Fool than he.
That thoughtless Sex is caught by outward form
And empty noise, and loves it self in man.

Alc. But since the War broke out about our Frontiers,
He Is now a Foe to Thebes.

Creon. But is not so to her; see, she appears;
Once more I Will prove my Fortune: you insinuate
Kind thoughts of me into the multitude;
Lay load upon the Court; gull 'em with freedom;
And you shall see 'em toss their Tails, and gad,
As if the Breeze had stung 'em.

Dioc. We'll about it.
[ Exeunt Alcander, Diocles, Pyracmon.
Enter Euridice. Creon. Hail, Royal Maid; thou bright Eurydice!
A lavish Planet reigned when thou were born;
And made thee of such kindred mold to Heaven,
Thou seem more Heaven's than ours.

Euryd. Cast round your Eyes;
Where late the Streets were so thick sown with men,
Like Cadmus Brood they justled for the passage:
Now look for those erected heads, and see 'em
Like Pebbles paving all our public ways:
When you have thought on this, then answer me,
If these be hours of Courtship.

Creon. Yes, they are;
For when the Gods destroy so fast, it is time
We should renew the Race.

Euryd. What, in the midst of horror!

Creon. Why not then?
There Is the more need of comfort.

Euryd. Impious Creon!

Creon. Unjust Eurydice! can you accuse me
Of love, which is Heaven's precept, and not fear
That Vengeance, which you say pursues our Crimes,
Should reach your Perjuries?

Euryd. Still the old Argument.
I bad you, cast your eyes on othermen,
Now cast 'em on your self: think what you are.

Creon. A Man.

Euryd. A Man!

Creon. Why doubt you? I Am a man.

Euryd. It Is well you tell me so, I should mistake you
For any other part of the whole Creation,
Rather than think you man: hence from my sight,
Thou poison to my eyes.

Creon. 'Twas you first poisoned mine; and yet methinks,
My face and person should not make you sport.

Euryd. You force me, by your importunities,
To show you what you are.

Creon. A Prince, who loves you:
And since your pride provokes me, worth your love,
Even at its highest value.

Euryd. Love from thee!
Why love renounced thee e're thou saw the light:
Nature her self start back when thou were born;
And cried, the work's not mine: --
The Midwife stood aghast; and when she saw
Thy Mountain back and thy distorted legs,
Thy face it self,
Half-minted with the Royal stamp of man;
And half o're-come with beast, stood doubting long,
Whose right in thee were more:
And knew not, if to burn thee in the flames,
Were not the holier work.

Creon. Am I to blame if Nature threw my body
In so perverse a mould? yet when she cast
Her envious hand upon my supple joints,
Unable to resist, and rumpled 'em
On heaps in their dark lodging, to revenge
Her bungled work she stamped my mind more fair:
And as from Chaos, huddled and deformed,
The God struck fire, and lighted up the Lamps
That beautify the sky, so he informed
This ill-shap'd body with a daring soul:
And making less than man, he made me more.

Euryd. No; thou art all one error; soul and body.
The first young trial of some unskilled Power;
Rude in the making Art, and Ape of Jove.
Thy crooked mind within hunch'd out thy back;
And wandered in thy limbs: to thy own kind
Make love, if thou can find it in the world:
And seek not from our Sex to raise an off spring,
Which, mingled with the rest, would tempt the Gods
To cut off humane Kind.

Creon. No; let 'em leave
The Argian Prince for you: that Enemy
Of Thebes has made you false, and break the Vows
You made to me.

Euryd. They were my Mothers Vows,
Made when I was at Nurse.

Creon. But hear me, Maid;
This blot of Nature, this deformed, loathed Creon,
Is Master of a Sword, to reach the blood
Of your young Minion, spoil the Gods fine work,
And stab you in his heart.

Euryd. This when thou do,
Then may thou still be cursed with loving me:
And, as thou art, be still unpitied, loathed;
And let his Ghost -- No let his Ghost have rest,
But let the greatest, fiercest, foulest Fury,
Let Creon haunt himself.
[ Exit Eurydice.
Creon. It Is true, I am
What she has told me, an offense to sight:
My body opens inward to my soul,
And lets in day to make my Vices seen
By all discerning eyes, but the blind vulgar.
I must make haste er'e Oedipus return,
To snatch the Crown and her; for I still love;
But love with malice; as an angry Cur
Snarles while he feeds, so will I seize and stanch
The hunger of my love on this proud beauty,
And leave the scraps for Slaves.
Enter Tiresias, leaning on a staff, and led by his Daughter Manto. What makes
this blind prophetic Foolabroad!
Would his Appollo had him, he is too holy
For Earth and me; I Will shun his walk; and seek
My popular friends.
[ Exit Creon.
Tiresias. A little farther; yet a little farther,
Thou wretched Daughter of a dark old man,
Conduct my weary steps: and thou who see
For me and for thy seif, beware thou tread not
With impious steps upon dead corpse; -- Now stay:
Methinks I draw more open, vital air,
Where are we?

Manto. Under Covert of a wall:
The most frequented once, and noisy part
Of Thebes, now midnight silence reigns even here;
And grass untrodden springs beneath our feet.

Tir. If there be nigh this place a Sunny banck,
There let me rest a while: a Sunny banck!
Alas! how can it be, where no Sun shines!
But a dim winking Taper in the Skies,
That nods, and scarce holds up his drowzy head
To glimmer through the damps.
[ A Noise within, follow, follow, follow, A Creon, A Creon, A Creon.] Hark! a
tumultuous noise, and Creon's name
Thrice echoed.

Man. Fly, the tempest drives this way.

Tir. Whither can Age and blindness take their flight?
If I could fly, what could I suffer worse,
Secure of greater Ills!
[ Noise again, Creon, Creon, Creon.
Enter Creon, Diocles, Alcander, Pyracmon; followed by the Crowd. Creon. I
thank ye, Countrymen; but must refuse
The honors you intend me, they are too great;
And I am too unworthy; think again,
And make a better choice.

1 Cit. Think twice! I never thought twice in all my life:
That Is double work.

2 Cit. My first word is always my second; and therefore I Will have
No second word: and therefore once again I say, A Creon.

All. A Creon, A Creon, A Creon.

Creon. Yet hear me, Fellow Citizens.

Dioc. Fellow Citizens! there was a word of kindness!

Alc. When did Oedipus salute you by that familiar name?

1 Cit. Never, never* he was too proud.

Creon. Indeed he could not, for he was a stranger:
But under him our Thebes is half destroyed.
Forbid it Heaven the residue should perish
Under a Theban born.
It Is true, the Gods might send this plague among you,
Because a stranger ruled: but what of that,
Can I redress it now?

3 Cit. Yes, you or none.
It Is Certain that the Gods are angry with us
Because he reigns.

Creon. Oedipus may return: you may be ruined.

1 Cit. Nay, if that be the matter, we are ruined already.

2 Cit. Half of us that are here present, were living men but
Yesterday, and we that are absent do but drop and drop,
And no man knows whether he be dead or living. And
Therefore while we are sound and well, let us satisfy our
Consciences, and make a new King.

3 Cit. Ha, if we were but worthy to see another Coronation,
And then if we must dye, well go merrily together.

All. To the question, to the question.

Dioc. Are you content, Creon should be your King?

All. A Creon, A Creon, A Creon.

Tir. Hear-me, ye Thebans, and thou Creon, hear me.

1 Cit. Who Is that would be heard; we'll hear no man:
We can scarce hear one another.

Tir. I charge you by the Gods to hear me.

2 Cit. Oh, it is Apollo's Priest, we must hear him; it is the old blind
Prophet that sees all things.

3 Cit. He comes from the Gods too, and they are our betters;
And therefore in good manners we must hear him: Speak, Prophet.

2 Cit. For coming from the Gods that is no great matter,
They can all say that; but he is a great Scholar, he can make
Almanacks, and he were put to it, and therefore I say hear him.

Tir. When angry Heaven scatters its plagues among you,
Is it for naught, ye Thebans! are the Gods
Unjust in punishing? are there no Crimes
Which pull this Vengeance down?

1 Cit. Yes, yes, no doubt there are some Sins stirring
That are the cause of all.

3 Cit. Yes there are Sins; or we should have no Taxes.

2 Cit. For my part I can speak it with a safe Conscience,
I never sinned in all my life.

1 Cit. Nor I.

3 Cit. Nor I.

2 Cit. Then we are all justified, the sin lies not at our doors.

Tir. All justified alike, and yet all guilty;
Were every man's false dealing brought to light,
His Envy, Malice, Lying, Perjuries,
His Weights and Measures, the other man's Extortions,
With what Face could you tell offended Heaven
You had not sinned?

2 Cit. Nay, if these be sins, the case is altered; for my part I never
Thought any thing but Murder had been a sin.

Tir. And yet, as if all these were less than nothing,
You add Rebellion to 'em; impious Thebans!
Have you not sworn before the Gods to serve
And to obey this Oedipus, your King
By public voice elected; answer me,
If this be true!

2 Cit. This is true; but it is a hard World Neighbors,
If a man's Oath must be his master.

Creon. Speak Diocles; all goes wrong.

Dioc. How are you Traitors Countrymen of Thebes?
This holy Sir, who presses you with Oaths,
Forgets your first; were you not sworn before
To Lajus and his Blood?

All. We were; we were.

Dioc. While Lajus has a lawful Successor,
Your first ^ath still must bind: Eurydice
Is Heir to Lajus; let her marry Creon:
Offended Heaven will never be appeased
While Oedipus pollutes the Throne of Lajus,
A stranger to his Blood.

All. We'll no Oedipus, no Oedipus.

1 Cit. He puts the Prophet in a Mouse-hole.

2 Cit. I knew it would be so; the last man ever speaks the best reason.

Tir. Can benefits thus dye, ungrateful Thebans!
Remember yet, when, after Lajus's death,
The Monster Sphinx laid your rich Country waste,
Your Vineyards spoiled, your laboring Oxen slew;
Your selves for fear mewed up within your Walls.
She, taller than your Gates, o're-look'd your Town,
But when she raised her Bulk to sail above you,
She drove the Air arround her like a Whirlwind,
And shaded all beneath; till stooping down,
She clapped her leathern wing against your Towers,
And thrust out her long neck, even to your doors.

Dioc. Alk. Pyr. We'll hear no more.

Tir. You durst not meet in Temples
T'invoke the Gods for aid, the proudest he
Who leads you now, then cowr'd, like a dared Lark:
This Creon shook for fear,
The blood of Lajus, cruddled in his Veins:
Till Oedipus arrived.
Called by his own high courage and the Gods,
Himself to you a God: ye offered him
Your Queen, and Crown; (but what was then your Crown!)
And Heaven authorized it by his success:
Speak then, who is your lawful King?

All. It Is Oedipus.

Tir. It Is Oedipus indeed: your King more lawful
Than yet you dream: for something still there lies
In Heavens dark Volume, which I read through mists:
It Is great, prodigious; it is a dreadful birth,
Of wondrous Fate; and now, just now disclosing.
I see, I see! how terribly it dawns.
And my Soul sickens with it:

1 Cit. How the God shakes him!

Tir. He comes! he comes! Victory! Conquest! Triumph!
But oh! Guiltless and Guilty: Murder! Parricide!
Incest; Discovery! Punishment -- it is ended,
And all your sufferings over.

A Trumpet within; Enter Haemon. Haem. Rouse up ye Thebans; tune your Jo.
Paeans!
Your King returns; the Argians are o're-come;
Their Warlike Prince in single Combat taken,
And led in Bands by God-like Oedipus.

All. Oedipus, Oedipus, Oedipus!

Creon. Furies confound his Fortune! --
Haste, all haste;
And meet with Blessings our Victorious King;
Decree Processions; bid new Holy Days;
Crown all the Statues of our Gods with Garlands;
And raise a Brazen Collumn, thus inscribed,
To Oedipus, now twice a Conqueror; Deliverer of his Thebes.
Trust me, I weep for joy to see this day.
[aside. [To them.
Tir. Yes, Heaven knows why thou weep'st: -- go, Countrymen,
And, as you use to supplicate your Gods --
So meet your King, with Bays, and Olive-branches:
Bow down, and touch his Knees, and beg from him
An end of all your Woes; for only he
Can give it you.
[ Ex. Tiresias, the People following.
Enter Oedipus in triumph, Adrastus Prisoner; Dymas, Train. Creon. All hail,
great Oedipus;
Thou mighty Conqueror, hail; welcome to Thebes:
To thy own Thebes; to all that is left of Thebes:
For half thy Citizens are swept away,
And wanting to thy Triumphs:
And we, the happy remnant, only live
To welcome thee, and dye.

Oedipus. Thus pleasure never comes sincere to man;
But lent by Heaven upon hard Usury:
And, while Jove holds us out the Bowl of Joy,
E're it can reach our Lips it is dashed with Gall
By some left handed God. O mournful Triumph!
O Conquest gained abroad and lost at home!
O Argos! now rejoice, for Thebes lies low;
Thy slaughtered Sons now smile and think they won;
When they can count more Theban Ghosts than theirs.

Adrast. No; Argos mourns with Thebes; you tempered so
Your Courage while you fought, that Mercy seemed
The manlier Virtue, and much more prevailed:
While Argos is a People, think your Thebes
Can never want for Subjects: Every Nation
Will crow'd to serve where Oedipus commands,

Creon to Haem. How mean it shows to fawn upon the Victor!

Haem. Had you beheld him fight, you had said otherwise:
Come, it is brave bearing in him, not to envy
Superior Virtue.

Oed. This indeed is Conquest,
To gain a Friend like you: Why were we Foes?

Adrast. 'Cause we were Kings, and each disdained an equal.
I fought to have it in my power to do
What thou have done; and so to use my Conquest;
To show thee, Honor was my only motive,
Know this, that were my Army at thy Gates,
And Thebes thus waste, I would not take the Gift,
Which, like a Toy, dropped from the hands of Fortune,
Lay for the next chance-comer.

Oed. embracing. No more Captive,
But Brother of the War: It Is much more pleasant,
And safer, trust me, thus to meet thy love,
Than when hard Gantlets clench'd our Warlike Hands,
And kept 'em from soft use.

Adr. My Conqueror.

Oed. My Friend! that other name keeps Enmity alive.
But longer to detain thee were a Crime;
To love, and to Eurydice, go free:
Such welcome as a ruined Town can give
Expect from me; the rest let her supply.

Adr. I go without a blush, though conquered twice,
By you and by my Princess.
[ Ex. Adrastus.
Creon aside. Then I am conquered thrice; by Oedipus,
And her, and even by him, the slave of both:
Gods, I Am beholding to you, for making me your Image,
Would I could make you mine.
[ Ex. Creon.
Enter the People with branches in their hands, holding them up, and kneeling:
Two Priests before them. Oedipus. Alas, my People!
What means this speechless sorrow, down cast eyes,
And lifted hands! if there be one among you
Whom grief has left a tongue, speak for the rest.

1 Pr. O Father of thy Country!
To thee these knees are bent, these eyes are lifted,
As to a visible Divinity.
A Prince on whom Heaven safely might repose
The business of Mankind: for Providence
Might on thy careful bosom sleep secure,
And leave her task to thee.
But where is the Glory of thy former acts?
Even that is destroyed when none shall live to speak it.
Millions of Subjects shall thou have; but mute.
A people of the dead; a crowded desert.
A Midnight silence at the noon of day.

Oed. O were our Gods as ready with their pity,
As I with mine, this Presence should be thronged
With all I left alive; and my sad eyes.
Not search in vain for friends, whose promised sight
Flattered my toyls of war.

1 Pr. Twice our deliverer.

Oed. Nor are now your vows
Addressed to one who sleeps:
When this unwelcome news first reached my ears,
Dymas was sent to Delphos to enquire
The cause and cure of this contagious ill:
And is this day returned: but since his message
Concerns the public, I refused to hear it
But in this general Presence: let him speak.

Dymas. A dreadful answer from the hallowed Urn,
And sacred tripous did the Priestess give,
In these Mysterious words,

The Oracle. Shed in a cursed hour, by cursed hand,
Blood Royal unrevenged, has cursed the Land.
When Lajus death is expiated well
Your Plague shall cease: the rest let Lajus tell.

Oed. Dreadful indeed! blood, and a Kings blood too:
And such a Kings, and by his Subjects shed!
(Else why this curse on Thebes?) no wonder then
If Monsters, Wars, and plagues revenge such Crimes!
If Heaven be just, it is whole Artillery,
All must be emptied on us: Not one bolt
Shall err from Thebes; but more, be called for more:
New molded thunder of a larger size;
Driven by whole Jove. What, touch anointed Power!
Then Gods beware; Jove would himself be next;
Could you but reach him too.

2. Pr. We mourn the sad remembrance.

Oed. Well you may:
Worse than a plague infects you: you are devoted
To Mother Earth, and to the infernal Powers:
Hell has a right in you: I thank you Gods,
That I Am no Theban born: how my blood cruddles!
As if this curse touched me! and touched me nearer
Than all this presence! -- Yes, it is a Kings blood,
And I, a King, am tied in deeper bonds
To expiate this blood: but where, from whom,
Or how must I atone it? tell me, Thebans,
How Lajus fell? for a confused report
Pass*d through my ears, when first I took the Crown:
But full of hurry, like a morning dream,
It vanished in the business of the day.

1 Pr. He went in private forth; but thinly followed;
And never returned to Thebes.

Oed. Nor any from him? came there no attendant?
None to bring news?

2 Pr. But one; and he so wounded,
He scarce drew breath to speak some few faint words.

Oed. What were they? something may be learnt from thence.

1 Pr. He said a band of Robbers watched their passage;
Who took advantage of a narrow way
To murder Lajus and the rest: himself
Left too for dead.

Oed. Made you no more enquiry,
But took this bare relation?

2. Pr. 'Twas neglected:
For then the Monster Sphynx began to rage;
And present cares soon buried the remote;
So was it hushed, and never since revived.

Oed. Mark, Thebans, mark!
Just then, the Sphynx began to rage among you;
The Gods took hold even of th'offending minute,
And dated thence your woes: thence will I trace 'em.

1 Pr. It Is Just thou should.

Oed. Hear then this dreadful imprecation; hear it:
It Is laid on all; not any one exempt:
Bear witness Heaven, avenge it on the perjured.
If any Theban born, if any stranger
Reveal this murder, or produce its Author,
Ten Attique Talents be his just reward:
But, if for fear, for favor, or for hire,
The murder'r he conceal, the curse of Thebes
Fall heavy on his head: Unite our plagues
Ye Gods, and place 'em there: from Fire and Water,
Converse, and all things common be he banished.
But for the murderer's self, unfound by man,
Find him ye powers Celestial and Infernal;
And the same Fate or worse, than Lajus met,
Let be his lot: his children be accursed;
His Wife and kindred, all of his be cursed.

Both Pr. Confim it Heaven!

Enter Jocasta; Attended by Women. Joc. At your Devotions! Heaven succeed your
wishes;
And bring the effect of these your pious prayers
On you, and me, and all.

Pr. Avert this Omen, Heaven!

Oed. O fatal sound, Unfortunate Jocasta!
What have thou said! an ill hour have thou chosen
For these fore-boding words! why, we were cursing!

Joc. Then may that curse fall only where you laid it.

Oed. Speak no more!
For all thou say is ominous: we were cursing;
And that dire imprecation have thou fastn'd
On Thebes, and thee and me, and all of us.

Joc. Are then my blessings turned into a curse?
O Unkind Oedipus. My former Lord
Thought me his blessing: be thou like my Lajus.

Oed. what yet again! the third time have thou cursed me?
This imprecation was for Lajus death,
And thou have wished me like him.

Joc. Horror seizes me!

Oed. why do thou gaze upon me? prithee love
Take off thy eye; it burdens me too much.

Joc. The more I look, the more I find of Lajus:
His speech, his garb, his action; nay his frown;
(For I have seen it;) but never bent on me.

Oed. Are we so like?

Joc. In all things but his love.

Oed. I love thee more: so well I love, words cannot speak how well.
No pious Son er'e loved his Mother more
Than I my dear Jocasta.

Joc. I love you too
The self same way: and when you chid, me thought
A Mothers love start up in your defense,
And bade me not beangry: be not you:
For I love Lajus still as wives should love:
But you more tenderly; as part of me:
And when I have you in my arms, methinks
I lull my child asleep.

Oed. Then we are blessed:
And all these curses sweep along the skies
Like empty clouds; but drop not on our heads.

Joc. I have not joy'd an hour since you departed,
For public Miseries, and for private fears;
But this blessed meeting has or'e-pay'd 'em all.
Good fortune that comes seldom comes more welcome.
All I can wish for now, is your consent
To make my Brother happy.

Oed. How, Jocasta?

Joc. By marriage with his Niece, Eurydice!

Oed. Uncle and Niece! they are too near, my Love;
It Is too like Incest: it is offense to Kind:
Had I not promised, were there no Adrastus,
No choice but Creon left her of Mankind,
They should not marry; speak no more of it;
The thought disturbs me.

Joc. Heaven can never bless
A Vow so broken, which I made to Creon;
Remember he is my Brother.

Oed. That Is the Bar:
And she thy Daughter: Nature would abhor
To be forced back again upon her self,
And like a whirle-pool swallow her own streams.

Joc. Be not displeased; I Will move the Suit no more.

Oed. No, do not; for, I know not why, it shakes me
When I but think on Incest; move we forward
To thank the Gods for my success, and pray
To wash the guilt of Royal Blood away.
[Exeunt Omnes.
ACT. II. SCENE I.
An open Gallery. A Royal Bedchamber being supposed behind. The Time, Night.
Thunder, etc. Haemon, Alcander, Pyracmon. Haem. SURE it is the end of all
things! Fate has torn
The Lock of Time off, and his head is now
The ghastly Ball of round Eternity!
Call you these Peals of Thunder, but the yawn
Of bellowing Clouds? By Jove, they seem to me
The World's last groans; and those vast sheets of Flame
Are its last Blaze! The Tapers of the Gods,
The Sun and Moon, run down like waxen-Globes;
The shooting Stars end all in purple Gellies,
And Chaos is at hand.

Pyr. It Is Midnight, yet there is not a Theban sleeps,
But such as never must wake. All crow'd about
The Palace, and implore, as from a God,
Help of the King; who, from the Battlement,
By the red Lightning's glare, descried afar,
Atones the angry Powers.
Thunder, etc.
Haem. Ha! Pyracmon, look;
Behold, Alcander, from yon' West of Heaven,
The perfect Figures of a Man and Woman:
A Scepter bright with Gems in each right hand,
Their flowing Robes of dazzling Purple made,
Distinctly yonder in that point they stand,
Just West; a bloody red stains all the place:
And see, their Faces are quite-hid in Clouds.

Pyr. Clusters of Golden Stars hang over their heads,
And seem so crowded, that they burst upon 'em:
All dart at once their baleful influence,
In leaking Fire.

Alc. Long-bearded Comets stick,
Like flaming Porcupines, to their left sides,
As they would shoot their Quills into their hearts.

Haem. But see* the King, and Queen, and all the Court!
Did ever Day or Night show ought like this?
[Thunders again. The Scene draws, and discovers the Prodigies.
Enter Oedipus, Jocasta, Euridice, Adrastus, all coming forward with amazement.
Oed. Answer, you Powers Divine; spare all this noise,
This rack of Heaven, and speak your fatal pleasure.
Why breaks yon dark and dusky Orb away?
Why from the bleeding Womb of monstrous Night,
Burst forth such Miriads of abortive Stars?
Ha! my Jocasta, look! the Silver Moon!
A settling Crimson stains her beauteous Face!
She Is all over Blood! and look, behold again,
What mean the mistick-Heavens, she journeys on?
A vast Eclipse darkens the laboring Planet:
Sound there, sound all our Instruments of War;
Clarions and Trumpets, Silver, Brass, and Iron,
And beat a thousand Drums to help her Labor.

Adr. It Is vain; you see the Prodigies continue;
Let Us gaze no more, the Gods are humorous.

Oed. Forbear, rash man. -- Once more I ask your pleasure*
If that the glow-worm-light of Humane Reason
Might dare to offer at Immortal knowledge,
And cope with Gods, why all this storm of Nature?
Why do the Rocks split, and why rouls the Sea?
Why these Portents in Heaven, and Plagues on Earth?
Why yon' Gygantick Forms, Ethereal Monsters?
Alas! is all this but to fright the Dwarfs
Which your own hands have made? Then be it so.
Or if the Fates resolve some Expiation
For murdered Lajus; Hear me, hear me, Gods!
Hear me thus prostrate: Spare this groaning Land,
Save innocent Thebes, stop the Tyrant Death;
Do this, and lo I stand up an Oblation
To meet your swiftest and severest anger,
Shoot all at once, and strike me to the Center.

The Cloud draws that veiled the he ads of the Figures in the Sky, and shows
'em Crowned, with the names of Oedipus and Jocasta written above in great
Characters of Gold. Adr. Either I dream, and all my cooler senses
Are vanished with that Cloud that fleets away;
Or just above those two Majestic heads,
I see, I read distinctly in large gold,
Oedipus and Jocasta.

Alc. I read the same.

Adr. It Is wonderful; yet ought not man to wade
Too far in the vast deep of Destiny.
[Thunder; and the Prodigies vanish.
Joc. My Lord, my Oedipus, why gaze you now,
When the whole Heaven is clear, as if the Gods
Had some new Monsters made? will you not turn,
And bless your People; who devour each word
You breathe.

Oed. It shall be so.
Yes, I will dye, O Thebes, to save thee!
Draw from my heart my blood, with more content
Than e're I wore thy Crown. Yet, O, Jocasta!
By all the indearments of miraculous love,
By all our languishings, our fears in pl^^sure,
Which often have made us wonder; here I swear
On thy fair hand, upon thy breast I swear,
I cannot call to mind, from budding Childhood
To blooming youth, a Crime by me committed,
For which the awful Gods should doom my death.

Joc. It Is not you, my Lord,
But he who murdered Lajus, frees the Land:
Were you, which is impossible, the man,
Perhaps my Poniard first should drink your blood;
But you are innocent, as your Jocasta,
From Crimes like those. This made me violent
To save your life, which you unjust would lose:
Nor can you comprehend, with deepest thought,
The horrid Agony you cast me in,
When you resolved to dye.

Oed. Is It possible?

Joc. Alas! why start you so? Her stiff'ning grief,
Who saw her Children slaughtered all at once,
Was dull to mine: Methinks I should have made
My bosom bare against the armed God,
To save my Oedipus!

Oed. I pray, no more.

Joc. Yo've silenced me, my Lord.

Oed. Pardon me, dear Jocasta;
Pardon a heart that sinks with sufferings,
And can but vent it self in sobs and murmurs:
Yet to restore my peace, I Will find him out.
Yes, yes, you Gods! you shall have ample vengeance
On Lajus murderer. O, the Traytor's name!
I Will know it, I will; Art shall be Conjured for it,
And Nature all unravel'd.

Joc. Sacred Sir, --

Oed. Rage will have way, and it is but just; I Will fetch him,
Though lodged in Air, upon a Dragon's wing,
Though Rocks should hide him: nay, he shall be dragged
From Hell, if Charms can hurry him along:
His Ghost shall be, by sage Tiresias power,
( Tiresias, that rules all beneath the Moon)
Confined to flesh, to suffer death once more;
And then be plunged in his first fires again.

Enter Creon. Cre. My Lord,
Tiresias attends your pleasure.

Oed. Haste, and bring him in.
O, my Jocasta, Euridice, Adrastus,
Creon, and all ye Thebans, now the end
Of Plagues, of Madness, Murders, Prodigies,
Draws on: This Battle of the Heavens and Earth
Shall by his wisdom be reduced to peace.
Enter Tiresias, leaning on a staff, led by his Daughter Manto, followed by
other Thebans. O thou, whose most aspiring mind
Know all the business of the Courts above,
Open'st the Closets of the Gods, and dares
To mix with Jove himself and Fate at Council;
O Prophet, answer me, declare aloud
The Traitor who conspired the death of Lajus:
Or be they more, who from malignant Stars
Have drawn this Plague that blasts unhappy Thebes.

Tir. We must no more than Fate commissions us
To tell; yet something, and of moment, I Will unfold,
If that the God would wake; I feel him now,
Like a strong Spirit Charmed into a Tree,
That leaps, and moves the Wood without a Wind:
The roused God, as all this while he lay
Entombed alive, starts and dilates himself;
He struggles, and he tears my aged Trunk
With holy Fury, my old Arteries burst,
My rivel'd skin,
Like Parchment, crackles at the hallowed fire;
I shall be young again: Manto, my Daughter,
Thou have a voice that might have saved the Bard
Of Thrace, and fore'd the raging Bacchanals,
With lifted Prongs, to listen to thy airs:
O Charm this God, this Fury in my bosom,
Lull him with tuneful notes, and artful strings,
With powerful strains; Manto, my lovely Child,
Sooth the unruly Godhead to be mild.

SONG to Apollo.
Phoebus, God beloved by men;
At thy dawn, every Beast is roused in his Den;
At thy setting, all the Birds of thy absence complain,
And we dye, all dye till the morning comes again,
Phoebus, God beloved by men!
Idol of the Eastern Kings,
Awful as the God who flings
His Thunder round, and the Lightning wings;
God of Songs, and Orphean strings,
Who to this mortal bosom brings,
All harmonious heavenly things!
Thy drouzie Prophet to revive,
Ten thousand thousand forms before him drive;
With Chariots and Horses all of fire awake him,
Convulsions, and Furies, and Prophesies shake him:
Let him tell it in groans, though he bend with the load,
Though he burst with the weight of the terrible God.
Tir. The wretch, who shed the blood of old Labdacides,
Lives, and is great;
But cruel greatness never was long:
The first of Lajus blood his life did seize,
And urged his Fate,
Which else had lasting been and strong.
The wretch, who Lajus killed, must bleed or fly;
Or Thebes, consumed with Plagues, in ruins lie.

Oed. The first of Lajus blood* pronounce the person;
May the God roar from thy prophetic mouth,
That even the dead may start up, to behold:
Name him, I say, that most accursed wretch,
For by the Stars he dies:
Speak, I command thee;
By Phoebus, speak; for sudden death's his doom:
Here shall he fall, bleed on this very spot;
His name, I charge the once more, speak.

Tir. It Is lost,
Like what we think can never shun remembrance;
Yet of a sudden's gone beyond the Clouds.

Oed. Fetch it from thence; I Will have't, where e're it be*

Cre. Let me entreat you, sacred Sir, be calm,
And Creon shall point out the great Offender.
It Is true, respect of Nature might injoin
Me silence, at another time; but, oh,
Much more the power of my eternal Love!
That, that should strike me dumb: yet Thebes, my Country --
I Will break through all, to succor thee, poor City!
O, I must speak.

Oed. Speak then, if ought thou know:
As much thou seem to know, delay no longer.

Cre. O Beauty! O illustrious Royal Maid!
To whom my Vows were ever paid till now,
And with such modest, chaste, and pure affection,
The coldest Nymph might read 'em without blushing;
Art thou the Murdress then of wretched Lajus?
And I, must I accuse thee! O my tears!
Why will you fall in so abhorred a Cause?
But that thy beauteous, barbarous, hand destroyed
Thy Father (O monstrous act!) both Gods
And men at once take notice.

Oed. Euridice!

Eur. Traitor, go on; I scorn thy little malice,
And knowing more my perfect innocence,
Than Gods and men, then how much more than thee,
Who art their opposite, and formed a Liar,
I thus disdain thee! Thou once did talk of Love;
Because I hate thy love,
Thou do accuse me.

Adr. Villain, inglorious Villain,
And Traitor, double damned, who dur'st blaspheme
The spotless virtue of the brightest beauty;
Thou dy'st: nor shall the sacred Majesty,
That guards this place, preserve thee from my rage.
[Draws and wounds him.
Oed. Disarm 'em both: Prince, I shall make you know
That I can tame you twice. Guards, seize him.

Adr. Sir,
I must acknowledge in another Cause
Repentance might abash me; but I glory
In this, and smile to see the Traytor's blood.

Oed. Creon, you shall be satisfied at full.

Cre. My hurt is nothing, Sir; but I appeal
To wise Tiresias, if my accusation
Be not most true. The first of Lajus blood
Gave him his death. Is there a Prince before her?
Then she is faultless, and I ask her pardon.
And may this blood never cease to drop, O Thebes,
If pity of thy sufferings did not move me
To show the Cure which Heaven it self prescribed.

Eur. Yes, Thebans, I will dye to save your lives,
More willingly than you can wish my fate;
But let this good, this wife, this holy man,
Pronounce my Sentence: for to fall by him,
By the vile breath of that prodigious Villain,
Would sink my Soul, tho I should dye a Martyr.

Adr. Unhand me, slaves. O mightiest of Kings,
See at your feet a Prince not used to kneel;
Touch not Euridice, by all the Gods,
As you would save your Thebes, but take my life:
For, should she perish, Heaven would heap plagues on plagues,
Rain Sulphur down, hurl kindled bolts
Upon your guilty heads.

Cre. You turn to gallantry, what is but justice:
Proof will be easy made. Adrastus was
The Robber who bereft the unhappy King
Of life; because he flatly had denied
To make so poor a Prince his Son-in-law:
Therefore 'twere fit that both should perish.

1 Theb. Both, let both dye.

All Theb. Both, both; let 'em dye.

Oed. Hence, you wild herd! For your Ringleader here,
He shall be made Example. Haemon, take him.

1 Theb. Mercy, O mercy.

Oed. Mutiny in my presence!
Hence, let me see that busy face no more.

Tir. Thebans, what madness makes you drunk with rage?
Enough of guilty death's already acted:
Fierce Creon has accused Euridice,
With Prince Adrastus; which the God reproves
By inward checks, and leaves their Fates in doubt.

Oed. Therefore instruct us what remains to do,
Or suffer; for I feel a sleep like death
Upon me, and I sigh to be at rest.

Tir. Since that the powers divine refuse to clear
The mystic deed, I Will to the Grove of Furies;
There I can force the Infernal Gods to show
Their horrid Forms;
Each trembling Ghost shall rise,
And leave their grizly King without a waiter:
For Prince Adrastus and Euridice,
My life's engaged, I Will guard 'em in the Fane,
Till the dark mysteries of Hell are done.
Follow me, Princes; Thebans, all to rest.
O, Oedipus, to morrow -- but no more.
If that thy wakeful Genius will permit,
Indulge thy brain this night with softer slumbers:
To morrow, O to morrow! -- sleep, my Son;
And in prophetic dreams thy Fate be shown.
[ Ex. Tires. Adrast. Eurid. Manto, Thebans.
Manent Oed. Joc. Creon, Pyrac. Haem. Alcan. Oed. To bed, my Fair, my Dear, my
best Jocasta.
After the toils of war, it is wondrous strange
Our loves should thus be dashed. One moment's thought,
And I Will approach the arms of my beloved.

Joc. Consume whole years in care, so now and then
I may have leave to feed my famished eyes
With one short passing glance, and sigh my vows:
This, and no more, my Lord, is all the passion
Of languishing Jocasta.
[Exit.
Oed. Thou softest, sweetest of the World! good night.
Nay, she is beauteous too; yet, mighty Love!
I never offered to obey thy Laws,
But an unusual chillness came upon me;
An unknown hand still checked my forward joy,
Dashed me with blushes, though no light was near:
That even the Act became a violation.

Pyr. He Is strangely thoughtful.

Oed. Hark! who was that? Ha! Creon, did thou call me?

Cre. Not I, my gracious Lord, nor any here.

Oed. That Is strange! methought I heard a doleful voice
Cried Oedipus. -- The Prophet bad me sleep;
He talked of Dreams, and Visions, and to morrow!
I Will muse no more on it, come what will or can,
My thoughts are clearer than unclouded Stars;
And with those thoughts I Will rest: Creon, good night.
[ Ex. with Haemon.
Cre. Sleep seal your eyes, Sir, Eternal sleep.
But if he must sleep and wake again, O all
Tormenting Dreams, wild horrors of the night,
And Hags of Fancy wing him through the air:
From precipices hurl him headlong down;
Charybdis roar, and death be set before him.

Alc. Your Curses have already taken effect;
For he looks very sad.

Cre. May he be rooted, where he stands, for ever;
His eye balls never move, brows be unbent,
His blood, his Entrails, Liver, heart and bowels,
Be blacker than the place I wish him, Hell.

Pyr. No more: you tear your self, but vex not him.
Methinks 'twere brave this night to force the Temple,
While blind Tiresias conjures up the Fiends,
And pass the time with nice Eurydice.

Alc. Try promises, and threats, and if all fail,
Since Hell's broke loose, why should not you be mad?
Ravish, and leave her dead, with her Adrastus.

Cre. Were the Globe mine, I Would give a Province hourly
For such another thought. Lust, and revenge!
To stab at once the only man I hate,
And to enjoy the woman whom I love!
I ask no more of my auspicious Stars,
The rest as Fortune please; so but this night
She play me fair, why, let her turn for ever.

Enter Haemon. Haem. My Lord, the troubled King is gone to rest;
Yet, e're he slept, commanded me to clear
The Antichambers: none must dare be near him

Cre. Haemon, you do your duty; --
And we obey. -- The night grows yet more dreadful!
It Is just that all retire to their devotions;
The Gods are angry: but to morrow's dawn,
If Prophets do not lie, will make all clear.
[Thunder. [As they go off.
Oedipus Enters, walking asleep in his shirt, with a Dagger in his right hand,
and a Taper in his left. Oed. O, my Jocasta! it is for this the wet
Starved Soldier lies all night on the cold ground;
For this he bears the storms
Of Winter Camps, and freezes in his Arms:
To be thus circled, to be thus embraced;
That I could hold thee ever! -- Ha! where art thou?
What means this melancholy light, that seems
The gloom of glowing embers?
The Curtain's drawn; and see, she is here again!
Jocasta? Ha! what, fallen asleep so soon?
How fares my love? this Taper will inform me.
Ha! Lightning blast me, Thunder
Rivet me ever to Prometheus Rock,
And Vultures gnaw out my Incestuous heart,
By all the Gods! my Mother Merope!
My Sword, a Dagger; Ha, who waits there? slaves,
My Sword: what, Haemon, dare thou, Villain, stop me?
With thy own Poniard perish. Ha! who is this?
Or is it a change of Death? By all my Honors,
New murder; thou have slain old Polybus:
Incest and parricide, thy Father's murdered!
Out thou infernal flame: now all is dark,
All blind and dismal, most triumphant mischief!
And now while thus I stalk about the room,
I challenge Fate to find another wretch
Like Oedipus!
[Thunder, etc.
Enter Jocasta attended, with Lights, in a Nightgown. Oed. Night, Horror,
Death, Confusion, Hell, and Furies!
Where am I? O, Jocasta, let me hold thee,
Thus to my bosom, ages; let me grasp thee:
All that the hardest tempered weathered flesh,
With fiercest humane Spirit inspired, can dare
Or do, I dare; but, oh you Powers, this was
By infinite degrees too much for man.
Methinks my deafn'd ears
Are burst; my eyes, as if they had been knocked
By some tempestuous hand, shoot flashing fire:
That sleep should do this!

Joc. Then my fears were true.
Methought I heard your voice, and yet I doubted,
Now roaring like the Ocean, when the winds
Fight with the waves; now, in a still small tone
Your dying accents fell, as racking ships,
After the dreadful yell, sink murmuring down,
And bubble up a noise.

Oed. Trust me, thou Fairest, best of all thy Kind,
None e're in Dreams was tortured so before,
Yet what most shocks the niceness of my temper,
Even far beyond the killing of my Father,
And my own death, is, that this horrid sleep
Dashed my sick fancy with an act of Incest:
I dreamt, Jocasta, that thou were my Mother;
Which, though impossible, so damps my Spirits,
That I could do a mischief on my self,
Lest I should sleep and Dream the like again.

Joc. O, Oedipus, too well I understand you!
I know the wrath of Heaven, the care of Thebes,
The cries of its Inhabitants, war's toils,
And thousand other labors of the State,
Are all referred to you, and ought to take you
For ever from Jocasta.

Oed. Life of my life, and treasure of my Soul,
Heaven knows I love thee.

Joc. O, you think me vile,
And of an inclination so ignoble,
That I must hide me from your eyes for ever.
Be witness, Gods, and strike Jocasta dead,
If an immodest thought, or low desire
Inflamed my breast, since first our Loves were lighted.

Oed. O rise, and add not, by thy cruel kindness,
A grief more sensible than all my torments.
Thou think my dreams are forged; but by thy self,
The greatest Oath, I swear, they are most true:
But, be they what they will, I here dismiss 'em;
Begone, Chimeras, to your Mother Clouds,
Is there a fault in us? Have we not searched
The womb of Heaven, examined all the Entrails
Of Birds and Beasts, and tired the Prophets Art.
Yet what avails? he, and the Gods together,
Seem like Physicians at a lossto help us:
Therefore, like wretches that have lingered long,
We Will snatch the strongest Cordial of our love;
To bed, my Fair.

Ghost within. Oedipus!

Oed. Ha! who calls?
Did thou not hear a voice?

Joc. Alas! I did.

Ghost. Jocasta!

Joc. O my love, my Lord, support me!

Oed. Call louder, till you burst your aerie Forms:
Rest on my hand. Thus, arm*d with innocence,
I Will face these babbling Demons of the air.
In spite of Ghosts, I Will on,
Though round my Bed the Furies plant their Charms;
I Will break 'em, with Jocasta in my arms:
Clasped in the folds of love, I Will wait my doom;
And act my joys, though Thunder shake the room.
[Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
A dark Grove. Enter Creon. Cre. IT IS better not to be, than to be unhappy.

Dio. What mean you by these words?

Cre. It Is better not to be, than to be Creon.
A thinking soul is punishment enough;
But when it is great, like mine, and wretched too,
Then every thought draws blood.

Dio. You are not wretched.

Cre. I am: my soul's ill married to my body.
I would be young, be handsome, be beloved:
Could I but but breath my self into Adrastus --

Dio. You rave; call home your thoughts.

Cre. I prithee let my soul take air awhile;
Were she in Oedipus, I were a King;
Then I had killed a Monster, gained a Battle;
And had my Rival prisoner; brave, brave actions*
Why have not I done these?

Dio. Your fortune hindered.

Cre. There Is it: I have a soul to do 'em all:
But fortune will have nothing done that is great,
But by young handsome fools: Body and brawn
Do all her work: Hercules was a fool,
And straight grew famous: a mad boistrous fool,
Nay worse, a Woman's fool.
Fool is the stuff, of which Heaven makes a Hero.

Dio. A Serpent never becomes a flying Dragon,
Till he has eat a Serpent.

Cre. Goes it there!
I understand thee; I must kill Adrastus.

Dio. Or not enjoy your Mistress:
Eurydice and he are prisoners here,
But will not long be so: this tell-tale Ghost
Perhaps will clear 'em both.

Cre. Well: it is resolved.

Dio. The Princess walks this way;
You must not meet her,
Till this be done.

Cre. I must.

Dio. She hates your sight:
And more since you accused her.

Cre. Urge it not.
I cannot stay to tell thee my design;
For she is too near.
Enter Eurydice. How, Madam, were your thoughts employed!

Eur. On death, and thee.

Cre. Then were they not well sorted: life and me
Had been the better match.

Eur. No, I was thinking
On two the most detested things in Nature:
And they are death and thee,

Cre. The thought of death to one near death is dreadsul:
O it is a fearful thing to be no more.
Or if to be, to wander after death;
To walk as spirits do, in Brakes all day;
And when the darkness comes, to glide in paths
That lead to Graves: and in the silent Vault,
Where lies your own pale shroud, to hover over it,
Striving to enter your forbidden Corpse;
And often, often, vainly breathe your Ghost
Into your lifeless lips:
Then, like a lone benighted Travellour
Shut out from lodging, shall your groans be answered
By whistling winds, whose every blast will shake
Your tender Form to Attoms.

Eur. Must I be this thin Being? and thus wander!
No quiet after death!

Cre. None: you must leave
This beauteous body; all this youth and freshness
Must be no more the object of desire,
But a cold lump of Clay;
Which then your discontented Ghost will leave,
And loath it is former lodging.
This is the best of what comes after death,
Even to the best.

Eur. What then shall be thy lot!
Eternal torments, baths of boiling sulphur:
Vicissitudes of fires, and then of frosts;
And an old Guardian Fiend, ugly as thou art,
To hollow in thy ears at every lash;
This for Eurydice; these for her Adrastus.

Cre. For her Adrastus!

Eur. Yes; for her Adrastus:
For death shall never divide us: death, what is death!

Dio. You seemed to fear it.

Eur. But I more fear Creon:
To take that hunch-back'd Monster in my arms.
Th'excrescence of a man.

Dio. to Cre. See what you have gained.

Eur. Death only can be dreadful to the bad:
To innocence, it is like a bugbear dressed
To fright'n Children; pull but off his Masque
And he will appear a friend.

Cre. You talk too slightly
Of death and hell. Let me inform you better.

Eur. You best can tell the news of your own Country.

Dio. Nay now you are too sharp.

Eur. Can I be so to one who has accused me
Of murder and of parricide?

Cre. You provoked me:
And yet I only did thus far accuse you,
As next of blood to Lajus: be advised,
And you may live.

Eur. The means.

Cre. It Is offered you.
The Fool Adrastus has accused himself.

Eur. He has indeed, to take the guilt from me.

Cre. He says he loves you; if he does, it is well:
He never could prove it in a better time.

Eur. Then death must be his recompense for love!

Cre. It Is a Fools just reward:
The wise can make a better use of life:
But it is the young man's pleasure; his ambition:
I grudge him not that favor.

Eur. When he is dead,
Where shall I find his equal!

Cre. Everywhere.
Fine empty things, like him,
The Court swarms with 'em.
Fine fighting things; in Camps they are so common,
Crows feed on nothing else: plenty of Fools;
A glut of 'em in Thebes.
And fortune still takes care they should be seen:
She places 'em aloft, of the topmost Spoke
Of all her Wheel: Fools are the daily work
Of Nature; her vocation: if she form
A man, she looses by it, it is too expensive;
'Twou'd make ten Fools: A man's a Prodigy.

Eur. That is a Creon: O thou black detractor,
Who spitt'st thy venom against Gods and man!
Thou enemy of eyes:
Thou who love nothing but what nothing loves,
And that is thy self: who have conspired against
My life and fame, to make me loathed by all;
And only fit for thee.
But for Adrastus death, good Gods, his death!
What Curse shall I invent?

Dio. No more: he is here.

Eur. He shall be ever here.
He who would give his life; give up his fame. --
Enter Adrastus. If all the Excellence of womankind
Were mine; -- No, it is too little all for him:
Were I made up of endless, endless joys. --

Adr. And so thou art:
The man who loves like me,
Would think even Infamy, the worst of ills,
Were cheaply purchased, were thy love the price:
Uncrown'd, a Captive, nothing left, but Honor;
It Is the last thing a Prince should throw away;
But when the storm grows loud, and threatens love,
Throw even that overboard, for Love's the Jewel;
And last it must be kept.

Cre. to Dio. Work him besure
To rage, he is passionate;
Make him the Aggressor.

Dio. O false love; false honor.

Cre. Dissembled both, and false!

Adr. Dare thou say this to me?

Cre. To you; why what are you, that I should fear you?
I am not Lajus: Hear me, Prince of Argos,
You give what is nothing, when you give your honor;
It Is gone; it is lost in battle. For your love,
Vows made in wine are not so false as that:
You killed her Father; you confessed you did:
A mighty argument to prove your passion to the Daughter.

Adrast. aside. Gods, must I bear this brand, and not retort
The lie to his foul throat!

Dio. Basely you killed him.

Adr. aside. O, I burn inward: my blood's all o'fire.
Alcides, when the poisoned shirt sat closest,
Had but an Ague fit to this my Fever.
Yet, for Eurydice, even this I Will suffer,
To free my love. -- Well then, I killed him basely.

Cre. Fairly, I Am sure, you could not.

Dio. Nor alone.

Cre. You had your fellow-Thieves about you, Prince;
They conquered, and you killed.

Adr. aside. Down swelling heart!
It Is for thy Princess all. -- O my Eurydice! --
[To her.
Euryd. to him. Reproach not thus the weakness of my Sex,
As if I could not bear a shameful death,
Rather than see you burdened with a Crime
Of which I know you free.

Cre. You do ill, Madam,
To let your headlong Love triumph over Nature:
Dare you defend your Fathers Murderer?

Eur. You know he killed him not.

Cre. Let him say so.

Dio. See he stands mute.

Cre. O power of Conscience, even in wicked men!
It works, it stings, it will not let him utter
One syllable, one no to clear himself
From the most base, detested, horrid act
That e're could stain a Villain, not a Prince.

Adr. Ha! Villain.

Dio. Echo to him Groves: cry Villain.

Adr. Let me consider! did I murder Lajus,
Thus like a Villain?

Cre. Best revoke your words;
And say you killed him not.

Adr. Not like a Villain; prithee change me that
For any other Lie.

Dio. No, Villain, Villain.

Cre. You killed him not! proclaim your innocence,
Accuse the Princess: So I knew 'twou'd be.

Adr. I thank thee, thou instruct'st me:
No matter how I killed him.

Cre. aside. Cooled again.

Eur. Thou, who usurp'st the sacred name of Conscience,
Did not thy own declare him innocent;
To me declare him so? The King shall know it.

Cre. You will not be believed, for I Will forswear it.

Eur. What Is now thy Conscience?

Cre. It Is my Slave, my Drudge, my supple Glove,
My upper Garment, to put on, throw off,
As I think best: It Is my obedient conscience.

Adr. Infamous wretch!

Cre. My Conscience shall not do me the ill office
To save a Rivals life; when thou art dead,
(As dead thou shall be, or be yet more base
Than thou think me,
By forfeiting her life, to save thy own. --)
Know this, and let it grate thy very Soul,
She shall be mine: (she is, if Vows were binding;)
Mark me, the fruit of all thy faith and passion,
Even of thy foolish death, shall all be mine.

Adr. Thine, say thou, Monster;
Shall my love be thine?
O, I can bear no more!
Thy cunning Engines, have with labor raised
My heavy anger, like a mighty weight,
To fall and pash thee dead.
See here thy Nuptials; see, thou rash Ixion,
Thy promised Juno vanished in a Cloud;
And in her room avenging Thunder rowls
To blast thee thus. -- Come both, --
[Draws. [Both Draw.
Cre. It Is what I wished!
Now see whose Arm can lanch the surer bolt,
And who is the better Jove. --
[Fight.
Eur. Help; Murder, help!

Enter Haemon and Guards, run betwixt them and beat down their Swords. Haem.
hold; hold your impious hands: I think the Furies,
To whom this Grove is hallowed, have inspired you:
Now, by my soul, the holiest earth of Thebes
You have profaned with war. Nor Tree, nor Plant
Grows here, but what is fed with Magic Juice,
All full of humane Souls; that cleave their barks
To dance at Midnight by the Moons pale beams:
At least two hundred years these reverened Shades
Have known no blood, but of black Sheep and Oxen,
Shed by the Priests own hand to Proserpine.

Adr. Forgive a Strangers ignorance: I knew not
The honors of the place.

Haem. Thou, Creon, did.
Not Oedipus, were all his Foes here lodged,
Durst violate the Religion of these Groves,
To touch one single hair: but must, unarmed,
Parle as in Truce, or surlily avoid
What most he longed to kill.

Cre. I drew not first;
But in my own defense.

Adr. I was provoked,
Beyond Man's patience: all reproach could urge
Was used to kindle one not apt to bear.

Haem. It Is Oedipus, not I, must judge this Act:
Lord Creon, you and Diocles retire:
Tiresias, and the Brotherhood of Priests,
Approach the place: None at these Rites assist,
But you the accused, who by the mouth of Lajus
Must be absolved or doomed.

Adr. I bear my fortune.

Eur. And I provoke my trial.

Haem. It Is at hand.
For see the Prophet comes with Vervin crowned,
The Priests with Yeugh, a venerable band;
We leave you to the Gods.
[ Ex. Haemon with Creon and Diocles.
Enter Tiresias, led by Manto: The Priests follow; all clothed in long black
Habits. Tir. Approach, ye Lovers;
I'll-fated Pair! whom, seeing not, I know:
This day your kindly Stars in Heaven were joined:
When lo, an envious Planet interposed,
And threatened both with death: I fear, I fear.

Eur. Is there no God so much a friend to love,
Who can control the malice of our fate?
Are they all deaf? or have the Giants Heaven?

Tir. The Gods are just. --
But how can Finite measure Infinite?
Reason! alas, it does not know it self!
Yet Man, vain Man, would with this short-lin'd Plummet,
Fathom the vast Abyss of Heavenly justice.
What ever is, is in it is causes just;
Since all things are by Fate. But pur-blind Man
Sees but a part of the Chain; the nearest links;
His eyes not carrying to that equal Beam
That poizes all above.

Eur. Then we must dye!

Tir. The danger's imminent this day.

Adr. Why then there is one day less for humane ills:
And who would moan himself, for suffering that,
Which in a day must pass? something, or nothing --
I shall be what I was again, before
I was Adrastus; --
Penurious Heaven can thou not add a night
To our one day; give me a night with her,
And I Will give all the rest.

Tir. She broke her vow
First made to Creon: but the time calls on:
And Lajus death must now be made more plain.
How loath I am to have recourse to Rites
So full of horror, that I once rejoice
I want the use of Sight. -- *

1 Pr. The Ceremonies stay.

Tir. Choose the darkest part of the Grove,
Such as Ghosts at noonday love.
Dig a Trench, and dig it nigh
Where the bones of Lajus lie.
Altars raised of Turf or Stone,
Will the Infernal Powers have none.
Answer me, if this be done?

All Pr. It Is done.

Tir. Is the Sacrifice made fit?
Draw her backward to the pit:
Draw the barren Heyfer back;
Barren let her be and black.
Cut the curled hair that grows
Full betwixt her horns and brows:
And turn your faces from the Sun:
Answer me, if this be done?

All Pr. It Is done.

Tir. Pour in blood, and blood like wine,
To Mother Earth and Proserpine:
Mingle Milk into the stream;
Feast the Ghosts that love the steam;
Snatch a brand from funeral pile;
Toss it in to make 'em boil;
And turn your faces from the Sun;
Answer me, if all be done?

All Pr. All is done.
[Peal of Thunder; and flashes of Lightning; then groaning below the Stage.
Manto. O, what Laments are those?

Tir. The groans of Ghosts, that cleave the Earth with pain:
And heave it up: they pant and stick half way.
[The Stage wholly darkn'd.
Man. And now a sudden darkness covers all,
True genuine Night: Night added to the Groves;
The Fogs are blown full in the face of Heaven.

Tir. Am I but half obeyed: Infernal Gods,
Must you have Music too? then tune your voices,
And let them have such sounds as Hell never heard
Since Orpheus bribed the Shades.

Music first. Then Sing. This to be set through. 1. Hear, ye sullen Powers
below:
Hear, ye taskers of the dead.

2. You that boiling Cauldrons blow,
You that scum the molten Lead.

3. You that pinch with Red-hot Tongs;

1. You that drive the trembling hosts
Of poor, poor Ghosts,
With your Sharpened Prongs;

2. You that thrust 'em off the Brim.

3. You that plange 'em when they Swim:

1. Till they drown;
Till they go
On a row
Down, down, down
Ten thousand thousand, thousand fadoms low.

Chorus. Till they drown, etc.

1. Music for a while
Shall your cares beguile:
Wondering how your pains were eased.

2. And disdaining to be pleased;

3. Till Alecto free the dead
From their eternal bands;
Till the snakes drop from her head,
And whip from out her hands.

1. Come away
Do not stay,
But obey
While we play,
For Hell's broke up, and Ghosts have holy day.

Chorus. Come away, etc.

[A flash of Lightning: the Stage is made bright; and the Ghosts are seen
passing betwixt the Trees. 1 Lajus!

2 Lajus!

3 Lajus!

1 Hear!

2 Hear!

3 Hear!

Tir. Hear and appear:
By the Fates that spun thy thread;

Cho. Which are three,

Tir. By the Furies fierce, and dread!

Cho. Which are three,

Tir. By the Judges of the dead!

Cho. Which are three,
Three times three!

Tir. By Hells blew flame:
By the Stygian Lake:
And by Demogorgon's name,
At which Ghosts quake,
Hear and appear.

[The Ghost of Lajus rises armed in his Chariot, as he was slain. And behind
his Chariot, sit the three who were Murdered with him. Ghost of Lajus. Why have
thou drawn me from my pains below,
To suffer worse above: to see the day,
And Thebes more hated? Hell is Heaven to Thebes.
For pity send me back, where I may hide,
In willing night, this Ignominious head:
In Hell I shun the public scorn* and then
They hunt me for their sport, and hoot me as I fly:
Behold even now they grin at my gored side,
And chatter at my wounds.

Tir. I pity thee:
Tell but why Thebes is for thy death accursed,
And I Will unbind the Charm.

Ghost. O spare my shame.

Tir. Are these two innocent?

Ghost. Of my death they are.
But he who holds my Crown, Oh, must I speak!
Was doomed to do what Nature most abhors.
The Gods foresaw it; and forbad his being,
Before he yet was born. I broke their laws,
And clothed with flesh his pre-existing soul,
Some kinder power, too weak for destiny,
Took pity, and indu'd his new formed Mass
With Temperance, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude,
And every Kingly virtue: but in vain.
For Fate, that sent him hood-winckt to the world,
Performed its work by his mistaking hands.
Asks thou who murdered me? 'twas Oedipus:
Who stains my Bed with Incest? Oedipus:
For whom then are you cursed, but Oedipus!
He comes; the Parricide: I cannot bear him:
My wounds ache at him: Oh his murderous breath
Venoms my aerie substance! hence with him,
Banish him; sweep him out; the Plague he bears
Will blast your fields, and mark his way with ruin.
From Thebes, my Throne, my Bed, let him be driven;
Do you forbid him Earth, and I Will forbid him Heaven.
[Ghost descends.
Enter Oedipus, Creon, Haemon, etc. Oed. What Is this! methought some
pestilential blast
Struck me just entering; and some unseen hand
Struggled to push me backward! tell me why
My hair stands bristling up, why my flesh trembles!
You stare at me! then Hell has been among ye,
And some lag Fiend yet lingers in the Grove.

Tir. What Omen saw*st thou entering?

Oed. A young Stork,
That bore his aged Parent on his back;
Till weary with the weight, he shook him off,
And peck'd out both his eyes.

Adr. Oh, Oedipus!

Eur. Oh, wretched Oedipus!

Tir. O! Fatal King!

Oed. What mean these Exclamations on my name?
I thank the Gods, no secret thoughts reproach me:
No: I dare challenge Heaven to turn me outward,
And shake my Soul quite empty in your sight.
Then wonder not that I can bear unmoved
These fixed regards, and silent threats of eyes:
A generous fierceness dwells with innocence;
And conscious virtue is allowed some pride.

Tir. Thou know not what thou say.

Oed. What mutters he! tell me, Eurydice:
Thou shak'st: thy souls a Woman. Speak, Adrastus;
And boldly as thou met'st my Arms in fight;
Dare thou not speak, why then it is bad indeed:
Tiresias, thee I summon by the Priesthood,
Tell me what news from Hell: where Lajus points,
And who is the guilty head!

Tir. Let me not answer.

Oed. Be dumb then, and betray thy native soil
To farther Plagues.

Tir. I dare not name him to thee.

Oed. Dare thou converse with Hell, and can thou fear
An humane name!

Tir. Urge me no more to tell a thing, which known
Would make thee more unhappy: 'twill be found
Though I am silent.

Oed. Old and obstinate! Then thou thy self
Art Author or Accomplice of this murder,
And shun'st the Justice, which by public ban
Thou have incurred.

Tir. O, if the guilt were mine
It were not half so great: know wretched man,
Thou only, thou art guilty; thy own Curse
Falls heavy on thy self.

Oed. Speak this again:
But speak it to the Winds when they are loudest:
Or to the raging Seas, they will hear as soon,
And sooner will believe.

Tir. Then hear me Heaven,
For blushing thou have seen it: hear me Earth,
Whose hollow womb could not contain this murder,
But sent it back to light: and thou Hell, hear me,
Whose own black Seal has 'firm'd this horrid truth,
Oedipus murdered Lajus.

Oed. Rot the tongue,
And blasted be the mouth that spoke that lie.
Thou blind of sight, but thou more blind of soul.

Tir. Thy Parents thought not so.

Oed. Who were my Parents?

Tir. Thou shall know too soon.

Oed. Why seek I truth from thee?
The smiles of Courtiers, and the Harlots tears,
The Tradesmans oaths, and mourning of an Heir,
Are truths to what Priests tell.
O why has Priesthood privilege to lie,
And yet to be believed! -- thy age protects thee --

Tir. Thou can not kill me; it is not in thy Fate,
As 'twas to kill thy Father; wed thy Mother;
And beget Sons, thy Brothers.

Oed. Riddles, Riddles!

Tir. Thou art thy self a Riddle; a perplexed
Obscure AEnigma, which when thou unty'st,
Thou shall be found and lost.

Oed. Impossible!
Adrastus, speak, and as thou art a King,
Whose Royal word is sacred, clear my fame.

Adr. Would I could!

Oed. Ha, will thou not: can that Plebeian vice
Of lying mount to Kings! can they be tainted!
Then truth is lost on earth.

Cre. The Cheats too gross:
Adrastus is his Oracle, and he,
The pious Juggler, but Adrastus Organ.

Oed. It Is plain, the Priest's suborned to free the Prisoner.

Cre. And turn the guilt on you.

Oed. O, honest Creon, how have thou been belied?

Eur. Hear me.

Cre. She Is bribed to save her Lover's life.

Adr. If Oedipus thou think --

Cre. Hear him not speak.

Adr. Then hear these holy men.

Cre. Priests, Priests all bribed, all Priests.

Oed. Adrastus I have found thee:
The malice of a vanquished man has seized thee.

Adr. If Envy and not Truth --

Oed. I Will hear no more: away with him.
[ Hoemon takes him off by force: Creon and Eurydice follow. To Tir. Why
stand'st thou here, Impostor!
So old, and yet so wicked. -- lie for gain;
And gain so short as age can promise thee!

Tir. So short a time as I have yet to live
Exceeds thy pointed hour; Remember Lajus:
No more; if e're we meet again, 'twill be
In Mutual darkness; we shall feel before us
To reach each others hand; Remember Lajus.
[Ex. Tiresias: Priests follow. Oedipus Solus. Rememember Lajus! that is the
burden still:
Murder, and Incest! but to hear 'em named
My Soul starts in me: the good Sentinel
Stands to her Weapons; takes the first Alarm
To Guard me from such Crimes. -- Did I kill Lajus?
Then I walked sleeping, in some frightful dream,
My Soul then stole my Body out by night;
And brought me back to Bed e're Morning-wake.
It cannot be even this remotest way,
But some dark hint would justle forward now;
And goad my memory. -- Oh my Jocasta!

Enter Jocasta. Joc. Why are you thus disturbed?

Oed. Why, would thou think it?
No less than Murder?

Joc. Murder! what of Murder?

Oed. Is Murder then no more? add Parricide,
And Incest; bear not these a frightful sound?

Joc. Alas!

Oed. How poor a pity is Alas
For two such Crimes! -- was Lajus used to lie?

Joc. Oh no: the most sincere, plain, honest man. --
One who abhorred a lie.

Oed. Then he has got that Quality in Hell.
He charges me -- but why accuse I him?
I did not hear him speak it: they accuse me;
The Priest, Adrastus, and Eurydice,
Of Murdering Lajus -- Tell me, while I think on it,
Has old Tiresias practiced long this Trade?

Joc. What Trade?

Oed. Why, this foretelling Trade.

Joc. For many years.

Oed. Has he before this day accused me?

Joc. Never.

Oed. Have you e're this inquired, who did this Murder?

Joc. Often; but still in vain.

Oed. Iam satisfied.
Then it is an infant-lye; but one day old.
The Oracle takes place before the Priest;
The blood of Lajus was to Murder Lajus:
I Am not of Lajus's blood.

Joc. Even Oracles
Are always doubtful, and are often forged:
Lajus had one, which never was fulfilled,
Nor ever can be now!

Oed. And what foretold it?

Joc. That he should have a Son by me, fore-doom'd
The Murderer of his Father: true indeed,
A Son was born; but, to prevent that Crime,
The wretched Infant of a guilty Fate,
Bored through his untried feet, and bound with cords,
On a bleak Mountain, naked was exposed:
The King himself lived many, many years,
And found a different Fate; by Robbers Murdered,
Where three ways meet: yet these are Oracles;
And this the Faith we owe 'em.

Oed. Say thou, Woman?
By Heaven thou have awakn'd somewhat in mo,
That shakes my very Soul!

Joc. What, new disturbance!

Oed. Methought thou said, -- (or do I dream thou said it!)
This Murder was on Lajus person done,
Where three ways meet?

Joc. So common Fame reports.

Oed. Would it had ly'd.

Joc. Why, good my Lord?

Oed. No questions:
It Is busy time with me; dispatch mine first;
Say where, where was it done!

Joc. Mean you the Murder?

Oed. Coud'st thou not answer without naming Murder?

Joc. They say in Phocide; on the Verge that parts it
From Daulia, and from Delphos.

Oed. So! -- How long! when happened this!

Joc. Some little time before you came to Thebes,

Oed. What will the Gods do with me!

Joc. What means that thought?

Oed. Something: but it is not yet your turn to ask:
How old was Lajus, what his shape, his stature,
His action, and his mien? quick, quick, your answer --

Joc. Big made he was, and tall: his port was fierce,
Erect his countenance: Manly Majesty
Sat in his front, and darted from his eyes,
Commanding all he viewed: his hair just grizled,
As in a green old age: bate but his years,
You are his picture.

Oed. aside. Pray Heaven he drew me not? am I his picture?

Joc. So I have often told you.

Oed. True, you have;
Add that to the rest: how was the King
Attended when he traveled?

Joc. By four Servants:
He went out privately.

Oed. Well counted still:
One escaped I hear; what since became of him?

Joc. When he beheld you first, as King in Thebes,
He kneeled, and trembling begged I would dismiss him:
He had my leave; and now he lives retired.

Oed. This Man must be produced; he must, Jocasta.

Joc. He shall -- yet have I leave to ask you why?

Oed. Yes, you shall know: for where should I repose
The anguish of my Soul; but in your breast!
I need not tell you Corinth claims my birth;
My Parents, Polybus and Merope,
Two Royal Names; their only Child am I.
It happened once; 'twas at a Bridal Feast,
One warm with Wine, told me I was a Foundling,
Not the Kings Son; I stung with this reproach,
Struck him: my Father, heard of it: the Man
Was made ask pardon; and the business hushed.

Joc. 'Twas somewhat odd.

Oed. And strangely it perplexed me.
I stole away to Delphos, and implored
The God, to tell my certain Parentage.
He bade me seek no farther: -- 'twas my Fate
To kill my Father, and pollute his Bed,
By marrying her who bore me.

Joc. Vain, vain Oracles!

Oed. But yet they frighted me;
I looked on Corinth as a place accursed,
Resolved my destiny should wait in vain;
And never catch me there.

Joc. Too nice a fear.

Oed. Suspend your thoughts; and flatter not too soon.
Just in the place you named, where three ways meet,
And near that time, five persons I encountered;
One was too like, (Heaven grant it prove not him)
Whom you describe for Lajus: insolent
And fierce they were, as Men who lived on spoil.
I judged 'em Robbers, and by force repelled
The force they used: In short, four men I slew:
The fifth upon his knees demanding Life,
My mercy gave it. -- bring me comfort now,
If I slew Lajus, what can be more wretched!
From Thebes and you my Curse has banished me:
From Corinth Fate.

Joc. Perplex not thus your mind;
My Husband fell by Multitudes oppressed,
So Phorbas said: this Band you chanced to meet;
And murdered not my Lajus, but revenged him.

Oed. There Is all my hope: Let Phorbas tell me this,
And I shall live again! --
To you, good Gods, I make my last appeal;
Or clear my Virtues or my Crime reveal:
If wandering in the maze of Fate I run,
And backward trod the paths I sought to shun,
Impute my Errors to your own Decree;
My hands are guilty, but my heart is free.
[ Ex. Ambo.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Pyracmon, Creon. Pyr. SOME business of import that Triumph wears
You seem to go with; nor is it hard to guess
When you are pleased, by a malicious joy:
Whose Red and Fiery Beams cast through your Visage
A glowing pleasure. Sure you smile revenge,
And I could gladly hear

Cre. Would thou believe.
This giddy hair-braind King, whom old Tiresias
Has Thunder-strook, with heavy accusation,
Though conscious of no inward guilt, yet fears;
He fears Jocasta, fears himself, his shadow;
He fears the multitude; and, which is worth
An Age of laughter, out of all mankind,
He chooses me to be his Orator:
Swears that Adrastus, and the lean-look'd Prophet,
Are joint-conspirators; and wish me to
Appease the raving Thebans; which I swore
To do.

Pyr. A dangerous undertaking;
Directly opposite to your own interest.

Cre. No, dull Pyracmon; when I left his presence
With all the Wings with which revenge could imp
My flight, I gained the midst of the City;
There, standing on a Pile of dead and dying,
I to the mad and sickly multitude,
With interrupting sobs, cried out, O Thebes,
O wretched Thebes, thy King, thy Oedipus,
This barbarous stranger, this Usurper, Monster,
Is by the Oracle, the wise Tiresias,
Proclaimed the murderer of thy Royal Lajus:
Jocasta too, no longer now my Sister,
Is found complotter in the horrid deed.
Here I renounce all tie of Blood and Nature,
For thee, O Thebes, dear Thebes, poor bleeding Thebes.
And there I wept, and then the Rabble howled,
And roared, and with a thousand Antic mouths
Gabbled revenge, Revenge was all the cry.

Pyr. This cannot fail: I see you on the Throne;
And Oedipus cast out.

Cre. Then strait came on
Alcander, with a wild and bellowing Crowd,
Whom he had wrought; I whispered him to join,
And head the Forces while the heat was in 'em:
So to the Palace I returned, to meet
The King, and greet him with another story.
But see, he Enters.

Enter Oedipus, Jocasta, attended. Oed. Said you that Phorbas is returned, and
yet
Entreats he may return, without being asked
Of ought concerning what we have discovered?

Joc. He started when I told him your intent,
Replying, what he knew of that affair
Would give no satisfaction to the King;
Then, falling on his knees, begged, as for life,
To be dismissed from Court: He trembled too,
As if Convulsive death had seized upon him,
And stammer'd in his abrupt Prayer so wildly,
That had he been the murderer of Lajus,
Guilt and destraction could not have shook him more.

Oed. By your description, sure as plagues and death
Lay waste our Thebes, some deed that shuns the light
Begot those fears: If thou respect'st my peace,
Secure him, dear Jocasta; for my Genius
Shrinks at his name.

Joc. Rather let him go:
So my poor boding heart would have it be,
Without a reason.

Oed. Hark, the Thebans come!
Therefore retire: and, once more, if thou love me,
Let Phorbas be retained.

Joc. You shall, while I
Have life, be still obeyed:
In vain you sooth me with your soft indearments;
And set the fairest Countenance to view,
Your gloomy eyes, my Lord, betray a deadness
And inward languishing: that Oracle
Eats like a subtle Worm it is venomed way,
Preys on your heart, and rots the noble Core,
How-e're the beauteous outside shows so lovely.

Oed. O, thou will kill me with thy Love's excess!
All, all is well; retire, the Thebans come.
[ Ex. Jocasta.
Ghost. Oedipus!

Oed. Ha! again that scream of woe!
Thrice have I heard, thrice since the morning dawned
It hollowed loud, as if my Guardian Spirit
Called from some vaulted Mansion, Oedipus!
Or is it but the work of melancholy?
When the Sun sets, shadows, that showed at Noon
But small, appear most long and terrible;
So when we think Fate hovers over our heads,
Our apprehensions shoot beyond all bounds,
Owls, Ravens, Crickets seem the watch of death,
Nature's worst Vermin scare her God-like Sons.
Echoes, the very leavings of a Voice,
Grow babbling Ghosts, and call us to our Graves:
Each Molehill thought swells to a huge Olympus,
While we fantastic dreamers heave and puff,
And sweat with an Immagination's weight;
As if, like Atlas, with these mortal Shoulders
We could sustain the burden of the World.
[ Creon comes forward.
Cre. O, Sacred Sir, my Royal Lord -- -

Oed. What now?
Thou seem affrighted at some dreadful action,
Thy breath comes short, thy darted eyes are fixed
On me for aid, as if thou were pursued:
I sent thee to the Thebans, speak thy wonder;
Fear not, this Palace is a Sanctuary,
The King himself's thy Guard.

Cre. For me, alas,
My life's not worth a thought, when weighed with yours!
But fly, my Lord, fly as your life is sacred,
Your Fate is precious to your faithful Creon,
Who therefore, on his knees, thus prostrate begs
You would remove from Thebes that Vows your ruin.
When I but offered at your innocence,
They gathered Stones, and menaced me with Death,
And drove me through the Streets, with imprecations
Against your sacred Person, and those Traitors
Which justified your Guilt: which cursed Tiresias
Told, as from Heaven, was cause of their destruction.

Oed. Rise, worthy Creon, haste and take our Guard,
Rank 'em in equal part upon the Square,
Then open every Gate of this our Palace,
And let the Torrent in. Hark, it comes,
I hear 'em roar: begone, and break down all
The dams that would oppose their furious passage.
[Shout. [Ex. Creon with Guards.
Enter Adrastus, his Sword drawn. Adr. Your City
Is all in Arms, all bent to your destruction:
I heard but now, where I was close confined,
A Thundering shout, which made my Jaylors vanish,
Cry, Fire the Palace; where is the cruel King?
Yet, by the Infernal Gods, those awful Powers
That have accused you, which these ears have heard,
And these eyes seen, I must believe you guiltless;
For, since I knew the Royal Oedipus,
I have observed in all his acts such truth
And God-like clearness; that to the last gush
Of blood and Spirits, I Will defend his life,
And here have Sworn to perish by his side.

Oed. Be witness, Gods, how near this touches me,
O what, what recompense can glory make?
[Embracing him.
Adr. Defend your innocence, speak like your self,
And awe the Rebels with your dauntless virtue.
But, hark! the Storm comes nearer.

Oed. Let it come.
The force of Majesty is never known
But in a general wrack: Then, then is seen
The difference 'twixt a Threshold and a Throne.

Enter Creon, Pyracmon, Alcander, Tiresias, Thebans! Alc. Where, where is this
cruel King? Thebans, behold
There stands your Plague, the ruin, desolation
Of this unhappy -- speak; shall I kill him?
Or shall he be cast out to Banishment?

All Theb. To Banishment, away with him.

Oed. Hence, you Barbarians, to your slavish distance;
Fix to the Earth your sordid looks; for he
Who stirs, dares more then madmen, Fiends, or Furies:
Who dares to face me, by the Gods, as well
May brave the Majesty of Thundering Jove.
Did I for this relieve you when besieged
By this fierce Prince, when cooped within your Walls,
And to the very brink of Fate reduced;
When lean-jaw'd Famine made more havoc of you
Than does the Plague? But I rejoice I know you,
Know the base stuff that tempered your vile Souls:
The Gods be praised, I needed not your Empire,
Born to a greater, nobler, of my own;
Nor shall the Scepter of the Earth now win me
To rule such Brutes, so barbarous a People.

Adr. Methinks, my Lord, I see a sad repentance,
A general consternation spread among 'em.

Oed. My Reign is at an end; yet e're I finish --
I Will do a justice that becomes a Monarch,
A Monarch, who, in the midst of Swords and Javelins,
Dares act as on his Throne encompast round
With Nation's for his Guard. Alcander, you
Are nobly born, therefore shall lose your head:
Here, Haemon, take him: but for this, and this,
Let Cords dispatch 'em. Hence, away with 'em.
[Seizes him.
Tir. O sacred Prince, pardon distracted Thebes,
Pardon her, if she acts by Heaven's award;
If that the Infernal Spirits have declared
The depth of Fate, and if our Oracles
May speak, O do not too severely deal,
But let thy wretched Thebes at least complain:
If thou art guilty, Heaven will make it known;
If innocent, then let Tiresias dye.

Oed. I take thee at thy word. Run, haste, and save Alcander:
I swear the Prophet, or the King shall dye.
Be witness, all you Thebans, of my Oath;
And Phorbus be the Umpire.

Tir. I submit.
[Trumpets sound.
Oed. What mean those Trumpets?

Haem. From your Native Country,
Enter Haemon with Alcander, etc. Great Sir, the famed AEgeon is arrived,
That renowned Favorite of the King your Father:
He comes as an Ambassador from Corinth,
And sues for Audience.

Oed. Haste, Haemon, fly, and tell him that I burn
TO embrace him.

Haem. The Queen, my Lord, at present holds him
In private Conference; but behold her here.

Enter Jocasta, Euridice, etc. Joc. Hail, happy Oedipus, happiest of Kings?
Henceforth be blessed, blessed as thou can desire,
Sleep without fears the blackest nights away;
Let Furies haunt thy Palace, thou shall sleep
Secure, thy slumbers shall be soft and gentle
As Infants dreams.

Oed. What does the Soul of all my joys intend?
And whither would this rapture?

Joc. O, I could rave,
Pull down those lying Fanes, and burn that Vault,
From whence resounded those false Oracles,
That robbed my Love of rest: if we must pray,
Rear in the streets bright Altars to the Gods,
Let Virgins hands adorn the Sacrifice;
And not a gray-beard forging Priest come near,
To pry into the bowels of the Victim,
And with his dotage mad the gaping World*
But see, the Oracle that I will trust,
True as the Gods, and affable as Men.

Enter AEgeon, Kneels. Oed. O, to my arms, welcome, my dear AEgeon;
Ten thousand welcomes, O, my Foster-Father,
Welcome as mercy to a Man condemned!
Welcome to me,
As, to a sinking Mariner,
The lucky plank that bears him to the shore!
But speak, O tell me what so mighty joy
Is this thou bring'st, which so transports Jocasta?

Joc. Peace, peace, AEgeon; let Jocasta tell him!
O that I could for ever Charm, as now,
My dearest Oedipus: Thy Royal Father,
Polybus, King of Corinth, is no more.

Oed. Ha! can it be? AEgeon, answer me,
And speak in short, what my Jocasta's transport
May over do.

AEge. Since in few words, my Royal Lord, you ask
To know the truth; King Polybus is dead.

Oed. O all you Powers, is it possible? what, dead!
But that the Tempest of my joy may rise
By just degrees, and hit at last the Stars:
Say, how, how died he? Ha! by Sword, by Fire,
Or Water? by Assassinates, or Poison? speak:
Or did he languish under some disease?

AEge. Of no distemper, of no blast he died,
But fell like Autumn-Fruit that mellow'd long:
Even wondered at, because he dropped no sooner.
Fate seemed to wind him up for fourscore years;
Yet freshly ran he on
Ten Winters more:
Till, like a Clock worn out with eating time,
The Wheels of weary life at last stood still.

Oed. O, let me press thee in my youthful arms,
And smother thy old age in my embraces.
Yes Thebans, yes Jocasta, yes Adrastus,
Old Polybus, the King my Father's dead.
Fires shall be kindled in the midst of Thebes;
In The midst of Tumults, Wars, and Pestilence,
I will rejoice for Polybus his death.
Know, be it known to the limits of the World;
Yet farther, let it pass yon dazzling roof,
The mansion of the Gods, and strike 'em deaf
With everlasting peals of Thundering joy.

Tir. Fate! Nature! Fortune! what is all this world?

Oed. Now, Dotard; now, thou blind old wizard Prophet,
Where are your boding Ghosts, your Altars now;
Your Birds of knowledge, that, in dusky Air,
Chatter Futurity; and where are now
Your Oracles, that called me Parricide,
Is he not dead? deep laid in's Monument?
And was not I in Thebes when Fate attacked him?
Avaunt, begone, you Vizors of the Gods!
Were I as other Sons, now I should weep;
But, as I am, I Have reason to rejoice:
And will, though his cold shade should rise and blast me.
O, for this death, let Waters break their bounds,
Rocks, Valleys, Hills, with splitting Io's ring:
Io, Jocasta, Io poean sing.

Tir. Who would not now conclude a happy end?
But all Fate's turns are swift and unexpected.

AEge. Your Royal Mother Merope, as if
She had no Soul since you forsook the Land,
Waves all the neighboring Princes that adore her.

Oed. Waves all the Princes! poor heart! for what? O spe

AEge. She, though in full-blown flower of glorious beauty,
Grow's cold, even in the Summer of her Age:
And, for your sake, has sworn to dye unmarry'd.

Oed. How! for my sake, dye, and not marry! O,
My fit returns.

AEge. This Diamond, with a thousand kisses blessed,
With thousand sighs and wishes for your safety,
She charged me give you, with the general homage
Of our Corinthian Lords.

Oed. There Is Magic in it, take it from my sight;
There Is not a beam it darts, but carries Hell,
Hot flashing lust, and Necromantick Incest:
Take it from these sick eyes, Oh hide it from me.
No, my Jocasta, though Thebes cast me out,
While Merope's alive, I Will never return!
O, rather let me walk round the wide World
A beggar, than accept a Diadem
On such abhorred conditions.

Joc. You make, my Lord, your own unhappiness,
By these extravagant and needless fears.

Oed. Needless! O, all you Gods! By Heaven I Would rather
Embrue my arms up to my very shoulders
In the dear entrails of the best of Fathers,
Than offer at the execrable act
Of damned Incest: therefore no more of her.

AEge. And why, O sacred Sir, if Subjects may
Presume to look into their Monarch's breast,
Why should the chaste and spotless Merope
Infuse such thoughts as I must blush to name?

Oed. Because the God of Delphos did forewarn me,
With Thundering Oracles.

AEge. May I entreat to know 'em?

Oed. Yes, my AEgeon; but the sad remembrance
Quite blasts my Soul: see then the swelling Priest!
Methinks I have his Image now in view;
He mounts the Tripos in a minutes space,
His clouded head knocks at the Temple roof,
While from his mouth
These dismal words are heard:
"Fly, wretch, whom Fate has doomed thy Fathers blood to spill,
"And with prepostrous Births, thy Mothers womb to fill.

AEge. Is this the Cause
Why you refuse the Diadem of Corinth.

Oed. The Cause! why, is it not a monstrous one?

AEge. Great Sir, you may return; and though you should
Enjoy the Queen (which all the Gods forbid)
The Act would prove no incest.

Oed. How, AEgeon?
Though I enjoyed my Mother, not incestuous!
Thou rav'st, and so do I; and these all catch
My madness; look, they are dead with deep distraction:
Not Incest! what, not Ineest with my Mother?

AEge. My Lord, Queen Merope is not your Mother.

Oed. Ha! did I hear thee right? not Merope
My Mother!

AEge. Nor was Polybus your Father.

Oed. Then all my days and nights must now be spent
In curious search, to find out those dark Parents
Who gave me to the World; speak then AEgeon,
By all the God's Celestial and Infernal,
By all the ties of Nature, blood, and friendship,
Conceal not from this racked despairing King
A point or smallest grain of what thou know:
Speak then, O answer to my doubts directly.
If Royal Polybus was not my Father,
Why was I called his Son?

AEge. He, from my Arms,
Received you as the fairest Gift of Nature.
Not but you were adorned with all the Riches
That Empire could bestow in costly Mantles
Upon it is Infant Heir.

Oed. But was I made the Heir of Corinth's Crown,
Because AEgeon's hands presented me?

AEge. By my advice,
Being past all hope of Children,
He took, embraced, and owned you for his Son.

Oed. Perhaps I then am yours; instruct me, Sir:
If it be so, I Will kneel and weep before you,
With all the obedience of a penitent Child,
Imploring pardon.
Kill me if you please,
I will not writhe my Body at the wound:
But sink upon your feet with a last sigh,
And ask forgiveness with my dying hands.

AEge. O rise, and call not to this aged Cheek
The little blood which should keep warm my heart;
You are not mine, nor ought I to be blessed
With such a God-like offspring. Sir, I found you
Upon the Mount Cithaeron.

Oed. O speak, go on, the Air grows sensible
Of the great things you utter, and is calm:
The hurried Orbs, with Storms so Racked of late,
Seem to stand still, as if that Jove were talking.
Cithaeron! speak, the Valley of Cithaeron!

AEge. Oft-times before I thither did resort,
Charmed with the conversation of a man
Who led a Rural life, and had command
Over all the Shepherds who about those Vales
Tended their numerous Flocks: in this man's Arms
I saw you smiling at a fatal Dagger
Whose point he often offered at your throat;
But then you smiled, and then he drew it back;
Then lifted it again, you smiled again:
Till he at last in fury threw it from him,
And cried aloud, the Gods forbid thy death.
Then I rushed in, and, after some discourse,
To me he did bequeath your innocent life*
And I, the welcome care to Polybus.

Oed. To whom belongs the Master of the Shepherds?

AEge. His name I knew not, or I have forgot,
That he was of the Family of Lajus,
I well remember.

Oed. And is your Friend alive? for if he be
I Will buy his presence, tho'it cost my Crown.

AEge. Your menial Attendants best can tell
Whether he lives, or not; and who has now
His place.

Joc. Winds, bear me to some barren Island,
Where print of humane Feet was never seen,
O're-grown with Weeds of such a monstrous height,
Their baleful tops are washed with bellying Clouds:
Beneath whose venomous shade I may have vent
For horrors that would blast the Barbarous World.

Oed. If there be any here that knows the person
Whom he described, I charge him on his life
To speak; concealment shall be sudden death:
But he who brings him forth, shall have reward
Beyond Ambition's lust.

Tir. His name is Phorbas:
Jocasta knows him well; but if I may
Advise, Rest where you are, and seek no farther.

Oed. Then all goes well; Since Phorbas is secured
By my Jocasta. Haste, and bring him forth:
My Love, my Queen, give Orders. Ha! what means
These Tears and Groans, and Struglings? speak, my Fair,
What are thy troubles?

Joc. Yours; and yours are mine:
Let me Conjure you take the Prophets Counsel,
And let this Phorbas go.

Oed. Not for the World.
By all the Gods, I Will know my birth, though death
Attends the search: I have already past
The middle of the Stream; and to return
Seems greater labor, than to venture over.
Therefore produce him.

Joc. Once more, by the Gods,
I beg, my Oedipus, my Lord, my Life,
My love, my all, my only utmost hope,
I beg you banish Phorbas: O, the Gods,
I kneel, that you may grant this first request.
Deny me all things else; but, for my sake,
And as you prize your own eternal quiet,
Never let Phorbas come into your presence.

Oed. You must be raised, and Phorbas shall appear,
Though his dread eyes were Basilisks. Guards, haste,
Search the Queens Lodgings; find, and force him hither.
[Exeunt Guards.
Joc. O, Oedipus, yet send,
And stop their entrance, e're it be too late:
Unless you wish to see Jocasta rent
With Furies, slain out right with mere distraction,
Keep from your eyes and mine the dreadful Phorbas.
Forbear this search, I Will think you more than mortal:
Will you yet hear me?

Oed. Tempests will be heard,
And Waves will dash, tho Rocks their basis keep, --
But see, they Enter. If thou truly love me,
Either forbear this Subject, or retire.

Enter Haemon, Guards, with Phorbas. Joc. Prepare then, wretched Prince,
prepare to hear
A story, that shall turn thee into Stone,
Could there be hew'n a monstrous Gap in Nature,
A flaw made through the Center, by some God,
Through which the groans of Ghosts might strike thy ears,
They would not wound thee, as this Story will.
Hark, hark! a hollow Voice calls out aloud,
Jocasta: yes, I Will to the Royal Bed,
Where first the Mysteries of our loves were acted,
And double dye it with imperial Crimson;
Tear off this curling hair,
Be gorged with Fire, stab every vital part,
And, when at last I Am slain, to Crown the horror,
My poor tormented Ghost shall cleave the ground,
To try if Hell can yet more deeply wound.
[Ex.
Oed. She Is gone; and as she went, methought her eyes
Grew larger, while a thousand frantic Spirits
Seething, like rising bubbles, on the brim,
Peeped from the Watery brink, and glowed upon me.
I Will seek no more; but hush my Genius up
That throws me on my Fate. -- Impossible!
O wretched Man, whose too too busy thoughts
Ride swifter than the galloping Heavens round,
With an eternal hurry of the Soul:
Nay, there is a time when even the rolling year
Seems to stand still, dead calms are in the Ocean,
When not a breath disturbs the drowzy Waves:
But Man, the very Monster of the World,
Is never at rest, the Soul for ever wakes.
Come then, since Destiny thus drives us on,
Let Us know the bottom. Haemon, you I sent:
Where is that Phorbas.

Haem. Here, my Royal Lord.

Oed. Speak first, AEgeon, say, is this the Man?

AEge, My Lord, it is: Though time has plough'd that face
With many furrows since I saw it first;
Yet I Am too well acquainted with the ground, quite to forget it.

Oed. Peace; stand back a while.
Come hither Friend; I hear thy name is Phorbas.
Why do thou turn thy face? I charge thee answer
To what I shall enquire: Were thou not once
The Servant of King Lajus here in Thebes?

Phor. I was, great Sir, his true and faithful Servant;
Born and bred up in Court, no foreign Slave.

Oed. What Office had thou? what was thy Employment?

Phor. He made me Lord of all his Rural Pleasures;
For much he loved 'em: often I entertained
With sporting Swains, over whom I had command.

Oed. Where was thy Residence? to what part of the Country
Did thou most frequently resort?

Phor. To Mount Citharon, and the pleasant Valleys
Which all about lie shadowing it is large feet.

Oed. Come forth AEgeon. Ha! why starts thou, Phorbas?
Forward, I say, and Face to Face confront him;
Look wistly on him, through him if thou can,
And tell me on thy life, say, do thou know him?
Did thou e're see him? converse with him
Near Mount Cithaeron?

Phor. Who, my Lord, this man?

Oed. This Man, this old, this venerable Man:
Speak, did thou ever meet him there?

Phor. Where, sacred Sir.

Oed. Near Mount Cithaeron; answer to the purpose:
It Is a King speaks; and Royal minutes are
Of much more worth than thousand Vulgar years:
Did thou e're see this Man near Mount Cithaeron.

Phor. Most sure, my Lord, I have seen lines like those
His Visage bears; but know not where nor when.

AEge. Is It possible you should forget your ancient Friend?
There are perhaps
Particulars, which may excite your dead remembrance.
Have you forgot I took an Infant from you,
Doomed to be murdered in that gloomy Vale?
The Swadling-bands were purple, wrought with Gold,
Have you forgot too how you wept and begged
That I should breed him up, and ask no more.

Phor. What-e're I begged; thou like a Dotar'd, speak
More than is requisite: and what of this?
Why is it mentioned now? and why, O why
Do thou betray the secrets of thy Friend?

AEge. Be not too rash. That Infant grew at last
A King: and here the happy Monarch stands.

Phor. Ha! whither would thou? O what have thou uttered!
For what thou have said, Death strike thee dumb for ever.

Oed. Forbear to Curse the innocent; and be
Accursed thy self, thou shifting Traitor, Villain,
Damned Hypocrite, equivocating Slave.

Phor. O Heavens! wherein, my Lord, have I offended?

Oed. Why speak you not according to my charge?
Bring forth the Rack: since mildness cannot win you,
Torments shall force.

Phor. Hold, hold, O dreadful Sir;
You will not Rack an innocent old man.

Oed. Speak then.

Phor. Alas, what would you have me say?

Oed. Did this old man take from your Arms an Infant?

Phor. He did: And, Oh! I wish to all the Gods,
Phorbas had perished in that very moment.

Oed. Moment! Thou shall be hours, days, years a dying.
Here, bind his hands; he dallies with my fury:
But I shall find a way --

Phor. My Lord, I said
I gave the Infant to him.

Oed. Was he thy own, or given thee by another?

Phor. He was not mine; but given me by another.

Oed. Whence? and from whom? what City? of what House?

Phor. O, Royal Sir, I bow me to the ground,
Would I could sink beneath it: by the Gods,
I do Conjure you to inquire no more.

Oed. Furies and Hell! Haemon, bring forth the Rack;
Fetch hither Cords, and Knives, and Sulphurous flames:
He shall be bound, and gash'd, his skin flead off,
And burnt alive.

Phor. O spare my age.

Oed. Rise then, and speak.

Phor. Dread Sir, I will.

Oed. Who gave that Infant to thee?

Phor. One of King Lajus Family.

Oed. O, you immortal Gods! But say, who was it?
Which of the Family of Lajus gave it?
A Servant; or one of the Royal-blood?

Phor. O wretched State! I dye, unless I speak;
And, if I speak, most certain death attends me!

Oed. Thou shall not dye. Speak then, who was it? speak,
While I have sense to understand the horror;
For I grow cold.

Phor. The Queen Jocasta told me
It was her Son by Lajus.

Oed. O you Gods! -- But did she give it thee?

Phor. My Lord, she did.

Oed. Wherefore? for what? -- O break not yet, my heart;
Though my eyes burst, no matter: will thou tell me,
Or must I ask for ever? for what end?
Why gave she thee her Child?

Phor. To murder it.

Oed. O more than savage! murder her own bowels!
Without a Cause!

Phor. There was a dreadful one,
Which had foretold, that most unhappy Son
Should kill his Father, and enjoy his Mother.

Oed. But, one thing more,
Jocasta told me thou were by the Chariot
When the old King was slain: Speak, I conjure thee,
For I shall never ask thee ought again,
What was the number of the Assassinates?

Phor. The dreadful deed was acted but by one;
And sure that one had much of your resemblance.

Oed. It Is well! I thank you, Gods! it is wondrous well!
Daggers, and Poison; O there is no need
For my dispatch: and you, you merciless Powers,
Hoord up your Thunder-stones; keep, keep your Bolts
For Crimes of little note.
[Falls.
Adr. Help, Haemon, help, and bow him gently forward;
Chafe, chafe his Temples: how the mighty Spirits,
Half strangled with the damp his sorrows rais*d,
Struggle for vent: but see, he breathes again,
And vigorous Nature breaks through all opposition.
How fares my Royal Friend?

Oed. The worse for you.
O barbarous men, and oh the hated light,
Why did you force me back to curse the day;
To curse my friends; to blast with this dark breath
The yet untainted Earth and circling Air?
To raise new Plagues, and call new Vengeance down,
Why did you tempt the Gods, and dare to touch me?
Methinks there is not a hand that grasps this Hell
But should run up like Flax all blazing fire.
Stand from this spot, I wish you as my friends,
And come not near me, lest the gaping Earth
Swallow you too -- Lo, I am gone already.
[ Draws, and claps his Sword to his breast, which Adrastus strikes away with
his foot.
Adr. You shall no more be trusted with your life:
Creon, Alcander, Haemon, help to hold him.

Oed. Cruel Adrastus! will thou, Haemon, too?
Are these the Obligations of my Friends?
O worse than worst of my most barbarous Foes!
Dear, dear Adrastus, look with half an Eye
On my unheard of Woes, and judge thy self,
If it be fit that such a Wretch should live!
O, by these melting Eyes, unused to weep,
With all the low submissions of a Slave,
I do conjure thee give my horrors way;
Talk not of life, for that will make me rave:
As well thou may advise a tortured wretch,
All mangled over from head to foot with wounds,
And his bones broke, to wait a better day.

Adr. My Lord, you ask me things impossible;
And I with Justice should be thought your Foe,
To leave you in this Tempest of your Soul.

Tir. Though banished Thebes, in Corinth you may Reign;
The Infernal Powers themselves exact no more:
Calm then your rage, and once more seek the Gods.

Oed. I Will have no more to do with Gods, nor Men:
Hence, from my Arms, avaunt. Enjoy thy Mother!
What, violate, with Beastial appetite,
The sacred Veils that wrapped thee yet unborn,
This is not to be born! Hence; off, I say;
For they who let my Vengeance make themselves
Accomplices in my most horrid guilt.

Adr. Let it be so; we'll fence Heavens fury from you,
And suffer all together: This perhaps,
When ruin comes, may help to break your fall.

Oed. O that, as often I have at Athens seen
The Stage arise, and the big Clouds descend;
So now in very deed I might behold
The ponderous Earth, and all you marble Roof
Meet, like the hands of Jove, and crush Mankind:
For all the Elements, and all the Powers
Celestial, nay, Terrestrial and Infernal,
Conspire the rack of outcast Oedipus.
Fall darkness then, and everlasting night
Shadow the Globe; may the Sun never dawn,
The Silver Moon be blotted from her Orb;
And for an Universal rout of Nature
Through all the inmost Chambers of the Sky,
May there not be a glimpse, one Starry spark,
But Gods meet Gods, and justle in the dark.
That jars may rise, and wrath Divine be hurled,
Which may to Atoms shake the solid World.
[Exeunt.
ACTV. SCENE I.
Creon, Alcander, Pyracmon. Cre. THEBES is at length my own; and all my wishes,
Which sure were great as Royalty e're formed,
Fortune and my auspicious Stars have Crowned.
O Diadem, thou Center of ambition,
Where all it is different Lines are reconciled,
As if thou were the burning-glass of Glory!

Pyr. Might I be Counselor, I would entreat you
To cool a little, Sir;
Find out Eurydice;
And, with the resolution of a man
Marked out for Greatness, give the fatal Choice
Of death or marriage.

Alc. Survey cursed Oedipus,
As one who, though unfortunate,'s beloved,
Thought innocent, and therefore much lamented
By all the Thebans; you must mark him dead:
Since nothing but his death, not banishment,
Can give assurance to your doubtful Reign.

Cre. Well have you done, to snatch me from the storm
Of racking Transport, where the little streams
Of Love, Revenge, and all the under passions,
As waters are by sucking VVhirl-pools drawn,
Were quite devoured in the vast Gulf of Empire:
Therefore, Pyracmon, as you boldly urged,
Eurydice shall dye, or be my Bride.
Alcander, Summon to their Master's aid
My Menial Servants, and all those whom change
Of State, and hope of the new Monarch's favor,
Can win to take our part: Away. What now?
[ Ex. Alcander. Enter Haemon. When Haemon weeps, without the help of Ghosts,
I may foretell there is a fatal Cause.

Haem. Is It possible you should be ignorant
Of what has happened to the desperate King?

Cre. I know no more, but that he was conducted
Into his Closet, where I saw him fling
His trembling Body on the Royal Bed;
All left him there, at his desire, alone:
But sure no ill, unless he died with grief,
Could happen, for you bore his Sword away.

Haem. I did; and, having locked the door, I stood;
And through a chink I found, not only heard,
But saw him, when he thought no eye beheld him:
At first, deep sighs heaved from his woeful heart,
Murmurs, and groans, that shook the outward Rooms,
And art thou still alive, Oh wretch! he cried?
Then groaned again, as if his sorrowful Soul
Had cracked the strings of Life, and burst away.

Cre. I weep, to hear; how then should I have grieved
Had I beheld this wondrous heap of Sorrow!
But, to the fatal period.

Haem. Thrice he struck,
With all his force, his hollow groaning breast,
And thus, with outcries, to himself complained.
But thou can weep then, and thou think it is well,
These bubbles of the shallowest emptiest sorrow,
Which Children vent for toys, and Women rain
For any Trifle their fond hearts are set on;
Yet these thou think are ample satisfaction
For bloudiest Murder, and for burning Lust:
No, Parricide; if thou must weep, weep blood;
Weep Eyes, instead of Tears: O, by the Gods,
It Is greatly thought, he cried, and fits my woes.
Which said, he smiled revengefully, and leapt
Upon the floor; thence gazing at the Skies,
His Eye Balls fiery Red, and glowing vengeance;
Gods, I accuse you not, though I no more
Will view your Heaven, till with more durable glasses,
The mighty Souls immortal Perspectives,
I find your dazzling Beings: Take, he cried,
Take, Eyes, your last, your fatal farewel-view.
When with a groan, that seemed the call of Death,
With horrid force lifting his impious hands,
He snatched, he tore, from forth their bloody Orbs
The Balls of sight, and dashed 'em on the ground.

Cre. A Masterpiece of horror; new and dreadful!

Haem. I ran to succor him; but, oh! too late;
For he had plucked the remnant strings away.
What then remains, but that I find Tiresias,
Who, with his Wisdom, may allay those Furies
That haunt his gloomy Soul?
[Ex.
Cre. Heaven will reward
Thy care; most honest, faithful, foolish Haemon!
But see, Alcander enters, well attended.
Enter Alcander, attended. I see, thou have been diligent.

Alc. Nothing these,
For Number, to the Crowds that soon will follow;
Be resolute,
And call your utmost Fury to revenge.

Cre. Ha! thou have given
The Alarm to Cruelty; and never may
These eyes be closed, till they behold Adrastus
Stretched at the feet of false Eurydice.
But see, they are here! retire a while, and mark.

Enter Adrastus, Eurydice, attended. Adr. Alas, Eurydice, what fond rash man,
What inconsiderate and ambitious Fool,
That shall hereafter read the Fate of Oedipus,
Will dare, with his frail hand, to grasp a Scepter?

Eur. It Is true, a Crown seems dreadful, and I wish
That you and I, more lowly placed, might pass
Our softer hours in humble Cells away:
Not but I love you to that Infinite height,
I could (O wondrous proof of fiercest Love!)
Be greatly wretched in a Court with you.

Adr. Take then this most loved innocence away;
Fly from Tumultuous Thebes,
From blood and Murder,
Fly from the Author of all Villainies,
Rapes, Death, and Treason, from that Fury Creon:
Vowchsafe that I, o're-joy'd, may bear you hence,
And at your Feet present the Crown of Argos.
[ Creon and Attendants come up to him.
Cre. I have o're-heard thy black design, Adrastus.
And therefore, as a Traitor to this State,
Death ought to be thy Lot: let it suffice
That Thebes surveys thee as a Prince; abuse not
Her proffered mercy, but retire betimes,
Lest she repent and hasten on thy Doom.

Adr. Think not, most abject,
Most abhorred of Men,
Adrastus will vouchsafe to answer thee;
Thebans, to you I justify my Love:
I have addressed my Prayers to this fair Princess;
But, if I ever meant a violence,
Or thought to Ravish, as that Traitor did,
What humblest Adorations could not win;
Brand me, you Gods, blot me with foul dishonor,
And let men Curse me by the name of Creon!

Eur. Hear me, O Thebans, if you dread the wrath
Of her whom Fate ordained to be your Queen,
Hear me, and dare not, as you prize your lives,
To take the part of that Rebellious Traitor.
By the Decree of Royal Oedipus,
By Queen Jocasta's order, by what is more,
My own dear Vows of everlasting Love,
I here resign to Prince Adrastus Arms
All that the World can make me Mistress of.

Cre. O perjured Woman!
Draw all; and when I give the word, fall on.
Traitor, resign the Princess, or this moment
Expect, with all those most unfortunate wretches,
Upon this spot straight to be hewn in pieces.

Adr. No, Villain, no;
With twice those odds of men,
I doubt not in this Cause
To vanquish thee.
Captain, remember to your care I give
My Love; ten thousand thousand times more dear
Than Life, or Liberty.

Cre. Fall on, Alcander.
Pyracmon, you and I must wheel about
For nobler Game, the Princess.

Adr. Ah, Traitor, do thou shun me?
Follow, follow,
My brave Companions; see, the Cowards fly.
[Ex. fighting: Creon's Party beaten off by Adrastus.
Enter Oedipus. Oed. O, it is too little this, thy loss of sight,
What has it done? I shall be gazed at now
The more; be pointed at, There goes the Monster!
Nor have I hid my horrors from my self;
For though corporeal light be lost for ever,
The bright reflecting Soul, through glaring Optics,
Presents in larger size her black Idea's,
Doubling the bloody prospect of my Crimes:
Holds Fancy down, and makes her act again,
With Wife and Mother, Tortures, Hell, and Furies.
Ha! now the baleful off-spring's brought to light!
In horrid form they rank themselves before me;
What shall I call this Medley of Creation?
Here one, with all the obedience of a Son,
Borrowing Jocasta's look, kneels at my Feet,
And calls me Father; there a sturdy Boy,
Resembling Lajus just as when I killed him,
Bears up, and with his cold hand grasping mine,
Cries out, How fares my Brother Oedipus?
What, Sons and Brothers! Sisters and Daughers too!
Fly all, begone, fly from my whirling brain;
Hence, Incest, Murder; hence, you ghastly figures!
O Gods! Gods, answer; is there any mean?
Let me go mad, or dye.

Enter Jocasta. Joc. Where, where is this most wretched of mankind,
This stately Image of Imperial Sorrow,
Whose story told, whose very name but mentioned,
Would cool the rage of Fevers, and unlock
The hand of Lust from the pale Virgin's hair,
And throw the Ravisher before her feet?

Oed. By all my fears, I think Jocasta's Voice!
Hence; fly; begone: O thou far worse than worst
Of damning Charmers! O abhorred, loathed Creature!
Fly, by the Gods, or by the Fiends, I charge thee,
Far as the East, West, North, or South of Heaven;
But think not thou shall ever enter there:
The golden Gates are barred with Adamant,
Against thee, and me; and the Celestial Guards,
Still as we rise, will dash our Spirits down.

Joc. O wretched Pair! O greatly wretched we!
Two Worlds of woe!

Oed. Art thou not gone then? ha!
How dare thou stand the Fury of the Gods?
Or come thou in the Grave to reap new pleasures?

Joc. Talk on; till thou make mad my rolling brain;
Groan still more Death; and may those dismal sources
Still bubble on, and pour forth blood and tears.
Methinks, at such a meeting, Heaven stands still;
The Sea nor Ebbs, nor Flows: this Molehill Earth
Is heaved no more: the busy Emmets cease;
Yet hear me on --

Oed. Speak then, and blast my Soul.

Joc. O, my loved Lord, though I resolve a Ruin
To match my Crimes; by all my miseries,
It Is horror, worse than thousand thousand deaths,
To send me hence without a kind Farewell.

Oed. Gods, how she shakes me! stay thee, O Jocasta,
Speak something e're thou go forever from me.

Joc. It Is Woman's weakness, that I would be pitied;
Pardon me then, O greatest, though most wretched,
Of all thy Kind: my Soul is on the brink
And sees the boiling Furnace just beneath:
Do not thou push me off, and I will go
With such a willingness, as if that Heaven
With all it is glories glowed for my reception.

Oed. O, in my heart, I feel the pangs of Nature;
It works with kindness over: Give, give me way;
I feel a melting here, a tenderness,
Too mighty for the anger of the Gods!
Direct me to thy knees, yet oh forbear:
Lest the dead Embers should revive,
Stand off -- and at just distance
Let me groan my horrors -- here
On the Earth, here blow my utmost Gale;
Here sob my Sorrows, till I burst with sighing:
Here gasp and Languish out thy wounded Soul.

Joc. In spite of all those Crimes the cruel Gods
Can charge me with, I know my Innocence;
Know yours: it is Fate alone that makes us wretched,
For you are still my Husband.

Oed. Swear I am,
And I Will believe thee; steal into thy Arms,
Renew endearments, think 'em no pollutions,
But chaste as Spirits joys: gently I Will come,
Thus weeping blind, like dewy Night, upon thee,
And fold thee foftly in my Arms to slumber.
[The Ghost of Lajus ascends by degrees, pointing at Jocasta.
Joc. Begone, my Lord! Alas, what are we doing?
Fly from my Arms! Whirl-winds, Seas, Continents,
And Worlds, divide us! O thrice happy thou,
Who have no use of eyes; for here is a ^ight
Would turn the melting face of Mercy's self
To a wild Fury.

Oed. Ha! what see thou there?

Joc. the Spirit of my Husband! O the Gods!
How wan he looks!

Oed. Thou rav'st; thy Husband's here.

Joc. There, there he Mounts,
In circling fire, amongst the blushing Clouds!
And see, he waves Jocasta from the World!

Ghost. Jocasta, Oedipus.
[Vanish with Thunder.
Oed. What would thou have?
Thou know I cannot come to thee, detained
In darkness here, and kept from means of death.
I Have heard a Spirit's force is wonderful;
At whose approach, when starting from his Dungeon,
The Earth does shake, and the old Ocean groans,
Rocks are removed, and Towers are Thundered down:
And walls of Brass, and Gates of Adamant,
Are passable as Air, and fleet like Winds.

Joc. Was that a Raven's Croak; or my Sons Voice?
No matter which; I Will to the Grave, and hide me:
Earth open, or I Will tear thy bowels up.
Hark! he goes on, and blabs the deed of Incest.

Oed. Strike then, Imperial Ghost; dash all at once
This House of Clay into a thousand pieces:
That my poor lingering Soul may take her flight
To your Immortal Dwellings.

Joc. Haste thee then,
Or I shall be before thee: See, thou can not see;
Then I will tell thee that my wings are on:
I Will mount, I Will fly, and with a port Divine
Glide all along the gaudy Milky soil,
To find my Lajus out; ask every God
In his bright Palace, if he knows my Lajus,
My murdered Lajus!

Oed. Ha! how is this, Jocasta?
Nay, if thy brain be sick, then thou art happy.

Joc. Ha! will you not? shall I not find him out?
Will you not show him? are my tears despised?
Why, then I Will Thunder, yes, I will be mad,
And fright you with my cries,: yes, cruel Gods,
Though Vultures, Eagles, Dragons tear my heart,
I Will snatch Celestial flames, fire all your dwellings,
Melt down your golden Roofs, and make your doors
Of Crystal fly from off their Diamond Hinges;
Drive you all out from your Ambrosial Hives,
To swarm like Bees about the field of Heaven:
This will I do, unless you show me Lajus,
My dear, my murdered Lord. O Lajus! Lajus! Lajus!
[ Ex. Jocasta.
Oed. Excellent grief! why, this is as it should be!
No Mourning can be suitable to Crimes
Like ours, but what Death makes, or Madness forms.
I could have wished methought for sight again,
To mark the Gallantry of her distraction:
Her blazing Eyes darting the wandering Stars,
To Have seen her mouth the Heavens, and mate the Gods,
While with her Thundering Voice she menaced high,
And every Accent twang'd with smarting sorrow;
But what is all this to thee? thou, Coward, yet
Art living, can not, wilt not find the Road
To the great Palace of magnificent Death;
Though thousand ways lead to histhousand doors,
Which day and night are still unbarr'd for all.
[Clashing of Swords: Drums and Trumpets without. Hark! it is the noise of
clashing Swords! the sound
Comes near: O, that a Battle would come over me!
If I but grasp a Sword, or wrest a Dagger,
I Will make a ruin with the first that falls.

Enter Haemon, with Guards. Haem. Seize him, and bear him to the Western-Tow'r.
Pardon me, sacred Sir; I am informed
That Creon has designs upon your life:
Forgive me then, if, to preserve you from him,
I order your Confinement.

Oed. Slaves, unhand me.
I think thou have a Sword: 'twas the wrong side.
Yet, cruel Haemon, think not I will live;
He that could tear his eyes out, sure can find
Some desperate way to stifle this cursed breath:
Or if I starve! but that is a lingering Fate;
Or if I leave my brains upon the wall!
The Aerie Soul can easily o're-shoot
Those bounds with which thou strive'st to pale her in:
Yes, I will perish in despite of thee;
And, by the rage that stirs me, if I meet thee
In the other World, I Will curse thee for this usage.
[Exit.
Haem. Tiresias, after him; and, with your Counsel,
Advise him humbly; Charm, if possible,
These feuds within: while I without extinguish,
Or perish in the Attempt, the furious Creon;
That Brand which sets our City in a Flame.

Tir. Heaven prosper your intent, and give a period
To all your Plagues: what old Tiresias can
Shall straight be done. Lead, Manto the Tower.
[ Ex. Tir. Manto.
Haem. Follow me all, and help to part this Fray,
Or fall together in the bloody broil.
[Trumpets again. [Ex.
Enter Creon with Eurydice, Pyracmon and his party giving ground to Adrastus.
Cre. Hold, hold your Arms, Adrastus Prince of Argos,
Hear, and behold; Eurydice is my Prisoner.

Adr. What would thou, Hell-hound?

Cre. See this brandished Dagger:
Forgo the advantage which thy Arms have won,
Or, by the blood which trembles through the heart
Of her whom more than life I know thou love,
I Will bury to the haft, in her fair breast,
This Instrument of my Revenge.

Adr. Stay thee, damned wretch; hold, stop thy bloody hand.

Cre. Give order then, that on this instant, now,
This moment, all thy Soldiers straight disband.

Adr. Away, my Friends, since Fate has so allotted;
Begone, and leave me to the Villain's mercy.

Eur. Ah, my Adrastus! call'em, call'em back!
Stand there; come back! O, cruel barbarous Men!
Could you then leave your Lord, your Prince, your King,
After so bravely having fought his Cause,
To perish by the hand of this base Villain?
Why rather rush you not at once together
All to his ruin? drag him through the Streets,
Hang his contagious Quarters on the Gates;
Nor let my death affright you.

Cre. Dye first thy self then.

Adr. O, I charge thee hold.
Hence, from my presence all: he is not my Friend
That disobeys: See, art thou now appeased?
Or is there ought else yet remains to do
That can atone thee? slake thy thirst of blood
With mine: but save, O save that innocent wretch.
[Ex. Attendants.
Cre. Forego thy Sword, and yield thy self my Prisoner.

Eur. Yet while there is any dawn of hope to save
Thy precious life, my dear Adrastus,
What-e're thou do, deliver not thy Sword;
With that thou may get off, though odds oppose thee:
For me, O, fear not; no, he dares not touch me;
His horrid love will spare me. Keep thy Sword;
Lest I be ravished after thou art slain.

Adr. Instruct me, Gods, what shall Adrastus do?

Cre. Do what thou will, when she is dead: My Soldiers
With numbers wll o're-pow'r thee. Is It thy wish
Eurydice should fall before thee?

Adr. Traitor, no:
Better that thou and I, and all mankind
Should be no more.

Creon. Then cast thy Sword away,
And yield thee to my mercy, or I strike.

Adr. Hold thy raised Arm; give me a moment's pause.
My Father, when he blessed me, gave me this;
My Son, said he, let this be thy last refuge;
If thou forego'st it, misery attends thee:
Yet Love now charms it from me; which in all
The hazards of my life I never lost.
It Is thine, my faithful Sword, my only trust;
Though my heart tells me that the gift is Fatal.

Cre. Fatal! yes, foolish Lovesick Prince, it shall:
Thy arrogance, thy scorn,
My wounds remembrance,
Turn all at once the Fatal point upon thee.
Pyracmon, to the Palace, dispatch
The King: hang Haemon up, for he is Loyal,
And will oppose me: Come, Sir, are you ready?

Adr. Yes, Villain, for whatever thou can dare.

Eur. Hold, Creon, or through me, through me you wound.

Adr. Off, Madam, or we perish both; behold
I Am not unarmed, my ponyard's in my hand:
Therefore away.

Eur. I Will guard your life with mine.

Cre. Dye both then; there is now no time for dallying.
[ Kills Eurydice.
Eur. Ah, Prince, farewell; farewell, my dear Adrastus.
[Dyes.
Adr. Unheard of Monster! eldest-born of Hell!
Down, to thy Primitive Flames.
[ Stabs Creon.
Cre. Help, Soldiers, help:
Revenge me.

Adr. More; yet more: a thousand wounds!
I Will stamp thee still, thus, to the gaping Furies.
[ Adrastus falls, killed by the Soldiers. Enter Haemon, Guards, with Alcander
and Pyracmon bound: the Assassins are driven off. O Haemon, I am slain; nor
need I name
The inhumane Author of all Villainies;
There he lies gasping.

Cre. If I must plunge in Flames,
Burn first my Arm; base instrument, unfit
To act the dictates of my daring mind:
Burn, burn for ever, O weak Substitute
Of that the God, Ambition.
[Dyes.
Adr. She Is gone; O deadly Marks-man, in the heart!
Yet in the pangs of death she grasps my hand:
Her lips too tremble, as if she would speak
Her last farewell. O, Oedipus, thy fall
Is great; and nobly now thou go attended!
They talk of Heroes, and Celestial Beauties,
And wondrous pleasures in the other World;
Let me but find her there, I ask no more.
[Dyes.
Enter a Captain to Haemon: with Tiresias and Manto. Cap. O, Sir, the Queen
Jocasta, swift and wild,
As a robbed Tygress bounding over the Woods,
Has acted Murders that amaze mankind:
In twisted Gold I saw her Daughters hang
On the Bed Royal; and her little Sons
Stabbed through the breasts upon the bloody Pillows.

Haem. Relentless Heavens! is then the Fate of Lajus
Never to be Atoned? How sacred ought
Kings lives be held, when but the death of one
Demands an Empire's blood for Expiation?
But see! the furious mad Jocasta's here.
Scene Draws, and discovers Jocasta held by her Women, and stabbed in many
places of her bosom, her hair disheveled; her Children slain upon the Bed. Was
ever yet a sight of so much horror,
And pity, brought to view!

Joc. Ah, cruel Women!
Will you not let me take my last farewell
Of those dear Babes? O let me run and seal
My melting Soul upon their bubling wounds!
I Will Print upon their Coral mouths such Kisses,
As shall recall their wandering Spirits home.
Let me go, let me go, or I will tear you piecemeal.
Help, Haemon, help:
Help Oedipus; help, Gods; Jocasta Dies.

Enter Oedipus above. Oed. I Have found a Window, and I thank the Gods
It Is quite unbarr'd: sure, by the distant noise,
The height will fit my Fatal purpose well.

Joc. What hoa, my Oedipus! see, where he stands!
His groping Ghost is lodged upon a Tower,
Nor can it find the Road: Mount, mount, my soul;
I Will wrap thy shivering Spirit in Lambent Flames! and so we'll sail.
But see! we are landed on the happy Coast;
And all the Golden Strands are covered over
With glorious Gods, that come to try our Cause:
Jove, Jove, whose Majesty now sinks me down,
He who himself burns in unlawful fires,
Shall judge, and shall acquit us, O, it is done;
It Is fixed by Fate, upon Record Divine:
And Oedipus shall now be ever mine.
[Dyes.
Oed. Speak, Haemon; what has Fate been doing there?
What dreadful deed has mad Jocasta done?

Haem. The Queen her self, and all your wretched Offspring,
Are by her Fury slain.

Oed. By all my woes,
She has outdone me, in Revenge and Murder;
And I should envy her the sad applause:
But, Oh! my Children! Oh, what have they done?
This was not like the mercy of the Heavens,
To set her madness on such Cruelty:
This stirs me more than all my sufferings,
And with my last breath I must call you Tyrants.

Haem. What mean you, Sir.

Oed. Jocasta! lo, I come.
O Lajus, Labdacus, and all you Spirits
Of the Cadmean Race, prepare to meet me,
All weeping ranged along the gloomy Shore:
Extend your Arms to embrace me; for I come;
May all the Gods too from their Battlements
Behold, and wonder at a Mortals daring;
And, when I knock the Goal of dreadful death,
Shout and applaud me with a clap of Thunder:
Once more, thus winged by horrid Fate, I come
Swift as a falling Meteor; lo, I fly,
And thus go downwards, to the darker Sky.
[Thunder. He flings himself from the Window: The Thebans gather about his
Body.
Haem. O Prophet, Oedipus is now no more!
O cursed Effect of the most deep despair!

Tir. Cease your Complaints, and bear his body hence;
The dreadful sight will daunt the drooping Thebans,
Whom Heaven decrees to raise with Peace and Glory:
Yet, by these terrible Examples warned,
The sacred Fury thus Alarms the World.
Let none, though never so Virtuous, great and High,
Be judged entirely blessed before they Dye.

EPILOGUE.
WHAT Sophocles could undertake alone,
Our Poets found a Work for more than one;
And therefore Two lay tugging at the piece,
With all their force, to draw the pondrous Mass from Greece.
A weight that bent even Seneca's strong Muse,
And which Corneille's Shoulders did refuse.
So hard it is the Athenian Harp to string!
So much two Consuls yield to one just King.
Terror and pity this whole Poem sway;
The mightiest Machines that can mount a Play;
How heavy will those Vulgar Souls be found,
Whom two such Engines cannot move from ground?
When Greece and Rome have smiled upon this Birth,
You can but Damn for one poor spot of Earth;
And when your Children find your judgment such,
They Will scorn their Sires, and wish themselves born Dutch;
Each haughty Poet will infer with ease,
How much his Wit must under-write to please.
As some strong Churl would brandishing advance
The monumental Sword that conquered France;
So you, by judging this, your judgments teach
Thus far you like, that is, thus far you reach.
Since then the Vote of full two Thousand years
Has Crowned this Plot, and all the Dead are theirs.
Think it a Debt you pay, not Alms you give,
And in your own defense, let this Play live.
Think 'em not vain, when Sophocles is shown,
To praise his worth, they humbly doubt their own.
Yet as weak States each others power assure,
Weak Poets by Conjunction are secure.
Their Treat is what your Pallats relish most,
Charm! Song! and Show! a Murder and a Ghost!
We know not what you can desire or hope,
To please you more, but burning of a Pope.
FINIS.

