A TREATISE OF Laying on of Hands, With the HISTORY THEREOF, Both from the
Scripture and Antiquity. Wherein an Account is given how it has been practiced
in all Ages since Christ, the mistakes about it rectified and the sense of Heb.
6.2. cleared.

By H. D'ANVERS.

Isa. 57.14. Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my People.

LONDON, Printed for Fran. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1674.

A TREATISE OF Laying on of Hands.
HAving given you an Account both from Scripture and Antiquity of the business
of Baptism in its Institution, Subject, Manner, End, The Introduction.
etc. It may neither be unnecessary nor unprofitable to give you here some
Account of that of Laying on of Hands, not only because it immediately follows
that of Baptisms, Heb. 6.1, 2. but more especially, because for Confirmation,
as it has been called, it has been next after Baptism, so solemnly asserted,
practiced, and enjoined both in former and latter times, as an Ordinance of
Christ and Essentially necessary to Church Communion. But what this laying on
of Hands is, and how that of Confirmation is founded upon the Word of God, we
shall here consider and examine, and recommend to the judgment of all
discerning and impartial Christians.

The Method observed.
The Method I shall observe herein, shall be, first to give you an Account what
we find of this Rite in the New Testament. Secondly, How asserted and Practiced
by the Ancients, with the Opinions of the Fathers and Decrees of Councils upon
it. Thirdly, How Practiced and enjoined by the Church of Rome. Fourthly, How by
the Church of England. Fifthly, How asserted by some of the Presbyterian and
Independent persuasion. Sixthly, And how practiced and enjoined by several of
the Baptized Churches in this Nation, with some remarks upon each of them for
the better discovery of Truth. 1. How used in the New Testament.


1. How laying on of Hands is used in the New Testament.

1. Benediction.
First, in Benediction, Mark 10.16. He took the young Children up in his Arms,
put his Hands upon them, and blessed them.

Miraculous healings.
Secondly, In the Cure of Diseases and healing the sick Mark 6.5. And he could
there do no mighty work, save that he laid his Hands upon a few sick folks and
healed them: And c. 16.17, 18. In my Name they shall cast out Devils they shall
speak with New Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; They shall lay Hands on the sick and they
shall recover, Acts 28.8. And it came to pass, that the Father of Publius lay
sick of a Fever and of a Bloody Flux, to whom Paul entered in and prayed, and
laid his Hands on him and healed him.

3. For extraordinary Gifts 1. Before Baptism.
Thirdly, For the conferring the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit. viz.

1. Before Baptism, Act. 9.17. And Ananias went his way and entered into the
House, and putting his Hands on him said, brother Saul, the Lord even Jesus
that appeared unto thee in the way as thou came, has sent me that thou
might receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, and immediately
there fell from his eyes as it had been Scales, and he received sight forthwith
and arose and was Baptized.

2. After Baptism, 2. After Baptism.
Acts 8.14, 15., etc. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that
Samaria had received the Word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, who
when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy
Ghost, for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were Baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. Then laid they their Hands on them, and they received
the Holy Ghost. And when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles Hands
the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, give me also this Power
that on whomsoever I lay Hands they may receive the Holy Ghost, but Peter said,
thy Money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may
be purchased with money, etc.

Fourthly, 4. Ordination. 1. Deacons
In Ordination or setting apart to Office, viz. Acts 6.6. whom they set before
the Apostles (viz. the seven Deacons the Church had chosen) and when they had
prayed and laid their hands on them, and the Word of God increased, etc.

1. Tim. 4.14. Neglect not the Gift which is in thee that was given thee by
Prophecy with the laying on of Hands of the Presbytery. 2. 2. Elders.
Tim. 1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of
God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands
suddenly on no Man, neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep thy self pure.

3 Messengers.
Acts 13.3. And when they (viz. the Elders or Teachers of Antioch; had Fasted
and Prayed, and laid their hands on them [viz. Paul and Barnabas] they sent
them away.

In which Scriptures speaking of this Rite, we may take notice of these things.

1. First, the several kinds of it, viz. For Benediction, Healing, Ordination,
and giving of the Spirit.

2. Secondly, what called, viz. Laying on of Hands.

3. Thirdly, the Subjects, viz. Little Children, Sick Persons, and such upon
whom the Spirit had not fallen, and Church Officers.

4. Fourthly, the Administrators, viz. Christ Jesus himself, any gifted
Believer, the Elders, or Presbyters, The gifted Apostles.

5. Fifthly, the end, to Bless little Children, to give Miraculous healing. And
for Extraordinary gifts of the Spirit to confirm the Gospel. And for Ordination
of Church Officers.

2 How by the Ancients.
Secondly, How asserted by the Ancients, and by the Canons and Decrees of
several Councils.

Dionysius Dionysius.
the Areopagite Paul's Convert at Athens supposed to be the first Writer about
the year 70. in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy cap. de Bapt. says, After Baptism
let the Sacrament of Confirmation be adjoined with Unction, then let the
Eucharist be given, Contemp. 3. Sermon. 8.

Pope Clement P. Clement
in his fourth Epistle, says, Let them be Baptized, and then Consigned by the
Bishop for the Holy Spirit, for without Confirmation no perfection. Joseph,
Vice comes De Bapt. Ritibus p. 369. c. 18.

Justin Martyrs Responses 137. Quest. says, Justin Martyr.
after Baptism we are to anoint with Holy Chrysm for Spiritual benefit, Vice
com. chapter 28. p. 369.

Pope Hyginus P. Hyginus.
in his Decree, as says Gratian L. Osiand. Cent. 2. l. 2. c. 5. says, in
Catechism, Baptism, and Confirmation, let there be a Gossip if necessity
require.

Pope Calixtus, P. Calixtus
Anno. 218. Ordained Confirmation to be performed with Chrism, Flores Temporum
confess. Fabo. c. 7.

Pope Urban P. Urban.
in, his decretal Epistle enjoins, that the Sacrament of Confirmation be
immediately given after Baptism, and that all the faithful are to wait for the
Spirit by the imposition of the Hands of the Bishop, Vice co. c. 38. p. 370.

Pope Melchiades, P. Melchiades.
or Meltiades about 310. ordained Imposition of hands as necessary to perfect
Baptism. And in his Universal Decretal Epistle, answering the Question, which
of the Sacraments Baptism or Confirmation was of greater Efficacy and Virtue,
says, they are to be joined together, there being such Affinity betwixt them,
that one is not to be done without the other; neither of them being perfect
alone, Vice comes p.

Pope Eusebius P. Eusebius.
in his Decretal Epistle calls Imposition of hands a Sacrament which was not
Lawful to be administered but by the Bishop. Magd. Cent. 4. p. 478. Also in his
Epistle to the Bishop of Tusca, prefers laying on of hands or Confirmation
before Baptism, Mag. Cen. 4. c. 7. p. 581.

Cyprian Cyprian.
in his 73 Epistle to Jubajan says, that Baptism is consummated by the
Sacrament of Confirmation. And again in Ep. 72. lev. 1. Persons are fully
sanctified, and may be sons of God if they be born of both Sacraments, viz.
Baptism and Confirmation, Vice. com. p. 370.

Ambrose Ambrose.
after the Font or Baptism, let there be perfection or Confirmation, for so he
calls imposition of hands, Lib. 2. c. 7.

Jerome Jerome.
advers. Lucif. Contending for the Rites of the Church, says, And do not you
know that it is the Custom of the Church, that upon the Baptized, hands should
be imposed, Mag. Cen. 4. p. 420.

Augustine; Augustine.
That Imposition of Hands after Baptism, was necessary for the gifts of the
Spirit. And that if Ignorant Infants be brought to be Baptized, let them Answer
for them that brought them, and being Baptized let them be Confirmed and
Anointed with holy Chrysme, and so let them receive the Eucharist, Lib. de
Eccles. Dogm. Vice comes, c. 28. p. 371.

Pope Innocent P. Innocent.
in his first Ep. 22. Macedon. c. 5, Shows how impious and Sacrilegious it is
to repeat the Baptism of Infants or Adult, and how requisite to lay hands on
the Baptized after the Example of Peter and John, Acts 8.17. and Paul 19.6.
Vice comes c. 3^. p. 376.

Isidore Isidore.
says, that Imposition of hands did belong not to the Bishops Vicars, but to
the Bishops themselves; And the Reason he renders is, because that none of the
70 Disciples who Represented the Apostles, had power by laying on of hands to
give the Spirit, Magdeburg. Cent. 6. p. 675.

Haimo upon Hebrews 6. says, Hstimo.
Imposition of hands is called Confirmation, which by the Spirit is received,
and after Baptism confirms the Unity of the Church, and that Children as well
as Adult were to partake thereof, Mag. Cen. 9.

Rabanus Rabanus.
Maurus Lib. 1. Inst. Cler. c. 30. says, that there are two laying on of
hands, one by the Priest in Baptism, the other by the Bishop in Confirmation,
as Christ gave the Spirit by blowing upon them before the Resurrection and
after upon the day of Pentecost.

Canons and Decrees of Councils.
In the Council of Laodicea C. Laod.
in Phrygia Pacatiana, held under P. Sylvester the first of that Name, Bishop
of Rome about 315. It was decreed in the 48 Canon, that the Baptized ought to
receive after Baptism the most sacred Chrysme, and be made partakers of the
Heavenly Kingdom. Vice com. p. 371.

In the Council of Eliberis in Spain, C. Eliberis.
held 305. unde Pope Mercellius. It was decreed in the 38 Canon. That such as
sailed into strange Countries, or if a Church be not near at hand, a Believer
if he has Baptism entire viz. Baptism and Confirmation, and have not two
Wives, may Baptize a Catechumen in case of necessity through sickness, but so
that if he Recover, he bring him to the Bishop that he may be perfected by
Imposition of Hands, and Canon 77. If any Deacon shall without a Presbyter
Baptize, the Bishop ought by blessing to perfect or Confirm them. C. Carth.


In the 4 Council of Carthage under P. Innocent the first, about 418. It was
decreed that there should be Imposition of hands for the Absolving the
Penitent, Vicler. L. 2. de persecut. Vandal. C. Spalen.


The Council of Spalenca, ordained that the Baptized were to have hands laid
upon them and to be signed with Chrism, and that the Bishops only were to
perform it. Magdeb. Cent. 7. p. 148.

C. Bracerens.
The Council of Bracerens c. 7. Commanded that a little Balsom should be put
into the Consecrated Oil, and that no less Reverence should be paid to this
Ceremony, than to Baptism it self. Mag. Cen. 7. p. 148.

The Council of Constantinople chap. 7. That none were to be admitted to
Confirmation but those that were instructed by Catechism, C. Constan
and could say the Creed and Lords Prayer by heart. Mag. Cen. 7. p. 148.

C. Cabil.
The Council of Cabillonosis Cap. 6. In the time of Pope Eugenius, Decreed that
the Baptism of the Adult should presently, if Infants after some years of
understanding, be confirmed with Consignation and Chrysm and that Confirmation
should not be reiterated, Mag. Cen. 8. p. 350.

In the Gallican Gallican.
Council it was decreed, that when the Bishop goes his Canonical Circuit to
Confirm, that the Priests be always ready for his Assistance, and that there be
Gossips as well in this, as in Baptism; and that the confirmed have his hair
cut, Mag. Cent. 8. p. 350.

The Council of Trent about Confirmation Decreed. C. Trent.


1. That whosoever said it was an Idle Ceremony not a Sacrament properly, or
that it was formerly used that Children might give an Account of their Faith.
2. That to ascribe Virtue to Chrysm was to wrong the holy Spirit. 3. That every
simple Priest is the ordinary Minister for Confirmation and not the Bishop
only, should be accursed. Osian. Cent. 16. p. 417.

By which sayings of the Ancients, Canons, and Decrees of Councils, it appears
they had early set a foot something for an Ordinance of the Church enjoined to
be Practiced after Baptism, and whereof we give you this brief account from
them.

First, 1 Name.
as to the Name by which it was called viz. Confirmation. 2. Anointing or
Chrysm. 3. Imposition of hands. 4. Perfection.

1. Confirmation, because both Baptism and the Unity of the Church was thereby
confirmed. 2. Chrysm or anointing, because Oil mingled with Balsom, the thing
used herewith in imitation of the holy Oil used of old. 3. Imposition of hands
in allusion to the Apostles practice, Act. 8.19. who laid on hands for the
Spirit (though this could not properly be so called, because it was but
crossing the Forehead with the Finger.) 4. Perfection, because they esteemed
Baptism imperfect without it, therefore for the first times they used to
practice it together.

2 Ground.
2. As to the Grounds upon which it was practiced, viz. as an Apostolical
Tradition handed to them from the Apostles times by the Eminent Doctors of the
three first Centuries, upon whose Authority it was practiced, till confirmed by
the Councils before mentioned, viz. Laodicea, Eliberis, etc.

3 Manner.
3. As to the manner of performing it viz. by Crossing and anointing the
Forehead of the Confirmed party, with Oil and Chrysm.

4 Admin.
4. As to the Administrators, viz. only a Bishop to whom in an especial manner
it was entailed, it being unlawful for any other to do it from Peter and John's
being sent by the Church of Jerusalem, to impose hands which Philip did not do.

5 Subjects.
5. As to the Subjects, viz. All Baptized persons who were either Adult, or
Infants, immediately, or afterward, Baptized Infants at years of discretion.
The Adult were first the Catechumens, who were either the Children of Heathen
that inclined to Christianity, or the Children of Christians newly come to the
Faith, who to their completing in Christianity, were to take these five steps,
thus known and distinguished.

1. They were to be Catechized, 1. Adult.
taught and instructed, and then were called the Catechumeni. 2. Upon their
propounding themselves to Baptism, were called the Competentes. 3. Being
admitted to Baptism, were called the Illuminati or initiati. 4. After Baptism
being confirmed, were called the Perfecti. 5. After Confirmation and receiving
the Eucharist, they were called the fideles.

Or, Secondly. Infants who were for the 4, 2 Infants. presently.
5, 6 and 7. Cent. the Subjects of it, and with Baptism, did receive
Confirmation and the Eucharist immediately, and so esteemed perfect and
complete Christians, then it began to be deferred for a week after Baptism, the
Children wearing the Baptismal white Garment all the week and upon the 8 day
Baptism was perfected by Confirmation, as says Raban Maurus L. Inst. Cler. c.
30.

Or, 3. 2. Persons Baptized in Infancy in their Adult state.
Such Infants who after they had been Baptized, did arrive to knowledge and
discretion, and were able to say the Lords Prayer, 10 Commandments, and Creed
by heart, as appears by some of those latter Councils.

And the reason of the said Alteration, as says Vice comes, p. 378. was
because about Charles the first's time, in the 8 Cent. Adult Baptism, did very
much wear off. The People for the most part being now Christians, their
Children became so numerous, that the Bishop found it too hard a task to
perform his part.

Therefore they appointed certain Visitations, especially at Easter and
Whitsontide, to confirm those in their Diocesses, that having been Baptized in
Infancy, were able to give an Account of their Faith, which, says Vice comes,
was Practiced in several places in the Latin Church.

6. The End
6. As to the end of this Rite, viz. For the giving of the Spirit, and
conferring of Grace, to perfect and confirm imperfect Baptism, and therefore
esteemed a Sacrament of greater force and Virtue than Baptism it self, and
therefore to be done with Oil, typing, figuring, or signing the Spirit.

7. Ceremonies.
7. As to the Ceremonies; they were diverse, viz. The party to be confirmed was
to be in white Garments, his head bound up in Linen, the hair of the head to
be Cut, and to have Gossips to undertake for them.

8. The Order.
8. As to the Order of Administering it, viz. especially after Baptism (though
some of the Catechumens in Imitation of Ananias his imposing hands upon Paul
Act. 9. had it before.) and then had they an immediate right given them to
partake of the Eucharist, without which they could not be admitted to partake
thereof.

9. As to the Form The Form.
in which the Bishop administered it, viz. in these words, I Sign thee with the
Sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with the Chrysm of Salvation in the Name of
the Father, Son, and holy Spirit.

The Usage of the Church of Rome.
The Church of Rome Church of Rome.
observed the very same Order and manner with the same rites and Ceremonies to
the same ends and upon the same ground as an Apostolical Tradition, which the
former Centuries had done; only whereas there began to be some space betwixt
the Infants Baptism, and their Confirmation, that they for the most part
especially in the latter Centuries have performed them together.

Contarenus, Lib. de Sacrament. Contarenus.
a great Popish Writer says, that Thomas Aquinas thought that this Sacrament
ought to be given to very young Infants, because they obtain more Grace and
therefore more Glory, which custom, says he, we have kept, leaning upon the
Authority of so great a Man. Aq. part 3. Q 72. Ar. 8.

Didoclavius says in Altar Damasc. Many think it to be expedient rather in the
time of Infancy, because the Infant-Age is not capable of Fiction, whereby the
effect of the Sacrament may be hindered, and that the Ancient use of the Church
favors that Opinion.

Ordo Romans
In the Ordo Romany An old Popish Missal, it is Recorded, that the Bishop
having seated himself in the Church, the Archdeacon holding the Chrysm, the
Priest presents the Baptized Infants with their Names to the Bishop, who
dipping his Finger in the Oil, and Crossing every one in the Forehead, says, I
Sign thee with the Sign of the Cross, and Confirm thee with the Chrysm of
Salvation in the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit; and which Rite they say is
confirmed by the Act of the Apostles and opinion of the Fathers from the
Scriptures, viz. Act. 8.17. Acts 19.6. and Heb. 6.2. and called Confirmation,
because the Unity of the Church was confirmed by the Bishop, as says Ambrose
upon Heb. 6. Haimo and Ansel. Joseph Vice comes c. 30. p. 375.

C. Trent.
The Council of Trent, as before, decreed, That whosoever should say that
Children should first give an account of their Faith before Confirmation should
be accursed.

Bellar.
Bellarmine de Sacrament. L. c. 11. says, that Confirmation confers greater
Grace than Baptism, neither can Baptism be perfected without it.

And again Tom. 2. says, Confirmation is to confer Grace that makes
acceptable, and to strengthen the soul against the Assaults of the Devil, and
to be enroled thereby the servants of Christ.

And again in the same Tom. 2. That it is more perfect than Baptism it self,
for whereas Baptism may be administered by Ordinary Priests or Deacons, yea even
women themselves in case of necessity, this is not to be performed but by the
holy hands of a Bishop.

The Usage of the Church of England.
The Church of England, Chur. of Engl.
though they lop off many of the Ancient and Popish Superstitions and
Ceremonies herein; yet do they retain the thing, viz. Confirmation after
Baptism by a Bishop only, and the Subjects, viz. Baptized Children, able to say
their Catechism, according to the Decrees of the Council of Constance, and the
Gallican Councils beforementioned. The whole Rite and Ceremony thereof, with
what appertains thereto, you have at large in the Engl. Liturgy, in the
Rubric; the substance whereof you may please to take as follows.

The Order of Confirmation or Laying on of Hands upon Children Baptized, and
able to render an Account of their Faith according to the Catechism.
TO the end that Confirmation may be administered to the more edifying of such
as shall receive it (according to St. Paul's Doctrine, who teaches that all
things should be done in the Church to the Edification of the same) it is
thought good that none hereafter shall be confirmed, but such as can say in
their Mother Tongue the Articles of the Faith, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments, and can also answer to such Questions of the short Catechism as
the Bishop (or such as he shall appoint) shall by his discretion appose him;
and this Order is most convenient to be observed, for diverse Considerations;

First, Because that when Children come to the years of Discretion, and have
learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism, they
may then themselves, with their own mouth, and with their own consent, openly
before the Church, ratify and confirm the same, and also promise that by the
Grace of God, they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe and
keep such things as they by their own mouths and Confession have assented unto.

Secondly, Forasmuch as Confirmation is ministered to them that are baptized,
that by Imposition of hands and Prayer, they may receive strength and defense
against all Temptations to Sin, and the Assaults of the World and the Devil; it
is most meet to be ministered when Children come to that Age, that partly by the
frailty of their own Flesh, partly by the Assaults of the World and the Devil,
they begin to be in danger to fall into sundry kinds of Sin.

Thirdly, For that it is agreeable with the Usage of the Church in times past;
whereby it was ordained that Confirmation should be ministered to them that were
of perfect Age; that they being instructed in Christ's Religion, should openly
profess their own Faith, and promise to be obedient to the Will of God.

The Order it self, this following Prayer being said.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy
Servants by Water, and the Holy Ghost, and have given unto them forgiveness of
all their sins; strengthen them, we beseech thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost
the Comforter, and daily increase in them thy manifold Gifts of Grace, the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of counsel and ghostly strength,
the Spirit of knowledge and true Godliness, and fill them O Lord, with the
Spirit of thy Holy Fear, Amen.

Then shall the Bishop lay his hand upon every Child severally, saying,

DEfend, O Lord, this Child with thy Heavenly Grace, that he may continue thine
for ever, and daily increase in thy Holy Spirit more and more, until he come
into thy everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

Then shall the Bishop say,

ALmighty and everlasting God, which makes us both to will and to do those
things that be good and acceptable unto thy Majesty, we make our humble
supplications unto thee for these Children, upon whom, after the example of the
Holy Apostles, we have laid our hands, to certify them (by this Sign) of thy
Favor and Gracious Goodness toward them, let thy Fatherly Hand, we beseech
thee, be over them, let thy Holy Spirit ever be with them, and so lead them in
the knowledge and obedience of thy Word, that in the end they may obtain the
everlasting Life, through our Lord Jesus, who with thee and the Holy Ghost,
lives and reigns, one God, world without end, Amen.

Then the Bishop shall bless the Children, saying,

The Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be upon you and
remain with you for ever and ever, Amen.

After are added these Directions relating to Confirmation, viz.

That the Curate of every Parish, or some other at his appointment, shall
diligently on Sundays and Holy Days, half an hour before Evening-Prayer, openly
in the Chureh, instruct and examine so many Children of his Parish sent unto
him, as the time will serve, and as he shall think convenient, in some part of
this Catechism.

And all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Dames shall cause their Children,
Servants and Apprentices (which have not learned their Catechism) to come to
the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to bear and be ordered by the
Curate, until such time as they have learned all that is here appointed for
them to learn; and whenever the Bishop shall give knowledge for Children to
be brought before him to any convenient place for their Confirmation, then
shall the Curate of every Parish either bring or send in writing the Names of
all those Children of his Parish which can say the Articles of the Faith, the
Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments; and also how many of them can answer
to the other Questions contained in this Catechism.

And there shall none be admitted to the Holy Communion until such time as he
can say the Catechism, and be confirmed.

Dr. Cave, Dr. Cave.
in his late Primitive Christianity, upon the Subject, says of our English
Confirmation, That almost exactly according to the Primitive usage, it is still
retained and practiced in our Church at this day; and happy were it for us,
were it kept up in its due power and vigor: Sure I am that many of our
chiefest Breaches and Controversies in Religion, do, if not wholly, in a great
measure, owe their Birth and Rise to the neglect and contempt of this excellent
Usage of the Church. p. 219.

Concerning which Rite, as used by the Church of England, we observe,

1. The Name given it, viz. Confirmation.

2. The Subjects, viz. Children Baptized in their Infancies, that are taught
their Catechism, and are able to say the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Ten
Commandments in the English Tongue.

3. The Administrators, a Bishop only; and therefore the Ceremony was so
vulgarly called Bishoping.

4. The Force and manner, as expr^ss'd by the Bishop's putting the hand upon
the Head of the Children, and saying that Form of words directed.

5. The Ends, as declared, viz. 1. To confirm Infants Baptized, and the Promise
of the Sureties made for them therein. 2. To give the Spirit for the increase
of Grace, and strength against Temptations. 3. To confirm the Unity and Order
of the Church, and orderly to admit them therein.

6. The Time when administered; betwixt their Baptism and the Supper, as soon as
they can say their Catechism.

7. The Grounds upon which they assert; viz. The Usage of the Ancient Church,
Decrees of Councils, Apostles Practice.

Performed by them with very little Reverence or Caution, either how or upon
whom they do it, says Mr. Hanmer and Mr. Baxter.

Mr. Hanmer, p. 42. Though they deem it to be of some weight and consequence,
yet as used by them, it is little less than ridiculous, a mere vain and empty
Ceremony; or (as the Saxon-Confession terms the Romish Sacrament of
Confirmation) Inanis Vmbra, an Empty Shadow; and Hommius, a vain Invention of
Superstitious men.

Mr. Baxter, In his Book Of Confirmation, p. 155. says, To his knowledge it
was done by the best of them in a careless hudling way, mumbling over a few
formal Prayers upon persons that they knew not whether they were Christians or
Infidels, or that they did so much as know there was a God.

In the Fifth place, We come to give you an Account how this Rite has been
asserted and pleaded by some, both of the Independent and Presbyterian
Persuasion; so especially by Mr. Jonathan Hanmer, in his Book called
Confirmation the ancient way of completing Church Members: Written with great
applause in the year 1657. And Mr. Baxter, in confirmation thereof, in his Book
called Confirmation and Restoration the necessary means of Reformation and
Reconciliation: Who do therein undertake to prove the necessity of
Confirmation, a laying on of the hands of the Presbytery for the confirming and
completing Infants Baptism, perfecting their Church Membership upon their
Profession and Confession of Faith; and which they endeavor to make good by
this five-fold Argument.

1. By Scripture. 2. By the Testimony of Fathers. 3. By Councils. 4. By the
Judgment and Practice of the Waldenses. 5. By the Judgment of many of the
Reformed Divines.

I. As to Scripture.

The main Scripture he insists on to prove this Confirmation by (and which as
modestly said, is a probable ground for the the same) is that of Heb. 6.2. And
laying on of Hands. Where, as urged, it is made one of the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ. Where,

1. Its Place is to be taken notice of, being next after Baptism, and as it
were, an Appendix thereof, and for the most part immediately following it in
such Adult as were baptized, and the next Privilege in the Church as such did
enjoy who were baptized in Infancy.

2. Because the best Interpreters do usually understand this of one or more of
the three Particulars that Imposition of hands has relation to, viz.

1. Of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which was conferred at first
upon many new Converts by the laying on of the Apostles hands, Acts 8.17, 19.

2. Of the Officers of the Church who were ordained and set apart unto their
Offices by Prayer and Imposition of hands. This Pareus in Heb. 6.1. Initiata
erat Doctrina de Donis Spiritualibus and Ministerio Ecclesiae; It was an
Initial Doctrine concerning Spiritual Gifts and the Ministry of the Church,
Ames. in Bellarm. Enervat. By Imposition of Hands is meant the whole Ministry;
Per Impositionem Manuum Ministerium totum intelligitur.

3. Of the Confirmation of such who had been baptized, who before the Church
made a Profession of Faith, the Adult before Baptism, the Baptized Infant
before Confirmation. So Piscator, Beza, Rivet, Doctors of Leyden, Anselm,
Calvin, Hyperius, Illyricus, Mr. Deering upon the place. By these and other
Expositors, it is said, is this place of Scripture understood, in part at
least, of Imposition of Hands in Confirmation; which therefore in their
apprehension, is warranted by it; as a Doctrine Fundamental that ought to be
known by all, and a thing practiced by, and taking its Rise from the Apostles.
And,

2. By Testimony of Fath.
II. That it was also as an Apostolical Practice received by the Church in
after-Ages, Cassander (that Learned Papist, and so well versed in the Ancients,
even to Miracle) tells us, Semper in Ecclesia religiosissime observatum fuisse,
To have been always most religiously observed in the Church; and therefore have
you an Account thereof from many of the Fathers, viz. Dionys. Areopag. Clem.
Roman. Justin Martyr's Responses, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Jerome, etc.
Which being all before mentioned, we need not repeat. And,

III. The Decrees of Councils, 3. Dec. of Councils.
confirming Confirmation to have been an Ancient and General Practice in the
Churches of Christ; of which two only are mentioned, viz. The Laod. before
recited, about the year 300, and the Council of Eliberis in Spain, in 305. And,

IV. 4. Wald. Practice.
By the Judgment and Practice of the Waldenses; who received it as an
Apostolical Institution, as appears by their Apology and Confession of Faith
exhibited to Vladislaus K. of Hungary, Anno 1504. witnessing to
Infants Baptism, and their Confirmation after, upon their Personal Confession;
which he mentions at large out of the same Apology, And,

V. 5. Reformed Chapter
From the compliance of the succeeding Reformed Churches; amongst whom the
Church of England is mentioned as one, who took much of the Order of
Confirmation (as he says) from that of the Waldenses; part whereof he repeats;
especially the Conclusion, that debars any from the Holy Communion, that were
not confirmed; and adds thereto the good wishes that Hommius, Calvin, the Leyd.
Professors, etc. that this Business of Confirmation was drained from
Antichristian Mixtures, both as to Name, Nature, Matter, Form, Administrator
and Subject also; the Romish Church confirming Children in their Infancies.

In whose Hypothesis we have first,

1. The Name they give this Rite; namely, Confirmation. 2. The Subjects, Adult
Persons, all baptized in Infancy. 3. The Administrators, viz. The
Presbytery-Eldership. 4. The End, viz. To confirm Baptism, give the Spirit, and
orderly to admit into the Church, 5. The Time when to be administered, viz.
Betwixt Baptism and the Lord's Supper, when they give an Account of their
Faith, and desire Church Communion. 6. The Grounds upon which they assert it;
viz. 1. Scriptural; especially from Heb. 6.2. 2. The Sayings of the Ancients,
and Decrees of Councils, confirming it to be an Apostolical Practice. 7. The
Usage and Practice of the Ancient and Modern Churches, especially that of the
Famous Waldenses.

6. Baptized Churches S. Fisher. Jo. Griffith. W. Rider T. Grantham.
6. The Usage of several Baptized Churches in the Nation.

Sixthly and lastly, We come to give you an Account how that this Rite of
Laying on of Hands has been asserted and practiced by several Baptized
Congregations, who have by their Writings maintained and defended, That Laying
on of Hands upon all Baptized Believers, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ,
essentially necessary to Church Fellowship and Communion, and that none are to
be admitted to the Lord's Supper without it; and which they endeavor to make
good, especially from Heb. 6.2. Which they conclude to be a Laying on of Hands
upon all Baptized Believers.

1. Because it is reckoned amongst the Foundation-Principles, Doctrines and
Oracles of God. And, 2. Because they find the Church of Samaria, Acts 8.17. and
the Church of Ephesus did practice accordingly immediately after Baptism; which
therefore they do conclude was both Christ's Precept and the Practice of all
the Churches in the New Testament.

Amongst whom respecting this Practice, we observe,

1. The Name Name.
they give this Rite, viz. Laying on of Hands.

2. The Subjects, viz. All Baptized Believers, Subject.
Men and Women.

3. The Administrators Admin.
viz. The Elders or Presbyters.

4. The End, End.
for the promised Spirit to confirm the Baptized, and orderly to admit into the
Church.

5. The Time Time.
or Order in which this is administered; betwixt Baptism and the Supper, or
presently after the Baptism.

6. The principal Ground Principal Ground
upon which they assert it, viz. The Scripture; especially from Heb. 6.2. Acts
8.17, 19.

Thus have you an Account of this Rite, Wherein all Parties do agree.
not only from Scriptures, but how it has been owned and practiced since the
first times, by several sorts; and who notwithstanding the vast differences
among them in the Ceremonial part, yet do all of them harmoniously agree in the
following Substantials, viz.

That there is a warrantable ground to conclude that the Hands of the Bishop,
Elder, or Presbyter should be imposed upon every Baptized Person for the
receiving of the Spirit, or Confirmation, and that without it none ought to be
admitted to the Lord's Supper.

It remains therefore in the next place, that we consider the said Grounds upon
which so great an Ordinance is enjoined, and which we find to be either
Tradition or the Scripture.

1. That of Tradition (which is principally asserted by the first four) is made
good either from the Sayings of the Ancients, and Decrees of Councils, or the
Usage of the ancient Churches.

2. And that of Scripture, which is principally urged by the two latter, is
especially from Heb. 6.2. compared Act. 8.17. and 19.6. Which we shall examine
distinctly and apart.

Tradition.
And first, As to the Sayings of the Ancients, that are avouched to make this
good, we shall first consider what they say about this Rite; and 2. Of what
Credit and Authority the said Authors are who be produced for the same.

And first, As to the Rite it self, which they would make us believe to be so
great an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, we find it to be so blasphemous and
Ridiculous, that the very naming of the Particulars thereof, may be sufficient
to detect the Folly and Impiety thereof to all discerning Christians. Whether
respecting the Name, which they call Chrysm; Unction, Perfection, Confirmation,
of which the Scripture is so much a stranger; or the Nature, which must be by
putting the Sign of the Cross with a Bishop's greased Finger, in the Forehead
of the Confirmed, with these words of Blasphemy, I sign thee with the Sign of
the Cross, and with the Chrysm of Salvation, in the Name of the Father, Son and
Spirit, the Party being in a white Garment, his Head bound with Linen, his
Hair cut, and attended with Gossips or Sureties. And this is that which the
several forecited Popes and Fathers have reported to be Apostolical; and the
several Councils have by their Canons and Decrees determined and enjoined as
the great Sacrament of Confirmation, and so transcendent also to Baptism it
self; and which without dispute (we must believe) was so much the appointment
and practice of Christ and the Apostles, and as yet practiced accordingly by
the Church of Rome to this day.

Concerning which Hommius Hommius
tells us, That it is not only unknown and contrary to the Scriptures, but
blasphemous and Idolatrous, and the vain Invention of superstitious men.

And Tilenus, Tilenus
upon their lifting it up above Baptism, and confining it only to a Bishop's
hand, says, That they make an Excrement of Antichrist so much more excellent
than the Sacrament of Christ, by how much they make a Bishop excel a common
Priest, or an ordinary person. Syntag. Part 2. c. 58.. 15.

And Amesius says, Ames.
The Reasons given by the Papists for the same, are both empty, and impious.
Bell. Enervat. c. 4.

And notably Mr. Calvin, Calvin.
In Pref. ante Catechis. inter Opuscul. That beyond measure they have d^ckt
this Adulterous Confirmation like an Harlot, with great splendour of Ceremonies,
and many pompous Gauderies; moreover, while they will adorn it, they do it with
execrable Blasphemies, boasting that it is a Sacrament more worthy than
Baptism, and calling them half-Christians, whoever have not been besmeared with
their stinking Oil; but in the mean while their whole action contains nothing
else but Histrionical Gestures, or rather wanton Apish Plays without any Art or
emulation, etc.

2. What their Authorities.
Secondly, From the Authorities themselves urged in proof hereof; concerning
whom, we may so well say, as is the Doctrine, so are the Doctors, viz. Those
that are first cited to deliver the same, the very naming of whom, may be
sufficient to detect the Cheat, we having already by substantial evidence
proved, that all those first-recited Authorities, viz. Dionys. Areopag. Clem.
4. Ep. Justin Martyr's Respons. Hyginus's Decree, and the Decretal Epistles of
those first Popes, to have been Impious Lies and Forgeries, things that in
after-Ages, by the Rise of the Mystery of Iniquity, were feigned and invented
by some Monks and Friars, and put upon those men of Name of the first Ages, the
better to countenance those Antichristian Impieties that were to be imposed
upon the World, for Apostolic; for by such Lies and Forgeries, did the man of
sin ascend the Throne. And is there not good ground think you, to suspect the
Justice and Truth of that Cause, that cannot otherwise be defended nor
maintained, but by suborned Witnesses, and Knights of the Post; for upon no
better Authority, have they imposed this which they call the Sacred Rite of
Confirmation, Infants Baptism, Exorcism, and a hundred ridiculous Ceremonies
more, which they would persuade us to believe were Apostolical; though as to
this of Confirmation, some of themselves are constrained to acknowledge, Rivet.
nec ab Apostolis, nec a Christo fuisse Institutio, etc. That it was neither
instituted by Christ or his Apostles, but by Pope Calixtus, Anno 218. Rivet's
Controv. Tom. 2. Yet so intoxicated with the Whores Cup were all these
Councils, upon no better grounds to decree it, and all these after-Doctors, as
Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, and others, to assert and plead it for an Ordinance of
Christ; which was not only so contrary to the Scripture, but so blasphemous and
ridiculous, as before.

And if it had been an Apostolical Tradition to practice this, as the first
Councils decreed, and the Fathers and others practiced, viz. for many hundred
years, as a Baptismal Rite, to be performed at one and the same time with
Baptism, whether upon Infants or Adult, and to whom also as perfect and
complete Christians, they gave the Eucharist; how came the after-Councils to be
so bold, to alter and change it from Infancy to the Adult state, put^ing it
upon them only for so many Ages; and the Church of Rome afterward to alter and
change it again, returning it to its first practice, leaning upon the Validity
of those first Authorities; concerning whom, though it is no wonder that they
should hold fast such impious Forgeries, and have recourse to such lying
Fables, to maintain it; yet it is matter of admiration, to find our
Protestant-Writers and Churches to fly to these Authorities, both Fathers and
Councils, to create some colorable pretense for Confirmation?

Objection as to the Waldens. Church.
But what do you say to the Practice of the Waldensian Church; to whom you have
ascribed so much Authentickness? Who, as you observe, were such early Witnesses
for Truth; as well as eminent opposers of the Romish Church in all their
Fopperies; who yet, as it appears, have asserted and practiced Confirmation,
as you have at large in the forecited Apology to King Laodislaus, King of
Hungary and Bohemia.

Answ.
To which I say, That it is most manif st, as I have already demonstrated that
that Apology was not from the Waldenses, as the Preamble it self declares; but
from some of those Professors distinguished by the name Hussites, who held much
with those of the Reformed Way in Germany: and not the Taborites or Waldensian
Brethren, who also inhabited in Bohemia, and other parts of Germany, Poland,
and Hungary. And that those true Waldenses were of a quite contrary Opinion,
appears by their Ancient Confessions of Faith; an eminent Instance whereof
you will find in their Treatise of Sacraments, in Paul Perin, p. 329. and in
Morland's History, p. 175. in these words; viz.

As for the Sacrament of Confirmation, which we find not instituted either by
Christ or his Apostles; for Christ, the Pattern of all his Church, was not
confirmed in his Person, and he does not require that there should be any such
thing in Baptism, but only pure Water; and that such a Sacrament is not found
needful for Salvation; whereby God is blasphemed, and which was introduced by
the Devil's instigation, to seduce the People, and to deprive them of the Faith
of the Church, and that by such means they might be drawn the more to believe
the Ceremonies, and the necessity of Bishops.

It is also to be taken notice of, Justin Martyr give no account in his Apology,
that Justin Martyr, in his Apology, giving an Account of the Faith and
Practice of the Churches in those days to Antonius Pius, takes not the least
notice hereof, though he recounts all their Services and Ceremonies in Worship
with great Plainness.

It is also not unworthy our observation, that the Novatians, Novatians.
that worthy famous Church and People, did, as Joseph Vicecomes tells us,
oppose this Business of Confirmation in Century 3. Vicecomes, l. 28. p. 372.

And also it is manifest out of Breerwood, Nor in the Greek Churches
the eminent Recorder of the Antiquities of the Greek Churches, that the Greeks
did impugn and reject that of Confirmation. Br. p. 127. out of Pas. De Rep.
Mosch. p. 40. And particularly tells us that the Nestorians Nestorians.
did not practice it. p. 124. out of Bib. Pat. p 1054.

That the Abyssines Abyssines
inhabiting Prester John's Country, did not practice it. Br. p. 167. Ex Alv.
Hist. Aethiop. c. 5.

Muscov.
And that the Muscovites omit it, Br. p. 136. Ex Jo. Metrop. Russ. in Epist. ad
Episc. Romans apud Sigism. De Reb. Musc. p. 31.

Cophti nor Jacobites.
And that there is no mention either of the Cophti in Egyp. or Jacobites in
Syria, that ever practiced this Rite.

It is also manifest out of the Confessions of Faith of the Belgic Churches,
esteeming themselves the true and immediate Successors of the Waldenses;
recorded at large in the Dutch Martyrol. or Bloody Theater, printed in 1660.
That there is no mention of any such practice as Imposition of Hands upon all
baptized persons amongst them either formerly or latterly.

3. The Scripture Ground.
In the next place we shall consider the Scripture-ground that is urged and
produced in proof hereof, especially by the two latter; which we find to be
principally from Heb. 6.2. The Doctrine of Baptism, laying on of Hands, (...),
which Mr. Hanmer Mr. Hanmer.
acknowledges to be the chief; and (though as he modestly expresses himself)
but a probable ground from the Scripture to found it upon, being there made one
of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and placed next after Baptism, and
as it were an Appendix thereof, and which for the most part, immediately
followed it in such Adult as were baptized, and the next privilege of the
Church (he says) that such did enjoy as had been baptized in Infancy; and that
many of the best Interpreters did usually understand this place to mean, in
part at least, of Imposition of Hands in Confirmation; though he does confess
others did also take it to mean Imposition of Hands in Ordination; and others,
the whole Doctrine of laying on of hands, as expressed in the Scripture; but
especially leans upon the Tradition, and the Usage, and Practice of the Church
in all Ages, p. 26, 27.

1. To whom, and to all of his Persuasion, I say, That if their Infants Baptism
be a Nullity, which they pretend hereby especially to confirm, and is the main
design of his and Mr. Baxter's Treatises; that their practice hereupon falls to
the ground; for if their Hypothesis be naught and rotten, their Thesis cannot
be sound that is built upon it: but that it is so, the foregoing Treatise of
that Subject does amply discover; proving with great clearness, that it was an
Invention and Institution of man, yea, of the man of Sin; calculated on purpose
to out Christ's Baptism, and to defile his Church; and this appearing to be of
the same Piece, contrived and ordered by the same Heads and Hands, it is meet,
that as they have lived, so they should die together.

And secondly, We may conclude rationally, If Infants were capable of Baptism,
they were as capable at the same time, of laying on of hands (as first
instituted and practiced) and of the Supper also, as Austin and others tell us
they had them all together, and not first baptize them, and then many years
after (and no body knows how and when) confirm them; for if one be a Foundation
or beginning Doctrine, as the other, they have done best and most according to
Rule and Reason, that have practiced it immediately, and not deferred it.

And thirdly, Since the Scripture is, as confessed, but a probable ground, and
that of Tradition, Antiquity, and constant Usage of the Church, the more
certain; the latter appearing so invalid upon all the foregoing Considerations,
that faint insinuation from that Scripture, cannot be a ground sufficient to
build that Practice upon.

And to which lastly, we will add Mr. Baxter's Sober Cautions, enough to shake
the confidence of any that have no better Ground for the Practice; as we find
them in p. 127, 128, 129. of his Confirmation: Where, after he had with all his
might endeavored to establish it both from Scripture and Antiquity, does,
according to his wonted manner, in a few Lines unsay more than he had said in
all the rest, viz.

M. Baxt. Sober Cautions
1. That we do not find that God instituted this Sign as a Matter of necessity,
still without interruption to be used; but only that by holy men it was applied
as a convenient Sign or Gesture to the works in which they used it; even as
lifting up of hands in Prayer, was ordinarily used as a fit Gesture, not
wilfully to be neglected without cause, and yet not of flat necessity; or as
Kneeling in Prayer, is ordinarily meet, but not always necessary; we find no
more Scripture for the one or for the other: which shows how little Reason
there is to make it matter of Necessity. The Ancient Church also used it so
variously, as that it is plain they fixed it to no one Case alone; of the
diverse Cases in which they imposed hands on the Catechumens, and four times on
the Penitents and diverse others, as; says he, you may see in Albaspinaeus's
Observat. p. 31, 32.

2. We find that Kneeling in Prayer, and lifting up of hands, were often
omitted; so we find that sometimes the Holy Ghost is given before Baptism or
Imposition of Hands, Acts 10. And we find not that the Apostles used it at all,
viz. for Confirmation; though I confess the Negative Arguing is infirm; yet it
seems not probable that this was always done.

3. It was somewhat suspicious to find in Justin Martyr's Description of the
Christian Churches practices, no mention of this, nor any Sacrament but Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, nor any of the Roman Ceremonies; and Irenaeus and some
others also are silent in it too.

4. God makes no Ceremonies under the Gospel so necessary, except the two
Sacraments; nor lays so great a stress on them as under the Law; and
therefore we are not to interpret the Gospel as laying men's Salvation, or the
Peace of the Church on any Ceremonies, unless we find it clearly expressed.

5. For all that I have said from Scripture for Imposition of Hands in
Confirmation (though the Lawfulness of it is proved past Doubt) yet the proof
of the Duty of using it, is liable to so many Objections, as that I must needs
confess that the Gospel-tenderness, and the sense of our mutual Infirmities,
and our care of tender Consciences, and of the Churches Peace, should restrain
all the Sons of Piety and Peace from making it a matter of flat necessity, and
forcing them that scruple to submit to it.

The Scripture-Gr. upon which the Bapt. have founded it.
We come in the next place to consider the Scripture-Grounds upon which the
Baptists have asserted this Rite, and founded this Practice of imposing hands
upon all Baptized Believers; and so essentially necessary to Church Communion,
and which, as before, you find to be especially held forth from Heb. 6.12.
Though affirmed not with that Sobriety and Modesty as the other from
Probability, but rather Infallibility; and therefore impose it accordingly,
denying Fellowship to any that do not so receive it; and as some have in Print
asserted, as neither being Babes in Christ, nor having Communion with God; as
Mr. Griffith in his Book has it, called God's Oracle, p. 87. And the reason of
this their great Confidence from this Text, is, as you have heard, twofold;
first, Because Laying on of hands is reckoned amongst the beginning-Teachings.
And secondly, Because they find it, as they say, practiced accordingly, Acts
8.17. Acts 19.6.

To the Trial and Examination thereof, we shall therefore apply our selves, and
see whether these have discovered a better Basis to found this Practice upon,
than those that have gone before.

And in order thereto, we shall in the first place lay down these two following
Principles, so fully owned by themselves, as a Line to carry us through the
Work, viz.

1. That to every Ordinance of Christ there must be some plain positive word of
Institution to confirm it. And neither Humane Tradition, nor far-fetcht
Consequence and Inference, such as the many Volumes that have been written from
Circumcision and Federal Holiness to assert Infants Baptism to be an Ordinance
of Christ, which no ordinary capacity can reach, and only men of Parts and
Abilities can trace and follow in their Meanders.

2. That to practice any thing in the worship of God for an Ordinance of his,
without an Institution, is Will Worship and Superstition. But how their
Assertions will comport with these honest Protestant Principles, we shall
presently see.

The great Text urged for the Institution of this Ordinance, is, Heb. 6.1, 2.
Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to
perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance from Dead Works; and
of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on of hands,
and of Resurrection of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment.

This is the Text which is affirmed to be the great Charter of the Church for
this Point of Faith and Practice; Granth.
but how to find the least Warranty for the same therein, we see not. If it was
indeed said, Let all baptized Believers have hands laid upon them; with as much
plainness, as Let all Believers be baptized, Mat. 28.29. Acts 10.48. Or, Let
all Baptized Believers eat the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.24. Acts 2.41, 42. It
was something to the purpose.



Doctrine of Laying on of hands is here reckoned amongst the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ [or his beginning-teachings]; but then it must be supposed
to be such a laying on of hands as was somewhere taught and practiced. But such
a laying on of hands upon all Baptized Believers, we find no where taught or
Practiced. Jesus Christ our great Example (as the Waldenses so well observe)
had no hands laid upon him by John Baptist after he baptized him; neither did
he lay hands upon all his Disciples before they broke Bread; neither did he
give one word of it in his Commission upon his Ascension; nor do we read that
this Church of the Hebrews practiced any such thing; for there is no mention
that the 120 had hands so laid upon them; nor the 3000 in Chap. 2. or 5000 in
Chap. 4. after their Baptism, before they broke Bread: Neither do we find the
least of it in any other of the Churches in the New Testament; neither in
Samaria, by Philip, after he baptized them, nor Corinth, Philippi, Coloss,
Thessalonica, Rome, the Churches of Galatia, Churches in Asia, Smirna,
Thyatira, Pergamus, Sardis, Philadelphia; no, nor in Ephesus: It is true, Paul
laid hands upon twelve of their number, upon another occasion, as Peter and
John did in Samaria; whereof you have an Account hereafter; nor in the Churches
in Syria, Antioch, Lystra, Derbe, etc.

none doubts but laying on of hands was a Practice, and this Practice was to be
taught to all Baptized Believers; yea, the Babes in Christ; and therefore must
it needs be practiced by all.

Institution and great Ground upon which it has been urged and imposed; but
how much of Fallacy and Falsehood is in this Argument, you will easily discern,
as though no act done upon, or Practice done by others, might be matter of
Doctrine or teaching to us, without being engaged in our own persons to do the
same: were not all the Miracles that Christ and his Apostles did, matter of
Doctrine, and much Edification and Instruction from them, and yet not for our
imitation and practice?

beginning-teachings; his first words, that is, Milk for Babes, and can you
tell us of any but such as is proper for all baptized Babes, or new-baptized
Believers?

Commission it self, which you cannot deny to be beginning-words? Mar. 16.
Where it is expressly said, That the Baptized shall in his Name cast out Devils,
speak with new Tongues, take up Serpents, drink poison, and not hurt them; and
also shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. And so did the
baptized Believers accordingly in those days, going out and preaching, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the Word with Signs following: But is this
the standing Ordinance to all baptized Believers to the world's end? This was
indeed that laying on of hands properly called Confirmation; whereas afterward
a laying on of hands of another nature, was so called, and introduced; so that
here you have then a laying on of hands amongst Christ's first Teachings for
Tongues, Healing and Miracles necessary and profitable to be taught to all,
even the meanest Babes, for Confirmation; as Heb. 2.3, 4. 1 Cor. 14.22. Acts
8.8. Mark 16.20. Which yet I presume none will say that every Believer ought to
practice.

Secondly, If every one of these Principles in Heb 6. are so absolutely to be
taken in by Babes, and without which, we are not to esteem them communicable;
what do you say to the Doctrine of Baptisms in the Text, one of the Principles
and Foundations of the Gospel? it is not said the Doctrine of Baptism. Must all
be baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit and of Suffering also, or not to be
received into Communion?

Thirdly, As to Laying on of Hands mentioned amongst these Principles in the
Text, as it may respect the Laying on of hands upon the Ministry, for their
solemn Investiture into their Office, whether Deacons, Acts 6. Elders, 1 Timothy
1.14. or Messengers, Acts 14. (whereby they are set apart to transact in the
whole Order, and in all the Ordinances of God's House; and wherein every
particular Member comes to be concerned, not only respecting the
Administrations performed by them, but the reciprocal Duty incumbent upon each
of them toward those their Overseers so set over them.) It becomes necessary
therefore to be taught, known, and understood by all, and that in the
beginning-Teachings, though all and every Member are not concerned in the
Personal Practice thereof; for all are not Prophets, Apostles, Teachers. And it
is most remarkable, that the Doctrine or Teaching of laying on of hands, is all
that is mentioned in this Scripture; all baptized Believers must be taught it,
that is plain; but that they are obliged therefore to practice it, is not here
or elsewhere to be found.

Acts 8.17. and 19.6. Are there not two express Presidents for such a laying on
of Hands immediately after Baptism, as we infer from hence, concluding that
these two Texts aforesaid, give sufficient warranty so to determine?

received and urged by those that so practice; but how warrantably, we shall
farther examine. We read indeed of laying on of hands for the giving of the
Spirit in three places; one whereof, Acts 9.17. was before Baptism; and these
two mentioned, after; so that there is no positive Conclusion to be fetched from
the Presidents, whether before or after; as it was in the matter of Healing,
which was given sometimes by laying on of hands, sometimes by words of Faith
spoken to the Sick, sometimes by Prayer, sometimes by sending Handkerchiefs,
sometimes by their very Shadows; so also was the Spirit given sometimes by
laying on of hands, sometimes by Prayer, sometimes by Preaching or Prophesying,
sometimes before, sometimes after Baptism.

But concerning these two Scriptures so much insisted upon, and imposed to be
the President and Pattern for all Churches, and for every Member in the Church,
let us put them to trial.

As to that of Samaria, it is said, that several being converted in that City,
and baptized by Philip, who wrought many Miracles, and continued some time with
them, as v. 13. yet did he not impose hands upon any of them that we read of.
The Church of Jerusalem hearing that Samaria had received the Word of God, and
that the Spirit was fallen upon none of them (viz. in a visible manner which
was the proper phrase attributed to those extraordinary measures of the Spirit
so frequently given to the Saints in those days; as, Act. 10.44.11.15, 16, 17.
Which sometimes did fall upon them before Baptism, as Acts 10. and sometimes
after, as Acts 2, 1.4.31. without laying on of hands) did therefore send Peter
and John, who it seems, were extraordinarily gifted by God; so that on
whomsoever they prayed and laid hands, the Spirit was visibly, extraordinarily
and immediately given; as ver. 18. As healing to the sick, by those that had
that Gift also given by God, (from whom every good Gift came) and who
accordingly, it is said, laid their hands upon them,; but how many of them it is
not said; surely not upon all; for Simon by his profane Offer, discovered he
had neither received the Wisdom nor Grace thereof, and had neither Lot or part
therein, though baptized; and so it is said they received the Spirit in such a
manner that it was visible to the Spectators.

And as to that of Ephesus, Acts 19.6. Paul it seems, finding some of the
Church there, that had not received the Spirit after they had believed and were
baptized, viz. in that visible manner so usually given in those days, lays his
hands upon twelve men of their number; (it is not said all the Church) who
thereupon, did immediately receive the Spirit, in such a degree, that it was
demonstrated by speaking with Tongues and Prophesying.

So that in neither of these two places (so much urged for the Explanation of
Heb. 6.2. And to be a President and Rule for us, to the end of the world) can
we find that there was a laying on of hands immediately after Baptism, nor with
any certainty upon all and every Member of the Church, nor to such an end as
can be attainable in aftertimes.

And as to that of 2 Timothy 1.6. Wherein Paul exhorts Timothy to stir up the Gift
that was in him by putting on of his hands, asserted to be a laying on of hands
of this kind, as urged, not Ordination; is,

First, a begging, not proving the Question.

Secondly, It is manifest that Timothy had the hands of the Presbytery laid on
him, which none doubts to be Ordination; and that Paul and Barnabas were the
Presbyters that did ordain in those Churches of Asia, is very manifest, Acts
14.23. Wherein by God's Blessing upon his Ordinance, there was a Gift received,
and to be stirred up; and therefore in saying, Stir up the Gift that was in him
by putting on of his hands, and neglect not the Gift that was in him, which was
given by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, whereof Paul was one,
seems to mean one and the same thing, and not two things, as urged; and to be
no other than those ordinary Ministerial Seize, which by giving
attendance to Reading, Meditation, Prayer, Exhortation and Doctrine, was to be
increased and stirred up.

Therefore since not the least Syllable of Institution, neither Precept nor
President can be found out for such a Practice, may we not fuily conclude in
the words of our Agreement, that for any to practice any thing in the Word of
God without an Institution from the Word of God, is Will Worship and
Superstition.



etc. would our Ignorance warrant you, to set up your Inferences and
Conclusions, as Oracles and Ordinances, without any Evidence or Authority from
the Word, and be thereby confirmed in your confident Assertions? It may be
enough to have evinced to you, that yours is not, cannot be that Ordinance of
Christ, that Principle and Foundation- Doctrine, so confidently asserted by
you. Yet not to leave you in the Dark, take here my apprehension of this Text,
and wherein I am persuaded I have the mind of Christ, viz.

The Apostle, Heb. 6.12. opened.
the better to gain their Attention to the great Doctrine of the High
Priesthood, tells them in the foregoing Chapter, by way of reproof, how dull of
hearing they had been in times past, how little they had improved Time or
Talent, what little progress they had made in Christianity, and what Babes they
yet were therein, and who, instead of bearing strong meat in Doctrine he was
delivering to them, they stood in more need of Milk, and to be taught again
those beginning-words of God, wherein in their first planting they had been
instructed; which notwithstanding for the present he would forbear to press
upon them, but go forward in his Design.

Not laying again the Foundation of Repentance and Faith, the Doctrine of
Baptismes, Laying on of Hands, Resurrection and Judgment, which are all the
Principles that are here enumerated; which some call five, some six, and some
seven; though as to the number, if they must be taken for all the beginning
Principles, I conceive we must either suppose them very comprehensive, or else
many must be left out, as the Ten Commandments, and several of the
Institutions, such as the Lord's Supper, which I presume will go for a
beginning-teaching as well as Baptism.

Therefore we must suppose that Repentance and Faith must comprehend all, both
the Negative and Positive part of Holiness; those of Baptismes and Laying on of
Hands, the Institutions, Privileges and Order in the Church of God;
Resurrection and Judgment, the whole of our Hope and Happiness for the time to
come; and particularly that Doctrine of laying on of hands, to contain not only
those laying on of hands by which the miraculous Healings and spiritual Gifts
were attained for confirmation of the Gospel, but those laying on of hands for
the investiture of the Church- Officers, who were to transact the whole order
of God's House, for the edification of each Member, and therefore necessary to
be taught to every one. And this is that, which amongst the rest they had need
to be taught, and might have been teachers of themselves; viz. what was the
end, use, blessing and benefit of such a Rite in the several Ministrations
thereof; but no ground in the least to confirm it to one particular, much less
to such an one of which no Syllable either here, or in the whole Book of God.



Truth in it; the Doctrine of laying on of hands is as much Plural, and may
respect the teaching of all sorts, of laying on of hands, as the Doctrine of
Baptismes respects all sorts of Baptismes.

offended that we pray for a Blessing upon our Brethren or Sisters after their
Baptism, or upon their admission into the Church, whereby the whole may also
take the better notice for whom we pray?

offended at a practice of that kind, be it lifting up or laying on of hands,
provided it be not urged as a thing of absolute necessity; while the Bishops of
old used many Ceremonies, people were not so much concerned; but when they
would impose them as necessary, and Institutions of Christ, that broke the
Peace, and occasioned much mischief; so to all such laying on of hands, a
beginning- Doctrine, or Oracle of God, a Foundation of Christian Religion, to
which every Member and Disciple of Christ ought to submit, upon penalty of
Non-Communion for the neglecting or rejecting a Foundation-Principle, though no
one word of Institution, Command, Precept, or Example for the same; and that
under pretense of receiving more of that Spirit of Christ thereby, which is a
Spirit of Love, Meekness, Humility, Tenderness, Peace, Edification, there
appears to be more of that other Spirit of uncharitable judging, rending,
tearing, and dividing the Body of Christ; and for asserting for Doctrine and
Practice the Customs, Commandments and Traditions of men; it is for these
things our Offense lies, as so well founded upon Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Rev.
22.18. Prove. 30.6.

There are two Objections more that I have lately met with, that I think very
necessary to give some Answer to; the one is this, viz.

Obj. 8. That as to the Point of Antiquity, though ('it is granted) the Ancients
and their Followers ever since, have so much erred, not only in the Subject,
but diverse Circumstances about this Rite of Imposition of hands; yet inasmuch
as there has been all along such a Witness born to the thing it self, it makes
much for its Apostolicalness, and confirms our Practice therein.

Answ. 1. To which, I say, That it does not appear that such a Witness has
been born all along thereto; for as Mr. Baxter so ingenuously acknowledges,
that Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and others in those times are as silent about it,
as the Scripture is that any of the Apostles did ever so practice it in the
first times; those Authorities that are pretended to assert the same in the
first Centuries, having been proved to be so spurious and supposititious.

Answ. 2. But Secondly, If the Practice of it should be granted to be as
ancient as the keeping of Easter and Lent, Diocesan Bishops, and Patriarchs,
and many other things that have been so generally received and practiced, it no
more proves it therefore to be Apostolical than each of them; For a pretense to
Ancient Prescription, without a Word of God to warrant it, can never justify
the Divine Authority of any Practice.

Obj. 9. The other is this, viz. That as to positive Scripture- Institution, so
much called for to justify our practice of laying on of hands upon all the
Baptized, from Precept or Example, it is not only unreasonable, but dangerous,
as to many Truths, to be demanded (as has in express words been lately told
me) for where is the plain word either for Women's receiving the Lord's Supper,
or to lay on hands upon Officers?

In answer whereto, I must needs say I am much grieved and astonished at such
prevarication; and than which, what can more betray the Truth and Justice of
your Cause? for do not your own Answers to such like Instances, so usually
brought by the Paedobaptists, sufficiently confute you? And do you not know
that if we had not plain and positive Scripture for both, that we would not
practice either? For is not 1 Cor. 11.28. compared with 1 Timothy 2.4, 5. and Gal.
3.28. a sufficient Precept for Women's Receiving? And Acts 1.14. with Chap.
2.42, 44. substantial evidence for the Practice thereof? And as for laying on
of hands upon Officers; is not 1 Timothy 5.22. a full Precept? And Acts 6.6. and
13.3. and 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. as clear Presidents for the same? And may we not
warrantably say, Let there be but as good Scripture-Authority produced for
laying on of Hands upon all Baptized Believers before they are permitted to
partake of the Lords Supper, and it shall suffice? But to set up a Practice in
God's Worship, without a warranty from his Word by some plain positive Rule and
Direction (the thing pleaded for by you) is no less (in my Judgment) than to
give countenance to all the Antichristian Innovations, to let go at once the
strongest Hold of Protestantism, reproach the Wisdom of Christ, and slight the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, as though we had not a sufficient direction
therein in all parts of God's Worship.

And therefore to all those worthy Sayings to this purpose, of those Eminent
men mentioned in the Treatise of Bapt. p. 93. I shall add that most remarkable
Expression of Dr. Owen; which you will find in his Communion with God, D. Owen.
p. 171. viz. This then they who hold Communion with Christ, are careful of,
they will admit of nothing, practice nothing in the Worship of God, private or
public, but what they have his warrant for; for unless it comes in his Name,
with Thus says the Lord Jesus, they will not hear an Angel from Heaven; they
know the Apostles themselves were to teach the Saints only what Christ
commanded them, Mat. 28.20.

By which sound and wholesome Rule well observed, we are delivered from all
Humane Inventions and Traditions; and by which Confirmation, Infants Baptism,
Lent, Easter, etc. and a hundred more of like import, are turned out of doors,
as accusing Christ of unfaithfulness, and the Scripture of insufficiency.

And to which purpose, T. G. himself has so very well urged lately to Dr.
Stillingfleet, about Infant Baptism, from Dr. Fulk out of Irenaeus; Irenaeus.
viz. When the Heretics are reproved out of Scripture, they fall to accusing
the Scriptures, as if all is not well in them, and that the Truth cannot be
found out of them that know not Tradition: And therefore that Tertullian says,
Take away these things from the Heretics, (which they hold with the Ethnicks)
that they may stay their Questions upon the Scripture only.

The Conclusion.
THus you have had a candid Account of the Rise, Growth and Progress of this
Rite of Confirmation or Laying on of Hands, from the beginning to this day
(amongst all Persuasions that have owned it) with the Authorities upon which it
has been founded and imposed; together with a genuine Examination of the
Grounds and Reasons each Party have given to justify the same. And may we not
upon the whole, fairly come to the following Conclusions? viz.

1. That there does not appear to be the least Scripture-Precept or Practice
for any such Ordinance of Confirmation, or an Imposing of Hands upon all the
Baptized before they break Bread, or are admitted into Church Communion.

2. That the Instances produced to prove it an Apostolical Tradition, are
impious Lies and Forgeries.

3. That the Authorities by which it has been heretofore enjoined, were
nothing but Antichristian Canons and Decrees.

4. That the most eminent Witnesses and Confessors that opposed the
Antichristian Usurpations and Innovations, have all along witnessed against and
impugned this of Confirmation, viz. The Novatians, Donatists, Waldenses, Greek
Churches, Wickliffians, etc.

All which are worthy the serious Consideration of all Sober and Judicious
Christians, and are especially recommended to them, who having rejected
Infants, and embraced Believers-Baptism, do yet cleave to this Practice, with
these following Observations, viz.

1. That it is most manifest that those Popes, Councils and Fathers, that have
enjoined and imposed Infants sprinkling for a Sacrament, or an Ordinance of
Christ, have enjoined this also as such.

2. That the Principal Arguments that have been pretended for the one, have
been urged and pleaded for the other also; viz. Apostolical Tradition, and
pretended Inferences and Consequences from Scripture.

3. That the Famous Churches and Confessors that have opposed
Infants-sprinkling, as Superstitious, Popish and Antichristian, have upon the
same account, opposed this also.

4. That it does not appear that any Baptized Church or People did ever, in any
Age or Country, own such a Principle or Practice to this day, except some in
this Nation in these late Times.

But then it may well be enquired, if this be so Novel a thing amongst the
Baptists, how came those in this Country so to receive and practice it, as
before asserted?

To which I give the following Account, as I have received it under the Hand of
one that affirms to have had the perfect knowledge thereof, as being an eye and
ear-witness of the same, and who certifies to this purpose, viz.

How, when and why, laying on of hands was practiced by the Bapt. in this
Nation.
That about the year 1646, some 27 years since, one Mr. Cornwell, heretofore a
public Preacher, then a Member and Minister of a Baptized Congregation in
Kent, was a great Asserter of this Principle and Practice; who coming about
that time into that Baptized Congregation, then meeting in the Spittle
Bishopsgate- Street, Land. did from Heb. 5.12, 13. and 6.1, 2. preach the
necessity of Laying on of Hands; inferring from thence, those that were not
under laying on of hands, were not Babes in Christ, had not God, nor Communion
with God. Whereupon, several of the said Congregation were persuaded to come
under that Practice; and which notwithstanding, the Church in Tenderness
indulged to them, upon their promise of a peaceable demeanor in the Church.
Notwithstanding which their said Promise, they did afterward not only press
their said Persuasion uncharitably, as they had been taught by their aforesaid
Teacher; viz. That none were Babes in Christ, nor had Communion with God
without it; therefore not to be communicated with in Church-Ordinances (and as
after was published in Print, by a Leading Brother amongst them, in a Book
called God's Oracles, and Christ's Doctrine) but made a Rent and a Separation
for the same; and from that very Schism propagated the same Principle and
Practice amongst many others in the Nation ever since, who have kept that
distance from their Brethren (not owning the same) as not esteeming or
communicating with them as the true Church of God, because defective in one of
the beginning Principles or Foundations of the Christian Religion.

Now this being a true Narrative as to matter of Fact; does it not naturally
follow?

First, That such a Principle so sucked in, and received, is founded in gross
Ignorance and Error? For what can more savor of Darkness and Error, than to
make our Adoption and Communion with God to depend upon some External Act done?
As though Christ himself was utterly mistaken, when he tells us, That as many
as receive him, have the privilege to become the Children of God, even as many
as do believe in his Name, John 1.12, 13. And the Apostle also in confirmation
thereof, That we are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3.26. And, that of his own Will we are begotten by the word of Truth, Jam.
1.16. But this Doctrine asserts our New Birth in another way, by the Laying on
of Hands after Baptism (and as though persons might be baptized that were not
Children of God; but afterward to be made so by this new way;) thereby
confirming the Superstition of the Papists, in their Idolizing this Rite above
all other Ordinances, as before.

And Secondly, The Principle (upon this account) appears not more erroneous,
than the Practice upon it, corrupt and vicious; viz. to make a Separation from
the Church upon it, so contrary not only to known Order, Discipline and Duty,
but their declared Promise; and therefore must not all those Churches of that
Constitution, necessarily be supposed to be founded in Sin and Schism, as well
as in great Error and Ignorance? and concerning which unnatural and undue
Separation, I hear some of Eminency amongst them, have lately so had their
Conviction, as to plead Reformation therein with their Brethren, and who I
doubt not, from the true sense of the bitter fruit (even the Gall and Wormwood
that has been brought forth thereupon) will naturally be led to consider the
Root from whence it has sprung, viz. the mistaken Principle, as here
discovered; for as our Savior tells us, Mat. 7.17, 18. That it is the corrupt
Tree that brings forth the evil fruit; and that as the good Tree cannot bear
evil fruit, so the corrupt Tree cannot bear good fruit. All which is
recommended to the serious Consideration of the Impartial and Judicious; not
doubting but the day is hastening, when not only all Antichristian Fogs and
Darkness, but all Mists of Error and Ignorance, shall be dispelled; and that
the God of Truth will so send out his Light and Truth, and cause it so to
spring up out of the Earth, that Knowledge shall fill the Earth as the waters
cover the Sea; when Discord and Division shall so cease amongst his People,
that they shall not with their Babylonish Language vex one another any more,
but with one Lip and Shoulder shall serve the Lord with one consent. And for
the speedy accomplishing and fulfilling such amiable and acceptable Promises,
let all the Upright say Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

