THE MALL: OR THE Modish Lovers. A COMEDY. Acted by His Majesty's Servants.

Inceptis nulla Potestas.
LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the lower Walk of
the New Exchange in the Strand. 1674.

TO WILLIAM WHITCOMB, Junior, Esquire
I Need not plead the privilege, which the Tribe of Scriblers may lay claim
too in Dedications, since your favors excuse these weak respects I pay you in
a public acknowledgement. All the interest I have in the Play, is inferior to
the Glory I take, in seeing your Name fixed in the Frontispiece; which methinks,
gives it a resemblance to the Structure of Minda, where the Porch far exceeds
the House. I know you have a Victorious Soul, and thence I do my self the
Honor (not without policy too, especially in the time of threatening Thunder,
when Demicracks of the Town, according to custom, will bark at Shadows) to run
under your Laurel, to avoid the Clap. Many there are yet to unload their Mouth
Grenades, those especially whose own actions were advise to the Painter* yet
for any Gentleman to become an infected mock Critic for Fashion sake, is as
much beneath his credit as to wear a Velvet Coat, when every Iohn-a-Nokes
presumes the fashion. I am very much in pain for the violence done to my
inclin^tion, whereby I am forbid to acknowledge the Person, and Obligations
done to the Play, only (as it is said) in favor to my interest. What e're the
reason be, I think the Play highly advanced in lying at your Feet; But in the
mean while I pray, 'twere in my power to present you with something Heroic,
and like your self. I am proud (...) you want no Soul, but Titles to (...)
popular, and wishing you the measure of your Worth, I think it duty to
subscribe my self, the

Humblest of all your Creatures, I. D.
Poetis nulla Potestas.
The Prologue.
WHen you cry Poets down, and damn 'um thus,
Like Vipers slain, they grow more numerous:
Like to Aegypt's Plagues around you swarm,
But you are proof against such common charm:
We know that none, beside a first rate Wit,
Can please the grand Inhabiters o'th Pit;
While others work's, each Ninny of the Town,
Takes privilege to damn for half a Crown.
Our Muse wants complaisance, knows not the Court,
Although she fain would be a prostitute;
Her walks are very near, and there you will find,
Her Evening love, too soft to be unkind:
Yet those that Critics are, for fashion sake
Will judge this dull, which scarce is a mistake;
And finding one fault, will make ten times more,
Often force a flaw where there was none before.
Yet if your bisses poison, this he sues
You would some lingering, painful sentence choose.
Prove Tyrants, and with leisure till the third day, kill.
Thunder Damnation then, and what you will.
Dramatis Personae.
Mr. Easy. An old Husband. Courtwell His Kinsman, a brisk Gallant, newly
arrived from Spain. Lovechange. Privately married to Mrs. Woodbee. Sir Ralph
Spatter. A foolish Country Knight, Rival to Amorous. Jo. His Man. Amorous
Servant to Grace, and Nephew to Mr's Woodbee. Mrs. Easy Young Wife to old Easy.
Mrs. Woodbee. Grace In love with Amorous, and Ne^^^ to old Easy. Perigreen
Alias Camilla, a Spanish Lady Disguise. Peg Woman to Mrs. Easy. Clare Woman to
Mrs. Woodbee. Betty Woman to Grace.
Scene St. James's Park, with the adjacent Places.

THE MALL: OR THE Modish Lovers.
Actus Primus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Lovechange solus. Lov. A Pox of this Love, how damned and Idle t'has
made me, here have I marched a long half hour, which Egad is an Age to me, to
wait for this Ambassador of my amorous Negotiation, pray Heaven no Rival of
mine leads her into Temptation!

Oh Lady! Enter Peg.


Peg. O Lord! What make you here so early?


Lov. Oh Peg, thou know Love is a restless Bedfellow, Peg, alas, who could
sleep, that could but hope the blessing of seeing thy sweet Mistress. Peg,
Well, what news, what news, from Cupids Court Wench, ha! Will she be kind, and
consider my Passion, faith I am but a dead Man without a little comfort.


Peg. Faith Sir, I am not idle in your behalf, I take all opportunities (which
is) when her Husband's out of the way, to let her know my thoughts of you,
which I Will assure you Sir are most advantageous.


Lov. I am beholding to thee Peg.


Peg. But you know Sir, she is a married Woman, and ought to be very cautious.


Lov. Oh Peg, I love her with a virtuous Flame, believe me I do! and if thou
would but swear and lie, and use a small kind of Treachery in the Case --


Peg. You need not doubt such small services Sir -- But --


Lov. But thou must be a little encouraged, is it so? Here, here is a pair of
Angels to invite thee to speak. -- gives her Money.


Peg. Do you take me for Balaams Ass Sir, that cannot speak without a Prompter,
however Sir, you court me in no common Language.


Lov. Oh thou art a Saint, that will despise a Prayer, made in the vulgar
Tongue, here Proxy, here is my Hand, and Seal, get it delivered, and further the
design.


Peg. I, but Sir, is there no harm in it?


Lov. What do thou call harm?


Peg. I mean Sir, is there nothing, but what I may carry with Honor?


Lov. Fie, fie Peg, do think I Would make a Bawd of thee?


Peg. I hope you would not at my years.


Lov. Right, having so many yet to come of the kind and amorous ones, But this
Letter Peg is only to invite thy Mistress into the Park to night. I know the
Evening will be fair, and if she can make an escape from that old impotent
Letcher her Husband, I shall be glad to kiss her hands there.


Peg. Is this all?


Lov. Upon my Life.


Peg. Then rest in hope, for I dare promise ye.


Lov. Farewell dear Peg.


Peg. Your Servant sweet Mr. Lovechange. Exit Peg.


Enter Courtwell who meets Lovechange going out. Lov. Courtwell!


Court. Lovechange, I have been a dozen times at thy Lodging to see thee, but,
like the Devil, thou art always ranging about, seeking whom thou can devour.


Lov. Thou have small reason to accuse me Courtwell, for since thy arrival from
Spain I have not enjoyed thee at our old rate; we were wont to Whose, and drink
together like loving Brothers in Iniquity, but I think thou now have taken up a
little of the Formality of the Climate, and do all thy Debaucheries in secret.


Court. No Ned, I have rather learnt the sobriety of that Nation, and have left
off those lewd courses.


Lov. Nay, if thou be come to that, to call them lewd thoud'st better e'n
have staid amongst them, for thou art unfit for this Town Egad Will.


Court. I think I had not so soon abandoned that agreeable place, but for the
Commands of my Uncle Easy, upon whom my Fortune does so depend, that I dare not
disobey him in any thing.


Lov. What, I Will warrant ye, he has that old fashioned design of Matrimony in
his head, he means to marry thee.


Court. Some such thing.


Lov. And who is the wretched thing, I pray?


Court. The rich Widow Wou'dbee, she is damned ill-favored, and they say as
ill natured, but she will serve for a Wife Ned.


Lov. How, the Widow Wou'dbee -- my Wife Egad! aside


Court. Yes the very same.


Lov. Hark ye William, I don't like the match William!


Court. Your Reasons?


Lov. I have diverse, and sundry -- That must be nameless aside


Court. Let Us hear a few of them.


Lov. Why, first she is Old, next Jealous, she is, to Damnation, Proud,
Expensive, and --


Court. This is all nothing.


Lov. She is beside -- a Plague on him I dare not discover -- aside


Court. What Sir?


Lov. Nay, nay dear heart, no passion prithee, for she is very honest, which
makes her very insolent.


Court. Oh I am glad 'twas no worse.


Lov. Worse! Nay here is ill qualities enough for one Woman a Conscience -- But
prithee was there never a Dona in all Spain worthy your kindness, but you must
come back to England, and like a Jew, be forced to Wed in your own Tribe, ha!


Court. Prithee don't call any Sins to remembrance, Oh Friend! I had a Mistress
in Spain, and such a Mistress, so kind, so fair --


Lov. And so tired you out with loving, was it not so? Aye there is the Devil
on it.


Court. No, in an unhappy Adventure wherein I took the party of an English
Cavaleir my Friend, I killed her Brother, who was of Quality sufficient to
cause me to fear the inquisition, so I was forced to quit Spain, and meeting
with the Command of my Uncle --


Lov. You soon lost the thoughts of your Mistress, and I shall advise you, as
you love health and liberty! two excellent qualities, to loose the thoughts of
this Widow too.


Court. Nay, since I cannot marry where I like, I Will e'n marry for a World of
Money, that is the next way, and the nearest I know to happiness, therefore I am
resolved to put on the Fetters.


Lov. Pox on it they will gingle after thee at that rate that all pretty Ladies
will shun thee for a fusty Husband, and who would be tied up from Ranging.


Court. There are Ladies Ned, who consider not the Man, but his Pockets, half a
piece for a clean pair of Sheets, half a Crown for a thrice retayl'd Bottle of
Rhenish, and --


Lov. The Pox into the bargain.


Court. The Pox in others will be but the Gout in me.


Enter a Boy. Boy. Your Uncle Sir, stays for you to go make a visit to the
Widow Woodbee.


Court. I Will attend him.


Lov. You ought to ask me leave first Sir, if you knew all -- It Is well I am not
a jealous Husband, and it is better I have no tempting Wife. [aside] Well Sir
you will go then --


Court. Without doubt.


Lov. Well Love speed you Sir, it is well you're young enough to spare some
hours, for of my Conscience it is mere loss of time.


Court. Farewell, farewell Sir, ha, ha, ha.


Lov. Let them laugh that win Sir, adieu.


Exeunt severally. Scene Second.
Enter Perigreene, and Servant. Perig. For Mrs. Woodbee at her house in Reading
the superscription of a Letter.
St. James's street, -- London. --
Sure it is hereabout.

Ser. This must be the house I Will knock till they answer. knocks

Enter Clare. Is this the Lady Woodbee's, Sweetheart?


Clare. It is Sir, may I know your affairs with her, for she is a little busy
at present.


Per. I am a Stranger by Nation a Spaniard, and bring her Letters from her
Brother who is Consul there.


Clare. Please you walk in Sir. -- They go in and return.


Per. Well Diego, thus far our business is prosperous, we are arrived to a
Land, rich, and beautiful, and where the civility of the Inhabitants give me
all the encouragement I can expect, grant ye gods I may find out this
perfidious Renigado of Love, and I Will forgive what e're you make me suffer
another way.

Enter Mrs. Woodbee and Clare. Madam, you I take it are the Lady to whom I am
addressed, and these will inform you, why I take this freedom. Gives her Letters,
she reads


Would. Sir, I am not only obliged by the Laws of good manners, and civility to
receive you well as a Stranger, but the Character my Brother gives me of you,
binds me to a more strict observance: Sir, you're welcome, believe so, and
command my house.


Per. Madam, you honor me, and if I take a freedom that unbecomes me, charge
it on your bounty, not my boldness.


Wood. A pretty youth in troth Clare, is it not?


Clare. Yes indeed Madam.


Enter Mr. Easy and Courtwell. Per. Madam, I Will take my leave for a few hours to
see the City, which done I Will wait on you again. kisses her hand.


Easy. So, right Woman, can no more be without a Man, then a Puritan without
his Bible.


Court. The Widow looks very amorous upon him, methinks it is a fine Youth. To
Easy aside.


Wood. Mr. Easy, Sir your servant.


Easy. No interruption, Lady, no interruption.


Wood. None in the World Sir I protest, this is a Person of Worth and Merit,
recommended to me by the only Brother I have, and for whose sake besides his
own I am obliged to pay him my respects.


Easy. By my faith, and he deserves it Lady, he is handsome, and young -- But
Lady, I have, once more, brought my Nephew to wait on you, and to know your
resolution concerning those propositions I made you of Marriage, I Will make short
work on it, I Am no Courtier, but let him speak for himself, he can talk many
fine things of Love, and the like -- In the mean time I Will take a turn in the
Garden. Exit Easy


Per. gods! Is not that Courtwell? I must withdraw, or dye; in what a happy
hour am I arrived, to be a witness of his injustice! Oh Fortune! thou have
recompensed me for all the injuries thou have done me, [aside] Madam! your
humble Servant, it shall not be many hours before I kiss your hands again.


Wood. They will seem many to me, Exit Perigreen looking with scorn on
Courtwell. believe me Gentle Sir.


Court. I find Widow, though you profess a great deal of cruelty, and coldness
to me, you can be kind too, when you please.


Wood. I am sorry you should take me for an insensible Mr. Courtwell, though
for many reasons I am forced to say I cannot admit of any concern for your
self, in a Word Sir I have reasons (that must be secret ones) to tell you, I
cannot entertain your passion, I am a Person Sir, that --


Court. Seems to have heat enough about you Widow for half a score, faith view
me well, I am a strait chin'd fellow, clean limbed, and sweet, and dare promise
as much as any Man.


Wood. And perform as little as most Men; Well, just thus did my Husband
promise before I had him, and now, though even in the Non age of our Marriage,
nay before the Wedding Sheets were sufficiently tumbled, I find him as
reasonable a quiet Soul, as heart can wish. aside


Court. What is it you consult on Widow.


Wood. In earnest Sir, I am past consideration, for I am resolved upon the
matter.


Court. Not to marry?


Wood. By no means Sir, not you.


Court. Why then the Devil take thee for making me loose so much of my precious
time, why thou Unmerciful, Insatiable Widow, that art not only content, to let
me miss of thee, but the opportunity of gaining at least a dozen hearts of
perhaps handsomer Women then thy self Widow.


Wood. How Mr. Courtwell, handsomer! you are rude Sir, I must tell you.


Court. Handsomer! Why thou did not take thy self to be a Beauty sure! but
yet thou have charms Widow in bank, which are alurements I confess, and 'twas
well thou had 'em at these years.


Wood. Years -- Certainly I don't pass for a Sibel with you? this is beyond all
patience, Clare, where is Mr. Easy?


Clare. Taking a turn in the Garden Madam.


Wood. Let him come and carry off his scurvy Nephew here, or I shall set my
Footman to do it in a more undecent manner: years quoth a'!


Court. Fie on it, Age makes thee testy Widow, ha, ha, ha.


Enter Easy. Wood. Oh intolerable Mr. Easy, do you bring your Kinsman to
affront me?


Easy. How Lady! Cocks bodikins, you mistake him it is the new way of making
Love, he is a spark of the times Lady, and Courts A-la-mode.


VVood. Mr. Easy I know you mean well, and for your Ladies sake, who is a
virtuous Gentlewoman, you are always welcome to my House, your Kinsman too, I
looked upon as a proper Gentleman, and one that I was Redivable too, for the
passion he professed to me, but now he has discovered so disagreeable a quality,
that really I am forced to say I do not like his conversation, nor his address.


Easy. Address Lady? I know not what you mean by address, but I am sure his
Estate is worth a thousand pound per annum, and a better penny, and do you talk
of his address?


Court. Uncle say no more, leave her to her own peevish humor, and the bare
imagination of so likely a young fellow as my self. Widow I am resolved to
have thee my way, or no way, so adieu dear Widow, I have other game in hand,
beside, tolerated going to it, and so farewell Widow. Exit. Courtwell.


Easy. Kinsman, come back I say.


VVood. Sir, it is in vain, let him go, for I am resolved never to dispose of my
self that way, this is my final resolution.


Easy. Is it so, then your Nephew, young Mr. Amorous, shall never have my Niece
Grace, and that is my final resolution. Exit. Easy.


Enter at the other door Mrs. Easy. Mrs. Easy. Sweet Mrs. Woodbee, your
Servant, what looks are these that cloud your smiles to day! What Is the matter
Friend?


Wood. Mrs. Easy I beg your pardon really, I did not see you, I have been so
ill treated by some friends of yours --


Mrs. Easy. Of mine! let me know who they are, and I Will secure you I Will own them
to be no more so.


Wood. On my Conscience thou will keep thy word, for 'twas thy most filthy
Husband.


Mrs. Easy. My Husband! Nay I believe it, for in good earnest Mrs. Woodbee, he
is kind and civil to no body, nay, if you knew the daily, aye, and nightly
torment too I have from him, you would not wonder at his incivility to you.


Wood. Nay, I believe indeed, you have very slender comfort of him, but alas,
what can you expect from an old fusty fellow, that is even past the years of
wishing well to our Sex --


Mrs. Easy. You are in the right, Lord if I could but tell you the story of all
my sufferings of that kind, but I ought not to complain, when there is no hopes
left of remedy. sighs.


Wood. So, I hope I have an occasion to be revenged on this Husband of hers,
and help contrive his being made a Cuckold, Hang me, if I am not infinitely
raised with the thoughts on it, ah sweet Vengeance! how I love thee! ( aside)

Come, I am no Woman if I don't fancy what thou wilt be at, nay, and it is but
just and reasonable: 'Slife for Women of our youth, and all that, to languish
away in sickly imagination; No, no, thou shall make use of what Nature has
bestowed on thee, so much Beauty to be buried alive, with an old rotten
Carcass. --


Mrs. Easy. What do you mean Madam?


Wood. That, which thou mean. Come Friend I know thy Soul, thou shall
Cuckold this Fellow.


Mrs. Easy. How! Cuckold my Husband, forbid it!


Wood. Husband! Why what virtue is there in that Name, does the old Fool act
like one? What duty of a Husband do you receive from him, ha?


Mrs. Easy. That indeed is true. But --


Wood. I know you Married him out of humor, because you were in Love with
another Man, but that Man, you have never yet confessed to me.


Mrs. Easy. That shall not be long a secret, dear Friend, if this counsel you give
me, proceed from your real thoughts?


Wood. So, let me thrive in the like success, when I have so great a
provocation as thou have, if I be not in earnest, I say again enjoy thy self. I
say be kind, be gay, and live for ever.


Mrs. Easy. And be a Whore? I blush to name it!


Wood. I see you are willing, and I long to be revenged on the Insolency of thy
Husband. ( aside) Why look ye Mrs. Easy? You may call your self what you
please, but so long as you can keep your own Counsel, you are pure, and
unstained in the eyes of all the World.


Mrs. Easy. I confess, when I look upon Mr. Easy as a very useless Man to me,
and how little Felicity I enjoy with him, I cannot scruple much at the thing
proposed. And therefore to be plain with you, I must own there is a Man, and
such a Man --


Wood. I such a Man, I like, forward --


Mrs. Easy. It Is the same that once made honorable Love to me, but he had no
Fortune, and I, not much, which parted us; And he has since, (by what good
fortune I know not) raised himself in the World, for he is full of Money, which,
managed by a strange liberality natural to him, is every day sacrificed to me
in Presents, and many entertainments.


Wood. Now thou speak as if thou understood'st thy self.


Mrs. Easy. He is beside a Gentleman, young, and infinitely agreeable.


Wood. 'Slife thou wilt make me Rival thee.


Mrs. Easy. He is extremely solicitous for a meeting, I mean such a one, as may
afford him, all I have to give. Hides her face


Wood. And have thou the heart to refuse him this?


Mrs. Easy. Conscience, Conscience, Madam!


Wood. Away, with those silly thoughts, come, if thou be certain of his
Love, recompense it for shame.


Mrs. Easy. I received a Letter from him this very Morning, and I vow, I need
counsel how to answer it, for it is to meet him this Evening in St. Iame's Park
-- Here Is the Letter. Gives her the Letter.


Wood. Before I read it, I protest you shall promise to meet him, nay, and as
he desires too, or loose my Friendship for an unwitty Woman.


Mrs. Easy. Well, you have prevailed, I Will swear to you to follow your Counsel.


Wood. Well said, now I Will see in what pleasing style he writes.

Reads. Madam, it is strange, that after so many Vows, and protestations, you
should still remain an Infidel! Why is it? You will force me to some
Extravagance that unbecomes a Man, and the secrecy of that Flame I have for
you, to express my Soul in: For Loves sake, for mine, whom once you said, you
loved, and more, for your own Honors sake, force me not into a stark madness
that will undo us all.




I vow he writes most passionately, oh do not force him to any despair, but be
kind -- Well, I Will read it out.

You have a Husband, and I have (Hell take them) other concerns too, that
require my secret carrying on of this affair of Love. Therefore meet me this
Night in St. James's Pel Mal, or expect to have me dead, or worse to morrow.

Yours Lovechange.




starts. Ha! It cannot be! Lovechange! It Is Witchcraft, this, Lovechange, Hell!
It Is not his hand, oh but I am too well assured it is -- Let me disguise my
Rage, and strive against Nature. aside


Mrs. Easy. Well, what think you often Madam?


Wood. I think all Men are false, and that Woman whose honor is trusted in
their hands, a ruined thing.


Mrs. Easy. Have you met with ought there that has wrought this sudden change
in you, if Women be not as false too, then how came you thus altered? Was it to
get this secret of my Life from me, and then betray it? Bad Woman, farewell.
Offers to go.


W. She must not go thus, nor must I discover, [aside] Mrs. Easy, come, be not
angry with me, nor suspect me, your Letter only made me call to mind some
former passages of my Life, In which I was betrayed; 'Twas such another Man as
this you have described, and such a Letter too, betrayed me, once, to ruin,
but you may keep your word, for this perhaps is real. [aside] I Will counterplot
you though.


Mrs. Easy. If there be truth in Man, this cannot err, and believe he speaks
all truths to me.


Wood. It may be so to you, but false to me, as thou art to thy Honor. Aside.


Mrs. Easy. Madam, Methinks I find a sudden alteration in you, I am sorry I
have occasioned it, pardon my ignorance.


Wood. Indeed you have put a melancholy thought into me, but 'twil not last.


Mrs. Easy. I Will take my leave, it may be you would be alone, when you are
disposed for it, I Will come and let you know my Adventure with Lovechange.


Wood. Oh how she stabs me! as if she would sound the mortal vein, (aside) your
servant sweet Mrs. Easy, however you leave me now, I assure you the Relation of
that Amorous adventure, will be very Cordial to me, as I shall order the matter
-- Exit Mrs. Easy Now Wit and Woman help me! Enter Clare.


Clare. Here Is your Kinsman Mr. Amorous, Madam.


Wood. Let him come in.

Enter Amorous. How now Nephew, thou look ill upon it.


Amor. As well as a successless Lover can do.


Wood. What still whining after Mrs. Grace? I Will tell you Nephew, I Would rather
thou should never marry, then be obliged to that old fool Easy for thy
admittance.


Amor. Madam, I was the most acceptable pretender, but I know not what Devil
has possessed him; For he comes into her Chamber just now, and finding me there,
very full of choler, forbade me her presence, and his house, and told me what
Treatment Mr. Courtwell found from you, I should receive there for the future.


Wood. He has done well, I tell thee, I hate him, take a secret which thou
know not. This fellow being vastly rich, had got my good will to marry me,
the day was assigned, the things provided; Over night, he by chance saw a woman
of something (as she, and he thought) a better Face, and married her. This,
from my Pride, I do so stomach that I can never forgive.


Amor. Yet, you seem to be very kind to the Lady, Madam?


Wood. I do so, and will revenge the affront I warrant thee.


Amor. But Madam, though you love not him, let not the Niece in your opinion
inherit the crimes of the Uncle, give me leave to adore her, for she is all
sweet and innocent.


Wood. I am not so ill natured, but I will say, that if without her Uncles
leave you can gain her, (for I scorn thou should be a suitor to him for any
thing) I give my consent, for besides my aversion to the old Man, I have a
secret Reason not to marry Courtwell, which you shall know hereafter. I have
some affairs of my own to dispatch before Night.


Amor. Madam I Will follow your directions in all things.


Wood. Cousin, I had forgot to tell you, that there is a young Man, a Person of
Quality, arrived from Spain, from your Uncle there, he has made my house his
home, and pray treat him kindly.


Amor. I shall obey you Madam.


Exeunt Woodbee, and Amorous severally. Enter Mrs. Easy, and Peg. Peg. I am
very glad Madam, that you are at last resolved to oblige Mr. Lovechange, I Will
swear he is almost wild for your answer.


Mrs. Easy. When will he call for it?


Peg. Madam, he is walking here hard by, or will be immediately, have you writ?


Mrs. Easy. No, but you may let him know my mind, that is, that I will be in
the Mall, as soon as it begins to be dark, if I can get from my Husband.


Peg. Oh Lord Madam! Now I think on it, we look for Sir Ralph Spatter to night,
Mrs. Graces Sweetheart, and my Master designs to make a Masquerade as they
call it, on purpose to entertain him.


Mrs. Easy. That Is true, some way must be contrived to cheat him of my Company.
For Peg, now I have resolved upon it, I cannot forbear going, had my Husband
been any thing approaching to Man, I should have believed I had longed, so
great is my desire of seeing Lovechange to night. Oh, this dear Letter has so
powerful an attraction, that I must go. Kisses the Letter.


Peg. Some way we will find out. O dear Madam, here is my Master in Rancour, for I
had forgot to tell you forsooth, that he has forbid Mr. Amorous the house, and
that Mrs. Grace is full of dolor.


Enter Mr. Easy, snatches the Letter out of Mrs. Easy's hand. Mr. Easy. What Is
this I pray?


Mrs. Easy. I am undone! Nay I protest you must not see it for the World, it is
a new Song.


Mr. Easy. Some bawdy Lampoon, I Will warrant ye, I Will see it.


Mrs. Easy. I Will protest it is not Sir, when it is set you shall hear it sung.
Enter Grace weeping.

She Is come in very good time. Alas! poor Cousin Grace, and have you Sir, can
you be so cruel to Cousin Grace, pray let her have the Man she loves. -- Peg,
have never a Song to change this for? Aside.


Peg. Yes, Madam, but it is a very scurvy one.


Mr. Easy. I say I Will see the Paper.


Mrs. Easy. Any thing dear Peg, but the Letter, Aside come Dear will you
consider Graece?


Mr. Easy. The Verses I say, I smell a Plot, it is some Love Letter, come, come,
produce, produce.


Mrs. Easy. I vow Dear I am ashamed you should see them, they are so very silly.


Peg. I Sir, and something --


Mr. Easy. Bawdy too, I Will warrant ye, let us see, let us see.


Peg. Truly Sir, my Mistress has not read them yet.


Mr. Easy. What Is here, Sig -- Sig, Signior -- hey day, what is the Devil got
amongst you two: I shall Signior ye, and you want a Signior.


Mrs. Easy. What say you concerning Grace Sir?


Mr. Easy. I say you are all naught, and it is time you had all Men, lusty Men,
able Men, for the Devil will supply their places else, and therefore I design
to morrow, to marry Grace to a young lusty Lad, and a Knight, de ye see a
Knight.


Grace. How Sir, marry me, and not to Mr. Amorous?


Mr. Easy. Amorous! Let me but see thee peep through the Window upon Amorous
again, and I Will make a Nun of thee, do hear, where thou shall languish with the
thought of flesh, and every day shall be a Good Friday to thee.


Grace. You will not be so inhumane, will you Sir? you have the liberty to
choose Youth and Beauty here in my Aunt, and despised Riches as the most
unvaluable thing; and can you believe I am so unlike you to choose Wealth and an
empty Title before so much Worth as dwells in Mr. Amorous.


Mr. Easy. If I have played the Fool, I do not mean you shall do so too. I have
a Wife indeed of Youth and Beauty, but had I known the continual Plague of
keeping her honest, she should e'n have been left to her old Gallant
Lovechange, perhaps his Youth without my Money, had made her take the same
courses, that my Money, and no Youth does, but I have rid my hands of him,
thanks be praised.


Mrs. Easy. This is unkind Mr. Easy to upbraid me with so innocent a kindness
as I had for Mr. Lovechange.


Mr. Easy. Nay, now I dare swear for thee, but yet I cannot help fearing, for
Sweetheart he is very much spruc'd up of late, that is, since you were married,
goes Rich, and spends high; notable signs, that some old Fool, or other may
have a handsome liberal Wife, but thou art truly honest. Well, we do every
moment expect Sir Ralph Spatter, pray let there be music got, and let the
young Folks dance, invite Mrs. Lay-it-on, and Mrs. Frisker, and who else you
please, and their Husbands, and entertain his Worship after the London fashion,
I Will have it handsome.


Grace. Madam, i am undone if your goodness don't assist me.


Mrs. Easy. Fear not, I Will warrant we will take some care, I know too well the
torment of forced Marriages to wish thee that punishment, but Cousin, pray do
you see all things got in order to night, for I have a visit, or two, to make
of concern.


Grace. Madam, you shall command me. Exit Mrs. Easy.


Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, here is a Gentleman inquires for you.


Mr. Easy. Bodikins, it is Sir Ralph, bring him in.


Ser. I believe it is Sir. Exit Servant.


Enter Sir Ralph and Boy. Sir Ralph. Sirrah, go you and look out Mr.
Lovechange, and let him know I am come to Town, and shall have need of that
small sum of money he owes me. Exit Boy.


Mr. Easy. Sir Ralph, I am yours, and heartily glad to see you.


Sir Lalph. Sir, I am as much yours, and as glad to see you, and so I am to see
you forsooth. To Mrs. Grace.


Grace. It Is more then I am to see you, I Will promise ye.


Sir Ralph. Oh cry ye mercy, then you are not the Lady I took you for, I
thought you had been Mrs. Grace my Mistress?


Mr. Easy. That Is her name Sir, and her quality.


Sir Ralph. Truly Uncle, that must be, if she have no better, you are much too
blame for giving her no better education, I thought she would have received me
with open arms, for though I say it, I deserve it, and understand breeding.


Grace. I doubt it Sir.


Sir Ralph. You cannot oblige me more, then to question my ability, for then you
give me occasion to show my parts, and first as touching the Art of Courtship,
though I don't read Romances, Plays, Histories, Pastoralls, or Farces, yet can
accost a Lady after this sort -- Madam, (with my Face scru'd up thus) I am your
proud Servitor, or in English proud to serve you, my hands beneath your feet,
is too mean a sacrifice; go where you will, I am your shadow, advance but the
standard of your eyes, and i am your Captive, your Creature, your very Frogg,
begot, by your gentle influence. P'shaw I am furnished with a thousand things
of the like nature.


Mr. Easy. Rare, rare, I vow, ah Sir Ralph, were I a young Wench for your sake,
I could hug you, and love you all over.


Grace. Pray do so for me Sir, for I find no one part of him to move me to it.


Betty. Madam, if I were you, I would dissemble with him a little.


Grace. I had as good do so indeed Betty.


Mr. Easy. A little time, will make her pliable.


Sir Ralph. P'shaw, I don't question that mun, what do you think Mrs. Grace?


Grace. Sir, I hope time will convince me of my error, and let me see, that
you have perfections, which are yet disguised.


Sir Ralph. I thank you Mrs. Grace, for your good opinion of me I vow, and
shall I hope do well against to morrow.


Grace. 'Twere unkind Sir, to forbid your hope.


Sir Ralph. Well then, I Will set my seal upon you, in sign and token that you are
my own. kisses her.


Mr. Easy. Go, now Grace, you may withdraw, get things in a readiness against
night.


Grace. I obey you Sir. Exit Grace.


Sir Ralph. Sir, I must crave your excuse for a few moments, I am going to call
in a little Money, an ill office to play the Dun, but you know Sir, we Lovers
that have peevish Mistresses to deal with, require more than bare Courtship,
well adieu Sir.


Exit Sir Ralph one way, Mr. Easy the other. Enter Lovechange solus. Lov. This
is my constant walk three times a day, pray Heaven the Neighborhood don't take
me for some walking spright, that upon certain hours, comes to give some
intelligence of hid treasure. Enter Peg.

But here is Peg, now dear Soul, what answer do bring me? Shall I see my
Mistress? Shall I be happy this night?


Peg. I know not how happy 'twill make you, but she will be this night in the
Mall, at the upper end.


Lov. Dear Maid, I Will owe thee the Indies for this.


Peg. I Sir, if you did but know, what shift my Mistress makes, you would think
your self obliged and indebted too I can assure you.


Lov. No more, here is an earnest of what I owe thee, prithee give her my
service, my Love, my Heart, and Soul, honest Peg.


Enter Sir Ralph. Peg. Oh lass, what shall I do, here comes Sir Ralph Spatter,
Mrs. Graces Sweetheart; who by no means must see me.


Lov. Why I hope he is no Rival.


Peg. No Sir, but he may hereafter know me, for he is a Suitor to Mrs. Grace.


Lov. Leave me then, for I have a message from him, and will take this
opportunity to speak to him. Exit Peg.


Sir Ralph. Mr. Lovechange your Servant, I sent to you just now, and a^ glad to
meet you, you know my business Sir.


Lov. Yes Sir, I know you pretend I owe you a thousand pounds but I am not
provided with such a sum at present.


Sir Ralph. Sir, I should not have given you this trouble now, and at so short
warning, but that I am upon my marriage, and there are a thousand Perquisits,
and Trangams required, in order to the gaining my Mistress.


Lov. Save your money Sir Ralph, save your money, for this is no time to
present idle Women, they are vain enough of themselves, do not raise them.


Sir Ralph. I, but Sir, we that are Lovers, must do these idle foolish things,
or loose those more foolish idle things called Women.


Lov. If all Lovers, are to walk by one Rule, then Sir I am in the same
predicament with you.


Sir Ralph. Why, are you going to marry too?


Lov. Faith, no Sir, I thank my Stars, but I am as much in Love, as those that
are.


Sir Ralph. Well Sir, I am a little in haste now, pray think of the Debt, your
Servant Sir. Exit Sir Ralph.


Lov. Pox of that foolish noddle of his, to believe i will ever pay that Debt,
which I was trappan'd into, by the old Rogue his Fathers cunning? as long as I
have a Woman in my eye, no, no, my designs cannot be carried on with empty
Pockets.


Enter a Porter with a Letter. Porter. I think Sir, your name is Mr. Lovechange.


Lov. The same -- From whom, this?


Porter. The Contents will inform you.


Lov. Reads. Dear Lovechange for some reasons that I must tell you, I have
thought fit to alter my design of meeting you in the Mall, but will wait your
coming at the side of the Duck-pond under those Trees, on the Bank.




I like the Resolution well, tell the Person from whom you come, I will not
fail to be at the place appointed. Exeunt severally.


The End of the First Act.
Actus Secundus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Mrs. Woodbee, and Clare. Wood. YOu are sure the Porter gave it into his
own hand?


Clare. Yes Madam, and he said he would not fail to meet you.


Wood. Well Lovechange, I will be revenged, and innocently so, perfidious man,
whom I married without Fortune, or Friends, believing that way to oblige thee,
but thou ungrateful as thou art, make no returns, but false ones, but at
least I will possess thee once more in revenge to both, and then scorn, and
abandon thee to thy former arts of living.


Clare. Well, I cannot but think Madam, how mad Mrs. Easy will be, when she
knows the trick put upon her.


Wood. Let her fret, till she grow old, but Clare I am not content to deprive
her of all she expects this night in Lovechange, but I would have it known, and
at once kill the old Cuckold, and destroy her Pride.


Clare. Oh Madam, I have it just now alighted in my Brain: you know Madam, Mr.
Courtwell makes love to you, and so he does to all Womankind by turns.


Wood. Yes, it is a loose Gallant, but what of him?


Clare. Why Madam, the next time he comes to wait on you. --


Wood. I have given him his answer, he will trouble me no more -- but suppose he
should -- for I begin to conceive a Project.


Clare. Pray Madam let me speak first, for fear it should be the very same I
have, and I claim the privilege of a discoverer: Madam, this very Man Mr.
Courtwell, will I send to meet Mrs. Easy instead of your Husband Mr. Lovechange.


Wood. I like the thing, and it is the very same with mine, but how to effect
it? I fear we shan'not meet with Courtwell, I would not wish for a madder
fellow, nor a more talkative.


Clare. Madam, walk off, for yonder is Mr. Courtwell, as pat as if the Devil had
sent him for the purpose.


Wood. I Will leave thee to thy wit, and him. Exit Woodbee.


Enter Courtwell walking, Clare walks by carelessly. Court. What Is here a Prize,
at this time of the day -- Mrs. if a Man should beg leave of you to take a turn
or so?


Clare. Two, or Three, if you please Sir --


Court. Kind, and gentle -- embraces her.


Clare. And your Servant Clare Sir.


Court. Ah! sweet Mrs. Clare, faith I am turns up her Hood. glad to meet thee,
and how, and how, what shall we take a Bottle? come Clare, thou should be
kind, and I Will be grateful, come, I can lead thee, the back way into the
Bull-head Tavern, and we will be merry for half an hour.


Clare. Tavern Sir, what to do?


Court. Only to drink thy Ladies health, Clare, no harm at all I protest Clare.


Clare. You would be making Love I warrant too?


Court. A little Love Clare, for exercise only, alas, we that are young and
brisk cannot live without it.


Clare. Why Sir, I do yet understand, but little of that my self, but I know a
Lady Sir --


Court. 'Pho thou talk of future joys -- but I am for a little of the
present, come dear Clare, be kind, upon my honor I have had a passion for thee
a long time, and will be as constant, nay i will swear to have no other Miss, but
thee, and will keep thee as fine as e're a Miss about the Town Egad now.


Clare. What, and pretend to my Lady Sir?


Court. That Is for a necessary thing, called a Wife, but thou Clare, shall
share with her.


Clare. For a whole week at least.


Court. By my troth, and a fair time too I take it.


Clare. Come Sir, you would better drive the other bargain with me?


Court. What, for the Lady thou speak of, if thou could bring it to pass
suddenly, much might be said, but I hate delays.


Clare. This Evening Sir.


Court. Now I hear thee, her name and parts, I prithee.


Clare. You may know more in good time -- but thus much now, she is exceeding
Beautiful, Young, and Innocent.


Court. No too much of the last, I pray.


Clare. Sir, to speak the naked truth, she is --


Court. Lovely, as Woman in the same condition --


Clare. No, but I vow Sir, I lie not, she is exceeding handsome, well shaped,
delicate fine, tall, virtuous, and --


Court. The Devil and all, whither will thou carry her, to the degree of an
Angel?


Clare. Besides, she is Rich, and needs none of your presents, nor keeping Sir.


Court. Oh thou have ravished me, I am all on Fire, for Heavens sake, sweet
Clare, let me have this Nymph to allay my Flames?


Clare. But Sir, I thought you had been in love with me?


Court. I, I, Clare, I am in love with thee too, but this Lady, Clare, ha!
where does she live Girl?


Clare. Look Sir, if I bring you together, I have done my part.


Court. I, I, that shall suffice, let me alone for the rest, and reward thee.


Clare. Well then Sir, about eight of the Clock this Evening, here in the Mall,
you shall find her in the upper end all alone, she is so, and so dressed, of a
good mean, and shape, not very tall. whispers


Court. All this I like, but is this pure kindness to me Clare, have thou no
design, no trick to put upom me? or like the Devil, do thou only enrich me to
damn my Soul hereafter.


Clare. Why, to tell you the plain truth Sir, I have an end in it, and that is a
little Revenge only, for Sir this Lady is to meet Mr. Lovechange there.


Court. Lovechange! A very Tiger at a Woman, in troth thou art kind to the Lady,
and putst her into gentler hands by far, but Clare, what spite have you to
Lovechange?


Clare. Now, what shall I say? -- Why truly Sir -- He -- aside made a little
love to me once, and the truth on it is, though I did not love him so well as to
do --


Court. What, what Clare?


Clare. That Sir; nay you make me blush I vow, yet I had such a smackering for
him, as will carry me to this innocent revenge.


Court. A plague on her, what does she call innocent, to rob a man of the
enjoyment of the finest Woman in Town, ( aside) well Clare, Heavens blessing,
and this -- go along with thee. gives her Money. But not a word of this to your
Lady.


Clare. Adieu Mr. Courtwell, I warrant you for secrecy.


Court. Now will I go, and dress me as like Lovechange as I can, for I suppose
that will please her best, here is the Rogue himself.


Enter Lovechange. Lov. Oh, your Servant Mr. Courtwell, how thrives your Amor
with the Widow, ha! what is she kind, and coming?


Court. Time has worn out, even the very thoughts of all those things in her, I
think, which -- because I cannot forbear telling her, does so incense her, as
the truth is Ned, I believe it will not be a match:


Lov. Oh, will it not so? Well I hope, like the Sea, what you loose in one
place, you gain in another.


Court. Faith no, that grand concern of the World, making love, is quite laid
by with me, I find none that are kind, but at so unmerciful a rate --


Lov. Thou art a miserable man, that can not get the knack on it, for William,
there be Ladies, yes there be Ladies, that will, and can love, look ye. shows a
Letter.


Court. Oh, you are a happy man Sir.


Lov. So might thou, did thou but use my Arts:


Court. Prithee, what be they?


Lov. Swearing, Lying, and shamming in abundance.


Court. Poh, all this, I daily practice, but it is bootless.


Lov. Thou do overdo't, or underdo't, there is a certain quantity goes to the
charm, thou will find it out in time -- there is a Lady Will -- Egad, such a
dear Soul -- that has a passion for me.


Court. Oh, I doubt it not Sir.


Lov. And this night begins my Heaven, for I shall possess her Will, do hear?
possess her Lad.


Court. Then, I rather think 'twil end your Heaven, for you will care but little
for her after that.


Lov. Of, that I Will give you a better account to morrow, I writ a Letter to her
to day to meet me here this Evening, and I am so impatient, that I cannot
forbear the place, till the hour come.


Court. And what, is this the Garb you have designed to entertain her in?


Lov. Even this.


Court. Well, I congratulate your good fortune Sir.


Enter Peg. Peg, I have been to inquire for you, and they told me, you were
here in the Park.


Lov. I vow thou make my heart ache, prithee let me hear thy message, quick,
and put me out of my pain, I hope thy Mistress will come?


Peg. Yes Sir, and I only forgot to tell you how my Lady is dressed, and
therefore came to let you know Sir, she will be -- whispers.


Lov. She need not fear, I shall not mistake her for any other, besides, she will
be in so remote a part of the Park, that I suppose there will be hardly any but
her self.


Peg. Lord Sir, what do you mean?


Lov. Mean? To meet thy Lady, and all the bliss I expect in this World.


Peg. But where Sir?


Lov. By the Duck-Pond side.


Peg. What do you mean Sir? Are you not to meet her in the Mall? here, in this
very place, where you now are?


Lov. No, dear Soul, did not I receive a Letter just now from her to the
contrary: That she desired to change the place for some reasons, best known to
her self? here, read it thy self.


gives her the Letter. Peg. Duck-Pond side -- for Reasons -- ha, ha, ha -- This
my Ladies hand?


Lov. Why do laugh Reprobate?


Peg. I would I were married, if this be'nt an errant cheat, well, faith I
laugh, but have more need to cry, to think how we poor Women are treated by you
false men, now have you been boasting your good fortune to some kind hearted
Lass, that is jealous of you.


Lov. The Devil take me Peg --


Peg. Hold Sir, don't swear, how could this come about else? Oh that ever my
Lady should trust you.


Lov. By Heaven, thou will make me rave, I have not seen a Woman, nor will I
see a Woman, whilst I have breath but thy Lady, Hell take me if I have named
her, but to the Air in sighs, and sure this must be hers.


Peg. Believe me Sir, she would not trust this secret to any but my self.


Lov. 'Twas a Porter brought it me as I was walking here, and now I do believe
it is some trick, therefore pray inform her, that according to her first order,
i will meet her in the Mall, here at the furthest end.


Peg. I Will let her know you will Sir, your servant. Exit Peg.


Court. What Is all this communication?


Lov. About a mistake, this is the servant to that Lady I must meet at night,
in order to which I must take my leave. Exit Lovechange


Court. Your servant Ned, good luck attend thee, now if I can but get here
before him, and lead the Lady off, I shall be a double conqueror. Exit.
Courtwell.


Scene Third.
Enter Mrs. Easy, Grace, and Betty. Grace. Now I have told you Madam, how much
I love, you will judge at my unhappiness.

It may be, you have been a Lover too, and then I cannot doubt your pity
Madam, I don't entertain you as an Aunt, our years are equal, and perhaps our
hearts, but as a Sister, and a friend, I sue, and beg you would afford me your
assistance.


Mrs. Easy. I was your friend before I was your Aunt, and wish I had remained
in that blessed state, without advancing farther.

Far from the joys of Youth, and Love, i am gone, but thou art wise, hold where
thou art dear Grace, and wed thy self to something like thy self, despise Sir
Ralph, and take young Amorous.


Grace. Oh Madam, how you do revive my Soul, this goodness in you, shows you
just, as fair; but Madam, whence shall I derive my hopes; my Uncle's too
severe, he will not suffer me to take my liberty abroad, nor here, and how can I
find time to speak with Amorous: who languishes with me by sympathy.


Mrs. Easy. This night your Uncle does design an entertainment: we will be in
Masquerade, Betty shall find out Amorous, and let him come also, mask't, none
will know him, and if it be possible, get away with him, I conceive the project
easy.


Grace. Most probable too, oh dear Madam! how I am obliged to your advice, and
permission.


Mrs. Easy. Now I have instructed you, i will be no more seen in your company to
night, farewell, think of nothing but Amorous; whilst I prepare for Lovechange:
[aside] Exit Mrs. Easy


Grace. Come Betty, follow me to my Closet for a Letter, if Prayers can help
us, the gods shall want no sacrifice. Exeunt


Scene Mrs. Woodbee's house. Enter Amorous, and Perigreen. Per. Sir, I am
infinitely obliged to you for your goodness to me an unhappy stranger, and when
you know how much I deserve your pity too, I don't doubt but you will give it
me.


Amor. Nothing Sir that you can suffer, can deserve pity, unless you be a
Lover.


Per. Sir, I am a Lover, and so distressed a one --


Amor. Dare you not oblige me with the knowledge on it?


Per. It Would be too tedious, and too melancholy, and none but Lovers can a
judgment make of what a Lover feels, therefore excuse me Sir.


Amor. To let you know, how great my sense can be I Will tell you I can love as
well as any, nay, and compare my miseries with yours, I love a Lady Sir, whose
youth, and beauty, make all Captives that but look upon her, it is such a
Treasure, that had Jason known, he would have let his golden Fleece alone, to
have made a Rape on her, and like that too, it is guarded by so strange a
monstrous Beast, an old decripped Miser Uncle, that it is more difficult to
charm his will, then fight a thousand Draggons, the Neeces full consent, and
heart i have won, but am forbid to love by this old man.


Per. What reasons can he give for this severity?


Amor. He makes no objections against my Estate, or Person, for I am sole heir
to my Aunt, and all the hope of being so to that Uncle too; which you know in
Spain.


Per. Your Person Sir, is far from being disgustful, it is rather to be admired,
and loved what can the reason be?


Amor. Why Sir, he has a Nephew, called Mr. Courtwell --


Per. Heavens! What of him? aside


Amor. Who is designed by this old testy man, to marry with my Aunt, she is
rich, and as you see, not disagreeable.


Per. What will this come to? aside


Amor. But she for some reasons refuses him, yet he is worthy, young, and rich.


Per. Does she refuse him Sir? Oh false Dissembler. aside


Amor. You seem disturbed Sir.


Per. Yes Sir, to think that no merits, no parts, though even Divine, can take
a heart inflexible, my Case was so, but does he love her much?


Amor. For her riches only, her wealth, he courts, not her, could he but gain
her, I should then be happy, for his Uncle declares, I shall be welcome to his
Niece, when Courtwell is received well by my Aunt, of if he would cease his
Courtship, and make it elsewhere, in time, the old man might be reduced.


Per. I know this Courtwell, and will try my Arts to make him alter his, as
well as his Uncles will, believe me Sir, I once had power over him, and I will
try and use it now for both your services.


Amor. I don't distrust your virtue, nor your will, pray see, what you can do,
and let me be honored, with the Title of your friend.


Per. Sir, I am proud of the glory, and am your faithful Servant.


Exit Perigreen. Enter Betty. Bet. Sir, I have a message to you, besides this.
gives him a Letter


Amor. Welcome dear messenger of Love, oh how you bless my Soul.


Betty. You speak as if you were sure it brought love, and good News.


Amor. Nothing from this hand can be ungrateful! Reads It Is enough, yes I will
come, though Hell opposed my passage Betty, thou know the contents of this,
and must assist my just design.


Betty. Has my Mistress sent you word what habit she will be in?


Amo. She has, but without that help, my heart would find her out, pray tell
her how impatiently I long for the wished for moment.


Betty. Sir, that you may employ your self to advantage till then, you were
best to provide the means to carry her away handsomely, and think of a place,
where.


Amor. Oh Betty, trouble not your self for that, if fortune be so kind to me,
to put her into my hands, I Will warrant her safety there, I Will defy Fate, to
ravish her ^^ence, keep but thy Mistress in this happy humor, and I don't fear
success.


Betty. Well Sir, it grows dark, and I shall be wanted, I Will say all the kind
things I can, and which I am sure you think, to Mrs. Grace, and so farewell Sir
--


Amor. Oh Betty, thou can not think what I would say, nor I cannot utter it,
but let Grace imagine, she loves, and knows my Soul to be entirely hers, I will
not fail a moment, and so disguised, as none but she shall know me. Exeunt
severally


Scene the Mall. Enter Mrs. Easy, and Peg. Mrs. Easy. I wonder Peg, who this
should be, that has put this trick upon us, and sent the note to Lovechange?


Peg. Some of his Ladies from Wildstreet Alley, or some other such part of the
Town.


Mrs. Easy. I cannot believe he would reveal it to any, I have had many proofs
of his prudence, and love, though no use of his secrecy, till this hour, pray
Heaven I don't repent it.


Peg. P'shaw, what at your repentance already, good Madam, don't think of it,
but go boldly on.


Mrs. Easy. Well, I Will be at the upper end of this Walk, but I am so impatient,
that I would have you go through the Guard, and see for him.


Peg. You need not doubt his speed, but however I Will go. Exit Peg.


Enter Courtwell in a Cloak. Mrs. Easy. Lovechange, Lovechange!


Court. This must be the Lady -- [aside] Madam is it you?


Mrs. Easy. I have sent Peg just now through the Guards to look for you; which
way came you?


Court. By a Key the other way, now what shall I entertain her with for a
beginning?

A pox on it, I shall spoil all I fear, if I talk much, and I cannot come right
down to the matter. aside


Mrs. Easy. You are thoughtfull, Mr. Lovechange, what is it some device to
excuse the mistake of the Letter? Oh Lovechange! I could not believe, you would
have treated my first kindness to you, in this ungrateful sort.


Court. What shall I answer now? some kind Devil assist me! [aside] Oh Madam,
he that can be false to you, is a Reprobate to Heaven, and durst not aspire to
the bounties of your love -- but Madam -- I am out again ( aside) will you
believe my Vows and Oaths? -- By your divine self, by all that is --


Mrs. Easy. Hold, I must, I will believe you.

Ah Lovechange, you little think with what fear I come to yield you up my
Honor, after believing you false -- But come you must dispose of me, I cannot
resist.


Court. Nay, if you be thereabouts already, I am happy enough: [aside] Madam
don't destroy our pleasures with fears of any thing, for by all that is good I
am entirely yours, come, whither shall I lead you, I am impatient. Enter Peg.


Peg. Madam, Madam.


Mrs. Easy. Stay, here is my Woman has something to say to me.


goes to Peg. Peg. Mr. Lovechange is coming Madam.


Mrs. Easy. Coming! whether is he coming tro?


Peg. To you Madam, as fast as he can.


Mrs. Easy. Fool, he is here already.


Peg. Already! where?


Mrs. Easy. Why, there thou Dunce.


Peg. He mounted a Cloud then, for I Am sure I saw him paying his Coach, and
spoke to him, told him where you were, and run before, to give you notice.


Mrs. Easy. Thou art stark mad, I have entertained him this half hour, here.


Peg. Lord Madam, it is the greatest mistake in the World, I vow this is some
forlorn, or other, that making a discovery of the Enemy unguarded, fell on,
believe me Madam, it is none of Mr. Lovechange.


Mrs. Easy. Who the Devil should it be then? Well it is a mercy I had not
discovered all to him.


Peg. If you have been together this half hour, I fear you have discovered too
much -- 'Slife -- I have it, I fancy this must be some body concerned in the
Intrigue of the Letter sent to Mr. Lovechange.


Mrs. Easy. Faith it may be so, I Will try, and fit him for it.


Court. Madam, you forget, that I am impatient of delay, what is all this
whispering for?


Mrs. Easy. My Woman informs me, that some of my Relations are in the Mall, and
it is possible may know me, therefore dear Lovechange, retire to some remote
place of the Park.


Court. Madam, I obey you, with joy.


Mrs. Easy. The Duck-Pond side, I think most convenient; But for our beter
security, go you about that way, I Will go this, and meet you.


Court. I take your word, and will be there before you.


Mrs. Easy. I believe you will, if at all? Exit Courtwell.
Oh the villainy of Man!

Peg. Oh th Wit of Woman! Madam, I adore your contrivance.

Enter Lovechange. Mrs. Easy. My Lovechange!


Lov. My dearest Mistress!


Mrs. Easy. Oh I know that voice it is music to my Soul, aside that I should be
so dull, not to distinguish the false one, from the true! Well dear Lovechange,
let us withdraw to some other part of the Park less open, for I have many eyes
to watch me.


Lov. This overcharge of joy arrives too hastily, I should have time to let it
enter by degrees.


Mrs. Easy. No ceremonious Foppery dear Lovechange! our joys require some have,
but something Peg, I have to say to thee first, here take this Key, and dress
your self in my Masking habit, and represent me this Evening, I Will trust thy
management of the business, and thy Wit to deceive the old Man.


Peg. Let me alone Madam, to act you to the life, till Bed time at least.


Mrs. Easy. Nay, I think thou may venture thy Maidenhead without danger,
there too.


Peg. I think, for any great massacre he has made of yours, I may; well I Will
run, for fear of the worst. Exit Peg.


Lov. Come my fair Mistress, whilst thus I bear you off, to reap the joys of
Love, I find more happiness, more real argument for glorious pride, then if
Tryumphant Laurel decked my Brow, to speak me Conqueror of Monarchys? Exeunt.


Scene supposed the Duck-pond side. Enter Mrs. Woodbee from one side, and
Courtwell from the other, meeting. Court. Well Madam, I find you are a Woman of
Honor, and have kept your word, and then I need not doubt of all the happiness
I wish beside.


Wood. Oh how my heart rises at this false Man, but I must dissemble it. aside

I vow Mr. Lovechange, it is well you cannot see me blush, for I confess I am not
used to these encounters.


Court. Come, come, fair one, no sense of shame I beseech you, for that will
call the blood up to thy face, which should be active in another part, oh that
dear thought, faith and troth makes me impatient: Come, come where shall we be,
where, where, what think you of yonder Bench?


Wood. Oh intolerable! he never was thus kind to me before! nor would he now,
if he knew all. aside


Court. Come, come, no study upon the matter.


Wood. Fie, fie, Mr. Lovechange, no approaches to the business; methinks there
should be some short Prologue of Courtship, before the Scene of Love begin.


Court. Our youth, and vigor, needs none of all that, we are ready at all
times.


Wood. I would you were -- Aside

Sir, you have prevailed, and overcome, but methinks this Bench is a very
undecent place.


Court. Oh Madam I There has been many a worse shift made, the night, and these
kind shades, secure our joys.


Wood. But not your perfidiousness. aside
I Will swear Sir, you are so importune. Exeunt hand in hand

Scene Mr. Easy's house. Enter Mr. Easy, and Sir Ralph. Mr. Easy. Come, come,
Grace, Wife, Betty, Peg, where be all these Girls, there is such tricking, such
licking, patching, and sinifying, that it is a shame to see it, and tedious to
attend it, but to entertain you, we will have a Song.


Sir Ralph. With all my heart Uncle. A Song.
Poor honest Fool, I wonder what I meant?
When in the Marriage Circle, first I went.
What Magick's in that Name?
What powerful conjuration, can there be,
Or where is that too, too happy she,
That can allay Love -- when it is Legion.
Yet for a quiet Life I Have often died,
But often my Wife has Murdered me beside:
So slyly too, she did the deed,
That at my Murderers sight, I could not bleed:
Though a Phillis new inspires,
At once Life, and whole troops of fresh desires.
And yet should I be constant still -- I will,
Yes like a Rock and like that too, I Will take
Each Wave that near me breaks:
And ravished gently, for her cruel sake:
There I Will drink, and quaff, and riot:
They Are sickly Souls that keep more constant diet.


Very well, I vow, and swear now.


Enter Peg as Mrs. Easy, in Mask. Betty disguised like Grace, other Men and
Women Masked, old Easy to Peg. Mr. Easy. My dear Wife, now I like thee, is it
not as good to be merry at home, as abroad?


Peg. Sir, I am all obedience, and like any place where you are.


Mr. Easy. Why, that's well said, come, inform the Music, and I Will make one, and
you Sir Ralph take Grace here, come Grace, be a good Girl, and love Sir Ralph.
Gives him Betty.


Dance all. Sir Ralph. Most judiciously tript, I vow and swear now, ha! little
Mrs. Grace, come since you can wag your heels so prittily in a Dance, you will wag
something else in place where, I Will warrant ye, ha Rogue, thy handsome Leg, and
Foot, has made me wish -- you little think, what, I vow now.


Betty. Nor care to know Sir.


Sir Ralph. You lie like a pretty little Baggage faith now, you do know, and
you shall know before anon, what say you Uncle?


Mr. Easy. I say, as you do Sir Ralph.


Sir Ralph. I Sir, and in order to it, pray send for a Cushion Cuffer, that
there may be no more shall I, shall I, in the Case, for all flesh is frail, and
Women fickle. What say you Mrs. Grace.


Betty. I am all obedience.


Mr. Easy. Come Ladies, and Gentlemen, I have a treat waits you within. Enter
Amorous disguised,


Amor. That must be she by her habit, and shape, Madam do you know me?


Betty. Do you know me?


Amor. My heart tells me I do, and yours might answer you.


Betty. Mr. Amorous, -- Oh Sir my Mistress --


Mr. Easy. How Is this!


Sir Ralph. What Is this a Rival, oh Uncle a Rival, a Rival.


Mr. Easy. Cocks bodikins it is this impudent young Hector Amorous.


Sir Ralph. How, Amorous? what is he? pray Uncle.


Mr. Easy. One, that would rob you of your Mistress. Sir Ralph, go and take her
from him.


Sir Ralph. I thank you for that, I make one of the worst bulleys in nature, I
vow, pray Uncle do you handle him for me, he has a terrible grim look of his
own.


Mr. Easy. Sir, pray who are you?


Amor. A troubled Spirit Sir, that still repairs to it is bright Treasure.


Sir Ralph. Oh are you so Sir? We shall conjure you, Uncle, Uncle.


Mr. Easy. First Mistress, come you of this side -- take her away Sir Ralph.


Betty. It Is not Amorous Sir.


Mr. Easy. I will not trust you, nor believe you, but who e're he be, we will
leave him to himself. Your Servant good Familiar.


Sir Ralph. I, Sir your Servant, you see the Treasure's owned, and you may
please to walk, fare you well, fare you well.


Exeunt all but Amorous. Enter to Amourous, Grace from behind the Hangings,
Easy returns to the door. Grace. Amorous, my faithful Friend!


Mr. Easy. What this? aside


Amor. My dearest Grace, 'twas kindly done to undeceive me quickly, why did
not tell me of thy plot?


Grace. Because I would surprise ye unawares, but dear Amorous, I have a plot
for thee wholly necessary to our happiness, you must play the Parson, and marry
this Fool to Betty, that we may have time for our escape, I have hid a habit
within a purpose, haste dear Amorous, for our affairs require haste.


Mr. Easy. Oh rare Rogues, have I caught ye. aside.


Amor. Dear Grace, how I am obliged to thee for this contrivance, doubt not my
management.


Grace. I Will wait behind these hangings for you. Exeunt.


The End of the Second Act.
Actus Tertius,
Scena Prima.
Enter Sir Ralph, and Betty. Sir Ralph. NOw I defy my Rivals, if Amorous court
thee now, I Will have an Action against him, I hate these fighting Fopps faith,
that upon every occasion are at Sa -- sa -- A pox of their Valor; sirrah,
court my mistress if you dare, says one, for if thou do, this shall proclaim
my right, then to it they go, and there is a Lover lost, perhaps the others
hanged, the Drunken Fopp cries dam ye, you dog, drink up your Glass, or you are
not fit for civil Society; which if refused, to Tilting they go, and this they
call an honorable quarrel. It Is likely three half pence well managed at an
Apothecaryes, cures all the wounds they have, and they set up for men of
Courage, brisk Bulleys of the Sword: These Grace, be the finest Blades of the
Age, that court ye, and gain too, all the idle Women of the Town; and when a
Country, downright, honest, peaceable Knight, as I am, makes Love; we are
laughed at called Sir Martin, Sir Nicholas, and forty other ridiculous names;
that the newest Comedies furnish ye withal; But Grace, I have money Grace, and
a pox of formal Fopps.


Betty. Sir, you entertain me with things that concern me not.


Sir Ralph. Yes Grace, I would have thee be wise now, thou art my Wife.


Enter Easy, leading Grace from behind the Hangings. Easy. Be these your tricks
Mistress, what you were hid to wait your Lover Amorous, were you? come along,
or I will disgrace thee publicly.


Sir Ralph. What Is this, what is this, my Uncle, and Mrs. Grace, why who the
Devil have I married here then?


Betty. Your Friend, and Servant Betty, Sir.


Sir Ralph. How! why you have not cheated me thus, out of my sweet self have
you? oh I Am undone, undone! cries.


Easy. How! Sir Ralph, married to Betty? Oh me, that I had but so much moisture
in my whole body as would keep you company Sir Ralph, but since I have not,
this baggage shall cry for me -- go -- get you in, and know your Commander.
Beats Grace in


Grace. Oh Betty I Am lost. Exeunt Easy, Grace, and Sir Ralph.


Enter Amorous. Amor. So, now I have resigned my holy Habit, and am become a
lay Lover again.


Betty. O Sir, my poor Mistress was discovered behind the Hangings, and her
Uncle has treated her very ill for your sake.


Amor. Discovered! oh Betty thou kill'st me! so near my wished for Port, and
sunk in the very harbor. Malicious Stars! --


Betty. Well Sir, I don't doubt but for all this, to bring it about again, in
the mean time, 'twere good you should retire, I will give you notice of all
that passes.


Amor. I thank thee Betty, but I fear my Fate,
How near was I, to being Fortunate. Exeunt severally.

Scene a Bedchamber, a Table out, and a Chair. Enter Mr. Easy, and Peg. Easy.
O Woman! monstrous Woman! Argus eyes quotha'! ye an hundred were not able to
watch one Woman, a curse upon the whole Sex, and foolish Man for being so fond
of 'em. Oh I am sick, very sick with fretting, ten years are taken from my time
with this nights work, but I have her fast, and will as soon as day appears
conjure her into better manners, oh my heart! But all my consolationis in thee
my dear Wife. undresses himself.


Peg. What the Devil shall I say, or do? I dare not turn my Face toward the
light, least he should know me, and if I speak, I fear that will betray me, if
I refuse to go to Bed, I discover all my Mistresses secrets, and then we are
undone, if I go to Bed -- Why then -- Heaven knows what -- Aside


Easy. I am happy in this yet, that I in thee my Honey, have a loving Virtuous
Wife, one that is above all the little Lightnesses of her Sex, yes, her
villainous Sex, Come, come to Bed my Love.


Peg. Sir, since it is so near day, and you so hasty to take Revenge upon Grace,
we had e'n as good save the labor of undressing.


Easy. By no means, to Bed I say, that I may take a little repose, after this
harasssing of my Spirits, but still I am thrice happy in thee.


Peg. Aye, would you knew all -- no hopes yet -- No Mistress come, what shall I
do? she is so taken up with her more soft affairs, that she minds not how
rashly I am like to be used with this old Master of mine. aside


Easy. Thou have but one only fault, and that is, not loving thy Bed, prithee
reform that lewd and scandalous way of life, of sitting up late.


Peg. Lord, that he should blame any Woman, that refuses to go into a pair of
Sheets with him. aside


Easy. Undress I say, or I shall be most villainous angry again.


Peg. It must out, and it will out, but I am to be excused, for I have played my
part, and counterfeited, till I am come to almost past counterfeiting. To Bed
quotha', 'Slife I had as live lie in a Charnel house, I don't blame my Mistress
for loving another, but hark, I hear a rusling [noise below] it is certainly
she, oh that I were now transformed. aside


Easy. Why the Devil, come you not to Bed?


Peg. I am hasting as fast as I can Sir. undresses her self.
Please you to go in before, I will not stay a moment after you.

Easy. Oh the intolerable Pride, and Plague of Womankind! I tell ye I will
not budge a foot without ye, therefore come away, I will break thee of this
humor at last. pulls her in.


Peg. Oh undone! quite undone!


Enter as below Mrs. Easy, and Lovechange. Mrs. Easy. All is hushed, and still,
I hope all is well, oh my dearest Lovechange, if you did but know with what
regret I leave you, your pity, would certainly augment your love. It Is almost
day, and yet methinks it is but a little moment we have been together: Oh how
short the hours of love and pleasure seem.


Lov. I think so too my Dear, would it had pleased the gods to have bound us
thus eternally together.


Mrs. Easy. Can you dear Lovechange, speak this Language still? after
enjoyment, men grow dull, and cold.


Lov. Number not me, amongst the common rout of those, whose beastly Appetite
begets a short lived passion, mine like the object that first caused it, is
pure, unchangable, without deceit.


Mrs. Easy. I must believe you, and must love you too, but we must part, oh
that ungrateful word!


Lov. But we must meet again, that only hope attones for the unkindness of the
other, pray don't suffer many hours to pass, before you let me see you, I shall
dye with one whole day of absence.


Mrs. Easy. You please me, when you do but wish to see me, and to return that
goodness, for it is such [sighs] I Will study how to love, and how to please, and
how to keep you ever in this state -- This blessed Estate of loving. But this
is an Argument we must discourse at large of, now Sir adieu, for the first time
I think we have done well.


Lov. I cannot leave the house, till I know how you speed with your too
passionate Husband.


Mrs. Easy. I Will creep softly up, if he be asleep, I Am safe, for nothing but
the noise of money can wake him, attend you below.


Exeunt severally. A Bedchamber discovered, with Peg and Mr. Easy in it. Peg.
Discovered! and undone!


Easy. Betrayed! ruined betrayed! oh thou wicked, thou treacherous Wretch,
where is my Wife, my lewd, wicked Wife?


Peg. Are you mad?


Easy. Yes, I am, and will show it, thou Eternal Baggage.


Peg. So now let him strike, They fight, Peg puts out the Candle. Exit Peg. if
he can aim well.


Easy. This shall not serve your turn, I will cudgel thee, till I have not left a
bit of skin on thy bones, I don't expect thou should tell me whereabouts thou
art, no Huswife, I Will feel you out he gropes to find her. I will, and so feel
thee, that thou shall feel me too.


Enter Peg softly, and Mrs. Easy, in the same Nightgown that Peg had on. Peg.
So, now go you in, and receive a blow or two, and be sure you cry out lustily,
and I Will come to your assistance with a Candle.


To Mrs. Easy aside. Exit Peg Mrs. Easy. Good dear Husband be'nt so passionate,
what have I done to cause this?


Mr. Easy. Thou impudent Harlot, do call me Husband? tell me truly, confess,
confess, what Rogue, has got thy Mistress out, where is she a Catterwawling?
confess, or I will dissect thee, for thou art her Pimp -- beats her.


Mrs. Easy. Your grief has made you lunatic, I am your Wife, hold, hold your
profane hands.


Mr. Easy. No, I will mark thee with a Vengeance, I Will spoil your Pimping.


Mrs. Easy. Murder, murder, since you are so inhumane, I will have no mercy
on your Reputation, murder!


Enter Peg with a Light. Peg. Bless me! what do I see, my dear Mistress?


Mr. Easy. Ha, ha, her dear Mistress? it is so, it is so, I, I, thou art Peg, and
this is my own sweet Wife. looks on 'um both.


Mrs. Easy. Sir, pray let me know why you use me thus? Is it not enough that
you have married me to an old stinking Carcass, a useless thing, but you must
beat me? I will no more endure you, no not the sight of thee.


Mr. Easy. Sweet Wife, most merciful Wife, bear with the frailties of my age.


Mrs. Easy. I have born with 'em too long.


Mr. Easy. Aye, there is it, It Is that sticks by thee, but dear Wife I protest,
I took thee all this while for Peg.


Mrs. Easy. How came you to mistake?


Mr. Easy. Why, when I was in bed, as you made me go before, you know, I
fancied that the Papers which you were looking on at the Table --


Peg. Which was no other then a Prayer Book to prolong time only. To Mrs. Easy
aside


Mr. Easy: And thinking it might have been a Love-Letter (for I am naturally
jealous) stole out of Bed, and looking thee full in the face, I thought thou
had been Peg, very Peg; as I am a lover of thy virtue, I know not how I came
to be mistaken, but so 'twas, and I dare swear --


Peg. What Sir, that 'twas I? Lord how merry you are Sir.


Mrs. Easy. And must I suffer, because you are old and blind?


Mr. Easy. Truth is, it is very unreasonable, pardon me my fair, my Angelical
Wife, I will never trust my eyes again in this case.


Peg, Pray forsooth bear with his Weakness, and the Infirmity of Age.


Mr. Easy. Ah how she aggravates my crime, old, and age were no harm, but that
she is brisk and youthful, patience, good Lady, patience.


Mrs. Easy. I Am resolved I Will pardon ye this once, in pity to your years.


Mr. Easy. Aye, there it is again.


Mrs. Easy. But if ever I find you faulty again, I Will be divorced.


Mr. Easy. Thou have reason, for on my Consccience thou art as good a Virgin,
as when I had thee.


Peg. I Will deny that, or she has past her night but ill. Aside.


Mrs. Easy. I will not bed with you to night, for besides that I am exceedingly
offended with you, you have mortified all inclinations of a Bedfellow in me,
and so fare you well Sir.


Mr. Easy. Patience I say -- though I have no great matter to do a bed with
her, yet I dare not trust her out of my sight, -- but I must let her have her
will this once, [aside] have you forgiven me?


Mrs. Easy. I shall do by the morning perhaps. Exit Mr. Easy. So, go thy ways,
and dream, if thou have any subject for it in thy Brain, whilst I Will to
Lovechange, and in his arms, complete the rest of this so well begun night.


Peg. I too, deserve something for acting' so judiciously in this affair.


Mrs. Easy. Thou, dear Peg, art Loves Matchivil, and deserve a Statue reared
to thy memory for all honest discreet Maids to worship.


Peg. Haste Madam, for Mr. Lovechange stays to take a parting kiss I Am glad we
are come off so nobly, and that you have a little time, good for a little more
delight, when you are pleased, we must contrive some way to free poor Mrs.
Grace, who suffers for Loves sake too.


Mrs. Easy. Let me alone for that. Exeunt ambae.


Scene Mrs. Woodbee's house. Enter Clare. Clare. I wonder in my heart, where
this Mistress of mine is, she will e'n stay till it is light, and discover her
self, pray Heavens she come before the house is up.

Enter Mrs. Woodbee* Oh Madam I Am glad you are come before my Master, well how
thrived you Madam?


Wood. Just as I wished Girl, and as we contrived it, he met me at the Duck-Pond
side, where we stayed most part of the night. Oh had the Joys which I received
been meant to me!


Clare. Madam you see, what imagination can do, and did he do as he ought to do
Madam?


Wood. O Clare! he said and did so many kind things to me!


Clare. So many say you Madam? Nay then we shall have him come home as tame,
and pensive, as a Gamester, outdone in his own Trade of Nicking, now it may be
I may go quietly about my business, all this day at least.


Wood. And I may lie quietly too, unless I can cheat him again, well I was never
so pleased, and displeased in my Life before, some way I will find to be
revenged.


Clare. Some such Comical way.


Wood. No my hopes are gone for ever having of him this way in my power, oh
this treacherous man that I have so obliged.


Clare. And he has this night made some returns.


Wood. Stay, when I think how great a satisfaction 'twas to him to believe
himself in the Arms of Mrs. Easy I cannot think of a better revenge, then to let
him know it was not she.


Clare. Why, will you tell him Madam?


Wood. Yes, and at once destroy his vain glory, and let him know how sensible I
am of the affront, if he has any sense of shame, or honor, this may reclaim
him.

Enter Lovechange singing, taking no notice of his Wife. He Is coming; how now
Mr. Lovechange, what no good morrow after a whole nights absence.


Lov. What the Devil do you up so early? you become your bed far better.


Wood. I cannot rest Mr. Lovechange, when you are not there.


Lov. You must use your self to such things, Husband and Wife, were not made to
lie Eternally together.


Wood. Why, Mr. Lovechange, what other use can you put your self to a nights?


Lov. I thank ye for that In Faith -- What -- then to lie with my own Wife? as I
take it, there were no Articles between you, and I, to leave off any part of my
former Trade, as Drinking, Gaming --


Wood. And Whoring.


Lov. Nay, my Dear, as for that -- believe me, I have left it quite off. A man
that has a Wife so experienced as thou art, so kind, so willing a Wife, faith I
think he were worse then a Tiger to abuse thee, thou have all my stock, believe
me dear Soul.


Wood. Which is a very small one.


Lov. Faith a Man, that drinks, and Games, cannot be very brisk that way.


Wood. Drinking was ever counted an Enemy to our Sex, but pray Sir how does
gaming abuse it?


Lov. Why faith, if a Man has ill luck, as likely I have -- What with Fretting,
Swearing, Damming, and throwing, my Spirits disperse, which should retire to
the place you wot on.


Wood. You think any excuse may serve for a Wife, all this, may make you unkind
at home, but do the Ladies abroad find your fretting, Damming, Swearing, and
throwing, disperse Nature in you?


Lov. Ah! I see where the Worm bites, thou art politickly jealous of me.


Wood. Oh fie! Jealous? (that were a fault indeed) of one so kind, so just, and
true a Husband as you are Mr. Lovechange.


Lov. Thou have said all in a word, Egad I would not change thee for the finest
Miss in Town.


Wood. Yes, there is a certain Lady, that for a Night, you did not care, if you
made an exchange with.


Lov. Who I? I defy the World.


Wood. You have not been to Night, with the dearest, the finest Woman?


Lov. How! 'Slife, this comes home to me. aside. Who I! I Have been Drinking, and
Gaming, away with these jealous Fopperies.


Wood. You were more obliged to the kind shades in St. James's Park, than to
the Moon, who is light perhaps might have discovered your error.


Lov. O confound her! all is out, how came she to know it? aside


Wood. What are you studying for an excuse? a lie to put me off with?


Lov. I will outface her. aside Now art thou as mad, as blind Love and
Jealousy can make thee, prithee to Bed and settle thy Brain, go --


Wood. Mr. Lovechange, I have no other end in this, more then to let you know
your error, and that I am sensible of the indignity, take notice I knew of
your meeting at the Duck-Pond side, and shall reward your kindness. She offers
to go out.


Lov. Duck-Pond side? Stay, I grow serious, that I have infinite obligations to
thee, I must ever own, and I had nothing to return you back, but this bare
substance, and a gratitude, and what the heats of youth may prompt me too I
cannot tell; But when you ask me truly what they are I will inform your
knowledge, and what you charge me with of this nights action, believe me Madam,
is false information, I saw no woman, by the Duck-Pond side.


Wood. How can I credit this? and yet I should believe him, aside perhaps my
eyes informed me of your falsehood, I am not apt to credit evil Tongues.


Lov. Oh don't pursue an error, to my prejudice; upon my Honor; by all the
vows of sacred Love, and Marriage, I was not near that place, but something I
remember past last night, 'twixt whom I know not, that perhaps deceived you.
I Will search it out and satisfy your Jealousy.


Wood. Oh Heavens! if this be true what thing am I? aside


Lov. Come don't vex thy self with peevishness, don't create these ills, that
will torment thee. I Will satisfy thy doubt, believe me Dear.


Wood. Oh I am ruined, [aside] if he be not false, how hard a fate is mine --
I Will take your word Sir. Exit Lovechange


Clare. For Heavens sake, Madam keep your courage up, for if you have Cuckold
my Master by -- mistake, it is the best way to put as good a face on it, as you
can, there is no recalling it. Lord what a business you make of a thing that is
not worth speaking of.


Wood. But guilt's a strange thing Clare.


Clare. Why you don't believe him sure, can all your senses fail you, or will
you credit him, in spite of 'em all, you saw, you heard, and felt too, as you
say.


Wood. They were all prepared to receive him, without any other imagination,
and might be easily deceived.


Clare. But since there is no possibility of any other Person's coming then his,
you ought not to give your faith so easily. But Madam, here comes Mr.
Courtwell, who will perhaps discover more.


Wood. Shame, and Confusion, will not let me hear him.


Exit with Clare Enter Courtwell. Court. Now, would I give the world to know
this Woman's name, and abode, these curiosities, don't usually last after
enjoyment, one would have thought I had glutted my self of Womankind for these
two days, and of her for ever, but 'twas a sweet plump active Rogue. 'Slife,
yonder is the Rogue Love-change, Enter Lovechange pensive. he looks like a
defeated Lover -- But what the Devil makes him here at the Widows, well a rich
Widow is the very sink of younger Brothers, and harbors more then a Gaming
house, I don't like his being here though, it looks like Rivalship, and though
it be but Justice in him, yet I can by no means permit it* It makes me angry --
Why how now Lovechange, methinks thou look melancholy upon it, what no hope
from the Widow? for I perceive you Rival me.


Lov. Oh trouble not your head with the Widow, you may remember I told ye she
was not for your turn.


Court. Are you sure of that?


Lov. Most certain.


Court. And are you the Man, the happy Man.


Lov. Why, what exceptions have you against me, what, I Will warrant, you thought
the noise of Lands, and Joynctures would have carried it, but know Will, that
Wit, and Parts are greater Motives.


Court. And does your conceit Edward! persuade you to the belief, that you are
so qualified?


Lov. Faith, I never studied that, but the Ladies are kind, and do tell me of
some such charms I am Master of.


Court. The Lady too Ned, that you met in the Park, she has that goodness for
you too, hah!


Lov. She is satisfied, and that is sufficient.


Court. I hope she was, for I did my best. Lord Ned, that thou shou'd'st be so
simple, to believe thy self Master of all hearts. All the Ladies submit to you
dear Ned, so did the Lady in the Mall, did she not; But there was a Man,
(though not so considerable as you Sir) that pleased her better by the
Duck-Pond side, and perhaps may make as good an interest in her, as you have in
the Widows heart, you guess the Man, and so farewell Ned, farewell, ha, ha, ha.


Offers to go out. Lov. Prithee stay, Egad thou art pleasant company my dear
Soul; and was there say you? was there such a spark? that did the feat so well
at the Duck-Pond side? ha, ha, ha?


Court. I am glad you are so merry Sir.


Lov. Faith, I cannot forbear being infinitely pleased to find my friend so
happy, I am glad I know this secret, I might have wanted the means to have
convinced my Wife else, that 'twas not I, but I wonder who the Devil the Lady
should be, surely some one taken with my Person, and that had a certain longing
-- and how Will, and how did you find her? for I am willing to communicate my
blessings.


Court. Why had thou ever enjoyed her?


Lov. In truth not, nor never will for ought I know.


Court. You seemed yesterday to praise her to the Skies, and is she fallen so low
in your opinion.


Lov. She that I spoke of, was, and is the same, and nothing but Age, can alter
her from being the finest, sweetest Person in the World.


Court. I found her so, ( aside) and in her arts of Love, so ravishing --


Lov. And was she brisk that way, say you? Will.


Court. To a miracle, I cannot contain my joy, I must discover all -- and now
dear Lovechange if thou would let me know her name, and quality?


Lov. By my troth Sir, if I could serve you this way, you might command me; But
you are already happy enough, be not too glorious with it.


Court. What humour's this, I cannot understand him, but Clare must be my guide
-- Your Servant Sir, since you are so fantastique.


Lov. Your Servant dear Will, ha, ha. Exit Lovechange.


Enter Perigreen dressing him. Court. I cannot comprehend this Fellow's fancy,
now I am for the Widow, whom I must gain in spite of all her peevishness, I
know she has no a version to my Person, and though I don't love her much, yet,
my Pride obliges me to come off Conqueror, but oh this other lovely, kind,
obliging Stranger.


Per. Oh excess of Treachery!


Court. Who Is here, ere another Rival? Pox on 'em, how they swarm about a rich
Widow, 'Slife, I think he is dressing himself.


Per. Sure Courtwell loves this Lady, for methinks he is very active, how shall
I accost him, how as a stranger shall I begin a discourse to him? I Will pretend I
am his Rival. aside


Court. Your Servant Sir.


Per. Yours Sir, proceed if you have ought with me?


Court. You look and talk Sir, as if you were Major Domo.


Per. It may be Sir I am, will that afflict you?


Court. My name is Courtwell Sir, and I pretend to the Lady of this Mansion.


Per. Very likely! but whether she will fall to your share or not, is a great
question.


Court. Not to be made by a Schoolboy, pretty Lad, have any nickers, or
cherry-stones? if thou have, there be Children of thy own size without, will
hold thee play.


Per. Oh Sir, I Will give you leave to be witty with my youth, whilst I laugh at
your gravity, and wisdom. In short Sir, if the Lady likes the Boy, better then
your Manhood, you will find cold entertainment, go Sir, take this answer, she is
not for your turn, go Sir, you loose your time, there is a certain kind,
obliging Lady.


Court. Oh the Devil have they that story by the end too? Well this Clare has
betrayed me, however this little diminutive Man, shall not affront me, yet hanged
he is a child not worth my malice.


Offers to go. Per. Hold Sir, you pass no further this way, that leads you to
the door.


Court. Prit he unhand me youth, thou wilt make me angry, and then I were too
blame, with so much innocence.


Per. None of your put off's Sir, I am not so young, nor innocent, as you take
me to be; I can do many things that would proclaim me Man, don't upbraid the
smoothness of my Chin, my Sword's as rough as thine, and I dare draw it.


Court. Very pretty. Lord how it tattles, why little talking Monsieur, by what
authority do you resist me? can that fair Face disguise it self in anger? and
that is the most that thou can do, let us see thee frown, that perhaps would
break a Ladies heart, a soft, young silly Lady, but I make sport at theee, ha,
ha, ha.


Per. What shall I do, to raise his anger up? For I had rather that way meet my
Death, then see him in the embraces of another: That will but kill me a more
cruel way. [aside] Come Sir, though you are pleased, I can be angry, you shall
find the effects on it, but this is no place to decide the business in, I Will meet
you in the Park, a pass, or two will end the fatal difference.


Court. Sure he has some other motive then the love of the Widow, that carries
him to this rashness, the Boy grows angry, serious, and can fight perhaps. aside


Per. No consideration Sir, if you refuse to fight me, I will Pistol ye, take
your choice to live with Honor, or to dye with Infamy.


Court. Well Sir, I Will meet you there, but don't care for fighting with thee
much.


Per. I have Conditions too for Peace, as well as War, and love fighting, as
little as you, I Am glad he consents to go out o'th house, I don't care to have
my story known to any but himself, who only can relieve me.


Exeunt ambo The End of the third Act.
Actus Quartus,
Scena Prima.
Scene Easy's house. Enter Mrs. Easy, and Peg. Peg. OH dear Madam, what shall
we do for Mrs. Grace, I vow she is in the lamentablest taking, nay, and a worse
matter then that, my old Master is resolved to fright her out of her wits, till
she consent to marry Sir Ralph.


Mrs. Easy. Why I thought he had by mistake married Betty.


Peg. So he did Madam, but they design to put her off for a piece of money, it
being a cheat, and without a License, and Betty offers for a thousand pound to
sit down with the loss, and release him to Mrs. Grace, but all this does not
satisfy, for Mrs. Grace is refractory, and will by no means consent.


Mrs. Easy. Poor Grace, what contrivance shall we think of, to release her from
her bondage and torment.


Peg. Alas Madam, if that were the worst, but her Uncle designs this morning to
let out some of her hot blood, as he calls it, he has sent for a Surgeon, and
pretending she is mad, means to try conclusions by opening a vein, or two.


Mrs. Easy. He dares not be so cruel, and inhumane.


Peg. I suppose he dares not design so ill a thing indeed, but she being very
young, and innocent, will soon (at least he thinks so) be brought to yield to
any thing, rather then be so used, but Madam I have thought of a stratagem;
when my Master sends out for a Surgeon, I Will let you see my wit, I will not tell
you before hand.


Mrs. Easy. Thou art so excellent at contrivance, that I will not question the
success, nor ask thee what it is, go on and prosper; but call upon me by and by
for a Letter, that I intend to write to Lovechange.


Exeunt severally. Scene Second, Chairs set out.
Enter Mr. Easy, Grace, Betty, and Sir Ralph. Mr. Easy. This, is your place of
execution, consider, repent, and be saved.


Sir Ralph. I, I, Mrs. Grace, that is your safest way, it is very ill lying in a
cold grave this Winter time, a Bed, and a good Bed fellow were much better,
consider, consider, I vow my heart bleeds to think how you will suffer for love
of me.


Grace. What shall I do Betty, is their no way left for my deliverance?


Betty. Do not fear it Madam, Peg, and I, have laid our heads together for your
relief, however make all the signs of fear you can. aside


Grace. I know not what can relieve me, but I will hope well, good Uncle, what
is it you would have me do? how can I marry with a man that is already married?


Mr. Easy. Aye, by your contrivance Baggage he is, but thou shall suffer
severely for it, and this Slut I will make dance a new Galliard in Bridewell.


Betty. Truly Sir I don't fear you, but for my poor Mistress sake I would do
any thing but loose my Husband.


Sir Ralph. Oh! I had rather hear a Schreech-Owl then that voice, Husband
quotha'? I defy thee.


Betty. Why Sir, I have youth and beauty enough to be a Lady.


Sir Ralph. Why I tell thee I care not, and thou were the Devil, so thou had
money, oh I am distracted to think that I should loose six thousand pound, and
Mrs. Grace.


Grace. You hear Sir, there is all his grief to loose the money.


Mr. Easy. I like him the better for it, -- Well you will beg pardon and be
received to mercy?


Grace. First Sir, let me see Sir Ralph free from Betty, for I confess I would
not marry a man that should be in danger of the Gallows.


Sir Ralph. Oh how I tremble at that word, I, I, pray good Uncle, let me be
freed from this little Jilt here, and then I do not fear my fate as they say
with Mrs. Grace, nay if thou do not release me I will give thee no money, nor
no consolation, thou shall 'en live by thy wits, and thou will for Ralph.


Betty. I am well enough satisfied to part upon good consideration.


Sir Ralph. What be they, what be they, any Condition.


Betty. Only giving me a thousand pound Sir.


Sir Ralph. How! a thousand pound? Mercy upon us!


Betty. I cannot live by my Wits, and therefore --


Sir Ralph. Thou will ruin me, a thousand pound?


Betty. You will loose six by the bargain Sir, in loosing my Mistress.


Mr. Easy. That Is well considered I confess; But will nothing less, then that
mighty sum suffice you.


Betty. By no means, for Sir I must marry, I would not fall much lower then a
Lady Ship.


Sir Ralph. O insatiable Woman! a thousand pound! why pray Mrs. Betty be good
and merciful.


Betty. I have said, and will hold there Sir, or keep my Title.


Sir Ralph. I am not able to endure the thoughts of parting with so much money
--


Mr. Easy. Come Sir Ralph, since there is no other way, you know Mr. Lovechange
owes you a thousand pound, give her that Bond, and it shall be sufficient.


Betty. I am content to take it Sir, but will Mr. Lovechange pay me, is it a
good debt?


Sir Ralph. I Will secure it good, here, here is the Bond, take it -- and with it
my curse. cries Here Is an after-clap indeed, had I had any thing for my Money,
it would not have grieved me.


Mr. Easy. Come Sir, it cannot be hope, this it is to have to do with any of
their Sex. But here is Grace to make you amends with, take her.


Grace. Hold Sir, two words to that bargain.


Mr. Easy. Refractory still! I will show no mercy on thee, Sir Ralph keep her
here, whilst I see if the Surgeon been't come that I sent for?


Exit Easy Sir Ralph. Sweet Mrs. Grace consent without compulsion as they say,
for I protest but that I have given a thousand pounds toward thee, I would
rather give you over, then see you suffer any hurt for me, therefore pray be
civil a little, though it be against your inclinations to be so.


Grace. I shall not consent.


Enter Mr. Easy, and Amorous, dressed as a Surgeon. Mr. Easy. Here Sir, here is
your Patient, and though she looks so soberly at present, she is stark mad poor
Soul. cries. And because of her Quality, I am loath to have her to Bedlam, if
any Cure may be had otherwise.


Grace. Sir forbear, I am not mad, nor will be so unless you make me. Amorous
holds her, and feels her Pulse.


Amor. Alas good Lady, you be troubled wit de Love, wit de vere great
extravagance, you be very much distemper'.


Grace. You be very much de Coxcomb Sir.


Mr. Easy: Aye, now she begins, come, come, to bleeding of her, is not that
very good?


Amor. We', we', ver' necessar, come Lady.


Grace. Thou inhumane fellow, think thou indeed I Am distempered, and need
thy cure, or if I were so, that thou have any skill? Yet once you sed that Love
was my Disease, and that indeed was truth. weeps


Amor. Vat Complexion be de Man of dat you love, and dat can be cruel to so
very amiable a Person.


Grace. He is not cruel, but my Uncle is, and with your help designs to kill me
sure, do so, for since I cannot marry Amorous I do desire to dye. weeps.


Mr. Easy. See Sir, how her fit alters, she will laugh again anon, I pray Sir be
speedy.


Sir Ralph. I am not able to see her blood, and therefore must withdraw. Exit
Sir Ralph.


Amor. Come Madamosel, you must permit me to do someting to cure your amors,
let me see, she must be tied to dis Chey'r, let me try it first. sits down Dis
is not very convenient Sir, it is too hard, and metinks too litel.


Mr. Easy. It Is well, it is well Sir, pray to your business.


Amor. No indeed Sir, it is not good, make you de experiment pray, and see if
it is convenient. Old Easy sits down.


Mr. Easy. Cocks bodikins, these villainous Outlandish-Men make such a pudder,
an English Man would have killed you half a score, whilst you cure one. Offers
to rise, Amorous holds him down.


Amor. Help to bind him fast Boy. They bind him in the Chair.


Mr. Easy. What do you mean Gentlemen?


Amor. Only to tie you up to your good Behavior a little.


Grace. Oh happy deliverance! Amorous is it you?


Amor. Yes, and do you shift for your self, and leave me to handle him. Exit
Grace,


Mr. Easy. Villains, unhand me, oh thou Monster Amorous, is it thou?


Amor. Even I Sir, I am turned Surgeon to serve you Sir, come strip up his
Arms, and let us bleed him speedily. I have a drench here that must be given
first, 'twil make him bleed like one of twenty. Pours down something.


Mr. Easy. Oh I am killed, I am murdered.


Amor. No, you are not to dye so patiently.


Mr. Easy. Yes, I will dye on purpose that thou may be hanged: no help near?
Wife, Grace, Betty, Murder, murder!


Enter Sir Ralph, Jo, and other Servants. Amor. Ah Pox of his bauling, I must
shift for my self now.


Mr. Easy. Oh are you caught Sir, I shall handle you now, it is the Rogue
Amorous.


Sir Ralph. Amorous, how came he in?


Amor. How shall he get out, oh the Devil --


Sir Ralph. Have I got ye in faith into my Clutches? Dear Uncle, leave his
punishment to me, I have a Servant here that has the notablest Hed-piece for
Villainy that ever was.


Mr. Easy. Do any thing to him, that may torment him soundly, have no mercy on
him, sweet Sir Ralph.


Sir Ralph. I warrant ye Uncle, I have a brave place to put him into, and will
have him bastinado'd thrice a day for Recreation, till I have mortified his
Love.


Amor. Fool, I do despise, and dare thy worst of evils, were Grace but safe, oh
I should be content to suffer, I Am sure they dare not murder me.


Sir Ralph. Yes Grace shall be safe, and my Wife within this hour; thou shall
never see her face more.


Amor. Devil do thy worst!


Sir Ralph. Here Io, take him into thy Custody, let him be put into the Vault,
let silence and darkness be his Companions.


Io. Come Sir, along with me Sir, I shall teach you the art of Surgery.


Sir Ralph. Nay, if thou escap'st now, I Will say thou had a Witch to thy
Mother, and a Devil to thy Father. Exeunt severally


Scene the Park. Enter Courtwell and Perigreen from fighting, Perigreen
wounded* Court. Rash Boy! to force me to this rudeness, for 'twas not manhood
in me thus to hurt thee, alas, thou could not fight, thou had no skill to
hold thy weapon for thy own advantage.


Per. Sir you have done enough if it be home.


Court. Sure thou art some poor dispairing thing that seek'st a Death from any
hand, why did thou choose out mine, for that base action, there are a
thousand Murderers, Ruffins, things desperate as thy self, that would have
done this, with the least provocation, why did thou choose a Gentleman?


Per. Thou a Gentleman? could any thing, that is not basely born, commit such
villainies as thou have done, ere since thou call'dst thy self a Man?


Court. Come don't talk, but let me lead thee to a Surgeon.


Enter Mrs Woodbee, and Clare. Wood. Mr. Perigreen and Courtwell say you? how
in the name of wonder should they come to fall out?


Clare. Nay, I know not Madam, but I believe 'twas about you.


Wood. Me? But see Clare where they are --


Per. Curse on her for coming now, a little time might have discovered all.


Court. I Am glad she has released me.


Wood. Gentlemen, I heard of some difference between you, and thought it but
Justice to prevent further danger.


Court. It Was well, and charitably performed, Widow, but I suppose 'twas care
of your new Gallant here that hastened you.


Wood. Oh villainous Courtwell! what have thou done! the poor youth bleeds --
alas, Sir, lets haste for some relief?


Court. Widow I have a word with you, before you go.


Wood. I have nothing to say to you, forbear. Exeunt Clare and Perigreen.


Court. But I must stay you for a small season to tell you Widow you are a --


Wood. What thou Impertinent?


Court. A strange inconstant, faithless, amorous thing, whom I have now thrown
from my heart.


Wood. Have you so Sir?


Court. Yes, and to make thee wretched, know I love elsewhere?


Wood. Yes Sir, your new Lady perhaps, which you met last night in the Mall.


Court. How! I did not think thou had been arrived to the years of Witchcraft
yet, Widow?


Wood. There needs none to know your secrets Sir, one need but have the faculty
of hearing well, to know 'em all, for you are loud enough in the Proclamation
of them.


Court. Now are all my hopes dashed here, this must be Clare, or Lovechange, the
last I believe, purposely to ruin all my expectations with the Widow, that
Rascal I must sight [aside] truth is I did meet a Lady in the Mall, a fine
handsome airy Rogue.


Wood. And was she kind too?


Court. Wondrous kind, nay of her self, so wittily found out the place of
entertainment, and made the treat too, when she came there.


Wood. How Sir! were you in any House?


Court. House? no, we enjoyed our selves like the gods of old, in Groves, and
Gloomy shades, on Rivers Banks, faith Widow, to kill thee quite, I met a Lady
on the Duck-Pond side, that would have fired an Anchoret:


Wood. How Sir? by the Duck-Pond side, thou wilt kill me indeed, if thou
undeceiv'st me not presently? aside


Court. Even there -- since Lovechange, has told her I Will do his business for
him. aside I must confess the blessing was not designed for me, but Lovechange,
I dressed my self as like as possible, -- and took all she said to him, on my
self.


Wood. Oh I am ruined! and was she easily won Sir? for perhaps I know the Lady
-- Oh how curious I am to know my own dishonor. [aside]


Court. I do suppose Lovechange had prepared her, for to me she made but weak
resistance, she said 'twas well the darkness hid her blushes, and that the
Bench was a very undecent place.


Wood. My very words! Oh I could kill the Rascal! what different passions is my
Soul possessed with! ( aside) Courtwell, thou art a Villain, this Lady I know,
and thou have abused her honor, not won her heart, and all the rest was but a
Rape, a base unworthy Rape, and one perhaps that shall be revenged.


Exit Mrs. Woodbee Court. By this light the Widow loves me, I know it by her
Jealousy, perhaps this may be the critical minute, I Will follow her and try my
chance: Perhaps too I may learn something from this young Bully that may
explain this Riddle to me. Exit Courtwell.


The Widows House, Enter Lovechange. Lov. How shall I contrive to see my dear
Mistress? For I am not able to live without her, though I am a damned mad
fellow, and love all her Sex in general, yet in her is bounded all my love and
pleasure -- Pox on it, I am damned dull at Invention.


Enter Clare. Clare. What melancholy after his Gaming? Well I hope I may trust
my self alone with him to day, therefore I Will venture in. aside What Sir, in a
doleful dump? what would you give to be put out on it now.


Lov. Prithee good property of my Wife, leave me.


Clare. Faith Sir, I would have a word or two in private with you first


Lov. Pox on it, thou would not be so forward if I desired thy Company now.


Clare. What will you say now, and I Will tell you what you are thinking on.


Lov. Not of your late cruelty to me Clare! nor care I a farthing if you are
come to offer me, what you then denied me, and therefore leave me.


Clare. Faith Sir, I have not the heart to obey you till I have left you in
better humor, come Sir!


Lov. If I should trust a secret with thee Clare, thou would be blabbing it to
my Wife.


Clare. You can trust me with nothing but what I know already Sir!


Lov. Faith it is not unlikely!


Clare. I am acquainted Sir, with all your last nights Intrigue.


Lov. The Devil thou art -- and like a wicked Jade, thou have informed my Wife.


Clare. And is that the cause of your affliction?


Lov. That Is all, that is all, but Clare was it kindly done to turn a base
Informer here at home, just thus it had been had thou been kind to me, on my
Conscience, thou would have told thy Mistress on it.


Clare. I hope you don't think me so simple Sir.


Lov. Thou never consider'st the evil consequences Clare, of carrying Tales?
now must my daily allowance be shortened, now must I drudge at home, for the
expenses of my Whoring abroad, nay and perhaps be chained up like a Mastiff dog
all day, to make me more fierce a nights: well Clare, if I am forced to keep
home for want of stock, and kept fasting, the whole force of my hungry love
will fall most heavily on thee, and I will show thee no more mercy, then thou
have done to me.


Clare. I don't fear you Sir, since you were with so fine a Lady last night.


Lov. I am found out, they know my Roguery, and have mistook the place only but
that is enough to ruin me. ( aside) But Clare -- Is there no hopes of a
forgiveness? no making up of this breach? Methinks you should follow the
greatest examples, that forgive all faults confessed with penitence, I must
confess, I had a Lady, Clare.


Clare. Oh, wicked Man! how stiffly he denied this to my Lady to day! Well Sir,
what will you give me to absolve this sin, and restore you to my Mistresses
grace again?


Lov. Give thee? Why my heart, thou shall command me.


Clare. Why then Sir, 'twas even my Mistress, and your own Wife that met you at
the Duck-Pond side:


Lov. What? the Duck-Pond side?


Clare. I Sir, and in St. James's Park, where you were kinder to her, than ever
you were before.


Lov. Ouns! my Wife?


Clare. Yes, your Wife, don't disturb your self, 'twas but one nights loss to
you, and that sure you may afford for all she has done for you* says Sir, we
knew of your Intrigue, and were resolved to counterplot ye, ha, ha, ha.


Lov. Devil! why do laugh?


Clare. To think how safe you fancied your self to be in the Arms of Mrs. Easy.


Lov Oh Curse! I am miserable both ways, not only to find my self Cuckolded by
Courtwell ( aside) but to have this discovery of my love made to my dear Easy.


Clare. What, are you disordered still? Troth, I think you may be glad to make
your peace on an any terms.


Lov. One comfort I have yet left, I Am released from the slavery of my Wife by
knowing I am a Cuckold, and that shall secure the credit too of my dear
Mistress whose Honor's now in danger, this secret too, it is fit I find some
way to let her know, and consult how to prevent a further growth, and thou
Courtwell shall feel the effects of my displeasure. Exit Lovechange.


Clare. O Lord, what have I done! he talks as if it were not he that met my
Mistress, but Courtwell, I am quite undone. It Is so by my Maidenhead, if I
could be serious now; I could cry, and fret my self into a Consumption, for
this unlucky mistake of mine, which I dare not discover to my Lady neither, she
has vexation enough already without this addition, oh that I could bring all
about again?


Exit Clare. Mr. Easy's house, Enter Sir Ralph and Jo. Io. Oh Sir! I have
excellent news for you, the lost sheep is found, I have taken your Mistress
Sir, just as she was marching off with all her Movables, her Jewels, and other
Toys, and Sir I have her fast --


Sir Ralph. Where?


Io. In a certain convenient dark Lodging, which her Uncle provided for her,
where she shall fast and pray, till her stomach come down to marry you Sir.


Sir Ralph. Aye Io, would I had her? that is her money, for she is very
beautiful that way. Io, but hark ye I would fain see her, I know her mind, for
it is a pretty little Rogue.


Io. Sir, I can do you that favor, for her Uncle has committed the Key to my
charge, with a command that none but you shall see her. Exit Jo.


Jo Reenters with Grace. Sir Ralph. So Mrs. Grace, what is your stomach come
down or not?


Grace. No, nor never will to thee, had you loved me, you could not have
suffered me to be used thus for your sake, a Gentleman would have desisted,
after so much aversion as I have shown you.


Sir Ralph. Pshaw, whaw, tell not me of desisting, nor aversions as I have
shown ye. Mrs. Grace, you are a Fool, and don't know so well as your Uncle and
I, what is good for you, I have two thousand pound a year mun, and I am a
Knight, and all that mun, keep my Gilt Coach, and five livery men -- and
Amorous has scarce a shilling for a dirty Hack.


Io. My Master speaks reason to you Lady.


Grace. Your Master and you, are a couple of sots, impertinent Fools, I hate ye
both, and would not marry him, though I should perish there, whence you draw me
now, It Is Paradise compared to where thou art.


Sir Ralph. Oh Rare! oh rich! what, you can rant, and scold, one would have
thought I vow that Butter would not a melted in her mouth.


Grace. You Will make me rave, you will, and I will Rave too, you cannot tie my
tongue up, that is still free to curse you with.


Io. Toes, here is fine doings.


Sir Ralph. Io, carry her down, she may be tame e're night.


Grace. Do what thou will, thou shall never bring me to be tame enough for
thee: this dark, this solitary Cave best suits my absent Love, here I
contemplate, here my thoughts are free, and like a little Bird I Will sit, and
sing a melancholy note within my little Cave.


Sir Ralph. I, do what you will, we shall change your note, fear it not. Exit
Sir Ralph.


Jo, puts her down. Io. So, now you are fast again, well I am a cruel Rogue, for
all this though, that can find no remorse. Enter Amorous


Amor. How now Jailer, what black deed are you a doing there?


Io. Only a putting your Mistress into her hole Sir.


Amor. My Mistress there, thou art not so barbarous?


Io. Indeed I am Sir.


Amor. Was it for this your kindness brought me out, and changed my Lodging for
this opener place to bury her in, Dog, set her loose or by the sacred passion I
have for that fair Maid I Will strangle thee.


Io. Say you so Sir, you had better let me alone though, hark Sir, she is well
contented with her retirement. Grace sings below.


Amor. Oh charming Virgin, how thy innocence can make thy entertainment, sirrah
deliver the Key, or you are dead.


Io. Stand off Sir, I have a rusty Sword, and you have no weapon, stand off, or
--


Amor. Slave do dare me? --. Runs into him, takes away his Sword, and wounds
him.


Io. Oh I am dead, I am dead! stark stone dead.


Amor. 'Slife I think the Rogue speaks truth, he is dead indeed, but if he be
I Will justify the action, stay, what am I next to do? In passing out perhaps I
may be seen -- I have devised a way for my escape, but first I Will release my
fair Prisoner. Unlocks the Vault, and enters.


Io. Now if I durst stir, I would get away and show them such a trick -- but
hark they are ascending, and I must lie purdue. lies down again.


Amor. My Dearest! it is no time to express joy in, this fellow I fear is dead,
and we have both need of a safe retreat, here is the Key of the Gate to the
Feilds, get you out, and go the back way to my Aunts, it is but six doors off,
you know she will receive you well, whilst I escape another way.


Grace. My dearest Amorous, take care of what I love, and let me see thee
quickly releast from this base Mansion, where naught but terror dwells. Exit
Grace.


Amor. Come Sir, I have a word or two with you in the next room, I Will put on
this Rogue's disguise, and that will be a means for my escape. Exit Amorous
dragging out Jo by the heels Enter Mrs. Easy.


Mrs. Easy. This Wench stays very long, I hope she has found my dear
Lovechange. Enter Mr. Easy, peeping after his Wife.


Mr. Easy. My heart tells me there is something a forging, but what I know not,
perhaps I may know more. Enter Peg not seeing Easy


Peg. Madam, here is the answer to your Letter.


Mr. Easy. How! a Letter to my Wife? gently, good supporters, gently. As Peg
and Mrs. Easy stands to read the Letter, he steals behind them and with his
Spectacles reads over their shoulders


Mrs. Easy. Why did thou stay so long? It grows late, and I am impatient to
be gone to Lovechange.


Mr. Easy. O rare! is it thereabouts with you? aside


Peg. I vow Madam, he kept me there so long -- asking me questions about you,
kissing your dear Letter, and sending so many recommendations to you, and so
many curses to my old Master.


Mr. Easy. Fine, delicate young Bawd. aside


Mrs. Easy. I had rather he should wish him well Peg. That Is in Heaven.


Mr. Easy. Hum, hum, charitable, kind Wife. aside


Mrs. Easy. But to my Letter, dear Lovechange let me kiss thee, before I read
thee. kisses the Letter, and reads.


Mr. Easy. Excellent! Aside


Mrs. Easy. Alas Peg, we are all undone, Lovechange cannot meet me at Mrs.
Woodbee's to night, for reasons he will tell me anon; but how anon dear Peg,
and where? for I am not able to live this night without him.


Peg. That too, I have to tell you by word of mouth.


Mr. Easy. O horrid impudence! aside Are you not so Mistress, nay never stare,
it is I, even I, the poor old Cuckold, that you wish so well too.


Mrs. Easy. O sad! What shall I do?


Mr. Easy. No evasions, no lies shall serve you, come I will lock thee up from
all humane society, and have no mercy on thee.


Mrs. Easy. Dear Husband!


Mr. Easy. Dear Devil! For such, and so severe I Will be unto thee.


pulls her in. Peg. Now all the Plot's spoiled, this will go hard with my poor
Mistress, I Will try my Wit once more for her deliverance, for I would not have
her disappoint Mr. Lovechange's expectations, she must meet him to night. Exit
Peg,


Enter Sir Ralph, and two Fellows with Battoons. Sir Ralph. Come Brothers of
the Battoon, open that door, for there is the subject of your mirth, oh how we
will swinge the Rascal, and do you hear Bulleys, you must be sure you beat him,
till he resign (before you that are my Witnesses) Mrs. Grace to me.


1 Fell. I warrant you Sir, They draw aside the Curtain and discover Jo sitting
in a chair, dressed in Amorous his clothes. for your business done.


Io. Sure it is the Rascal Amorous returned to make me sure, therefore to my
counterfeiting. aside sits still.


Sir Ralph. There he sits, Gentlemen to your business.


Jo. It Is so, there is no resistance to be made.


Sir Ralph. But first let me take him into examination, come sirrah answer me
precisely to these particulars, first how long have you commenced Doctor of
Divinity (for all is out) how came you to marry me to Mrs. Betty? a pox of your
sanctified cause, 'thas cost me a thousand pounds good English Money.


Jo. It Is Sir Ralph my Master. aside


Sir Ralph. No reply sirrah, next you quitted the long Robe, and transformed
your self to a French Doctor, a plague of your Physic, as my Uncle may say.
And lastly, sirrah you would have cheated me of Mrs. Grace, for which three
enormities I will chastise thee most abundantly. They beat him


Jo. Hold Sir, what do you mean Sir?


Sir Ralph. Bind him fast Gentlemen.


Jo. I am not Amorous Sir, a pox of my Vizor, I cannot get it off.


Sir R. Stop his mouth Gentlemen, for so he served my Nuncle Easy.


Jo. I am not Amorous Sir, but, but --


Sir Ralph. Stop his mouth I say, have no mercy on him, so now bastinado him
soundly. They beat him, he cries out the while.


Jo. Murder, murder, I am dead, and you shall all be hanged.


Overturns the Chair and falls down. Sir Ralph. Oh Gentlemen he is dead indeed,
what shall we do now?


2 Fell. We care not Sir, if he be dead, we shall not be hanged for him, it is only
you shall suffer, who set us on:


Sir Ralph. Here be rare Rogues, no life? no he is gone, quite gone! oh what
shall I do? a pox of Mrs. Grace, and all her Race, accursed I may say.


1 Fell. Farewell Sir, we will shift for our selves. Exit Rogues.


Sir Ralph. I Will go hide my self somewhere from the hands of Justice.
Ah Grace, it is you are the cause of all my dolor,
But how shall I escape the Hempen Collar. Exit.

The End of the fourth Act.
Actus Quintus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Peg running, after her Sir Ralph. Sir Ralph. SWeet Mrs. Margaret don't
fly me, I protest I Will do you no harm, alas I Am in distress, and only beg thy
assistance.


Peg. What Is the matter Sir Ralph?


Sir Ralph. Oh I have committed, I dare not tell thee all*


Peg. What, Adultery? or Fornication Sir?


Sir Ralph. Neither, but a worse matter by much, I have killed Mr* Amorous, and
desire you to conceal me a little, I dare not tell my Uncle? cries


Peg. Amorous I Am sure is safe enough, and so is Gracy, what can this fool
mean? But I will now make use of him: well though I say it, I am full of device
and contrivance: aside This accident Sir Ralph is very unlucky, but if you will
take my advice I Will secure you.


Sir Ralph. Oh any thing dear Mrs. Margaret.


Peg. And can you keep counsel too?


Sir Ralph. Yes sure, where my life depends on it?


Peg. You must then beg leave of my Master, to make a visit to my Mistress, she
is kept a close Prisoner in her Chamber upon some Jealousy that is come into
his Noddle, I know you may be admitted.


Sir Ralph. And what then?


Peg. Oh let me alone then to work for your safety; do this presently, and
before the news of your killing Amorous arrive to his Ear.


Sir Ralph. I, I, I Will follow your counsel. cries


Peg. There must be something in it, where is the body of this dead Man?


Sir Ralph. In the appartment of the Garden, but pray say nothing and here is
something to close thy mouth. Exit Sir Ralph.


Peg. So, I hope this Plot will take, I must next invent a way to let my
Mistress know my design, and since I am not permitted to see her, I Will write by
this Fop. Exit Peg.


Enter Mrs. Woodbee, and Clare. Wood. What strange misfortune rules the fate of
things, the first Revenge that ever I designed, that it should so unhappily
fall on my own head, it is too certain that I did meet Courtwell instead of my
Husband: And it is as certain that he took me for Mrs. Easy, when I consider my
condition, I find it every way so deplorable that without some extraordinary
change, I shall grow weary of my Life, I am mad, and know not whom to be
revenged on.


Clare. Faith Madam, carry on the Intrigue, and let us make a perfect Plot on it?
Enter Lovechange Here comes a principal Engineer in the work.


Lov. I cannot meet this Rascal Courtwell, for though I don't love this foolish
Woman, whose jealousy has made me a Cuckold: Yet i am in honor bound to fight
the Villain, 'twas happy as it proved, that 'twas not my dear Mistress, yet
either way he merits my chastisement. aside


Wood. Oh what shall I do? I have not power to withdraw. aside


Clare. All this is my Roguery. aside


Lov. Good Evening to you Madam.


Wood. Why this distance Lovechange?


Lov. Why these Tears?


Wood. For your unkindness Sir.


Lov. It Is rather Madam, for your own lewdness, come I will not entertain you
with the circumstances, but to the business, I will part with you, you know the
entertainment which you gave young Courtwell on the Riverside in the Park, I
know it too, and would have killed you for the deed, but that I know the offense
ought to be charged on your curiosity, you thought to have met me there.


Wood. It Is true, and will you punish so severely a fault of Love, alas, I meant
no harm.


Lov. It Was harm to be so curious, to be jealous, and harm to think of cheating
me, for so t'had been if I had met you there instead of Mrs. Easy, for I find
you knew the design.


Wood. And are not you as guilty Sir, as I?


Lov. No, it is the scandal makes the sin, and not the action, custom makes it
sin to us; when you offend, I bear the dishonor on it, when I, you but the
little griefs. In fine, Madam I am resolved to part, none knows, as yet, that
we are married, and if you please it may be still concealed.


Wood. I Have nothing Sir to answer for my self, and since I cannot have your
heart, I am content to quit your Person too, you know the Articles between us
Sir, when I married you, I made you Master of half my Fortune, take it, and
what remains I will enjoy my self with, give me your hand -- Farewell, I Have had
an ill bargain of thee, for a poor Months service, thou have cost me ten
thousand pounds.

Well Clare, in this divorce some ease I find,
Since I am free, to Courtwell I Will be kind. Exeunt Clare and Wood.

Lov. So, I have shook thee off, and with very little remorse too Egad -- Thou
were a good Woman, but you are gone -- hang sorrow -- I Will to my sweet, pretty,
little, dear Mrs. Easy, and if she can but contrive to do as much for her
Husband, as i have done for my Wife, we will 'en strike up a match A-la-mode. Exit
Lovechange.


Enter Mrs. Easy dressed in Sir Ralph's clothes, and Peg with her. Peg. So, so,
thus far it has succeeded well.


Mrs. Easy. I would thou could but see the Knight dressed in my Nightgown, and
Linen, it is a sight worth the laughing at, i have charged him to sit very
pensive, and dark, and to answer for me to every question ask't, if my Husband
should come to catechize him.


Peg. 'Twou'd be a Dialogue worth the harkening too, he knowing nothing of your
affairs -- It Is like his answers must be very proper to the questions. Enter Mr.
Easy.

Uds life Madam, here is my Master, what shall we do?


Mrs. Easy. Let me alone with him, it is pretty dark he cannot well distinguish
me.


Mr. Easy. Sir Ralph, when you asked me leave to give a visit to my Wife, I did
not desire the doors should have been shut upon you, I hearkened, and must tell
you, I believe you were no better then you should be.


Mrs. Easy. Truth is Sir, since you have found us out, I only pretended to Mrs.
Grace, but your Wife was my main design.


Mr. Easy. How! Why thou impudent Varlet, oh horrible? dare thou make me a
Cuckold? and tell me so? sirrah I know thou art a Coward, and I will beat thee,
yes I dare venture on thee. Draws


Mrs. Easy. Nay, then it is time to show a fair pair of heels, farewell Sir, I Will
leave your house. runs out.


Mr. E. I will not let thee go so, if I have any daring in me. runs after.


Peg. 'S^ife I know she cannot fight, I Will after her, and see to call some body
to her assistance. runs out.


Enter Lovechange as in a street. Lov. I see no light in my Mistresses Chamber,
I wonder where they are all, and that Peg brings me no answer.


Enter Mrs. Easy running. Mrs. Easy. Lovechange, dear, assist me!


Lov. What the Devil art thou? Enter old Easy, and Peg.


Mr. Easy. Oh thou Traitor to my house, have I trusted thee to this end, to rob
me of my Wife and Honor?


Mrs. Easy. So, I have made fine work --


Lov. Stay Sir, don't hurt him, for who e're he be, if he have wronged your
Wife, I will revenge it, thy Arm's too weak for such a glorious deed.


Mr. Easy. Hey day! another Rival! oh I begin to see I am a most notorious
Monster, I dare not encounter him though, but for thee thou villainous Sir
Ralph. --


Lov. Sir Ralph my Rival! -- go Sir withdraw, this is not work for you, leave
me to be your Champion.


Mr. Easy. Yes, yes, against my will I do -- but I will home and claw my Wife,
my fine whorish Wife, away for this. Exit Easy


Lov. Now Sir, you and I, must have a touch.


Mrs. Easy. Or two I hope Lovechange, before we part.


Lov. Are you so brisk Sir?


Mrs. Easy. You shall try that anon.


Lov. Draw then Sir, for I am ready.


Mrs. Easy. Hold, hold, dear Lovechange, put up, we will fight it out in another
place.


Lov. My noble Mistress.


Mrs. Easy. My dear Lovechange the same, stole out purposely to meet thee, my
Husband has found out our Intrigue, and I dare return no more, I Will tell you all
the story at large, let us have -- but whither?


Lov. I have taken a private Lodging on purpose to night in a friends house,
whom I can trust, fear nothing --


Mrs. Easy. But thy inconstancy, Lovechange.


Lov. Sooner thy soul may change it is goodness and generosity, or any thing
more impossible, come the Moons up, and we for our more security will go
through the Park. Exeunt omnes


Scene the Park, Enter Perigreen and Courtwell severally Per. Here they say
he is walking, I long to know the worst of my sad fate, it is strange he should
not know me, he is here -- your Servant Sir.


Court. Yours Sir, have you forgiven my Mornings Complement? how does your
wound Sir?


Per. It Is not troublesome.


Court. Pray Sir, tell me, and tell me seriously, what moved you to this rage
against me? how came you to be angry? you told me something of Camilla too,
which Sir, has made me thoughtful ever since, are you indeed acquainted with
that Lady?


Per. Yes Sir, most intimately, there is nothing of her soul that is hid from me,
she told me how she loved, and what false breath betrayed her to that weakness.


Court. Poor Camilla!


Per. Your pity comes too late, for Sir she is dead, killed by your cruelty,
which at once has robbed the World, and me, of all we held most dear.


Court. Since she is gone, I Will put this penance on my self; I Will marry nothing
that is young, or beautiful.


Per. But can you talk of marrying any?


Court. Why not Sir, whilst there be women and money to be had, and I suppose
you will be of my mind too.


Enter Lovechange and Mrs. Easy. Lov. Ha! Courtwell! come Sir, you and I must
Tilt a little.


Court. How! for what? prithee leave fooling.


Lov. For several Reasons, but first upon the Widows score, you have debaucht
her Sir.


Court. What do mean Ned? I debauch the Widow?


Lov. Yes, you Sir.


Court. You Are mad.


Lov. No Sir, you have forgot the Lady you made love to, by the Duck-Pond side?


Court. I had a Lady Sir, but she I thought had been thy Mistress.


Lov. For that I Will kill thee too if possible.


Court. That were the juster quarrel of the two, but I have reason too, to
fight with thee, who told the Widow of my being there thinking to undermine me.


Lov. Come Sir, no argument, but this.


Mrs. Easy. Do You hear Lovechange, pray don't fight, for then I must be forced
to discover my self.


Lov. This will not satisfy, stand by dear friend, my honor is engaged, and I
must fight,


Court. I wait you Sir.


Per. Dear Courtwell, don't fight, for if you dye, I Will wait on you to your
Grave. weeps


Court. Whence comes this pretty softness? why for me?


Per. Do thou not know me yet? Methinks by my faint sigh, thou might
discover -- Thy once loved Camilla, at least this voice, might well enough
inform thee. discovers her self


Lov. This is wondrous!


Court. Yes I do know thee, and am ashamed to tell thee that I do so.


Mrs. Easy. What the Devil, is it a woman all this while?


Per. I can forgive you, if you can be penitent, but on no other terms.


Court. I would not ask it any other way.


Per. Don't let me ask thee that I am ashamed to sue to thee for, can you not
guess what it is?


Court. Marry thee, by all that is good I Will do it.


Lov. This reformation pleases me, and ends our quarrels; come Sir I Am still
your friend, if you need my assistance, I am at your service, if not, I have a
little piece of transformation here too, that longs to be alone with me.


Court. A Woman this Ned?


Lov. Yes indeed, and the same you thought you had possessed on the Riverside.


Court. Give me the honor of your hand Madam, and your forgiveness.


Mrs. Easy. You have it Sir, and you pretty Sir, I hope we shall be better
acquainted hereafter. Exeunt Lovechange, and Mrs. Easy.


Court. Come dear Camilla I will loose no time.


Per. I Am overjoyed at this return of Love!
May every moment the rich store improve. Ex. Court. and Per.

Scene Mr. Easy's house, Enter Sir Ralph in Woman's Clothes, to him Easy. Mr.
Easy. One comfort I have yet, that my Wife is in my hands to handle how I
please, I Will be revenged on her bones however, come impudence let me take you
into examination, nay never hide your face, for you are past blushing, come to
your Catechize, come.


Sir Ralph. O Lord! what shall I do now? my Nuncle knows all, and I shall be
hanged. aside


Mr. Easy. Had thou had fear before thy eyes, thou could not ha'been, to
abomination, wicked?


Sir Ralph. I, I, it is plain, I do confess I am something wicked. cries


Mr. Easy. Are you so? where learnt you this ha? at Church?


Sir Ral. No indeed Sir, I have not been at Church these many years.


Mr. Easy: Oh impudence! to confess this to me! was it for this, I took thee
into my house? needy, and poor, and made Mistress of all my family, my goods,
my wealth, and now do thou contrive to Cuckold me, to entertain a lewd Rascal
to Whore thee, to mine, and thy eternal shame, what answer can thou make?


Sir Ralph. Hey toss! the old Man's mad, what the Devil does he mean now? aside


Mr. Easy. You must have your youngster with a Pox to you, I was the old Fool,
the Cuckold, the Ass, to bear all, I, what say you in your vindication?


Sir Ralph. I am in good hope he does not take me, to be me, I were best to say
nothing for fear he should know me. aside


Mr. Easy. Speak impudence, and tell truth, for it shall be thy last.


Sir R. How! my last? I had as good speak and be hanged, as have my throat cut
silently, I don't like this same dying of any sort. aside


Mr. E. What say you Mrs. Jilt, what say you for your self? not a word? I Will
break silence then, take that, and that -- and that, beats him.


Sir Ralph. Oh Plague of your chastising, hold, hold!


Mr. Easy. Oh are you plyant, are you Mistress?


Sir Ralph. Yes Sir as plyant as you shall be immediately.


Gets a Battoon and beats Easy. Mr. Easy. Hold, hold, Murder, murder, do
thou add this to thy other wickedness? of chastising thy own natural Husband.


Sir R. You lie Sir, you lie, I am none of your Wife, I defy thee, renounce me
quickly, or I Will beat thee into nothing.


Mr. Easy. Renounce thee? yes I do renounce thee, for thou art a most notorious
Whore, and I scorn thee.


Sir Ralph. I will beat thee, till thou deny that too, come Sir about, about,
exercise your musty part, come Sir. beats him again.


Mr. Easy. Murder, murder! no help? shall I be killed like Acteon with my own
Bitch, ha?


Enter Amorous disguised, and Grace. Sir Ralph. Nay, now I shall be betrayed.


Amor. Dear Madam! why so cruel! let me interpose?


Mr. Easy. Who art thou.


Amor. One Sir, related to you now, I am Amorous and thy Kinsman.


Mr. Easy. How! oh undone! undone!


Amor. Not so Sir, Grace will give me a better Character, and you must be
contented for we are married Sir.


Grace. Yes indeed Sir, we are married, and beg your good liking of it.


Sir Ralph. Amorous alive! and married to Grace? nay then it is no time to
dissemble.


Mr. Easy. Oh miserable man! Grace married to thee? how many misfortunes arrive
on the neck one of another to make me unhappy, my Wife a Whore, and my Niece
married, oh, oh, ho.


Sir Ralph. Nay Sir, I Will keep you company, for I am the miserabler man of the
two.


Mr. Easy. Why who are you?


Sir Ralph. Would I had a Wife, to have been a Whore too for me, would I had
been the biggest Cuckold in London, so I had had Grace and all her money.


Mr. Easy. Worse, and worse! what art thou?


Sir Ralph. What am I? what should I be? a man as thou art, I am --


Amor. Sir Ralph Spatter?


Sir Ralph. Yes, that I am, i am sure you have used me scurvily.


Mr. Easy. This not my Wife?


Sir Ralph. No, not your wife Sir, I would I were any thing but Sir Ralph, any
thing but damnable cheating, cozening woman.


Grace. I always told you Sir Ralph, that I would never marry any but Mr.
Amorous:


Sir R. I thought I had made him sure, why Sir if it were not you that was
dead? who was it I killed?


Amor. Sir, I will show you presently. Goes out, and brings in Jo in Amorous 's
Clothes.


Sir Ralph. How! my own man! Io! nay if I had thought t'had been but him that I
killed, I had never took this disguise.


Io. Why Sir, had I been killed, you would as soon have hanged for it, as for
Mr. Amorous.


Sir Ralph. Why, thou were not dead then?


Io. No indeed Sir, which was no fault of yours, but of my own natural ability,
for you laid it on, without mercy.


Sir Ralph. It Is no matter, why did not you speak then?


Io. Because you would not let me, nor hear me when I did, but I thank my stars
you are served in your kind.


Sir Ralph. And did thou know of the going away of these two Lovers?


Io. Yes Sir, but durst not resist them, I would have pursued 'em, had you
given me leave to speak.


Sir Ralph. How got you loose and be hanged, when the Steed was stolen?


Io. By great good Fortune, Mrs. Peg coming to look for Mr. Amorous his dead
body as you directed, found me, and untying me, saw 'twas I, and conjured me in
return to that good office, not to come into your presence, till I knew Mr.
Amorous, and Mrs. Grace, were married.


Sir Ralph. How! Rogues amongst our selves? my own servant turn upon me, well
Jo, well, I Will be even with thee for this, however I thrive.


Mr. Easy. Well, since I cannot strive against fate, and that I think I am not
long lived, I will say Heavens bless you together; and you Sir Ralph, I only
desire to know how you came in my Wives Night-cloaths, 'twas not long since you
past out of my house, boasting your love for my Wife, and telling me --


Sir Ralph. Who I Sir, no, no, 'twas not I, alas I flew hither by Peg's advice
for refuge, but I find 'twas only a trick to abuse me with, and to help your
Wife to make an escape.


Mr. Easy. Escape! Why, is my Wife gone? nay then by this time she has acted,
what before was but designed, and by this time I am a most formidable monster,
however I am arrived to this knowledge, that nothing can oppose a woman's will.
But I Will be divorced from her, and let her see, what her new Gallant will do.


Enter Courtwell, and Camilla. Mr. Easy. What Is here to do, more mischief? nay,
nay, never bow to me, I imagine what it is you would say; pardon me Sir for the
freedom I have taken in choosing a Wife without your approbation, and so forth.


Court. You are in the right Sir.


Mr. Easy. Am I so Sir? A Pox take ye all, may you be Cuckolds as great as I
am! and have the consolation to know it, as well as I do, with all my heart, I
say, with all my heart, de' ye hear?


Enter Mrs. Woodbee and Clare. Wood. Sir, I am come, not out of kindness to
you, but revenge, to let you know --


Mr. Easy. That I am a Cuckold, a contented yiedling Cuckold, yes spare your
pains, I know it, I know it, Mistress do you hear, I know it, and am contented, and
what have you to say to this, ha?


Wood. I am glad you know your misery as well as I do mine.


Mr. Easy. Thine? I wish no better companion, much good may it do you, do you
hear? very much good, oh it lightens my heart!


Wood. I have a Husband Sir --


Mr. Easy. Yes, and I have a Wife -- Confound her --


Wood. And do you know my Husband is the man that Cuckolds you?


Mr. Easy. How! thy Husband! still better, and better! I desire no greater
Plague should befall you, then to feel what I do.


Wood. You are very uncharitable, but Sir I find my heart much at ease, and
since this common Calamity has befal'n me, I am resolved to make the best on it,
I have put off my Husband, and intend to entertain a Gallant.


Court. Faith Madam i am sorry I cannot serve you, for i am newly entering upon
that dangerous Sea, where you have been too lately ship-wrack't.


Wood. Why Mr. Courtwell, you are not married?


Court. Yes indeed am I.


Clare. Faith Madam, i would 'en think of Mr. Perigreen, he is very pretty, and
very young.


Court. Say thou so Clare? to thy hearts breaking, behold, that pretty young
Gentleman is become a Lady, and my Wife, Clare.


Clare. Is he? well there is no trust in humane things! well the Town's wide,
and many distressed Gamesters will be glad upon a loosing hand, to be kind.


Wood. Nay if Mr. Courtwell be gone, I will never think of his Sex more, but
thus kind I Will be to Lovechange, to beg of you Mr. Easy, to resign your Wife to
him, being much fitter to be his Mistress.


Mr. Easy. I do renounce her, let her do what she will, I Will have a Mistress
too, and will be young again, what say you Betty?


Betty. Sir, I never liked an old man much, especially having been so lately a
Lady to a young Knight.


Sir Ralph. Sure Jo, I Will take thy counsel, 'twere simple to go home and be
laughed at, as all the Country will do, if I return without a wife.


Io. Besides Sir, you will have your thousand pounds again.


Sir Ralph. I, I, I considered that too man! come Mrs. Betty if you think fit,
I Will 'en take you instead of Mrs. Grace, ungrateful Grace. --


Grace. Indeed Sir Ralph, she will make a good wife.


Sir Ralph. She Is the worse for thy recommendations, but however she shall take
the wall of her Mistress.


Mr. Easy. Well said Sir Ralph, I like your resolution, I will be young again,
and gay, and I will like every Extravagance, here take Betty, and we will send for
the music; I will dance, and forget all sorrow, oh that my Wife, my kind, my
handsome young Wife, were here now, I would give her to Lovechange, yes
heartily, and wish 'em joy together, come, some music there, I will not ask
you Amorous, what settlement my Niece has, for I believe she deserves none,
they will be all alike, all turn -- it is no matter what -- nor you Nephew, I
will not ask what Fortune your Wife has, for be she rich, or be she poor, she
will prove an errant -- Much good may't do you Sir, I am young again, and will
live as lewdly as the best of you, come fall to dancing, be merry, very merry,
whilst you may, for sorrow will come fast enough I Will warrant ye, come, come, to
Frisking, to Frisking. They Dance.


Enter Lovechange and Mrs. Easy in Masquerade. Lov. By your leave Sir --


Mr. Easy. Gentlemen you are welcome, very welcome.


Mrs. Easy. I doubt you would recall that word, if you knew who we were.


Mr. Easy. You are mistaken Sir, I care not if you be Lovechange, and my
quondam Wife, do you hear, you are still welcome.


Lov. Say you so Sir, then have at ye. discovers


Mr. Easy. So, I like this well, I am pleased, wondrous pleased, here Sir,
instead of affronting you, I will present you, come Sir, never hang back, I
know you well, here -- live -- and lie -- and be hanged -- together if you
please, with all my heart do you hear? I am not angry, no the business is done, I
am a Cuckold that is not my fault, but I will not be a Fool, and so, much good
may it do you kindly.


Mrs. Easy. Well Sir, I thank you, it is no disgrace to be a Mistress as the
World goes.


Lov. Faith Sir, in this gift, you have been so generous, and obliging, that I
have nothing to return but my Wife, by my troth Sir, try her, your Nephew has
found her brisk and active, she is a good soul, she made an excellent Wife for
the time, perhaps she may repair by you, the loss she has sustaind by me.


Easy. But while these gods Almighty, Guinneys reign, shows a purse
The needy Miss, though chaste, can scarce contain
Religion, and her Hosts of Virtues, prove
Too yiedling, to resist such power of Love.
Jove never rained in Gold, but you found Laps,
Without respect to after Thunderclaps:
The loose Gallant grown poor, must yield, and then
Hey for old Wine, old Treasures, and old Men.

FINIS.
The Epilogue.
WHat has our Poet done you look so big,
Has he not treated you with brisk Intrigue?
Some with dull Morals, would affront the Age,
And make a Conventicle of the Stage.
Should he, but treat you with such things as those be:
Damn the sententious Fop -- come -- let us to Mosely.
Would ye recall some stories of your own,
What on this Tuft, what on that Bank was done,
Our Play perhaps uncensur'd might have gone.
You Rogue cries one, behold on yonder side,
I joy to name it; I, and Phillis died:
Another with fierce Indignation raped,
Cries, Damn her for a Whore there were I Clap't:
Another year, whoever lives, and sees,
I fear you will rub the Rind off from the Trees.
Yet for all this, nothing can relish well,
Unless we huff the gods, and hector Hell:
With Wit, and Women, you deal much at one,
First you debauch, and then you cry 'um down.

