Mac Flecknoe, OR A SATYR UPON THE TRUE-BLEW-PROTESTANT POET, T. S.

By the Author of ABSALOM and ACHITOPHEL

LONDON, Printed for D. Green, 1682.

Mac Flecknoe, OR A SATYR UPON THE True-Blew-Protestant POET, T. S.
ALL humane things are subject to decay,
And when Fate Summons, Monarch's must obey;
This Flecknoe found, who like Augustus young,
Was called to Empire, and had Governed long;
In Prose and Verse was owned without Dispute,
Through all the Realms of Nonsense, Absolute;
This Aged Prince now flourishing in Peace,
And blessed with Issue of a large Increase,
Worn out with Business, did at length Debate,
To settle the Succession of the State,
And Pond'ring, which of all his Sons were fit
To Reign, and Wage Immortal Wars, with Wit,
Cried, it is Resolved (for Nature pleads, that he
Should only Rule, who most resembles me,)
Shad -- alone my perfect Image Bears,
Mature in Dullness from his Tender Years;
Shad -- alone of all my Sons, is He
Who stands confirmed in full Stupidity;
The rest, to some faint meaning make Pretense,
But Shad -- never deviates into Sense;
Some Beams of Wit on other Souls may Fall,
Strike through and make a Lucid Interval;
But Shad -- Genuine Night admits no Ray,
His rising Fogs prevail upon the Day;
Besides, his goodly Fabric fills the Eye,
And seems designed for thoughtless Majesty;
Thoughtless as Monarch Oaks that shade the Plain,
And spread in solemn State* supinely Reign;
Heywood and Shirly were but Types of Thee,
Thou last great Prophet of Tautology.
Even I a Dunce of more renown then they,
Was sent before but to prepair thy way;
I coursly Clothed in Drugget Russet, came
To teach the Nations in thy greater name;
My warbling Lute, the Lute I whilome strung*
When to King John of Portugal I Sung,
Was but a prelude to that Glorious Day,
When thou on Silver Thames did cut thy Way,
With well timed Oars before the Royal-Barge,
Swelled with the Pride of thy Caelestial Charge,
And big with Hymn, Commanders of an Host,
The like was nere in Epsom Blankets Tossed.
Methinks I see the new Arion Sail,
The Lute still Trembles underneath thy Nail;
At thy well sharpened Thumb, from Shore to Shore
The Treble squeaks for fear, the Bases Rore;
Echo from Pissing-Alley, Shad -- Call,
And Shad -- they resound from Aston-Hall;
About thy Boat the little Fishes throng,
And gently waft the over all along;
Sometimes as Prince of thy Harmonious Band,
Thou weild'st thy Paper in thy Thrashing-Hand.
St. Andrew's Feet never kept more equal Time,
Not even the Feet of thy own Psyches Rhyme;
Tho they in Number, as in Sense excel,
So Just, so like Tautology they fell;
That Pale with Envy Singleton forswore
The Lute and Sword, which he in Triumph wore,
And Vowed he never would Act Villerius more,
Here stopped the good old Sire, and wept for Joy,
In silent Raptures of the Hopeful Boy;
All Arguments (but most his Plays) persuade,
That for Anointed Dullness he was made.
Close by the Walls which fair Augusta-Bind,
(The fair Augusta much to Fears Inclined)
An Ancient Fabric raised to Inform the sight,
There stood of Yore (and Barbican it Hight,)
A Watchtower once, but now (so Fate ordeins)
An Empty name of all the Pile Remains;
From its old Ruins Brothel-Houses rise,
Scenes of lewd Love, and of Polluted Joys;
Where their vast Courts the Mother-Strumpets keep,
And undisturbed by Watch, in silence sleep;
Near these a Nursery Erects its Head,
Where Queens are Formed, and future Heroes Bred,
Where unfledged Actors learn to Laugh and Cry,
Where Infant Puncks their tender Voices try,
And little Maximins the Gods Defy.
Great Fletcher never treads in Buskins here,
Nor greater Johnson dares in Socks appear;
But gentle Simpkin just reception finds
Amidst these Monuments of Varnisht Minds:
Pure Clinches the Suburbane Muse Affords,
And Panton waging Harmless War with Words;
Here Flecknoe as a place to Fame well known,
Ambitiously designed his Shad -- Throne.
For ancient Decker Prophesied long since,
That in this Isle should Reign a mighty Prince,
Born for a Scourge of Wit, and Flaile of Sense;
To whom true Dullness should some Psyche's owe,
But Worlds of Misers from his Pen should flow:
Humorists and Hypocrite's his Pen should produce
Whole Raymond Families and Tribes of Bruce;
Now Empress Fame had Published the Renown
Of Shad -- s Coronation through the Town;
Roused by report of Pomp, the Nations meet
From near Bunhill, to distant Watlingstreet;
No Persian Carpet spread the Imperial way,
But scattered Limbs of Mangled Poets lay;
From Dusty Shops neglected Authors come,
Martyrs of Pies, and Relics of the Bum;
Much Heywood, Shirly, Ogilby, there lay,
But Loads of Shad -- almost Choked the way;
Bilk'd Stationers for Yeomen stood prepared,
And Herringman was Captain of the Guard;
The Hoary Prince in Majesty appeared
High on a State of his own Labors reared;
At his Right Hand our young Ascanius Sat,
Romes other Hope, and Pillar of the State;
His Brows thick Fogs, instead of Glories-Grace,
And Lambent Dullness played about his Face.
As Hannible did to the Akars come,
Sworn by his Sire a Mortal Foe to Rome;
So Shad -- Sworn, not should his Vow be vain*
That he to Death true Dullness would maintain;
And in his Fathers Right and Realms Defense,
Would bid defiance unto Wit and Sense;
The King himself the Sacred Unction made,
As King by Office, and as Priest by Trade;
In his Sinister-Hand, instead of Ball,
Was placed a mighty Mug of Potent Ale.
Love's Kingdom to his Right he did Convey,
At once his Scepter, and his Rule of Sway;
Whose Righteous Love the Prince had practiced Young,
And from whose Loins Recorded Psyche Sprung;
His Temples (last) with Poppey were o'respread,
That Nodding seemed to Consecrate his Head*
Just at that point of time, (of Fame not lie*)
On his Left Hand Twelve Reverend Owls did fly;
So Romulus ('it is Sung) by Tiber's Brook,
Presage of Sway from Twice six Vultures took;
The advancing throng loud Acclamations make,
And Omens of the future Empire take;
The Sire then shook the Honors on his head,
And from his brows damps of Oblivion Shed:
Full of the filial Dullness long he stood,
Repelling from his Breast the Raging God,
At length burst out in this Prophetic Mood.
Heaven bless my Son, from Ireland let him Reign
To fair Barbados on the Western Mayn,
Of his Dominion may no end be known,
And greater than his Fathers be his Throne;
Beyond loves Kingdoms may he sttetch his Pen,
He paws'd -- and all the People cried -- Amen.
Then thus continued he, my Son advance
Still in new Impudence, new Ignorance,
Success let others teach, learn thou from me,
Pangs without Birth, a fruitless Industry.
Let Virtuoso's in five Years be Writ,
Yet not one thought accuse thy Soul of Wit;
Let Gentle George with Triumph Tread the Stage,
Make Dorimant betray, and Loveit rage,
Let Cully Cockwood, Fopling charm the Pit,
And in their folly show the Writers Wit;
Yet still thy fools shall stand in thy Defense,
And justify their Authors want of Sense,
Let them be all of thy own Model made
Of Dullness; and desire no Foreign Aid,
That they to after Ages may be known,
Not Copies drawn, but Issues of thine own;
Nay, let thy Men of Wit too be the same,
All like to thee, and diffring but in Name;
But let no Alien Sydney Interpose,
To lard with Wit thy hungry Epsome Prose:
And when false Flowers of Rhet'rick thou would cull
Trust Nature, do not labor to be dull;
But Write thy best on the top, and in each line
Sir Formal's Oratory Wit be thine;
Sir Formal tho unsought attends thy Quill,
And does thy Northern Dedications fill
Nor let false Friends seduce thy Mind to Fame,
By Arrogating Johnson's Hostile Name;
Let Father Flecknoe Fire thy Mind with Praise,
And Uncle Ogleby thy Envy raise;
Thou art my Blood where Johnson has no Part,
What share have we in Nature, or in Art?
Where did his Wit or Learning fix a Brand?
Or rail at Arts he did not understand?
Where made he love in Prince Nycanders Vain?
Or swept the Durst in Psyches humble Strain?
Where sold he Bargains? Whip-stich, Kiss mine A -- s,
Promised a Play, and dwindled to a Farce.
Where did his Muse from Fletchers Scenes purloin,
As thou whole Etheridge do transfuse to thine?
But so transfused as Oils on Water Flow,
His always Floats above, thine Sinks Below;
This is thy Promise, this thy wondrous Way,
New Humors to Invent for each New Play;
This is that Boasted Bias of the Mind,
By which one way to Dullness it is Inclined;
Which makes thy Writings lame on one side still,
And in all Charges, that way bends thy will;
Nor let thy Mountain Belly make Pretense,
Of likeness, thine's a Tympany of Sense.
A Tun of Man in thy large Bulk is Writ.
But sure thou art a Kilderkin of Wit;
Like mine thy Gentle Numbers feebly creep,
Thy Tragic Muse gives Smiles, thy Comic sleep;
With what e're Gall thou sets thy self to write,
Thy Inoffensive Satyrs never bite;
In thy Felonious Heart, though Venom lies,
It does but touch thy Irish Pen and dies;
Thy Genious calls the not to purchase Fame,
In keen Iambicks, but wild Anagram;
Leave writing Plays, and choose for thy Command,
Some peaceful Province in Acrostick Land.
There thou may Wings display, and Alters raise,
And torture one poor Word ten thousand ways;
Or if thou would thy different Talent suite,
Set thy one Songs, and Sing them to thy Lute*
He said, but his last words were scarcely heard
For Bruce and Longvile had a Trap prepared
And down they sent the yet declining Bard;
Sinking, he left the Drugget Robes behind,
Born upwards by a Subteranean Wind,
The Mantle fell to the young Prophets part
With doubled Portion of his Fathers Art.
FINIS.
A Gentleman having a curious Colection of Poetry by the most Ingenious of the
Age, Intends to oblige the World with a Poem every Wednesday Morning, and with
all New ones as they come to his hand.

Sold by most Booksellers.


