THE HUSBAND His own CUCKOLD.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the Theater in Little Lincolns -- Inn -- Fields, By His
MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. John Dryden, Jun.

Et Pater Aeneas, and Avunculus excitet Hector. Virg.

LONDON,

Printed for J. Tonson, at the Judge's-Head in Fleetstreet, near the Inner
Temple-Gate, 1696.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir ROBERT HOWARD, etc.
SIR,
ATrifle of this kind is so little worthy your attention, that I know not how
to make a fair way for its appearance, and beg you to give it audience. The
Muses are become so prostitute, that every Enthusiast begets a work on'em;
Plays are grown mere Foundlings, and generated so fast, that we find one or
more laid at the door of every Nobleman; and these impudent Begetters are not
satisfied that you give their unlawful Issue a maintenance and reering, but
have the Conscience also to expect a Reward for easing themselves on you of
their ungodly burden. Sir, I must confess I am little better than a lewd
Sinner of this Order, but have so much Grace and Modef^y at least to require no
Recompense where I ought to be begging Pardon for committing a slip of this
nature. I am confident I could not choose a more indulgent Foster-Father; and
though my very Name bears an accusation against me, yet I have the honor also to
be related to the Muses by the Mothers side; for you your self have been guilty
of Poetry, and a Family Vice is therefore the more excusable in me, who am
unluckily a Poet by descent. Poe^e is a Noble Exercise, and like a reserved
Game seems intended wholly for the recreation of Learned Gentlemen, or such at
least as have had liberal Education, and these have still succeeded best in it:
But we see the illiterate breaking in daily on the Quarry, and even those
assuming, to themselves the name of Poets, who never had any other call to that
Art beside the hope of a third day. If one half of us who set up for making
Plays, understood what Horace says in these Lines, it may be we should not
vainly presume to think our selves what indeed we are not.

Descriptas servare Vices, operumque Colores, Cur Ego, si nequeo, ignoroque
Poeta salutor.

Shakespeare among all the Writers of our Nation may stand by himself as a
Phoenix, the first and last of his Order; in whom bounteous Nature wonderfully
supplied all the parts of a great Poet, and Excellent Orator; and of whom
alone one may venture boldly to say, that had he had more Learning, perhaps he
might have been less a Poet. It Is certain the good nature of the Town suffers
any thing for the sake of Novelty and Entertainment, however meagre, and the
encouraging some miserable Writers, is to be allowed more an act of Charity
than Judgment; for though Poverty be generally the end of a Poet, I think it is
but a very lamentable beginning. There is a large difference between those, who
following the itch of gaining empty applause, mispend their time in writing
themselves into necessity, and such who spend their time in writing themselves
out of it; and where the Muse begins with the want of a Mealsmeat. The former
might be any thing else better than what they choose to be; the latter, because
they can be nothing else, would fain be Poets. It Is dangerous making a Pastime
of any one thing so long, that at last we are glad to embrace it as a
Profession; like those, who after they have melted all their Substance in
search of the Philosopher's-Stone, are forced in the end to turn Chemists. But
of this enough; for I am already conscious to my self of deviating something
from my Theme, and can only form this application out of what I have said, that
you, Sir, have prudently known how to make the best use of your Excellent
Talent in this kind, by applying it to your diversion, and the unbending your
Mind. By these means, you have happily given our Country a great Poet in your
Writings; and at the same time have not omitted the more necessary part of
giving her a Great Statesman, and Hero; to which Emi^ncy your Birth, Courage,
and Capacity have equally raised you. And should I enlarge on these Heads, I am
confident the World would not tax me of the least flattery, and I should only
be guilty of not giving you your due; but you are reserved for a better Pen,
and silence therefore is a good fault in me. I have only now to beg pardon for
sending so mean a Trifle so long a Voyage; it is so full of faults I know not
how to give it the name of a Play. The Italians when they know not what to make
of a thing, call it Un Pasticcio Inglese, what kind Complement they intend our
Country in the Expression I know not, but I believe they mean no better than a
Hotch-podge. It Is my first Poetical Cookery of this sort, and whatever it be, I
humbly submit it to your Censure, but more to your Patronage; and with it,

Sir, Your most obliged humble Servant and Nephew, John Dryden.
Rome, August the 20th, 1695. New-Style.
THE PREFACE OF Mr. Dryden, to his Son's Play.
I Have thought convenient to acquaint the Reader with somewhat concerning this
Comedy, though perhaps not worth his knowledge. It was sent me from Italy some
years since, by my second Son, to try its fortune on the Stage: And being the
Essay of a young unexperienced Author; to confess the truth, I thought it not
worthy of that honor. It Is true, I was not willing to discourage him so far,
as to tell him plainly my Opinion, but it seems he guessed somewhat of my Mind,
by my long delays of his expectation: And therefore in my absence from the Town
last Summer, took the boldness to Dedicate his Play to that Person of Honor,
whose Name you will find before his Epistle. It was received by that Noble
Gentleman with so much Candor and Generosity, as neither my Son nor I could
deserve from him. Then the Play was no longer in my power, the Patron demanding
it in his own right, it was delivered to him. And he was farther pleased,
during my Sickness, to put it into that Method in which you find it; the loose
Scenes digested into order, and knit into a Tale. As it is, I think it may pass
amongst the rest of our New Plays; I know but two Authors, and they are both my
Friends, who have done better since the Revolution. This I dare venture to
maintain, that the Taste of the Age is wretchedly depraved, in all sorts of
Poetry, nothing almost but what is abominably bad can p^se. The young Hounds
who ought to come behind, now lead the pack, but they miserably mistake the
scent. Their Poets, worthy of such an Audience, know not how to distinguish
their Characters; the Manners are all alike inconsistent and interfering with
each other. There is scarce a Man or Woman of God's making in all their Farces:
yet they raise an unnatural sort of laughter, the common effect of Buffoonry;
and the Rabble which takes this for Wit, will endure no better, because it is
above their Understanding. This account I take from the best Judges, for I
thank God, I have had the grace hitherto to avoid the seeing or reading of
their Gallimaufries. But it is the latter end of a Century, and I hope the next
will begin better. This Play I dare assure the Reader is none of those; it may
want Beauties, but the faults are neither gross, nor many. Perfection in any
Art is not suddenly obtained; the Author of this, to his misfortune, left his
Country at a time when he was to have learned the Language. The Story he has
treated, was an Accident which happened at Rome, though he has transferred the
Scene to England. If it shall please God to restore him to me, I may perhaps
inform him better of the Rules of Writing; and if I am not partial, he has
already shown, that a Genius is not wanting to him. All that I can reasonably
fear, is that the perpetual good success of ill Plays may make him endeavor to
please by writing worse, and by accommodating himself to the wretched capacity
and liking of the present Audience, from which, Heaven defend any of my
Progeny. A Poet indeed, must live by the many, but a good Poet will make it his
business to please the few. I will not proceed farther on a Subject which
arraigns so many of the Readers. For what remains, both my Son and I are
extremely obliged to my dear Friend Mr. Congreve, whose Excellent Prologue was
one of the greatest Ornaments of the Play. Neither is my Epilogue the worst
which I have written; though it seems at the first sight to expose our young
Clergy with too much freedom. It was on that Consideration that I had once
begun it otherwise, and delivered the Copy of it to be spoken, in case the
first part of it had given offense. This I will give you partly in my own
justification, and partly too, because I think it not unworthy of your sight.
Only remembering you that the last line connects the sense to the ensuing part
of it. Farewell, Reader, if you are a Father you will forgive me, if not, you
will when you are a Father.

Time was when none could Preach without Degrees,
And seven years toil at Universities:
But when the Canting Saints came once in play,
The Spirit did their business in a day:
A Zealous Cobbler with the gift of Tongue,
If he could Pray six hours, might Preach as long:
Thus, in the Primitive Times of Poetry,
The Stage to none but Men of sense was free.
But thanks to your judicious taste, my Masters,
It lies in common now to Poetasters.
You set them up, and 'till you dare Condemn,
The Satire lies on you, and not on them.
When Mountebanks their Drugs at Market cry,
Is it their fault to sell, or yours to buy?
It Is true, they write with ease, and well they may,
Fly-blows are gotten every Summers day,
The Poet does but buz, and there is a Play.
Wit's not his business, etc.

PROLOGUE,
Written by Mr. (...), (...) Mr. Betterton.
THIS Year has been Remarkable two ways,
For Blooming Poets, and for Blasted Plays.
We Have been by much appearing Plenty mocked,
At once both tantaliz'd, and over-stock'd.
Our Authors too, by their success of late,
Begin to think third days are out of date:
What can the Cause be, that our Plays will not keep,
Unless they have a Rott some Years like Sheep?
For our parts, we confess we are quite (...)
To read such Weekly-Bills of Poets damned.
Each Parish knows it is but a mournful Case
When Christnings fall, and Funerals increase.
Thus it is, and thus 'twill be when we are dead,
There will be Writers that will never be read.
W^y will you be such Wits, and write such things?
You're willing to be Wasps, but want the stings.
Let not your Spleen provoke you to that (...),
'Od^ife you don't know what you do, Sirs, when you write.
You Will find that Pegasus has tricks, when tried,
Though you make nothing on it but up and ride;
Ladies and all, I faith, now get astride.
(...) Characters, and Scenes, and Plots,
Is grown as common now, as knitting Knots;
With the same ease, and negligence of thought,
The Charming Play is writ, and Fringe is wrought.
Though this is frightful, yet we are more afraid,
When Ladies leave, that Beaux will take the Trade:
Thus far it is well enough, if here 'twould stop,
But should they write, we must even shut up shop.
How shall we make this Mode of Writing sink?
A (...) said I? It Is a Disease, I think,
A (...) Tetter that is not Cured with Ink.
(...) it spreads, 'till each the infection takes,
And seizes ten for one that it forsakes:
Our Play to day is sprung from none of these,
Nor should you Damn it, though it does not please,
Since born without the bounds of your four Seas.
(...) if you grant no savor as it is new,
Yet as a Stranger, there is something due:
From Rome (to try its fate) this Play was sent,
Start not at Rome, for there is no Popery meant;
Where ever the Poet does his dwelling choose,
Yet still he knows his Country claims his (...)
(...) an (...)-Born he sends,
(...), (...), on you depends.
Yet he (...) hope some kindness may be shown,
As due to greater Merit than his own,
And begs the Sire may for the Son atone.
There Is his last Refuge, if the PLAY don't take,
Yet spare Young Dryden for his Father's sake.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs (...), Written by Mr. Dryden.
LIKE some raw Sophister that mounts the Pulpit,
So trembles a young Poet at a full Pi^
Unused to Crowds, the Parson quakes for fear,
And wonders how the Devil he durst (...) there;
Wanting three Talents needful for the Place,
Some Beard, some Learning, and some little Grace:
Nor is the Puny Poet void of Care;
For (...), (...) our new (...),
Have not much Learning, nor much Wit to spare:
And as for Grace, to tell the truth, there is scarce one,
But (...) as little as (...) Parson:
Both say, they Preach and Write for your Instruction:
But it is for a Third Day, and for Induction.
The difference is, that though you like the Play,
The Poet's gain is never beyond his Day.
But with (...) it is another Case,
(...) without (...), may rise to Grace;
The Poet (...) more,
That if his Play be dull, (...) Damm'd all over,
Not only a damned Blockhead, but damned Poor.
But Dullness well becomes the Sable (...);
I warrant that never spoiled a Priest's (...);
Wit's not his Business, and as Wit now go^s,
Sirs, it is not so much yours as you suppose,
For you like nothing now but nauseous Beaux.
You laugh not, Gallants, as by proof appears,
At what his Beauship says, but what he wears;
So it is your Eyes are tickled, not your Ears:
The Tailor and the F^rier find the Stuff,
The Wit lies in the Dress, and monstrous Muff.
The Truth on it is, the Payment of the Pit
Is like for like, Clipped Money for Clipped Wit.
You cannot from our absent Author hope
He should equip the Stage with such a Fop:
Fools Change in England, and new Fools arise,
For though the Immortal Species never dies,
Yet every Year new Maggots make new Flies.
But where he lives abroad, he searc^ can find
(...), (...) Million (...) left behind.
Dramatis Personae.
Sir John Crossit. Old Landy. Sir Timothy Shallow. ^urch. Feewell, Kinsman to
Old Landy. Bellville, in Love with Lucy. Doctor Lorman. Scrible, a Scrivener.
Elliot, a Servant to Mr. Bellville's Uncle. Lady Crossit, Wife to Sir John.
Mrs. Lucy, Old Landy's Daughter. Mrs. Lurch, Wife to Lurch. Phill, Woman to
Mrs. Lucy. Grace AND Betty. Two WaitingWomen.
THE HUSBAND His own CUCKOLD.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir John Cro^it, and Lurch. Sir John. Neighbor Lurch, I am heartily
glad to see you, but why that melancholy Face, that Countenance in Eclipse, how
goes the World Man?


Lurch. How goes the World, Sir John? why how should it go with a married Man?
I have been Married a whole half year, in which time I have had more business
on my hands than a Secretary of State, have raised more Outworks than any
Governor of a Citadel to preserve my Wife's Chastity: In short, I am so broken
and brought down with this blessed half year of Wedlock, that at the end of the
next half, I am of Opinion I shall be Celebrated with the Anniversary of my
Funeral; the Doctors have almost given me over already.


Sir John. And the Midwives too, Neighbor; you have entered indiscreetly upon
this business of Matrimony, without making some necessary reflections. Why, in
the name of goodness, what could provoke you with these some fifty years, as I
modestly suppose on your back, at such an Age of ^umbling to take a Girl of
sifteen?


Lurch. Why, Sir John? to answer you with the same freedom what you
interrogate, this was my Reason; you are not ignorant, as being my Neighbor,
that I have thriven in the World; having so done, I began to bethink my self of
making a retreat from business, in order to enjoy the declension of my days as
comfortably as I could.


Sir John. In order to which, you took a Wife, a very pretty retreat from
Business and the World, and an excellent Cordial for a Man in a declining
Condition; then to finish the happiness of your retreat, you are most
abominably jealous, and take all the care imaginable to divulge it to the
World, by depriving your Wife of those Christian Liberties which all Wise Men
allow theirs; as you order your affairs, Neighbor, you had as good make a
public Proclamation in the Streets of London, I have a pretty young Wife, who
will make me a Cuckold, you do the same thing in effect already.


Lurch. Sir John, I am obliged to you for the Summary you have been pleased to
make of my present Condition; but methinks in the first part of your Discourse,
where you take notice of the little or no Comfort there is to be had in
Marriage with so small concern, you seem to forget that you your self are a
married Man.


Sir John. Forget, say you, that would be more than any married Man in
Christendom could ever do yet; but I remember it as seldom, and with as little
regret as possibly I can: I have been married now these ten years, that is to
say, I have served almost two Apprentiships to Matrimony, 'twere hard if I were
not Master of my Vocation.


Lurch. So it should seem indeed, by your advising me to allow my Wife that
Christian Liberty which you say all wise Men allow theirs; it is a Heathen
Liberty, a Crime Capital, the broad Road to Cuckoldom.


Sir John. I tell you, Neighbor, you talk like a mere Novice in Matrimony,
give me leave to tell you, it is in vain to consine them; for the more Women are
constrained and deprived of Liberty, the more eager they are in the pursuit of
it; if you vex them, they will cross you, it is an original perverseness they
inherit by Nature; why, I tell you once again they are the crooked rib of Adam,
they love nothing like cross purposos.


Lurch. It Is well there are no Women here to hear you; but still I say no
liberty; if I must be a Cuckold, I shall have this satisfaction at least, to be
made one my own may.


Sir John. It Is pity but your Wife should give it you; i am afraid, Neighbor,
I am afraid you have Capricorn gloriously ascending in your Nativity, you have
a very foreboding look with you.


Lurch. Sir John, you that are so good at decyphering other Peoples looks, had
best look at home; since I am provoked to speak my mind, I have observed that
there is a certain swindging two-handed well set black Doctor, who comes very
often to feel your Lady's Pulse, I think they call him the Ladies Doctor in the
Town, but he looks more like a Horn Doctor; I am of opinion your Lady is not so
often indisposed for nothing.


Sir John. You mean Doctor Lorman, that insignificant Fop Doctor, who has not
the tenth part of the Learning of a Mountebank in LincolnsInn-Fields, a mere
Crevat and Periwig one, who never knew beyond the composition of a Washball or
a Pomatum, or how to prescribe a Clyster for my Lady's Lap-Dog. He is not the
first Coxcomb that has passed with Women for a Man of Parts; but to confess
freely to you, Neighbor, I never yet suspected my Wife's Virtue with the
Doctor; I know her to be humorous and fantastic, and therefore as she is often
troubled with little indispositions, I am willing to let her have the Doctor
she fancies.


Lurch. You take a very prudent course Sir John, according to your Maxim of
Christian Liberty.


Sir John. This it is to be in company with a Man that is Jealous; Neighbor,
thou art just like those who are seized with the Plague, they are not satisfied
to have the Disease themselves, but make it their business to infect others:
all Husbands ought to avoid thee as the Contagion, thou art full of the Purples
of Jealousy. But no more of this, here comes my Wife.

Enter Lady Cro^it; leaning on her Woman.
Lady Crossit. Oh! Grace, I am so very weak and faint all of the sudden, that
except you hold me up, I shall scarely have strength to come to your Master.
Oh, Sir John, where are you? I have got such a dizziness in my, head, I can
scarcely see from one end of the Room to the other.


Sir John. What Is the matter, my Dear, what new accident has befallen you?


L. Crossit. Oh, Sir John, no new accident, it is my old misfortune, the
Vapors, a sudden faintness, a kind o^ a Falling Sickness, that reigning
Disease among Ladies of Quality. Oh! dear Sir John, send quickly, before I have
another Fit, for that fin^ Doctor, who is so Famous for Curing the Ladies of
their Vapors; Oh, oh, I am ready to fall, I am so faint; quickly, Sir John,
quickly.


Sir John. Have a little patience, my Dear, 'till I go to the door and give
orders -- Who Is without there? do you hear,

Goes to the door, Enter a Servant. Run immediately and fetch your Lady's
Doctor hither, desire him to come with all possible speed.


L. Cross. O fie, Sir John, how you give a Message to a Doctor of such a Repute!
I find I must word it my self, though I am so very faint. Do You hear, Fellow, run
quickly to the Gentleman your Master has mentioned, and present Sir John's
humble service to him, and besure you remember to give mine in particular --
This Fellow's such a Sot he will never remember half the Message -- And, do you
hear, let the worthy Doctor know I have had a most violent Fit of the Vapors.

Exit Servant. O ^ie, Sir John, what Servants you keep, what a beastly leg the
Fellow has made, and dirty'd all the boards of my Room.


Sir John. My Dear, you take no notice of my Neighbor Lur^ here.


Lady Cross. O Mr. Lur^h, I protest I never saw you all this while, I am utterly
ashamed of my self for being so unmannerly, pray Mr. Lurch how does the good
young Woman do?


Lurch. Whom does your Ladyship mean, if I may be so bold?


L. Cross. I mean the good young Woman your Wife.


Lurch. I left her at home very well, at your Ladyship's service, under Lock
and Key.


Aside. L. Cross. I need not ask you how you like a married Life, you are but in
Hony-Moon yet.


Lurch aside. If there be a hony-Month in Marriage, I should be glad to find
it; but I Will swear I have felt nothing but the Sting, without one drop of the
Honey hitherto.


Sir John. My Neighbor is but a mere Bridegroom yet, my Dear; by that time he
has been as long Married as you and I have been, he will be able to give a good
account of it. What say you, Neighbor, to ten years of Matrimony?


Lurch. Why I say, Sir John, that in half that time Matrimony would give a
better account of me.


L. Cross. I protest, Mr. Lurch, I forgot to ask you one Question, is your Wife
never troubled with Vapors?


Lurch. O yes, of all sorts, Madam. I am sure she Hectors and Vapors me
sufficiently.


Aside. L. Cross. It Is a sign she is well born, for Vapors are more frequent
among Persons of Quality, than those of mean Condition; I believe I* have the
ablest Physician in all Christendom for removing of them.


Sir John. Pray, Neighbor, let me recommend my Wife's Doctor to you, I Will send
him to visit your Spouse to morrow, or next day, or when you will.


Lurch. No, Sir John, I am in no haste, I thank you, my Wife is in no such want
of a Doctor yet, as yours.


L. Cross. You need not fear our sending the Doctor to you, Neighbor, he is not
so easily sent; he is not a Person who runs after Patients, on my word, the
whole Town runs after him. But what is the reason, Neighbor, you did not bring
your Wife along with you? I warrant you have left her at home all alone; sie,
you do very ill, Neighbor, it is enough to make a young Woman grow melancholy,
and despair; you ought to take her abroad, and air her sometimes.


Sir John. Come, Neighbor, I know my Spouse will be glad of some Company, to
pass away her indisposition; come, I will not be denied, you must step home now
immediately and bring your Wife to us, it is a deed of Charity -- But do you
hear, Neighbor, do not forget in returning, to come along with her.


Lurch. You might have omitted your last Commands, for here is a a swindging
black Doctor to be here, who looks like a Bird of Prey.


Exit. Sir John aside. So, I have taken a very good pretense to send him for
his Wife; the impertinencies of this Doctor, whom I expect every minute, will
make the jealous Rogue ^ass like a vexed Wasp.


Lady Cross. O (...), Sir John, why would you send for Company? I cannot endure
to receive Visits when I have got the Vapors: I am so indisposed at present, I
am fit only to be seen by a Physician.


Sir John. I thought 'twas your desire, my Dear, I did it to procure you some
Company to pass away time, and divert Melancholy, but you always pervert my
good Intentions.


Lady Cross. I Would rather you would procure me a Physician: Oh, oh, I Am so faint
again all of the sudden, your Arm quickly, Grace, your Arm.

Enter Dr. Lorman.
Grace. Courage, Madam, here comes the Doctor.

The Doctor sets his Wig in order, then advances.
Dr. Lorm. Sir John, after having professed the more than ordinary Concern I
had, when just now I was Informed by one of your Attendants, of the most
unwelcome News of your very Honored Lady's Indisposition; I ought to make a
just Apology for my appearance in this negligent and too familiar Habit: But I
have been so pursued and persecuted by several Persons of Honor at home, for
this whole Morning, that as I am a Professor of Physic, I have not had a
Minutes leisure, to compose and put* my self into a decent posture, in order to
visit and attend those Patients, for whom I reserve so much esteem and respect,
as I really do for your self, and much honored good Lady.

While the Doctor and Sir John Talk and Bow together.
Lady Cross. aside to Grace What do you think Graee, is he not a Comely, Proper,
Well-set, Black Man? He Is absolutely the ablest Physician in all Europe.


Dr. Lorm. Worthy (...), you confound me with your Goodness. But that I may not
neglect the great end for which I came hither, I must beg your permission to
approach your Fair Lady, and take the Moments of her Pulse.


Sir John. What a flourishing Coxcomb's this: A Patient might expire in the
while he is making a Compliment of Entrance, or setting his Wig in order.


Lady Cross. O welcome, Doctor, I have been dying for you, absolutely dying for
you, I have had such a terrible (...) of the Vapors; but the very sight of you
has half Cured me already.


Dr. Lorm. Why, that is not altogether impossible, Madam, for I have had
several Patients, who have protested to me, that they have discovered, I know
not how to express my self, a Jenescay quoyness in my Physiognomy, that my very
first appearance, I will not say has absolutely Cured them, but has given them
a present ease from the Distemper under which they then labored*


Lady Cross. Good Doctor feel my Pulse quickly; how does it beat? am I a Woman
of this World or no?

Feels her Pulse.
Sir John. aside. It Is a brawny Aesculapius, he is able to beget a whole College
of Physicians.


Dr. Lorm. Madam, you have a very uneven disordered Pulse, it beats an allarm:
But I shall order you a Tizan to rectify it immediately, as also (...) remove
those Obstructions from your Head and Stomach, which gene^te and beget Vapors.


Sir John. aside. The Rogue has got the Trick of the French Doctors, ho
prescribe a Tizan to every Disease.

Enter Lurch and Mrs. Lurch. Neighbor Lurch; I see you are a Man of your Word,
you are doubly welcome now.


Lurch. aside. Here is that Doctor whom Heaven confound.


Sir John. Doctor Lorman, this is a worthy Neighbor of mine, and this a Fair
Lady called his Wife, whom I recommend to you as a Patient, that she may li^
her self under the Protection of so able a Physician.


Lurch. aside to Sir John Methinks you are very forward in recommending another
Man's Wife, Sir John, but I shall desire hereafter, you would neither list my
Wife for a Patient, nor me for a Cuckold.


Dr. Lorm. to Mrs. Lurch Madam, I cannot but harbor an exceeding Esteem for
your person, in which, at the first view, I discover such transcendant Merits,
and as I have dedicated my Self and my whole Art, to the Service of the Fair
Sex, I should be infinitely transported, if ever I may be able to serve you in
any particular of my Profession.


Mrs. Lurch. Sir, I shall think my self highly honored, in being assisted by
One, whose Famous Cures have sill'd all Eyes with admiration, and all Tongues
with sufficient Matter of Discourse.


Lurch. aside. So, she is in with him already; now am I all over in a sweat, I
shall have him laying his brawny Fist on her Pulse immediately.


Dr. Lorm. As for my Cures, Madam, (but first let me beg the Honor of your
Fair Hand to consult your Pulse) as for my Cures, I say, they speak themselves.

Holds her by the Arm and Discourses, while Lurch endeavors to loose his Wife
from him. And though indeed my Public Profession is of Physic, yet I dare
aver, no Man in Christendom has a freer Hand in the Practical Part of Anatomy
and Surgery.


Lurch. O Lord, O Lord! but you had as good depose my Wife's Hand, Doctor, that
it may not be a hinderance to your Discourse.


Mrs. Lurch. No, the Doctor does me a particular Favor, and if it be no burden
to him, I am very well satisfied he continue it.


Dr. Lorm. It Is impossible, a Fair Lady's Hand should be a burden.


Mrs. Lurch. I am much troubled with a Noise in my Head, Doctor.


Lurch. And so am I, while your Tongue's there.


L. Cross. aside. I can bear this no longer, that he should Court any other
Woman in my presence; I knew this devilish Company would hinder me from
enjoying him all my self; but I Will be even with Sir John for this.

The Doctor lets go Mrs. Lurches arm, and her Husband slips his arm into its
place, which the Dr. receives, not knowing it.
Dr. Lorm. But now I will acquaint the Company present of some precious
Rarities of my own Manufacture.


Imprimis. I have a most approved water-wash for the Face, called my Lac
Virginis, which works wonders on the Fair Sex, in clearing and beantifying
their Skins; and this Rich Cosmetick not to be sold a Farthing under five
Guineas the Bottle, absolutely the greatest Secret in the European World.


Lurch aside. Absolutely the greatest Cheat in the whole Universe; how the
Rogue squeezes me.


Dr. Lorm. Secondly, I have most precious Pomatoms of all sorts, of my own
composition.

Thirdly, I have rare oiled Night-Gloves of right Roman Kid.

Fourthly, Plumpers for the help of decayed Ladies who are Cheek-fallen; Lead
Forehead-Pieces, all manner of Night-vizards, or Face-moulds, with several
other Gallantries of great consideration and importance; but for fear of
seeming vainglorious, I shall pass by in silence the rest of my Abilities, and
beg your Pardon, Madam, for keeping your fair hand a Prisoner so long, which I
thus Salute, to expiate my Crime with all due --

Sees Lurch. Sir, I am no Mountebank, I would have you to know I am no
Mountebank; Sir, let me tell you, I seldom or never knew any Person who made a
jest of my Profession expire in his Bed -- I am no Mountebank, Sir.


Lurch. I know not whether I am in jest with you or no, but I Will swear you
have been in earnest with me, this hand of mine which you have worried so,
knows it very well.


L. Cross. Mr. Lurch, Let me tell you that you have neither a capacity to
distinguish, or good breeding in treating with such levity a Person so esteemed
for his many Virtues by all the World*


Dr. Lorm. Madam, you mortify me with your exceeding goodness, let the
Gentleman alone, he will meet with his reward one time or other, as I said
before.


Sir John. Doctor, will you favor me to order the Tizan you mentioned for my
Wife?


Dr. Lorm. You may command my Art, Sir John.


Sir John. Who waits without, bring Pen, Ink, and Paper quickly.

Dr. Lorm. writes.
Dr. Lorm* Let your Lady take this, and I Will pawn my Art it does the business,
it wants only to be superscribed; for when my Apothecary serves

Superscribes the Receipt. a Person of Quality, he always makes use of his best
Drugs.


Sir John. Now you have obliged my Wife, Doctor, I have another Patient to
recommend to you, which is my Wife's Lap-Dog, who is so troubled with the
worms, he is a very pest in the house.


Dr. Lorm. Sir John, I receive particular consolation in the Proposal, and
declare it to be one of the chief branches of my Profession, the knowing how to
Cure those tender Creatures, who are so Lady-like in their Constitutions.

Begins to write. What Appeliation or Nom de Guerre does your Ladyship use for
your Dog, that I may superscribe?


L. Cross. Cupid.


Dr. Lo^. His Age, Madam? that I may regulate the Dose.


L. Cross. Two years old since Candlemas last past.

Dr. Lorm. Reads. For Mr. Cupid, Lap. Dog to the Honorable the Lady Dorothea
Crossit, this will suffice.


L. Cross. Really I shall be overjoyed when my Dog's Cured.


Sir John. I must put an end to this impertinence, Doctor, I have some business
to dispatch this Morning, and therefore must beg your leave to --


Dr. Lorm. Let me see what is it a Clock, this is my Governor;

Looks on his Watch. How, is it possible it can be so late, I am a ruined Man!
certainly my Watch runs upon wheels, I shall lose my Reputation absolutely, I
should have made my whole tour of Patients by this time; when a Man is once
become necessary to the World, he is a Slave ever after. Ladies, I must suffer
an unwilling divorce from your fair Companies.


L. Cross. Adieu, Doctor.


Dr. Lorm. Adieu, dear Madam.


L. Cross. Adieu, dear, dear Doctor. Your Fee, Sir John your Fee quickly, and
remember my Dog's Fee.

Aside to Sir John. Sir John presses the Dr. to receive the Fee, who at first
seems to be repugnant.
L. Cross. You must force him to take it, my Dear; he is so modest.


Dr. Lorm. O Lord! Sir John, what do you mean to do? O pray, Sir John, what do
you mean? Sir John; your most humble Servant.


Sir John. You shall give me leave to wait on you down Stairs.


^rch. Sir John, my Wife and I have been troublesome too long to you and your
Lady, and therefore will take our leaves also.


Mrs. Lurch. I hope, Madam, I shall find another occasion to show how much I am
your Ladyship's most humble Servant.


L. Cross. Madam, you may command me; you will pardon me that I leave Sir John
to accompany you; I am so faint with the Vapors, I dare not venture out of
doors.


Sir John. Repose your self, my Dear, in your Chamber, and leave me to ^rve the
Company.

Ex. Sir John, the Doctor, Lurch, and his Wife. Lady Crossit and Grace remain.
Grace. Ay, you are much discomposed, Madam.


L. Cross. I am all confusion, prithee call 'em to Sing the Song I love.


SONG.
HElp, help, ye Powers Divine,
For sure from you this Lightning came,
That from his Eyes shot thorough mine,
Down to my Heart a subtle flame.
2.
I try to get (...), (...) always in vain,
For as fast as I fly, I fly with my pain.
There Is nothing my Love and my Life can divide,
For equally both to my Heart Strings are tied.
L. Cross. Do You hear, shut the door close: Well, we Ladies of Quality are all
Slaves to our Waiting-Women. We are forced to trust them with our Secrets, and
then they become our Mistresses:

Aside. Have you shut the Door?


Grace. I have locked it on the inside, Madam.


L. Cross. Do you remember, how many Rich Gowns and Petticoats, how many laced
Pinners, Hoods, Scarfs, and Nightrails, I have given you, since the three Years
you have served me, together with many other Vails, Perquisites, and Profits
you have enjoyed in my Service?


Grace. aside. What Tune will this Prelude end in, I wonder!


L. Cross. I do not call to mind my Favors; implying, that you are ungrateful;
but only to encourage you to persevere in the Love and Duty you owe me, and in
that Faithfulness and Secrecy I have always found in you. Secrecy, Grace, is
a most necessary Gift and Accomplishment, for one in your Station.


Grace. It Is a Gift with which very few of our Sex are blessed.


L. Cross. Art thou sure thou can be Secret Proof.


Grace. I think I am, Madam.


L. Cross. But it is such a Secret, that if ever it should be discovered,
especially by my Husband, I am a ruined Wife for ever. Have thou the gift of
Secrecy? May I make thee my Confessor? But first to stop thy Mouth, I give
thee that fresh Manteau and Petticoat I wore yesterday.


Grace. Now, Madam, I am sure I have the Gift of Secrecy, you may Confess with
safety.


L. Cross. Swear thou will be true to me.


Grace. What Oath shall I (...) by (...) that?


L. Cross. Swear by any (...), (...) (...).


Grace. ^hen, may I never wear ^ood, Scarf, Manteau, or Petticoat, more of your
Ladyships, when ever I am guilty of betraying my Trust.


L. Cross. Well, I must tell thee then, I am in Love, Grace! O that Doctor, that
Doctor, that Charming Doctor, I dye for him!


Grace. It Is pity your Ladyship should dye for want of a Physician.


L. Cross. O, this Doctor will be the Death of me.


Grace. That may be too, for it is one part of his Profession.


L. Cross. Did thou never observe, how often I have chan^d Color at the sight
of Dr. Lorman, my frequent Sighs, and languishing Looks, that have spoke too
plainly my Passion?


Grace. Yes, indeed, I always thought your Ladyship had a kind of a grudging to
him.


L. Cross. Ah, would it were no worse; I love him even to Madness.


Grace. Nay, now I find your Ladyship is (...) a desperate Condition.


L. Cross. Well, since I have made thee my Confident, I must inform thee what
Service thou must do me in this Business. Knowing my Husband was to go to
Barnet this day, and not return till to Morrow Morning, I went privately
yesterday to the Change, and bought a dozen of the finest Holland Shirts, lac^d
with the best Flanders Lace I could lay hands on: These I have put up in a
Band-Box, and intend you shall convey 'em to Dr. Lorman, in form of a Present.


Grace. A whole dozen of Shirts! does your Ladyship intend he shall wear 'em
all out in your Service?


L. Cross. Leave your idle Questions: I intend to place a Letter in the
Band-Box, which will sufficiently unriddle the meaning of my Favors.


Grace. I think the Riddle of your Favors is not so very dark, that it should
want an Explanation: Those Coats of Arms, as soon as seen, are blazoned; and
declare your Ladyship of the Family of Love, without a Herald to pronounce it.


L. Cross. However, don't you fail in your Duty, and when the Doctor Reads my
Letter, be sure you say a world of tender Things to him, such as I would, were
I present; thou have Wit at command.


Grace. I warrant you, Madam, he is ours; he must be a Doctor of Marble, to
resist such a Letter as you have writ. Besides, there is a Present will bring
him with a Vengeance.

Love and a Bribe will make him soon surrender,
Such powerful Forces make all Hearts grow tender.
Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE the Street.
Enter Feewell, and Belleville, meeting each other. Feew. DEar Harry, well met,
may I presume to guess whither you are bound in such haste?


Bell. No, my Friend, I Will ease you of that trouble, and let you know I am
bound with all my Sails full to the Port of Love; Mrs. Lucy, your fair Cousin,
Rich old Landy's Daughter.


Feew. It Is as I thought, you are a happy Man, you have the young Lady's heart,
and ^er Father's liking, you cannot fail of making a prosperous Voyage, and
carrying the Golden-Fleece off in Triumph.


Bell. True indeed, I steer as (...) with fair weather, and a prosperous gale
in sight of the Port; but, my Friend, there are so many Sands, Rocks, and
shallows to be passed ever I can enter, that if a Man be not an expert Pilot
indeed, he may perhaps founder in sight of it. I shall never think my self out
of danger, 'till I have cast Anchor in the Harbor.


Feew. Never doubt, your Person, Virtues, and Repute you have in the World,
with the deserts of a Thousand Pounds a year, are sufficient to secure you,
without other helps.


Bell. Of which I must own your Friendship to be the chief; but why does old
Landy torture me thus with these delays and puts off? it throws me into
continual agonies, and (...).


Feew. O my Friend, these Rich old miserable Fathers are always more
considerate than other Men, they never clap up a Marriage in haste, but haggle
to the last farthing, and love to have a lumping Penniworth of a Husband.


Bell. I wish he were less Rich, then I would convince him I value not his
paltry dust, and that I Court your fair Cousin for her own sake, not for the
sake of what he has to give her -- But it is late, and I must follow where my
heart is gone before me.


Feew. I am just now come from thence, and as soon as I have dispatched a word
of business, at a house within half a stones cast, I shall be back again there
as soon as you; for I have to tell you, that I have already ^ngag'd old Landy
and his Daughter to be merry at a Dinner I have (...) for 'em, where you, dear
Harry, must oblige me to make one. Besides, you may have known that Lurch the
Landlord of the (...) where they lodge, has newly married a young brisk Wife,
with whom I have a small Intrigue in Embrio. My design is to get this young
(...) of (...) dinner along with us, in which I desire your (...) my return,
for the beast is not a little jealous of her; he has carried her abroad
somewhere this Morning, and was not returned home when I left old Landy.


Bell. Ah, Ned, Ned, will thou never leave this single sinful way of living?
had thou not as good take up in time, and end honorably in Matrimony?


Feew. I have no design to make an end so honorable as yet, this little World
and I have something more to say to one another ever we part. Well, fare you
well, I Will be with you in a minute.

Exeunt severally. Enter Lucy, and her Maid Phil.
Lucy. Where Is my Father, Phil?


Phil. I saw him about a quarter of an hour since,
Walking about, with starts and pauses,
And talked, or rather muttered to himself,
Some grumbling words.

Lucy. Could thou not distinguish any?


Phil. Very little, yet I listened, for I fancied
'Twas you that caused his staggering:
But I could hear nothing, but sometimes
Too little; a very scanty pattern; then paused, and then,
But this Girl, then paused again, and then again
Repeated the words Too little.

Lucy. What power has Money in the mind it governs?
'Twill not allow Virtue to bear a price,
Nor purchase any thing but its (...) increase,
And yet afraid to use it.

Phil. I hope, Madam, all will be well yet;
Sure Mr. Bellvill's merits will prevail.

Lucy. Did he see with my eyes they would,
But Misers see no difference in Men,
But what is made by Fortune.
Enter Bellville.
Bell. Oh! my dear Mistress, in what fears I languish,
Your Cruel Father keeps me on a rack
By his delay; every look I take
From your fair sight, gives a fresh Torment;
To think what Curses rise against me,
To keep me from enjoying such a blessing.
Kisses her hand
Lucy. I have owned enough for you to guess
I share in your afflicton; press him now
To give his final Resolution.

Bell. But if he should deny, let me have yours;
And keep his slighted Wealth for his own load
That clogs his greedy Soul.

Lucy. O Bellville, though I love you
Enough to share the lowest Fortune with you,
I dare not show it by a disobedience;
Though to a Cruel Father, one shake in any Virtue
Will loosen all the firmness of the rest.
Enter Landy.
Bell. See where he comes, disturbance
Hangs on his looks.

Landy. O Mr. Bellville, what, in your old pursuit?


Bell. I have no other Object in this World
To wish or hope for, but the longed for Blessing
Of your fair Daughter.

Landy. And you forsooth, are languishing, I hope,
As well as your warm Lover; all in haste,
Reason and Consideration are grown Enemies.

Lucy. I hope, Sir, Mr. Bellvill's Merits
Are a just Reason for my value of him.

Landy. Yes, yes, send Virtue to the Market,
And see what 'twill purchase: Mr. Bellville,
I have perused the Authentic Copies
Of your Estate and Fortune; I think
It barely may amount to a Thousand Pounds per Annum.

Bell. Were it a Thousand Millions,
All were too little
To present your Daughter.

Landy. We are not talking of if it were,
But what it is; let me see,
A bare Thousand, as we suppose at best,
Is in troth too little, a very slender Patrimony.

Lucy. You talk, Sir, as if all Content and Happiness
Were only placed in R^hes.

Land. Hold your tongue, busie-box, when your Father
Speaks, meddle not in the Matter, Huzzy;
It Is I am to give the Money, you have nothing to give
But your Consent, a thing not worth a Groat;
It Is a fond property, that every Woman gives
To the first Man she likes.
You have been reading some vile Romance,
Where the sine outside Fellow gets the Lady:
I thought I had burnt all your Amorous Fables.
Enter Feewell.
Feew. What, in wrath, Mr. Landy, with your own Flesh
And Blood? Come, come, there is a Haunch of Venison
And a Bottle of Burgundy that stays for you,
Will set all right again.

Landy. Angry, Cousin Feewell! yes, very angry,
'T would move a Millstone to speak!
The Gipsey interrupts me just as I am talking
For her own good.

Feew. You know, Mr. Landy, she is an obedient Daughter.
And you may kindly end these troubles;
Tell me, when is my Friend Bellville to be made happy
With your fair Daughter?

Land. It Is that I was discoursing of, Cousin,
But things of Importance require a mature
And weighty Consideration; but she is in haste,
In a most Amorous haste; let me see,
A Thousand pounds per Annum -- (...) -- a thousand pounds.

Feew. So much my Friend has, I Am sure, besides
A considerable Personal Estate, which he is so modest
Never to mention; this joined to what you are
Able to give, may be a fair provision
To make a very happy Couple.

Land. It Is true, what I am able to give, I am able
To give; but by way of Bargain, and as I am
A dealing Man, I am obliged to lay down no more
In ready Moneys, than what is equivalent to
Mr. Bellvill's Estate.

Feew. He has an Uncle, that has fifteen hundred
A year, and no Child.

Land. And may give it I suppose to whom he pleases.
Besides, Mr. Feewell, there is an old English Proverb,
He that waits for Dead Men's shoes may go barefoot.

Feew. But sure, Sir, you ought to regard a little
The many Virtues and Deserts
Which render my Friend capable
To pretend to any Fortune.

Land. Alas, Cousin, Deserts and Virtues
Are mere Drugs now adays, mere Drugs,
No Man is looked upon or esteemed,
But he that has Money, and where there is most Money,
There Is most Worship; and commonly
Your Men of great Virtues, are great Beggars.

Feew. Our Forefathers, whom some will allow
To be as Wise as we are, were of another Opinion.

Land. What Forefathers do you mean?
A Company of ragged (...) Philosophers,
Who lived in Tubs, and Cellars, and worth nothing
But what they carried about 'em.

Feew. Yet that was a greater Treasure than
Men ordinarily can now boast of.

Land. What Treasure do you mean; their numbers
Of Vermin, and other troublesome Companions
That infested them?

Feew. I mean their Knowledge and Content,
Which Money cannot purchase.

Land. Nor could their great Wisdoms purchase a groat,
Look you, Mr. Bellville, we have been
Discoursing your Concerns; you have a zealous Friend,
And I join with him in a just and far esteem of you,
But that must not hinder my care and desire
To see that Gypsy well settled; nothing of Consequence
Ought to be done in haste, we ought to look
Before we leap; I like your Person, and
My Daughter likes you, but soft and fair goes far;
Time and Straw ripen Medlars.

Bell. It Is but just reason you should have
The satisfaction due to a Parent
In this, and all things that concern your Daughter:
But since you say you have no great objections
Against my Estate, my Person, or Conditions,
I humbly* beg your Promise as an earnest
Of all my future Happiness.

Land. Well, I promise you, as I may say; well,
I do promise you.
Enter Mrs. Lurch.
Bell. May all the Happiness --
Curse of her interruption.

Mrs. Lurch. So, there is Feewell, as I thought;
Aside. I must give him a hint that my Husband
Is to go abroad this Afternoon
To receive some Money; sure he will have sense enough
To take the hint, and give a civil Visit.
Though the Brute should leave me under
Lock and Key, as sometimes he does:
I have a Key as good as his, thanks
To my Revengeful Ingenuity.
Mr. Landy, your Servant; your Servant
Sweet Mrs. Lucy.

Feew. You come, Madam, seasonably, if you please
To grant me the favor of your most
Agreeable Company, with the rest of your
(...) here, to do Penance at a
Poor Batchelor's Dinner.

Mrs. Lurch. Were I absolute Mistress of my self,
And my own time, I could quickly resolve you
How much more I esteem a Batchelor's Treat,
As you call it, than what I am like to have
At home with a Husband, who this Afternoon
Goes to the other end of the Town
About some earnest business, and leaves poor me
All alone at home; I know not how to spend
My time alone, not I, I swear -- besides,
He is so wickedly Jealous, that if I do
But look on a Man, as I may now on you,
Mr. Feewell, he immediately thinks I intend
To make him a Cuckold.
She looks amorously upon him. Enter Lurch.
Feew. What a Tottipottimoy Tyrant it is,
She has given me a hint,
And I must improve it.
Aside.
Lurch. So, there is my Prisoner broke loose;
I no sooner turn my back, but she
Breaks Goal immediately; and talking
With Feewell, whose frequent Visits to
My House have given me suspicion.
Heigh day, how she (...) and jetts her tail
In and out -- this can be no less than a Plot
To Subvert the Government of her Anointed
And Supreme Head -- but I shall dissipate
The Conspiracy in a moment. Hark ye,
Hark ye, Mrs. Wagtail, I have something
To say to you, I have some earnest business
With you, by the leave of this Gentleman
With whom you are so close in Council.
She starts*
Mrs. Lurch. Earnest business! you have had no
Earnest business with me the Lord knows when;
But you always interrupt me, if I am engaged
In Discourse with any one.

Lurch. Very (...)! I shall make you know
That you ought not to be engaged with any
But your Husband, Madam; therefore
I Command you, in virtue of Holy Obedience,
To come away; come away, I say, and do not
Provoke me to make use of my Sovereign Authority.

(...). (...), fie, Mr. Lurch, now you are (...) severe
Upon your (...), the Company have reason to take
It ill; this Warfare of your (...) is (...),
It Is enough to deter a young (...)
That are going to join hands.

Mrs. Lurch. I am weary (...), I (...)
Forbear saying so; he never (...) me to see
Any Company, or go abroad, but keeps me
Under Lock and Key for whole days together,
He had as good bury me alive.

Bell. Come, Mr. (...), to make amends for the scandal
You have given, I propose that you permit
Your Wife to dine with us, and (...) you also
Be overruled by the present Court, to do
The same in order there, to make up this breach
Of Wedlock, and give ample security for keeping
The (...)* (...) Feewell (...) to
Day, and will be pleased to have his Table (...) with
Good Company.

Feew. '(...) my intention to have (...) the (...), had
Not you prevented my Request.

Lurch. I have a strong (...) your (...)
Are, but I shall put a spoke (...).
Aside.
Land. It Is a laudable (...), and I
Am resolved to see it executed, and therefore
I press you Mr. Lurch to muster with us,
And the other moiety, your little (...),
To be merry to day.

Lurch. Me you may (...), (...) my (...) no
Doubt may be pressed, but now (...) may
Come in as a Volunteer.

Land. Come, it lies on my (...)
To see this Domestic Fury (...);
Why Man, you are not (...),
Should you be left in this Fit alone (...)
Your Spouse, in hot blood you*
Might be apt to exercise (...)
Upon her.

Mrs. Lurch. Let him (...) his (...), (...) are already
Ceased between (...), I fear no (...) of
Manhood he can do.

Land. Come, no more of (...),
Prepare for (...) now but Mirth and Peace.

Lurch. Well, well, I submit, I must go lay up
Some Papers, and will be there as soon as
You -- Nay, Mistress, you shall along with me,
You shall march with your Chief Officer,
We'll be with you presently.
Exit with his Wife.
Bell. How this Fellow with his Soliciting
Jealousy prepares a Cuckoldom for himself.
Enter Scrible, a (...).
Scrible. Save you, Mr. Landy.


Land. O Mr. Scrible, what News with you*
I hope my Mortgages stand good?

Scrib. O very safe, Sir; but I have a business with you,
That may deserve your privacy.

Bell. What a Devil brings this ill-look'd (...)?


Land. Pray Gent. oblige me
To entertain your selves in the next
Room, 'till I call you; I know it is no*
Unkindness to leave you together.
(...) all but Landy and Scrible. Now, Mr. Scrible, the business.

Scrib. Why, Sir, I hope it is that will be
Acceptable to you; but first give me leave
To ask you, for I see Mr. Bellville
Here, and there is a Report he is to have your
Daughter Mrs. Lucy, I hope you are not engaged*

Land. Why, Mr. Scrible? he is a Gentleman
Of a fair Character, and an indifferent
Competent Estate.

Scrib. But I hope you are not engaged?


Land. Why, why, good Mr. Scrible?


Scrib. Why, Sir, I am come with a Proposition
To you, for a Gentleman of two Thousand a year,
His Name Sir Timothy Shallow, of a good Family
In the North; the Shallows of Shallow-Hall have
Been ancient there, his (...) clear, and as
Much as I tell you; a plain honest (...),
And a Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum*

Land. How, how, two Thousand a year?


Srib. Yes, as good a two Thousand as is in England, and the
Gentleman himself, upon my Account of your
Daughter, and what you were very well able to give,
Is so earnest in the matter, that he would needs
Presently present himself to you. I have lodged him
Hard by, at a Friend's House, 'till I made way
For his Reception.

Land. Umh, this is very unlucky.


Scrib. You (...) troubled, Sir.


Land. A little, Mr. Scrible.


(...). Do you not like my Proposition?


Land. Yes, Mr. (...), (...) like (...) Proposition
Very well; yes, very well, but I am --

Scrib. What, Sir -- you are much concerned.


Land. A little, Mr. Scrible -- (...) -- two Thousand a year.


Scrib. Yes, Sir, fairly and (...), without any the
Least encumbrance.

Land. I am unlucky.


Scrib. I hope you have not (...) your self?


Land. Why, in troth I have (...) a way,
Or as one may say, in a (...)
Given my Consent.

Scrib. But have you (...) any Agreement?


Land. Not at all, not in the (...); nay, I was not at all willing*
But always put off coming (...) the matter,
For I (...) Mr. (...) Estate
Of the smallest; but at last being
Very much importuned, I think I did say
I consented, or promised, or something like it.

Scrib. And was this all?


Land. Yes, the very all* and no more*
And the word slipped (...)
But just as you came.

Scrib. Well, well, (...) nothing in this
Actionable, and therefore if you (...) it*
I Will fetch Sir Timothy presently,
To present himself to you, and your Daughter,
And if you agree, we'll make short work
Of it, to prevent tricks and devices.

Land. Pray do, Mr. (...)* and in the mean time
I Will discourse the matter (...). (...)
A Man ought to do the
Best he can for his Child, you know; I Will tell him
So plainly, so pray (...) the Knight.
Two Thousand Pounds per (...), and a Lady
At first dash; not to be neglected.
Without there --
Exit Scrible. Goes to the door. Call in Mr. Bellville, and
My Daughter, I shall make a (...)
Pother amongst 'em; but my Daughter's
My Daughter, and if she be not wise enough,
I ought to be so for her*

Enter Mr. Bellville, leading Mrs. Lucy and Feewel* Mr. Bellville, I have often
told you, that Prudence
And Consideration ought to be used in
Matters of Importance, and the bestowing
A Child is a great one.

Bell. I hope, Sir, you proceeded so when you
Promised me the Happiness of your Daughter.

Land. Soft and fair, good Mr. (...), your
Importunities, and my Cousin Feewells, were
So troublesome, that I think I did in a
Manner, and as a Man may say, somewhat (...)
Utter something of Consent, Of to that purpose.

Lucy. So much, Sir, that sure I cannot justly be
Any others, but Mr. Bellvill's.

Land. Again Prattle-Box, at your old way, to
Meddle when your Father pronountes Matters
For your good.

Feew. But your Reputation, Sir,


Land. Ay, Sir, my Reputation shall be preserved.
By keeping my self from being thought an Ass,
By seeming not to know a Shilling from a Sixp^nce.
In short, I have received a Proposition,
From a worthy Knight for my Daughter,
With double Mr. Bellvill's Estate,
I say double.

Bell. But, Sir.


Land. No buts, Sir, no buts, I am bound in
Conscience, and must and will examine the Matter,
Therefore no more words, they are but wind.
The Knight will be here presently.
Enter Sir Timothy Shallow and Scrible. See where he comes.


Lucy. Bless me, what a Figure it is.


Scrib. Mr. Landy, this is the worthy Knight
I made the Motion for, who comes in Person
To present himself to you and your
Fair Daughter.

Land. He is very welcome, Mr. Scrible.


Sir Timo. Your Servant, Sir, and as Mr. Scrible
Told you, I come to offer my self a
Servant to your Daughter. I suppose,
Sir, this may be she.

Land. Yes, Sir, such as she is.


Sir (...). By your leave, Fair L^dy,
He Salutes Mrs. Lucy. By the Mass, I never blink'd my Eyne on
A titer Lass, in good Faith, Mr. La^dy,
You have a most bonny Daughter.

Land. Why indeed, Sir Timothy, I think she is not
Much a-miss, come, Lucy, hold up your Head,
Leave whimpering, Huzzy,
Aside. She Is bashful, Sir.

Sir Tim. In Faith, a most dainty Creature:
Look you, Mr. Landy, Ise (...) make many words,
I am downright Country all over,
I don't practice the fine Words, and
May be most of them the fashionable Li^s
Of the Town; but in short, if you and
The Lady likes me and my Estate, I am fully
Satisfied; I Will prod^ you the Particu^
Of an Honest Estate of 2000 l. a Year,
All lying about (...) Hall, where the S^llows
Have been known for many (...).

Land. A fair Estate, I confess, Sir Timothy,
And when you please to bring the Particulars,
We shall proceed, and I make no question,
But fairly on all sides.

Sir Tim. Nay, Ise not be long in doing that,
For I hate delays; besides, I hate staying
In this Town, I should be ^akt here in,
A little time.

Scrib. If Sir Timothy pleases, we will depart now,
And speedily return, with a full Account
Of every thing, and short Heads for an Agreement.

Land. With all my Heart, Mr. Scrible.


Sir Tim. Nay, I warrant (...) Ise ^sten Matters,
For in troth, Fair Mistress, I like you exceedingly,
And you shall live in the North, as well
As the Proudest of 'em all,
And have a Coach at your Command,
And if you take to Love Hunting,
I have as good a Pack of Dogs (...) ever laid nose to ground.

Scrible. Come, Sir Timothy, time calls upon us.


Sir Tim. I go, I go, Mr. Scrible; for this time farewell,
Good Mr. Landy, I shall be with you again
Speedily; farewell Fair Mistress, I assure you
I like you very much, exceedingly yf^ith.

Land. Come, Sir Timothy, I Will wait upon you out:
Lucy follow me, I have something to say
To you.
Exeunt Sir Tim. and Scrible, Landy and Lucy another ^ay.
Bell. Was there ever such a turn
Of Fortune, I fancied that Parchment
Rascal came for no good?

Feew. Was there ever such a Miser?
A Groat more purchases him from
The freehold of common honesty.

Bell. It Is insupportable to think of losing her.


Feew. Come, clear up, we will not lose her,
We'll pursue 'em close, this Northern Privateer
Shall never Board our Rich Vessel.

Bell. I Will sink him and my self first;
Before he has fair Lucy for his Wife,
I must be first unmarry'd from my Life.
Exeunt. Enter Lady Crossit, and Grace with a Band-Box.
L. Cross. Are you sure you are perfect in your Message?


Grace. I have it all without book to a tittle,
And your Ladyship has no more to do now, but to give me your Letter,
And fling an old shoe after me for good luck.

L. Cross. Here Is the Letter ready writ, Signed and Sealed,
Take it you, and put it under the Shirts,
That when the Doctor goes to look on the Present,
He may take it out with his own hands.

Grace. I like the Contrivance very well, however let me alone to guide him to
take up the Linen, and to put his hand upon it.


L. Cross. Use your own discretion,
I rely wholly on your Conduct.

Grace. Sir John is already gone to Barnet,
And there is no danger of his return 'till (...) morrow Morning,
For he is to lie at one of his Tenants Houses in the Town,
As it is his usual Custom.

L. Cross. Thou art in the right,
Therefore carry my Letter, and the Present immediately
To my dear Doctor, sure he will not slight the Summons
A Person of my Quality sends him.
Well, (...) leave thee to bring about the ^est;
And retire to feed my fancy befir^-hand,
With the thoughts of my Lover, 'till thy return;
Do but ^cceed, and bring him to my Chamber to night,
And I Will Reward thee beyond thy expectation.
Exit.
Grace alon^ Now if I can but play the Mistress of the Ceremonies,
And Conduct this Ambassador
To a private Audience to Night, my Fortunes are made.
Well, I find the Vapors her Ladyship complain of,
Were only a mist she cast before her Husband's eyes,
And the large Rewards she has promised,
Have caused the like effects on me;
W^o am to hear all, see all, and know nothing*
As they who keep a Treating-House connive
At all the Cheats and Vice by which they thrive;
When Mass and Miss in hugger-mugger come,
The officious Chamberlain strait shows a Room:
And though he more than guesses their Design,
He has no other but upon their Coin*
So I, as true a Chamberlain as he,
Am guiltless of the Fact, to get the Fee.
Is going out, when Sir John Crossit Ente^ at the same time in his Riding
Habit, and makes her start.
Sir John. Grace, is it you, what makes you start so?


Grace. To see your Worship returned so soon.


Sir John. I am returned, only to take a Copy of a Lease I forgot.
Where Is your Lady?
Grace (...) to bide the Band-Box.
Grace. Retired to her (...).


Sir John. What (...) you got there, that you (...) so,
And endeavor to conceal from me?

Grace. Some things that belong to my Lady.


Sir John. What things?


Grace. Only some new Head-dresses my Lady does not like,
And I am going to carry 'em back to the Change.

Sir John. Let me see 'em,
If they like me better than they do your L^dy*
It may be I may persuade her to wear 'em.

Grace. But I am sure you will not like 'em neither --
Besides, there are some things here, that Men must not see.

Sir John. If it be any thing that belongs to my Wife,
I am sure I may see it, and will see it.
I begin to suspect something,
Aside. Her starting, and endeavoring to hide the Band-Box m^kes me curious.
Open the Band-Box, and show me what you have got there.

Grace. It Is nothing but foul Linen indeed, indeed, Sin


Sir John. First Head-Dresses, and then foul Linen,
This is mere prevaricating, it may be she has stole something,
And I have seized her in the act of Conveyance.
Aside. Come, open your Band-Box quickly, or I Will force it open;
For I am in haste, and cannot lose time.
Open, Open, I say.

Grace. Why should you desire to pry into Women's Affairs?
I must not, and cannot open to you.

Sir John. I Will see that immediately.

Snatches the Band-Box away from her, and opens it.
Grace. O Mercy, Mercy, and I Will discover all.


Sir John. First, let me see what discoveries I can make without you,
Do You call these Head-Dresses?
Pulls' out one of the Shirts. They are very large ones,
And the Fashion is prodigiously increased.

Grace. aside. If he looks any further, he certainly discovers the Letter; and
I am ruined.

Sir John pulls out another Shirt, and the Letter falls on the ground.
Sir John. Item another -- But what does this Letter do here?

Reads the Superscription. To the Dear Idol of my Soul.



This looks like my Wif^'s Fenwork;

But now for the Contents.

Opens and Reads. I never thought before this fatal Hour,
Thus to confess the Naked Archer's Power.
Till now my stubborn Breast, like (...) shreld,
Slighted his weaker Darts, and (...) not yield.
That only Arrow (...) me through and through,
Which the well-ayming Bow-Boy shot for you;
Who rushing on me then in Fury came,
And took me Prisoner in your Mighty Name.



And so forth in Doggrel quite ^o the bottom: What can this LoveStuff mean? But
hold, here is a Post-scribble, I think in Prose; what says this?

Reads. Dir Doctor, my Husbane is gone to Barnit this Ivining, and duz not cum
bak tell cummorro mornin; the Nits are long and coll'd, and I am not accost^'d
to ly alon, bein firful^; I think no Parson so we^ quallifid to guard my Hon^s,
as you ar, and therefore (...) bold to beg yor swet Company to Nit, excuse this
(...) Lins, from hur, who is alw^s yor most umbel Sarvant:

Dorothy Crossit.





This is some of her own Ingenious Style and Spelling; However, there is Sense
enough in it to make me a Cornuto.

To Grace. Pray, Madam, what was your Ladyship to have for the Postage of this
important Letter; what reversion of the next Satin Gown or Silk Petticoat have
you been promised for this great Piece of Bawdy Service?

Grace. O Mercy, Mercy; Pardon me but this one time, and I Will never do so again.


Sir John. aside. That ^ealous Rogue, Lurch, who suspects all Wives as well as
his own, was in the right I find.

To her. Well I will be Merciful for once to you, but on these Conditions, that
you ^cerely unravel the very bottom of this Intrigue to me; and Secondly, that
you keep my Counsel, as you have kept my Wife's.


Grace. The bottom of the Intrigue is this; my Lady, who is deeply Enamored of
this ugly Fellow of a Doctor, went yesterday privately to the Change, and
bought those dozen of Shirts you have discovered in the Band-Box; and ordered
me just now to deliver them with this Letter, as a Present to him in her Name;
the rest you may easily understand by the Letter you have Read. -- I believe my
good Angel was the cause of your unexpected return; for just at that very
Moment when you surpised me, I had a qualm of Consclence, and was ready to
wave my Commission. Thought I, what, shall I be accessory to the wronging so
sine a Gentleman, as your Worship is, for the sake of that ugly Blackamoor
Doctor. Thought I, I Will never do it: -- Your Worship's a ^ine Gentleman: I
wonder ind^d, how my Lady can have the Heart to fall in love with such an ugly
Monster, when she has so fine a Gentleman as your Worship for her Husband.

Sir John chucks her under the Chin.
Sir John. Well, well, I am glad to be thought so by thee, thou art a forward
Girl, I have always had a particular Esteem for thee, and am resolved to
continue it.

aside. The Baggage is full of Wit, and taking; I have had a liking to her long
ago.

to her But do you hear, if you intend I should Seal your Pardon, you must now
do me a piece of Service.


Grace. Any thing, Sir, to serve you, and to show I intended you no wrong.


Sir John. Then thus; you must keep all secret from your Lady that has passed,
or is to pass between us two: In the next place, you shall pretend to have
delivered the Message and Present to the Doctor; and acquaint your Lady he will
wait on her at the time appointed; and I instead of goi^g to (...) will take
Possession of the Shirts, and play the Doctor in (...) this very Night.


Grace. But how will your Worship do, not to be discovered who you are?


Sir John. Why thus: I intend to come late, and you shall order it so, that my
Wife shall expect me in Bed; I shall have nothing upon me but a Nightgown, and
when I am just ready to enter her Room, you shall immediately let the Light
fall, or snuff it out, as by chance, so that I being undressed, and having
nothing to do, but to step into the Bed to her, there will be no occasion of
lighting the Candle again.


Grace. So far all goes well: But how will your Worship do not to be known by
Talking, and in the Morning before your departure?


Sir John. That Is easy still, for my Voice, when I talk in a whispering Tone,
will not be distinguished. Then I intend to put on one of the laced Shirts,
which will favor my design still more: As for my parting undiscovered in the
Morning, thou know it is late before the day breaks this Winter Season, and I
design to leave her before it is light, pretending fear of being seen to Morrow
by the Neighborhood, in the absence of her Husband.


Grace. You have answered all my Objections, and I promise to serve your
Worship faithfully.


Sir John. Do so, and I Will not only forgive thee what is past, but also Reward
thee Nobly -- Be sure you take care your Lady knows nothing of this my sudden
return by means of any in the Family.


Grace. There Is no fear I believe of that, for she is retired to her Chamber,
has there shut her self up, to Meditate, as she told me, and will speak to no
body all this Afternoon but me; when I return as she imagines from the Doctor.


Sir John. Well, I Will slip aside 'till about Eleven at Night, at which Hour
expect my Return, and get all things ready.

Exit.
Grace. Your Worship shall be served punctually, leave it to my Management.

Exit.
ACT III.
SCENE in Lurch' s House.
Enter Mrs. Lurch, and her Maid. Mrs. Lurch. 'TWas a Noble Entertainment Mr.
Feewell made us, Retty* yet I fed my eyes more than my stomach;
For every time I observed my Husband's head was turned from me,
I immediately cast an amorous look on Mr. Feewell,
Who seldom failed of catching it, and returning me another.
What did not he ask me with his Eyes?
What did I not grant him with-mine?
Our Eyes spoke faster, and explained
Such Thoughts no Tongues could utter:
It Is certainly a Language only of Angels, and of Lovers.
Mr. Bellville was the best Friend I had at Table;
He still plied my Monster of (...) with so many
Healths, and full Glasses, that he forced him
By mere strength of Wine, and Argument of Bumpers,
To change his natural ill humor for a good one,
And become a sociable Beast in Company
Yet he did not forget himself so much,
But that as soon as Dinner was ended,
He ordered a Coach to be got ready,
And hurried me home along with him;
And is gone to the other end of the Town to receive a sum of Money.

Betty. What would you say if Mr. Feewel should come to you now?


Mrs. Lurch. It Is not impossible.
For when I was going out of the Room where we were merry,
I remember I heard the Company talk something of breaking up.
Besides, I gave him a hint this very Morning,
That my Husband was to go abroad.

Betty. This very morning I did as much,
Fearing the Infallibility of Eye-Language
Might fail in such Particulars;
And told him, this hour your Husband was to go abroad.
For which, like a well-bred Gentleman,
He put a New Crown Piece into my hand;
It Is not the first I have had of him.

Mrs. Lurch. Then I am certain he will come,
If the Company does not detain him.

Betty. I hope you will be Civil to him, Madam, if he should come?


Mrs. Lurch. Oh, Betty, my heart's so full,
And I find my self in such a Confusion,
That I know not what I shall say to him if he should come --
Love has put me so on the rack of Expectation,
That I shall never be able to speak to him;
And I Am af^aid he will mistake my silence for a rebuke,
And be daunted in his Address.

Betty. Never fear, Madam, you will sind the benefit of your Tongue.
We Women never lose the use of it,
But in the Bed of Sickness, or of Love.
But should you be as mute as a Fish,
Do You think Mr F^wel does not understand the hanging of the Lip,
And the Languishing cast of an Eye half asleep?
Besides, Men have more ways to the wood than one;
When they see that Love and whining Passion will not work us,
And that we expect to be put to the Question,
They behave themselves like an undaunted General,
Who, resolved to storm a Fort, admits of no Parley,
And Puts all to the Sword.
(...), hist, what footsteps do I hear?

Mrs. Lurch. It Is Feewel, on my life; I tremble all over.


Betty. Let him come, we are two to one.
We'll give him as good as he brings, never fear.
Enter Feewell.
Mrs. Lurch. O Heavens! who is that, my Husband?


Betty. No, it is Mr. Feewel, Madam.


Mrs. Lurch. Sure Mr. Feewell has mistaken my Chamber,
For that of his Cousin Landy.

Feew. Joy of my eyes, it is impossible I should mistake,
When I have so sure a guide as Love to direct me.

Mrs. Lurch. You naughty Man,
How durst you venture to come into my Chamber,
When you knew my Husband was abroad, and I all alone?

Feew. That was the chie^est motive of my coming, Child.


Mrs. Lurch. If my Husband should find us two together,
I am ruined for ever.

Feew. Therefore we must prevent his coming upon us,
And dispatch my Love:
It Is no time now to discourse or think of an absent Husband,
When a Lover's present;
Come, prithee, I am in more haste than thou imagin'st.

Betty aside. He has the true knack of undoing us,
He has such a pretty kind of way with him, no Woman can deny him.
My Mistress is reduced to her Eye. Language already --
Well, I Will take a turn in the Garden,
And leave the Knight and the Enchanted Lady together.
Steals out.
Mrs. Lurch. What, is the filthy Girl gone,
And left me all alone with a Man?
Why Betty, help, help, where are you? I darn't call aloud now,
For fear any body should hear me.
Aside. Why Betty, Betty.
Softly.
Feew. Come, come, if Betty should hear,
She has more wit than to answer;
She knows you are in safe hands, come prithee, come this way a little,
And do not put me to lug so hard, thou dear Creature.

Mrs. Lurch. Bless me, what do you mean to do, Mr. Feewell?


Feew. Why, I do mean to bless thee, and my self too;
But in the first place, I intend to lock the door,
And after that, to retire with thee into the next Chamber,
And I Will tell thee the rest when I am there.

Mrs. Lurch. I hope you are a Man of Honor, Mr. Feewell,
And intend me no harm,
You see I trust you with my Reputation.

Feew. Ay, Child, I warrant thee,
Thou shall find that I am a true Man of Honor*
As they are retiring, Lurch knocks, and cries without, open the door there.
Mrs. Lurch. O my Husband, my Husband, what shall we do?


Feew. 'Sdeath, I fancied the Devil would thrust in his horns,
When you began to talk of him;
Is there no place to hide me in?

Mrs. Lurch. No place but an old Armory,
And there he will be sure to look in the first place.
Knocks louder, and bids open the door.
Mrs. Lurch. All I can do, is to disg^ you
In some of the Maids Clothes, that lie in the next Room.

Feew. Come, dispatch the Masquerade then, if there be no other way.
But 'twill not do, unless we (...) out fire, fire, and I sally in the smoke.

Mrs. Lurch. So, so, now get to that Corner --
Rush out upon him.
Having dressed him in a (...) and loose Sc^rves and Hoods, they cry out Fire,
Fire, Fire.
Mr. Lurch. Open the door, I say, open the door,
Or I Will break it open.
She opens the door, crying Fire still.
Mr. Lurch. Where, where? O my Papers, my Papers.

As (...) enters, Feewell rushes out against him, and throws him down.
Mrs. Lurch. I hope it is out again, 'twas but just begun;
I was so suddenly frightened, that it made me cry out.
Enter B^tty. O Betty! I hope the Fire's out?


Betty. Yes, Madam, you ne^d not be afraid.


Lurch. A very sudden Fire, and as suddenly put out.
There was a devilish strong dockt Jade gave me a broad side,
And whirld me about like a Gigg;
You had got a very lusty Lady, a Fortune Tellers, I suppose,
Or a Cuckold-maker in Woman^ Clothes,
Which amounts to the same thing.

Mrs. Lurch. If a Broom were dressed up in Woman's Clothes,
Your Jealousy would make a Man of it immediately.
If you continue to mistrust my Virtue at this rate,
I Will give you cause to do so in reality.

Lurch. I think that is pretty well performed already.


Mrs. Lurch. None but such a jealous head as yours,
Could harbor such a suspicion. How came you, pray,
To return so soon from the other end of the Town?

Lurch. Because I remembered I was invited to a
Burial that way, as you know (...) morrow,
And so I turned back, resolving to do it all under one.

Mrs. Lurch. No, 'twas your jealousy brought you back,
Only to plague me with your hotheaded Fit*
Be as innocent as I will, I must be Condemned;
You're a great Encourager of Virtue indeed;
You ought in Conscience to ask my Pardon on your knees,
And it is well I have the Charity to forgive you.

Lurch. Forgive me, very good, forgive me!


Mrs. Lurch. Yes, forgive you, for thus publishing
Your own Folly, and my Dishonor.

Lurch. Excellent! come, we'll go in and consider the Matter; If any one
wilfully destroys himself, they say he is felo de se, she shall not have cause to
call me Cuckold de se, I Will not be Jilted out of my Care and Vigilance:

Plots may be better laid, and then, if luck hold,
I may ask Pardon for being made a Cuckold.
Exit.
SCENE II. of the Third Act.
Enter Landy. Land. Sir Timot^y has sent word he is coming.
It Is well, very well, Mr. Bellville must give way;
A Knight, and 2000 per Ann. not to be resisted.
Let Fools please themselves with empty Notions
Of fine Parts, and outside Virtu^.
A dressed up fashionable Gentleman --
All fading Fooleries, their value a Notion;
Give me the solid lasting Properties
Of Land, and Money -- O here he comes.
Enter Sir Timothy, and Scrible.
Sir Timothy, you are a punctual Man, I like it well,
I love punctual Proceedings, Mr. Scrible.

Sir Tim. Nay, Sir, you shall always find me
Tite and honest, plain-dealing, and steady;
Good faith, Ise no waverer.

Scrib. Sir Timothy has hereby brought you
A true and honest particular of his Estate.
I have also prepared some short Particulars,
With Blanks for either to Sign, if you so agree;
For Sir Timothy is much taken with you Daughter, and is in haste.

Sir Tim. Why, look you Mr. Landy,
(Father I hope that shall be) I am at a word, I hate delays,
Besides, I would fain be rid of this smoaky Town, so plaguey full of noise,
That a Man had as good live in a Belfry when they ring a Peal,
And things so strangely dressed, as if it were all a Poppet-show;
Ise even thought I had met two or three Ghosts,
They said they were the Sparks of the Town,
And called them by a strange name, Boughs, or something like it;
'Slid they looked as if they had been haled out of Meal-Tubs,
Tom (...) our Miller does not go more besinea^.

Land. For my part, Sir Timothy, I'like an honest plain Country Gentlem^n,
there is no tricks covered in fine words to abuse one another; a Civil-war of
Tongues in this Town rages perpetually.


Sir Tim. Nay, in good faith, Ise carry your Daughter to Peace and Plenty, and
show you how well I like her, Ise make a Thousand a year Joynter.


Land. Enough, enough, good Sir Timothy, and I will give the Girl a Portion
proportionably.


Scrib. It is then meet that you sign these short Articles accordingly.


Land. We'll retire to my Closet, and there finish.
Come, Sir Timothy, good Fortune attend us.
Exeunt. Enter Bellville, and Feewell.
Bell. They say this damned Image of a Knight
Is come, with that Rascal Scrible.

Feew. Curse on' em, what (...) they make; 'slife they give us no time for
invention, we might else try to bribe that Scribbling Cur, he would bark on any
side for Money


Bell. I am so confounded, that my Thoughts justle and crowd one another into
confusion.

Look, Feewell;

Enter Mrs. Lucy. See where that Sunshine comes, over-cast with a soft shower
-- O, my dear Lucy, while this gentle pity blesses my Soul with joy; the cruel
fears of losing you, blasts all the springing Comfort, and withers into sorrow.


Lucy. How cruel is a Father, to make the Life he g^ve so miserable, as mine
must be!

Enter Philadelphia hastily.
Phil. O Mistress, we are all undone, I peept into my Master's Closet, and
there is the Bumkin Knight and he, Signing and Sealing, and that Ink-Bottle
Rascal, busy in ^iverting the Papers.


Feew. This is worst of all.


Bell. I am lost beyond Redemption, there is no avoiding this ruin, unless fair
Lucy will fly with me, and in my Fortune find shelter from this storm.


Lucy. Alas, I dare not! I cannot fly from that which Heaven makes my Duty.

Enter Servant.
Serve. Mr. Bellville, there is a Gentleman without, come Post from the Country,
who desires to speak with you.

Exit Servant.
Bell. Let him come in --

What should this be?
Enter Elliot, Servant to Mr. Bellville' s Uncle. How! Elliot -- what News with
you?


Elli. Very sad, Sir, at least to me, your Uncle my good Master is dead, and
has left all his Estate to you, Real and P^rsonal: (...) ^ Letter from his
Steward, Mr. Trusty, who keeps all things in qulet Possession for you, and
desires you to hasten down with all the speed you can.


Bell. It Is so -- My Uncle was lately in good Health.

Bellville reads the Letter.
Elli. Yes, Sir, but died suddenly of an Appoplex, I lost a good Master.


Bell. And you have found another, if you please, Elliot.


Elli. I thank you, S^r, what order do you please to take for going?


Bell. Do You know my Lodging, Elliot?


Elli. Yes, Sir, I was directed from thence to find you here.


Bell. Go thither then, and refresh your self, I believe you ^ave Rid hard, I
have some (...) that I must look after; but I Will come thither with all the
speed I can, and then order every thing.


Elli. I Will wait there for you, Sir.

Exit Elliot.
Feew. This is very ^lucky, would this News had come a little sooner, this
Argument would Convert the Old Gentleman to the Religion of our side.


Bell. But I fear it is gone too far.


(...). 'Twill turn him again, and fet him, like a wind mill, to ^all with the
wind that changes, and turn off the Knight, as he did the Squire.


Lucy. But if he has Signed Covenants, he will never venture the battle of a Suit
of Law, he dreads a Writ, as he would a piece of Canon (...) him.


Feew. 'Slife, how dull we are; yet if we could make him of our Party, there
might be some contrivance to (...) this Knight (...) upon a wrong Adventure.

Studies.
Lucy. It Is possible this additional Consideration might incline his (...)
Prudence, but I fear it is too late.


Phill. Mistress, I have a Fancy come into my Head, that may do.


Bell. P^thee Phill, let us hear it.


Phill. Nay, it is a very pretty one, and tends to no less than to make my self
a Lady.


Feew. On my Life, I have hit on the same fancy with Phill.


Phill. Mine is to pack the Cards upon him, and shuffle me to turn up instead
of my Mistress.


Feew. Say no more, Phill, I have it all; thou art the ^ather, and I the Mother
of this Plot; let me alone to shape it, now thou have got it.


Bell. But dear Cousin Feewell, what is it.


Feew. Say no more, but let me alone with my Cousin Landy, you ^ellville shall
be Taught your Part in good time, and you Cousin Lucy have nothing to say, but
to have and to hold, after the Parson.


Phil. You intend, I suppose, to draw my Old Master into the Plot. It cannot
fail; he will certainly take the Bait, and then Mistress, I must take place of
you.


Lucy. With all my Heart, Phill; thou do deserve it for taking mine.


Feew. Come, no Words, nor Conjuring up Doubts, withdraw all, and leave me to
Assault this Castle of Treasure, which is unfortified to hold out against such
Batteries as I shall raise against him, observe well your Parts. One thing I
had forgot; you Bellville, you must seem a little cold, as if your new Fortune,
and being so ill used by him had chilled your passion for his Daughter; stay,
give me the Letter, now be gone, while I wait for his bolting out.


Bell. Heaven prosper your attempt.

Exit Bellville.
Feew. They are gone in time, see where the Squadron comes, led by Captain
Scrible, having, I suppose, newly Signed the Treaty.

Enter Scrible first, Landy, and Sir Timothy.
Scrible. Give you joy, Mr. Landy, and you, Sir Timothy; I suppose you have no
business more for me at present, I must hasten and provid^ other Matters
necessary for the Wedding.


Land. Do, good Mr. Scrible.

Exit Scrible.
Sir Tim. Nay, I must about Matters too, in good faith; (...) ^mble the Parson,
time, and place together, I long y faith to make Mrs. Lucy the Lady Shallow,
and Ise return quickly.


Land. The sooner the welcomer, good Son, as I think I may now call you.


Sir Tim. And I hope I may call you Father, and get a little Son to make you a
great Father.


Land. Lustily spoke y faith, Sir Timothy, and I Will give it a Father's Blessing.


Sir Tim. And in good faith Ise ^asten to get it, so farewell 'till then; Ise
quickly come to fetch my Lady, to increase the Family of the Shallowe.

Exit.
Land. So, all goes well. Pretty y faith! they would have p^swaded me to take
Ninepence for a Noble; very pretty y faith. O (...) Fe^well, your Servant.

Fe^well steps out.
Feew. I waited to speak with you, Cousin.


Land. What, about the old Story? Pray Cousin Feeweell give off the pursuit of
that Matter, it is a cold scent, and I am engaged, fully engaged.


Feew. I hope not, Sir, for it is a new Matter I have to acquaint you with.


Land. New Matter, pish, what new Matter! my Daughter's my Daughter, and my
Care of her the same* and a Thousand a year is but a Thousand a year, and two
Thousand is two Thousand; and I must desire Mr. Bellville to forbear further
troubling himself, and me.


Feew. I wish, Sir, ne may not too readily comply; he had your Promise, and I
assure you, resents his injury.


Land. I think I did utter a hasty word, or so, but two Thousand a year is a
very good Ex^use:


Feew. But almost three Thousand is a better Argument.

In short, Sir, I resolved, without Mr. Bellvill's leave, to acquaint you that
his Uncle is dead, and has left him above Fifteen Hundred a year, besides a
great Personal Estate.


Land. How, Cousin, sure this is a devise?


(...). Read this Letter, and if your Opinion holds, you will repent what you
now joy in.

Reads the Letter.
Land. By my life it is so indeed; nay, I have heard his Uncle had such a fair
Estate. O Mr. Feewell, what have I done?


Feew. I hope nothing but what may be undone.


Land. O yes, Cousin, that scrible scrable Rasc^l has fettered me in Articles,
to get his Fee.


Feew. Not so fast, I hope, but that you may get loose.


Land. O impossibl^, they will clap Writs upon me, and toss me into the Spiritual
Court, where no flesh ever 'scap'd destruction.


Feew. I am very much troubled, is there no Remedy?


Land. O I would there were, Cousin, you know I ever esteemed Mr. Bellvill's
Person.


Feew. I must confess I wondered you were so suddenly fond of this Knight, of
the ill-favored Countenance; besides, you knew your Daughter loved Bellville,
some Consideration should have been had of her Content.


Land. Alas! 'twas for her sake; care of her, care of her; it is very
unfortunate, had this News come but a day sooner.


Feew. That Is not to be helped now, if I were you, I Would stand the (...).


Land. No, Cousin, I Would as willingly Death should Arrest me as a Sergeant, and
had as good almost fall into the hands of the Hangman, as the Lawyers; besides
public shame, Cousin.


Feew. Would you be truly and heart^ly pleased, if a way might be found to set
you safely free, and Bellville (...) have your Daughter?


(...). Cousi^, Cousin, with all my Soul, I have found this Knight to be Sir
Shallow, indeed a very Coxcomb.


Feew. And will you steadily act in the (...), if a handsome one be contrived?


Land. Most cheerfully, Cousin, trust me, most willingl with my best skill and
power. But do you hear, Cousin, will not this great addition of ^ortune, joined
to the unhappy usage of Mr. Bellville, make him fly off?


Feew. 'Troth he is something grumb upon the Matter, but it is possible his love
for your Daughter may overcome.


Land. Persuade him, good Cousin, work him into easiness, and forgiven^; I
always esteemed his Person, desire him to believe it from a penitent and hasty
Father; good Cousin can you tell where we may find him?


Feew. Easily, Sir, for I left him taking his leave of his Mistress, I saw her
begin to put finger in eye.


Land. Then I fear he will fall off. Call 'em in, good Cousin, and assist me ^n
that you say is your own design; call 'em in, good Cousin, and endeavor to
soften him by the way; tell the Girl I charge her to look kindly (...) him.


Feew. Well, Sir, I Will try my utmost --

B^t be sure, Sir, to be very kind to him.

Exit Feewell.
Land. Doubt it not in the least. Now am I to go to Sentence and Repentance,
and my Penance will be (no doubt on it) an additional Portion; how this
Earthquake of Land has shaken me? No matter, if the Plot be well laid, and
succeeds, I shall be contented, and my poor Gi^l will be pleased. And I
consider, when Riches give me leave, that the truth on it is, this Knight is a
very Coxcomb, and my Daughter had been as well disposed of in a deep Well, as
to this Shallow; what Troubles have I twisted my self into! O these Girls,
these Girls, every one of them gives as much trouble as a Leash of Boys, they
must be reared like Or^ngeTrees in a cold Country, kept within doors, and
carefully housed; what a happiness it would be for Parents, were there an
Insurance-Office ^or getting Boys instead of Girls, any Wise Man would give Ten
in the Hundred to have his Wife Insur'd. Soft, they come -- I see my Cousin
Feewell is working the Matter.

Enter Feewell, earnestly whispering with Bellville, Lucy and her Maid
following.
Bell. Have you any Commands for me, Sir?


Lan. I wish Mr. Bellville I had the power to Command you, but I am now the
Petitioner for what you once desired.


Belt. I do not understand you, Sir.


Land. I think you once desired Lucy.


Bell. I did, Sir.


Land. And now, Sir, I desire you should have her.


Bell. Once indeed, Sir, you seemed to be of that mind, but presently I was
forbid to hope that happiness.


Land. I was too hasty I confess, and if you still love my Daughter, she shall
plead my excuse. Speak to him, huzzy.


Lucy. What should I say, Sir?


Land. What should I say! when I scrupled at your having Mr. Bellville; then
you could interrupt me with your chattering, and now forsooth, you cannot speak;
look kindly on him, and win him into kindness and forgiveness.


Lucy. You hear, Mr. Bellville, what my Father says, if you lov^ me still.


Land. Well said, my best Girl, y faith, that was a devilish look; can you
resist it, Mr. Bellville?


Bell. I must ever love Mrs. Lucy, I dare not deny that powerful truth; but to
what purpose is all this discourse? I hear you are engaged to Knighthood.


Feew. Then let me speak, I have promised my Cousin Landy to find a way to free
him from that engagement; he joyfully con^ents to act his part in the Plot, and
if you love Mrs. Lucy still; she shall be yours.


Land. With an addition of Portion, Mr. Feewell, to express my esteem of you.


Feew. Come, (...), Mrs. Lucy shall be yours; but no more words, we'll in,
(...) our Design, which I think cannot fail; Phill is one of the Party, Sir.


Land. She Is honest, I dare swear.


^il. At this time especially, when my own advantage Rewards me for it.


Feew. You must be sure, Madam Phil. that must be, under pretense of Modesty,
to (...) ordel and mu^le your self with Hoods, that the Knight may not discover.


Phil. Trust that to my management.


Feew. (...) Mrs. Lucy, when the Knight comes next to make his last Claim, you
must manage your Hoo^ so as to be a pattern for Phil. But now let us withdraw,
and perfect (...) Design.

Exit Bellville, leading Lucy.
SCENE Changes to the Street.
Enter Lurch alo^. Lurch. Well, I must rid my self of these Lodgers, for as
long as they domineer, at this rate, I shall never be Master of my own House,
or my Wife; at the end of this (...) I shall (...) old Landy to remove himself,
his Daughter, and the rest of his Luggage; as long as they are here, this
Feewell will have a (...) upon my House, under pretense (...) coming to (...)
Landy. B^des, wherever a Rich young Heiress lives, all the young (...) and
starched (...) of the Town, come buzzing about that House all day long, like so
many Bees about a Hive, and the Servants need have no other business, than to
open the door to Penny-Post Men, and (...) in the shape of Porters.

Enter feewell, and his Servant.
Feew. Who do thou (...) gave this (...) (...) to thee?


Serve. Sir, it was given me by a Woman in ^aste, just at the turning of the
last Street.


Lurch. aside^ (...) you so! This is Feewell, I know the voice. I Will venture to
draw nearer, and observe him a little; it is late in the Evening, and (...) not
easily discover me.


Feew. At the Corner of the (...) Street! (...) thou so? I have a strong guess,
before I open it, from whence it comes.


Lurch aside. So have I, I Will swear.

Feewell opens the Letter.
Few. Yes, it is that Dear Creature, Lurch his Wife, as I imagined.


Lurch. aside. Yes, it is that dear Devil, as I imagined too.


Feewell reads Sir, To Morrow at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, my
Husband goes Abroad, to Accompany the Corpse of a deceased Friend; this is to
let you know, I expect your Company in my (...) at that (...), begging that you
would not omit so blessed an Opportunity.


Lurch. aside. To make me a Cuckold.


Feewell reads on I shall impatiently wait you at the Place appointed, (...)
without Seconds; if you are a Man of Honor do not fail me, who am yours, etc.


Lurch. No Seconds, said she? tho, by her leave, I intend to make a third, to
hinder the effusion of Christian Blood.


Feew. Yes, fair Inviter, I will meet thee.

O thou dear expected Hour of Three in the Afternoon to Morrow, how long will
thou (...) coming? How shall I be able to pass my time away with Patience? To
Night I Will go in search of Bellwille, or pick up some other intimate
Acquaintance, with whom I may be free, and over a Glass of Life-giving Liquor,
I Will heighten Humor, and Enjoy my Friend.

To Morrow for my Mistr^ss.

Exit with Servant.
Lurch. Your Mistress, and my Wife -- Hence forward I shall never wonder at
these Billet-douxs, for being made up in the fashion of Horns -- Blessed
Opportunity, and Man of Honor -- O sine Age!

O dainty fine Age! O delicious Age!

What a Wife of defiance have I got?

O Husbands, Husbands, you that are fast in the Lobs-Pound of Matri^mony,
behold, and pity your Poor Fellow su^rer: Was it not sufficient that we entered
the Prison voluntarily but we must bind our selves over to such good Behavior,
and give such swinging Security for our staying there? We have all paid dearly
for our Peeping and (...).

So have I seen a Mouse with Hunger spent,
To the strong Parmaz^ns inviting scent
Advance, and creep around the wiery Gin,
That seems to fortify the Bait within*
At length (for nothing hazard, nothing hold,
Hunger and Women make a Coward bold)
The thoughtless Animal, resolved to dare,
Ventures within the Matrimonial Snare:
Down falls the Trap door of the teacherous House,
And makes a Husband of that Captive Mouse.
(...).
End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
A Night Scene.
Enter Sir John (...) (...) his Night Gown, and a dark Lanthorn in his Hand.
Sir John. I Am got loose from her Ladyship at last! Never was Poor Man so put
to it, to play the Lover with his own Wife! One such another Night, would have
forced me to have crossed the Cudgels, and confessed the Husband in my own
defense.

E^ter Grace to (...).
Grace. softly. Sir John, Sir John, is it you?


Sir John. Yes, it is I, all that is left of me.


Grace. I heard your Wors^ip come out of my Lady's Chamber; I hav'n't Slept a
^ink all this Night, for fear my Lady should have discovered you, and I was
terribly afraid she had, because I heard her make a Noise, and cry out, as I
thought -- just when yo^ Worship left her.


Sir John. Thou are in the right, the Outcry was made by my Wife, but not
because she discovered me.


Grace. Why was it then?


Sir John. 'Twas because I (...) her a (...) ^ort of a (...) at my parting,
instead of a more civil good Morrow, she might reasonably have expected from me.


Grace. I cannot comprehend your meaning, Sir.


Sir John. To be more (...), I have (...) Marks of Remembrance behind me, on
her Ladyship's Face, with these Ten Executioners, that the Doctor will not be
able (...) Cure them this Month, with all his Art; in short, I Counterfeited
the Madman all (...) sudden, rose from her Bed in a Clap of (...), like (...)
from his Mistress, and have left such a storm of my Fingers ends on her Visage,
that she writes no more Love Letters in haste, I (...). But do you hear; Go you
up to your Lady immediately, and strive to (...) her as well as you can, and
above all, be sure you tell her, you have (...) the Doctor is given to be
Lunatic (...) certain (...). Go get you gone, you will find I have locked the
door upon her. In the mean time, I Will dress my self abroad in my Riding Habit,
in order to return home again, as from the Country. Do as I bid you, and leave
the rest to me.


Grace. Well, I will go to her, (...) you have Commanded me, though I tremble at
the approaching storm.

Exit.
Sir John. (alone)

This it is to have a Matrimonial Conduct.
Happy were all the Husbands in the Nation,
Could they, like me, put down the old Horning Fashion,
And follow this new Dance, as I have led it,
Of Cuckolding themselves to save their Credit.
Exit.
Enter Landy. Landy. The Plot's admirably laid, it cannot miss, I cannot but be
pleased to think my poor Girl shall be pleased too. To say the truth* Mr.
Bellvill's an honest Worthy Gentleman; she had almost as good have been coupled
to one of his Hounds, as to this Knight; but he will not be unprovided of a Wife;
and of my Conscience Phil. will make one good enough for him.

Enter Sir Timothy.
Land. O Sir Tim^y; welcome, I see you hasten Matters.


Sir Tim. In geud faith Ise have been used to pursue the Chase, when I like my
Game.


Land. Nay, I must confess, I think Lucy is a fair Quarry.


Sir Tim. And (...) run her down I (...) you; I pray call my Mistress, Ise let
her know I have provided all things, and the mickle Man of God waits ready for
us.


Land. Without there, bid my Daughter Lucy come presently.

Landy calls for Lucy.
Sir Tim. Ise quickly gang into the Country with her; I am here like one that
has lost his way in the night. I hope, Father Landy, we shall see you at
Shallow-Hall, (...) faith the Bells ^all twang it away, to bid you welcome.


Land. Thank you Son, all in good time.

Enter Lucy, with a Hood over (...) face. Why, how now, what (...) up? here is
Sir Timo^ come to carry you to Church, are you ready?


Sir Tim. Yes, Mistress, and y faith Ise gang thither more (...), than ever I
did to say my Prayers.


Land. Why, how now Girl, look up; and speak to Sir (...), what, whimpering
(...) a (...)? what say you, Girl, not a word?


Lucy. What you please, Sir.


Land. You must excuse her, she is so bashful she cannot look up.


Sir Tim. It Is the fashion when Women are going to be Married, they all seem
fearful. Why, there was Jane (...) of our Town, I was ^vited to the Wedding,
she never held up (...) head all the while, but whimpering, and (...) she liked
the Fellow well enough.


Land. Besides, Sir Timothy, you may excuse her, she is a fond Girl, and must
leave a fond Father; come, hold (...) thy head, my Child.


Sir Tim. No matter, Father, Ise warrant you, Ise blink upon her face
hereafter, and gudfaith show it in the North, where there is never such
another; Ise carry them the Northern Star.


Land. Notably said, in troth.

Enter (...) and Feewell. How now, Mr. Bellville, what brings you at this time
of day?


Bell. You may easily guess, Sir, I come to demand my Right.


Land. Your Right, (...) your Right?


Bell. Your (...), (...) if you (...) just (...) word.


Land. Mr. (...), my Daughter's disposed of, and I am bound in Covenants to
this Worthy Knight.


Sir Tim. It Is even so, (...), and Ise (...) keep her.


Bell. You shall neither do it with ease or safety, I shall not quickly submit
to such an injury.


Sir Tim. Nay, geud (...), if you are angry, you may turn the (...) of your
Girdle behind you.


Bell. Are you, Madam, consenting to my injury and ruin?


Lucy. I must obey my Father, Sir.


Land. That Is my good Girl. In troth, Mr. Bellville, I esteem you, and wish you
well, heartily well (...) and if you wish my Daughter well, I hope you will not
(...) to hinder her good Fortune; let that prevail with you to excuse me; Care
of a Child, Mr. Bellville is excusable in a Father; I do not doubt, Sir, but
(...) Merits will make you happy in another.


Feew. Faith, Bellville, this is gone so far, that I could wish you might
desist, if possible.


Land. I thank you, good (...), I pray you good Mr. Bellville, you see? it is
impossible for me to go back now.


Bell. But I can Sue you upon your I (...).


Land. But I have Signed nothing.


Feew. Come, Bellville, a Lawsuit will but bring trouble to you (...), let me
beg you to desist.


Lucy. Since I must obey my Father, you will but (...) a storm upon us all.


Bell. Nay, Mrs. since you are of the Party, I must submit.


Land. In (...), Mr. Bellville, this is very kind, and I wish you had another
Lady at the same time, to make you happy, (...) I may (...) your Wedding-Feast.


Feew. Why, on my (...) that may be* if Bellville will; I know a Lady that has
loved him long, and deserves (...), or any one. Now to make all things clear,
and that the World may see that you are dis^ from your Promise, I would propose
that Bellville should be Mrs. Lucy's Father, and give her in the Church, and
permit me to fetch the fair Lady that loves (...) and I to be her Father, and
give her Bellville at the same time.


Sir Tim. Geud faith, a rare Contrivance.


Bell. Since I have (...) to (...) Mrs. Lucy, I can (...) submit to all the
rest.


(...) I am for (...) you, Mr. Bellville.


Sir Tim. Y Good Faith, Sir, Ise ever be your Servant; and if I should have the
good For^ to see you at Shallow Hall, Ise make you welcome, and show you good
Sport. I have good (...), and a (...) of good Hounds as (...) away; and when we
have done our Chase, then what (...) think we (...) y' (...) even (...) it away
to my Neighbor Allens, and there (...) off a (...) of (...) Ale, and all the
while John Slouch, the (...) Piper in the North of England, plays to us; and
afterward every one trips off a Jigg cleverly away.


Feew. Who are your best Jiggers, Sir Ti^?


Sir Tim. Geud Faith, I have a man without, even (...), that foots it as well
as the best.


Feew. Pray, Sir Timothy, oblige us all with the fight of it.


Sir Tim. Mar^y, with all my Heart: Call in my man Jonny.

Enter Johny Thump.
Come Johny: Geud Faith you must trip a (...) my (...)*


Johny. (...) can they play John (...) his (...)?


Feew. Yes, I warrant you: Strike (...) there.

They play Stoakes' s Jigg. He (...).
Land. I protest, Son, you are a (...) Gentleman, you have half celebrated your
own Wedding.


Feew. Come, let us dispatch then, for I am to (...) a Bride too.


Land. Come, Child, make your self ready; you will acquaint them, Sir Timothy,
where they must come.


Feew. Aye marry, and fetch the (...), (...) meet (...) at the ChurchDoor.


Land. Go, Lucy, and make your self ready. So, (...), prosperity attend you;
and in (...), you Mr. Bellvile, in your new Lady.

Exit Lucy. -- -- Excellent, it goes smoothly on all. I Will send and invite my
Friends, especially Sir* John Crossit and his Lady, and (...). (...), (...) his
Wife. -- (...), (...); Lucy: will have (...). They that have most Wealth, have
most Worship: I remember a most pertinent parcel of Verses on the Subject of
Riches.

All (...) ^sides is poverty: with Gold,
Wit, Virtue, Courage, Honor, bought and sold.
Even Jove once doubting his Almighty pow^.
(...) his Mistress in a Golden shower.
Ex^.
SCENE the Third, which opens, and (...) Lady Crossit in an Undress.
Lady Crossit and her Women come forward on the Stage. Lady Crossit. O Grace, I
am undone for ever, This Devilish inhumane Doctor has ruined my Face to that
degree, 'twill never be my own again! What could move this Cruel Monster to use
me thus?


Grace. Madam, I (...) told for (...), (...) I (...) gave credit to it 'till
now; that (...) some very extravagant. (...).


L. Cross. It must be so, Grace; for no man living, in his right Senses, would
have (...) a Woman at such a (...): A Woman that loved him too passionately --
O my Face!


Grace. Ah! poor Lady, my very Heart bleeds for you: Did you perceive no (...).
Madam, lin (...), Senses, no alteration of his Carriage before the Morning?


L. Cross. None, that I remember; no discomposure of his Carriage, but what was
very agreeable. I had no cause to complain of him the first part of the Night.


Grace. These men who study hard, are often given to odd Fancies, and (...)
Madness; but to show it in such an unnatural way, is something more than one
would have suspected.

Enter a Servant.
Serve: Madam, Sir John is (...) from (...)*


L. Cross. O Grace, what shall I do now* What Excuse shall I make for my Face?
say quickly, or I am ruined for ever; Sir John will ask me twenty questions why
I am so bepatched.


Grace. Tell him any thing, Madam; that you have had a Fit of the Vapors, the
Swimmings in the Head, and have got a Fall, and so hurt your (...), or any
thing (...) that comes (...) Head first; if a Woman sets her self to (...),
she? (...) an (...) worth a (...).


L. Cross. I am so distracted, I can (...) think or say any thing.


Grace. Lay your self down quickly then, and receive Sir John in your Bed, as
becomes your (...).


L. Cross. Had I received no other, besides Sir John, I had never been so (...).
I (...) my (...).


Grace. Hark, I hear him (...); (...) to accost him, and put the best Face on
the Business I (...).

Enter Si^ John as: from the Country.
Sir John. What ails your Lady, Grace? the Servants tell me she is very ill.


Grace. O Sir! there is my poor Lady; she has had a most violent Fit of the
Vapors, and spoiled all her Beauty with an unlucky fall.


Sir John. Ah my poor Dear; how is it? are you not (...) -- with fulling?


L. Cross. Ah Sir John, my Face, my (...), my Face, has received all the (...);
my (...) is (...) very Soul of my Body; I am hurt in the very Soul, (...) John.


Sir John Aside I find Women have (...) then.

to her (...) shall we (...) you, my (...)? (...) find your (...)?


L. Cross. Troubled with a (...), Sir John.


Sir John. But has not the Doctor been with you yet.


(...). (...). O no, Sir John*


Sir John. Why, what a neglect's that? (...), look (...) your L^dy, that see
she wants nothing, while I my self go for the (...).


L. Cross. No Doctor, I beseech you, my Dear; don't put your self to these
perpetual Expenses.


Sir John. I take it unkindly of you, my Dear, that you should think I grudge
to give a Guinea or two to do you good; my whole Estate is too little for such
a Wife.


L. Cross. You Will ruin your self with Doctors Fees. O Sir John, Si^ John!


Sir John. Ay, ay, my Dear; I Will look all over the Town, but (...) find him
out, and send him to you immediately; (...) have patience a little, and (...)
send him to you.


Exit. L. Cross. What Grace, must I see this Devil of a Doctor again, after all
my (...)? I shall tear his Eyes out of his Head, if ever I light on him, and
revenge the Wrong he has done to my Face on hi^


Grace. And so I would, Madam, and repay it with Usury.


L. Cross. And so I will, Grace; therefore I charge you get a (...) of my
Footmen ready with stout Oaken Plants: But he will never be so bold to approach
me, sure, not even to come near the House.


Grace. It may be he has forgot what he has done in his mad fit, and may come;
(...) if he does, let me alone to prepare a substantial Bastinading for him.


L. Cross. O, I am so afraid of Visitants! Give Orders to all the House, that
I Will see no body; I Will see no body this half Year: O this Face that has
Captivated so many, is ruined it self.

Exeunt. Enter Mrs. Lurch and her (...)
Mrs. Lurch. So, Betty, now we have caused the great Ches^ to be brought from
the other Room into this, and got the (...) of Ropes ready, let Mr. Feewell
come when he will, I am prepared to receive him without fear of being
discovered by my Husband: This Plot is so well laid, it cannot but take -- When
Husbands grow Jealous, they only put us to the trouble of being so much the
more Ingenious, and working the Web of our Designs finer. How long is it,
Betty, since my Husband has been gone to the Burial?


Betty. About half an Hour, Madam.


Mrs. Lurch. Is It possible, it is no more: O what a sweet half Hour of Love's
lost by Feewell's not making more haste to take his share of it!


Betty. It Is scarcely yet the Hour you appointed him.


Mrs. Lurch. When will that dear Hour come?


Betty. Immediately, Madam, have but patience.


Mrs. Lurch. O, 'twill never come 'till he comes!


Betty. Then it is already come, for here he is.


Enter Feewell. (...). Am I not (...) daring Lover, in venturing to mount that
breach a second time, where I lately 'scap'd a scowring so narrowly?


Mrs. Lurch. And to appear a Confessed Man, whereas before you were glad to
(...) off in the opprobrious Shape of a Woman.


(...). Love, Child, can do all things; Almighty Love, that Trans^ the Gods
into Birds and Beasts, and all other sort of Living Creatures.


Mrs. Lurch. Transformed your Worship into a Chambermaid.

If I (...) not, there is another God called Fear, altogether as Powerful,
which worked this last wonder, and diminished you from the stronger Sex, to the
weaker.


(...). Fear that thy Husband should have discovered thee, no other: But
whatsoever Fear diminished in me then, Love has restored me now, I can tell
thee; and (...) thou have any doubts left concerning my Sex, I am come on
purpose to clear 'um.


Mrs. Lurch. You had as good let the Trial alone, I shall make a Woman of you
the second time; for my Mind misgives me terribly, and I know not why, that my
Husband will return upon us unexpectedly as he did before, and if he should,
you will be changing Sexes again: But for your Comfort, I have taken Compassion on
you this time, and found out a securer Retreat than you made use of before; I
have prepared a Ladder of Ropes, not a Rope and a Ladder for you; by which, if
my Husband should surprise us, you may easily escape out of my BedChamber
Window into the Garden, and then let your self out, through a back door, into the
Street: As for that Chest you see there, it is a Trap for my Husband, if he
should (...) untimely to disturb us.


Feew. Prithee tell me no more, I know too much already, and would not think my
self secure in my Enjoyment; It Is difficulty and danger, make an (...) pleasant.

Lurch knocks at the door softly.
Betty. Madam, some body knocks at the door.


Mrs. Lurch. Bless me! Who can it be? My Husband would have knocked louder, and
with more Authority; go to the door softly, and listen a little: How I tremble
all over?

Betty goes to the door. Lurch from without in a Woman's Voice.
Lurch. Will my Lady buy any Ribbands or Gloves to day?


Betty. Madam, we are undone; on my Life it is my Master, who feigns a Woman's
Voice; it must be so, for I am sure I have turned away the Ribband Woman once
to day already: I am certain it is a feigned Voice.


(...). Then I suppose, I must in good Manners betake my self to the Ladder of
Ropes, and scamper.


Mrs. (...). You must so, and that without delay, there is no help for it; but if
the Plot I have laid succeeds, I Will not be long from you.


Feew. That Is all my Comfort; what Noses these Husbands have got! this is the
second time this old Bowman has smelt me out.


Mrs. Lurch. (...).


Feew. What so coldly must we part! By Heavens, I must have the pleasure of
ravishing a Kiss or two, now thy (...), to (...) veng'd on him! -- O, I could
dwell here for ever!


Mrs. Lurch. Go, get you gone, till you can Kiss (...). Betty, (...) him
quickly to escape, and leave me to manage this Ribband Woman.

Feewell and Betty go into the (...) Chamber. Lurch knocks again.
Mrs. Lurch. Who Is there?


Lurch. (...) a Woman's Voice It Is your (...) Glove-woman* I have the finest
scented Gloves, and new fashioned Ribbands, no Man in Europe has finer.


Mrs. Lurch. So, (...) has discovered himself, it is he, now I must play him
(...) trick.

She speaks, that her Husband may over-hear her. Betty, why don't you make more
haste? the (...), (...), (...); lock the Chest upon him quickly, quickly.

To her (...) I have no need of (...) Gloves or Ribbands, at present, (...), I
am (...), (...) here another day.

At the door* Re-Enter Betty.
Betty. Madam, all is safe, you may open the door to your Husband (...) please;
the Bird's flown.


Mrs. Lurch. That Is well; but we must endeavor to (...)

Lurch (...) Who Is (...) knocks so loud and impertinently?


Lurch. in his own Voice It Is I my Dear; I want something in your Chamber, let
me in quickly.


Mrs. Lurch. Betty, open the door to your Master.

(...) opens the door, and Lurch rushes (...) a (...), and (...) it, she (...)
Lurch. What does you Conscience misgive you (...) that you dare not look a
Blunderbus in the Face?

John, (...), Thieves, Thieves.

Calls out. Enter John and Thomas.
John. Where, Sir, where?


Lurch. Hid in the House; (...) every Corner, and under the Bed, carefully I
charge you.

Exeunt. I heard her say, lock him in the Chest quickly; he must be in that
Chest there.

The Chest shall be my Throne.

Gets on the Chest. Where I sit and reign over this Slave and Cuckoldmaker; the
King on Horseback in the Stocks-Market, that tramples on Heretics and Pagans,
is but a Type of me, that triumph over the living (...) -- Now, Mistress, if
you have not a mind to have some Pills discharged into your Stomach, to (...)
Amorous (...), tell me immediately and directly, (...) you have hid that Robber
of my Honor.


Mrs. Lurch. Whom do you (...)


Lurch. You know, Minx, well enough (...) I mean; I mean Feewell, that Polluter
of my (...) and (...) of my (...).


Mrs. Lurch. How should I know?

(...): (...).
Lurch. I believe (...), and (...) too; but what does this Chest do here? it
uses to stand in another Room.


Mrs. Lurch. O my Dear, I have put some Table Linen in it, and other things,
and had it brought into this Room, to be readier at hand.


Lurch. Where is the (...) of it? give me the Key.


Mrs. Lurch. You have put (...) in (...) a (...), I know not where I laid it;
it is well I am not with (...), (...) a fright would (...) have made me (...).


Lurch. (...), what of a (...)? if (...) you (...) with Child, I Am resolved to
plead (...) Guilty, in the face of the World, declare it a Bastard from, the
beginning, and proceed to (...) it (...) it is Born. Come, come, without delay,
deliver me the Key of (...).


Mrs. Lurch. Nay, prithee, my Dear, 'twill be so (...); I have things there, I
(...).


Lurch. I (...) indeed, there (...) that you will want very often.

(...) two (...).
(...). We have (...) every (...), and can (...) nothing like a Thief.


Lurch. (...), be (...) keep the (...); then he

Exit. must be here waiting (...) the resurrection of the Flesh; come, the Key
I say, or do you see this?

Holds the Blunderbuss at her.
Mrs. (...). Yes, (...), if you please; you have murdered my Honor already, by
your base Jealousy; all the World thinks (...) made you a Cuckold.


Lurch. Then all the (...) in the (...).


Mrs. Lurch. It Is (...) makes you one* you had best kill me, and be hanged for
it.


Betty. Good Sir, don't hold the Gun so against my Mistress; Lord! if it should
go off.


Lurch. (...) her give me the Key then.

Enter Sir John Crossit.
Sir John. Why how now, Mr. Lurch, Armed, and in a furious Warlike posture?


Lurch. Yes, Sir John, I am upon my guard, being near the Enemy.


Sir John. What Enemy, Mr. Lurch, I see none but your Wife?


Lurch. Why that is one, the other is enclosed here in this Fortification; but I
shall storm it.


Sir John. Fie, Mr. Lurch, your (...) makes you fancy it.


Lurch. Sir John, I never saw a Marriage in all my life, but a CuckoldMaker
belonged to it; every Husband is as sure of his evil Genius, as having a shadow
when the Sun shines on him. A Cuckold-Maker is as inseparate from our Calling,
as an Apothecary from a Doctor of Physic he Prescribes, but the Apothecary
Administors.


Sir John. Fie, Mr. Lurch, you grow Extravagant.


Lurch. Let her give me the Key then.


Mrs. Lurch. There are Women's things in it, not fit to be sce^.


Lurch. I believe so, truly; now Sir John, do you perceive, Sir John* look you
Mrs. no more delays, if you will not open the door, I Will fire upon the Castle.

Offers his Blunderbuss at the Chest.
Mrs. Lurch. Hold, hold, Sir; here Betty, give him the Key.


Betty. There it is, Sir, now for your Discovery.


Mrs. Lurch. So, have you found this mighty Enemy*

Lurch opens the Chest hastily.
Sir John. Nay, Mr. Lurch, this is so unreasonable, are you not ashamed?


Mr. Lurch. I had ears sure -- this is odd, very odd.


Sir John. Fie, Mr. Lurch, come ask your Wife forgiveness, and use her more
like a reasonable Man.


Lurch. Why, I confess I did believe she had made me a Beast; come, Sweet
heart, we'll forget, and forgive.


Mrs. Lurch. And how long will you continue reasonable?


Lurch. As long as you please to let me; come, my Dear, no more skirmishing,
Peace is concluded, and I Will present thee with a handsome New Gown, and the
Appurtenances, as a Testimony of my Reconciliation.


Sir John. Well said, Mr. Lurch, and now prepare for Mirth and Jollity; we
shall be presently Invited to Mrs. L^oy's Wedding, and Mr. Lan^ has prepared a
mighty Feast.


Mrs. Lurch. Send him a happy Voyage through the u^certain ways of Matrimony.

Constant severeness that warm Sex inflames,
The wildest Haggards gentle Manning tames:
Too much ill usage, and to want all trust
Raises Revenge, to make their Crimes seem just.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Lady Crossit' s Antichamber.

Enter Grace alone. Grace. THere lies my Lady in the next Room, Railing at, and
Cursing the Doctor, and Swearing she will tear him to pieces if he durst come
near her, and it cannot be long before he must come.

Enter Doctor Lorman. O Doctor! you are Born under a Lucky Planet, you are the
happiest Man; my Lady thinks it an Age till she sees you! But we must speak
so^ly, she is run half Mad for you; well, it is most certain, you are a most
taking Man with the Ladies; and you know mine in particular, has always had an
Esteem for your Person, she does nothing but sigh all day for you, I believe
poor Lady she will run Mad; but you must be secret, o^ you ruin all, you know
there is a Husband in the case.


Dr. Lorm. Poor Lady, she needs not fear, I took an Oath to be secret, when I
was Sworn Doctor: Alas! she is not the first Lady who has fallen in love with
my Person, one half of my Women Patients are in her Condition.


Grace. I must inform you, that my Lady has had the Misfortune to hurt her self
a little with a fall, as you will see by her Face, and has taken that occalion to
^eign her self (...) ^or your ^ake, has sent her own Husband to fe^ch you, and
lies on her Bed in the next Chamber, expecting your happy Arrival; I blush to
say more, but you may guess the rest.


Dr. Lorm. What her Ladyship has a violent sit of the Vapors, I warrant, is it
not? Well, let me alone with her Ladyship.


Grace. But hold, do you Entertain your self in this Room; while I acquaint her
that you are come, as I am ordered: If the violence of her Passion should cause
her to be extravagant in her Actions, you are not to be surprised, now I have
told you how excessively she loves you.


Dr. Lorm. Never fear, I can be as Extravagant as she is; I like an open
barefaced Love that con^es it self; the more manifest the Disease is, the more
easily the Remedy is applied.


Grace. Expect here a Moment then, and you shall be admitted immediately, I
must use you now like a Lover, and not like a Doctor.

Exit.
Dr. Lorm. Doctor or Lover, Lover or Doctor, Student in Physic, or Student in
Love, are Synonimous. We Doctors of Physic, have a ^arge Cure of Bodies, an
unlimited ^rerogative over Flesh and Blood.

Enter Lady Crossit. But here is my Patient! Hem! Hem! Now to show my skill in
manageing an extravagant sit of Love: Now to show my self a Physician of Parts.
Hem! Hem!


L. Crossit. Where is this Devil? Where is this cruel, inhumane, barbarous
Monster?


Dr. Lorm. ( in a soft voice) Here am I, no Devil, but a Man; a kind, yielding,
melting Lover.

( aside) she is in a desperate taking: Hem! Hem! How she stares on me, and
devours me with her Eyes.

The Doctor scts his Wig in order, and smiles on her.
L. Crossit. (aside) What does the Villain jear and laugh at me after all; O
Devil! Devil! Let me come ^ear to th^e, that I may revenge my self for all I
have suffered.


Dr. Lorm. (getting loose from her) Hold, hold, a Truce.

(^ide) she is in a furious fit of Love I see; the Old ^hilosopher was in the
^ight -- Prima Coitio est acerrima, The first Engagement is the sharpest.
Truce, Truce, a little, and I Am for you again.

Lady Crossit follows him round the Stage, with her Arms stretched out as
before, and the Doctor makes the more haste to unbutton himself.
L. Crossit. O Impudent Devil! Monstrous Hell-hound* a Rape! Help! Help!

Servants come in with Cudgels, and bastonade him round the Room.
Dr. Lorm. Treason! Treason! Murder! Mercy! Murder! O my Crevat and Perriwig!
What shall I do? My Profession's spoiled for ever!


L. Cross. Monster! Devil! Pound him, break his Bones, beat him to a Jelly!

Enter Sir John Crossit.
Sir John. What all the House in an uproar! Hold there, and let me know what is
the Matter amongst you; who is that Fellow undrest there?


L. Crossit. O my Dear, a Monster, that would have offered Violence to my
Virtue; would have ravished me, but for the Servants who came in to my
assistance.


Sir John. Speak, Monster of Monsters; what art thou?

Shaking him by the Collar.
Dr. Lorm. O, Sir John, your most humble Servant,

I am a Doctor of Physic, my Name's Lorman,

Sir John, your most humble Servant.

Enter Grace.
Grace. Dr. Lorman, what, a Doctor of Physic Practicing undrest; is it you,
good Doctor, who would have thought it! I could have sworn Butter would not
have melted in his Mouth, by his fine Talking! -- Well, I shall always suspect
the worst of a fine Talking man, that can do nothing but Talk finely, for his
sake.


Dr. Lorm. (aside) Now I begin to see day a little, the Lady is Literally run
Mad for Love, and in this mad fit, she thinks I am some Monster or other, and
has treated me accordingly: But I must frame some plausible Excuse, to save my
Credit and Doctoral Authority, if the aching of my Bones, will permit me to
Harangue.

To Sir John. Honored, Sir, I imagine you are not a little surprised, as also,
your much Honored and Virtuous good Lady; who by this time, I dare aver, is
returned to her good Senses again, to behold a Person of my Coat at this
present in disorder: But when you shall have understood the Reasons I had to
put in practice this Mysterious Operation; I promise my self, you will not only
hold me guiltless of any ill designs, but also applaud my Conduct and Physical
way of Proceeding in a Matter of so weighty Consequence.


L. Crossit. (aside) What, is the Villain going to discover all? What can this
mean?


Dr. Lorm. Perceiving at my first Entrance. But first let me beg the favor of
perusing my Habiliments again.


Sir John. By all means, pray let the Dr. peruse his Habiliments.

Doctor

(dresses himself, and speaks.) Perceiving at my first Entrance, as I was
saying, that your very honored and virtuous good Lady's indisposition -- Sir
John, may I beg the favor you would be pleased to order one of your Attendants
to restore my Periwig to its former decorum.


Sir John. By all means, Doctor; who is there? give the Doctor's Wig to my Valet
to revive it a little.


Dr. Lorm. Perceiving at my first entrance, as I was saying, that --


Sir John. I pray dispatch, for my Wife's indisposed, and wants repose.


Dr. Lorm. Now I am a Doctor of Physic again, and can harangue.


L. Cross. How the Villain holds me in suspense.

Aside to Grace. O, Grace, I am ruined for ever, if he produces the Letter I
sent him.


Grace. ( softly ^o L* Crossit.) Never fear, Madam, let him go on, I warrant we
have Cudgel'd him into discretion.


Dr. Lorm. Hem, hem, perceiving at my first entrance --


Sir John. He Is perceiving at his sirst entrance again; what did you perceive
at your first Entrance?


Dr. Lorm. That your honored and good Lady's indisposition had troubled and
diverted the right course of her senses, which I soon discovered by a
disorderly stare, or rolling of her eyes; it immediately came into ^y head, to
restore your Lady's health, by playing a piece of ingenious Extravagance; upon
which, incontinently I fell to undressing and dismantling my self --


Grace. Yes, incontinently indeed, Doctor!


Dr. Lor. And threatened to assault your Virtuous Lady by way of a Rape; but as
I hope to receive a Fee to day, without any sinister intention, Sir John, your
good Lady's natural inclination to Virtue, restored her to her right senses
again; caused chiefly by the fright with which I struck her good Ladyship, for
I had put on a look as fierce as that of a Centaur.


Sir John. That is to say, of a Horse Doctor, by way of Parenthesis only.


Dr. Lorm. Sir John, I am your most humble Servant; but I am a Member of the
Reverend College.

Enter a Servant.
Serve. There Is a Footman without, who enquires for Dr. Lorma^, say^ he comes
from my Lady Lackit, who lies dangerously ill, and desi^es the Doctor would
come to her immediately.


Dr. Lorm. ( aside.) She Is a very impertinent Lady, I am not in a Condition of
serving her at present, but I Will make use of this pretense to go home, and
apply Sal^es and Ointments to my back and sides.

(to Sir John.) Sir John, I am heartily sorry I am interrupted by the Request
of this Lady, for my Personal Appearance to relieve her, and that I have not
leisure to dilate on this wonderful Cure I have wrought to day mo^ning on your
very Virtuous, and much honored Lady.


L. Crossit. I can a^ure you, Doctor, I won'd rather have chosen to have
remained indisposed, than to be Cured (...) such an undecent and (...) way, it
has put me in such a fright.


Grace. To her softly Admirably well Counterfeited, Madam.


D. Lorman. There is a virtuous Wife for you; Sir John, you are very happy in a
virtuous Lady.


L. Cross. Aside. (...) seem to be sorry for his being beaten to satisfy my
Husband ( to D. Lorman) I am in^initely concerned, Doctor, that you have
received so (...) a Recompense for the great service you have done me to day.
My Servants beat you like a very Stock Fish.


D. Lorm. Dear Madam, never trouble your self for that, the Credit I shall gain
in the World for this Operation, will make me sufficient amends. I aim at Fame
-- Madam, Hercules gained Heaven by his Club; and I mount up to the top of Fame
and Heaven of Reputation, by means of the Cudgel, like a second Hercules -- But
I must take my leave of you now, Sir John, to wait on this Patient, who expects
me; she is a Lady of Quality, and must be served punctually.


Sir John. You have more need to look after your self, Doctor; you must of
necessity have received some damage in your outward Man.


D. Lorm. Nothing at all, Sir John, a trifle, a Rib or two of lesser note
broken, or so, nothing else, on my word, a mee^ Trifle, Sir John, and Madam,
your most humble Servant.

Sir John offers him a Fee.
D. Lorm. Sir John, I wonder you will put your self to this trouble, suspend your
Favors 'till I have done your Lady some further service.


Sir John. But for the beating, Doctor, you must accept it indeed.


D. Lorm. You are so obliging, Sir John! well, I Will protest I Will have nothing
from you, for my next Visit. Sir John, and sweet Madam, your most humble
Servant.

Exit Doctor.
Sir John. Aside. So he said the very last time he was here; so far by the help
of my own Wit, and Grace's assistance, I have carried it victoriously, not only
satisfied my self on the Body of him that might have made me a Cuckold, but
also revenged my self bodily on my Wife, that would have made me a Cuckold.

Come Sweet heart, how does your Face?


La. Cross. O Sir John, so torn and scratcht.


Sir John. Scratching is an Appendix to Caterwauling.


L. Cross. How, Sir?


Sir John. Your Doctor, Madam, was justly beaten for his wonderful Cure, but he
was to have cured you another way.


L. Cross. I know not what you mean.


Sir John. You may understand without my telling you.


L. Cross. What should I understand?


Sir John. Your own Folly.


L. Cross. Ah me. --


Sir John. No more, you must understand me now. The Leter and Shirts (...): I
have (...), your (...) would (...) you than Excuses, or seeming (...).


L. Cross. Oh Sir John, Can you forgive me?

(...).
Sir John. I Will try.


L. Cross. By all my hopes of good, I Will never more injure you in a Thought.


Sir John. It Is well, rise and compose your self, for we are invited by Landy,
to his Daughter's Wedding, they are ready to (...) from Church.


L. Cross. I hope, Sir, you will not carry me in this Condition.


Sir John. Yes, but I will, or else worse Interpretation may be made of it; no
more words, I must be obeyed in this; I have hid your shame and mine:
Henceforth, be your own Doctor, and prescribe your self a Constant use of
Virtue.

For that Receipt never failed of doing good,
And Cures the looser Fevers of the blood.
Exeunt. Enter Landy.
Land. By this time Lucy has her Wishes, and I have mine; if the Plot should be
discovered, I hope Bellville has too much mettle to lose his Mistress; the
Knight will look as blank as a Cutpurse, that finds no Money in the place he
searched for -- No matter, it is not the first Game he has lost, and Phill will
stand him another very good Chase.

Enter Mr. Lurch and his Wife.
O Mr. Lurch, you are welcome, heartily welcome, and your fair Partner too;
they are coming, Mr. Lurch, with your ^etters about 'em.


Lurch. I wish they may prove Easy to all, especially to fair Mrs. Lucy.


Mrs. Lurch. She deserves all Happiness.


Land. I thank you both.

Enter Sir John Crossit and his Lady.
Sir John, Welcome good Sir John, and your good Lady too, what is not your Lady
well?


Sir John. She has got an unhappy fall, Mr. Landy, and very much hurt her Face,
but her respect to you and Mrs. Lucy, forced her to come, notwithstanding her
unfit Condition.


Land. In Troth, Madam, I am very much obliged to you, the new Married People,
I believe, are near upon returning.


Sir John. Mr. Bellville will be a happy man.


Land. None, Sir, my Daughter is to be a Lady.


Sir John. How, a Lady?


Mr. Lurch. This is very strange.


Land. It Is very true, Sir, a Northern Knight, one Sir Timothy Shallow, has
out-bid Mr. Bellville by a Thousand a Year.


Sir John. I wish Mr. Landy that you are not bribed to make your Daughter
unhappy.


Land. I have known many, Sir John, very unhappy by being too Poor, but never
any by being too Rich.

Ha^ke --

I hear 'em coming.

Soft Music.
Enter ^well like Hymen, going before; Sir Timothy and his Lady, and Bellville
with his. Feew. What Is here, a Mask?

I now represent Hymen, Signior Landy,
My Deputy has done as well as can be;
Has made their Tongues tie knots to such a wonder,
That their own Teeth, though Bones, cannot know asunder:
And now we are for jollity preparing,
Which all ('till deep Night calls) shall have a share in.
Then we must leave the Lovers to their own share,
To end their Kind Disputes in Civil-Warfare;
Where the least Mercy the most Love expresses,
And he most gentle proves, that most oppresses.
While the Fair Sufferer Languishing cries sie on it,
The God of Love's the only pleasing Tyrant;
Advance, Sir Tim, and with a dutiful guessing,
Find out your Daddy quickly, and ask Blessing.

Sir Tim. Your Blessing.


Land. What, Madam, not down upon your Maribones; come, off with your trumpery
-- how -- what have we here?

Pulls off (...) Hood.
Sir Tim. What Is the meaning of this? woe's me, what have I got?


Phill. An Obedient Wife, Sir.


Sir Tim. Nay, in geud faith, hold a blow, Ise not be choused so.


Land. Where Is my Daughter, I am abused, where is my Daughter?


Bell. Here, Sir, with her Husband, and beg your Blessing.


Land. Hey day, what means all this?


Sir Tim. Nay, by the Mass, Mrs. Lucy is my Wife, and no other, and Ise seize
my own Chattel where I find her.


Bell. You must seize this first.

Offers to draw.
Sir Tim. What a God's name, must one sight for his Wife? Father Landy, I pray
let us send for Mr. Scrible, and clap Actions on 'em for Cheats and Robbers.


Land. 'Troth, Sir Timothy, Lawsuits are dangerous Boggs to get into, we may
sink faster than we can get out; besides, I fear Matters are gone too far.


Feew. Be appeased, Sir Timothy, what is done, cannot be undone; be contented,
many have done worse, you have Married a handsome Woman, virtuous and good.


Lucy. Believe me, Sir, none exceeds her in goodness, and good humor; I have
esteemed and loved her, as I would a Sister.


Land. Why, in troth, Sir Timothy, since we are both deceived, the best way is
to bear it patiently; and, in troth, she has always behaved her self so well,
she shall not come a Beggar to you.


Lucy. I hope, Mr. Bellville, for my sake, will add to my Father's (...).


Bell. That I will, most willingly, and as largely as my dearest Lucy pleases.


Feew. Look you there, Sir Knight, come, give her your hand; nay, never hang
back, there is no other Remedy; come, come, she will bring you a brave young
Shallow.


Sir Tim. If it must be so, y faith Ise gang into the North as fast as four
Legs will carry me.


Phill. This minute, if you please; Sir, you shall ever find me an Obedient
Wife, and with true Love and Care will ever strive to please you.


Sir Tim. Since I am Pounded, and no (...) out, Ise even make the best of a bad
Market.


Land. I dare swear you will be pleased with her, when you know her better.
Come, no more words, nothing now but Music, and every Man take his Lady.


Feew. I having none of my own, must presume to borrow another Man's.


Lurch. Like enough, in troth.

Enter Servant to Landy.
Serve. Sir, here are Gypsies, that desire admittance.


Land. Let 'em come in, all is free this day.

Enter Gip^.
1. Gypsy. Bless you Masters, we'll tell your Fortunes.

To Bellville. O Master! you may be happy if you will,
For it is a good Jack, that makes a good Gill.

2. Gypsy. Master, Master.

You have a great Cross through the Line of Life, Perhaps you are Jealous, you had as
good trust your Wife.

To Lurch.
3 Gypsy. You shall enjoy good health, and good cheer, And have a young
Huntsman within the year.

To Sir Tim.
4 Gypsy. O brave Palms, you have Mistresses plenty, And you can be Constant
at once to twenty.

To Feewell.
Old Landy. Come, Mr. Lurch, you could Sing well in your young days, if
Marriage has not cracked your Voice, let us hear the Dialogue between you, and
your Wife; it may be a means to make a thorough Reconciliation.


DIALOGUE.
He. WHy so Coy, and so Strange?
Does your Kindness decline?
Your Love find a Change,
Or do you doubt mine?

She. When inconstant Men grow,
We c^n quickly discern,
And ou^ Sex you ^ll know,
Are apt Scholars to Learn.
I watched how your Eyes on Phillis wero g^ncing,
Crowned with a Garland of Roses for Dancing:
When the Pedlar came, you gave her a Lace,
And a fine gaudy string for her Needle-Case.

He. You remember, it may be,
When you were May-Lady,
The nimble Thyrsis so Caper d and Chanted,
You gave him a Ribband so long that it ^aunted
And waved in the air; when the brisk youth then tried
For a Kiss, you simper'd, and faintly denied:
And blushing; you only cried fie, forbear,
You're such another; nay, pish, I swear
There was never in the World such rudeness as this;
Yet gently contrived he should rav^sh a Kiss.

He. Now prithec let us leave this impertinent str^ggle,


She. For Men will be false,


He. And Women will juggle.


Both. Then let us be easy by freedom hereafter,
For Jealousy never yet mended the Matter.

He. What Is past, we'll forget,


She. What Is to come, never enquire,


Both. But take surest Advice of present Desire.


Land. Now to such poor Cheer as I have provided for you;

Joys Crown you all, every one here is my Guest, (...) all are welcome to a
Mis^'s Feast.

Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.

