To the right Honble. Lords, and Honble. Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of
the High Court in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The humble Petition of THOMAS DVCKET Gent: Practitioner in Physic.
Shows:
THat h^e by Gods blessing and his study, great charge, Expense of time,
exercise of his natural gifts, and diligent searching into the Secrets of
nature, is now perfect in knowledge, able to augment great profit to this
Kingdom, by new ways of Improving Lands and other Experiments, as also to
discover many new profitable additions to the Art of husbandry and such like
terrene designs* all which he is experimentally Mr. of. The effects of which
being discovered, may increase in this Kingdom many thousand pounds profit per
annum, if the Professor be not debarred by Mortatality, hindered, quashed,
discouraged by incredulity, or otherwise frustrated in his endeavors by uncoth
events, want of power or means to make substantial manifestation of his
skill, which are malevolences that do often oppose the progress of all
singular perfections and inventions though they be very hopeful, your
Petitioner being capable of such contingent hazards, and knowing the
consequents thereof of high ^nowing it does only lie in your Honors powers to
uphold (...) that labor for the Weale-publike; The assurance of which does
stir the Petitioner in a faithful humble way to crave the favorable grant
of both the right Honble. Houses of Parliament, to entertain and take notice
of his well intended service for the good of this Kingdom, yet not incapable
of your other great Affairs in continual agitation for the good of the
Kingdom; amongst which. notwithstanding your Petitioner most humbly prays, in
behalf of the whole Kingdom, which his present intentions so much concern, you
would be pleased to involve and consider of his Designs tendered in the
ensuing Propositions. And refer your Peitioner and his resolutions, to the
sca^ning and result of a Co^mittee for that purpose by your Honors appointed,
before there be any procrastination in this Businesses of such hopeful success
and happiness to this Nation, that may accrue yearly thereunto (by Gods
blessing) beginning the next ensuing year, if your Petitioner shall be enabled
thereunto in communicating his Arts to the Kingdom, part of whose undoubted
skill, for the present is manifested by Certificate under the hands of the Hon:
Committee of Parliament for the County of Monmouth, sent unto Henry Herbert
Esquire, one of the Members of the Honble. House of Commons, to the end, that
the contents thereof might be published in both the honorable Houses of
Parliament.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays your Honors that according to
the Acts of Parliament in such causes, concerning the Promotion and
countenancing of Persons endued with such profitable Arts and mysteries, and
inabling them to Practice their knowledge therein: To give unto your Petitioner
such means, properties, and encouragements, as appertain to the Confirmation
of the Practice of the Art, being a Benefit of that consequence, to all people,
that they will perceiving the profit thereof, hasten the Effecting, your
Petitioners Directions.

And the whole Kingdom with your Petitioner herein is concerned to pray, etc.
The Certificate of the Committee of the County of Monmouth.
To our much honored friend Henry Herbert Esqu. one of the Members of the
Honble. house of Commons, or to whom he shall appoint to proceed, etc.
Noble Sir,
WHereas Colonel Hughes Governor of Chepstow, your self and we of the
Committees of the County of Monmouth, have in certifying letters formerly
declared our hope and expectation of the reality of many inventions and
profitable additions and discoveries of this hearer Thomas Ducket Gent.
practitioner in Physic, for the advantage of the Commonwealth, by the
improvement of Land, and other special benefits, in which be seemed to us to
be so for a Mr. of knowledge, that we held it fit to assist and further his
endeavors therein, that they might the better be presented to the high Court
of Parliament, by which means he might receive credit and estimation,
preferment and rewards, suiting to the worth and validity of such beneficial
accomplishes, as he by his experience and industry, has made fit to
accommodate this Kingdom therewith; and whereas the said Gentleman ever since
your absence, still continuing in these parts upon his occasions, did take
notice that many persons were somewhat incredulous of his former intentions
which so wrought upon his judgment, that he was loath to let his reputation
remain in such doubtful suspense. To prevent the which, he justly and
ingeniously did rather conceive it fit to disclose and perfect some beneficial
and effectual designs which accordingly he did so truly and perfectly
perform, that we should not do him right, if we should not give him his due
deserts, by declaring that he has made manifest some experiments to our
viewes, and also to our apprehensions; which without doubt or further question,
will perfectly hold good, in procuring great benefit to this Nation; and
therefore we do even more certainly and fully then heretofore approve of his
sufficiency, and do confidently believe that other of his inventions and
secrets undiscovered, which he says is of far greater consequence and (...)
respect he has already showed us such good patterns of his knowledge, we do
the more credibly believe that his other designs will appear as rightly
perfect, and as materially certain for the future, as these apparances that are
made known unto us: which may justly challenge a requital of this Nation for
his directions therein. And therefore our motion and request unto you is, that
you will recommend him and his designs to the friendship and consideration of
the powerful Members of both the Honble houses of Parliament, that thereby
they may the better take notice of his deserts, entertain his good service for
the Commonwealth with love, and speedy settling a certain course, that he may
have fitting preferment and recompense correspondent to the worth of every
particular discovery, when they or any of them are made apparent to the Honble.
Houses, by demonstration or by any of the models thereof, or by rational
judgment and understanding, that any of his Works or Arts seem infallibly
beneficial, and that then there may be no delays in advancing and dignifying
the said Gent. with such suitable assistance and valuable requitals, as he shall
justly merit by publishing and directing others, in these laudable parts and
qualities, the which by his studious endeavors and observations, he has
attained unto. And therefore according to the former excellent estimations, of
this and other civil Nations, of and concerning the Inventions of industrious
persons, we make no question but the present state of this Kingdom will ever be
ready to requite, cherish and encourage all that labor for the weal-publicke,
to which good actions we are assured of your willingness and readiness in
your particular aid and opportunity, to assist in the effects of these our
loving motions, and to persevere in the same until a fitting course be
established, and for your endeavors herein you shall oblige.

Chepstow this first of May. 1646. Your servants, Tho. Hughes, Edm. Morgan, Jo:
Walter, Will. Jones, Rice Williams, Will. Blething, Chr. Catchmay.


To the right Honorable, the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The humble motions and Propositions of Thomas Ducket Gent: Practitioner in
Physic, in the Petition beforementioned.
Wherein is declared the heads of such Designs and Secrets as the Propositor
is Mr. of, and is ready to manifest and perfectly make appear, how to effect
the Contents of these ensuing Propositions. viz.

Expert experiments, how to Improve all sorts of English fruit.
1 IMprimis, He professes to show singular skill by giving perfect Directions
for the Improvement of all sorts of English fruit, viz. In choosing out the
fittest land and place for speedy growth and bearing, and showing ways by
unusual directions, for defending young Trees or setlings from the spoil of
Cattle, by bruising or rubbing, notwithstanding the residence of many Cattle in
the ground, and that by a cheap and easy way, the value being considered; And
also to improve the growth of all young Trees in the places where they are
planted, far exceeding all former Art in that particular; insomuch that they
shall thrive and prosper so exceedingly, where his skill is used, that they
shall in far less time then heretofore, both bear and be grown out of
hazard of Cattle, and likewise diverse other beneficial Observations and
additions to the benefit of Fruit; so much that Fruit and all the profits
thereof shall in some few years after the general use of the new Husbandry,
become double or treble as plentiful in this Nation, if such success be by
this honorable House held considerable; and the Author made use of to spread
and dispierce his directions therein throughout this Kingdom.

Improvement of all sorts of Wood.
2. He also professes to direct a course how to Plant young trees of all sorts
of Timber wood, or any other beneficial trees in such manner, that though much
Cattle usually continue in herbage of the said Land, they shall not
nevertheless rub or bruise or make spoil of such young trees, and that by an
easy and cheap way, with many other aditions for improving of the pasture or
herbage, that is much lost in and under all sort of Woods or woody Lands,
showing reasons withal for advantaging and increasing of all sorts of Woods,
in such convenient places, that little or no pasture shall be wasted,
diminished or taken up, by sowing or planting the same, if the Authors rules be
rightly followed

A profitable Art of save Wood and Coals, and avoid smoke of Chimneyes.
3. Whereas Wood and Coals of all kind, and other materials for fire grows
very scarce and very chargeable, the Author therefore will direct some
necessary neat course to be used in the forepart of every Chimney, that by a
small matter of Smiths and Masons work, Which design he has brought to such
an exact perfection, that he will direct them a way, that shall save a third or
one quarter of the expense of fuel aforesaid, both in this City and the rest
of the Kingdom, and of such validity are such designs, that notwithstanding
the expense of less fuel, yet shall that lesser quantity make much warmer
all rooms then formerly they were with large expense. And by the use of this
Art the offense of smoking Chimneyes shall be for ever avoided, and all sorts
of provision of diet shall be prepared and dressed with more neatness and
speed then did before. The charge to effect which, is of such small
consequence, that the Money saved in fuel in half a year, shall make
satisfaction for the whole charge belonging to the finishing of the design in
every Kitchen Chimney, or any other Chimney where fire is daily used.

An Art for the destruction of Moss more effectually then has been.
4. Whereas Moss does corode and devour the greatest part of the grass of
many thousand Acres of land, the Author Professes to give infallible direction,
how to destroy the same without plowing the ground, in case the same lie flat
and even, and not rugged, by Mole hills, Pits, or old Ridges, if so then after
the said Land is laid even and smooth by Plough or other instruments, whether
Hills or Dales, or sides of hills or in what place soever the ground is overcome
with Moss, all people by the same may know how to destroy and defend the same
from Moss for ever, and also to double or treble the quantity and goodness of
the grass, the first year where this Art is used, will defray the charge.

A speedy way to Cure Land surcharged with Fern, Heth, Sedges, Rushes,
Thistles, Docks, Netles etc.
5. Whereas Fern, Heath, Sedge, Rushes, Thistles, Nettles, Docks or other
impedimentall trash, which not only hinders the growth of grass killing the
roots thereof, but also shadows and takes away the benefit of the light of
the Sun from purifying, sweetning and maturizing the same, and so causes the
pasture of that land to be of a sower, cold and earthy constitution, and by all
likelihood an similitude is as distasteful for Cattle, as unripe fruit to men,
all which trash he will direct a certain course (if the Land so offended lie
flat and even) how to destroy for ever without any Ploughing at all. But if it
be very rugged, uneven, or in great ridges, then after the same is once laid
even, then never more shall any sort of trash be the loss of grass or breed
other impediment in Commons, or severals where the Art has once been used,
except so mountainous, Rocky, or lakey, that it cannot be wrought upon with
Plough or other levelling Instruments; in the like manner may Broom, Gorst,
Fursne, Brieres, Thorns, or any trashy under Woods, or Shrubs, which overrunne
Lands, destroying much of the herbage in Commons or enclosures, be destroyed
either all, or part thereof (if not reserved for fuel whereby for more
profit) the same may be converted into Pasture or Meadow

Greater benefit may be made of Mud Marish ground, Boggs and Lakes then
formerly has been used.
6. He professes to direct a course whereby greater benefit may be made then
yet has bin, of all Mud-marish grounds, and standing Bogges or mires, by
employing the same upon Corn land or Pasture, with many other additions of
that nature, viz. Whereas Black Barren Turffe land yields little or no profit
(save only for the cutting Turfe for fuel, and the vastness of that land so
great, that abundance thereof may be spared for other uses. He undertakes to
prescribe a way that a greater benefit may be raised thereof, then ever
formerly has bin; and in many places where deep marish grounds are, to direct
a course to draw them dry, that it may be converted to some good use. Turning
the watery Lakes thereof into such a profitable way that much Fish may be there
stored and bred. All which may be effected at a very cheap and easy rate,
respecting the great profits will accrue thereby.

A certain way of improvement of Cold-marish ground.
7. He professes to direct a course how to improve all baren or moist morish,
or marish ground, which bears but a short picked hory course sower grass,
unkindly for feeding or breeding of Cattle, by converting the same into a
better, deeper and larger growing layer of grass, and of a sweeter and better
nature, consisting of hony-suckles, dasies, and yellow flowred grass; The
profit whereof will be so great, that the very first year will quit the cost
in those places where the materials may conveniently be had for the performance
of the design, whereby many thousands of Acres of course ground in commons or
enclosures may be cured.

Obstructionall Arts to Augment much more Meadow ground then has been.
8. He will give certain intelligence in a most expert manner, to improve and
augment many thousand Acres of Meadow ground, which shall yield a great, sweet,
and beautiful crop of Mowing grass, the improvement whereof that shall be
discovered, will so effectually accomplish the experiment, in every place that
few men's thoughts or ingenuity has formerly found it out, or at least not made
so full and perfect a use of the means or method to effect the design as
shall be described, directed and presented, to the rational apprehension of
all men by the Author.

Preventions against rotten Diseases in Sheep.
9. The Author being desirous to serve his Country with the best of his
abilities, has therefore practiced rules and medicines to prevent the rotten
diseases in Sheep, which in some Counties he has so rightly experienced,
where he has resided, that he doubts not (with Gods blessing) to be very
expertly able to make that rich accommodation hold current in all parts of the
Kingdom. viz. That by a cheap and easy way, method and observation of little
cost or trouble, he will resist the impediment of water in the body, and worms
in the liver of Sheep, whereby the putrifycations in them, which procures
dearth and destruction shall be avoided, when his secrets in this particular
shall be discovered, the impediments before said in those profitable Cattle
shall be for ever prevented.

Directions and Observations to advance the race of English Horses.
10. Whereas the decay of gallant Horses within these 40 years past in this
Kingdom, and the cause thereof not sufficiently known unto many, but fully and
specially apprehended by the Author: He intends by his own observations to give
infallible rules for the advancing, maintaining and improving (...) reasons of
the decay and declining of the English Race. But give certain directions how
Colts in breeding shall be advanced and improved to a more perfect growth in
strength, perfection in shape and courage, He will also set forth rules and
means by which men of ability may in breeding and feeding their young horses
in the stable, and by managing them according to his directions, advance their
carriage, and proportion them with high crest and comelier areyne then ordinary.

Directions to find out fit soil for Cold Land where Lime is not to be had.
11. Further, he will give directions how to prepare in many Countries where
the errable land is either of a cold constitution, or that such tillage land
does lie wet, cold and gaulie, whereby it may be conceived that lime is the
fittest soil or Compost, if it were not too far to be fetched and so scarce to
be had, that it will not quit cost in many of those Countries, instead thereof
there is other materials, as congruent as Lime to be had in many places as
shall be directed, which at cheap and easy rates may be had, when known,
which will richly avail land-holders for soyling and quickening of their Corn
land, and improving the same so effectually, that the people shall spare much
misking, dung and soil made by cattle from their Corn-land to be employed for
improvement of Pasture for which it is most fit and proper, and by this new Art
shall cold Corn-land and cold Pasture be much enriched when discovered.

Observations concerning Cattle.
12. He further will disclose and publish some more profitabler rules and
observations for improvement of all sorts of rother Cattle, as Kine, Oxen,
Sheep, Goats, Swine and the like; then has hitherto been observed.

Now means to draw water over much Land.
13. He will prescribe courses by the help and power of this Parliament,
whereby more profit may be raised by waterworks in many Countries then has
been accustomed, and with more ease and facility. As also he will direct the
making of many Engines, Tools, and instruments of husbandry that are of new
invention, and also direct new beneficial additions to advantage and make more
useful many utensils of those kinds.

Rules for Smoothing and Levelling of Land.
14. And whereas some land is much disadvantaged by wanhillocks and
Anthillocks, and rugged tompes of ground that lies dry, and thereby unkindly
for grass that much is lost thereby. The Author will direct the making of
Engines whereby much more ground may be levelled and made even with the charge
of twenty shillings, then could with the Spade and Shovel be perfected for five
pound. And more availeable, as will be confessed, when the Authors reasons be
given and understood.

Rules to lay wet Land dry, and dry Land wet.
15. And whereas amongst other of the Authors studies and observations, he has
been effectually careful to find out all the cheapest and speediest Rules and
Methods, to lay wet land as dry as may be, and to keep dry land as wet as is
possible, touching which design, he has many expert perfections and
directions, that shall in his works be tendered amongst those designs as are
formerly treated of, all which designs will much increase the Revenues of this
Kingdom; and therefore requires expeditious settling, whilst the property and
constitution of such contents be in Esse.

To the right Honorable, the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled.
The Manner and form of the Authors intentions to proceed in the discovery of
his Designs.
May it please your Honors,
WHereas such profitable designs, inventions and additions to former Arts of
husbandry as is before treated of, should be made known by Manuscript, Printed
book, or by Model, Platform or demonstration, by divulging or manifestation,
before confirmation of such considerable conditional gratuities, as your
Honors shall in your wisdoms conceive the benefit of his Art will merit of
the Kingdom, as thankfulness to the Author, and encouragement of others in
the like causes: The benefit and credit of such discoveries may be derived to
others as things of their knowledge, or else undervalued and slighted by some
natures, or ambitious spirits; as things formerly known in some parts of this
Nation or Foreign Countries in respect there may be some resemblance or
coherence with some of this Authors inventions, or else some detraction from
the perfection thereof, by some imaginary opposition; but all the objections
of that nature, the Professor by this following and undeniable Sillogisme
denies, his inventions consisting of so rich and great profit, as are
contracted and abstracted into such cheap and easy ways of perfection; he
therefore says, if the intelligence thereof had been formerly known, so fully
as the Author intends to express himself, or that formerly used in some parts,
then would the benefit thereof occasion daily use; and the designs and
additions would have been acted in general, and in all places as common as
other Artifices of husbandry, whose benefits are discovered. Many times such
objectio^s against such things of rich and hopeful concernment, although the
object or does mistake and recount knowledge of part of some designs, that in
some particular kind are used, though not perfectly practiced in general
throughout the Kingdom, may interrupt many times the proceedings in good
designs, as hereafter will be manifested when the Author has declared the
capacity of his skill.

The Author humbly craves that your Honors will take notice of his good
intentious service, and allow him in his proceedings your honors protection,
that he may not receive any such prejudices or otherwise by explaining or
divulging the methodicall and practick part of the said Arts; and that upon
trial made of the sufficiency of any part of them, by rational judgment,
discovery or intelligence they hold current, as some of the primest effects
will really do. And that other of his designs, that consist of a Cult mystery,
do appear by patterns or platformes thereof to be apparently valuable. That
then before the Author be requested to unobscure, any other of his designs,
that he may be enabled by legal satisfaction by Ordinance of Parliament, as to
your Honors wisdoms shall seem answerable to the merit of his first
discoveries.

That the Author when his first designs are manifested according to the season
of the year, and the faculties and qualities thereof drawn into a Manuscript,
may have the same unprinted, in which book shall be involved the Print of many
artificial Cuts of the right figure, shape, proportion and Emblem of every
perfect Model, Engine, or Instument that is by the Author invented, discovered
or observed to be fit to accomplish and make perfect the Models, or the
designs to perform the works, according to the fancy or device of the
director, with instructions to make use of every of them, that then by virtue
of an Ordinance of Parliament every Parish with in this Kingdom may receive a
book thereof, published by Authority and with approbation of your Honors to
be made use of for the good of the Weale-publike in general, and their own
particular profit, which Command will hasten profitable effects, and expedite a
requital of the Author. After which establishment your Ora tour will proceed
to discover other valuable secrets in the form and manner aforesaid. And when
the Master-peeces of his inventions are distributed in several books, and
himself considered. Then he intends to compose all his works into a natural
History of one entire volume with all convenient observations, material and
profitable experiments of all the former particular tracts, and present the
same to your Honors. Garnished and furnished with many other beneficial and
delightful directions of much consequence.

And for a more speedy, secure and certain accomplishment and perfecting these
new Arts, inventions and additions unto husbandry, the Author further craves
your Honors to give power to the Author to take a general Survey of the
Kingdom, thereby the better to discover the improvements and profit that may
be made and raised in all Countries, either upon Land Common, or several baren
or fertile, or of what kind soever, where either himself or such deputies as
may be authorized by the said Surveyer, and by him made skillful and capable
of, and in his designs both in finding out the defects in all sorts of land,
which the owners through want of knowledge in curing thereof, neglect to their
damage, not only to advise what is fittest husbandry for all sorts of land
according to the Authors inventions. But also the said Surveyor or his
deputies, may oversee and cause to be made, certain Models and patterns of the
Authors design, with the Engines or instruments that are any whit useful in
perfecting the same. And when directions are thus given, and the benefits made
apparent in the most eminent and fit places of this Kingdom in every Shire,
which will occasion attractivenesse and willingness in people of all places,
speedily to make practice of the Authors directions. By which means, in few
years more profit will be raised, then will be in many years without it.

Lastly, the Author humbly craves, that to the end his intended designs may be
expedited, your Honors would be pleased to appoint unto him a convenient house
with necessaries, and some small out-lets walled in, being in the Suburbs of
London or Westminster, in the disposal of your Honors, for his better
preparation of his Designs, Models and Patterns, Demonstrations and
expressions for your honors satisfaction; whereby you may personally see
manifested and substantially be assured in many particular realities of the
consequences and validities, of some of his proposed designs, touching the
great benefit and service of this Kingdom.

And whereas some may peradventure object. That this fertile Kingdom is
already by former industry and invention of ancient (...) brought so near to
the very highest improvement of Land, and other conveniences, that little more
can be done, shall (by your honors favor find themselves convinced in their
oppinion) when (by your honors assistance and permittance) the Author has
unclouded the splendour of new and true perfections, fit to deserve your honors
approbation, and the Kingdoms applause and prayers, for him that stands at a
helm of knowledge, fraughted with skill, conducing to pleasure and plenty,
ready for presentation to the Kingdom, after

Your Honors shall have had trial of the abilities of your most humble
servant whilst he is, yet THOMAS DVCKET.


