THE Wild Gallant: A COMEDY.

As it was Acted at the THEATER-ROYAL BY HIS MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

WRITTEN, By JOHN DRYDEN, Esquire

In the SAVOY.

Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for H. Herringman, at the Blew-Anchor, in the
Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange. 1669.

Preface.
IT would be a great Impudence in me to say much of a Comedy, which has had but
indifferent success in the action. I made the Town my Judges; and the greater
part condemned it. After which I do not think it my Concernment to defend it,
with the ordinary Zeal of a Poet for his decry'd Poem. Though Corneille is more
resolute in his Preface before his Pertharite, which was condemned more
Uuiversally than this: for he avowes boldly, That in spite of Censure his Play
was well, and regularly written; which is more than I dare say for mine. Yet it
was received at Court; and was more than once the Divertisement of His Majesty,
by His own Command. But I have more modesty than to ascribe that to my Merit,
which was His particular Act of Grace. It was the first attempt I made in
Dramatique Poetry; and, I find since, a very bold one, to begin with Comedy;
which is the most difficult part of it. The Plot was not Originally my own: but
so altered, by me (whether for the better or worse, I know not) that, whoever
the Author was, he could not have challenged a Scene of it. I doubt not but you
will see in it, the uncorrectness of a young Writer: which is yet but a small
excuse for him, who is so little amended since. The best Apology I can make for
it, and the truest, is only this; That you have since that time received with
Applause, as bad, and as uncorrect Plays from other Men.

PROLOGUE to the WILD GALLANT, as it was first Acted.
IS it not strange, to hear a Poet say,
He comes to ask you, how you like the Play?
You have not seen it yet! alas it is true,
But now your Love and Hatred judge, not You.
And cruel Factions (bribed by Interest) come,
Not to weigh Merit, but to give their Doom:
Our Poet therefore, jealous of the Event,
And (though much boldness takes) not confident.
Has sent me, whither you, fair Ladies, too
Sometimes upon as small occasions go,
And from this Scheme, drawn for the hour and day,
Bid me inquire the fortune of his Play.
The Curtain drawn discovers two Astrologers; The Prologue is presented to
them. First Astrol. reads. A Figure of the heavenly Bodies in their several
Apartments, Feb. the 5th. half an hour after three after Noon, from whence you
are to judge the success of a new Play called the Wild Gallant.


2. Astrol. Who must judge of it, we, or these Gentlemen? We'll not meddle with
it, so tell your Poet. Here are in this House the ablest Mathematicians in
Europe for his purpose.


They will resolve the question ever they part. 1. Ast. Yet let us judge it by
the rules of Art.
First Jupiter, the Ascendants Lord disgraced,
In the twelfth House, and near grim Saturn placed,
Denote short life unto the Play: --

2. Ast. -- Jove yet,
In his Apartment Sagitary, set
Under his own Roof, cannot take much wrong;

1. Ast. Why then the Lif's not very short, nor long;


2. Ast. The luck not very good, nor very ill,


Prolo. That is to say, it is as it is taken still.


1. Ast. But, Brother, Ptolomy the Learned says,
It Is the fifth house from whence we judge of Plays.
Venus the Lady of that House I find
Is Peregrine, your Play is ill designed,
It should have been but one continued Song,
Or at the least a Dance of 3 hours long.

2. Ast. But yet the greatest Mischief does remain,
The twelfth Apartment bears the Lord of Spain;
Whence I conclude, it is your Authors lot,
To be endangered by a Spanish Plot.

Prolo. Our Poet yet protection hopes from you,
But bribes you not with any thing that is new.
Nature is old, which Poets imitate,
And for Wit, those that boast their own estate,
Forget Fletcher and Ben before them went,
Their Elder Brothers, and that vastly spent:
So much 'twill hardly be repaired again,
Not, though supplied with all the wealth of Spain:
This Play is English, and the growth your own;
As such it yields to English Plays alone.
He could have wished it better for your sakes;
But that in Plays he finds you love mistakes:
Besides he thought it was in vain to mend
What you are bound in honor to defend,
That English Wit (how ever despised by some)
Like English Valor still may overcome

PROLOGUE to the WILD-GALLANT Revived.
AS some raw Squire, by tender Mother bred,
Till one and Twenty keeps his Maidenhead,
(Pleased with some Sport, which he alone does find,
And thinks a secret to all Humane kind;)
Till mightily in love, yet half afraid,
He first attempts the gentle Dairymaid.
Succeeding there, and led by the renown
Of Whetstones Park, he comes at length to Town,
Where entered, by some School-fellow or Friend,
He grows to break Glass-Windows in the end:
His valor too, which with the Watch began,
Proceeds to duel, and he kills his Man.
By such degrees, while knowledge he did want,
Our unfletch'd Author, writ a Wild Gallant.
He thought him monstrous lewd (I Will lay my life)
Because suspected with his Landlords Wife:
But since his knowledge of the Town began,
He thinks him now a very civil man:
And, much ashamed of what he was before,
Has fairly played him at three Wenches more.
It Is some amends his frailties to confess;
Pray pardon him his want of wickedness:
He Is towardly, and will come on apace;
His franck confession shows he has some grace.
You balk'd him when he was a young beginner,
And almost spoiled a very hopeful sinner:
But, if once more you slight his weak endeavor;
For ought I know, he may turn tail for ever.
THE Wild Gallant. The Scene LONDON.
Names of the persons.
Lord Nonsuch, An old rich humerous Lord. Justice Trice. His Neighbor. Mr.
Loveby. The Wild Gallant. Sir Timorous. A bashful Knight. Failer, Burr, Hangers
on of Sir Timorous. Bibber, A Tailor. Setstone, A Jeweller.
Women.
Lady Constance, Lord Nonsuch his Daughter. Madam Isabelle, Her Cousin. Mrs.
Bibber. The Taylers Wife.
Sergeants. Boy to Loveby, Servants. A Bawd and Whores. Watch and Constable.
THE Wild Gallant. SCENE LONDON
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Failer entering to Burr; who is putting on his Buff-Coat. Fail. WHat! Not ready
yet, Man?


Burr. You do not consider my Voyage from Holland last night.


Fail. Pish, a mere Ferry; get up, get up; my Cousins Maids will come and
Blanket thee anon: Art thou not ashamed to lie a Bed so long?


Bur. I may be more ashamed to rise; and so you will say, dear Heart, if you look
upon my Clothes; the best is, my Buff-coat will cover all.


Fail. I gad, there goes more cunning than one would think, to the putting thy
Clothes together: thy Doublet and Breeches are Guelphs and Ghibellins to one
another; and the stiches of thy Doublet are so far asunder, that it seems to
hang together by the Teeth. No Man could ever guess to what part of the Body
these fragments did belong, unless he had been acquainted with u'm as long as
thou have been. If they once lose their hold, they can never get together
again, except by chance the Rags hit the Tallies of one another. He that gets
into thy Doublet, must not think to do it by storm; no, he must win it inch by
inch, as the Turk did Rhodes.


Burr. You are very merry with my Wardrobe: but till I am provided of a better,
I am resolved to receive all Visits in this Trucklebed.


Fail. Then will I first scotch the Wheels of it, that it may not run; thou
have Cattle enough in it, to carry it down stairs, and break thy neck. it is got
a yard nearer the door already.


Enter Boy. Sir, Mr. Bibber your Taylor's below, and desires to speak with you.


Fail. He Is an honest Fellow, and a fashionable, he shall set thee forth I
warrant thee.


Burr. I, but where is the Money for this dear Heart?


Fail, -- Well, but what think you of being put into a Suit of Clothes, without
Money?


[aside. Burr. You speak of Miracles.


Fail. Do you not know Will. Bibbers humor?


Burr. Prithee, What have I to do with his humor?


Fail. Break but a Jest, and he will beg to trust thee for a Suit; nay, he will
contribute to his own destruction; and give thee occasions to make one: he has
been my Artificer these three years; and, all the while I have lived upon his
favorable apprehension: Boy, conduct him up.


[ Exit Boy. Burr. But, What am I the better for this? I never made Jest in all
my life.


Fail. A bare clinch will serve the turn; a Carwichet, a Quarterquibble, or a
Punn.


Burr. Wit from a Low-Countrey-Soldier? One that has conversed with none but
dull Dutchmen these ten years! What an unreasonable Rogue art thou? why, I
tell thee, it is as difficult to me, as to pay him ready Money.


Fail. Come, you shall be ruled for your own good, Lie down; I Will throw the
Clothes over you to help Meditation; and, upon the first opportunity, start you
up, and surprise him with a Jest.


Burr. Well, I think this impossible to be done: but, however I Will attempt.


[Lies down Failer covers him. Fail. Hushed! he is coming up.


Enter Bibber. Bib. Morrow Mr. Failer: What, I warrant you think I come a
Dunning now?


Fail. No, I vow to Gad, Will, I have a better opinion of thy Wit, than to
think, thou would come to so little purpose.


Bib. Pretty well that: No, no; my business is to drink my mornings-Draught in
Sack with you.


Fail. Will not Ale serve the turn, Will?


Bib. I had too much of that last night; I was a little disguised, as they say.


Fail. Why disguised? Had thou put on a clean Band, or washed thy Face
lately? those are thy Disguises, Bibber.


Bibb. Well, in short, I was drunk; damnably drunk with Ale; great Hogen Mogen
bloody Ale: I was porterly drunk, and that I hate of all things in Nature.


Burr. Rising: And of all things in Nature I love it best.


Bib. Art thou there In Faith; and why, old Boy?


Burr. Because when I am porterly drunk, I can carry my self.


Bib. Ha, ha Boy.


Fail. This Porter brings sad News to you Will. you must trust him for a suit
of Clothes, as bad as it is: come, h's an honest Fellow, and loves the King.


Bib. Why? it shall be my Suit to him, that I may trust him.


Burr. I grant your Suit, Sir,


Fail. Burr. Make have and dress you: Sir Timorous Dines here to day you know
him.


Burr. I, I a good honest young Fellow; but, no Conjurer; he and I are very
kind.


Fail. I gad we two have a constant Revenue out of him: he would now be
admitted Suitor to my Lady Constance Nonsuch, my Lord Nonsuch his Daughter; our
Neighbor here in Fleet street.


Burr. Is the Match in any forwardness?


Fail. He never saw her before yesterday, and will not be brought to speak to
her this Month yet.


Burr. That Is strange.


Fail. Such a bashful Knight did I never see; but we must move for him.


Bib. They say here is a great Dinner to be made to day here, at your Cousin
Trices, on purpose for the enterview.


Burr. What he keeps up his old humor still?


Fail. Yes certain; he admires eating and drinking well, as much as ever, and
measures every man's wit, by the goodness of his Palate.


Burr. Who Dines here besides.


Fail. Jac. Loveby.


Bib. O, my Ghest.


Burr. He has ever had the repute of a brave clear-spirited Fellow.


Fail. He Is one of your Dear Hearts, a Debau che.


Burr. I love him the better for it: the best Heraldry of a Gentleman is a
Clapderiv'd to him, from three Generations: What fortune has he?


Fail. Good Fortune at all Games; but no Estate: he had one; but he has made a
Devil on it long ago: he is a bold Fellow, I vo w to Gad: a person that keep;
company with his betters; and commonly has Gold in's pockets: come Bibber; I
see thou longest to be at thy mornings watering: I Will try what credit I have
with the Butler.


Burr. Come away my noble Festus and new Customer.


Fail. Now will he drink till his Face be no bigger than a threepence.


(Exeunt. Enter Loveby and Boy; followed by Frances Bibbers Wife. Lov. Nay, the
Devil take thee, sweet Landlady, hold thy tongue: Was It not enough thou have
scolded me from my Lodging, which, as long as I rent it, is my Castle; but to
follow me here to Mr. Trices, where I am invited; and to discredit me before
strangers, for a lowsy, Paltry sum of Money?


Franc. I tell you truly, Mr. Loveby, my husband and I cannot live by Love, as
they say; we must have wherewithal, as they say; and pay for what we take; and
so shall you, or some shall smoke for it.


Lov. Smoke! why a piece of hung Beef in Holland is not more smoakt, then thou
have Smoked me already. Thou know I am now fasting; let me have but fair
play; when I have lined my sides with a good dinner, I Will engage upon
reputation to come home again, and thou shall scold at me all the afternoon.


Franc. I Will take the Law on you.


Lov. The Law allows none to scold in their own Causes: What do thou think
the Lawyers take our money for?


Franc. I hope you intend to deal by my Husband like a Gentleman, as they say?


Lov. Then I should beat him most unmercifully, and not pay him neither.


Franc. Come, you think to fobb me off with your Jests as you do my Husband;
but it wonn't be: yonder he comes, and company with him; Husband, husband; why
William I say!


Enter Bibber, Burr, and Failer at the other end. Lov. Speak softly, and I will
satisfy thee.


Franc. You shall not satisfy me, Sir; pay me for what you owe me, for
Chamber-rent, and Diet, and many a good thing besides, that shall be nameless.


Lov. What a Stygian woman's this to talk thus? hold thy tongue till they be
gone, or I Will Cuckold thy husband:


Fran. You Cuckold him -- would you durst Cuckold him; I will not hold my
Tongue, Sir.


Bib. Yonder Is my Guest; what say you Gentlemen? shall I call him to go down
with us?


Lov. I must make a loose from her, there is no otherway: Save ye Mr. Failer; is
your Cousin Trice stirring yet: answer me quickly Sir, is your Cousin Trice yet
stirring?


Fail. I Will go and see, Sir; sure the man has a mind to beat me; but I vow to
Gad I have no mind to be beaten by him: come away


Burr. Will. you will follow us.


Bib. I Will be with you immediately --


[ Exeunt Burr. Failer. Lov. Who was that with Failer, Will.


Bib. A man at Arms, that is come from Holland.


Lov. A man out at Arms thou mean, Will.


Bib. Good In Faith.


Franc. I, I; you runquesting up and down after your Gambols, and your Jests
William; and never mind the main chance, as they say: pray get in your Debts,
and think upon your Wife and Children.


Lov. Think upon the Sack at Cary-House, with the Apricot flavor Will. hang a
Wife; What is she, but a lawful kind of Manslayer? every little hugg in bed, is
a degree of murdering thee: and for thy Children fear u'm not: thy part of u'm
shall be Tailors, and they shall trust; and those thy Customers get for thee
shall be Gentlemen, and they shall be trusted by their Brethren; and so thy
children shall live by one another.


Bib. Did you mark that Frances? there was wit now; he called me Cuckold to my
face, and yet for my heart I cannot be angry with him: I perceive you love
Frances Sir (...) I love her the better for your sake; speak truly, ^o you
(...) such a pretty brown kind of woman?


Lov. I do In Faith, Will. your fair Women have no substance in u'm they shrink
In The wetting.


Franc. Well, you may be undone if you will Husband: I hear there are 2 or 3
Actions already out against him: you may be the last, if you think good.


Bib. It Is true she tel's me; I love your wit well Sir; but I must cut my coat
according to my cloth.


Franc. Sir, we'll come by our own as we can; if you put us off from week to
week thus.


Lov. Nay, but good Landlady --


Franc. Will good Landlady set on the Pot, as they say; or make the Jack go;
then I Will hear you.


Bib. Now she is too much on the the other hand: hold your prating Frances; or
I Will put you out of your Pater Nosters with a sorrow to you.


Franc. I did but lay the Law open to him, as they say, whereby to get our
money in: but if you knew how he had used me Husband.


Bib. Has he used you Frances; put so much more into his Bill for Lodging.


Lov. Honest Will, and so he died; I thank thee little Bibber, being sober, and
when I am drunk, I will kiss thee for it.


Bib. Thank me, and pay me my money, Sir; though I could not forbear my jest, I
do not intend to lose by you; if you pay me not the sooner, I must provide you
another Lodging; say I gave you warning.


Lov. Against next quarter Landlord?


Bib. Of an hour Sir.


Lov. That Is short warning, Will.


Bib. By this hand you shall up into the Garret where the little bed is; I Will
let my best room to a better paymaster; you know the Garret, Sir.


Franc. I, he knows it by a good Token Husband.


Lov. I sweat to think of that Garret, Will. thou art not so unconscionable to
put me there: why it is a kind of little ease, to cramp thy rebellious Prentices
in; I have seen an Usurers Iron Chest would hold two on it: a penny
Looking-glass cannot stand upright in the Window, that and the Brush fills it:
the Hat-case must be disposed under the Bed, and the Comb-case will hang down
form the Seeling to the Floor. If I chance to Dine in my Chamber, I must stay
till I am empty before I can get out: and if I chance to spill the Chamber Pot,
it will overflow it from top to bottom.


Bib. Well, for the description of the Garret, I Will bate you something of the
Bill.


Lov. All, all, good Will. or to stay thy fury till my Rents come up; I will
describe thy little Face.


Bib, No, rather describe your own little money; I am sure that is so Little, it
is not visible.


Lov. You are in the right, I have not a cross at present, as I am a sinner; and
you will not believe me, I Will turn my Pockets inside outward -- Ha! What Is the
meaning of this, my Pockets heavy? Has my small Officer put in Counters to abuse
me? -- How now, yellow Boys, by this good light! Sirrah, Varlet, how came I by
this Gold? Ha!


Boy. What Gold do you mean, Sir? the Devil-a-piece you had this morning: in
these last three weeks, I have almost forgot what my Teeth were made for; last
night good Mrs. Bibber here took pity on me, and crumm'd me a Mess of Gruel,
with the Children, and I popt and popt my Spoon three or four times to my
mouth, before I could find the way to it.


Lov. It Is strange, how I should come by so much Money! (aside. Has there been
no body about my Chamber this morning, Landlady?


Boy O yes, Sir; I forgot to tell you that: this Morning a strange Fellow, as
ever eyes beheld, would needs come up to you when you were asleep; but when he
came down again, he said, He had not waked you.


Lov. Sure this Fellow, who ever he was, was sent by Fortune to mistake me into
so much Money. -- Well, this is not the first time my necessities have been
strangely supplied: some Cadua or other has a kindness for me, that is certain:
( aside. -- Well Monsieur Bibber, from henceforward I Will keep my wit for more
refined spirits; you shall be paid with dirt; -- there is Money for you.


Bib. Nay, Good Sir. --


Lov. What Is your sum? tell it out: Will the Money burn your fingers? Sirrah,
Boy, fetch my Suit with the Gold Lace at Sleeves from Tribulation -- Gives him
Gold.


[ Exit. Boy. Mr. Taylour, I shall turn the better Bill-man, and knock that
little Coxcomb of yours, if you do not answer me what I owe you.


Bib. Pray Sir, troub not your self; it is nothing; Ifeck now it is not.


Lov. How, nothing Sir?


Franc. And't please your worship, it was seventeen pounds and a Noble,
yesterday at noon, your worship knows: and then your worship came home ill last
night, and complained of your worships head; and I sent for three Dishes of Tea
fo your good worship, and that was six pence more, and please your worship's
honor.


Lov. Well; there is eighteen pieces, tell u'm.


Bib. I say, Frances, do not take u'm,


Lov. What, Is all your pleading of necessity come to this?


Bib. Now I see he will pay, he shall not pay, Frances; go home, and fetch him
the whole bag of forty pounds, I Will lend it him, and the Lease of the House
too; he shall want for nothing.


Lov. Take the Money, or I Will leave your house.


Bib. Nay, rather than displease his Worship, take it.


[She takes it. Lov. So, so; go home quietly, and Suckle my God-son, Francis.


[ Exit Frances. Bib. If you are for the Cellar, Sir, you know the way.


[ Exit Bibber. Lov. No, my first visit shall be to my Mistress, the Lady
Constance Nonsuch: She Is discreet, and how the Devil she comes to love me, I
know not; yet I am pretty confident she loves me: well, no woman can be wiser
than, you know what will give her leave to be.


Enter Lady Constance, and Madam Isabella. Isa. Look, look; Is not that your
Servant, Loveby.?


Love. It Is she; there is no being seen, till I am better habited --


[ Exit Loveby. Constable. Let him go, and take no notice of him: poor Rogue!
He little thinks I know his poverty.

Isa. And less, that you supply it by an unknown hand.


Constable. I, and falfified my Fathers Keys to do it.


Isa. How can you answer this to your discretion?


Constable. Who could see him want she loves?


Enter Setstone. Isa. Oh here is Mr. Setstone come, your Jeweller, Madam.


Constable. Welcome Setstone, have thou performed thy visit
Happi y, and without discovery?

Set. As you would wish it, Madam: I went up to his
Chamber without interruption; and there found him
Drowning his cares, and pacifying his hunger with sleep;
Which advantage I took, and undiscovered by him left
The Gold divided in his Pockets.

Constable. Well, this Money will furnish him I hope, that we may have his company
again.


Set. Two hundred and fifty good pounds, Madam! Has your Father missed it yet?


Constable. No; if he had, we should have all heard on it before how: but, pray God
Monsieur Loveby has no other haunts to divert him now he is ransomed: what a
kind of woman is his Landlady?


Set. Well enough to serve a Tailor; or to kiss when he comes home drunk, or
wants money; but, far unlikely to create jealousy in your Ladyship.


Enter Servant. Serve. Madam, Justice Trice desires your Ladyships excuse, that
he has not yet performed the Civilities of his hour to you; he is dispatching a
little business, about which he is earnestly employed.


Constable. He Is Master of his own occasions.


[ Exit Servant. Isa. We shall see him anon, with his face as read, as if it
had been boiled in pump-water: but, When comes this Miror of Knighthood that is
to be presented you for your Servant?


Constable. Oh, it is well thought on; 'Faith thou know my affections are
otherwise disposed; he is rich, and thou want a Fortune; atchieve him if thou
can; it is but trying, and thou have as much wit as any Wench in England.


Isa. On condition you will take it for a Courtesy to be ridd of an Ass, I care
not if I marry him: the old fool, your Father, would be so importunate to
match you with a young Fool, that partly for quietness sake I am content to
take him.


Constable. To take him! then you make sure on it.


Isa. As sure, as if the Sack Posset were already eaten.


Constable. But, What means will thou use to get him?


Isa. I Will bribe Failer, he is the man.


Constable. Why this Knight is his inheritance; he lives upon him: Do thou think
he will ever admit thee to govern him? no, he fears thy wit too much: besides, he
has already received an hundred pound to make thee Match between Sir Timorous
and me.


Isa. It Is all one for that; I warrant you he sells me Fee-simple of him.


Set. Your Father, Madam. --


Enter Nonsuch. Isab. The Tempest is risen; I see it in his face; he puffs and
blows yonder, as if two of the Winds were fighting upwards and downwards in
his belly.


Set. Will he not find your false Keys, Madam?


Isa. I hope he will have more Humanity then to search us.


Constable. You are come after us betimes, Sir.


Non. Oh Child! I am undone; I am robbed, I am robbed; I have utterly lost all
stomach to my dinner.


Constable. Robbed! good my Lord how, or of what?


Non. Two hundred and fifty pounds in fair Gold out of my Study: an hundred of
it I was to have paid a Courtier this afternoon for a Bribe.


Set. I protest, my Lord, I had as much a do to get that parcel of Gold for
your Lordship. --


Non. You must get me as much more against to morrow; for then my Friend at
Court is to pay his Mercer.


Isa. Nay, if that be all, there is no such have: the Courtiers are not so
forward to pay their Debts.


Constable. Has not the Monkey been in the Study? he may have carried it away, and
dropped it under the Garden-window: the grafs is long enough to hide it.


Non. I Will go see immediately.


Enter Failer, Burr, Timorous. Fail. This is the Gentleman, my Lord


Non. He Is welcome --


Fail. And this the particular of his Estate.


Non. That Is welcome too.


Fail. But, besides the Land here mentioned, he has wealth in specie.


Non. A very fine young Gentleman.


Tim. Now, my Lord, I hope there is no great need of Wooing: I suppose my Estate
will speak for me; yet, if you please to put in a word.


Non. That will I instantly.


Tim. I hope I shall have your good word too Madam, to your Cousin for me;


[ To Isabelle.] Isa. Any thing within my power, Sir Timorous.


Non. Daughter, here is a person of Quality, and one that loves and honors you
exceedingly --


Tim. Nay, good my Lord! you discover all at first dash.


Non. Let me alone, Sir; Have not I the dominion over my own Daughter?
Constance, here is a Knight in love with you, Child.


Constable. In love with me, my Lord, it is not possible.


Non. Here he stands that will make it good, Child.


Tim. Who I, my Lord? I hope her Ladyship has a better opinion of me than so.


Non. What, Are not you in love with my Daughter? I Will be Sworn you told me so
but even now: I Will eat words for no man.


Tim. If your Ladyship will believe all reports that are raised on Men of
Quality --


Non. He told it me with his own mouth, Child: I Will eat words for no man;
that is more then ever I told him yet.


Fail. You told him so but just now; fie, Sir Timorous.


Non. He shall have no Daughter of mine and he were a thousand Knights; he told
me, he hoped I would speak for him: I Will eat no man's words; that is more than
ever I told him yet.


Isa. You need not keep such a pudder about eating his words; you see he has
eaten u'm already for you.


Non. I Will make him stand to his words, and he shall not marry my Daughter
neither: by this good day, I will --


[ Exit Nonsuch. Constable. It Is an ill day to him; he has lost 250 l. in it.


[ To Isab. Burr. He swears at the rate of two thousand pounds a year, if the
Rump Act were still in being.


Fail. He Is in passion man; and besides, he has been a great Fanatic formerly,
and now has got a habit of Swearing, that he may be thought a Cavalier.


Burr. What noise is that? I think I hear your Cousin Trice's voice.


Fail. I Will go see --


Exit Fail, Isab. Come Sir Timorous, be not discouraged: it is but an old man's
srowardness; he is always thus against rain.


Enter Failer. Fail. O Madam follow me quickly; and if you do not see sport,
Melancholy be upon my head. --


[Exeunt omnes. The Scene changes, and Trice is discovered playing at Tables by
himself, with Spectacles on, a Bottle, and Parmezan by him; they return and see
him, undiscovered by him. Trice. Cinque and Cater: my Cinque I play here Sir,
my Cater here Sir: Now for you Sir: but first I Will drink to you Sir; upon my
faith I Will do you reason Sir: mine was thus full Sir: pray mind your play Sir:
-- Size Ace I have thrown: I Will play em at length Sir: -- will you Sir? then
you have made a blot Sir; I Will try if I can enter: I have hit you Sir.

-- I think you can cog a Dye Sir.
-- I cog a Dye Sir? I play as fair as you, or any man.
-- You lie Sir, how lie Sir; I Will teach you what it is to give a Gentleman the
lie Sir. --


[Throws down the Tables. They all laugh and discover themselves. Isab. Is this
your serious business?


Trice. O you Rogue are you there? you are welcome huswife, and so are you
Constance, fa tol de re tol de re la.


Claps their backs. Isab. Prithee be not so^ude Trice.


Trice: Huswise Constance, I Will have you into my Larder, and show you my
provision: I have Cocles, dainty fat Cocles that came in the night; if they had
seen the day, I would not have given a fart for u'm. I would the King had u'm.


Constable. He has as good I warrant you.


Trice: Nay that is a lie, I could sit and cry for him sometimes he does not
know what it is to eat a good meal in a whole year: his Cooks are Asses: I have
a delicate dish of Ruffs to dinner Sirrah.


Constable. To dinner!


Trice. To dinner! why by supper they had been past their prime. I Will tell thee
the story of u'm: I have a friend. --


Enter Servant. Sir Dinner's upon the Table. Trice. Well, well; I have a friend
as I told you. --


Serve. Dinner stays Sir, it is Dinner that stays: sure he will hear now.


Trice. I have a friend as I told you. --


Isab. I believe h's your friend, you are so loath to part with him --


Trice. Away; away; -- I ll tell you the story between the courses. Go you to
the Cook immediately, Sirrah; and bring me word what we have to supper, before
we go to dinner; I love to have the satisfaction of the day before me.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. II.
SCENE II.
Enter as from Dinner, Trice, Timorous, Failer, Burr, Constace, Isabelle.
Trice. SPeak thy conscience; was it not well dressed sirrah?


Tim. What think you of the Park, after our plenteous entertainment Madam?


Isab. I defy the Park, and all its works.


Constable. Come, Mr. Trice, we'll walk in your Garden.


Exeunt preter Failer and Burr. Fail. O, one thing I had almost forgot to tell
you: one of us two must ever be near Sir Timorous.


Burr. Why?


Fail. To guard our interest in him from the Enemy Madam Isabelle; who, I
doubt, has designs upon him. I do not fear her wit, but her sex; she carries a
prevailing argument about her.


Enter Bibber with a Bottle. Bib. By this hand, I have a light upon the best
wine in your Coufins Cellar, drink but one glass to me, to show I am welcome,
and I am gone.


Fail. Here then, honest Will. it is a cup of forbearance to thee.


Bib. Thank you Sir, I Will pledge you -- now here is to you again.


Fail. Come away; what is it Will.


Bib. It Is what you christened it, a cup of forbearance Sir.


Fail. Why, I drank that to thee Will. that thou should forbear thy money.


Bib. And I drink this to you, Sir; henceforward I Will forbear working for you.


Fail. Then say I: take a little Bibber, and throw him in the River, and if he
will trust never, then there let him lie ever.


Bib. Then say I: take a little Failer, and throw him to the Jaylour; and there
let him lie, till he has paid his Tailor.


Bur. You are very smart upon one another Gentlemen.


Fail. This is nothing between us; I use to tell him of his Title, Fiery
facias; and his setting dog, that runs into Alehouses before him, and comes
questing out again, if any of the woots his customers be within.


Bib. I faith it is true; and I use to tell him of his two Capons tails about
his hat, that are laid spread eagle wise to make a feather; I would go into the
snow at any time, and in a quarter of an hour I would come in with a better
feather upon my head; and so farewell Sir; I have had the better on you
hitherto, and for this time I am resolved to keep it.


[ Exit Bibber. Fail. The rogue's too hard for me; but the best on it is, I have
my revenge upon his purse.


Enter Isabelle. Isab. Came not Sir Timorous this way, Gentlemen? he left us in
the Garden, and said he would look out my Lord Nonsuch, to make his peace with
him.


Fail. Madame, I like not your enquiting after Sir Timorous: I suspect you have
some design upon him: you would fain undermine your Cousin, and marry him your
self.


Isab. Suppose I should design it; what are you the worse for my good fortune?
Shall I make a proposition to you: I know you two carry a great stroke with
him: make the match between us, and propound to your selves what advantages you
can reasonably hope: you shall chouse him of horses, clothes and Money, and
I Will wink at it.


Bur. And if he will not be choused, shall we beat him out on it?


Isab. For that, as you can agree.


Fail. Give us a handsel of the bargain; let us enjoy you, and it is a match.


Isab. Grammarcy in faith boys; I love a good offer how ever the world goes? but
you would not be so base to wrong him that way.


Fail. I vow to gad but I would Madam: in a horse or a woman I may lawfully
cheat my own Father: besides, I know the Knights complexion; he would be sure
to follow other women; and all that.


Isab. Nay, if he fought with the sword, he should give me leave to fight with
the Scabbard.


Bur. What say you Madam? is it a bargain.


Isab. It Is but a promise; and I have learnt a Court trick for performing any
thing. (aside) Well Gentlemen, when I am married I Will think upon you; you will
grant there is a necessity I should Cuckold him, if it were but to prove my self
a Wit.


Fail. Nay, there is no doubt you will Cuckold him; and all that; for look you
he is a person fit for nothing else; but I fear we shall not have the graffing
of the horns; we must have Livery and Seisin before hand of you, or I protest
to gad we believe you not.


Isa. I have past my word, is it not sufficient? what do you think, I would tell
a lie to save such a paltrie thing as a nights lodging? -- Hark you Sir:


(to Burr.) Fail. Now will she attempt Burr; igad she has found him out for the
weaker vessel.


Isa. I have no kindness for that Failer, we'll strike him out, and man ge Sir
Timorous our selves.


Burr: Indeed we wonnot.


Isa. Failer's a Rook, and besides, he is such a debauched fellow.


Burr. I am ten times worse.


Isa. Leave it, and him that taught it you: you have virtuous inclinations, and
I would not have you ruin your self. He that serves many Mistresses, surfeits
on his diet, and grows dead to the whole sex: it is the folly in the world next
long ears and braying.


Bur. Now I Am sure you have a mind to me; when a woman once falls to preaching,
the next thing is ever use and application.


Isa. Forbear your rudeness --


Bur. Then I am sure you meant to jilt me: you decline Failer because he has
wit; and you think me such an ass, that you may pack me off so soon as you are
married; no, no, I Will not venture certainties for uncertainties.


Isa. I can hold no longer; Mr. Failer, what do you think this fellow was
saying of you?


Fail. Of me, Madam.


Isa. That you were one of the errantest Cowards in Christendom, though you
went for one of the Dear Hearts: that your name had been upon more posts than
play-bills: and that he had been acquainted with you these seven years, drunk
and sober, and yet could never fasten a quarrel upon you.


Bur. Do you believe this, Dear Heart?


Isa. If you deny it, I Will take his sword, and force you to confess it.


Fail. I vow to gad, this will not do, Madam: you shall not set us at variance
so easily; neither shall you have Sir Timorous.


Isa. No! then mark my words: I Will marry him in spite of you; and which is
worse, you shall both work my ends; and I Will discard you for your pains.


Fail. You shall not touch a bit of him: Ill preserve his humbles from you
igad; they shall be his Keepers fees.


Bur. She shall cut an Atome sooner than divide us.


Exeunt Burr and Failer. Enter Constance. Con. I have given u'm the slip in the
Garden, to come and overhear thee: no fat overgrown virgin of forty ever
offered her self so dog cheap, or was more despised: methinks now this should
mortify thee exceedingly.


Isa. Not a whit the more for that: Cousin mine, our Sex is not so easily put
out of conceitwith our own beauties.


Con. Thou have lost the opinion of thy honesty, and got nothing in recompense:
now that is such an oversight in a Lady.


Isab. You are deceived; they think me too virtuous for their purpose; but I
have yet another way to try, and you shall help me.


Enter Loveby new habited. Constable. Mr. Loveby. welcome, welcome: where have you
been this fortnight.


Lov. Faith Madam, out of Town to see a little thing that is fallen to me upon
the death of a Grandmother.


Constable. You thank death for the windfall, Servant: but why are you not in
mourning for her.


Lov. Troth Madam it came upon me so suddenly I had not time: it was a fortune
utterly unexpected by me.


Isab. Why, was your Grandmother so young you could not look for her disease?


Lov. Not for that neither; but I had many other kindred whom she might have
left it to, only she heard I lived here in fashion, and spent my money in the
eye of the world.


Constable. You forge these things prettily; but I have heard you are as poor as a
decimated Cavalier, and had not one foot of land in all the world.


Lov. Rivals tales, Rivals tales, Madam.


Constable. Where lies your land, Sir?


Lov. I Will tell you Madam, it has upon it a very fair Manor house; from one
side you have in prospect an hanging Garden.


Isa. Who was hanged there? not your Grandmother I hope?


Lov, In the midst of it you have a Fountain: you have seen that at
Hampton Court; it will serve to give you a slight image of it. Beyond the
Garden you look to a River through a Perspective of fruittrees; and beyond the
River you see a Mead so flowery: well I shall never be at quiet, till we two
make hay there.


Constable. But where lies this Paradise?


Lov. Pox on it; I am thinking to sell it, it has such a villainous unpleasant
name; it would have sounded so harsh in a Ladies ear. But for the Fountain,
Madam --


Constable. The Fountain's a poor excuse, it will not hold water; come the name,
the name.


Lov. Faith it is come so lately into my hands, that I have forgot the name
on it,


Isab. That Is much, now, you should forget the name, and yet could make such an
exact description of the place.


Lov. If you will needs know, the name's Bawdy; sure this will give a stop to
their curiosity.


(aside.) Isa. At least you will tell us in what County it lies, that my Cousin
may send to enquire about it; come, this shall not serve your turn, tell us any
Town that is near it.


Lov. 'Twill be somewhat too far to send; it lies in the very North of Scotland.


Isa. In good time, a Paradise in the Highlands; is it not so Sir?


Constable. It seems you went Post, Servant: in troth you are a rank rider, to go
to the North of Scotland, stay and take possession, and return again, in ten
days time.


Isa. I never knew your Grandmother was a Scotch woman: is she not a Tartar
too: pray whistle for her, and lets see her dance: come -- whist Grannee!


Constable. Fie fie Servant; what no invention in you? all this while a studying
for a name of your Manor? come, come, where lies it? tell me.


Lov. No faith, I am wiser than so; I Will discover my Seat to no man; so I shall
have some damned Lawyer keep a prying into my title to defeat me of it.


Constable. How then shall I be satisfied there is such a thing in Nature?


Lov. Tell me what Jewel you would wear, and you shall have it: Enquire into my
money, there is the trial.


Constable. Since you art so flush, Sir, you shall give me a Locket of Diamonds of
three hundred pounds.


Isa. That was too severe; you know he has but 250 l. to bestow.


[to her.] Lov. Well you shall have it, Madam: but I cannot higgle: I know
you will say it did not cost above 200 pieces.


Isa. I Will be hanged if he does not present you with a parcel of melted Flints
set in Gold, of Norfolk pebbles.


Lov. Little Gentlewoman you are so keen: -- Madam, this night I have appointed
business, to morrow I Will wait upon you with it.


Exit Loveby. Isa. By that time he has bought his Locket, and paid his
Landlady, all his Money will be gone: but, Do you mean to prosecute your plot,
to see him this evening?


Constable. Yes, and that very privately; if my Father know it I am undone.


Enter Setstone. Isa. I heard him say this night he had appointed business.


Set. Why that was it Madam; according to your order I put on a disguise, and
found him in the Temple-Walkes: having drawn him aside, I told him, if he
expected happiness, he must meet me in a blind Alley I named to him, on the
backside of Mr. Trices house, just at the close of evening; there he should be
satisfied from whom he had his suplies of Money.


Constable. And how did he receive the Summons?


Set. Like a bold Hector of Troy; without the least doubt or scruple: but, the
jest on it was, he would needs believe that I was the Devil.


Constable. Sure he was afraid to come then.


Set. Quite contrary; he told me I need not be so shy, to acknowledge my self
to him; he knew I was the Devil; but he had learnt so much civility, as not to
press his Friend to a farrher discovery than he was pleased, I should see I had
to do with a Gentleman; and any Courtesy I should confer on him he would not
be unthankful; for he hated ingratitude of all things.


Constable. 'Twas well carried not to disabuse him: I laugh to think what sport I
shall have anon, when I convince him of his lies, and let him know I was the
Devil to whom he was beholding for his Money: go Setstone; and in the same
disguise be ready for him.


( Exit. Setstone. Isa. How dare you trust this fellow?


Constable. I must trust some body; gain has made him mine, and now fear will keep
him faithful.


To them, Bur, Failer, Timorous, Trice, Nonsuch. Fail. Pray, my Lord, take no
picque at it: it is not given to all men to be confident: Igad you shall see Sir
Timorous will redeem all upon the next occasion.


Non. A raw mieking Boy.


Isa. And what are you but an old Boy of five and fifty; I never knew any thing
so homorsome. -- I warrant you, Sir Timorous, I Will speak for you.


Non. Would thou have me be friends with him! for thy sake he shall only
add five hundred a year to her Jointure, and I Will be satisfied: come you
hither, Sir.


Here Trice and Nonsuch and I imorous, talk privately; Burr with Failer apart;
Constance with. Isabelle. Constable. You Will not find your account in this trick to
get Failer beaten; it is too palpable and open.


Isa. I warrant you 'twill pass upon Burr for a time: so my revenge, and your
interest will go on together.


Fail. Burr, there is mischief a brewing, I know it by their whispring I vow to
gad: look to your self, their designs on you; for my part I am a person that am
above u'm.


Tim. to Trice: But then you must speak for me Mr. Trice; and you too my Lord.


Non. If you deny't again, I Will beat you; look to it Boy.


Trice. Come on; I Will make the bargain.


Isa. You were ever good in a Flesh Market.


Trice. Come you little Harlotry; What satisfaction can you give me for running
away before the Ruffs came in?


Constable. Why I left you to u'm, that ever invite your own belly to the greatest
part of all your feasts.


Trice. I have brought you a Knight here Huswife, with a plentiful Fortune to
furnish out a Table; and, What would you more? Would you be an angel in Heaven?


Isab. Your minds ever upon your belly.


Trice. No; it is sometimes upon yours: but, What say thou to Sir Timirous,
little Constance?


Constable. Would you have me married to that King Midas Face?


Trice. Midas me no Midas; he is a Wit; he understands eating and drinking well:
Poeta coquus, the heathen Philosopher, could tell you that.


Constable. Come on Sir; What Is your will with me?


(Laughs) Tim. Why Madam, I could only wish we were a little better
acquainted, that we might not laugh at one another so.


Constable. If the Fool puts forward I am undone.


Tim. Fool! Do you know me Madam?


Constable. You may see I know you, because I call you by your name.


Fail. You must endure these rebukes with patience, Sir Timorous.


Constable. What, are you Plannet stroke? Look you, my Lord, the Gentleman is
Tongue-ty'd.


Non. This is past enduring.


Fail. It Is nothing, my Lord; Courage, Sir Timorous.


Non. I say it is past enduring; that is more then ever I told you yet: Do you
come to make a fool of my Daughter?


Isa. Why Lord --


Non. Why Lady --


( Exit Nonsuch. Trice. Let Us follow the old Man, and pacify him.


Isa. Now Cousin --


Exeunt Isabelle, Trice, Burr. Constable. Well Mr. Failer, I did not think you of
all the rest would have endeavored a thing so much against my inclination, as
this Marriage: if you had been acquainted with my heart, I am sure you would
not.


Fail. What can the meaning of this be? you would not have me believe you love
me; and yet how otherwise to understand you I vow to gad I cannot comprehend.


Constable. I did not say I loved you, but if I should take a fancy to your Person
and Humor: I hope it is no Crime to tell it you: Women are tied to hard
unequal Laws: the passion is the same in us, and yet we are debarred the
freedom to express it. You make poor Grecian beggars of us Ladies; our desires
must have no language; but only be fastened to our breasts.


Fail. Come, come; I gad I know the whole Sex of you: your Love's at best but a
kind of blind-mans-buff, catching at him that is next in your way.


Constable. Well Sir, I can take nothing ill from you; when it is too late you will see
how unjust you have been to me. -- I have said too much already. --


(is going.) Fail. Nay, stay sweet Madam: I vow to gad my fortunes better than
I could imagine.


Constable. No, pray let me go, Sir; perhaps I was in jest.


Fail. Really Madam, I look upon you as a person of such worth and all that,
that I Vow to gad I honor you of all persons in the World; and though I am a
person that am inconsiderable in the World, and all that Madam, yet for a
person of your worth and excellency, I would --


Constable. What would you, Sir?


Fail. Sacrifice my life and fortunes, I vow to gad, Madam.


Enter Isabelle, Burr, and Timorous at a distance from them. Isa. There Is
Failer close in Talk with my Cousin; he is soliciting your suit, I warrant you,
Sir Timorous: do but observe with what passion he courts for you.


Burr, I do not like that kneading of her hand though.


Isa. Come, you are such a jealous Coxcomb: I warrant you suspect there is some
amor between u'm; there can be nothing in it it is so open: pray observe.


Burr. But, How come you so officious, Madam; you, that ever now had a design
upon Sir Timorous for you self?


Isa. I thought you had a better opinion of my Wit, than to think I was in
earnest. My Cosen may do what she pleases, but he shall never pin himself upon
me assure him.


Constable. to Fail. Sir Timorous little knows how dangerous a person he has
employed in making love: --


(aloud) Burr. How Is this! Pray my Lady Constance, what is the meaning of that
you say to Failer?


Fail. What luck was this, that he should over-hear you! pax on it!


Constable. Mr. Burr, I owe you not that satisfaction; what you have heard you may
interpret as you please.


Tim. The Rascal has betrayed me.


Isa. In earnest, Sir, I do not like it.


Fail. Dear Mr. Burr. be pacified; you are a person I have an honor for; and
this change of Affairs shall not be the worse for you I gad Sir.


Constable. Bear up resolutely Mr. Failer; and maintain my Favors, as becomes my
servant.


Burr. He maintain u'm! go you Judas! I Will teach you what it is to play fast and
loose with a Man of War


(Kickes him. Tim. Lay it on Burr.


Isa. Spare him not, Burr.


Constable. Fear him not, Servant.


Fail. Oh, oh; would no body were on my side; here I am praised I vow to gad
into all the Colors of the Rainbow.


Constable. But, remember it is for me.


Burr. As you like this, proceed, Sir; but, come not near me to night, while
I Am in wrath.


(Exeunt Burr and Timorous. Constable. Come, Sir; How fare you after your sore
Trial: you bore it with a most heroic patience.


Isa. Brave man at Arms, but weak to Balthazer!


Fail. I hope to gad, Madam, you will consider the merit of my sufferings: I would
not have been beaten thus, but to obey that person in the World --


Constable. Heaven reward you for it: I never shall.


Fail. How Madam!


Isa. Art thou such an Ass as not to perceive thou art abused: this beating I
contrived for you: you know upon what acount; and have yet another or two at
your service: yield up the Knight in time, it is your best course.


Fail, Then, Does not your Ladyship Love me Madam?


Constable. Yes, yes; I love to see you beaten.


Isa. Well, methinks now you have had a hard bargain on it: you have lost your
Cully, Sir Timorous; and your Friend Burr, and all to get a poor beating: but
I Will see it mended against next time for you.


(Exeunt Constance, Isabelle Laughing. Fail. I am so much amazed, I vow to gad,
I do not understand my own condition.


(Exit Failer. Enter Loveby solus in the dark; his Sword drawn; groping out his
way. -- Loveby. This is the time and place he 'pointed me; and it is certainly
the Devil I am to meet; for no mortal creature could have that kindness for me,
to supply my necessities as he has done, nor could have done it in so strange a
manner: he told me he was a Scholar, and had been a Parson in the Fanatics
times; a shrewd suspicion it was the Devil; or at least a limb of him. If the
Devil can send Churchmen on his Errands, Lord have mercy on the Layety! well.
let every man speak as he finds, and give the Devil his due; I think him a very
honest and well-natur'd fellow: and if I hear any man speak ill of him, (except
it be a Parson that gets his living by it) I wear a Sword at his Service: yet
for all this I do not much care to see him. He does not mean to hook me in for
my Soul, Does he if he does, I shall desire to be excused. But what a Rogue am
I, to suspect a person that has dealt so like a Gentleman by me? he comes to
bring me Money, and would do it handsomely, that it might not be perceived: let
it be as 'twill, I Will seem to trust him, and then if he have any thing of a
Gentleman in him, he will scorn to deceive me, as much as I would to cousin
him, if I were the Devil, and he Jack Loveby.


Enter Failer at the other end of the Stage. Fail. What will become of me to
night! I am just in the condition of an out-lying-Deere, that is beaten from his
walk for offering to (...): Enter I dare not for Burr.


Lov. I hear a voice, but nothing do I see; speak what thou art.


Fail. There he is, watching for me: I must venture to run by him; and when I
am in, I hope my Cousin Trice will defend me: the Devil would not lie abroad in
such a night.


Lov. I thought it was the Devil before he named himself.


[ Failer goes to run off and falls into Loveby's arms. Lov. Honest Satan!
well encountered! I am sorry with all my heart it is so dark: 'Faith I should
be very glad to see thee at my Lodging; prithee let us not be such strangers to
one another for the time to come; and, What have thou got under thy Cloak there
little Satan; I warrant thou have brought me some more Money.


Fail. Help; help; Thieves, thieves.


[Loveby lets him go. Lov. This is Failers voice: How the Devil was I mistaken!
I must get off, ever Company comes in.


( Exit Loveby, Fail. Thieves! Thieves!


Enter Trice, Burr, Timorous, undressed. All: Where! where!


Fail. One was here just now; and it should be Loveby by his voice, but I have
no Witness.


Trice. It cannot be; he wants no Money.


Burr. Come, Sirrah; I Will take pity on you to night; you shall lie in the
Truckle-bed.


Trice, Pox of this noise, it has disturbed me from such a Dream of Eating!


EXEUNT OMNES. ACT. III.
Constance, Isabelle.

Constable. 'TWas ill luck to have the meeting broke last night, just as Setstone
was coming toward him.


Isa. But in part of recompense you will have the pleasure of putting him on
farther streights, O, these little mischiefs are meat and drink to me.


Constable. He shall tell me from whence he has his Money: I am resolved now to try
him to the utmost.


Isa. I would devise something for him to do, which he could not possibly
perform.


Constable. As I live yonder he comes with the Jewel in his hand he promised me;
prithee leave me alone with him.


Isa. Speed the Plough; if I can make no sport I Will hinder none: I Will to my
Knight, Sir Timirous; shortly you shall hear news from Damaetas.


Exit Isabelle. Enter Loveby. Lov. Look you Madam, here is the Jewel; do me the
favor to accept it, and suppose a very good Complement delivered with it.


Constable. Believe me a very fair Jewel: but, Why will you be at this needless
charge? What acknowledgment do you expect? you know I will not Marry you.


Lov. How the Devil do I know that; I do not conceive my self under correction,
so inconsiderable a person.


Constable. You Will alter your partial opinion, when I tell you it is not a flash of
wit fires me; nor is it a gay outside can seduce me to Matrimony.


Lov. I am neither Fool, nor deformed so much as to be despicable. What do I
want?


Constable. A good Estate, that makes every thing handsome; nothing can look well
without it.


Lov. Does this Jewel express poverty?


Constable. I conjure you by your love to me, tell me one truth not minced by your
invention: How came you by this Jewel.


Lov. It Is well I have a Voucher; pray ask your own Jeweller Setstone, if I did
not buy it of him.


Constable. How glad you are now, you can tell a truth so near a lie: but, Where
had you the Money that purchased it? come, -- without circumstances and
preambles --


Lov. Umh, -- perhaps that may be a secret.


Constable. Say it be one; yet he that loved indeed, could not keep it from his
Mistress.


Lov. Why should you be thus importunate?


Constable. Because I cannot think you love me, if you will not trust that to my
knowledge, which you conceal from all the World beside.


Lov. You urge me deeply --


Constable. Come, sweet Servant, you shall tell me; I am resolved to take no
denial: Why do you sigh?


Lev. If I be blasted it must out.


Constable. Either tell me, or resolve to take your leave for ever.


Lov. Then know I have my means; I know not how.


Constable. This is a fine secret.


Lov. Why then if you will needs know; it is from the Devil; I have Money from
him, what, and when I please.


Constable. Have you sealed a Covenant, and given away your Soul for Money?


Lov. No such thing intended on my part.


Constable. How then?


Lov. I know not yet what conditions he will propose: I should have spoke with
him last night, but that a cross chance hindered it.


Constable. Well, my opinion is, some great Lady that is in love with you, supplies
you still; and you tell me an incredible Tale of the Devil, merely to shadow
your infidelity.


Lov. Devise some means to try me.


Constable. I take you at your word; you shall swear freely to bestow on me, what
ever you shall gain this unknown-way; and for a proof, because you tell me you
can have Money, what and when you please; bring me an hundred pounds ever night:
[If I do marry him for a Wit] I Will see what he can do; he shall have none from
me.


(aside. Lov. You overjoy me, Madam; you shall have it, and 'twere twice as
much.


Constable. How Is this!


Lov. The Devil a cross that I have; or know where to get; but I must promise
well to save my credit: now Devil, if thou do forsake me!


(aside. Constable. I mistrust you; and therefore if you fail, I Will have your hand
to show against you; here is ink and paper


Loveby Writes, Enter Burr and Timorous. Bur. What makes Loveby yonder? he is
Writing somewhat.


Tim. I Will go see. --


(Looks over him.) Lov. Have you no more manners then to overlook a man when
he is a Writing? -- Oh, Is It you Sir Timorous? you may stand still; now I think
on it you can not read Written hand.


Bur. You are very familiar with Sir Timorous.


Lov. So I am with his Companions Sir.


Bur. Then there is hopes you and I may be better acquainted: I am one of his
Companions.


Lov. By what title, as you are an Ass Sir.


Constable. No more Loveby. --


Lov. I need not Madam; alas this fellow is only the Solicitor of a quarrel,
till he has brought it to an head; and I will leave the fighting part to the
Courteous pledger. Do not I know these fellows? you shall as soon persuade a
Mastiff to fasten on a Lion, as one of these to engage with a courage above
their own: they know well enough who they can beat, and who can beat them.


Enter Failer at a distance. Fail Yonder they are; now would I compound for a
reasonable sum, that I were Friends with Burr: if I am not, I shall lose Sir
Timorous.


Constable. O, Servant, have I spyed you! let me run into your Arms.


Fail. I renounce my Lady Constance: I vow to gad I renounce her.


Tim. To your Task, Burr.


Enter Nonsuch and Isabelle. Constable. Hold, Gentlemen; no sign of quarrel!


Non. O Friends! I think I shall go mad with grief: I have lost more Money.


Lov. Would I had it: that is all the harm I wish my self: your Servant, Madam;
I go about the business. --


Exit. Loveby. Non. What! Does he take no pity on me?


Constable. Prithee moan him Isabelle.


Isa. Alas, alas poor Nuncle! could they find in their hearts to rob him!


Non. Five hundred pounds out of poor six thousand pounds a year! I and mine
are undone for ever.


Fail. Your own House you think is clear, my Lord?


Constable. I dare answer for all there, as much as for my self.


Burr. Oh that he would but think that Loveby had it!


Fail. If you will be friends with me, I Will try what I can persuade him to.


Burr. Here Is my hand, I will dear heart.


Fail. Your own House being clear, my Lord; I am apt to suspect this Loveby for
such a person: Did you mark how abruptly he went out?


Non. He did indeed, Mr. Failer: but, why should I suspect him? his carriage is
fair, and his means great: he could never live after this rate if it were not.


Fail. This still renders him the more suspicious: he has no land to my
knowledge.


Bur. Well said mischief --


(aside. Constable. My Father's credulous, and this Rogue has found the blindside
of him; would Loveby heard him! --


( to Isab. Fail. He has no Means, and he looses at Play: so that for my part,
I protest to gad, I am resolved, he picks Locks for his Living.


Bur. Nay, to my Knowledge, he picks Locks.


Tim. And to mine.


Fail. No longer ago than last night he met me in the dark, and offered to dive
into my Pockets.


Non. That Is a main argument for suspicion.


Fail. I remember once when the Keys of the Exchequer were lost in the
Rump-time, he was sent for upon an extremity, and I gad he opens me all the
Locks with the Blade-bone of a Breast of Mutton.


Non. Who, this Loveby;


Fail. This very Loveby: Another time, when we had sat up very late at Ombre
in the Country, and were hungry toward morning, he plucks me out, I vow to gad
I tell you no lie, four ten-pennyNailes from the Dairy-Lock with his teeth,
fetches me out a Mess of Milk; and knocks me u'm in again with his Head, upon
Reputation.


Isa. Thou Boy!


Non. What shall I do in this case? my comfort is, my Gold's all marked.


Constable. Will you suspect a Gentleman of Loveby's worth, upon the bare report of
such a Rascal as this Failer?


Non. Hold thy tongue, I charge thee; upon my blessing hold thy tongue, I Will
have him apprehended before he sleeps; come along with me, Mr. Failer.


Fail. Bur. Look well to Sir Timorous; I Will be with you instantly.


Constable. I Will watch you, by your favor.


(aside.) Exeunt Nonsuch, Failer, Constance following them Isa. A word, Sir
Timorous.


Bur. She shall have a course at the Knight, and come [Gets behind. up to him,
but when she is just ready to pinch he shall give such a loose from her, shall
break her heart.


Isa. Burr there still, and watching us? there is certainly some Plot in this,
but I Will turn it to my own advantage.


(aside. Tim. Did you mark Burrs retirement, Madam?


Isa. I; his guilt it seems makes him shun your company.


Tim. In what can he be guilty?


Isa. You must needs know it; he Courts your Mistress.


Tim. Is he too, in love with my Lady Constance?


Isa. No, no; but which is worse, he Courts me.


Tim. Why, what have I to do with you? you know I care not this for you.


Isa. Perhaps so; but he thought you did: and good reason he had for it.


Tim. What reason, Madam?


Isa. The most convincing in the World: he knew my Cousin Constance never loved
you: he has heard her say, you were as invincibly ignorant as a Town-fop
judging a new Play: as shame faced as a great overgrown Schoolboy: in fine,
good for nothing but to be worm'd out of your estate, and Sacrificed to the god
of Laughter.


Tim. Was your Cousin so barbarous to say this?


Isab. In his hearing.


Tim. And would he let me proceed in my suit to her?


Isa. For that I must excuse him; he never thought you could love one of my
Cousin's humor: but took your Court to her, only as a blind to your affection
for me: and being possessed with that opinion, he thought himself as worthy as
you to marry me.


Tim. He is not half so worthy; and so I Will tell him, in a fair way.


Burr to a Boy entering. Sirrah Boy, deliver this Note to Madam Isabelle; but be
not known I am so near.


Boy. I warrant you, Sir.


Bur. Now fortune all I desire of thee, is, that Sir Timorous may see it; if he
once be brought to believe there is a kindness between her and me, it will
ruin all her Projects.


Isa. To the Boy. From whom!


Boy. From Mr. Burr, Madam.


Isabelle reads. These for Madam Isabelle.

Dear Rogue.

Sir Timorous knows nothing of our kindness, nor shall for me; seem still to
have defigns upon him; it will hide thy affection the better to thy Servant
Burr.


Isa. Alas poor Woodcock, do thou go a birding: thou have e'n set a Sprindge
to catch thy own neck: look you here Sir Timorous; here is something to confirm
what I have told you.


Gives him the Letter. Tim. D, e, a, re, dear, r, o, g, u, e, ro-gue. Pray
Madam read it: this written hand is such a damned pedantique thing I could
never away with it.


Isa. He would fain have robbed you of me: Lord, Lord! to see the malice of a
man.


Tim. She has persuaded me so damnably, that I begin to think she is my Mistress
indeed.


Isab. Your Mistress? why I hope you are not to doubt that at this time of day.
I was your Mistress from the first day you ever saw me.


Tim. Nay, like enough you were so; but I vow to gad now, I was wholly ignorant
of my own affection.


Isa. And this Rogue pretends he has an interest in me merely to defeat you:
look you, look you where he stands in ambush, like a Jesuit behind a Quaker,
to see how his design will take.


Tim. I see the Rogue: now could I find in my heart to marry you in spite to
him; what think you on it in a fair way?


Isab. I have brought him about as I would wish; and now I Will make my own
conditions ( aside) Sir Timorous, I wish you well; but he I marry must promise
me to live at London: I cannot abide to be in the Country, like a wild beast
in the wilderness, with no Christian Soul about me.


Tim. Why I Will bear you company.


Isa. I cannot endure your early hunting matches there; to have my sleep
disturbed by break of day, with heigh Jowler Jowler, there Venus, ah Beauty!
and then a serenade of deep mouthed curres, to answer the salutation of the
Huntsman, as if hell were broke loose about me: and all this to meet a pack of
Gentlemen Salvages to ride all day like mad men, for the immortal fame of being
first in at the Hares death: to come upon the spur after a trayl at four in the
afternoon to destruction of cold meat and cheese, with your lewd company in
boots; fall a drinking till Supper time, be carried to bed, rop'd out of your
Seller, and be good for nothing all the night after.


Tim. Well, Madam, what is it you would be at? you shall find me reasonable to
all your propositions.


Isa. I have but one condition more to add; for I will be as reasonable as you,
and that is a very poor request, to have all the money in my disposing.


Tim. How, all the Money?


Isa. I, for I am sure I can huswife it better for your honor; not but that I
shall be willing to encourage you with pocket money, or so sometimes.


Tim. This is somewhat hard.


Isa. Nay, if a woman cannot do that, I shall think you have an ill opinion of
my virtue: not trust your own flesh and blood, Sir Timorous.


Tim. Well, is there any thing more behind?


Isa. Nothing more only the choice of my own company, my own hours, and my own
actions: these trifles granted me, in all things of moment, I am your most
obedient Wife and Servant Isabelle.


Tim. Is It a match then?


Isa. For once I am content it shall; but it is to redeem you from those Kascals
Burr. and Failer. -- that way Sir Timorous, for fear of Spies; I Will meet you at
the Garden door. --


Exit Isa. Sola. I have led all women the way, if they dare but follow me; and
now march off, if I can escape but spying, with my Drums beating, and my Colors
flying.


Exit Isa. Burr. So their wooing's at an end; thanks to my wit.


Enter Failer. Fail. Oh Burr! whither it is Sir Timorous and Madam Isabelle are
gone together?


Bur. Adore my wit, boy; they are parted never to meet again.


Fail. I saw u'm meet just now at the Garden door: so ho, ho, ho: who is within
there: help here quickly, quickly.


Enter Nonsuch and two Servants. Nons. What Is the matter?


Fail. Your Niece Isabelle has stolen away Sir Timorous.


Nons. Which way took they?


Fail. Follow me, I Will show you.


Nons. Break your necks after him, you idle Varlets.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter Loveby: Loveby's Collar unbuttoned, Band carelessly on, Hat
on the Table, as new rising from sleep. Lov. Boy! how long have I slept boy?


Enter Boy. Boy. Two hours and a half Sir.


Lov. What Is a clock Sirrah?


Boy. Near four Sir.


Lov. Why there is it: I have promised my Lady Constance an hundred pounds ever
night; I had four hours to perform it in when I engaged to do it; and I have
slept out more than two of them: all my hope to get this money lies within the
compass of that hat there. -- before I lay down I made bold a little to prick
my finger, and write a note in the blood of it, to this same friend of mine in
to'ther world, that uses to supply me, the Devil has now had above two hours to
perform it in; all which time I have slept to give him the better opportunity:
time enough for a Gentleman of his agility to fetch it from the East Indies,
out of one of his Temples where they worship him; or if he were lazy, and not
minded to go so far; 'twere but stepping over sea, and borrowing so much money,
out of his own Banck at Amsterdam! hanged, what is an hundred pounds between him
and me. -- Now does my heart go pit a pat, for fear I should not find the money
there: I would fain lift it up to see, and yet I am so fraid of missing: yet a
plague, why should I fear h'll fail me; the name of friend's a sacred thing;
sure he will consider that: -- methinks this Hat looks as if it should have
something under it: if one could see the yellow boys peeping underneath the
brims now: ha! ( looks under round about) in my conscience I think I do: stand
out oth'way sirrah, and be ready to gather up the pieces that will flush out of
the hat as I take it up.


Boy. What is my Master mad trow.


Loveby Snatches up the hat, looks in it hastily, and sees nothing but the
paper.

Now the Devil take the Devil: ah plague! was ever man served so as I am:
(throws his hat upon the ground) to break the bonds of Amity for 100 pieces:
well, it shall be more out of thy way than thou imagin'st, Devil: I Will turn
Parson, and be at open defiance with thee; I Will lay the wickedness of all
people upon thee though thou art never so innocent; I Will convert thy Bawdsand
Whores; I Will Hector thy Gamesters, that they shall not dare to swear, curse or
bubble; nay, I Will set thee out so, that thy very Usurers and Aldermen shall
fear to have to do with thee.


[a noise within of Isabelle and Frances. Enter Frances, thrusting back
Isabelle and Timorous. Fran. How now what is the matter?


Isa. Nay, sweet Mistress, be not so hard-hearted; all I desire of you is but
harbor for a minute: you cannot in humanity deny that small succor to a
Gentlewoman.


Fran. A Gentlewoman! I thought so, my house affords no harbor for
Gentlewomen: you are a company of proud Hallottries; I Will teach you to take
place of Tradesmens Wives with a wannion to you.


Lov. How Is this Madam Isabelle.


Isa. Mr. Loveby! how happy am Ito meet with you in my distress!


Lov. What Is the matter Madam?


Isa Ill tell you, if this Gentlewoman will give me leave.


Franc. No Gentlewoman, I will not give you leave; they are such as we maintain
your pride, as they say. Our Husbands trust you, and you must go before their
Wives, I am sure my Goodman never goes to any of your Lodgings but he comes
home the worse for it, as they say.


Isabelle Loveby whispers. Lov. Is that all! prithee good Landlady, for my sake
entertain my friends.


Franc. If the Gentleman's Worship had come alone, it may be I might have
entertained him; but for your Minion!


Enter Nonsuch, Failer, Burr, and Officers: cry within, here, here. Fail. My
Lord, arrest Sir Timorous upon a promise of marriage to you Daughter, and we will
witness it.


Timor. Why, what a strange thing of you's this Madam Isabelle, to bring a man
into trouble thus!


Fail. You are not yet married to her;


Tim. Not that I remember.


Isabelle. Well Failer, I shall find a time to reward your diligence.


Lov. If the Knight would have owned his action, I should have taught some of
you more manners, then to come with Officers into my Lodging.


Franc. I Am glad with all my heart this Minx is prevented of her de-sign: the
Gentleman had got a great catch of her as they say. His old Father in the
Country would have given him but little thank for it, to see him bring down a
fine bred Woman, with a Lute, and a Dressing-box, and a handful of money to her
portion.


Isa. Good Mistress Whatdeelack! I know your quarrel to the Ladies, do they
take up the Gallants from the Tradesmens wives? Lord, what a grievous thing it
is for a she-Citizen to be forced to have Children by her own Husband!


Fran. Come, come, you are a slanderful huswife, and I squorn your hallottry
trick that I do, so I do.


Isa. Steeple-hat your Husband never gets a good look when he comes home,
except he brings a Gentleman to Dinner; who if he casts an amorous eye toward
you; then, trust him good Husband, sweet Husband trust him for my sake: verily
the Gentleman's an honest man, I read it in his countenance: and if you should
not be at home to receive the Money, I know he will pay the debt to me. Is It
not so Mistress?


Enter Bibber in Slippers, with a skein of Silk a bout his neck. Franc. Will
you see me wronged thus, under my own roof, as they say, William?


Isa. Nay, it is very true Mistress: you let the men with old complements take
up new clothes: I do not mean your Wives clothes Mr. Merchant- Tailor.


Bib. Good in faith! a notable smart Gentlewoman!


Isa. Look to your Wife, Sir, or in time she may undo your Trade: for she will
get all your men-Customers to her self.


Bibb. And I should be hanged, I can forbear no longer.


He plucks out his Measure, and runs to Isabelle. to take measure of her. Isa.
How now! what means Prince Pericles by this?

Bibber on his knees.

I must beg your Ladyship e'n to have the honor to trust you but for your
Gown, for the sake of that last jest. Flowr'd Satin, wrought Tabby, Silver
upon any grounds: I shall run mad if I may not trust your Ladyship.


Franc. I think you are mad already, as they say, William: you shall not trust
her. -- plucks him back.


Bib. Let me alone Frances; I am a Lion when I am angered.


Isa. Pray do not pull your Lion by the tail so Mistress. -- In these Clothes
that he now takes measure of me for, will I marry Sir Timorous, mark that, and
tremble Failer.


Fail. Never threaten me Madam, you are a person a despise.


Isa. I vow to gad I Will be even with you Sir.


Exit Isabelle. Nonsuch to the Bailiffs. -- And when you have arrested him, be
sure you search him for my gold.


Bailiffs to Loveby. We arrest you Sir at my Lord Nonsuch his Suit.


Lov. Me you Rascals!


Nons. Search him for my gold; you know the marks on it.


Lov. If they can find any marked or unmarked gold about me; they will find more
than I can. You expect I should resist now; no, no, I Will hamper you for this.
--


Bail. There Is nothing to be found about him.


Fail. It Is no matter, to prison with him; there all his debts will come upon
him.


Lov. What hurried to durance like a Stinkard!


Bib. Now as I live a pleasant Gentleman; I could find in my heart to bail him;
but I Will overcome my self, and steal away.


(is going. Bail. Come, Sir, we must provide you of another Lodging; but I
believe you will scarce like it.


Lov. If I do not, I ask no favor; pray turn me out of doors.


Bib. Turn him out of door! What a jest was there? Now and I should be hanged
I cannot forbear Bayling him: stay Officers; I Bail him Body and Soul for that
Jest.


Fail. Let us be gone in time, Burr.


[ Exeunt Burr, Failer, Timorous. Franc. You shall not Bail him.


Bib. I know I am a Rogue to do it; but his Wit has prevailed upon me, and a
man must not go against his Conscience. There Officers --


Lov. to Non. Old Man, if it were not for thy Daughter. --


Non. Well, well; take your course, Sir.


[ Exit Nonsuch and Bailiffs. Lov. Come Will. I ll thank thee at the Tavern.
Frances, remember this the next time you come up to make my Bed.


Franc. Do your worst, I fear you not, Sir. This is twice to day, William; to
trust a Gentlewoman, and Bail a Ragamuffin: I am sure he called you Cuckold
but yesterday, and said he would make you one.


Lov. Look you Frances, I am a man of Honor, and if I said it, I Will not break
my word with you.


Bib. There he was with you again, Frances: an excellent good jest In Faith la.


Fran. I Will not endure it, that I will not, so I will not: I Will go to the Justices
Worship and fetch a Warrant for him.


Lov. But Landlady, the word Cuckold will bear no Action in the Law, except you
could prove your Husband prejudiced by it. Have any of his Customers forsook
him for it? or, any Mercer refused to trust him the less, for my calling him so.


Franc. Nay, I know not for the Mercers; perhaps the Citizens may take it for
no slander among one another, as they say; but for the Gentlemen --


Lov. Will, Have they forsaken thee upon it?


Bib. No, I assure you, Sir.


Lov. No, I warrant u'm: a Cuckold has the signification of an honest
well-meaning Citizen; one that is not given to jealousies or suspicions; a just
person to his Wife, etc. one that to speak the worst of him, does but to her,
what he would be content should be done to her by other men.


Franc. But that another man should be the Father of his Children, as they say;
I don't think that a civil thing Husband.


Lov. Not civil, Landlady! Why all things are civil that are made so by Custom.


Bib. Why may not he get as fine Children as I, or any man?


Fran. But if those Children, that are none of yours, should call you Father,
William!


Bib. If they call me Father, and are none of mine; I am the more beholding to
u'm.


Fran. Nay, if that be your humor, husband, I am glad I know it, that I may
please you the better another time, as they say.


( Exit Frances. Bib. Nay, but Frances, Frances; it is such another woman.


Exit Bibber. Lov. It Is such another Man: -- My Coat and Sword Boy, I must go
to Justice Trices; bring the Women, and come after me.


( Exit Loveby. ACT. IV.
Table set with Cards upon it. Trice walking: Enter Servant. Serve. SIr, some
Company is without upon Justice-business.


Trice. Saucy Rascal, to disturb my Meditations.

Fxit Servant. -- I, it shall be he: Jack Loveby, what think thou of a Game
of Picquet, we two, hand' to fist! you and I will play one single Game for ten
pieces: it is deep stake Jack, but, it is all one between us two: you shall Deal
Jack: who I, Mr. Justice, that is a good one, you must give me use for your hand
then; that is six in the hundred? Come, lift, lift; mines a ten; Mr. Justice: --
mines a King, oh ho, Jack, you Deal. I have the advantage of this In Faith, if I
can keep it.

He Deals 12 a piece; 2 by 2.
And looks on his own Cards.
I take seven, and look on this -- Now for you Jack Loveby.


Enter Loveby behind. Lov. How Is this? am I the man he fights with?


Trice. I Will do you right Jack; as I am an honest Man you must discard this,
there is no other way: if you were my own Brother I could do no better for you.
-- Zounds, the Rogue has a Quint-Major, and three Aces younger hand. --

Looks on the other Cards.
Stay; what am I for the Point? but bare Forty, and he Fifty one: Fifteen and
Five for the Point, 20, and 3 by Aces, 23. well, I am to play first: 1.23. 2.
23. 3. 23. 4. 23. -- Pox on it, now I must play into his hand: 5 -- now you take
it Jack, 5. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. and the Cards Forty.


Lov. Hitherto it goes well on my side. --


Trice. Now I Deal: How many do you take Jack? All? then I am gone: What a
rise is here! 14 by Aces, and a Sixieme Major: I am gone, without looking into
my Cards. -- I, I thought so: If ever Man Played with such cursed Fortune, I Will
be hanged, and all for want of this damned Ace -- there is your ten pieces, with
a Pox to you, for a Rooking beggarly Rascal as you are.


Takes up an Ace and bites it. Loveby Enters. Lov. What occasion have I given
you for these words, Sir? Rook and Rascal! I am no more Rascal then your self,
Sir.


Trice. How Is this, how is this!


Lov. And though for this time I put it up, because I am a winner.


(Snatches the Gold. Trice. What a Devil do'ft thou put up? not my Gold I hope
Jack?


Lov. By your favor but I do; and 'twas won fairly; a Sixieme, and Fourteen by
Aces by your own confession. -- What a Pox we don't make Childrens Play I hope?


Trice. Well, remember this, Jack; from this hour I forswear playing with you
when I am alone; What, Will you bate me nothing on it?


Lov. Not a farthing, Justice: I Will be Judged by you, if I had lost you would
have taken every piece on it: what I win, I win. -- and there is an end.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, these People stay without, and will not be answered.


Trice. Well, What Is their business?


Serve. Nay, no great matter: only a Fellow for getting a Wench with Child.


Trice. No great matter say thou; 'Faith but it is: is he a poor fellow, or a
Gentleman?


Serve. A very poor fellow, Sir.


Trice, Hang him, Rogue, make his Mittimus immediately; must such as he presume
to get Children?


Lov. Well considered: a poor lousie Rascal, to entrench upon the Game of
Gentlemen! he might have passed his time at Nine-pins, or Shovel-board, that
had been fit sport for such as he; Justice, have no Mercy on him.


Trice. No, by the Sword of Justice will I not.


Lov. Swear'st thou, ungracious Boy? that is too much on the other hand for a
Gentleman. I Swear not, I drink not, I curse not, I Cheat not; they are
unnecessary Vices: I save so much out of those Sins, and take it out in that
one necessary Vice of Wenching.


Enter Loveby's Boy. Boy. Sir the Parties are without according to your order.


Lov. It Is well; bring u'm in Boy.

Enter Lady Du Lake, and two or three Whores. Justice I recommend this ancient
Gentlewoman, with these virtuous Ladies, to thy Patronage; for her part, she is
a person of exemplary life and behavior, of singular conduct to break through,
and patience to bear the assaults of Fortune: a general Benefactress of
Mankind, and in fine, a promoter of that great Work of Nature, Love.


Trice. Or, as the Vulgar Translation has it, a very sufficient, and singular
good-Bawd: Is It not so Boy?


Lov. I, Boy: Now for such a petty-fogging Fellow as thy Clerk to persecute
this Lady; prithee think on it: it is a grievance of the Free-born-Subject.


L. Dulake. To see the ingratitude of this Generation! I that have spent my
youth, set at naught my Fortune, and what is more dear to me, my honor, in the
service of Gentlemen; should now in my old age be left to want and beggary, as
if I were the vilest, and most unworthy creature upon Gods Earth.


(crying.) Lov. Nay, good Mother, do not take it so bitterly.


L. Dulake. I confess the unkindness of it troubles me.


Lov. Thou shall not want so long as I live: look, here is five pieces of
Cordial Gold to comfort thy heart with, I won it e'n now of Mr. Justice; and I
dare say he thinks it well bestowed.


Trice. My Money's gone to very pious uses.


L. Dulake, (Laying her hand on Lovebyes head.)


Son Loveby, I knew thy Father well; and thy Grandfather before him; Fathers
they were both to me; and I could weep for joy to see how thou take after
them. ( Weeping again) I wish it lay in my power too, to gratify this worthy
Justice in my Vocation.


Trice. 'Faith I doubt I am past that noble Sin.


Lov. Prithee good Magistrate drink to her, and wipe sorrow from her eyes.


Trice. Right Reverend, my Service to you in Canary.


(She Drinks after him) and stays at half-Glass. L. Dulake. It Is a great way
to the bottom; but Heaven is alsufficient to give me strength for it: --

(Drinks it up.) Why Gods blessing on your heart, Son Trice. I hope it is no
offense to call you Son: Hem, hem! Son Loveby, I think my Son Trice and I are
much of the same years: let me see Son if Nature be utterly extinct in you:
are you ticklish, Son Trice?


(tickles him.) Trice. Are you Ticklish Mother Dulake.


(Tickles her sides.) She falls off her Chair; he falls off his to her; they
roll one over the other. Lov. I would have all London now show me such another
sight of kindness in Old Age:

(they help each other up.) Come, a Dance, a dance; call for your Clerk,
Justice, he shall make one in sign of Amity:


(Strike up Fiddlers.) (They Dance around Dance, and Sing the Tune.) Enter
Isabelle and Constance. Isa. Are you at that Sport, In Faith? have among you
blind Harpers:

She falls into the Dance.
At the Dances ending Loveby sees Constance.

Trice. Is she come! a Pox of all honest Women at such a time!


Lov. If she knows who these are, by this Light I am undone.


Constable. Oh Servant, I come to mind you of your promise; come, produce my
hundred pounds; the times out I set you.


Lov. Not till dark night upon my Reputation: I have not yet fpoke with the
Gentleman in the black Pantalloons; you know he seldom walks abroad by
daylight: Dear Madam, let me wait on you to your Coach, and if I bring it not
within this hour, discard me utterly.


Constable. You must give me leave to salute the Company: What are they?


Lov. Persons of Quality of my acquaintance; but, I Will make your excuse to n'm.


Constable. Nay, if they are Persons of Quality, I shall be rude to part from u'm
so abruptly.


Lov. Why so! the Devil owed me a shame; and now he has paid me. I must present
u'm what ever come on it. (aside. -- This Madam is my Lady Du Lake -- the Lady
Spring well, -- The Lady Hoyden


(She and Isabelle Salute u'm.) Isa. What a Whiff was there came from my Lady
Heyden! and, What a Garlic breath my Lady Spring-well had?


Trice. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Lov. Do not betray me, Justice, if you do. --


Isa. Oh, Are you thereabouts, Sir; then I smell a Rat In Faith; but I Will say
nothing.


Constable. Ladies, I am an humble Servant to you all, and account it my happiness
to have met with so good Company, at my Cousin Trices.


Trice. Ha, ha, ha.


L. Du Lake. Are these two Ladies of your acquaintance Son Loveby?


Lov. Son quoth a! a Pox of our Relation. --


(aside. L. Du Lake. I shall be glad to be better known to your Ladyships.


Constable. You too much honor Servants, Madam.


Isa. How Loveby fidges up and down: in what pain he is! well, if these be not
they they call Whores, I Will be hanged, though I never saw one before: --


(aside. Lov. Will your Ladyship please to go, Madam?


Constable. I must beg the favor of these Ladies first, that I may know their
Lodgings, and wait of u'm.


L. Du Lake. It will be our Duty to pay our respects first to your Ladyship


Con. I beg your Ladyships pardon Madam --


L. Du L. Your Ladyship shall excuse us, Madam --


Isa. Trice. Ha, ha, ha!


Lov. Ah Devil grinyou --


aside. Trice. I must go out, and laugh my belly full.


[ Exit Trice. Con. But in earnest Madam, I must have no denial; I beseech your
Ladyship instruct me where I may tender my devoyres?


La. D. Since your Ladyship commands me, Madam, I dare disobey no longer. My
Lodgings are in St. Lucknors Lane, at the Cat and Fiddle.


Con. Whereabouts is that Lane, Servant?


Lov. Faith Madam, I know not that part oth' Town. -- Lord, how I sweat for
fear --


aside. Con. And yours Madam, where, I beseech your Ladyship.


2d. Wh. In Dog and Bitch Yard, and't please your Ladyship.


3d. Wh. And mine in Sodom, so like your Ladyship.


Con. How Loveby! I did not think you would have used me thus?


Lov. I beseech your Ladyship but hear my Justification as I lead you.


Con. By no means, Sir; that were such a rudeness to leave persons of quality,
to wait upon me: unhand me Sir.


Isa. Ha, ha, ha. --


Exeunt Constance, Isabelle. Lov. I am ruined! for ever ruined, plague had you
no places in the Town to name but Sodom, and Lucknors. Lane for Lodgings!


L. Du L. If any prejudice arise from it, upon my honor Son 'twas by mistake,
and not intended you: I thought she desired to have been admitted of the
quality.


Lov. I was cursed when I had first to do with you -- kicks u'm


L. D. L. Well, I thank Heaven, that has endued me with such patience.


Exeunt all but Loveby and his Boy. Lov. I have made a fair hand on it to day --
both lost my Mistress, and hear no news from my friend below: the World frowns
upon me, and the Devil and my Mistress have forsaken me: my Godfathers and
Godmothers have promised well for me: instead of renouncing them, they have
renounced me.


Boy. Sir, I saw my Lady Constance smile as she went out: I am confident she is
angry but from the teeth outward; you might easily make fair weather with her,
if you could get the money you promised her, but there is the devil --


Lov. Where is he boy? show me him quickly.


Boy. Marry God bless us! I mean Sir, there is the difficulty.


Lov. Damnd rogue to put me in hope so. --


Enter Bibber at the other end. Lov. Uds so, look where Bibber is: now I think
ont, he offered me a bag of forty pounds, and the Lease of his house yesterday:
but that is his pocky humor, when I have money and do not ask him, he will
offer it; but when I ask him he will not lend a farthing -- turn this way
Sirrah, and make as though we did not see him. --


Bib. Our Gentleman I think a talking with his boy there. --


Lov. You understand me --


Boy. I warrant you Sir.


Lov. No News yet; what an unlucky rascal it is! if the rogue should hereafter
be reduced to the raiment of his own Shreds, I should not pity him --


Bib. How Is this!


Lov. Now is this rascal hunting after jeasts, to make himself the greatest to
all that know him.


Bib. This must be me.


Boy. I can hear neither tale nor tidings of him: I have searched him in all
his haunts; amongst his Creditors; and in all Companies where they are like to
break the least jest. I have visited the Coffeehouses for him; but among all
the news there, I heard none of him.


(Bib. Goodifaith. Lov. Where Is the warrant, I Will put in my own name, since I
cannot find him.


Boy. Sir, I gave it a Scrivener at next door because I could not write, to
fill up the blank place with Mr. Bibbers name.


Lov. What an unlucky vermin it is; now for an 100 l. could I have gratified him
with a waiters Place at Custom-house, that had been worth to him an 100 l. a
year upon the nail.


Bib. Could you so, could you so Sir? give me your hand, and I thank you
heartily Mr. Loveby.


Lov. Art then honest Will? faith it is not worth thy thanks till it be done: I
wish I had the money for thee.


Bib. How much is it Sir?


Lov. An hundred pounds would do it:


Bib. Let me see forty I have already by me; take that in part Sir; -- and
that, and the Lease of my house would over-do it.


Lov. By all means thy Lease Will: near scruple at that; hang a piece of
Parchment, and two bits of soft wax: thou shall do it, thou shall boy.


Bib. Why then I will, Sir: -- but stay, stay; now think on it, Frances has an
120 pieces of old Grandam and Aunt gold left her, that she would never let me
touch: if we would get that Mr. Loveby -- but she will never part with it.


Lov. It Is but saying the place is for her; a Waiting-woman's place in the
Custom-house: Boy, go and tell her ont immediately.


Exit Boy. Bib. Hold a little; she has been very defirous to get a place in
Court, that she might take place as the Queens Servant.


Lov. She shall have a Dressers place, if thou wilt keep counsel. The worst on it
is, I have never a Warrant ready.


Bib. It Is all one for that Sir; she can neither write norread; it is but my
telling her it is a Warrant and all is well. I can but laugh to think how she will
be choused.


Lov. And you too: Mum. She Is here Will.


Enter Frances. Franc. A Waiting-womans place in the Custom-house! there is news
for me! thank you kind Mr. Loveby; you have been instrumental I hear of my
preferment.


Lov. No, it is a Dressers place at Court, Landlady.


Franc. O gemini! that is better news.


Bib. I, but you must make have and fetch an hundred pieces: I can assure you
500 are bidden for it: and the Courtiers are such slippery youths, they are
ever for the fairest Chapman.


Franc. I Will fetch it presently; oh how my heart quops now, as they say: I Will
fetch it presently: fweet Mr. Loveby, if the business can be done, it shall be
a good thing in your Worships way I promise you: O the father! that it could be
done: O sweet father!


Loveby plucks out a Paper. Lov. Here Mr. Bibber, pray put in Madam Bibbers
name into the Warrant.


Bib. Madam Bibber, there is joy, I must call you Wife no more, it is Madam
Bibber now.


Franc. Pray read it Mr. Bibber.


Bib. An Order for the admission of the Illustrious Lady Madam Bibber into her
Majesty's service.


Franc. Pray give me the Paper, I Will have no body touch it but my self; I am
sure my Money pays for it as they say. These are the fi-nest words; Madam
Bibber; pray Chicken show me where Madam is written that I may kiss it all
over. I shall make bold now to bear up to these flirting Gentlewomen, that
sweep it up and down with their long tails. I thought my self as good as they
when I was, as I was, but now I am, as I am.


Lov. Good Landlady dispatch, and bring the Money. --


Franc. Truly in the place of a Dresser, I dare be bold to say, as they say; I
shall give their Majesty's Worships good content: I Will go fetch it. --


( Exit Frances. Bib. We must keep the poor Soul in ignorance as long as we
can, Sir; for, when she has one smoked it, I have no other way but to retreat
into the body of my Janissaries my Journey-men; and never come out into her
presence more: Where will you be at nine a Clock, Sir, that we may rejoice over
our good Fortune.


Lov. Call me at my Lord Nonsuch his House, and I Will go with you.


Bib. We'll have the Fiddles and triumph In Faith.


( Exit Bib. Lov. Lord, how eager this Vermin was to cheat himself: well, I Will
after, I long to finger these Jacobus s: perhaps they may make my peace again
with my Mistress.


( Exit Loveby. Enter Failer, Nonsuch. Constance and Isabelle listening. Fail. I
Vow to Gad my Lord, Sir Timorous is the most dejected person in the World, and
so full of regret for what is past. 'Twas his misfortune to be drawn in by such
a Person as Madam Isabelle.


Non. It Is well his Estate pleads for him; he should never set foot more within
my doors else.


Fail. All be security for him for time to come: leave it to me to get the
License: all I desire is, your Daughter may be ready to morrow morning.


Non. Well, let me alone with her.


[ Exeunt Failer, Nonsuch. Isa. You heard the dreadful sound to morrow Cousin.


Constable. I would not throw my self away upon this Fool, if I could help it.


Isa. Better marry a Tertian Ague then a Fool, that is certain; there is one
good day and night in that.


Constable. And yet thou art mad of him thy self.


Isa. Nay, the Fool is a handsome Fool, that is somewhat; but it is not that;
it is a kind of fancy I have taken to a Glass Coach, and six Flanders Mares;
rich Liveries, and a good Fortune.


Constable. Prithee do not mind me of u'm; for though I want u'm not, yet I find
all Women are caught with Gayeties: one grain more would turn the balance on
his side; I am so vexed at the wild courses of this Loveby.


Isa. Vexed? Why vexed? the worst you can say of him, is, he loves Women: and
such make the kindest Husbands I am told. If you had a Sum of Money to put
out; you would not look so much whether the Man were an honest Man, (for the
Law would make him that) as if he were a good sufficient Play Master.


Enter Setstone. Constable. As I live thou art a mad Girl.


Set. She must be used as Mad-folkes are then; had into the dark and cured,


Constable. But, all this is no comfort to the word Tomorrow.


Isa. Well, what say you, if I put you to night into the Arms of Loveby?


Constable. My condition's desperate, and past thy Physic.


Isa. When Physics past, what remains but to send for the Divine? here is
little Nicodemus your Fathers Chaplain; I have spoke with him already; for a
brace of Angels he shall make all sure betwixt you without a License. I, and
prove ten at night a more Canonical hour than ten in the Morning.


Constable. I see not which way thou can perform it; but if thou do; I have
many Admirations in store for thee.


(Whispers. Isa. Step in, and get a Cushion underneath your apron.


Constable. O, I must be with Child it seems!


Isa. And Loveby shall bring you to Bed to night, if the Devil be not in the
Dice: away, make have; --

(Exit Constance. Setstone Be not you far off; I shall have need of you too: I
hear my Uncle coming; --

Me thinks I long to be revenged of this wicked Elder for hind ering of my
Marriage to day: Hark you Setstone. --


Set. It Is impossible, Madam: 'twill never take.


Isa. I warrant you, Do not I know him? he has not Brains enough, if they were
buttre'd to feed a blackbird -- Nay, no replies -- out of what I have said,
you may instruct my Cousin too.


(Exit Setstone. Enter Nonsuch. Isa. Oh, Are you there, Sir? Faith it was
kindly done of you to hinder me of a good Husband this afternoon: and but for
one thing, I would resolve to leave your house.


Non. I Am glad there is any thing will stay thee.


Isa. If I stay; it is for love of my Cousin Constance, not of you: I should be
loath to leave her in this sad condition!


Non. What condition?


Isa. Nay, I know not; she has not worn her Busk this fortnight. I think she is
grown fat of the sudden.


Non. O Devil, Devil! what a fright am I in?


Isa. She has qualmes to every morning: ravins mightily for greenfruit; and
swoones at the sight of hot meat.


Non. She Is with Child: I am undone! I am undone!


Isa. I understand nothing of such matters: She Is but in the next room; best
call her, and examine her about it.


Non. Why Constance, Constance?


Enter Constance, as with Child. Isa. Now for a broadside; turn your prow to
him Cousin.


(to her. Non. Now Gentlewoman! is this possible?


Constable. I do not reach your meaning, Sir.


Non. where have you been of late?


Constable. I seldom stir without you, Sir: these Walls most commonly confine me.


Non. These Walls can get no Children; nor these Hangings; though there be Men
wrought in u'm.


Isa. Yet, by your favor Nuncle, Children may be wrought behind the Hangings.


Non. O Constance, Constance! How have my gray hairs deserved this of thee? Who
got that Belly there?


Con. You, I hope, Sir.


Non. Tell me the truth; for I will know it; come, the Story.


Constable. The Story's quickly told, Sir, I Am with Child.


Non. And whose the Father?


Constable. I do not know, Sir.


Non. Not know! went there so many to it?


Constable. So far from that, that there were none at all, to my best knowledge,
Sir.


Non. Wast got by Miracle? who was the Father?


Constable. Who got your Money, Sir, that you have lost?


Non. Nay, Heaven knows who got that.


Constable. And, Heaven knows who got this: for, on my Conscience, he that had your
Money, was the Father on it.


Non. The Devil it was as soon.


Constable. That Is all I fear, Sir.


Isa. It Is strange: and yet 'twere hard, Sir, to suspect my Cousin's Virtue,
since we know the house is haunted.


Non. It Is true, that nothing can be laid, though under lock and key, but it
miscarries.


Isa. It Is not to be believed what these villainous Spirits can do: they go
invisible.


Constable. First they stole away my Prayer Book; and a little after that a small
Treatise I had against Temptation; and when they were gone, you know Sir --


Isa. If there be such doings, pray Heaven we are not all with Child: it is
certain that none that live within these Walls, but they have power of; I have
feared Toby the Coachman any time this fortnight.


Non. Out impudence! a man with Child! why it is unnatural.


Isa. I, so is he that got it.


Non. Thou art not in earnest.


Isa. I would I were not; hark, I hear him groan hither: come in poor Toby.


Enter Toby Coachman, with an Urinal. Non. How now! what have you there, Sirrah?


Tob. And't please your worship it is my Water; I had a spice oth' new Disease
here in the house, and so carried it to Master Doctor.


Non. Well; and what did he say to you?


Tob. He told me very sad news, and please you: I am somewhat bashful to speak
on it.


Isa. Out with it Man.


Tob. why truly he told me the party that owed the Water was with Child.


Isa. I told you so; Uncle.


Non. To my best remembrance I never heard of such a thing before.


Teb. I never stretch out my self to snap my Whip, but it goes to the heart of
me.


Isa. Alas poor Toby.


Non. Be gone, and put off your Livery Sirrah: you shall not stay a minute in
my Service.


Tob. I beseech your good Worship be good to me; 'twas the first fault I ever
committed in this kind: I have three poor Children by my Wife, and if you leave
me to the wide World, with a new charge upon my self.


Non. Be gone, I will not hear a word.


Tob. If I must go, I Will not go alone: Ambrose Tinis the Cook is as bad as I am.


Non. I think you will make me mad: Call the Rascal hither I must account with him
upon another score now I think on it.


Enter Ambrose Tinis. Non. Sirrah, what made you send a Pheasant with one wing
to the Table yesterday?


Amb. I beseech your Worship to pardon me, I longed for it.


Isab. I feared as much.


Amb. And I beseech your Worship let me have a boy to help me in the Kitchen;
for I find my self unable to go through with the work: besides the Doctor has
warned me of stooping to the fire, for fear of a mischance.


Non. Why, are you with child Sirrah!


Amb. So he tells me: but if I were put to my oath, I know not that ever I
deserved for it:


Non. Still worse and worse: and here comes Setstone groaning.


Enter Setstone. Setst. O Sir I have been so troubled with swooning fits; and
have so longed for cherries.


Non. He Is poopt to.


Isa. Well, this is not the worst yet: I suspect something more; than I will
speak on.


Non. What do thou suspect; ha!


Isa. Is not your Lordship with child too?


Non. Who, I with Child! Marry Heaven forbid: what do thou see by me to
ground it on?


Isa. You Are very round of late; that is all Sir.


Non. Round, that is only fat I hope: I have had a very good stomach of late I Am
sure.


Isab. Alas, and well you may: you eat for two Sir.


Non. Setstone look upon me, and tell me true: do you observe any alteration In
me?


Set. I would not dishearten your Ladyship: -- your Lordship I would say: but I
have observed of late, your color goes and comes extremely: methinks your
Lordship looks very sharp, and bleak in the face, and mighty puff in the body.


Non. O the Devil! wretched men that we are all: nothing grieves me, but that
in my old age, when others are past childbearing, I should come to be a
disgrace to my family.


Con. How do you Sir? your eyes look wondrous dim: is not there a mist before
u'm?


Isa. Do you not feel a kicking in your belly? when do you look Nuncle?


Non. Uh, uh! methinks I am very sick o'th sudden?


Isa. What store of old shirts have you against the good time? shall I give you
a shift Nuncle?


Non. Here Is like to be a fine charge toward: we shall all be brought to bed
together: well, if I be with Devil I will have such Gossips: an Usurer and a
Scrivener shall be Godfathers.


Isa. I Will help you Nuncle, and Saundyes two Grannies shall be Godmothers: the
Child shall be Christened by the Directory, and the Gossips Gift shall be the
good Scotch Kivenant.


Constable. Set. Non. Toby. Ambr. Uh, uh, uh! Isa. What rare musicks here!


Non. When ever it comes from me 'twill kill me, that is certain:


Set. Best take a vomit.


Isa. And't comes upward the horns will choack him.


Non. Mass and so they will.


Isa. Your only way is to make sure oth' Man-midwife.


Non. But my Child's dishonor troubles me the most: if I could but see her well
married, before I underwent the labor and peril of Childbearing! what would
you advice Niece!


Isa. That which I am very loath to do: send for honest Jack Loveby, and let
him know the truth ont: he is a fellow without a fortune, and will be glad to
leap at the occasion.


Non. But why Loveby of all the world? it is but staying till to morrow, and
then Sir Timorous will marry her.


Con. Uh! I swell so fast, I cannot hide it till to morrow.


Isa. Why there is it now!


Non. I Will send for the old Alderman Getwell immediately: he will father the
Devils Bastard I warrant you.


Isa. Fie Nuncle! my Cousins somewhat too good yet for an Alderman; if it were
her third child she might hearken to you.


Non. Well, since it must be so, Setstone go you to Loveby, make my excuse to
him for the arrest, and let him know what fortune may attend him.


Isa. Mr. Setstone, pray acquaint him with my Cousins affection to him; and
prepare him to father the Cushion underneath her Peticoat.


[aside to Set. Set. I Will bring him immediately.


Exit Setstone. Isa. When he comes Nuncle, pray cover your great belly with
your hat, that he may not see it.


Non. It goes against my heart to marry her to this Loveby; but what must be,
must be.


Enter Loveby. Con. O, Mr. Loveby! the welcom'st man alive: you met Setstone I
hope, that you came so opportunely.


Lov. No faith Madam, I came of my own accord.


Isa. It Is unlucky he is not prepared.


Lov. Look you Madam, I have brought the 100 l. the Devil was as punctual as
three a clock at a Playhouse: here, it is right I warrant it without telling: I
took it upon his word -- gives it.


Con. Your kindness shall be requited Servant: but I sent for you upon another
business: Pray Cousin tell't him, for I am ashamed to do it.


Lov. Ha! it is not that great belly I hope! is it come to that?


Isa. Hark you Mr. Loveby, -- a word with you.


Lov. A word with you Madam: whither is your Cousin bound?


Isa. Bound Sir?


Lov. I bound; look you, she is under sail, with a lusty fore-wind.


Non. I sent for you Sir, but to be plain with you 'twas more out of necessity
than Love.


Lov. I wonder my Lord at your invincible ill nature: you forget the arrest
that I passed by: but this it is to be civil to unthankful persons; it is feeding
an ill-natured dog, that snarles while he takes the victuals from your hand.


Non. All friends, all friends; no ripping up old stories; you shall have my
Daughter.


Lov. Faith I see your Lordship would let Lodgings ready furnished, but I am
for an empty Tenement.


Non. I had almost forgot my own great belly; if he should discover that too!
--


[Claps his hat before it. Isa. to Loveby. You will not hear me, Sir: it is all
roguery as I live.


Lov. Flat roguery I Will swear; if I had been father ont; nay, if I had but laid
my breeches upon the bed, I would have married her: but I see we are not
ordained for one another. -- is going.


Non. I beseech you Sir. --


Lov. Pray cover, my Lord.


Isa. He does his great belly, methinks --


Non. I Will make it up in money to you.


Lov. That cannot tempt me; I have a friend that shall be nameless, that will
not see me want -- and so your Servant.


Exit Loveby Isa. I Will after and bring him back --


Non. You shall not stir after him; does he scorn my daughter.


Isa. Lord how fretful you are: this breeding makes you so peevish Nuncle.


Non. It Is no matter, she shall straight be married to Sir Timorous.


Con. I am ruined Cousin.


Isa. I warrant you: -- My Lord I wish her well married to Sir Timorous; but
Loveby will certainly infect him with the news of her great belly.


Non. I Will dispatch it ever he can speak with him.


Isa. When ever he comes, he will see what a bona roba she is grown.


Non. Therefore it shall be done in the evening.


Isa. It shall my Lord.


Con. Shall it?


Isa. Let me alone Cousin, -- and to this effect she wall write to him, that to
conform to your will, and his modesty, she desires him to come hither alone
this Evening.


Non. Excellent wench! I Will get my Chaplain ready.


Exit Nons. Con. How can you hope to deceive my father?


Isa. If I do not I have hard luck.


Con. You go so strange a way about, your bowl must be well biased to come in.


Isa. So plain a ground there is not the least rub in it, I Will meet Sir Timorous
in the dark, and in your room marry him.


Con. You Will be sure to provide for one.


Isa. You mistake me Cousin: Oh! here is Setstone again;

Enter Setstone. Mr. Jeweller, you must again into your Devils shape, and speak
with Loveby: but pray be careful not to be discovered.


Set. I warrant you Madam; I have cousned wiser men than he in my own shape;
and if I cannot continue it in a worse, let the Devil I make bold with, e'n
make as bold with me.


Isa. You must guide him by back ways, to my Uncles House, and so to my
Cousins Chamber, that he may not know where he is when he comes there: the rest
I Will tell you as we go along.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter Timorous; after him Burr and Failer. Tim. Here here, read
this Note; there is news for us.


Fail. Let me see it.

(reads.) Sir Timorous.

Be at the Garden door at nine this Evening, there I Will receive you with my
daughter; to gratify your modesty I designed this way, after I had better
considered on it: and pray leave your Caterpillars Burr and Failer behind you.

Yours Nonsuch.

There is some trick in this, what e'rit be: but this word Caterpillars: you
see Burr, Sir Timorous, is like to be lured from us. --


Burr. Is there no prevention?


To him aside. Fail. One way there is: Sir Timorous pray walk a turn while Burr
and I confer a little upon this matter -- Look you Burr, there is but one
remedy in Nature I vow to gad: that is for you to have a new Sir Timorous,
exceeding this person in bounty to you. Observe then, in Sir Timorous his place
will I go, and igad I Will marry my Lady Constance; and then from the bowels of
friendship bless thee with a thousand pounds, besides Lodging and Diet for thy
life, boy. --


Burr. Umh -- very well thought on. -- No Sir, you shall trust to my bounty;
I Will go in his place, murmr or repine, speak the least word, or give thy lips
the least motion; and I Will beat thee till thou art not in condition to go.


Fail. I vow to gad this is extreme injustice: was it not my invention?


Burr. Why do thou think thou art worthy to make use of thy own invention? --
speak another word dee see -- come help me quickly to strip Sir Timorous: his
Coat may conduce to the deceit.

-- Sir Timorous by your leave. --


[fals on him. Tim. O Lord! what is the matter? -- murder -- murder.


Burr. Dee open; I have something in my Pocket that will serve for a gag now I
think on it.

(gags and binds him.) So lie there Knight. Come Sir, and help to make me Sir
Timorous; and when I am married, remember to increase your manners with my
fortune -- yet we'll always drink together.


Exeunt. ACT. V.
Constance, Isabelle, Nonsuch.

Con. THis is just the Knights hour; and Lovers seldom come after their time.


Non. Good night Daughter, I Will to bed; and give you joy tomorrow morning.


Exit Nonsuch Isa. I Am glad he is gone: what, your train takes?


Con. Yes, yes; Loveby will come: Setstone has been with him in disguise; and
promised him golden Mountains if he will not be wanting to his own fortune.


Isa. Is your habit provided too?


Con. All is ready.


Isa. Away then; for this is the place where we must part like Knights Errant,
that take several paths to their adventures.


Con. It Is time; for I hear some body come along the Alley; without question
it is Timorous. Farewell, the Captain stays for me in my Chamber.


Isa. And I Will post after you to Matrimony; I have laid a fresh Parson at the
next Stage that shall carry me tantivy.


Exit Constance. Enter Burr with Timorous his Coat on. Burr. My Lady Constance!


Isa. The same: Sir Timorous!


Burr. The same.


Isa. Sir Timorous takes me for my Cousin.


(aside.) Bur. My Lady Constance mistakes me for the Knight.


(aside.) Isa. Here, Sir; through the dark walk; it is but a little way about:
-- he is my own beyond Redemption. --


(aside. Bur. The Indies are mine; and a handsome Lady into the bargain. --


(Exeunt. Enter Failer, dogging them as they go off. Fail. He shall be hanged
ever he shall get her. Thus far I have dogged u'm, and this way I am sure they
must pass ever they come to the house: the Rogue had got the old Dog-trick of a
Statesman; to fish things out of wiser heads than his own, and never so much as
take notice of him that gave the Counsel. --

Enter Isabelle and Burr again. Now if I can but give her the hint without his
knowledge! -- Madam, -- my Lady Constance --


Isa. Whose voice is that?


Fail. A word in private, or you are undone: -- Pray step aside.


Bur. Where are you, Madam?


Isa. Immediately, Sir Timorous.


Fail. You are mistaken, Madam; it is not Sir Timorous; but Burr in his clothes:
he has stripped the Knight; gagged him, and locked him up.


Isa. Failer?


Fail. The same: I could not but prevent your unhappiness, though I hazard my
person in the discovery I Vow to Gad, Madam.


Burr. Who Is that talks to you, my Lady Constance?


Isa. a Maid of my acquaintance that is come to take her leave of me before I
marry; the poor soul does so pity me.


Bur. How will that Maid lie thinking of you and me to night!


Isa. Has he the Key about him?


( To Failer. Fail. I think so, Madam.


Isa. Could not you possibly pick his pocket, and give me the Key? then let me
alone to release Sir Timorous; and you shall be witness of the wedding.


Fail. Igad you want your Cousin Isabells wit to bring that to pass Madam.


Isa. I warrant you my own wit will serve to fool Burr, -- and you too, or I am
much deceived --


(aside) Fail. I am a little apprehensive of the Rascals fingers since I felt
u'm last; and yet my fear has not power to resist the sweet temptation of
revenge; I vow to Gad I Will try, Madam. --


Isa. Never fear; let me alone to keep him busy. --


Bur. Come, Madam, and let me take off those tastless Kisses the Maid gave you;
may we not join lips before we are Married?


Isa. No, fie, Sir Timorous.


They struggle a little, and in that time Failer picks his Pocket of the Key.
Fail. I have it, -- here it is, -- now shift for your self as I Will do: I ll wait
you in the Alley.


( Exit Failer. Isa. Sir Timorous, pray go into my Chamber; and make no noise
till I return: I Will but fetch the little Man of God, and follow you in a
twinkling.


Bur. There Is no light I hope. --


Isa. not a spark


Bur. For to light me to the mark --


Exit Burr. Isa. What a scowring have I escaped to night! fortune, it is thou have
been ingenious for me! Allons Isabelle! courage! now to deliver my Knight from
the Enchanted Castle.


( Exit Isabelle. Enter Loveby led by Setstone antickly habited; with a torch
in one hand, and a wand in the other. Lov. What art thou that have lead me this
long hour

Through Lanes and Alleys, and blind passages?


Set. I am thy Genius; and conduct thee to

Wealth, Fame, and Honor; what thou come to do

Do boldly: fear not; with this rod I charm thee;

And neither Elf nor Goblin now can harm thee.


Lov. Well, march on; if thou art my Genius, thou art bound to be

Answerable for me: I Will have thee hanged if I miscarry.


Set. Fear not my Son.


Lov. Fear not quoth a! then prithee put on a more familiar shape: -- one of us
two stinks extremely: prithee do not come so near me: I do not love to have my
face bleach'd like a Tiffany with thy Brimstone. --


Set. Fear not, but follow me. --


Lov. 'Faith I have no great mind to it: I am somewhat godly at present; but
stay a month longer and I Will be proud, and fitter for thee: in the mean time
prithee stay the stomach with some Dutchman: an Hollander with Butter will fry
rarely in Hell.


Set. Mortal, it is now too late for a retreat: go on and live: step back and
thou art mine.


Lov. So I am however; first or last, but for once I Will trust thee. --


The Scene opens, and discover Constance; and a Parson by her, she habited like
Fortune. Enter again. Set. Take here the mighty Queen of good and ill;

Fortune, first Marry, then enjoy thy fill

Of lawful pleasures; but depart ever morn:

Slip from her Bed, or else thou shall be torn

Piece-meale by Fiends; thy blood carows'd in Bowls,

And thy four quarters blown to the top of Pouls.


Lov. By your favor I Will never venture it: is marrying the business; I Will none
I thank you. --


( Here Constance whispers Setstone. Set. Fortune will turn her back if twice
denied.


Lov. Why she may turn her Girdle too on the other side.

This is the Devil; I will not venture on her.


Set. Fear not; she swears thou shall receive no harm.


Lov. I, if a man durst trust her; but the Devil is got into such an ill name
for lying.


Set. When ever you are not pleased, it shall be lawful to sue out your Divorse.


Lov. I; but where shall I get a Lawyer? there you are aforehand with me: you
have retained most of them already -- for the favors I have received, I am very
much her servant, but in the way of Matrimony, Mr. Parson there can tell you
it is an Ordinance; and must not be entered into without mature deliberation:
besides; Marriages you know are made in heaven; and that I am sure this was not.


Set. She bids you then at least, restore that Gold, which she, too lavishly,
poured out on you unthankful Man. --


Lov. Faith I have it not at present; it is all gone, as I am a sinner; but,
it is gone wickedly; all spent in the Devil her Fathers service.


Set. Where is the grateful sense of all your favors? Come, Fiends, with
Flesh-hooks tear the wretch in pieces, and bear his Soul upon your leather
wings, below the Fountain of the dark Abyfs.


Lov. What, are you a Conjuring? if you are good at that sport, I can Conjure
as well as you --


(Draws his Sword. Con. Hold; for Heaven's sake hold, I am no spirit: touch but
my hand; Ghosts have no Flesh and Blood.


(Discovering. Lov. My Lady Constance! I began to suspect it might be a trick;
but never could imagine you the Author: it seems you are desirous I should
Father this Hans en Kelder here.


Constable. I know not how without a blush to tell you it was a cheat I practiced
for your Love.


Set. A mere Tympany, Sir, raised by a Cushion; you see it is gone already.


Constable. Setstone was sent to have acquainted you; but by the way unfortunately
missed you.


Lov. 'I was you then that supplied me all this while with Money; pretty
Familiar, I hope to make thee amends ever I sleep to night: come Parson, prithee
make have and join us. I long to be out of her debt poor Rogue.


The Parson takes them to the side of the Stage: they turn their backs to the
Audience, while he mumbles to them. Set. I Will be the Clark; Amen, give you joy
Mr. Bridegroom, and Mrs. Bride.


Lov. Constable. Thanks honest Setstone.


Bib. Franc. And Music without, they Play. Music. God give your worship a
good even Mr. Loveby.


Constable. Hark! what noise is that? Is this Music of your providing, Setstone.


Set. Alas, Madam, I know nothing of it.


Lov. We are betrayed to your Father, but the best on it is, he comes too late
to hinder us -- fear not, Madam, I Will bear you through them all. --

As they rush out; Bibber, Frances, and Music are entering in: Bibber and
Frances are beaten down. [ Exeunt Loveby, Constance, Setstone, Parson, All cry
out, Oh the Devil! the Devil! the Devil!


Bib. Lord bless us, Where are you Frances?


Franc. Here William! this is a judgment, as they say, upon you William; for
trusting Wits: and calling Gentlemen to the Tavern, William.


Bib. No; 'twas a Judgment upon you, for desiring Preferment at Court, Frances.
Let Us call up the Watch, and Justice Trice, to have the house searched.


Franc. I, I; there is more Devils there I warrant you.


(Exeunt. Enter Loveby, Constance, Setstone, again. Lov. It was certainly Will.
Bibber and his Wife with Music: for now I remember my self I pointed him this
hour at your Fathers house: but we frighted them worse than they frighted us.


Constable. Our Parson run away too: -- when they cried out the Devil!


Lov. He was the wiser: for if the Devil had come ind eed, he has Preached so
long against him it would have gone hard with him.


Set. Indeed I have always observed Parsons to be more fearful of the Devil
than other people.


Lov. Oh the Devil's the Spirit, and the Parson's the Flesh: and betwixt those
two there must be War: yet to do 'um both right, I think in my Conscience they
quarrel only like Lawyers for their Fees; and meet good friends in private to
laugh at their Clients.


Con. I saw him run in at my Cousin Isabells chamber door, which was wide
open; I believe she is returned: we'll fetch a light from the Gallery, and give
her joy. --


Lov. Why is she Married, Madam?


Con. I Will tell you as we go. --


(Exeunt. The Scene changes; Burr and the Parson enter, meeting in the dark.
Bur. My Lady Constance are you come again? that is well: I have waited
sufficiently for you in the dark.


Pars. Help, help, help good Christian People! the Devil, the Devils here.


Bur. It Is I Madam; what do you mean?


Pars. Avoid Satan! avoid, avoid.


Bur. What have I here, the hairy Woman?


Enter Loveby, Constance with the light. Bur. Ha! yonder is my Lady Constance!
Who have I got, a stone-Priest by this good Light. How Is this, Loveby too!


Lov. Burr, a beating my Reverend Clergy: What make you here at this
unseasonable hour! I Will know your business --


(Draws. Bur. Will you Sir? --


(They Fight. Constable. Set. Parson. Help, Murder, murder.


Enter at one Door, Trice Drunk: with the Watch: Bibber: and Frances following,
At the other Nonsuch. and Servants, and Failer. Non. Murder, murder! beat down
their weapons: Will you murder Sir Timorous, Mr. Loveby --


(They disarme both. Sir Timorous! ha, Burr! Thieves; thieves! Sit down good
Mr. Justice, and take their Examinations: now I shall know how my Money went.


Trice. They shall have Justice I warrant u'm.


(Goes to sit and misses the chair. Bib. The Justice is almost dead drunk, my
Lord.


Franc. But and't please your Worship my Lord this is not the worst sight that
we have seen her to night in your Worships house, we met three or four hugeous
ugly Devils, with eyes like Sawcers, that threw down my Husband, that threw
down me, that made my heart so panck ever since, as they say.


Non. The Devil again in my house.


Lov. Nay, here he was, that is certain; he brought me hither, I know not how my
self, and Married me; Mr Setstone there can justify it: but the best is, I
have a Charm about me that will lay him yet ever midnight.


Fail. And I Vow to Gad my Lord, I know as little how I came hither as any man.


Bur. Nor I.


Trice. Nor I.


Lov. No I dare swear do thou not Mr. Justice.


Trice. But I wonder how the Devil durst come into our Ward, when he knows I
have been at the Duties of -- my Family -- this evening.


Enter one of the Watch, with Timorous, and Isabelle. Watch. And please your
Worship I met this couple in the street late, and so seeing them to be man and
woman, I brought u'm along with me, upon suspicion of Felony together.


Franc. This is the proud minx that sought shelter in my house this afternoon
Mr. Justice.


Fail. Sir Timorous and Madam Isabelle! I Vow to Gad we are undone Burr. --


Isa. Do not you know me, Mr. Justice?


Lov. Justice is blind, he knows no body.


Isa. My name is Isabelle.


Fran. No, thy name is Jezabelle: I warrant you there is none but Rogues and
Papists would be abroad at this time of night.


Bib. Hold Frances. --


Trice. She Is drunk I warrant her as any beast: I wonder woman you do not
consider what a crying sin Drunkenness is? Whom do you learn it from in our
Parish? I Am sure you never see me worse.


Isa. Burr and Failer; acknowledge your selves a couple of recreant Knights:
Sir Timorous is mine: I have won him in fair Field from you.


Con. Give you joy Cousin, -- give you joy!


Lov. Married!


Isa. And in Diana's Grove boy.


Lov. Why it is fine by heaven; it is wondrous fine; as the Poet goes on sweetly.


Tim. I am sure they had gagged me, and bound me, and stripped me almost stark
naked, and locked me up as fast as a Butterfly, till she came and made me a man
again; and therefore I have reason to love her the longest day I have to live.


Isa. I, and the longest night too, or you are to blame. And you have one
argument I love you, if the proverb be true, for I took you almost in your bare
shirt.


Burr. So much for us Failer!


Con. Well my Lord, it had as good at first as at last: I must beg your
Lordships blessing for this Gentleman and my self.


both kneel. Non. Why you are not Married to him I hope! he is Married to the
Devil.


Lov. 'Twas a white Devil of your Lordships getting then; Mr. Setstone, and the
Reverend here can witness it.


Set. Par. We must speak truth my Lord.


Non. Would I had another Child for your sake, you should never see penny of my
money.


Lov. Thank you my Lord; but methinks it is much better as it is.


Isa. Come Nuncle it is in vain to hold out now it is past remedy: it is like the
last Act of a Play when people must Marry; and if fathers will not consent
then, they should throw Oranges at 'um from the Galleries: why should you stand
off to keep us from a Dance?


Non. But there is one thing still that troubles me, that is her great belly, and
my own too.


Con. Nay for mine my Lord, it is vanished already: 'twas but a trick to catch
the old one.


Lov. But I Will do my best; she shall not be long without another.


Isa. But as for your great belly Nuncle, I know no way to rid you on it but by
taking out your guts.


Loveby. It Is such a pretty smart rascal; it is well I am pleased with my own
choice; but I could have got such Hectors and Poets and Gamesters out of thee


Con. No, no; two Wits could never have lived well together; want would have so
sharpened you upon one another.


Isa. A Wit should naturally be joined to a fortune; by the same reason your
Vintners feed their hungry Wines.


Con. And if Sir Timorous and I had married; we two fortunes must have built
Hospitals with our Money, we could never have spent it else.


Lov. Or what think you of paying Courtiers debts with it.


Isa. Well, to show I am in charity with my Enemies, I Will make a motion: while
we are in Town let us hire a large house, and live together: Burr and Failer.
--


Fail. Shall be utterly discarded; I knew 'twould come to that I vow to gad.


Isa. Shall be our Ghests.


Burr and Failer throw up their Caps, and cry Vivi, Madame Isabelle. Lov. And
Bibber shall make our Wedding Clothes without trusting.


Bib. No, hence forward I Will trust none but landed men; and such as have houses
and apple trees in the Country: now I have got a Place in the Customehouse.


Franc. Nothing vexes me, but that this flirting Gentlewoman should go before
me; but I Will to the Heralds Office, and see whether the Queens Majesty's
Dresser should not take place of any Knights Wife in Christendom.


Bib. Now all will out -- no more good Frances.


Franc. I will speak, that I will, so I will: what! shall I be a Dresser to the
Queens Majesty, and no body must know on it; I Will send Mr. Churchwarden word
on it; and Gentlemen, when you come to St. Brides Church (if ever you come to
Church Gentlemen) you shall see me in the Pew that is next the Pulpit; thank Mr.
Loveby's Worship for it.


Loveby. Spare your thanks good Landlady, for the truth is we came too late,
the Place is gone; and so is yours Will; but you shall have 200 l. for One, if
that will satisfy you.


Franc. This is better news as they say.


Lov. Cheer up thy Wife Will: where are they fiddles? a dance should do it:


Bib. I Will run and call u'm.


Isa. I have found out that will comfort her: henceforward I christen her by
the name of Madam Bibber.


All. A Madam Bibber, A Madam Bibber.


Franc. Why, I thank you sweet Gentlemen and Ladies, this is a Cordial to my
drooping spirits: I confess I was a little eclipsed; but I Will cheer up with
abundance of love, as they say. Strike up Fiddles. --


Lov. That Is a good Wench.


Dance. Trice. This Music, and a little nod has recovered me; I Will in and
provide for the Sack-Posset.


Non. To bed, to bed; it is late: Son Loveby get me a boy to night, and I Will
settle three thousand a year upon him the first day he calls me Grandsire.


Lov. I Will do my best.

To make the bargain sure before I sleep.
Where Love and money strike, the blow goes deep.

EPILOGVE to the WILD GALLANT, as it was first Acted.
The Wild Gallant has quite played out his game;
He Is married now, and that will make him tame;
Or if you think Marriage will not reclaim him,
The Critiques swear they will damn him, but they will tame him,
Yet though our Poet's threatened most by these,
They are the only People he can please:
For he to humor them, has shown to day,
That which they only like, a wretched Play:
But though his Play be ill, here have been shown
The greatest Wits, and Beauties of the Town,
And his Occasion having brought you here
You are too grateful to become severe.
There is not any Person here so mean,
But he may freely judge each Act and Scene:
But if you bid him choose his Judges then,
He boldly names true English Gentlemen:
For he never thought a handsome Garb or Dress,
So great a Crime to make their Judgment less:
And with these Gallants he these Ladies joins,
To judge that Language their Converse refines.
But if their Censures should condemn his Play,
Far from Disputing, he does only pray
He may Leanders Destiny obtain:
Now spare him, drown him when he comes again.
EPILOGVE to the WILD GALLANT revived.
OF all Dramatique Writing, Comic Wit,
As it is the best, so it is most hard to hit.
For it lies all in level to the eye,
Where all may judge, and each defect may spy.
Humor is that which every day we meet,
And therefore known as every public street;
In which, if ever the Poet go astray
You all can point, 'twas there he lost his way,
But, What Is so common, to make pleasant too,
Is more then any wit can always do.
For it is, like Turks, with Hen and Rice to treat;
To make regalio's out of common meat.
But, in your Diet you grow Salvages:
Nothing but Humane flesh your taste can please:
And, as their Feasts with slaughtered slaves began,
So you, at each new Play must have a Man.
Hither you come, as to see Prizes fought;
If no Blood's drawn, you cry the Prize is naught.
But fools grow wary now; and when they see
A Poet eyeing round the Company,
Straight each man for himself begins to doubt;
They shrink like Seamen when a Press comes out.
Few of 'em will be found for Public use,
Except you charge an Oph upon each house,
Like the Train-Bands, and every man engage
For a sufficient Fool to serve the Stage.
And, when with much ado you get him there,
Where he in all his glory should appear,
Your Poets make him such rare things to say,
That he is more wit than any Man in the Play.
But of so ill a mingle with the rest,
As when a Parrat's taught to break a jest.
Thus aiming to be fine, they make a show
As tawdry Squires in Country Churches do.
Things well considered, it is so hard to make
A Comedy, which should the knowing take:
That our dull Poet, in despair to please,
Does humbly beg by me his Writ of ease.
It Is a Land Tax, which he is too poor to pay;
You, therefore must some other Impost lay.
Would you but change for serious Plot and Verse
This mottley garniture of Fool and Farce,
Nor scorn a Mode, because it is taught at home,
Which does, like Vests, our Gravity become;
Our Poet yields you should this Play refuse,
As Tradesmen by the change of fashions, lose
With some content their fripperies of France,
In hope it may their staple Trade advance.
FINIS.

