THE HISTORY OF IMBANKING and DRAYNING OF DIVERSE Fenns and Marshes, Both in
FOREIGN PARTS, AND IN THIS KINGDOM, And of the Improvements thereby.

EXTRACTED FROM Records, Manuscripts, and other Authentic Testimonies,

BY WILLIAM DUGDALE Esquire, NORROY King of Arms.

LONDON; Printed by Alice Warren, in the Year of our Lord MDCLXII.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THE first and greatest attempt, that has been made in this Kingdom, for the
general Drayning of those vast Fenns, lying in Cambridgeshire and the Counties
adjacent, was by that Prudent and Grave Prelate John Morton, sometime Bishop of
Ely, the principal Instrument of that happy Union betwixt the two Houses of
York and Lancaster (as the Channel betwixt Peterborough and Wisbeche, still
bearing his name does witness:) And the next by your Royal Grandfather and
Father of Blessed Memories, the chiefest branches of that Renowned Stock. Which
not succeeding, as it was designed, by reason of the distractions of those
times; it will be no small Honor to your Sacred Majesty, and Advantage of your
Realm, to complete and make perfect that Noble undertaking: To which end I most
humbly offer unto your Majesty this present Historical Discourse; whereby it
will appear, not only, that diverse Great and Mighty Princes, and other Persons
famous in their times, have in Foreign Parts been active in Works of this kind:
but how much your Majesty's own Royal Ancestors have by several excellent and
wholesome Laws promoted the like in this Kingdom: Praying to the Almighty, that
he will bless your Majesty with a Long and Prosperous Reign, that good Arts may
again flourish amongst us, and Virtue receive its due Encouragement, to the joy
of all your Loyal Subjects; and amongst them, of

Your Majesty's most Obedient Subject, and Faithful Servant, WILLIAM DUGDALE.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THAT the Strength of a King is in the Multitude of his Subjects, is a truth
which no man will gainsay: Hence is it, that those Countries, the soil whereof
is naturally fruitful, are always much better esteemed, than such as be
sterile, in regard they afford more and better sustenance to their Inhabitants.
And hence is it likewise, that the most civilized Nations have by so much Art
and Industry endeavored to make the best improvement of their Wastes, Commons,
and all sorts of barren Land. Amongst which advantages, that of Enclosure has
not been the least; whereof there is a notable instance in the Counties of
Northampton and Somerset; which, though little differing in their extent and
goodness of soil: yet, if estimation may be made, by Musters, Subsidies,
Tenths, and Fifteens, Enclosure has made the one more than double to exceed
the other, both in people, and wealth, as has long ago been observed See the
life of K. Edw. 6. by Sir John Hayward, p. 45.
by some of great Judgment.

If then the mere Enclosure and Tillage of that which naturally yielded little
profit, does justly deserve so great a commendation; how much more is the skill
and pains of those to be had in esteem, who have recovered many vast
proportions of Land, totally overwhelmed with a deluge of waters? And of these
I need not look out for examples from abroad, our own Country affoarding a
multitude of notable Instances, as the ensuing Discou^se will fully manifest;
whereby it will appear, that in sundry parts of this Realm, there are many
thousands of Acres, which do now yield much benefit, yearly, by Rape,
Cole-seed, Grass, Hay, Hemp, Flax, Wheat, Oats, and other Grain; nay by all
sorts of excellent Plants, Garden-stuff, and fruit Trees, which in former times
were Drowned Lands.

And this was it, which gave encouragement to o^^ two late Sovereigns of
Blessed Memory; ( viz. King James, and King Charles the first) to become the
sole Adventurers for the Drayning of those vast Fenns of Cambridgshire, and the
five other adjacent Counties; (a worthy Work, and never totally attempted till
their times;) well discerning, that by a complete performance thereof, the
costly and troublesome meeting of Commissioners for Sewers; the frequent great
Taxes, for the maintenance of diverse Banks and Drains, with many unhappy
controversies and emulations relating thereto, might be, in a great measure
prevented. And if our industry were but comparable to that of our Neighbors in
the Belgique Provinces, how much more might those drayned grounds afford us,
for profit and pleasure, than they yet do? forasmuch as theirs, lying below the
Level of the Sea at high Tides, is drayned by Engines, which cast out the
water; and ours have not only a descent to the Sea, but diverse large Rivers and
streams for leading the waters to their natural out-falls.

To give instance in the benefits: First let us consider the large proportion
of this one Level, which is no less than five hundred thousand Acres, it
being, from the edge of Suffolk, to Waynflete in Lincolnshire, full Lxviii.
miles in a strait line: And if we reckon by the bow of the Fenn, which runs
up on both sides of the River Witham, within a mile of Lincoln, it may be well
accounted Lxxx miles; the breadth being in many places xxx. more xx. and seldom
so little as ten miles: so that, it is thought by some, to be as good ground,
and as much, as the States of the low Countries enjoy in the Netherlands.

Next for the richness of the soil, being gained from the waters, does it not
for the most part exceed the high grounds thereon bordering, as much as other
meadows do, which are ordinarily let for xx s. the Acre? And do we not see,
that in the Marshes beyond Waynflete in Lincolnshire, where the grounds are
severed and trenched, it is hard to find a poor man, though they sit at great
Rents? for their Cattle, being always sound and thriving, are therefore
merchandable; or if they come to a mischance, yet fit for food.

Moreover, besides the great plenty of flesh and white meats, with the breed of
servicable Horses, let us consider the abundance of Wool, Hydes, Tallow, and
other Commodities, which this fruitful ground now produces; and that the new
Channels, made for the Drayning, do yield no small advantage to all those parts,
for the carriage of their Corn and Merchandise; whereas before, they were
constrained to go many miles about, according to the natural bending of the
Rivers.

And if we weigh the great inconveniences, which these over-flowings have
produced; certainly the advantage by the general Drayning ought the more to be
prized: for in the Winter time, when the Ice is strong enough to hinder the
passage of Boats (as has been by some well observed) and yet not able to bear
a man; the Inhabitants upon the Hards and the Banks within the Fenns, can have
no help of food, nor comfort for body or soul; no woman aid in her ^ravail, no
means to baptize a Child, or partake of the Communion, nor supply of any
necessity, saving what those poor desolate places do afford. And what
expectation of health can there be to the bodies of men, where there is no
element good? the Air being for the most part cloudy, gross, and full of rotten
harrs; the Water putrid and muddy, yea full of loathsome vermin; the Earth
spungy and boggy; and the Fire noisome by the stink of smoaky Hassocks.

As for the decay of Fish and Fowl, which has been no small objestion against
this public work, there is not much likelihood thereof: for notwithstanding
this general Drayning, there are so many great Meeres and Lakes, still
continuing, which be indeed the principal harbors for them, that there will be
no want of either; for in the vast spreading waters they seldom abide, the
Rivers, Channels, and Meeres being their principal Receptacles; which being now
increased, will rather augment than diminish their store. And that both Fish
and Fowl are with much more ease taken by this restraint of the waters within
such bounds, we daily see; forasmuch as all Netts for Fishing, are better made
use of in the Rivers and Meeres, than when the waters are out of those narrower
limits: And that Decoys are now planted upon many drayned Levels, whereby
greater numbers of Fowl are caught, than by any other Engines formerly used;
which could not at all be made there, did the waters, as formerly, overspread
the whole Country.

THE HISTORY OF IMBANKING and DRAYNING.
CAP I.
THAT works of Drayning are most ancient, and of divine institution, we have
the testimony of holy Scripture. Genesis 1.9.
In the beginning God said, let the waters be gathered together, and let the
dry land appear; and it was so: 12.
And the Earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree
yielding fruit after his kind; and God saw that it was good.

Again, after the Deluge, it was through the divine goodness, that Genesis 8.13.
the waters were dried up from off the Earth, and the face of the ground was
dry.

And that those Nations, which be of greatest antiquity, and in chief renown
for Arts and Civility, are also famous for their works of this nature, is
evident from the practice of the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Graecians,
the Romans, and several other, of which I shall give instance.

Egypt.
First therefore of Egypt; because Herod. lib. 2. cap. 35.
that Country is more mervailous than any other; and that the works there, are
more remarkable than the Country. This lies in a great length from South to
North, between Arabia and Lybia, and is watered with the River Nilus: a stream
that all the Winter keeps Ibid. l. 2. cap. 19.
within his banks; but at the Summer Solstice begins to exceed; and swelling
an hundred days, is almost as long a time in retreating. Which constant
inundation is so commodious; that those surrounded parts, as an eminent
Historian Strab. lib. 17. p. 786. D.
testifies, are only habitable; and that whatsoever place on either side the
River, rises in such a manner, that it cannot receive the flood, remains
desert and uninhabited through want of water.

We may therefore esteem the Egyptians to have been the first Masters in this
Art of Drayning, whom necessity and profit induced to employ their wit and
labor, to the improvement of their Country, and making the best advantage of
that exorbitant River; wherein they became most excellent; their workman-ship
about the River Nilus, being such (as the same learned Author Ibid. p. 787. D.
manifests) that Industry surpassed nature: for Egypt (says he) though
naturally fruitful, being watered is more fruitful: And though, according to
the course of nature, the greatest increase of the River, waters the most
land; yet, through industry, it was so brought to pass, that oftentimes, when
nature was defective, there was by the help of Trenches and Banks, as much
ground watered with the smaller floods, as with the greater: Ibid. 788. D
so that at high flood the Country is all a Sea, except the Cities and
Villages; which, being situate, either on Natural hills, or Artificial banks,
at distance seem to be Islands.

The Plin. 5.9.
just increase (of this flowing) appears to be xvi. Cubits: Less waters
not all; more is too slow in retreating: too much water keeping the ground wet
too long, loses the season of sowing: too little affords no season, through
drougth. The Country reckon upon both. At xii Cubits they foresee famine; at
xiii hunger; xiv bring mirth; xv security; xvi plenty.

The Egyptian Trenches therefore were of two sorts; either for avoidance of
superfluous water, or disposing of what might be useful; there being notable
examples of both kinds. Of the first sort are those many out-lets made by hand,
for the Rivers more current passage into the Mid-land Sea; the natural mouths
of Nile being insufficient: for the septem ostia were not all natural. Nilus
Herod, l. 2. c. 17.
having run through Egypt in one stream, to the City Cercasorus, thence
divides it self into three Channels; one runs Eastward toward Pelusium; the
other Westward toward Canobus, from whence they are denominate; the third,
dividing Delta, runs straight forward to Sebennitus, from whence it has
it is name; and there is divided into two other streams, the one passing by
Sais, the other by Mendes, receive their names from those Cities: But the
Bolbitique and Bucolique Channels, are not natural, but made by digging.

This Island of Egypt toward the Sea, between the Pelusiaque and Canobique
Channels, is Strab. p. 788 C.
called Delta, from the form of the letter D. Between these two mouths, besides
the five before named, there are many smaller: For from the former, there are
diverse subdivisions, throughout the whole Island, which make sundry
Watercourse and Islands; so as one Chanel being cut into another, it is
navigable every way. The reason why these lower parts were cut and Drayned in
such extraordinary manner, may be supposed to be (besides the convenience of
navigation) for that they were more apt to silting; whereof the AEgytian
Priests had good experience: For Herod. l. 2. ^ap^ 13.
in the Reign of King Myris, when the River rose not above eight Cubits, it
watered all Egypt below Memphis: But now (in Herodotus his time,) unless it
rose xvi or at least xv. cubits, it overflowed not that part of the Country:
Herodotus outlived Artaxerxes Longimanus K. of Per^ia. Myris, or Maeris,
reigned in the tenth Century after the flood.
Nor was there nine hundred years passed from the death of King Myris, to the
time that Herodotus heard this from the Priests.

Amongst this sort of works, against the inconvenience of the River, may be
reckoned the inbanking Herod. lib. 2. cap. 137.
of Cities, which Sesostris first performed: But those works, especially at
Bubastis, were after heightened by Sabacon the Ethiopian, who employed therein
all persons condemned to death. The other kind of Trenches, extending the
benefit of the inundation beyond nature, is more commendable, having less of
necessity, but more for imitation. The first of these was made by King Maeris,
into a Lake on the Lybian side, which bears his name: which Lake (says
Herodotus li^. 2. c. 149.
) is three thousand and six hundred furlongs in compass (being the measure of
Egypt along the Sea coast) and lies in length North and South; the greatest
depth being ^ifty paces. Almost in the middle thereof, stand two Pyramids, each
fifty paces above water, and as much below; in all an hundred paces; there
being upon each a Colossus sitting in a Chair. The water of this lake is not
esteemed to spring in the place (the soil being very dry) but comes out of
Nilus by a Trench; flowing six months into the lake, and ebbing as many into
the Nile; yielding into the Kings treasury, for the Fish taken therein, a
talent of silver, for every day of the six months ebb; and twenty minae when
it flows. The Egyptians would have it believed, that this lake was made by
hand, and dugg, by reason of the Island and Pyramids in it: and when it is
objected, that there is no sign of earth cast out, they say that it was thrown
into the River Nile.

After him also King Sesostris, returning victorious out of Asia, and bringing
Herod. l. 2. c. 107.
with him a multitude of people out of the subdued Countries, enforced them to
digg sundry Watercourse, which are still in Egypt; improvidently making the
Country, which before was passable with Horse and Wagon, to want that
conveniencie: for from that time, though Egypt be all plain, yet can neither
Horse nor Wagon pass, by reason of the Cuts, which are many and various: But
the reason why he so trenched the Country, was, that the Cities more remote
from the River, might not want water to drink, upon the recess of the stream.

There were also very remarkable Trenches on the Arabian side of Egypt. As that
at Strab. p. 804. B.
Pelusium, which fills the two Lakes, that have their names from the Fenns
there; besides other Lakes and Trenches into them, in those parts, without
Delta; and two others which meet in a Lake in the Sethroitique division: For
Egypt was by Sesostris divided into xxxvi parts, in Greek (...), in English you
may call them Shires: but that is the most famous Trench, which was drawn into
the Red Sea.

It was first Hero ^ 2 c 158.
undertaken by King Necos, the Son of Psamnitichus, (This is that Pharaoh
Nechoh, King of Egypt, who slew 2 Kings, c. 23. v. 27.
Josias King of Judah, in battle at Megiddo) being seconded by Darius King of
Persia. The length of He^od. ut supra.
this trench was four days sail: the breadth such as two Galleys might row
together. The water of Nile entered into it a little above the City Bubastis,
and passing by Patumos (a City of Arabia) entered the Red Sea. They began to
dig in the plain of Egypt, toward Arabia, running a great way from West to
East, by the foot of that Hill, near Memphis, in which is the stone quarry:
Then turning South, through the parting of the Hill, into the Arabian gulf. The
passage from Mount Cassius, and the North Sea, unto the Red Sea, is a thousand
furlongs: But by this Trench, the way was longer, being not so straight. In the
digging hereof, there perished an hundred and twenty thousand Egyptians.
Necos, having half done, desisted, being discouraged by an Oracle; which said,
he wrought for the Barbarians: So the Egyptians call all that use not their
language.

Strabo (who lived under Tiberius) says Li^. 17. p. 804. B.
that this Watercourse issued into the Red Sea, or Arabian gulf, at the City
Arcinoe, which some call Cleopatris; and that it passed through those Lakes,
which are called Bitter. (They had the name of Exo. 15.23.
Marah; because the children of Israel, at their departure out of Egypt, could
not drink of those waters.) But the water of those Lakes, though in old time
bitter, was changed Strab. ib.
upon the making of this new River, and mingling with fresh water; and now bred
good Fish and abundance of waterfoul. He says, that this Trench was first made
by Sesostris, before the Trojan war; or (as others relate) it was only begun by
the Son of Psamnitichus, who soon died. Afterward it was again undertaken by
Darius the first; who having almost finished the work; gave it over, out of a
fond conceit, that the Red Sea was higher than Egypt; and that if the whole
isthmus were cut, Egypt would be drowned with the Sea. But the Ptolemaies,
Kings of Egypt, cut it through and set a Sluice upon the Chanel, that they might
sail out into the Sea, and in again, as they pleased. It was Ibid. p. 805.
an hundred Cubits in breadth, and deep enough for a great Ship.

The intended benefit of this Chanel, seems to have been an intercourse
between the Midland Sea, and the Atlantique; and a communication of traffic,
by water, between Europe and the East Indies: but I do not find, that any great
use was made thereof to that purpose: For in aftertimes, the way of trading
into those Eastern parts, was either from the Port of Gaza, to Aila, a
Port-Town situate near the bottom of the Arabian gulf, on the East side
thereof; or from Coptus, a Town of Egypt, on this side Thebes, to Berinice a
Port on the West side of the Red Sea.

This passage, from Gaza to Aila, is said (...). l. 1^. p. 759.
to be 1260 furlongs. There are two ways, one through Arabia, the other through
Egypt, by Heroopolis; to which the nearer way is by Pelusium: the way through
the Deserts and Sands, is going by Camels, and is obnoxious to Serpents.

From this Elath, Solomon made 2. Chr^. 8.1^
his voyage to Ophir. The Town was lost 2 King. 8.20
in King Iorams reign, when the Edomites revolted; but it was recovered 14 22.
by Azariah; and under Ahaz lost 16. 6.
again to Rezin King of Syria. It was a frontier Town of the Roman Empire, and
the Station S. Hie^on. de loci^.
of the x Legion.

The other passage from Coptus to Berinice, is reckoned 258 miles, the
particular stations whereof, you have in the Itinerary of Antoninus. They were
settled, Strab. l. 17. p. 815. B.
and Inns erected by Philadelphus; because the innermost part of the Red Sea
was not so navigable This Coptus was a common Town, both to the Egyptians and
Arabians, and the mart for all Indian, Arabique and AEthiopique Commodities;
from whence was a Chanel Ib. p. 79^. C.
cut into the Nile, whereby the Merchandises were transplanted to Alexandria.
Which place being, from the Macedonian times, the head of all Egypt, ought not
slightly to be passed by; because none ever had the like advantage of
artificial Watercourse: By which in short time it became, for greatness,
populacy, wealth, and pleasantness, one of the most renowned Cities of the
world.

The ancient Egyptians superstitiously abhorred the Sea, and had them in
abomination, who got their living by it. And albeit, according to the
Chronology of An. 1230.
Eusebius, they had the dominion of the Sea, in the Reigns of Psamnis, and
Bocchoris, a little before the first Olympiade, (which was not suitable to the
distracted condition of Egypt in those times:) Yet it is certain, that Herod.
l. 2. c. 154
the Egyptians never had any Seaport; that Psamnitichus was the first that
Ib. c. 178.
admitted strangers to inhabit; that Naucratis (on the Chanel of Canopus) the
only mart Town of Egypt, was opened by Amasis, who (took Cyprus and) dyed the
same year that Egpyt was lost to the Persians.

Neither was the coast of Egypt fit for navigation, being Strab. l. 17. p. 791.
harbourlesse, low, and full of flats and shelves, except where the Island
P^arus, lying in length before a Bay, at a village called Rhacotis, a hundred
and thirty furlongs from Canopus, afforded the means of a Haven, whereof
neither the Egyptians nor the Persians made use; but held a guard there, to
keep off strangers: Howbeit, Alexander the great, seeing the opportunity of
place, caused a City to be built there, which bore his name; the foundation
whereof was laid with Brann, instead of Chalk, which was taken for a good omen.
Which City was seated as it were) between two Seas; having on the South the
Lake Mareia, or Mareotis: But it had been an intolerable inconvenience to have
dwelt in a dry Country, so far from the River Nilus, had not that discommodity
been avoided by means of artificial Rivers: Therefore that navigable Chanel was
made from Canopus, which became Strab. p. 8^0.
famous for the practice of Luxury.

Another navigable River was also Ib. p. 795. a.
made from the Haven, on the Mid-land Sea, to the said lake Mareotis. This Ib.
p. 793. a.
lake is filled from the River Nile, by many Trenches, as well from above,
(that is, out of the Lake Meris, whereof I have spoken) as on the sides of it,
by Trenches cut immediately from the Nile; and having eight Islands in it,
contains Ib. p. 799. c.
above an 150 furlongs in breadth, and near 300 in length, being well inhabited
round about, and affording good Corn. By which Water-passages Ib. p 793. a.
much more Commodities were brought to Alexandria, than by Sea; so as the Haven
on the Lake side, was richer than that on the Sea; and more goods carried from
Alexandria to Italy, than from Italy thither, as plainly appears by the
Vessels, more or less fraughted, which pass to and again from thence and from
Puteoli. Besides the wealth that is brought in at both Havens from the Lake and
Sea, the goodness of the air is not unworthy to be remembered; it being
occasioned by the water on both sides of the City, and the seasonable rising of
the River Nilus: For whereas other Towns, situate by Lakes, have in the heat of
Summer a gross and stifling air, forasmuch as their banks being left muddy,
slimie exhalations are drawn up by the Sun, which make the air unwholesome, and
occasion sickness, here, in the beginning of the Summer, the Nile being full,
fills the Lake, leaving no part muddy to exhale any malignant vapor: At
which time, the Etesian winds blow also from the North Sea, so as the
Alexandrians pass the Summer pleasantly.

And that the improvement made in Egypt by the drains and new Rivers, after the
building of Alexandria, was very large, appears by these following instances,
in several ages. In Diod. Sic. p. 19. B.
the sacred Commentaries of the ancient Priests, there were numbered in Egypt
Cities and Towns of note, eighteen thousand. Under Amasis (the last King before
the Persian Conquest,) there were Herod. l 2. c. 177.
twenty thousand Towns in Egypt inhabited. And under Ptolomy the first, above
thirty thousand.

The Printed Copies of Diodorus have only (...): But that reading is faulty, as
appears by the preceding numbers, and the testimony of Theocritus, who was
one of the seven Pleiades in the Court of Philadelphus, the second Ptolomy, in
whose Territory there Theoc. Id. l. 17. v 82.
were thirty three thousand three hundred thirty nine, the improvement seeming
then to be more complete.

Howbeit, in tract of time, through great neglect, these Trenches and Drayns,
by which the overflowing of the Nile so much inricht this Country, were filled
Suet. in Aug. cap. 18.
with mud: But Augustus Caesar having reduced Egypt into the condition of a
Province to the Roman Empire, caused them to be scoured Suet. in Aug. cap. 18.
by his Soldiers: which noble work did so much restore it to the fertility it
formerly had; and consequently increase the populousness thereof, that the
number of persons there inhabiting, over and besides the Alexandrians, were
shortly after, found to be no less than seven millions and five hundred
thousand, as the tribute Joseph. de bello Jud. l. 2. cap. 16.
money paid by every head does manifest. And thus much for Egypt.

CAP. II. BABYLON.
I Am now come to that sometime famous City of Babylon, situate in a low and
flat Country: Of which Sir Walter Rawleigh (giving a reason, why there is so
little written of Belus, who succeeded Nimrod the first Assyrian Monarch)
says, Hist. of the World. l. 1. cap. 10. Sect. 4.
that it is thought he spent much of his time, in disburthening the low Lands
of Babylon, and drying and making firm grounds of all those great Fens and
over-flown Marshes, which adjoined to it.

How the parts hereabouts came thus to be surrounded, let us hear what Pliny
says, which is thus in effect. The River C. Plin. not. hist. lib. 5. c. 26.
Euphrates being cut into two parts, stretches it is left arm into Mesopotamia,
by Seleucia (the principal City in Syria) and so into Tygris: and it is right
arm to Babylon, the chief City of Chaldea; whence, passing through the midst
thereof, it runs into the Fens. It is reported, Ib. lib. 6. c. 26.
that this division of that River was made by Gobaris the Prefect, lest
otherwise, by it is violent course, it might have infested the City of Babylon:
but by the Assyrians it is called Ibid.
Naarmalcha, which signifies the Kingly River.

That the inundations from this River, are occasioned upon the same reason as
those of Nilus before spoken of, we have not only the testimony of the before
specified Plin. not. hist. l. 5. c. 26.
Author, but of Strabo, whose words Str^b. l. 16. p. 740.
are these, -- Exundat enim Euphrates aestate, sub ver incipiens, etc.
Euphrates overfloweth in Summer, beginning at the Spring time, when the Snow in
Armenia melts; so that the Fields must needs be overwhelmed with water^
unless that the flood be diverted by Trenches, in such sort as they restrain
the River Nilus in Egypt; hereupon therefore is it, that Channels are dug.
etc.

That the Banks and Drains made by Belus, did not fully accomplish that work of
Drayning above mentioned: or in case it did, that after-ages, through
discontinuance of their repair, were little the better for them, appears by the
relation of Herodotus; He^od. l. 1. p 76.
who speaking of those two famous Queens of Babylon, viz. Semiramis and
Nitocris, says of Semiramis, (who reigned five ages before the other) Haec per
planitiem aggeres extruxit, spectando dignos, quum antehac flumen eam
restagnare solitum, (id est) She raised Banks throughout the whole Level,
worthy of observation, whereas before she did so, it was wont to be drowned by
the River.

And of Nitocris, that I^id.
being more active and diligent than her Predecessor, -- ante omnia Fluvium
Euphratim, etc In the first place she diverted the stream of Euphrates into
crooked Channels, which before ran in a straight course, through the midst of
the City, levelling the Ditches above, so that it might thrice flow into
Arderica, a certain village of Assyria; and that those things which were
conveyed by the Sea toward Babylon, through the River Euphrates, should thrice
land at this village, for three days together. This she thus accomplished. And
likewise upon the verge of the said River, on each side, she raised Banks, for
bigness and height wonderful to behold.

Moreover, far above the City, and at some distance from the River, she dug
a Chanel for the Fen, as deep as the water: which was in breadth every way, near
three hundred and twenty furlongs: And the Earth dug out of it, she brought
to the Banks of the River^ the brims whereof she strengthened with stones, in
such places where the weight of the said Banks did oppress them. These two
works, viz. the turning of the River into that winding posture, and the making
that Drayn, she did; first to the end that the said River, by the many bendings
thereof, might glide more gently; next, that the passages of Ships toward
Babylon, might be crooked; and lastly, that by those Navigations, the long
Turnings of the Chanel might be sustained.

CAP. II. GREECE.
Greece:
I Next come to those works of this kind, as were performed by the Grecians,
wh^reof I shall give instance, in Thessalie and Acarnania. The first of these
is said H^rod Polymnia l. 7. c. 129. p. 423.
to have been anciently a Lake, being on every side enclosed with Mountains:
For on the East it has the Hills Peleon and Ossa, mutually joining at their
descent; to the North, Olympus; to the West, Pindas; and to the South, Othris.
The Valley betwixt these Hills, is Thessalie. Among other Rivers that flow into
it, these five are the chiefest, Peneus, Apidanus, Onochonus, Enipeus and
Pamisus, which running from the Hills, incompassing this Country, meet in the
Plain and become one stream; which at one passage, and that but narrow, issues
into the Sea: from the confluence of these waters, Peneus continues the name.

It is reported, Ibid.
that in old time, when as yet there was no outlet, these Rivers, and the Lake
Bebeis besides, were not called as at present, although they did run no less
than now; but running made all Thessalie a Sea. The Thessalians themselves say,
that Neptune made that passage, by which Peneus flows into the Sea: For the
Greeks ascribe all beneficial inventions to their Gods: And Herodotus takes it
to be the effect of an Earthquake: But no man can deny it to be a very
remarkable work of Drayning. And that it is now a place of extraordinary
pleasantness, I shall refer my reader to the Map of Tempe, in Ortelius his
Parergon.

Of Acarnania, this is observable, Herod l. 2.10
that where Achelous (a River of that Country) runs into the Sea, it has
already made continent one half of the Islands, called Echinades: and that the
Fable goes, that Strab. l. 10. n. 458.
Hercules, here, encountering with Achelous, who is said to have transformed
himself into a Bull, because of the roaring noise of the River; broke off one
of his Horns, and gave it to Oeneus in pledge of his marriage with Deianeira
his daughter. They which collect truth out of Fables, say, that Hercules, who
was generally beneficial, for Oeneus, his Father in Law's sake, restrained the
exorbitant overflowings of this River, with Banks and Trenches; and drayned a
great part of the adjacent Country; and that this was the Cornucopia, which the
Poets made to be the emblem of Plenty.

CAP. V. Of the ROMANS
THAT the Roman works of this nature, were not a few, and those very eminent, I
shall next make manifest; by their drains in the Pompeian Marshes; the Fossa
Mariana; the improvements about Placentia, and Gallia Cisalpina; the restraint
of the River Tiber in it is overflowings; and the exsiccation of the great
Fucine Lake in Italy.

Sect. 1. The Pompein Marshes.
In the year 593, when L. Anicius Gallus, and M. Cornelius Cethegus were
Consuls, the Senate, L^v. 43.915.922.
being in Counsel conc^rning the Provinces; because there seemed not sufficient
use against the Enemy, for the ordinary forces of both the Consuls (which are 4
Legions, besides the Auxiliaries, and socii;) there was a motion made,
concerning the improvement of a great level of waste land, lying under water,
about xl miles from Rome, in Latium. Which business was entertained with great
approbation; for Plin. l. 18 c 3^ ex Cu^ne.
like as it is esteemed a most high commondation, for a private man to be
called a good Hus^andman, by the Consuls; So does the Senate now think, that
they should deserve the praise of good Husbands for the commonwealth, if in
this opportunity of leisure, they could gain such a quantity of rich Land to
Italy, which is, (the greatest part) mountainous and barren.

Neither is this employment thought too mean for the Legions, though consisting
of Free men: For the Roman and Italian Infantry, as well accustomed to the
Spade and Basket, as to the Sword and Buckler, use to be their own Pioners, in
their daily intrenchments: Neither work they for their own safety only, in time
of danger; but for the common good also, in time of security. The Live. l. 39.
Consuls Ao. 566. had herein given a president; who, lest their Soldiers
should be idle, employed them in making of Highways: hereupon it was decreed,
that one Consul should attend the Enemy (in Gallia) and the other undertake the
drayning of the Pompeine Marshes.

All Strab. l. 5.
the Country, which lies Eastward of Rome, between the River Tiber and
Campania, is now united under the name of Latium; and in it, that place, which
lies toward the Sea, beneath the row of Hills, which reach from Belitre to
Terracina, is the largest. It is denominate from Suessa Pometia, anciently a
rich City, and metropolitan of the Volsi, but now scarce extant. The maritime
parts of this Vale, for a great extent, are drowned; not so much through any
inundation of the Sea, (whose Tides are here but small) as by reason the waters
of Amasenus and Ufens the bigger River, having not their passages sufficienttly
open into the Sea, diffuse themselves over those spacious low grounds, up
toward Sulmo and Setia. This tract is therefore called the Pomentin, or Pomptin
Fens, having been in such manner surrounded beyond all memory: For Homer Odyss.
l. 10. v. 158.
describing the arival of Ulysses, at the Circean promontory, calls it an
Island, in regard of these waters on the one side, and the Sea on the other:
The which Island (says Theophrastus Hist. plant. l. 5. c. 9.
) had about ten miles of circuit: But in his time (he wrote An. 460. Plin. 3.5.
about twenty years after Appius had been Cen^or) the Rivers, by casting up
earth, had joined it to the continent: So as I do not perceive that hitherto
(either before the Romans were Lords of the soil, or since) there had been any
order taken for the winning of this ground from the Water. But now, by order of
the Senate, the Pomptin Fens are laid dry Live. Epist. 49. Florus lib. 46.
by Cornelius Cethegus, the Consul to whom that Province fell, and they are
made good ground.

The Country people, allured therefore with the richness of the soil, settled
themselves here, in such abundance, that there was said Plin. l. 3. c. 5. e.
(...), sui aevi.
to be, not long after this time (for I cannot understand it of any former)
three and twenty Towns in this place, it being a land capable of many thousand
Hus^andmen. But Pluta^^^ Caes. p. 735 C.
in after times, whilst the state (distracted with civil Faction,) negl^cted
the maintenance of the Works, the waters again, by degrees, gained upon the
Land; so D^o ^. 44 p. 242. D.
as Julius Caesar had an intention, not only to have drayned the Fenns anew,
but to have brought the Appian way through them.

Whether Augus^us did any thing to them, may be doubted; for Pl^n 3.5. and 26.4.
in Vespasians time they were come to that pass, that it was esteemed a
miracle they should ever have been so well inhabited. At the same time (I
conjecture) when the beds of the Rivers were scoured, and the lands trenched,
was that great cut made through the midst of these Fens, which served
afterward, not so much for a Sewer, as the more direct and easy passage of
the Traveller: For whereas the Appian way (tracing the up-land) turned
Eastward, and went in compass about the Fens^ This, being drawn in a straight
line, crosses over more directly, and meets the Highway again. About three
miles from Terracina, (says S^^^b. l. 5. p. 233. B.
Strabo) as you go to Rome, this canal abutteth on the Appian way, and is
replenished in many places, with the Fennish and River waters: The ordinary
passage is in the night; so as they who go aboard in the Evening, land in the
Morning, and go on the rest of their journey in the Appian way. They pass also
in the daytime, the Boats being towed with Mules. Which water-passage is
elegantly described by Horace lib. ^. Sat. 5^
; where the company parting, he mentions the two ways from Forum Appii, to
Terracina, the Appian, and this by Boat.

This Landing-place next to Rome, was in aftertimes known by the name of Forum
Appii, a small Town, inhabited I^id. v. ^.
chiefly by Watermen, and Victuallers: but it is not evident whether it were
formerly built, when the Appian was first made; or whether now, upon this
occasion, it was erected for the convenience of them that here do take water,
and named from the Road whereon it stands. The use of this passage continued
long after the restagnation of the Fens, which were not again drayned, til
Trajan the Emperor (performing the work, which Julius Caesar perhaps intended)
made a stone way through the Pomptin Fens, building Dio. l. 63. p. 777.
Inns thereon, and most magnificent Bridges, for the conveyance of such waters,
as were on the upper part of the Fen; In memory whereof, a monumental stone,
was erected, with this Inscription, Copyed from the original at Terracina, by
that learned Gentleman, Mr. John Graves.

IMP. CAESAR
DIVI NERVAE
FILIVS NERVA
TRAIANVS AVG.
GERMANICVS
DACICVS
PONTIF. MAX.
TRIB. POT. XIIII
IMP. VI. COS. V. PP.
Decenn^vium.
XVIIII. SILICE SVA PEGVNIA.
STRAVIT
LIII.
This work of Trajans had no peculiar name; but because it shortened the Appian
way, was esteemed part of it: Yet about four hundred years after, from the
number of Mile-stones, it was called Decennovium, the reckoning being Itin.
Hieroso^ym.
from Forum Appii, ad Medias (the lodging of Trajan reared on the way) ix
miles; From thence to Terracina, x more: And the Canal or River so called,
because Procop. de b. Coth. l. 1.182.
it was xix miles long. After this, Theodoricus King of Italy, authorized one
Decius to drayn Cass^od. Va^. l. 2. Ep. 32, 33.
Paludem Decennovii^ which he performed by cutting many Trenches, that were not
before; this being the third and last time, that these Marshes were laid dry;
and in memory thereof, caused this Inscription Gruter. p. 152.
to be set up.

Anxuri, sive Terracinae, in Caesarei templo.
DN. GLORIOSISS. ADQ. IN
CLVTVS. REX. THE ODORICVS. VICT.
AC. TRIF. SEMPER. AVG. BONO. REIP.
NATVS. CVSTOS. LIBERTATIS. ET.
PROPAGATOR. ROMANI. NOMINIS.
DOMITOR GENTIVM.
DECENNOVII. VIAE. APPIAE. ID EST A. TRIP.
VSQ. TERRACENAM. ITER. AD. LOCA. QUAE.
CONFLUENTIBUS AB. UTRAQ. PART. PALUDUM.
PER. OMNES. RETRO-PRINCIPIVM. INVNDAVERVNT.
VSVI. PVBLICO. ET. SECVRITATI. VIANTIVM.
ADMIRANDA. PROPITIO. DEO. FELICITATE.
RESTITVIT. OPERI. INIVNCTO. NAVITER. INSVDANTE.
ADQ. CLEMENTISSIMI. PRINCIPIS. FELICITER.
DESERVIENTE. PRAECONIIS. EX. PROSAPIA. DECIO
RVM. CAEC. MAV. BASILIO. DECIO. VC. INL.
EXPF. VRB. EXPPO. EX. CONS. ORD. PAT. QVI AD
PERPETUANDAM. TANTI. DOMINI. GLORIAM. PER.
PLVRIMOS. QVI. ANTE ERANT ALBEOS.....
............................. DEDUCTA. IN. MARE.
AQVA. IGNO^AE. ATAVIS. ET. NIMIS. ANTIQVAE.
REDDI.......................
Sect. 2. Fossa Mariana.
This was made Plutarch in vi^a C. Marii aedit Luteti^ 1624 p. 413, 414.
by the famous Marius Ante Christi incarna. an. 65.
(who was seven times Consul) near unto one of the out-falls of the great River
Rhodanus, in that Fenny and Marish Country, not far from Aries; and issues
into the Sea.

Sect. 3. The Fenns about Placentia.
These being occasioned by the overflowings of the Po, were Strab. l. 5. p. 217.
drayned by Scaurus, who caused navigable Trenches to be cut, from them, into
Parma. The like is still observable in the Territory of Ferrara; which, though
a low ground, and receiving the current of Po, with other Rivers of Lombardy,
is yet secured by Banks and Works, which hinder their inundations; particularly
by the help of the Rotto di Ficarollo, and the Ramo di Polistella.

Sect. 4. Gallia Cis-Alpina.
This Strab. l. 5.
Country much abounds with Rivers, especially that Territory belonging to the
Venetians; which lying flat and toward the Sea, by the flowing of the Tides
became a Fenny Marish: But by the help of Trenches and Banks (in such manner,
as was long before experimented in the lower Egypt) some part thereof has been
p. 212.
drayned, and made useful for tillage; some navigable, and some cut into
Islands.

Sect. 5. Of the River Tiber.
To restrain the exorbitant overflowings of this stream, which was not a little
choakt with dung and several old buildings that had fallen into it; I find,
Sueton in Aug. c. 30.
that Augustus Caesar bestowed some cost in the clearing and scouring of it:
And that after this, through Annal. Tacit. l. 1.
abundance of rain, the low grounds about the City, suffering much by great
inundations thereof, the remedy in preventing the like for the future, was, by
the Emperor Tiberius, committed to the care of Ateius Capito, and L. Aruntius.
Whereupon it was by them discussed in the Senate, Whether for the moderating
the floods of this River, the Streams and Lakes, whereby it increased, should
be turned another way: But to that proposal there were several objections made
from sundry Cities and Colonies; the Florentines desiring, that the Clanis
might not be put out of it is accustomed Chanel, and turned into the River
Arnus, in regard much prejudice would thereby befall them. In like manner did
the Inhabitants of Terano argue; affirming, that if the River Nar should but
cut into smaller streams, the overflowings thereof would surround the most
fruitful grounds of Italy. Neither were those of Reate (a City in Umbria)
silent, who refused to stop the passage of the Lake Uelinus, (now called Lago
de Terni) into the said River Nar. The business, therefore, finding this
opposition, was let alone. After which, Nerva or Trajan attempted Plin. l. 8.
Epist. 27.
likewise, by a Trench, to prevent the fatal inundations of this River; but
without success.

Sect. 6. The Fucine Lake.
Nor is it a little to be admired, what labor and costs the Romans bestowed in
endeavors of this kind; it being testified (...) in vi^a Cl^ud^i cap. 20.
of the Emperor Claudius, that he employed no less than thirty thousand men,
for the space of eleven years, without intermission, for drayning of the great
Fucine Nov. ^word de C^lan^.
Lake, in Italy: who dug for that purpose, a Chanel of three miles in
length; whereof part was cut through a Mountain; yet did not accomplish the
work. Which failing^ no whit deterred posterity for making Father attempts
therein: For it appears, C. P^in. Ep. l. x. 69. n.
that Pliny described to the Emperor Trajan, how it might be perfected. What
he did thereupon I find not; for it was his successor Adrian that finished (...)
Sp^r^. d^ Ad iano C^. in hist. Augu^t. Paris. aedita anno 1620.
it.

CAP. V. The Belgique Provinces.
FRom the works of the Romans, in Italy, (wherein I have instanced) I now come
to Belgique Provinces.

This Country was part of Gallia; but so full of Woods and Fenns, that the
victorious Caesar could not conquer it. -- Omnes Gallias, nisi quae paludibus
inviae fuere, ut Salustio docetur autore, post decennales belli mutuas clades,
Caesar societati nostrae faederibus junxit aeternis, says Li^. ^v.
Am. Marcellinus. (i. e.) All France, except the Fenny parts, which are not
pa^sable, after ten years war, was by Caesar reduced. And afterward says
Ibid. l. 39
farther, Hae vero Galliae, etc. But these parts of France, being, by reason of
the Fenns, unpassable, are the Province of the Menapii, which Caesar could
never possess, as Dion Cassius testifies; who speaks of Caesar thus. --
After this he marched with his Forces against the Morini, and the bordering
Menapii, whom he thought had been terrified with his other warlike
achievements, and easy to be conquered, though he had subdued none of them:
Howbeit, they, not dwelling in Towns, but in Cottages, within Fenny places
compassed with thick Woods; having hidden whatsoever they had most estimation
of, did more annoyance to the wearied Romans, than they received from them.
It Is true, that Caesar cutting down the Woods, did attempt to pass the said
Fens: But by reason of their greatness, and that the Winter season approached,
despairing of success, he forbore the enterprise.

Now, that this part of Gallia, here spoke of, is the same which we at this day
call Flanders, we have the testimony of a late learned Writer O^iva^ius
V^ed^us, in hi^t. Com ^landr. de vet. F^and. c^p. 1. p. 3.
. Quamvis in Flandria fuisset hic author, etc. (says he.) If this author had
been himself in Flanders, and made a strict ocular Survey thereof, he conld not
more exactly have described it, as it anciently was: For the Nervii and
Attrebati, first met with vast Woods, about Gant, Ipres, and Cortray, even to
Bruges; and afterward, having passed the woods; with mighty Fens, where now
the Territory of Franc....., F^rne, and Berge, are, extending to the main
Ocean. It is the opinion, therefore, of some learned men, that it has it is
name from the watery and Fenny situation thereof: And Uredius Ib. c. 1. p. 9.
taking notice of Kilianus his exposition of the word ulacke, that it signifies
aestuarium, locus vicissim aestu maris, vel nudus, vel aquis stagnantibus
offertus; id est, a place whereunto, either the Sea-tides do eb and flow, or
that is filled with standing waters, has this expression -- Adeoque, quia toto
illo tractu, ab Ardenburgo Dixmudam usque, and ultra, plura ejusmodi aquosa
loca and paludosa occurebant, toto regio Ulaendren dicta, unde Flandrae, numero
plurali, voce in latinitatem deflexa: i. e. Therefore because in that whole
tract, from Ardenburg to Dixmuth, and beyond, there be many of those watrie and
Fenny places, all the Country is called Ulaendren, and thence Flanders, in the
plural number, the word being declined into Latin.

Much more could I add, from the authority of Authentic Historians, to
manifest how full of Marshes, Lakes, and Fenns, this Country anciently has
been, were it needful, though now there be little appearance that ever it was
so; forasmuch as by the industry of the Inhabitants, those Fenns and Marshes
are so Banked and Drayned, that the fertility thereof has made it one of the
most rich and populous Countries in this part of the world.

There are those who affirm, that Baldwin the first, having wedded M^n^
Cosm^gr. lib. 2. p. 119.
Judith, daughter to the Emperor Charles the bald, who was also King of
France, had by the gift of the said King, this territory of Flanders, whereof
he was made Earl: And that this Baldwin, besides his building the Castle of
Bruges, and other places of strength, did much in clearing of the Woods and
exsiccation of the Marshes, for making the Country more habitable and
fruitful. That this is undoubtedly true, I am induced to believe, from what
the learned Uredius, beforementioned, says of this Earl; viz. -- Eo anno, sc.
DCCCLxiiii. and anno sequenti, Baldvinus operam adhibuit Brugensi castro and
vico, aquis and firmitatibus muniendis, adversus Normannos, ex Edictis Synodi
Pistensis anno DCCCLxii. and DCCCLxiii. quae habentur in Capitulis Caroli
Calvi, editis a
Sirmondo -- ut illi qui in hostem pergere non pot^erint, juxta antiquam, and
aliarum gentium consuetudinem, ad Civitates novas, and pontes, ac transitus
paludum operentur; and in Civitate atque in marcha wu^actas faciant ad
defensionem patriae, omnes sine ulla excusatione veniant. i. e. In the year
DCCCLxiiii. and the year following, Baldwin bestowed labor in fortifying the
Castle and Town of Bruges, with Moats and Bulwarks, against the Normans, by
virtue of the Edicts of the Pistensian Synod, held in the year DCCCLxii. and
DCCCLxiii. which are recorded in the Statutes of Charles the bald, published by
Sirmondus -- viz. that they who were not able to march against the Enemy;
should, according to the ancient custom of other Nations, be employed in the
making of new Cities, Bridges, and passages over the Fens: And, without any
excuse, should come to raise Banks in the Cities and limits of the Country, for
the defense thereof.

The story of drayning that part of this Country, lying betwixt Dam and
Ardenburg, and thereby making it habitable, being very memorable, and much to
the honor of those who were active in that work, I shall in the next place
exhibit.

In Hist. of the Netherlands p. 14 and 15.
the year MCLxix. Floris Earl of Holland, demanding the Isle of Walchren, in
Zeeland, from Philip Earl of Flanders; after a war betwixt them, upon this
quarrel, they came to an accord; viz. That Count Philip should enjoy to him and
his heirs for ever, the Land of Waes, (which is one of the best quarters of
Flanders, which the Earls of Holland had formerly held) and Floris to be
restored to the said Isle of Walchren; in consideration whereof, he should send
to Count Philip a thousand men, expert in making of Ditches, to stop the
breach, which had been made near unto Dam, or the Sluse; whereby the Country
was drowned round about, at every high Sea; the which the Flemings could by no
means fill up, neither with wood, nor any other matter, for that all sunk as in
a gulf without any bottom, whereby in process of time, Bruges and all that
jurisdiction had been in danger of being lost by inundation, and to become all
Sea, if it were not speedily repaired. Wheerupon Count Floris sent the best
workmen that he could find in all his Countries: who being come to the place,
they found a great hole, near unto this Dam; and at the entrance thereof, a Sea
Dog, that, for six days together, did nothing but cry and howl very terribly.
They not knowing what it might signify, resolved to cast this Dog into that
hole; whereupon a madheaded Hollander, getting into the bottom of the Dike,
took the Dog by the tail, and cast him into the midst of the Gulf, with earth
and turf after him; so as, finding a bottom, they filled it up, by little and
little.

And because many workmen, that came in to the repairing of this work, lodged
in Cabins (which made the place seem a pretty Town) Count Philip gave to them,
and such others as would inhabit there, as much land, as they could recover,
from Dam to Ardenburg, for them and their successors for ever, with diverse
immunities and freedoms; by reason whereof, many planted themselves there, and
in tract of time made it a good Town; the which, by reason of this Dog, so cast
into the hole, they named Hontsdam; that is to say, a Dogs-Sluce; Dam in
Flemish signifying a Sluice, and Hondt a Dog: And therefore, at this day, the
said Town (now called Dam) carries a Dog in their Arms.

After this, viz. in the year of Christ MCLxxx. were the Banks from Dam to
Sluse (then called Lamminsuliet) raised and made; Annals F^andr. pet Meie^um.
by which means the Sea, which had drowned all that tract, was excluded.

I now descend to Holland and Zeland.

CAP. VI. HOLLAND.
THis Country, consisting of a threefold earth; viz. Sandy to the Sea, Clay to
the Rivers, and Moorish in other places, is accounted, sa^^h Bertius P.
Ber^ius, de agg^^i us etc. cap 13.
, not without good reason, to be the gift of the Ocean, and of the Rivers Rhene
and Mose, as Egypt is of the River Nile, by the testimony of Herodotus:
Consonant whereunto, is that expression of Lib. ^. mis^^lan. cap. 1.
Petr. Nannius -- Quod si penitus liceat in origines nostras inquirere, omnino
mihi persuadeo, Hollandiam munus Boreae ac Rheni esse, etc. i. e. If it be at
all lawful to enquire into our Original, I wholly persuade my self, that
Holland is the gift of the North Wind, and of the River Rhene; and was in the
beginning no other than a more high place than ordinary, over which the tides
did usually flow; whereby, through the increase of the sands, which the
North Wind (fiercely agitating the waves) stirred up, it first grew to be a
shore, and afterward raised those sandy heaps, which we daily see, both to be
made and destroyed. And further adds, that the waters of the Rhene, by this
stop, being kept up as it were with a Bank, settled the mud, brought down by the
stream, a^out the shores; and so by long and frequent inundations produced
these Pastures. For it cannot be imagined, says Bertius; P. B^^tius de
aggeribus c. 13.
that the face of this Country was always as it now is discerned to be; or
that it soon arose from it is former condition, unto this fertile and pleasant
state, in which we behold it at present; there being much time, extraordinary
labor, excessive study, vast expenses, and great diligence necessary thereto:
Nature therefore first inviting the Inhabitants bordering near unto it, to make
those Banks of sand, as a defense against the North Wind; and necessity also
spurring them on (than which no Master is more ingenious and powerful) in time,
those their accustomed endeavors became a second nature to them; it being not
unusual to see the very Boys and Girls, when they come to the Seaside to
recreate themselves, to put off their stockings and shoes, and taking up the
sand with their singers, to make walls therewith against the Ocean; within
which thus encompassing themselves, they despise the force of the Waves.

That the Batavians (a warlike and hardy people of Germany) were the first, who
obser^ing as well the natural richness of the soil, which the surges of the
Ocean, had, of it is silt, sands, and mud, so raised in time, to the height of
it is usual tides; did by their great industry, in making of large and strong
Banks, thus gain it from the Sea, and make it habitable, we have the credit of
diverse Munst. Cosm. ^. 516. ^. Bertius ut supra.
Historians: As also, that the Danes and Normans, did, after their invasion
thereof, continue to preserve what they found so gotten. Nay, I find I^id.
that the Saxons, whom my Author calls Aggerum exstruendorum peritos, skilful
men in making such Banks, did exercise their industry in this kind, here; the
Town of Saxhenheym giving also some testimony thereof. Nor is it unlikely, but
that the Francs, whose native seat these parts of the Netherlands was,
contributed much to the works, here, of that kind; forasmuch as it is app^rent
Ibid.
, that they were the raisers of those Banks upon the Loyre in France, which do
restrain the inundations of that River from drowning the Plains that lie
adjacent thereto. How much honor, therefore, is due to the memory of those
industrious people, who did first set upon this great and profitable work, I
cannot easily express: For invenire, primum praecipuumque est, etc. says D^
rerum invent. in Epist. s^a ibid^m, Lu^ovico Odaxio.
Polydore Virg. i. e. The first invention is the chief and principal thing, the
^ame whereof so exciteth many, out of the love they have to themselves, that
every one, were it possible, would be accounted the Author of some Art; because
without Arts, it is evident, that there could be no living. Whereunto may be
added, the consideration of it is difficulty, which makes it much the more
regardable -- Quid enim la^dis (says Ib^d.
the before mentioned Author) assecutus esset Caesar^ si facile fuisset
Britannis bellum infer? Aut Hannibal, quantum gloriae sibi comparasset, si
pervias Alps, dum Italiam adiret, citra, ut dicitur, pulverem, sudoremque, ac
non magna suorum caede fecisset? i. e. For what renown had Caesar got, if his
war with the Britans had been an easy business? Or what glory had Hannibal
obtained, if he had passed the Alps with dust only and sweat, and not without
great slaughter of his Soldiers?

Nor can I be silent in the due praise of their Posterity, through whose
industry, not only what has been so happily gained by their Ancestors, is (for
the most part) kept and maintained; but besides the daily improvement thereof,
through their singular dexterity and diligence, much more, frequently,
increased and gained. To which end, and that those their defensive walls may be
the better preserved, they do constitu^e peculiar Magistrates, whose charge and
Office it is to look to them; whom they call P. Bertius ut supra.
Diickgraven, that by them, both the inner and outer Banks, may upon all
occasions be repaired and made good, in case of any breach or weakening in them.
Which Banks are of that strength and height, that they do preserve the Country
from certain drowning at the high tides: For it is evident to all that sail in
the Ports of these flat Countries, that at full Sea, the Fields within the
Banks, wherein Cattle are depasturing, and Corn growing, do lie below the
level of the Ocean, which is to many no small astonishment.

Having thus showed, how and by whom this Country of Holland was first gained
and made habitable, I will now make some observation, of those advantages as
have been farther acquired of late years, by this active and ingenious people
in their great and beneficial improvements; the number of the Inhabitants so
much increasing, as that urgent necessity enforced them to make use of their
utmost skill, for the accomplishing somewhat, as might be considerable in such
a case. This was by drayning of sundry Lakes, whereof sixteen were most
considerable; all which was performed within the space of these last fifty
years, by certain Wind-mills, devised and erected for that purpose. The
chiefest of which Lakes, called the Beemster (containing above eighteen hundred
Acres) made dry by the help of Lxx. of those Mills, and walled about with a
Bank of great strength and substance, is now become a place of such profit and
pleasure, through the abundance of Cattle, that are fed in it, and the
plantation therein, otherwise made, that it may not without desert, be very
justly called, the most famous Garden of all that Province.

The other Lakes, so drayned, as I have said, do lie about the Cities of
Alcmare, Horn, and Purmerende; and are vulgarly called de Schermere, de W^ert,
de Pucmer, and de Wormer: Which, being drayned by the help of fewer Mills, are
now become not only most fruitful Pastures; and little inferior to the
Beemster; but have so inricht the adjoining villages, by the concourse of
people to them, that through the great emolume^t to the public Treasury, and
the abundance of Cheese and Butter there made, there seems to be a new
Holland within the old.

That the performance of these eminent works, required extraordinary knowledge
and skill, which ancient times had not attained to, and foreign Nations now
admire, is not to be doubted; the Engines of several kinds made use of, in this
business, for raising up the water and casting it off, being framed by men of
singular judgments in Mathematical learning, and suitable to the depth of the
water, or opportune conveying it away.

Neither have the attempts of these people, by the like commendable
enterprises, in South-Holland, about the Cities of Leden, Dort, and Amsterdam
had less success; there having been diverse thousands of Acres, formerly
overwhelmed with water, made good and firm land, within these few years, by the
help of these Engines, as I have been credibly informed by that learned
Gentleman, Dr. John de Laet of Leyden, to whom I have been beholden for much
that I have here said, touching these improvements in Holland, in such sort as
I have expressed.

CAP. VII. FRISELAND.
THis Country, situate also very low, and much subject to inundations from the
Sea, wants not the like advantages by Walls and Banks of earth, for it is
better safeguard, as that of Holland has; nor of less antiquity (I presume:)
But those elder times, I shall pass by, and take notice of that remarkable and
famous work, of this kind, done by Pierii Winsemi^ hist. de rebus Frisicis l.
3. p. 241.
Gaspar Roblesius (a Portugal) Governor of this Province and Groningen, under
Philip the second K. of Spain.

About the year MDLxxvi. this worthy person, having driven out Entenius (a
Rebel) and dispersed his Forces, betaking himself to works and studies,
besitting a time of peace, perfected that famous Sea-Bank, by which Westergoos
(a part of that Territory) was defended from the overflowing of the Ocean;
which for many Ages, had by it is tides, occasioned infinite damage to the
Country; thereby raising to his memory a lasting Monument of his fame: For by
his contrivance it was, that the work was set upon; and by his power, that the
people, of themselves averse and slow to so public and beneficial a work, were
compelled to come in, man by man, to raise this strong Bank, as if it had been
to quench a Fire: In this alone, it being a work, of security to the Country,
and for his Honor, which exceeded the renown of those that had been the
preceding Governors of that Country, under the Em^perour Charles the vth. and
the said King Philip, to last (says my Author Ibid.
) quamdiu natura rerum, aut mari limes sit. i. e. to the end of the world. For
this famous Sea-Bank, being perfected, Adrianus Vastartius, and Johannes
Carolus went to Harling, and erected a Monumental pillar of stone, upon the
shore there, which should give bounds to the maritime and mediteranean
Westergois; and thenceforth avoid all future contention about the repairing
that Sea-bank; in the foundation of which pillar were laid twelve thousand
Bricks, the height of it being xx. foot above the top of the said Sea-Bank, and
this Inscription toward the West.

Caspari a Robles Equiti, domino de Billi etc. Frisiae, Gro^ingae, ejusque
territorii ac adjacentium gubernatori, quod hanc provinciam, praeter arma,
consiliis and munimentis juverit; ac inter caetera aggere-ipsis Kal. Nov.
MDLxx. funditus everso, amplissimi D. Viglii Zuichemi, patris patriae,
auxiliaribus operis, and adhibitis Igramo ab Achelen Pr. Adriano vastaret,
Petro Frittema, and Ioanne Carolo senatoribus, conciliorum sociis, novum maris
propugnaculum, summo labor, vigilia, and celeritate, decretis quoque, and de
suo persolutis diligentiae praemiis, tribus plus minus mensibus a fundamentis
erexerit, and ad summam manum perduxerit; atque hunc lapidem, sublatis
controversiarum litibus terminum esse voluit; gratus Provincialium ordo, ob rem
prudenter, been and fideliter gestam, de se ac de Republica optime merito. In
Ex relat. v. cl. Ioh. de L^ et.
this Province, likewise, and in Groningen, which adjoyneth thereto, diverse
Lakes have also been drayned of late years, which are now become most fruitful
Pastures: Amongst which the most notable, was a certain Fenny tract, which in
the Dutch Language, they called de Wild Weemh; which, at the costs of diverse
Merchants of Amsterdam, is become such rich meadow ground, that within these
six or seven years last past, about the number of ten thousand people, went
thither to plant themselves, who do now live there very happily.

CAP. VIII. ZELAND^
IN Ao MDxxxvi, Hist ^f ^he N^therlands. p. 161.
the new Haven of Middleburg, in the Island of Walcren, passing in a straight
line from the Town unto the Bank of the Island, where it falls into the Sea,
was finished. Before this their Haven was near unto the salt Marshes to
Armuyden, having a crooked course unto the Town, and there very discommodious.

And in Ibid. p. 177.
Ao MDxlvii. Adolph of Burgundy, Seignior of Chapelle and Wackene; Ierosme
Sandelin Sei^nior of Herentont, Receiver of Bewesterscheldt in Zeeland, and
some private Gentlemen, did recover and wall in, about Sheerenskerke, and
Henkepsandt, in the Country of Zuydbeveclandt (otherwise called the Isle of Ter
Goes) the old enclosure or Poidor (which is a land won from the Sea) the which
before the inundation, was usually called Zeeshuys, so as it remained a long
time unprofitable; but since it is recovery, they call it Cray; at this present
a most fertile Country.

It would require a Volume, to give instance of the sundry works of this nature
in these low Countries, by Banks, Ditches and Sluices. Nor have they been less
active in Brabant, as it should seem: For in the opinion of the learned Nennius
Alemanensis
, that Country, now a fair and dry habitation, has been Sea almost as far as
Tongerne.

CAP. IX. HOLSTEIN.
IN Holsatia likewise, Holstein.
about Dithmarsh, and the tracts of Wilstar, and Crempen, consisting of Low
grounds and subject to inundations; Johannes Adolphus, Duke of Holstein,
beginning in the year MDCx. by notable works, within the compass of five years,
s^cured many thousand acres, and improved the lands above three hundred
thousand Dollars: which being effected, he parcell'd them out by gift or sale
unto his Subjects; reserving out of every portion, a Rent unto himself; Tantum
territorii subditis and amicis cessit, ea lege, ut vel aggeribus cingatur, vel
ab aquis intestinis liberetur, and hinc quotannis celsitudinis suae aerario,
certus Canon, pro quolibet Every d^^^tum contains 36 virgae in length, and 6 in
breadth; and every Virga 16 foot.
demeto numeretur, as the learned Schoneveldeus In Scithyologia. p. 47.
reports.

CAP. X. AMERICA.
NEither do we want examples of this nature, in America: For the City of
Mexico, being seated in a great Lake, much subject to inundations, which had
almost destroyed it; in the year MDCxxxiiii. the Spaniards with mighty
industry, secured that habitation, by turning the Lake, and so laying the City
dry.

CAP XI.
HAving now done with my observations of the most remarkable Bankings and
Draynings in Foreign parts, which by way of Introduction, I thought fit to be
taken notice of; I come to England, that being the place of my farther designed
discourse on this subject: Wherein, for my more orderly proceeding, I do
purpose to begin with Kent, in respect of it is Eastern situation; and in it,
first, with Romney Marsh, a spacious tract in that Country, and more anciently
secured from the inundations of the Ocean, than any other part of this Realm,
as may seem by the Laws and Constitutions for regulating it is repair, which
have been long ago made the Rule and Standard, whereunto all the other Marshes
and Fenns in this Nation, were to conform.

And in the next place to take a view of the other, heretofore, surrounded
Marshes in that County, as well adjacent to the Thames, as bordering on the Sea:
And, having so done, to ascend up the stream of that fair River, on the
Southside: And then descending on the North side, to observe what I have met
with, which is memorable, in reference to any Marshes that lie on either.
Thence into Sussex, Somersetshire, Gloucestershire, Yorkshire, and
Lincolnshire; and lastly to that great Level, which extends it self no less
than Lx. miles, and into six Counties; viz. Cambridge, Huntindon, Northampton,
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Lincolnshire, wherewith I shall conclude this work.

How long since, or by whom, this fruitful and large tract, containing Lamb.
peram. of Kent (aedit. Land. 1656.) p. 211.
no less than twenty four thousand Acres, was won from the Sea, there is no
testimony left to us from any Record or Historian, that ever I could discover:
Which defect, does strongly argue, that the first gaining thereof was a work of
the greater antiquity.

To attribute it unto the Britans (the primary Inhabitants of this Nation) or
to the Saxons, who succeeded them, I dare not adventure; the first of these,
being a people so rude and barbarous, as they were not verst in any Arts; and
the latter so illiterate, for the most part, as that little of invention can
justly be ascribed to them. That it was therefore a work of the Romans, whilst
they were Masters here, as it is the opinion of some learned men, so do I make
thereof no doubt, considering to what a height, not only in learning, but in
diverse Arts and Sciences that people were arrived, as by sundry testimonies we
plainly find. Besides, it is not only evident, from the credit of our best
Historians, that their several Colonies, dispersed throughout this Nation, were
so excellently disciplined; that, for avoiding the mischiefs, which idleness
produces, they were always exercised in some fit and necessary employments, as
those great and public Ways Watlingstreet. Foffe. Erminstreet. ^k^nild, and
diverse other.
, and other stupendous Works, made and raised by their skill and industry, do
sufficiently show: But by the testimony of the famous Tacitus In vi^a Agrico^ae.
(an Author of that time) who tells us, that the Britans complained, that the
Romans wore out and consumed their bodies, and hands, in silvis and paludibus
emuniendis, i.e. in clearing the woods, and banking the Fens, if I mistake not:
For the word emuniendis, must have a sense, as well befitting paludibus as
silvis; and therefore cannot properly (I presume) be otherwise construed.

It Is true, that munire viam, is a phrase used by Cicero, for the paving a way,
or making a Caus^y: And some Dr. Holland, in his transl. of Cambd. Brit.
are of opinion, that here, the words paludibus emuniendis, are to have the
like signification, and to be construed in making Causeys over the Fens: But if
it should, as I cannot well admit, it must be granted, that before any pavement
or Causeys could be made in such places, the water was, of necessity, first to
be taken and kept off, by drayning and banking: So that, allowing that
construction, what I endeavor to prove will be well enough made good; viz.
that the bankings and draynings, both here and in some other parts of this
Realm, which were, before that time, overflowed by Sea-tides, was a work of the
Romans; as when I come to Holland in Lincolnshire, and Marshland in Norfolk, I
purpose more fully to demonstrate.

And therefore, forasmuch as the Romans, when they were here in Britain, did
something in this kind, as I shall make more evident in my discourse of Holland
and Marshland, before specified, from undoubted testimonies; I cannot but
conclude, that this Marsh was a part thereof; in regard, that not long after
their desertion of this Country, I find mention of it, and that it was then
inhabited. For in the year of Christ DCCXCvi. it is thus said E^h^lw. Chron. l.
3. f. ^78. a.
of Ceolf King of Mercia; viz. that Cantiam vastavit, and provinciam quae
dicitur Mers^wari; which (no doubt) is meant this Romney Marsh: For the learned
Cambden, in his Britannia, speaking of it, says, that in the Saxons time, the
Inhabitants thereof were called (...), id est, viri palustres, Marshmen; which
accords fitly with the nature of this place.

There are who suppose, that the name of it, viz. Romeney, does declare
sufficiently, that it was, at first, won from the Sea by the Romans: But
Peramb. of Kent. p. 208.
Mr. Lambert says, that it was, in the Saxons time, written Rumen-ea, id est
the large watery place; and since that R^menale, and Romenale, corruptly.
Consonant to which expression of his, I find, that the River, pas^^ng through
this Marsh, was anciently called Rumen ea: For so it appears by that grant
L^l. Co^^. vol. 2. p. 57.
of Pleigmund the Archbishop, made to Christs-Church in Canterbury, about the
year of Christ, DCCCC. in these words -- Concedo Ecclesiae Christi, terram quae
vocatur Wefing merse, juxta flumen quod vocatur Rumen ea.

Having now, by these circumstantial testimonies showed, that the Romans were
they, that by their skill and experience in such works of Banking and Drayning,
did first gain this rich and large tract of ground, from the impetutuous
Sea-tides; I shall now descend to those Statutes and Ordinances, which the care
and wisdom of succeeding ages did make, for the preservation and defense
thereof, from being again drowned and destroyed, by the violent over-flowings
of the Ocean.

That the Common Laws of England, whereof we find no original, were Docto^ and
Student c. 7.
at first certain Constitutions made by some of the ancient Kings and Rulers of
this Nation, there is none (I presume) that doubts, though there be no other
authority for to back them, than long usage and custom. The like therefore (I
suppose) were the Statutes and Ordinances for the conservation of this Marsh:
For albeit we are yet to learn, when and by whom they were first framed and
composed, it is evident from the testimony of unquestionable Records, that
above four hundred years since, they were called antiquas and approbatas
consuetudines, i.e. ancient and approved Customs: For Claus. 35. H 3 m 16 in
^^r^o.
in 35 H. 3. the King, directing his Writ to the Sheriff of Kent, and thereby
declaring Ibid.
, that Complaint having been made to him, on the behalf of the xxiiii Jurats,
made choice of for the conservation of the Marsh and Sea-Banks of R^menale;
importing, that whereas in pursuance of their ancient and approved Customs,
they had distrained those, who ought of right to repair those Banks, according
to the proportion of their Tenements, for the safeguard and defense of all the
Country against the Sea: And that he the said Shireeve had made Replevin of the
same distresses; commanded him, that in case he had so done, he should return
them back to the said Guardians, and permit those Jurats to use their Customs
and Liberties, for the defense of themselves and others against the Sea, as
they ought and had wont to do, lest farther complaint should be made thereof,
and that by him any peril might come to the said K. and Kingdom; because (as
the same Mandate expresses) they are ready to exhibit Justice to every
Complainant, according to their Customs to that time obtained and used; and
likewise to abide the Law, as they ought and had wont to do, if they had in any
thing transgressed against those usual Customs. By which precept he was
moreover forbidden to make any future replevin, by virtue of whatsoever Writ
from the said King: quia necessitas defensionis talis inopinata, si venerit
(says the Record) legi communi vel justitiae subesse non poterit. i.e. because
the unforeseen necessity of such defense, in case it should happen, cannot be
subject to the Common Law, or Justice.

Nay, so tender was the said King, for the preservation and security of this
famous and fruitful Marsh, that, the next year following, by his Letters
Pa^tents, bearing date at S. Edmunds^ury, Claus. 36. H. 3. m 4.
the second of September, directed likewise to the Shireeve of Kent, making
this recital; viz. that because xxiiij lawful men, of the Marsh of Rumenale,
elected and sworn for that purpose, time out of mind, ought to make distresses
upon all those, which have lands in the said Marsh, for the repairing of the
Banks and Watercourse thereof, against the violence and danger of the Sea:
and upon all others which are obliged and bound to the repair of the said Banks
and Watercourse; he granted to those xxiiij that for the security of the said
Marsh, they should make those-distresses, so that they were done equally,
according to the proportion more or less, which each man had therein, and
according as some of them were obliged and bound: And therefore commanded the
said Shireeve, that for avoiding of peril, he should neither by himself nor
his Bailiffs, meddle with the distresses so made by the appointment of the said
xxiiij Jurats. Farther signifying, that whosoever should make complaint to him
upon consideration of the said distresses, he would do him Justice in his own
Court, and reserve that Justice to himself, or his own special Mandate.

But after this, viz. in the 41 H. 3. it being represented Pat 42 H. 3. m. 10.
in dorso.
to the said King, by certain of his loyal Subjects; that whereas, time beyond
memory, judgments ought to be made, by xxiiij lawful men of the Marsh of
Romenalle, to that purpose chosen and sworn, for the distraining of all those
which had lands in the said Marsh, to the repair of the Banks and Watercourse
of the same, against the force of the Sea, and peril of inundation by other
waters; as also of all those, who were otherwise obliged or bound to those
repairs, he the said King, by his special Precept Ibid.
, bearing date at Mertone the xvith of April, directed to Henry de Bathe (a
famous Justice Itinerant of that time) reciting his Letters Patents next above
mentioned; with the power thereby given to the said xxiiij Jurats, touching the
taking of distresses, as aforesaid; and signifying, that the said xxiiij
Jurats, having had opposition and resistance by certain persons of the said
Marsh, who were obliged to the repair of those Banks and Watergangs, according
to the quantity of the lands, which they had therein, were not able to make the
before-specified distresses: Whereupon the said Banks and Water-gangs, being
not repaired, the inundations from the Sea and other waters overflowed this
Marsh, to the inestimable damage of the said King and the Inhabitants thereof.
Being therefore desirous to provide for his own Profit and Indemnity, and the
men of the said Marsh, he constituted the said Henry de Bathe, his Justice, to
hear and determine the controversies touching those repairs, risen betwixt the
said Jurats and the Marsh-men, who were so obliged to the same repairs,
according to the quantity of their Lands and Tenements lying therein, and
according to what some men were otherwise bound or obliged; commanding him,
that at a certain day and place, to be by him appointed, he should be in those
parts, to hear and determine the said controversies, and to provide for the
security and defense of the said Marsh, as aforesaid. And moreover to signify
in writing, distinctly and plainly, unto him the said King, what he had done
therein, that the same might be enrolled. And directed, likewise, his Mandate
to the Shireeve of Kent, that at a certain day and place to be assigned by the
said Henry, he should cause such and so many honest and lawful men, of this
Bayliwick, to come before him; by which persons the said differences might be
the more fitly determined, and provision for security of the said Marsh the
better made. And that the said Shireeve should personally assist and attend the
said Henry therein, as he the said Henry, on the said King's behalf should
enjoin him.

By authority of which Precept, the said Henry de Bathe, with his associates;
viz. Nicholas de Hanlou, and Alured de Dene, sat Claus. 42. H. 3. in dorso m.
9.
at Romenhale upon the Saturday after the Feast of the Nativity of the Blessed
Virgin, in the said xlii year of King Henry the third, before specified; to
which place the said Shireeve of Kent, his assistant, by virtue likewise of the
said Writ, then brought thither so many and such lawful men of his Bayliwick,
as aforesaid, by whom these differences might be determined, and provision for
the safety of the said Marsh the better made. And the said Henry, at the
request of the Council of the Commonality of the said Marsh, then and there
likewise being, and none of the Marsh-men gainsaying it, made and constituted
these following Ordinances; viz.

That twelve lawful men should be made choice of, The Ordinances of Henry de
Bathe.
by the Commonality of the said Marsh; viz. six of the Fee of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and six of the Barony; who, being sworn, should measure both the
new Banks and the old, and those other, which ought to be new made; the measure
to be, by one and the same perch scil. of xx foot. And that afterward the said
Iurats should likewise, according to the same perch, measure by Acres all the
Lands and Tenements, which were subject to danger, within the said Marsh. And
all the said measure being so made, that then xxiiii men, first elected by the
Commonality, and sworn, having respect to the quantity of the Banks of those
Lands, which lay subject to peril, upon their oaths to appoint out every man
his share and portion of the same Banks, which should so belong to him, to be
made and sustained; so that according to the proportion of the Acres subject to
danger, there should be assigned to every man his share of perches; and that
the said assignation should be made by certain limits, so that it might be
known where, and by what places, and how much each man should be obliged to
maintain.

And that when necessity should happen, by xxiiii Iurats should meet together,
and view the places of danger, and consider to whom the de^ence of the same
should be assigned, and within what time to be repaired.

And that the common Bailiff of the said xxiiii Iurats: And if they neglected
so to do, that then the said common Bailiff should, at his own chardge, make
good the said repairs, by the oversight of the xxiiii Iurats: And that
afterward, the party so neglecting should be obliged to render to the said
Bailiff, double the chardge so laid out by him about those repairs: Which
double to be reserved for the benefit of the said Banks, and the repair of
them: And that the party so neglecting should be distrained for the same, by
his lands situate within the said Marsh.

Moreover, in case any parcel of land; viz. a whole or half perch, in respect
of the small quantity of the Land; that then it should be ordained by the oaths
of the xxiiii Iurats, and viewed what proportion of the said land so held in
common he might be able to defend; and thereupon a certain portion so to be
defended by the said partners, in common, to be assigned to them. And if any of
the said partners should neglect to defend his portion, after admonition given
to them by the Bailiff, the said portion of the party so neglecting to be
assigned to the other partners, who ought to make the like defense: Which
partners to hold the portion of the party so neglecting, in their hands, until
he should pay his proportion of the costs laid out about the same defense, by
the oversight of the xxiiii Iurats; and also double toward the Commodities of
the said Banks, and the repair of them, as aforesaid.

And that if all the partners should happen to be negligent in the premises,
then that the common Bailiff before mentioned, should make good the whole
defense, at his own proper costs, and afterward distrain all those partners,
in double the chardges so by him expended in the said defense, by view of the
xxiiii Iurats, as aforesaid: Saving to the chief Lords in the said Marsh, the
right which they have against their Tenants, touching this defense, according
to their Feoffments.

And (lastly) that all the lands in the said Marsh be kept and maintained
against the violence of the Sea, and the floods of the fresh waters, with Banks
and Sewers, by the Oath and consideration of xxiiii Iurats, at the least, for
their preservation, as anciently had been accustomed.

About this time I find Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 7.
, that the K. had advertisement, that his Haven of Rumenale was in great danger
of destruction, to the no little damage of the public, and excessive annoyance
of the Town of Rumenale, unless the course of the River of Newendene,
whereupon the said Haven was founded, being then diverted by the overflowings
of the Sea, were reduced to the said Port: And that he was informed by an
Inquisition, made by Nicholas de Handlon, whom he had sent into those parts, to
provide and ordain in what sort the said stream might be again brought to the
same Haven, by it is ancient Chanel, or a new one to be made; that it could not
be so reduced, nor the said Haven preserved for the common benefit of the said
Port and Town, except certain obstructions, which were in the old course of
that River, were removed; and that a new Chanel were made, near to the same old
course; viz. from a certain Cross, belonging to the Hospital of infirm people
at Rumenale (standing by Aghenepend) unto Effetone; and from Effetone to the
house of William le Byll, and so to Melepend; and thence descending unto the
said Port; so that a Sluse be made under the Town of Apeltre, for reception of
the Salt Water entering into the said River, by the inundation of the Sea, from
the parts of Winchelsea, and for retaining thereof in it is passage and recourse
to the Sea; to the intent that the same water might come together with the
fresh water of that River, by the ancient course, into the before specified new
course; and so by that passage directly to descend and fall into the said
Haven. And that another Sluse should be made at Snerega^e, and a third near to
the said Port, where that water might descend into the Sea, for restraint only
of the Sea-tide on that part, that it enter not into the said course, but
reserving the ancient and oblique course from the said Cross to the before
specified Haven.

The King therefore providently desiring the common profit and safeguard of
the said Port, by his Precept Ibid.
dated at Oxford the xxith of June, commanded the said Nicholas, that he should
repair in his proper person, upon a certain day assigned, unto those parts;
together with the Shireeve of Kent, unto whom the said King had thereupon sent
his Writ; and by the Oaths of xxiiii as well Knights as other free and lawful men
of the neighborhood, by whom the truth might be the better known, to make
estimation how much of other men's lands would be necessary to be taken for the
making of the said new Chanel and Sluses; and what those lands were worth by
the year; and to make speedy assignation to the Tenants of those lands, to the
value of the same lands or more, out of the lands or money of the Barons and
honest men of the said Port: as also to remove the said obstructions in the old
Chanel; and to make the said new Chanel and Sluses, in the lands of whomsoever
it should be requisite, for the common benefit and advantage of the said Port
and Town of Rumenale, as aforesaid. And the said Shireeve of Kent was likewise
commanded, that he should diligently assist and attend the before specified
Nicholas, in this business; and to cause the said xxiiii Knights and others of
the neighborhood, as aforesaid, to be before the said Nicholas, at the same
day and place.

But notwithstanding those Ordinances, so made by the said Henry de Bathe, for
the defense and preservation of this Marsh, and taking distresses for that
purpose: And also, notwithstanding the former Precepts from the King to the
Shireeve of Kent. forbidding him to intermeddle at all with any more distresses
so taken (as I have at large already showed) it appears, that the Shireeve did
again make Replevin of some distresses, taken by virtue of those Ordinances:
For in 43 H. 3. I find Ex eod. MS. penes Oliv. S. John Arm. f. 9. a.
, that the King issued out another Writ to the said Shireeve, bearing date the
xxth of April, requiting him to return back those distresses, to the end that
no more complaint might be made against him upon that occasion, for which he
might farther incurr the said King's displeasure.

lb. f. 9. b.
To give instance of all the particular persons, who opposed these Ordinances,
it would be too tedious, could I exactly do it, I shall therefore here take
notice of one only suit in this case, which was commenced by one Godfrey le
Fau^oner, against Hamon Pit, John Cobbe, and others, for taking ten Cows by
way of distress, upon his the said Godfrey's Manor of Hurst, for his
disobedience to the said Ordinances. To which action the said Hamon and his
Fellow-defendants pleaded, that the said Godfrey enjoyed certain possessions,
lying in Romney Marsh; in which Marsh, all that hold any lands, ought,
according to the quantity of their Tenements, to make the Banks and
Watercourse, against the Sea and other inundation of water: And that the
xxiiii men o^ that Marsh, chosen and sworn by the commonality thereof, ought to
make distresses in the same, upon all the Landholders, according to the
quantity of their Tenements, whenever the Banks and Watercourse thereof
should stand in need of repair. Which said Jurats ( as the custom was) because
they could not attend it themselves, made choice of the said Hamon to take
those distresses, and constituted him their Bailiff so to do:
And that they have this liberty by the ancient Custom of the said Marsh, and
by the Kings Charter, which they then produced.

Whereupon they say, that, by teason of the said Godfrey's default, that
distress taken for repair of those Banks and Watergangs was justly made: Of
which, there were assigned by the said Jurats, three perch and a half at the
least, for his proportion in the Bank of Apuldre, to be repaired at his costs;
and according to the overflowing of the waters, more, if need should be, in
diverse places: And whether they might not have taken a greater distress upon
him, they appeal to the Country.

They say nevertheless also, that they took upon one A. B. a Fermour to the
said Godfrey, ten Steers and ten Lambs, belonging to I. N. Tenant also to the
said Godfrey, by reason of his default in repairing the said Banks and
Watergangs; for which they afterward made satisfaction, and had their Cattle
again. And being questioned for how much he took the first distress, and for
how much the second; he said, that the first default of the said Godfrey was
estimated at four Marks; and the second at xlviii s.

And the said Godfrey alleged, that he held those Tenements in the Marsh
aforesaid, by the grant of Henry sometime King of England, Grandfather to King
Henry then being: And that the same King Henry gave them to William the Son of
Balderic, ancestor of the said Godfrey, whose heir he is. And that by this
grant, both his Ancestors and himself after them, always held their Tenements
in the said Marsh, as freely and quietly as the said Baldric first held them.
And he farther said, that this custom for the repair of those Banks and
Watergangs, was never required, neither of his said Ancestors, nor himself,
till about five years then last past; that the said Hamon was made Bailiff for
the custody of the same Banks and Watergangs; nor that they ever made them at
any time; and produced the Charter of the said King Henry (the second:) And
moreover said, that his Ancestors held those Tenements by that ^eoffment, so
freely that they never did any repair to the said Banks not Watergangs: And
that neither he, after he possessed the same lands, nor his Ancestors were ever
distrained, till within these five or six years last passed, that the said
Hamon and others took his Cattle. And forasmuch as they knew who they were that
made those distresses, for that defect in repairing the said Banks and
Water-gangs, which neither he nor his ancestors made, nor were used to make; he
required judgment of their recognition.

Whereunto the said Hamon and the rest replied, that in former time there was a
difference betwixt the Tenants in the said Marsh, touching the repair of the
before-specified Banks and Water-gangs: Upon which there grew a suit in the
Country before the Shireeve; wherein the said xxiiii Jurats; deeming themselves
wronged, came to the King's Court and complained to the Shireeve; alleging this
Plea did not pertain to the Shireeve, to hold: It was therefore determined by
the King's Counsel, that the Kings Justices should be sent thither, to ordain
and dispose of those differences, according to Justice; and, accordingly, Henry
de Bathe being sent, all the Tenants of the said Marsh had summons of xl days,
as in the Iter of the Justices. And the said Henry, upon his view of those
Banks and VVater-gangs, by the consent and good liking of the whole commonality
of the said Marsh, then ordained; that the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the tena^ts in the said Marsh, should co^tribute
to the repair of those Banks and Water-gangs, according to the quantity of
their tenements. VVhereupon, as the said Godfrey desired to be defended by the
said Banks and water-gangs, the said Hamon required, that he the said Godfrey
should contribute to those repairs, as it was ordained in the presence of the
said Justice: And that there was such an Ordinance, as aforesaid, he referred
himself to the Record, in the Rolls of the said Henry de Bathe.

And also the said Hamon further alleged, that of necessity the said Godfrey
ought to contribute to the said Banks, etc. Because, that if his land should
not be defended by them, it would be wholly drowned and made salt. But to this
the said Godfrey answered, that though that Ordinance was so made by the said
Henry, yet he the said Godfrey never gave his consent thereto; and that he was
neither summoned, nor called to come before him at the making thereof. And
moreover said, that neither before the same Ordinance, so made; nor after,
either he or his Ancestors ever so contributed; but always held their land
quietly without any exaction at all, according to the Tenor of the
before-specified King Henry's Charter (Grandfather to the then King Henry)
until two years before, that the before-specified Hamon and others, took his
Cattle: Whereupon he required judgment, whether the same Ordinance ought to
prejudice him in that behalf.

Howbeit, the said Hamon, and others replied, that he had the common summons of
xl days, in such sort as the whole Commonality of the said Marsh had, whereof
he ought not to be ignorant; And thereupon said, that though the said Godfrey
would not come, as he ought to have done, with his neighbors, he ought not
therefore to be free from payment of the before-specified contribution for
repair of those Banks; because it conduced to the common profit of all the
Tenants in the same Marsh; that as well his lands, as the lands of the other
Tenants, be defended by the said Banks and Water-gangs; whereupon he required
judgment. And he also said, that after the said Ordinance, the said Godfrey
and his Tenants gave one Mark toward the repair of the said Banks and
Water-gangs, before he the said Hamon was Bailiff: And that this he was ready
to justify.

To which the said Godfrey answered, that he held himself to the
before-specified Charter of King Henry; And to the liberty, which he and his
Ancestors had used, against which no Ordinance, made by the said Henry de
Bathe, could or ought to do him harm: And stood upon it, that neither himself,
nor any by him, had given ought, either before the said Ordinance so made, or
afterward; and that this he was ready to justify.

After which, on the morrow after the feast of S. Martin, in the xlii of H. 3,
came the said Godfrey, Hamon, and others: And the Shireeve had command, that he
should bring xii, as well Knights, as others, having no lands in the said Marsh,
on the morrow three weeks after Easter, by whom the truth might be the better
discovered; to enquire, whether the said Godfrey and his Ancestors, after they
had their land of Hurst, of the gift and grant of the beforementioned King
Henry, had wont to repair the said Banks and Water-gangs, together with others
that had lands in the said Marsh, and to contribute with them for their repair,
when need should require. Whereupon the said Godfrey, by a certain Ordinance,
in which he acknowledged before the said Henry de Bathe, whom the King had sent
to that end, that though he gave a Mark to the repair of the said Banks and
Water-gangs, before the said Hamon was Bailiff of the said Marsh, as they the
said Hamon and John did affirm; yet he ap^pealed, whether himself or his
Ancestors, were not quit of the said repairs, and payments thereto by the
Charter of King Henry, Grandfather to the then King, forasmuch as he did not
consent to the said Ordinance, nor ever gave any thing to the repair of those
Banks and Water-gangs, as he affirmed.

But the Shireeve, not making his Precept, as abovesaid, was amerc'd, and
another Writ directed to him, to summon the said xij men, to appear, etc. the
morrow after the Feast of the Holy Trinity: At which time the said Godfrey,
Hamon and others, came, and required that judgment should be done, according
to the Record and process upon the before-specified Plea. VVhereupon the Plea
was recited before the King and his Council: And because it was found,
according to that Record, that the King had sent Henry de Bathe, his Justice
thereunto assigned, unto the said Marsh of Romenale; who determined, that all
they that had lands in the said Marsh, ought to contribute according to the
proportion of their Tenements, for the repair of the said Banks and
VVater-gangs thereof, as the said Hamon and others did allege; and to which
contribution he the said Godfrey said he was not obliged: And that as yet
nothing did appear to the King's Court here, of the said Ordinance or
Determination, without which of right, there could be no proceeding to
Judgment, a farther day was given; viz. until the xvme of S. Michael, that in
the mean time, the Rolls of the said Henry de Bathe might be looked into; And
that the Plea thus depending, no distress should be farther made upon the said
Godfrey.

At which time, viz. in the xvme of S. Michael in xliijo H. 3. the said Godfrey
came, and withdrew his process against the said Hamon and others; therefore,
being amerc'd he consented for himself and his Heirs, that for the future they
would repair the said Banks and Water-gangs, together with their neighbors,
according to the quantity of their land,
as it was the Custom of the Country, without any contest, or contradiction,
for ever.

And that the said Hamon granted and became obliged, for himself and the rest,
that he would make a due accomp^, before the xxiiij Jurats, chosen by the
Country, touching the distresses and Catals of the said Godfrey, taken from the
time of the beginning of the suit, until that present: And deducing so much as
should be sufficient to satisfy the said repairs, according to the proportion
belonging to the said Godfrey, to repay the surplusage of the money, for the
Catals of him the said Godfrey so sold. And the said Godfrey agreed, that if
the said Hamon, by his account could make it manifest, that the value of the
Catals so distrained by him, for the cause premised, would not suffice for his
portion, in repair of the said Banks and Water-gangs, according to the quantity
of his Land, he the said Godfrey would make satisfaction to him of the whole
arrerage, from the beginning of the suit, till that present time, according to
the view and estimation of the before mentioned xxiiij Jurats of the Country.

The next thing memorable touching this Marsh, is, that King Edw. the first, by
his Letters Ex p^aes^to^ cod. MS. f. 11. a.
Patents, bearing date at Westminster, the xxth of Novem. in the xvith year of
his reign, granteda commission to John de Lovetot, and Hen. de Apuldrefeld, to
view the Banks and Ditches upon the Seacoast and parts adjacent within the
County of Kent, in diverse places then broken, through the violence of the Sea;
and to enquire by whose default this damage had happened: And, together with the
Bailiffs of Liberties, and others in those parts, to distrain all those, which
held any Lands and Tenements there, and had or might have defense and
preservation, in any sort, by the said Banks and Ditches, according to the
quantity of their said Lands and Tenements, either by the number of Acres, or
by Carucates, for the proportion of what they held, for the necessary repair of
those Banks and Ditches, as often and where there should be need; so that no
man, of what condition, state, or dignity whatsoever, who had safeguard in any
sort by those Walls or Ditches, whether it were within Liberties or without,
should have favor therein: Commanding also the said John any Henry, to behave
themselves so faithfully and discreetly, in the execution of this business,
that as well the men residing in those parts, as their lands, should be safe
against the like dangers, and perhaps worse; no custom favorably introduced,
notwithstanding. And that of their transaction in this imploym^nt, they should
distinctly and plainly certify the said King, under their Seals, and the
Seals of the Jurats, as well Knights as other honest and lawful men. Commanding,
moreover, his Shireeve of Kent, to cause so many and such persons of his
Bayliwick, to appear before the said John and Henry, at certain days and
places, whereof he should give them notice, by whom the truth in the premises
might be the better enquired into and known.

By virtue of which Mandate, the said Shireeve was required to summon the
xxiiij Jurats of the Marsh of Rumenale, and all the Lords of the Banks of the
same Marsh; as also such and so many honest and lawful men, of all the maritime
lands in his Bayliwick, by whom the truth in the premises might be the better
enquired into and known; and to do farther in the p^emisses, as it should be
decreed. Who came accordingly. And the said xxiiij Jurats of the Marsh before
named, together with the Commonality of the said Marsh, said; that King Henry,
Father of the then King, did by his Charter grant to them certain Liberties, in
his own Lands, within the said Marsh: And they therefore required that those
their Liberties might be preserved: As also that nothing might be attempted, or
de^reed in prejudice of their said Liberties, and produced the same Charter of
the said K. Henry.

And they likewise said, that K. Henry, father to the then King, in the xlii
year of his reign, by reason of a certain controversy, arisen betwixt diverse
men of this Marsh, occasioned for the repair of the Banks and Water-gangs
therein, sent Henry de Bathe, his Justice, into those parts, to hear and
determine the differences in that business, betwixt the xxiiij Jurats and the
same Marshmen; and to provide for the defense and security thereof, and against
the peril of inundation by other waters, in causing the Banks and Water-gangs
to be repaired, by those who were obliged thereto, for the lands which they
held therein, according to the proportion thereof. Whereupon they said, that
the said Henry de Bathe, by authority of the same King Henry's Mandate,
ordained and decreed for them a certain Law and Ordinance, by which this Marsh
was to that time kept and preserved; and therefore desired, that they might,
for the future, be guided and defended by that Ordinance and Law, as they had
wont to be till that present time:
And thereupon produced the said Ordinance of him the said Henry, under the
King's Seal.

And because the said Ordinance seemed The Ordinances of John de Lovetot, and
Henry de Apeltrefeld.
and had been to that time approved, command was given, and it was decreed,
that the same should be in all things observed, without diminution: Adding
nevertheless, that in regard there was no mention therein of the election of
the King's common Bailiff in the said Marsh, Election o^ the common Bailiff.
how and by whom be ought to be chosen, it was determined, that for the future,
upon the decease of the said common Bailiff, or his quitting the Office,
another to be chosen, who should reside and have lands in this Marsh: And that
the said election should thenceforth be, by the common assent of the Lords of
the Towns Lying therein, or by their Atturnies; and as the Major part should
determine, to submit to that election, because till that time the usage had
been so.

And touching that double of the costs, the former Ordinance had been
appointed; and employed to the common profit of this Marsh, and not to the
b^hoof of the said Bailiff.

And forasmuch as there were diverse Banks and Water-gangs in the said Marsh, to
the maintenance of which, the commonality thereof did not contribute, except
only they whose lands lay contiguous to the said Banks and Water-gangs: And
tha^ some, through the oppression of the Lords of the said Marsh, did sometime
pay as much for the repair and maintenance of those Banks and Water-gangs, for
forty Acres, as others did for fifty, which was much against the law of the
Marsh, and the Ordinance of the said Henry de B^the: It was therefore decreed
and ordained, that notwithstanding and Custom, by whomsoever introduced; all
and singular persons, who had lands therein, which were subject to the danger
of the Sea, and had preservation by the same Banks and Water-gangs, That
contribution for ^he repair of the Banks be equal according to the number of
Acres.
should thenceforth be distreined for the reparation and maintenance of them;
so that every man might contribute equally, according to the number of Acres,
which they had therein; and that no person, be he of whatsoever state or
condition, that had preservation and defense thereby, should be favored.

And because before that time, in this Marsh of Romenale, beyond the course of
the water of the Port, running from Suergate, toward Romenhale, on the West
part of the same Port, till it come to the County of Su^sex, there had not been
any certain Law of the Marsh, ordained nor used, otherwise than at the will of
those that had lands in the same; insomuch as diverse dangers and intolerable
losses happened by the Seas inund^tion: To the end therefore, that the like
perils might for the future, be prevented, and the common benefit provided for,
it was agreed and jointly ordained; that in the said Marsh, beyond the
before-specified Port, That Jurats be established in that part of the Marsh
toward Sussex.
toward Sussex, there should be Iurats established, chosen by the Commonality,
who being sworn to that purpose, for the security of those parts, having
respect to the number of Acres, lying subject to that danger, and to the
proportion of the Banks and Watergangs, to be repaired and sustained there;
should, upon their Oaths consider and ordain how much might be necessary for
such repair and sustentation; so that, according to the portion of their Acres,
and value of them, there might be assigned in the said Banks and Water-gangs,
an equal portion of perches, to be maintained, as it is more fully contained in
the Ordinance of the said Henry de Bathe.

And moreover, forasmuch as till that As also a common Bailiff.
there had been no common Bailiff constituted in those parts, beyond the
before-specified Port, toward Sussex, who ought, for the public benefit, take
care, and provide against the perils there happening, and to prevent the like for
the future; it was ordained, that thenceforth there should one common Bailiff
be made choice of, in the said Marshes, beyond that course of the water toward
Sussex, for overseeing, keeping, and repairing of the said Banks and
Water-gangs, in such places and bounds of the said whole Marsh, as should seem
most expedient to all the whole Commonality: As also to summon together unto
places necessary^ the Iurats of the said Marsh, as often as need should
require, for the making of Ordinances and Laws, for preservation of the lands
in those parts; causing distresses to that purpose to be made, and levying a
double proportion upon such as should make default, according to the tenor of
the Ordinance made by the sai^ Henry de Bathe. Provided, that at the election
of the said Bailiff, when ever it might happen to be, the Lords of the Towns in
the said Marsh, beyond the said course of the water, toward Su^^ex, should be
summoned and called, if they would be present thereat; as also the Iurats and
whole Commonality of that Marsh.

And it was likewise ordained, that for Of which B^yliff and Jur^^s, the King's
common Bailiff to be Supervisor.
should be the Supervisor of the beforementioned Bailiffs and Iurats in this
Marsh, beyond the course of the water toward Sussex; and that he should summon
together, to fit places, all the Iurats chosen on both sides the said course of
that water, when need required, to make their Ordinances and Laws for
preservation of the said Marshes; so that always, on both parts of that
Watercourse, they should abide by the Ordinances and considerations of the
said Iurats, as to the prejudice or more safeguard of any man's land;
notwithstanding any custom whatsoever: Saving always the tenor of the King's
Charter, granted to the Commonality of Romney Marsh, and the Ordinance of Henry
de Bathe, ever to remain in full power and strength.

Not long after this, there happened certain differences, be^wixt the Master of
the Hospital, called God's house, in Dover, Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
and certain of his Tenants, within the Mannours of Hunychilde, and Estbrigge,
in Romenale marsh, touching some Banks and Water-gangs, upon the Sea coast;
which the said Master alleged, that his said Tenants, for the ancient demesnes
belonging to him in those Mannours, as often as need required, should at their
proper costs repair and maintain, against the violence of the Sea, and
inundations of the Fresh waters: For the hearing and determining of which
controversies, according to the Law and Custom of the said Marsh, John de
Lovet, Robert de Septvaus, Master Thomas de Gudinton, and Henry de
Appletrefeld, were by the King assigned. Whereupon, the parties so at
difference, weighing all circumstances touching the same, put themselves upon
the Inquisition of the Country: But the taking thereof, in regard that the said
Master refused, that any persons, residing in the said Marsh, should be
admitted thereof; and the said Tenants, not being content with any Foreiners,
was delaid, to the great damage of those parts, as by complaint the King was
informed: To put, therefore, a speedy end to the business, the said King, by
his Letters Patents, dated at Tydeswell xxiiij Sept. constituted Stephan de
Pencestre, then Constable of Dover-Castle, Henry de Appletrefeld, and Bertram
de Tancrey, his Justices, for to make farther enquiry thereof: But what was
done therein, I have not seen.

About four years afterward, the said King Edward the first, taking great care
for the defense and preservation of this Marsh; by his Letters patents, bearing
date at Westminster, Ex ver. co^. MS. ad Abb. S. Aug. Cantuar. quondam
spectante; tunc vero penes Rog. Twysden Baronettum.
xx April, in the xviijth year of his reign, wherein he has this observable
expression -- viz. quod cum nos, ratione dignitatis regiae, and per juramentum
astricti sumus, ad providendum salvationi Regni nostri circumquaque, i. e. in
respect of his royal dignity, and that he was obliged by Oath to provide for
the safeguard of his Kingdom round about; assigned H. de Apeldrefeld, and
Bertram de Tancrey, to oversee the Banks and Ditches upon the Sea coasts and
parts adjacent, in the County of Kent; which by reason of the roughness of the
Sea, were in many places broken; and to enquire through whose default that
damage had happened: As also of all those that held lands and tenements in those
parts, and had or might have safeguard and defense any manner of way, by the
said Banks and Ditches; and to distrain them for the quantity of their said
Lands, or number of Acres, or Carucates, according to the portion that they
held; together with the Bailiffs of Liberties, and others of those parts, for
the repair of the said Banks and Ditches, in necessary places, as often and
where there should be need; so that no Land-holder, rich or poor, of what
estate, dignity or condition soever he was, in case he had defense and
preservation any manner of way, by the same Banks of Ditches, were he within
Liberties or without, should have favor in any kind.

Commanding them, moreover, that in the execution of that business they should
behave themselves with such fidelity and discretion; that as well the
Inhabitants of those places, as their lands, might be preserved from the like
perils, and casually worse; any Custom, through favor, by whomsoever it had
been introduced, notwithstanding. And what they should do and ordain therein,
to certify the said King thereof, under their Seals, and the Seals of xxiiij
as well Knights as other honest and lawful men, distinctly and plainly. And for
their better accomplishment of that business, directed his Precept to the
Shireeve of Kent; appointing him, that at certain days and places, of which he
was to give them notice, he should cause to come, before the same King's
Justices, such and so many honest and lawful men of his Bayliwick, by whom the
truth in the premises, might be the better known and enquired into.

By virtue also of which Mandate, the said Shireeve had command to bring before
the said Justices at that time, the xxiiij Jurats of Romene Marsh, and all the
Lords of the Towns therein; and such and so many honest and lawful men, of all
of the maritime parts in his Bayliwick, by whom the truth in the premises
might likewise be the better known, and enquired of; and to do farther what
should be ordained in the premises.

Which Commissioners came accordingly, as also the said xxiiij Jurats, together
with the Commonality of this Marsh; and alleged, that K. Henry (the Father of
the said King Edward) by his Charter granted to them certain Liberties in their
Lands within the same Marsh; and required, that those their Liberties might be
preserved; and nothing accepted or ordained in prejudice of them; producing the
Charter of the said King Henry, in which was recorded the Ordinance of Henry de
Bathe. And, farther, declared their approbation of the said Ordinance, with the
additions thereto, in such manner and form, as they had before done in the
xvith year of this King's reign, before John de Lovetot and the said Henry de
Apeldrefeld, then the Kings Justices, as I have at large already showed;
whereunto, for avoiding repetition, I refer my Reader. Adding moreover, by
common agreement, to those wholesome Ordinances, these ensuing Constitutions;
viz.

The Ordinances of Henry de Apeldrefeld and Bertram de Tancrey.
1. That through all other maritime places in the said County, liable to the
danger of the Sea, the River of Thames, or any other water, wherein the Marsh
Law had not formerly been established and used; and that diverse perils through
defect of Banks and Water-gangs, had there happened: Lest therefore, for the
future, the like or worse might accrue. 2. That in every Hundred and Town,
as well by the Sea coast, as bordering on the Thames and other waters, in which
the Marsh lands are subject to inundation, there be chosen and sworn xij or six
lawful men, according to the largeness of the Hundreds or Towns, and who have
lands in danger of the Sea, the Thames, and other waters: Which men to be
assigned keepers of the Banks and Water-gangs, in the Hundreds and Towns
aforesaid, who upon their Oath shall keep safe the said^ Banks and Water-gangs;
and when and as often as need requires, repair them: As also shall, in respect
of the raging of the Sea, raise the said Banks higher, by four foot, at the
least, than formerly they were, and make them of thickness answerable to that
height. 3. For the reparation of which Banks and Water-gangs (when need shall
so require) the charge to be raised in manner following; viz. That all and
singular persons, having lands liable to the danger, whether situate near or
far off, forasmuch as they have preservation by those Banks and Water-gangs;
they shall contribute for the quantity of their Lands and Tenements, either by
number of Acres or Carucates, according to the proportion of what they hold; so
that to no Tenant of these Lands or Tenements, be he rich or poor; or of what
order, state, dignity, or condition soever, either within Liberties or without,
any favor shall be showed in this matter. 4. That in every place, for the
levying of the said costs and chardges; and faithfully laying it out upon the
said Banks and Water-gangs, two lawful persons, out of the said sworn men to be
assigned; who, together with the Bailiffs of the Liberties, or Lords of the
Fee, shall make distresses for the same. 5. And when the before-specified
Banks, shall be, according to the Ordinance of the Iurats, so repaired at the
common chardges; that there shall be assigned to every man, his peculiar
portion of the Bank, by certain places and bounds, to be sustained at his own
proper costs, according to the quantity of his Tenement and number of Acres
subject to that danger; so that it may ^e known where, and by what places, and
to what portion every man is so obliged to make defense. 6. And if any shall be
negligent in paying their portions of the said contribution, at the day
appointed by the Iurats for that purpose; or in his portion for repair of the
Banks, that he be distrained by his goods and Catalls, wheresoever they should
be found, within Liberties or without, till he have contributed his share, and
paid his chardge of the said Banks, with double costs: Which double to be
reserved for the common benefit of the like repairs in those parts. 7. And that
those distresses shall be made by the Collectors of the said costs, together
with the Bailiffs of the Liberties, or Lords of the Fee: And, being so made, to
^e kept for the space of three days at the most; if they, upon whom they shall
be made, be stubborn or negligent for so longtime, and then forthwith sold, in
respect of the perilous rage of the Sea, imminent. 8. And if as well the
Collectors, as Tenants, shall be found negligent in performing the premises;
that then every Lord of the Fee, within the compass of his Fee, shall cause
the said Banks and Water-gangs to be repaired, at his own proper chardge; and
the costs that he shall be at therein, together with the double thereof, he
shall cause to be levied upon the goods and Catalls of those that are
negligent, for his own use. 9. And that no Shireeve of Kent, for the time
being, or his Bailiff or Officer shall take any distress, touching the Banks
and Water-gangs in any Marshes; nor thenceforth meddle at all; neither with the
distresses, taken by the Lords of the Fees, Bailiffs of Liberties, or
Collectors of the costs or contributions to the said Banks and Water-gangs; nor
distrain them by Writ of Replevin; nor deliver them by surety, or pledge any
manner of way. 10. And it was also ordained and concluded; that if the Iurats,
so chosen for the custody of the Banks and Water-gangs; whether they shall be
of this Marsh of Romenale, or of other maritime Lands, do refuse to come at the
Summons of their Bailiffs, for the necessary repair of the said Banks and
Water-gangs; they shall, for that their negligence, be punished by their
Bailiffs, as in this Marsh of Romenhale, they had been heretofore accustomed.
11. And that the Collectors also of the costs, bestowed in repair and support
of the Banks and Water-gangs, after the said repairs are perfected, shall
forthwith make their account, before the Iurats and Bailiff of that Country,
as well within the Marsh of Romenhale, as without, of all moneys assessed and
levied for the before-specified repairs; as also for the double, whenever it
may fortune to be levied: And if they shall not so do, then to be distrained by
the Bailiffs of the Country or place, to make account thereupon: Saving always
to the chief Lords of the Fees, their right which they have, and hitherto had
wont to have, touching the defense of their Lands, according to their
feoffments; and of levying the double, according to ancient custom used, as it
is contained in the Ordinace of the said Henry de Bathe.

In testimony whereof, Sir Walter de Ripple, and Sir William de Haute, Knights;
Adam Wastechar, William Waste^har, William le Ros, Guy de Trulegh, John Amfrey,
Peter de Maryns, Thomas le Read, Thomas Elys, Hugh de Suthlonde, Richard Ion,
William Collol, Henry de Bettesangre, Jordan Collol, John at Ware, Hamon at
Port, John Sprott, Jacob de Pastre, John de Mossederme, Henry Kenet, Thomas le
Frensse, Henry Woodman, and William de Mereworth did put to their Seals.

That the Ordinance of the said Henry de Bathe, for preserving this Marsh; as
it was in no mean esteem, we see, by all those of the Country, whom it
immediately concerned; so had it a high regard with the succeeding Kings of
this Realm, as by their Confirmations thereof (of which I shall in due place
take notice) will appear. The first of which Confirmations was made by King
Edward the second, whose Charter Pat. 7 E. 20 p. 2. m. 26.
, for that purpose, bears date at Westminster the xxiijth of November, 7 E.
2. In which he first makes mention of his Grandfather K. Henry the 3ds Patent
in 36o of his reign; whereby he declares his Royal pleasure, that no Shireeve
of Kent shall intermeddle with such distresses as should be taken for the
repair of the Banks and Water-gangs of this Marsh. And next in that of 42o
which expresses the occasion of his sending Hen. de Bathe, his Justice, into
those parts; and at large recites the said Ordinance thereupon then made by
the said Henry. And then concludes thus; Nos attendentes, quod impetus maris
in partibus illis, plus solito jam accrevit, etc. i. e. We therefore, taking
into consideration, that the violence of the Sea in those parts, is grown
greater than it had wont to be; by reason whereof it is necessary that a more
diligent regard should be had, for the reparation of the said Banks; Forasmuch
as by a breach in them, though but small, should it happen (as God forbid) an
inestimable and inrecoverable loss must needs accrue to us and the men of the
said Marsh. Purposing therefore to make prevention of such damage and peril,
and to provide for the safeguard of those parts, as well for our own benefit, as
the commodity of the said Marsh-men (as we are obliged to do) we do, for us and
our heirs, as much as in us lies, ratify and confirm all and singular the
things in the said Letters Patents of our said Grandfather, and the
before-specified Ordinance contained: Willing and commanding, that no Shireeve
of Kent, or any of his Bailiffs, for the time being, shall of himself at all
intermeddle with such distresses, as are or shall be made by the direction of
the said xxiiij Iurats: But that such Justice, as is to be executed thereupon,
shall be reserved to us and our heirs, or to our special Mandate, as it is
before expressed in that Patent of our said Grandfather.

Which King, continuing his mindfulnesse thereof, by his Letters Pat. 10 E. 2.
p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
Patents, bearing date at York, 24o Augusti, in the tenth year of his reign,
appointed Robert de Kendale; John Malemeyns, de Hoo; and William de Cotes
(Gentlemen then of special note in this Country) to oversee the Sea-banks in
this Marsh, situate betwixt Apeldre and Romenale. And in the 17o of his reign,
by the like Patent Pa^. 17 E. 2 p. 2. m. 12. in dorso.
dated at Westminster xxo Maii, constituted Edmund de Passele, John de Ifeld,
and Robert de Sardone, his Commissioners for the like view of the Banks in
sundry parts of the said Marsh.

The next year following, there having been a complaint made to the King, that
by reason of a certain Trench, made betwixt Apuldre and the Port of Romenhale,
very many discommodities and losses daily befell the Country adjacent:
Whereupon he assigned Claus. 18. E. 2. m. 38.
the before-specified Edmund and John, together with William de Cotes, to
enquire by the Oaths of honest and lawful men of these parts, by whom the truth
in the premises might be the better discovered, who they were that made that
Trench, and when and for what cause; as also how, and in what manner: And
moreover, what discommodity and damage had happened by means thereof, and to
whom, and in what sort. But being afterward advertised, that there was so
great a dissension risen, betwixt his Barons of the Cinque Ports, and the
Commonality of Romenale Marsh, by reason thereof, that both sides were
preparing to fight it out, if there should be any farther proceeding in that
Inquisition; which, as it would occasion much terror to the people thereabouts,
so might it not a little hinder that warlike expedition, which the said King
then intended. Considering therefore the need that at present he had, of the
service of his faithful Subjects, as well by Land as by Sea; and being desirous
to his utmost power, to provide for their unity and peace, by his special
Precept Ibid.
, bearing date at Guldeford 6o Aug. he commanded the before-specified Edmund,
John and William, for the causes above expressed, to supersede the taking of
that intended Inquisition, until they should receive his farther commands
therein. Which stop in that business lasted not long: For at the beginning of
the next February, the King granted out a new Commission Ibid. m. 19.
to them, for to proceed forthwith therein.

In the same year, it seems that the Banks in this Marsh, betwixt Tyd and
Dengemareys were broke; for in the month of June ensuing, I find, that the
said King issued out his Commission Pat. 18 E. 2^ p. 2. m 3. in dorso.
to Henry de Shardon, Thomas de ^eversham, and William de Roberts brigge, for
the viewing and repairing of them.

That greater care and regard could be, than appears by what I have already
instanced, to have been taken, in the regulation of all things, tending to the
safeguard of this Marsh, cannot (I presume) be well imagined: Nevertheless,
such is the pravity of some ill-disposed men, who chiefly mind their particular
gain, though it be by cheating the public; that were it not for a strict watch
over them, all good order would be subverted, and little else but cousenage, if
not rapine practiced, instead thereof, as we shall find by the doings of some,
who were employed with the levying and collection of moneys, to the repair of
the Banks and Water-gangs of this Marsh: Who, most unconscionably, and against
the trust reposed in them, made use of those Sums, so gathered, to their own
private uses; insomuch as complaint thereof was made to the King in 5 E. 3. Who
thereupon gave commission Pat. 5 E 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 19.
to William de Clinton, Raphe Sauvage, and Thomas de Feversham, to enquire into
the particulars thereof.

Which King, out of the like tender respect to the preservation of this Marsh,
7 E. 3.
as his Father and other his Ancestors had, by his Leters Pat. 14 R. 2. p. 2 m.
38. per ^is. ex^
Patents, bearing date at Westminster 28o of Novem. in the seventh year of his
Reign, wherein he recited that famous Ordinance, made by Henry de Bathe (of
which I have so often made mention) added his Royal Confirmation thereof. And
afterward, at sundry times, as occasion required, granted his Commission to
several persons of quality in the said County of Kent, for the overseeing the
said Banks and Water-gangs, and taking care for their necessary repair, as by
the enroulments of them appears; viz. in April 13 E. 3. Pat. 13 E 3 p. 1. m.
22. in dorso.
to Thomas de Brockhill, William de Orals^on, Robert de Sh^rden, and Geffrey de
Basham, for those Banks, etc. upon the Seacoast in the Marsh of Lude, near
Romenhale. And in October. following, to Pat. 13. E. 3 p. 2. m. 18. i^ do^so
the same Thomas, Geffrey, and James de Echyngham, touching those which lay
betwixt the Town of Romne, and a certain place called Longerake; and betwixt
the Church of Lyde and the Sea, within the Town of Lyde.

In June, 18o E. 3. to Pat. 18 E. 3. p. 2. m. 49 in dorso.
the same Thomas de Brokhull, John de Erde, Thomas de Rethelin, and William
Alleyn of Brokeland, for those in Romenhale Marsh.

In March 21o E. 3. to Pa^ 21 E. 3. p. 1 m 25 in dorso.
the same Thomas, and Thomas de Gillingham, Stephan Donet, and Stephan de
Horsham, for the same Banks.

In April 22o E. 3. to Pat. 22 E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. in do^so.
James de Echingham, Thomas de Broxhill, and the rest last mentioned, the like.
So also in Pat. 22 E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
July following, to William de Broclond, Stephan de Horsham, Richard de Morton,
and William Waschare.

But notwithstanding that wholesome Ordinance, so often mentioned, and the
several confirmations thereof; I find, that Simon Islip Archbishop of
Canterbury, with other Land-holders within this Marsh of Romene, made a
grievous complaint Ex ^od. MS. (...). S. Io^n Arm. ^. 12. b.
to the King in 33 E. 3. that whereas all those their lands lay bordering to
the Sea coast; and without the continual support of the Banks, Gutters,
Ditches, and other Mounds, as well for excluding the Sea, as for the voiding out
of the fresh waters, there made, they could not by any means be defended and
preserved. Farther showing; that for the safeguard thereof, it was in the time
of King Henry, sometime King of England (Ancestor to the said King Edward the
3d) ordained by Henry de Bathe, and his Fellows, Justices of the said King, for
that purpose; that whosoever being Tenant and resident within the precinct,
whom the greater part of the Lords of the Towns therein situate, should choose,
ought to be the Bailiff to levy the Taxes, assessed for reparat^on and
maintenance of the said Banks, as in the said Ordinance more fully may appear.
And, that though in pursuance of those Ordinances, one John at Lose, a Tenant
and resident within the said Marsh, had been elected and deputed to the Office
of the said Bailiff, for levying of the said Taxes, by the Lords of this Marsh,
in form aforesaid: Nevertheless one Matthew at More, and other his Accomplices,
having confederated themselves together by false contrivance, to constitute
another Bailiff there, in favor to his friends, and to lay load unjustly upon
others, contrary to the before-specified Ordinance; did so terrify the said
John, by grievous threats, and otherwise hinder him, that he neither would or
durst take upon him that Office, according to the said Ordinance; So that by
reason of the said Bailiffs default, all the before-specified Marsh, being
daily liable to be overflown, was in danger to be destroyed, without speedy
remedy were had.

The said King therefore, taking this complaint into mature consideration; for
prevention of that imminent mischief, granted his Royal Commission Pat. 35 E.
3. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
, bearing date at Westminster, 17o Febr. in the same thirty fifth year of his
reign, to Thomas de Lodelowe, Robert Belknap, and Thomas Colepepir; appointing
them, or any three or two of them, as well to oversee the said Banks, Gutters,
etc. and cause them to be repaired, as to take a view of the said Ordinances:
And in case they should find them any way defective,
as to the defense of the said Marsh against those inundations, then to correct
and amend them; and, if need were, to make a new Ordinance, to direct how the
same Marsh might be better defended and preserved against the said waters, upon
any chance that should thenceforth happen: And to decree certain strict
punishments against all such as should transgress the said Ordinances so to be
made by them the said Thomas, Robert, and Thomas, or any two of them.
And moreover, to cause Proclamation to be made, all about in those parts, for
the perpetual observance of them: And likewise to do all other things for the
safeguard and defense of the said Marsh, in exclusion and evacuation of those
waters, as should be necessary and fit. And lastly to enquire by the Oaths of
honest and lawful men of that Country, of all the confederacies and practices
before specified; as also of such trespasses and contempts, as had been made
against the said King, by the beforementioned Matthew and his Accomplices.

By virtue of which Precept Adhuc ex praef. cod. MS. penes praef. O^iv. S. John.
, the said Thomas, Robert, and Thomas, being met at Crowethorne, the Monday
next after the Feast of the Translation of S. Thomas the martyr, E^ ^x ver.
^od. MS. penes Will. le N^ve Clar. Regem Armorum. an. 1640.
in the year abovesaid^ by the consent of the Lords of the Towns, the Bailiff,
xxiiij Jurats, and Commonality of the said Marsh; viz. by John Franceis,
Attorney to Simon Archbishop of Canterbury^ the Abbot of S. Augustines in
Canterbury; the Prior of Christs-Church in Canterbury; Simon, Master of
Gods-House in Dovor; Edmund Staplegate Lord of Nether-Bilsyngton; and other
Lords to this purpose specially elected, with certain also of the Commonality;
scil. William de Echyngham, Stephan de Valeyns, etc. chosen likewise for the
said Commonality, did ordain Ibid.
and appoint, 1. that the common Bailiff of the said Marsh, The Ordinances of
Thomas de Lodelowe and his associates.
who has lands and residence therein, should be elected by the public consent
of the Lords of the Towns of the same Marsh, or their special Attorneys: And
where the greater number consents, the c^oice to stand: Which election to be
made at Demecherche or Newecherche, Choice of the Bailiff.
or some other fit place, within the compass of the said Marsh, in the xvme of
S. Michael, yearly; upon summons of the before-specified Bailiff; except upon
necessity and reasonable cause, the said Bailiff ought to be removed, within
that year, and another put in his place.

Penalty for refusal.
2. And if the person so elected, shall be present, and refuse to undergo the
said Office, that he be forthwith amerc'd in xl s. to be levied by the
succeeding Bailiff, upon his Goods and Catals, for the common benefit of the
said Marsh: And so forthwith a new choice to be made of another Bailiff, who
will undergo the Office, and take his Oath, and receive for his Fee the double
of all the money assessed upon any whomsoever, The Bailiffs Fee.
for their negligence. And if the person so elected, shall be hereafter
hindered by any man, so that he dare not undergo the Office, that then the
parties so hindering him, to be severally punished by the said Electors, in
such sort as the said Bailiff should have been punished, if he had refused to
take his Oath, and to bear the same Office.

3. And if i^ happen, How the p^rty elected, being absent, shall be compelled.
that he that shall so be chosen, be absent at the time of election, all his
Goods and Catals to be forthwith distrained, by the preceding Bailiff of the
Marsh, and impounded in fit and wanted places; and there detained until he
shall repair to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbot of S. Augustines, and
Prior of Christs-Church, for the time being, or to one of them; and admit of
the said Office and take his Oath; and thereupon carry to the preceding Bailiff
his Letters sealed: And this he shall do within six days next after the
election made; and if he do not, then to be punished as aforesaid, and a new
election to be presently made.

4. At which principal Last, That the Collectors and Expenditors do make
account of their receipts
if the said common Collectors of all the former general Taxes, will be
present, they shall make their account to the Bailiff, xxiiij Iurats and
Commonalty of the said Marsh: Which account to be written by Indentures, made
betwixt them and the Bailiff, xxiiij Iurats and Commonalty of the said Marsh.
And after the same manner shall the Bailiff make his account of those things,
which belong to him to reckon for.

And if any of the xxiiij Iurats, How those that are absent in the L^st, shall
be amerced.
do make default in the said principal Last, except he have a reasonable
excuse, he shall be amerc'd in xiid to be levied by the Bailiff, to the use of
the Commonalty.

5. And if it happen, The choi^e of the Jurats, Collectors and Expenditors.
that any of the xxiiij Iurats do depart within the year, or ought to be
removed, that then another be made choice of in his place, and put in the said
principal Last, by the Lords of the Fees, Bailiff, xxiiij Iurats and
Commonalty, of the most faithful, discreet and wealthy men of the said Marsh,
to the number of xxiiij complete.

6. In like sort it shall be done touching the Collectors and Expenditors, The
pen^lty of the Jurats, elected refusing.
so that they be not chosen out of the said xxiiij Iurats, if the said Lords
will be there. And if the said xxiiij Iurats, Collectors or Expenditors, shall
be chosen and will not take his Oath, he shall be amerc'd in xxs. to be levied
as aforesaid; and forthwith another chosen in his place, and receive the
chardge.

7. And if the before-specified xxiiij Iurats, shall be summoned wheresoever,
within the precinct of the said Marsh, to the common or several Last, The
penalty for their not appear^nce at the Last.
where no more than eight or ten, at the most, do come; by reason whereof there
can be no Judgment and Decree made for the safeguard of the said Marsh,
considering the absence of the greater number; that then every absent person
shall be ^merced by the Bailiff in vid to be levied as aforesaid; whereof the
said Bailiff shall make account in the principal Last.

The Oath of the Jurats.
8. Also every one of the xxiiij Iurats shall swear, that he will, together with
his fellows, ^ustly make all Judgments and Decrees, not favoring rich or
poor, either in making distresses, or in what concerns the Banks, Land-eas,
Water-gangs, Sewers, Ditches, and Gutters; or the removing of Bridges and other
impediments whatsoever, within the precinct of the said Marsh, and punishing of
Trespassers. And that they be observant to the Bailiff of the said Marsh, That
they be observant to the Bailiff.
for the valuing and selling of the distresses, taken and impounded for three
days or more in the places accustomed. And that they cause all the Judgments
and Decrees, by them made, to be enrolled, and thereof an Indenture to be made
betwixt them and the men of the said Marsh, for the time being.

The Oath of the Collec^ors and Expenditors.
9. Likewise the Collectors and Expenditors, chosen as aforesaid, shall swear,
that they will faithfully levy, collect, disburse and make account of all the
Taxes and Assessments, made by the Lords, Bailiff, and xxiiij Iurats, or the
greater part of them. And the same course shall be observed in all the
Water-gangs, within the precinct of the said Marsh, and before every of the
Lords of the Towns, if they will be present thereat.

The Oath of the Bailiff, and his making Execution.
10. Also the Bailiff shall swear, that he will make faithful execution of the
Judgments and Decrees of the before-specified xxiiij Iurats; and of those
things, which do pertain to them, to judge and determine of^ As also, that in
his proper person, he will chardge upon all the Collectors and Expenditors, by
Oath, that they shall faithfully levy, collect, disburse and account for, as well
all general Taxes, as several Water-gangs so assessed, as abovesaid. And that
he will, in person, take view of all the Banks, Landeas, Water-gangs, Sewers,
Gutters, and Bridges, when need shall require; at least twice in the year; viz.
once in the month of January, and afterward in the month of June. And that he
will deliver unto his successor, all the evidences, which he has in his
custody; as well the Charters of the Kings of England, concerning the Liberties
and Customs of the said Marsh; as the Roules of Judgments, Decrees and
Awards, made by the said xxiiij Iurats^ with every process of accounts of the
Collectors and Expenditors, whatsoever, done in their times. And the Clerk of
the said Bailiff, The Fee of the Bailiffs Clerk.
shall have for his Fee, from the Commonality of the said Marsh, vis. viijd.

11. Moreover, it shall not be lawful for any man, thenceforth, to make any
Dams or Fords, That no Dams or Fords shall be made.
or other impediments, in any Land-eas, Water-gangs, Ditches, or common
Watercourse in the said Marsh, whereby the right course of the waters, may in
any sort be hindered. And if they shall so do, and testimony given thereof, by
the Baylik, and six of the Iurats, or the Commonality of the Watercourse,
where such danger shall be made; he shall be forthwith amerc'd, according to
the proportion of his offense, by the said Bailiff and xxiiij Iurats; which
amercement to be likewise forthwith levied, to the common benefit, as
aforesaid. And nevertheless, if any other, than the Commonality, shall receive
damage by that means, and that proof be made thereof, by the testimony of the
Bailiff and six Iurats, satisfaction shall be made to him for the same.

12. Likewise they did ordain and appoint, The Proclamation be made of the Tax
assessed.
that every Tax assessed in the said Marsh, should be proclaimed in certain
public places; and a day of payment thereupon assigned: And this Proclamation
to be so made, that no man might plead ignorance, as to the time and place he
ought to pay it at.

13. And they did farther ordain and decree, Price of the Acres for the Banks.
that every Acre, for the Banks, in Ditches, and Water-gangs, be bought for
xls. and that it shall not be lawful for any man, to draw away any workmen,
being in the public work, for his own private employment; nor to take them to
any other place, Workmen not to be drawn away.
till that work be perfected: And if any man shall be found faulty therein, by
the testimony of the Bailiff, or Iurats, in the common Last, he shall be
amerc'd in xs. to be forthwith levied by the said Bailiff, to the common
benefit, as abovesaid.

14. Also they ordained and decreed, How the Channels shall be kept.
that all the Water-^ourses within the said Mash, by whatsoever Lands and
Tenements, How the Channels shall be kept.
in each Chanel be so kept, that the water shall not run out of it is right
course, to the damage of any man; upon penalty of the value thereof, to be
levied by the said Bailiff, for the behoof of the Commonalty, when any shall be
found guilty thereof, in the common Last, by the testimony of the Bailiff and
six Iurats.

The Bailiff and Jurats to have their chardges, in going to other places.
15. And because, of ancient time, it was appointed by the King, that all the
maritime Lands, from the Isle of Thanet, unto Pevenese, as well in the County of
Kent, as County of Sussex, should be governed by the Laws, Ordinances, Statutes
and Customs of the said Marsh of Romene; it shall be lawful to the said
Bailiff and xxiiij Iurats, to require and have his reasonable chardges, of
those which shall have a mind to bring them to the places (be they Lords, or of
the Commonalty) where they ought to make their Ordinance, according to the
maritime Law, as well in the Banks as Water-gangs, Gutters, Sewers, and
Fishings; and other things whatsoever touching that Law.

Penalty for such as shall rescue any distress.
16. And Lastly they ordained and decreed, that if any person should make a
rescue from the Bailiff of the Marsh, or his Officers, of any distress
whatsoever, taken by any of them, by virtue of the before-specified Articles,
or any Ordinance made, or to be made, for the benefit of the said Marsh; and
thereof to be found guilty by the testimony of the said Bailiff, and six or
eight of the said xxiiij Iurats; or of the Watercourse, where the distress
shall fortune to be taken, he shall be amerc'd in xls. to be levied to the
Bailiff, for the use of the Commonalty, as aforesaid. And in the same manner it
shall be done in those places, where the maritime Law is used, within the Isle
of Thanet and Pevenese, whether in Kent, or Suffex.

After this, I have not met with any thing else, of this Marsh, worthy the
observation, until the 43o E. 3. that the beforementioned Thomas de Lodelowe;
as also Robert Belknap, John Woodhall, Roger Dygge, William Topclive, and
William Horn were constituted Pat. 43 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in do^so.
Commissioners for oversight of the Banks and Ditches therein. Nor from that
time till 48 E. 3. that William Latymere, Constable of Dovor Castle, and Warden
of the Cinque Ports, Thomas Reins, then his Lieutenant, Roger Dygge, and some
others, were assigned Pa^ 48 E 3 p. 1. m. 30. in dorso
by the King, to view the Banks, Watercourse etc. thereof, lying betwixt the
Towns of Hethe and Newendon. By which Commission they had power to impressed so
many Carpenters and other Laborers,
as they should deem necessary for the accomplishment of the work in hand,
wheresoever they could be found, within the County of Kent.

To King Edward the 3d succeeded Richard the 2d, in the first year of whose
reign, it appears that Richard de Horn, Stephan Wettenham, John Franceys, and
Hamon Wodeman, were put in Commission, Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 2^. in dorso.
for to supervise the Banks in this Marsh, from the Town of Hethe, all along
the Seacoast unto Apuldre; as also in other Marshes within this County; viz.
from the Haven of Romney, to Promhill Church; and thence by the Sea coast to
Apuldre before mentioned; they being at that time in decay, in sundry places
thereof. Which King ( viz. Richard the 2d) out of his special care also for the
safeguard of this Marsh, having viewed the Charter of his Royal Ancestor King
Edward the first; wherein as well that of King Henry the 3d (whereof I have
taken notice in it is due place) as that memorable Ordinance of Henry de Bathe
(likewise before repeated) are recited; did not only make Confirmation of them
both; but farther, out of his Princely favor, by the assent of his Council, at
the request of the Inhabitants of the said Marsh, granted Pat. 1^ R. 2^ p. 2.
m. 38.
for himself and his heirs, to the Bailiff and xxiiij Jurats, which then were,
and that thenceforth should be; that they, as also their heirs and successors,
should for ever have this Liberty; viz. they and every of them, to be exempt
from serving at any Assizes, on Juries, Inquisitions, or Recognitions, as well
within this County of Kent, as out of it; excepting in what should relate to
the said King, or his heirs. And that they, nor any of them should be Shireeve,
Eschaetor, Bailiff, Collector of Tenths or Fifteens, or of any other Subsidy,
Chardge, Tax, or Tallage, to be granted to him the said King, or his heirs; or
any other Officer or Minister to him or his heirs aforesaid, against their own
good will, during the time that they or any of them should be in the said
Office of Bailiff, or one of the Jurats aforesaid. And the reason of this his
Royal grant, for such immunity, he there declares; viz. that by their absence,
the whole Marsh (as he had been informed) might be overflown in a very short
time; and so, utterly lost and destroyed, to the infinite peril and damage of
all his liege people in those parts.

In like manner, and with the like recitals, at large, did King Pat. 10 H. 4.
p. 1. m. 17.
Henry the 4th and King Pat. 8 H. 6. p. 1. m. 21.
Henry the sixth confirm the said Charter of King Henry the 3d, and the so
often mentioned Laws and Ordinances of Henry de Bathe, concerning this Marsh:
Adding the like Liberties and Privileges, as King Richard the second by his
Charter, last before observed, did.

Which said Laws, with all others relating to this Marsh, as also the Customs
thereof, were grown at length so famous; that the said King Henry the sixth in
the 6th year of his reign, by Inter Statuta de ar. 6 H. 6. Cap. 5.
the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and at the special
instance of the Commons of this Realm, then assembled in his Parliament holden
at Westminster, having considered the great damage and losses, which had often
happened, by the excessive rising of waters in diverse parts of the Realm; and
that much greater was like to ensue, if remedy were not hastily provided: And
thereupon ordaining and granting, that for ten years ^^^n next ensuing, several
Commissio^s of Sewers should be made to diver^ persons by the Chancellor of
Eng^and, for the time to come, in all pa^ts of this his Realm, where should be
needful (the form of which Commission is there recited) amongst other things
gave unto the said Commissioners special power and direction, by that Act, to
make and ordain necessary and convenable Statutes and Ordinances, for the
salvation and conservation of the Sea-Banks and Marshes, and the parts
adjoining, according to the Laws and Customs of (this) Romney Marsh.

And after the expiration of the said ten years, by Act 18. H. 6. cap. 10.
of Parliament in 18 of his reign, continued the same form of Commissions. So
also in 23 H 6. c. 9.
23. The like did 12 E 4. c. 6.
K. Edw. the 4th in 12o of his reign, and K. Henry the 7th in 4 H. 7. c. 1.
4o of his.

And now having thus manifested, how great a care and regard the successive
Kings of this Realm, had, for diverse ages, of this famous Marsh; I will cloze
up what I have farther to say thereof, with that notable Charter of King Edward
the 4th bearing date at Westminster 23o Febr. in the first year of his reign;
whereby he incorporated the Bailiff, and Jurats thereof; the tenor whereof is
as follows; viz. That whereas he the said King, held himself obliged to take
care of the defense of this his Realm, and his loyal Subjects thereof, from
what place soever; especially those who lay nearest to the first assaults, and
attempts of his Enemies. And considering, that many Towns and places, situate
near the Sea, had been laid waste by the spoils and burnings of the said
Enemies; and through the affrights of the Inhabitants, who thereupon forsook
them, left unhabitable and desolate: Thinking it therefore most necessary, to
repair the said Towns and places, or to new build others near unto them; and
being so built to endow and arm them with Liberties and Privileges; that being
so fortified, they may, by the peoples recourse to them, be made more powerful
and strong, for the better safeguard of the whole Country. And considering that
in this Marsh of Romeney in the County of Kent, which is situate near to the
Sea, there was not at that time such a plenty of people and inhabitants, as
were wont to be: But were it better defended, there would a much greater
confluence resort thereto, and dwell therein, for the more safeguard of the
whole Country, as he the said King had been informed from the credible relation
of the Inhabitants of the said Marsh, and other parts adjacent.

Taking therefore the premises into consideration; of his special grace and
favor, at the instant request of all the Commonalty and Inhabitants within the
said Marsh, as also for the preservation thereof, and more security of the
adjacent Towns, he gave and granted to the said Inhabitants residing within the
limits and bounds thereof, that they should be one body in substance and name,
and one Commonalty perpetually incorporate of one Bailiff and xxiiij Jurats,
and the Commonalty of the said Romeney Marsh in the County of Kent, for ever.
And that the said Bailiff, Jurats, and Commonalty shall have a continual
succession, and they and their successors for ever called, termed and named by
the name of the Bailiff, Jurats and Commonalty of Romeney Marsh in the County
of Kent. And that they and their successors shall be persons proper and capable
in Law to purchase Lands and Tenements, and other Possessions whatsoever, to
themselves and their successors, to enjoy i^ Fee and perpetuity. And that that
they shall have a common Seal for their affairs and businesses, relating to
them the said Bailiff, Jurats, and Commonalty, and their successors: And shall
plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered, by the name of the Bailiff,
Jurats and Commonalty of Romeney Marsh, in the County of Kent, in every of the
said King's Courts, and the Courts of his Heirs and Successors; and in all
other Courts and places whatsoever. Which said Bailiff and Jurats, to be
elected in like manner and form; as also exercise their Offices, and be
displaced from them, as heretofore it was wont and accustomed to be in the said
Marsh.

And moreover, that the said Bailiff, Jurats and Commonalty, and their
Successors shall have a certain Court before them the said Bailiff and Jurats
of the said Marsh, for the time being, at some certain convenient place within
the same, to be held from three weeks to three weeks for ever. And have full
power and authority, to hear and determine in the said Court, by Bills of
complaint therein; all and singular Pleas of Debts, Accounts, Covenants,
Contracts, Trespasses, by force and Arms, or otherwise in contempt of the said
King, or his Heirs; with many other Liberties and Privileges, of which for
brevity I omit the rehearsal; referring my Reader to the Record Pa ^ E^ 4. p.
2. m. 3.
it self, if he desire to be farther informed therein.

And likewise the said King, for himself and his Heirs, then granted to the
said Bailiff, Jurats and Commonalty, and their successors, that they shall from
time to time have power to make reasoable Ordinances and Constitutions of good
credit, and consonant to reason, for the common good of the said Marsh; as also
for the sound and wholesome Government thereof; and for the common profit of the
Inhabitants and residents therein; to make use of them and put them in
execution, within the bounds and limits thereof: And likewise to change them
and every of them, for ever, as they shall see best. And that the said Bailiff,
Jurats, and Commonalty, and their successors, for the necessities and profits
relating to the said Marsh, shall amongst themselves assess and levy Taxes, and
lay impositions upon the Goods, Lands, Tenements, and Merchandises of the
Inhabitants and residents, being within the bounds and limits of the said
Marsh; and otherwise, as it shall seem best to them, without the let^ or
impediment of the said King or his heirs, or his or their Justices, or other
their Officers whatsoever.

And moreover granted to the said Bailiffs, Jurats and Commonalty, and their
successors, that none of them, or of their heirs and successors, thenceforth
should be put or impanelled in any Assizes, Juries, Recognitions, Attaints, or
any other Inquisitions whatsoever, out of the bounds and limits of the said
Marsh; nor to be compelled to go out of those bounds or limits, to travail on
any Juries, Inquisitions, Assizes, Recognitions, Attaints, or matters
whatsoever, though they concern the said King, or his Heirs. Nor that any of
them shall be made an Assessor, Taxer, or Collector of Tenths, Fifteens, or any
parcel thereof; or of any other Chardge, Subsidy, Tallage etc. whatsoever.

CAP XII.
HAving now done with Romney marsh, I come to East Kent, in which the first
thing observable (wherewith I have met) is, that the K. Edw. the first, by his
Letters Pat. 13 E. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
Patents, bearing date at Westminster, xvio Maii, in the thirteenth year of his
reign; making mention, that he had granted license to his Barons of Sandwich,
for the digging of a certain Trench, over the lands, lying betwixt Gestlinge,
and Stonflete; and from Stonflete to the said Town of Sandwich; to the intent
that the passage of the water called Northbroke, which was at Gestling, should
be diverted; so that it might run to Sandwich, for the perpetual commodity of
that Town, and his Barons thereof; he the said King assigned Solomon de
Rochester, and Roger de Norwode, to enquire by the Oaths of honest and lawful
men of the County of Kent, in what place the said Trench, and over whose lands,
and to the least damage of the said Landholders, it might be most fitly made:
As also to provide and take care, that the same Trench, and turning of the said
water, should be so done, that the owners of those Lands, over which it was to
pass, might be satisfied for the hurt they should receive thereby, before the
work was begun.

About three years after, the said King directing his Precept Ex vet. cod. MS.
in bibl. C^^to^ [^^b effigy Cleopa^^ae. C. 7.] f. 45. a.
, dated at Tuttebury, the xvijth day of November, in the 16th year of his
reign; unto Edmund de Passele, John de Ifelde, and Stephan de la Dane; and
therein expressing, that by reason of the defect in repair and support of the
Banks, Item ex vet. cod MS. penes Ro^. T^^^dea d^ East-^eckham in com. Kan^
Baronetium. p. 223.
Ditches, etc. on the Seacoasts, and adjacent Lands, lying in the parts of
East-Kent; very great damage through the violence of the Sea, and overflowing
of the fresh waters, had happened; and that greater would ensue, unless some
speedy remedy were applied: for prevention thereof he constituted the said
Edmund, John, and Stephan, his Justices, to supervise and take care thereof.

By virtue of which Precept, the Shireeve of Kent was commanded to bring before
the said Justices, at a certain day and place, xxiiij as well Knights as other
honest and lawful men, of the Vicinage of Monketone and Menstre, (in the Isle
of Thanet) and to enquire of the premises. At which day he, accordingly,
returned his Writ, and brought before them, John Friday, Roger Belringer, and
others; who being sworn to take view of the defects in those Banks, Ditches,
Gutters, and Sewers, in the Marshes of Monketone and Menstre, and to certify
unto the said Justices, through whose default those damages had happened: they
answered, that they knew not, except it were by the boysterousnesse of the Sea,
and the floods of fresh waters. And being asked when the said Banks and Ditches
were so destroyed, and who ought and had wont to repair them? They said upon
their Oaths, that when the Seabank was new made, all the men that had lands,
lying within the danger of inundation; whether they were near or remote, and
who had preservation by the same Bank, did contribute, according to the
proportion of what they held, for a certain time, to the making and reparation
thereof. And after the making and first repair of the same; those then, who had
lands adjacent thereto, did, at their own costs, repair the same defects, which
afterward happened, and not any others.

And having perused the Ordinances of Sir Henry de Bathe, John de Lovetot, and
other Justices their associates, which were approved and confirmed by the King;
in which Ordinances it was expressly contained, that all persons, having Lands
or Tenements, or common of Pasture or Fishing; or that had defense and
preservation in any sort, or might have, by the Banks, Ditches, Gutters;
Sewers, etc. in those Marish grounds; ought to contribute, according to the
quantity of their said Lands and Tenements, either by number of Acres, or by
Carucates, according to the proportion of their said tenure, not only, to the
new making of the said Banks, Ditches, etc. but to their repair and support, as
often and whensover need should require: Whereupon it seemed meet to the said
Justices; that, not only they, who had grounds lying near to those Banks; but
also they, who held lands situate within the before-specified Marshes of
Monketone and Menstre; whether near, or at a large distance; forasmuch as they
are within the peril of the Sea, and had, or in some sort might have had safety
and defense by the same Banks, Ditches, etc. ought to contribute thereto,
according to the quantity of their tenure, without any favor, either to rich
or poor, of what condition, state, or dignity soever: And to be compelled
thereto, not only by distresses and amerciaments, but also by double the
chardge; and whatsoever other ways or means, is in the said Ordinances
contained.

And for the fulfilling of all these things, in the said Marshes of Monketone
and Menstre, it was then ordained and agreed, that a common Bailiff should be
elected by the Lords of the Fees, and Commonalty of the Marsh, within the said
Marsh of Monketone; and another Bailiff in the Marsh of Menstre; to supervise,
do, and execute all such things as to the Office of Bailiff of the Marsh
pertained, according to the judgment of the Jurats, or Dike-Reeves.

Also that there should be chosen xij honest and lawful men, by the Lords of
the Fees, or their Attorneys, and the Commonalty of the Marsh; or six of the
Marsh of Monketone, and six of the Marsh of Menstre, who had lands in the said
Marshes, lying in danger of the Sea; which twelve to be assigned and sworn,
jointly to oversee the Banks, Ditches, etc. in the said Marshes; and to measure
all the Lands, Tenements, and common of Pasture in those parts, which either
had or might have safety and defense, in any sort, by the said Banks, Ditches,
etc. to the end it might be known for how much they ought to contribute; and
who afterward, upon their Oaths might supervise those walls, Ditches, etc. and
place a certain Crest.
Keire in every part of the said Banks, of such height and thickness, that the
Marish grounds might be fitly preserved thereby: And that they should hold
their Last when and as often as it might be needful for any defect in repair.
And that a certain day be by them assigned, within the compass whereof those
defects should be made good, according to their discretion: And if the said
repairs were not completed within the time prefixed, that then the several
Bailiffs, within their particular Bayliwicks, should lay out their own moneys,
and receive the double thereof: And the xij men to give notice of the several
defects, to those Bailiffs, after the repairs were not made good within the
time so assigned. And if any of the said Bailiffs, Jurats, or Dike-Reeves did
die; or not give content to the said Lords of the Fees and Commonalty, others
should be chosen in their stead, by the Lords of the Fees, or their Attorneys,
if upon notice given they would come in; and by the Commonalty of the said
Marshes. And they to be accounted Bailiffs or Jurats of every Marsh, who should
have the consent of the Lords of the Fees, and greater part of the Commonalty
of the said Marsh, lest that by long delay much peril might happen.

Also that there be chosen out of the xij Jurats, two men, in either Marsh, who
were to be the Collectors of all such moneys, as should be assessed for those
common repairs; viz. in Gutters, Sewers, Water-gangs, and of the whole Bank,
which lies in common to be repaired and sustained: And those two so chosen, to
make Collections and disbursements; and of such their receipts and layings out,
afterward to render a just account to the said Lords of the Fees, or their
Attorneys, and to the Commonalty of the said Marshes, within the several
Marshes. And the Bailiffs of the Lords of the Fees to assist the said
Collectors in the assessing and gathering the said moneys, and likewise, if
need be, to distrain for the same.

Also that the said Common Bailiffs should cause the said xij men to meet
together, as often and whenever there might be need; or that there was any
danger, to supervise all the Banks, Ditches, Water-gangs, Sewers, and Gutters;
and to take certain consideration, before they departed, of all the defects;
and likewise to assesse a certain portion of money upon every acre, to each
Tenant, according to the quantity of what he held; and also to repair and amend
the said defects within a certain time, whether that they belonged to
particular persons, or the whole Commonalty; and for the fulfilling of all
those determinations, that they be not only compelled by distresses, but by
amerciaments; and double, if need required.

And the said Bailiffs moreover, should punish all such, as being refractory to
their summons, did not appear. And if any man's Land, lying within the Banks of
the said Marshes, were dug for the repair of the said Banks, Ditches, Sewers
or Water-gangs; or for any new Bank or Ditch; or for the making of an in-ditch
or out-ditch, that then the Commonalty of every Marsh should give satisfaction
to the party damnified, by the discretion and judgment of the said Jurats,
according to the usage of Marish Lands; having always respect to the quantity
of the ground so dug or lost: Saving always to the Lords of the Fees their
right which they had and ought to have against their Tenan^s within their
proper Fee, as well for having defense, as for the taking double, when through
their Tenants default, they did lay down their own moneys.

And lastly, that if any thing of difficulty, doubt, or obscurity did fortune
to arise in these Ordinances, that it should be reserved to the Decree and
Declaration of the before-specified Justices. Nor was it the intent of the said
Justices, that any persons, who ought to have safeguard by others; or that held
their lands under certain conditions, should be by this Ordinance excluded from
their defenses and agreements, in case that such their agreement were not
derogarory to the Law.

And for the performance of these Ordinances, William Shirreeve and John
Coopere of Hoo, were appointed Collectors of the moneys to be levied in
Menstre; and William de Everle and Thomas Hamon, in Monketone.

The next year following (which was the xvijth of the said King's reign) I find
that John de Lovetot and Henry de Apuldrefelde, being also constitued Pat. 16
E. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
Commissioners for the viewing of the Banks, Ditches, etc. in the parts of East
Kent, which were broken and in much decay, through the violence of the Sea; and
to provide remedy for the same; met Ex cod MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy
Cl^opatrae^ C. 7. f. 41. a.
at Erchesto, on the morrow after the Feast of St. James the Apostle; where all
those that held Lands lying within the Hundreds of Eastri and Cornilo, which
lay in danger of the Sea, by virtue of the said King's Precept, attended them;
as also such and so many lawful men by whom the truth in the premises might be
the better known. And it being then and there testified by the Commonalty of
the Country; that it was expedient for the said whole Commonalty to have one
Bailiff and xij Jurats, within those Marshes, in such sort as they of Romeney
Marsh, and the Marshes toward Sussex then had; the same Jurats appointed the
said whole Commonalty, then and there being, that they should make choice of
one Bailiff, and xij trusty and lawful men, viz. six of the Hundred of Eastrie,
and six of the Hundred of Eornilo, having Lands lying in peril of the Sea
within the precinct of those Hundreds. Who being accordingly chosen, did
^orthwith swear, that they would faithfully perform all things, which on the
King's behalf might therein be enjoined. Whereupon the said Commissioners
appointed them, that they should upon their Oaths justly measure all the Lands,
as well of the Lords, as Tenants, which lay in danger of the Sea within those
places: And having so done, that then the said Jurats should cause the said
Banks and Sewers to be made, at the common chardge of all those, which had
Lands in those parts, within the compass of that danger, for the safeguard of
them from the like peril, and defense of the Lands lying so in danger. And
moreover, that they should frequently oversee those Ditches and Sewers, and
cause them to be kept in repair at the common chardges, as aforesaid,
whenever need should require. And if any of the said xij Jurats should happen
to dye, or could not attend the care of the said Banks and Sewers; that then
another of the same Hundred, should be forthwith chosen by the rest of the
surviving Jurats, in each hundred; and sworn to perform all the premises
faithfully and diligently, together with the said other Jurats.

According to which Ordinance the said xij Jurats of the before-specified
Hundred of Cornylo; did then cause all the Acres of Land and Marsh, lying in
the said Hundred, and in the peril of the Sea, to be measured; the number
whereof were as follows; viz.

Acres. Belonging to the Abbot and Covent of St. Augustines in Canterbury
CLiii. The Tenants of Scholdone Ciii. The Tenants of Northbourne Lxx. The
Tenants of Fenglesham Lx. Dionyse de Foulmed Cx. Thomas de Bonyngton xcii.
Smothemershe contained in it self, xlv. Mennese of Cornylo contained Liii.
Collol and Laurence Marscall, had one Marsh called Calhill, containing iiii.
The Tenants of Dale CXLvi. Brokes of Monyngeham x. The Fee of Scholdone CLv.
The Prebend of Dale xlii. The Chamberlain of S. Augustines of Canterbury xiii.
The Tenants of Lydene, in the whole CCxxxiiii. The Prior of Dovor, and his
Tenants CCCvi. The Abbot and Covent of Langedone xliii. The Cotiers of
Northbourne Lix.
The total of all the Acres. MDC. The total of the Assessment xxxv l. viii s.
iiij d.

In like manner did the same Jurats measure the Lands lying within the the
Hundred of Eastrie wherein they found that; Acres. The Prior and Covent of
Christ-church in Canterbury, had in the whole CCCCiii. The Tenants of Halklyng
Lx. The Tenants of Worth XC. Likewise toward Henelyng iii. The Field called
Herynglond, x. The Field adjoining to Herynglond, on the North xv. In one
Marsh, called Garestoft xxv. In the Marsh, called Stapynberghe Cviii. In the
Marsh, called Prestemed xv. In the Marsh from Hamme bridge, to the curtilage of
John Feykyn L.


The total of all the Acres DCCLxxix. The total of the Assessment xvi l. iiii
s. vii d.

Acres. Sir Bertram de Trauncrey, and his Tenants Lviii. John Fitz Bernard. xl.
Nicholas de Sandwyche ^xxxix. The Heirs of Simon de Ercheslo L. Thomas Edwards
and his Partners, at Sanddowne Cxxxiiii. The Heirs of Henry de Schenebroke vi.
The total number of Acres CCCLxxvii.

The total of the Assessment -- vii l. xvii s. i d.

The total of the Acres in both Hundreds, MMDCCCLvii. Acres.

The total of the whole Assessment -- Lix l. x s.

In the same year ( viz. 17 E. 1.) William Barry of Rolvyndenne complaining,
that whereas one William de Potone, in respect of his Lands lying within the
Marsh of Neubrok and Rolvyndene, near to the Sea coast, betwixt Smalhede and
Mayhamme, ought to repair and maintain certain Banks, Ditches, etc. for the
defense of his Lands and Tenements, and of others having lands in that Marsh,
against the violence and rage of the Sea; and that the said William de Potone,
notwithstanding that himself and his Ancestors, had always wont to repair and
maintain them, did then withdraw himself from so doing; the King therefore by
his Letters Patents, bearing date at Ledes xxi Aug. did constitute Pat 17 E. 1.
m. 10.
Henry de Appeltrefeld, Robert de Savauuz, and Henry de Ledes, his
Commissioners to enquire the truth thereof, and to make redress accordingly.

The next year following, upon the like complaint of Osbert de Forshamme, Hugh
de Herindenne and Eustace de Casinghamme; that whereas John Malemeins, by
reason of his lands in Rolvindenne aforesaid, lying near the Sea coast, betwixt
Mayhamme and Newindenne, ought to repair and maintain certain Banks, Ditches,
etc. for the defense of the said Lands, and the Lands of others, against the
force of the Sea; he the said John, notwithstanding that himself and his
Ancestors, had usually so repaired them, did maliciously neglect so to do; by
means whereof, the said Osbert, and others, holding Lands in those parts, did
through the violence of the Sea, undergo grievous and intolerable losses; the
said King by his Patent dated at Kings-Clipston 30 Oct. 18 E. 1. appointed Pat.
18 E. 1. m. 5.
the said Henry de Apletrefeld, and Bertram de Tancre, his Justice^ to enquire,
and make redress thereof.

The like Commission, upon the complaint of William de Barry of Rolvyndene,
against the said John Malemeins, who by reason of his lands in the Marsh of
Westbroke, ought to have repaired certain Banks and Ditches there, and
neglected so to do; was directed to the before-specified Henry and Bertram.

In the same year 8 Dec. Hugh de Blund, John de Dovor, and William de Gatecumbe
were constituted Pat 18 E. 1. in dorso m. 44.
Commissioners to oversee the Banks, Ditches, etc. lying on the Seacoast
within this County of Kent.

And the next ensuing year, upon a farther complaint made by the
before-specified Osbert de Hamme and others, against the said John Malemeyns,
for his neglect to repair the Banks and Ditches betwixt Mayhamme and
Newindenne, formerly mentioned, the said King by his letters Pat. 19 E 1. m. 22.
Patents dated at Asherugge, associated Will. de Gaselhamme to the said Henry
and Bertram, to make a new enquiry thereof.

In 20 E. 1. the King being informed, that Richard Ferynge, Parson of the
Church of Lymene, having, by reason of his Lands and Tenements belonging to his
said Church, at his own proper costs repaired, and was still ready so to do, a
certain Bank at Westhethe, situate near the Seacoast, as often as need
required: and that therefore he ought not to contribute to the repair of any
other Banks, forasmuch as neither himself nor his Predecessors, Parsons of that
Church, had ever been accustomed so to do: And that nevertheless, John de
Chert, Bailiff of Romenhale Marsh, and the xxiiij Jurats of the said Marsh, had
newly distrained him, together with others of those parts, for the repair of
the Banks and Ditches, near the Sea-^oast, at Appeldere; the said King
herefore, not willing that the said Par^on should suffer wrong therein, granted
^is Commission Pat 20 E. 1. m. 2. in dorso
, bearing date at Chau^one the 18th of Febr. unto Stephan de Pencestre, and
William de Echingham, to make enquiry in the Premises, and to make redress of
such injury as they should find to have been done therein.

And in 27 E. 1. the Sea-banks in this County, being grown to decay in diverse
places, Robert de Septva^s, and William Mause were constituted the Pat. 27 E. 1
in dorso m. 28
King's Justices to take view of them, and to take order for their speedy
repair.

In 2 E. 2. William de Walleins and others, being constituted Ex cod. MS. penes
O^o. S. I^^n c^p. Just^c. d^ ^anco 3 D^c. 1657. t. 12. b.
Commissioners for the viewing of the Banks and Water-gangs in this County,
sat at Newcherche upon the Monday next following the Feast of S. Mildrede the
Virgin, in the said year; where, by the common assent of the Lords of the
Marshes of Lyde and Oxney, and the appointment of the King, it was ordained, Ex
cod. MS. penes O^o. S. I^^n c^p. Just^c. d^ ^anco 3 D^c. 1657. t. 12. b.
that thenceforth the said King's common Bailiff in Romeney Marsh, should
oversee the Bailiffs and Jurats of the said Lyde and Oxney; and when necessity
should require, to summon them, together with the xxiiij Jurats of Romeney
Marsh, to fit places, to consult of Ordinances and making Laws for the defense
of the Lands in the said Marshes; so that they should always abide by the
Determinations and Customs of the said Jurats, for the less loss and more
safeguard of their Lands, notwithstanding any Custom to the contrary: Saving
always the tenor of the King's Charter granted to the Commonalty of the said
Marsh, and likewise the Ordinances of Sir Henry de Bathe, as also of John de
Lovetot and his associates, for to remain in their full power.

In the same year Henry de Cobham Junior, John Malemeyns and William de
Bernefeld were appointed Pat. 2 E. 2 m. 22. in do^so cedul^.
by the King, to take view of the Banks, Sewers, etc. in East-Kent. So likewise
were Wares^o de Valeynes, John Malmeynes, and Henry de Worhope assigned Pat. 2
E. 2. m. 19. in dorso.
to make enquiry of the Banks, Ditches etc. in the Marshes of Meyhamme and
Gatesdenne, upon the Sea coast, betwixt Smallyde and Meyhame, then wanting
repair, through the default of Raphe de Thordonne, Scoland de Forshamme, Thomas
Fitz Hubert of Hechyndenne, and Walter de Marcleshamme^ who held lands in those
Marshes.

In 6 E. 2. the Jury for the Hundred of Cornylo exhibited a Presentment Ex cod.
vet. MS. pen^s Rog. (...). ^^ronettum p 108.
unto Hervic de Stantone and his fellow Justices Itinerants, sitting at
Canterbury in the Octaves of S. John Bapt. importing that the Prior of
Christs-Church in Canterbury, did, about ten years then past, divert the course
of a certain water, called Gestling, in which such Felons as were condemned to
death, within the before-specified Hundred,
ought to suffer judgment by drowning; so that by this turning of that stream,
those condemned persons could not there be drowned as formerly; and that this
was to the prejudice of the King, etc. And they likewise presented, that the
said Prior, about two years then past, raised a certain Trench of four foot, by
which the same water of Gestling, coming from the upper part of that Country,
had wont to pass unto the Sea, and wherein the King had used to have fishing
worth Cs. by the year: And that by the said diversion, the King not only lost
the profit of his fishing, but a thousand and five hundred Acres of Land were
thereby drowned, to the great damage of the said King, and all the Country
thereabouts: The Shireeve therefore had command to summon the said Prior etc.

Who appearing, and the said Jury taking the premises into farther
consideration, said upon their Oaths; that, as to the Fishing, the said Prior
and Covent had anciently a certain mill in a place called Lydene; which Mill
being burnt in the time of war, there was no other there built till that the
Prior then living about...... years past erected a new one: And they said, that
after the building thereof, the said Prior raised a certain Gutter, four foot
high, which had there been made in former time, for conveyance of the water
from the upper parts of the Country: And they said likewise, that without the
said Gutter, there then was a certain Fishing, which the Kings Officers
belonging to Dover Castle (it being within the liberties thereof) sold
sometimes for 30s. per annum, sometimes for 20s. and sometimes for less: And
that the course of the said water, which passed through the before-specified
Gutter, passed to that place, wherein those condemned persons had wont to be
drowned, and their bodies carried to the Sea. And they moreover said, that
after the same Gutter was so raised, the water, so descending from the upper
parts beforementioned, could not pass through it, whereby not only the said
fishing became totally lost, but the drowned bodies could not be conveyed to
the Sea by that Stream as formerly; and all this, by reason that the water had
not it is passage there, as usually; and that the ground without the Gutter so
increased, and grew higher, that the stream could not have it is course there.

And the said Jury being asked, how long that Gutter had been so raised; they
answered, for four years only^ And what the said fishing was yearly worth; they
replied one Mark. The Shireeve thereof had command, that he should cause the
said Gutter to be put into the same condition as it was before; and that the
earth, without the Gutter, so raised, should be thrown down again at the
chardge of the said Prior etc. so that the course of the beforementioned water
might run as it formerly did; and the said Prior was amerced.

About two years afterward, viz. in 8 E. 2. Will. de Basinges, Will. de
Swantone, and Will. de Leteriche were constituted Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m. 122. in
dorso.
Commissioners to oversee the Banks, Ditches, etc. in the Marshes of Romenale,
and Oxene, in this County; and to take order for their repair.

So also in 9 E. 2. was Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m. 17. in dorso.
Robert de Kendale, then Constable of Dovor Castle, John Malmeyns of Hoo, and
Will. de Cotes, for those in East-Kent. The like Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 21. in
dorso.
Commission had John de Ifelde, Will. de Cotes, Stephan de la Dene, and Will.
Lotriche, in 10 E. 2. As Ib.
also the said Robert de Kendale, Nich. Kyriell, John Malemeyns of Hoo, and
William de Cotes.

In 11o E. 2. Thomas de Sandwiche, Will. de Cotes, Will. de Derby and Thomas de
Poveyn, were specially appointed Pat. 11 E. 2. m. 31. in dorso.
to view the Banks, Ditches etc. in the Marsh of Chistelet, lying also in
East-Kent; and to cause the defects therein amended.

The next year following, Edmund de Passele, Will. de Dene, and John de Ifeld
were assigned Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 2. m. 21. in dorso.
to take the like view etc. for those Banks and Ditches lying near Newendene
and Rolvyndene. In Pat. 14 E. 2. p. 2. m. 7. in dorso.
14 E. 2. John Abell, and Robert de Shirlond, for those on the Banks of Medway,
near to Reynham and the parts adjacent, which had received much decay by the
fresh waters. And in P^t. 16 E. 2. p. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
16 E. 2. the before-specified Edm. de Passele, John de Ifeld, and Stephan de
la Dane, again for those in East-Kent.

In 20 E. 2. the Prior of Bilsyntone representing Esc. 20 E. 2. n. 14.
to the King; that whereas John Maunsell, the founder of that Monastery, had
given to the Canons of that House and their Successors, the Manor of Over
Bilsyngtone, with the appurtenances; whereunto a certain salt Marsh, situate in
Lyde, near Romenale, containing Lx Acres, did belong: which both at the time of
the said grant, and since, had been always drowned by the flowings of the Sea;
humbly petitioned, Esc. 20 E. 2. n. 14.
that he would please to grant license for the drayning thereof; and that it
might be reduced to culture, by the defense of Banks, according to the Marish
Law. Whereupon the said King issued forth a Writ of Ad quod dampnum to his
Escaetor for this County, commanding him to enquire whether the same might be
effected without prejudice to himself or others. Upon which enquiry, the Jury
certified Esc. 20 E. 2. n. 14.
upon their Oaths, that it might: and that the said Marsh contained of it self
CCxl. perches in length, and xl perches in breadth; and that it was of no value
before the drayning, and banking thereof; but that being so banked and drayned,
it might be yearly worth xxxs. every Acre prized at vid.

In 2 E. 3. upon complaint Ex bund. de Brev. and Recordis, Wallia and fossata
tangentibus, in Arce Land. n. 2.
made to the King on the behalf of those that held lands of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, lying within the Isle of Tanet, Gravene, and Harnhull; showing,
that whereas diverse Banks, Ditches and Sewers, during the time that the
Temporalities of the said Archbishopric, by the vacancy thereof, remained in
the said King's hands, were decayed and worn down by the violence of the Sea;
which Banks etc. the Archbishops of that See, had used to repair; the said
King, directing his Commission to the Guardians of the Temporalties of the said
Archishoprick, commanded them by an Inquisition to be taken thereupon, and such
other ways and means, as should be most expedient, to enquire whether he ought
to repair those Banks, by reason of the said Temporalties, at that time in his
hands.

By virtue of which Precept John de Ifelde and other the Commmissioners for
that purpose, came to Gravene and Harnhull, to view the said Banks, and called
before them, upon Tuesday next after the Feast of the Ascension, in the year
abovesaid, xij honest and lawful men, who were Tenants of the same
Archbishopric, in those parts; and finding diverse of the said Banks, very
ruinous, and almost totally broken down, made enquiry, by John at Fayrebroke,
and other his Fellow Jurors, touching that matter. Who upon their Oaths then
certified, that in the 17 year of K. Edward the second's reign, there were in
the said Towns of Gravene and Harnhull DL Acres of Marsh, lying in North-mershe
and Denle, in the Demesne and Fee of the before-specified Archbishop, and
diverse men of those parts: Of which, the portion belonging to the said
Archbishop was CLxiii Acres and a half of Marsh, which by the flowing of the
Sea-tides had wont to be drowned; for prevention whereof, by the consent and
good liking of Walter then Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Tenants there^ and
all other persons of those parts, who were Tenants of those Marshes, in the
month of June, in the before-specified year, there was a Bank made, containing
in length CCCxx Perches, and in breadth two Perches, by which the said Marshes
were included and defended: Which Bank continued until the Friday next after
the Feast of St. Vincent, in the first year of the said King Edward the third:
On which day it suddenly happened, through the violence of the winds, and raging
of the Sea, that a piece of the said Bank of North-mersh, containing Cxx
Perches, was v^ry much broken, and almost quite destroyed.

And they farther said, that there was within the said Town of Gravene, in a
place called Clyvesmersh, part of a Bank, containing xvij perches, by which
xxviii Acres of Marsh, of the Demesnes of the Archbishop of Canterbury were
defended; which Bank, through the said tempestuousnesse of the Sea, was beaten
down, being then in the Kings hands by reason of the said vacancy of the
Archbishopric: And that if speedy remedy were not had, for the repair of those
Banks, both the said Marshes would be in danger to be drowned. And they said
moreover, that the decay in the said Bank of the North-mersh, could scarce be
made good for xxijl. xvijs. viijd. For the raising of which sum for that
repair, the said Jurats assessed every Acre of the said DL Acres of Marsh, at
ten pence; whereof the portion for the Archbishops Demes^e, came to vil. xvis.
iijd. And they likewise said, that the beforementioned part of the Bank at
Clyvemershe, containing xvij perches, might be repaired for two Marks and a
half: And that though they had received command, that they should take care
that no more damage, for want of these repairs, should happen to those parts,
in respect of what concerned the said King; they had nevertheless forborne to
be at any cost therein, until they should receive farther signification of his
royal pleasure. And lastly, as to the Banks in the Isle of Thanet, that they
found them all in good repair.

In 11 E. 3. upon a Writ E^c^ 1^ E. 3. n^ 103. (...).
of Ad quod dampnum, the Jury certified, that it would not be prejudicial to
the King or any other, if license were given to John then Archbishop of
Canterbury, and to the Prior of Christs-Church in Canterbury, to suffer an
ancient Trench, leading from an arm of the Sea, called Ap^ldre, toward the
town of Romeney, which passed through the proper soil of the said Archbishop
and Prior, and which was then newly so obstructed by the Sea-sands, that Ships
could not pass thereby, to the said town of Romeney, as they had used; to be
wholly stopped up and filled, so that they the said Archbishop and Prior might
make their benefit thereof as they thought fit; in regard that there then was a
certain other Trench, leading from the said arm unto Romeney, lately made by
the force of the Sea, by which Ships and Boats might pass, without impediment
to the said town, as they had wont to do by the other, before it was so filled
up. And they said moreover, that the said ancient Trench was the proper soil,
of the before-specified Archbishop, Prior, and Margaret de Basinges; and that
it had been obstructed in such a sort, by the space of xxx years and more then
last past, by the Silt and Sea-sands, as that Ships could not conveniently
pass that way: And that the new Trench was more proper and sufficient, whilst
it was open, than the said old one, for the passage of Ships to Romeney
abovementioned; and did so remain at that time: And moreover, that the same
new Trench was the soil of the said Archbishop, Prior, and Covent, Margaret de
Basynges, and the Abbot of Roberts^rigge. And lastly, that the said old Trench
contained in length viiC. perches, and in breadth x. And the new one vC. perches
in length, and in breadth xx.

In 14 E. 3. Henry de Bradwey, Will. de Langley, and Thomas St. Nocholas, were
constituted Pat. 14 E 3. p. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
Commissioners for viewing and repairing the Banks and Ditches, in certain
Marshes lying betwixt the Towns of Sesalter, Gravene, and Hornehill, and others
adjoining thereto. So also were Pat. 14 E. 3. p 2. m. 21. in dorso.
William de Scotheni, Will. de Cotes, and Stephan de la Dane, for the like
Banks, Ditches, etc. lying on the Seacoast, in East-Kent.

In 25 E. 3. John de Cobham, Otto de Grandison, Will. Waure, and Stephan de
Horsham had the like Commission Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 3. m. 7. in dorso.
, for those betwixt Bigpole and Estflet, in this County. So also had Pat. 25.
E. 3. p. 2 m. 6 in dorso.
Sir Robert de Cheyne, Knight, Will. de Stavere, and John de Broke, for the
Banks etc. lying betwixt Newenton and Dovor.

In 31 E. 3. Thomas de Lodelawe, Will. de Halden, Pat. 21 E 3. p. 2. m. 25. ^n
do^so.
and Robert Bilknappe were appointed to take view of the Banks etc. in the
Marshes of Tenham, Lodenham, Stone, Ore, and Faversham, in this County, much
broken by the violence of the tides, and to provide for their repair.

In 27 E. 3. Robert de Herle, Will. de Haldene and Stephan Donet had Pat 37 E.
3. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
Commission to take view of all the Banks etc. in the Isles of Shepeye and
Thanet; as also in the parts of Gravene, Harnhull, Sesaltre, Gunneston,
Chistelet, Recolvre, and Leyden, near Sandwich; and likewise in the Marshes of
Tenham, Lodenham, Stone, Ore, and Faversham in this County of Kent;
and to determine all things touching their repair, according to the Custom of
the Marsh Lands, formerly used in this County. And the next year following,
Robert de Belknap, and Thomas de Walton Clerk, were appointed Pat. 38 E^ 3. p.
2. m. 13. in dorso.
to do the like in the Marshes of Tenham, and other adjacent places.

In 39 E. 3. the King being informed, Par. 39. E. 3. p 1. m. 19. in dorso.
that the Sea had more than formerly overflowed the Lands, Marshes, and other
Tenements, extending from a certain place called the Clivesende, within the
Isle of Tanet, unto the Town of Stonore, which contained in compass two miles;
whereby in a short time the hurt and damage done thereto, was such, as that it
was almost destroyed: And that, within a few days, except some help were had
to resist those violent overflowings, all the low grounds, adjoining to the Sea
and Arms thereof, within the Hundreds of Ryvesko, Wyngham, Prestone, and
Dounhamford, to an inestimable damage, would be overwhelmed; he assigned Par.
39. E. 3. p 1. m. 19. in dorso.
Raphe Spigurnell, then Constable of Dovor Castle, John Cobham, Robert Belknap
and others, to enquire and determine thereof according to the Law and Custom
of this his Realm. And in 41 E. 3. John Flemmyng Parson of the Church of
Whitstaple, John de Feversham, and Will. Tidecombe were constituted Par. 43 E
3. p. 2. m. 45. in dorso.
Commissioners, to view the Banks, Ditches, etc. lying betwixt Swalclif and
Graveney.

In 43 E. 3. John de Co^ham, Robert de Belknap, Will. de Horn, Simon de
Kegworth, and Thomas de Garwynton were appointed Pat. 43 E. 3. p. 2. m^ 45. in
dorso.
, to cause all the coasts of the Isle of Thanet, where Shfps or Boats might
land, to be fortified with Banks and Ditches, if they were capable thereof.

In 47 E. 3. the said Robert Belknap, with Roger de Asheburnham, Will. de
Toppeclyve, and Thomas de Harcheregge were assigned Pat. 47 E. 3 p. 1. m. 32.
in dorso.
to view all the Banks etc. betwixt Hetecrone, and Ealdyng, as also between
Patyndennesmel, and Elherst, in this County of Kent; and to do what should be
requisite concerning them, according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. In
the same year also was such an assignation Ibid. m. 8.
to Sir Thomas de Lodelowe Knight, Will. Horn, and Thomas de Shardelowe,
touching the Banks etc. betwixt Pekesende and the Marsh of Lesnes.

In 48 E. 3. Roger Dig, Will. Tydecombe, Nicholas Heryng and others had Pat.
48. E. 3. p. 1. m 30. in do^so.
the like Commission for the Banks in Harnhull marsh, betwixt Whitstaple, and
Faversham: So also had Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
Robert Bealknappe, Roger Dygge, Will. Horn^, and others, for those betwixt
Gravesend, and Shepeye, and thence to Recul^re; and so to Sandwiche, Dovor,
Romeneye, Promhelle, and Newendenne. The next year following, Robert Beleknap,
Thomas Reins, Lieutenant of Dovor Castle, and Warden of the Cinque Ports, with
Roger Dygge, and others, were in like manner appointed Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 1. m.
6. in dorso.
for those Banks etc. upon the Seacoast, extending from the Town of Hethe to
Romeneye, and thence to Promhull, and Apuldre. So also were Pat. 49. E. 3. p.
1. m. 1. in dorso.
Nich. Heryng, Will. Symme, Richard de Blore, and others, for those in the
King's Marshes of Slayhill, Werkeworthe, Greneberghe, Daundeleye, and North
mersh, in the Isle of Shepeye: And Sir John de Cobham, Knight, John de Sudbury,
Will. Toppeclive, and others, for Ib.
the Banks etc. in the Marsh, called Court broke, in the Isle of Oxene; to do
therein as to Justice should belong, according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm.

In 50 E. 3. Thomas de Garwynton, Will. Makenhad, Stephan Bittyngham, with some
others, were constituted Pat. 50 E. 3. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
Commissioners, for the view of those Banks etc. situate in the Marsh of
Harnhull, betwixt Whitstaple and Faversham. And Ib. m. 30.
Nicholas Heryng, John Godewot, Will. Symme of Uppechirche, and others, for
those in Motteneye marsh, at the Mannou^ called Quenescourte, in this County:
and to proceed in both these according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 1 R. 2. the before-specified Thomas Garwynton, Will. Makenhede, Stephan
Bettenham, and Richard Sandre, had Pat. 1. R. ^. p. 2. m. 23. in dorso.
the like appointment for those Banks etc. in the said Marsh of Harnhull,
betwixt Whitstaple and Faversham. So also had Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 1 m. 25. i^
do^so.
Will. Horn, Stephan Bettenham and John Fraunceys for those in the Marshes of
Ebbenesorok and Sharlee.

In 3 R. 2. Robert Bealknap, John Barry, Will. Horn, Will. Makenade, Stephan
Betenham, Stephen Pestenden, and John Broad, being constituted Pat. 3 R. 2. p.
1. m. 44. in dorso.
Commissioners for view of the Banks etc. in the Parishes of Stone, Witresham,
Appuldore, and Snergate in this County; as also of Idenne in Suffer, had
command to proceed in the repair of them, according to the Custom of the
Marsh,
and Law and Custom of this Realm. And in the same year the said Rob.
Bealknap, Will. Horn, with Nich. Heryng, Thomas Shardelowe, Will. Makenade,
and Will. Else, had Pat. 3. R. 2. p. 2. m. 6. in dorso.
the like Commission, for the view and repair of those Banks etc. lying betwixt
Pekesmere, and Stonore, near Sandwiche; and to do therein what should be
consonant to Justice, according to the Law and Custom of the Marsh aforesaid.
So also had Will. Topclyf, Will. Makenade and John Fraunceys, for those in
the Marsh of Harnhull, betwixt Whitstaple and Faversham.

The next year following the said Robert de Bealknap, Will. Topclyf, Will.
Makenade, John Roper, Thomas Chiche, and Will. Brenchele, had Pat. 4 R 2. p.
1. m. 17. in dorso.
the like appointment for those betwixt Feversham and Muston. And in Pa^. ^. R.
2. ^. ^. m. 29. in do^so.
5 R. 2. Rob. de Ashton, Robert Bealknap, Arnald Sauvage, Thomas Garwynton,
Will. Symme, and Elyas Reyner, for those in the Marsh of Ore, within the
Hundred of Middleton; and to determine of all things therein according to the
Custom of Romeney marsh, to that time reasonably used.

In 9 R. 2. Simon de Burley, Constable of Dovor Castle and Warden of the Cinque
Ports, Sir Thomas Symond Knight, Roger Ashburnham, Stephan Betenham, and John
Broke, were constituted Pat. 9 R. 2. p. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
Commissioners to view and repair the Banks etc. betwixt Beauclif and
Sturdes^ale. And Ibid.
Will. Horn, Will. Makenade, Stephan Betenham, and John Lynet, for those
betwixt Fairfeld and Apuldre:
By which Commission the said William and the rest had authority given them to
take so many Carpenters, with other Artificers and Laborers, as should be
needful for repair of those Banks, Ditches, etc. upon competent wages for their
work therein, in respect of the great and urgent necessity for making good the
said Banks etc. with all expedition.

In 10 R. 2. Simon de Burley, then also Constable of Dovor Castle etc. Robert
Bealknap, Thomas Garwinton, and John Colepepir had the like Commission Pat. 10
R. 2. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
for the Banks etc. lying betwixt Faversham and Sandwiche. And in 12 R. 2. Sir
John de Cobham Knight, Sir Thomas Fogge Knight, Sir Arnold Sauvage Knight, with
others, were Pat. 12 R. 2. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
appointed to view and repair those Banks, which were in the Marshes of Thanet;
as also betwixt Reculvre, and a certain place called S. Mary Clif; and farther
specially directed by their Commission, to hear and determine all things
concerning the premises according to the Law and custom of Romeney marsh, to
that time used: As also to take so many Ditchers, with other Workmen and
Laborers, as might be needful for the said work, upon fitting wages to be paid
to them for the same; and this in respect of the great and urgent necessity,
for the dispatch of that work.

The next year following John VVadham, Will. Horn, Will. Makenade, Stephan
Betenham, and John Lynet were constituted Pat. 13 R. 2. p. 1. m. 34. in dorso.
Commissioners to view and repair the Banks etc. betwixt Fairfelde and Apuldre,
and Snargate, then broken with the violence of the Tides; and to proceed
therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm of England, and the
Custom of Romeney marsh.

In 17 R. 2. the like Pat. 17. R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in dorso.
Commission was directed to John Colepepir, Will. Makenade, Stephan Betenham,
Thomas Brokhelle, and Nich. Potyn, for the view and repair of those Banks etc.
which were betwixt the Cities of Canterbury and Rochester; and to act therein
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and of Romeney Marsh. So also
Ibid.
in the same year, the like to the said John Colepepir, John Septvaus, Will.
Elys, Will. Tydecoumbe, and Richard Bartelot, for those betwixt the said City
of Canterbury and Sandwiche, and to act therein as aforesaid.

In 22 R. 2. Stephan Betenham, Robert Oxebregge, Will. Berton, and Thomas
Ikham, had the like Pat. 22 R. 2. p. 1. m. 2. in dorso.
appointment for those Banks etc. lying betwixt the Town of Ebbene in Oxene,
and the Town of Brensete. So also had Pat. 1. H. 4. p. 5. m. 22. in dorso.
Will. Makenade, Stephan Betenham, Will. Bertone, Will. Bertyn, and Henry
Horn in 1 H. 4. for those upon the Seacoast, betwixt the Towns of Smallyde
and Promhelle. And Pat. 2 H. 4. p. 1. m. 12. in dorso.
in 2 H. 4. Will. Rykhill, Will. de Makenade, Stephan Betenhamme, John
Colepepir, Will. Bertone, Will. Elys, Thomas Ikham, and John Martyn of
Derteforde, for those Banks etc. situate between the Towns of Grethe and
Sandwiche. In all which Commissions, special care was taken that they should
proceed according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of
Romney Marsh.

In 3 H. 4. the King directing his Letters Pat. 3 H. 4. p. 1. m. 12.
Patents to the inhabitants of the Isle of Shepeye; wherein, taking notice of a
certain Sea-bank therein, extending it self from a place called Tremmodferye,
unto another place, named Cothelles; which, before the building of Quenesburgh
Castle, being only four foot in breadth, and afterward, by Edward the third,
late King of England, for the advantage of Carts and Wagons, passing from the
before-specified Ferry to the said Castle, was made thirty foot broad; had
suffered so much decay, that scarce a single person could then go upon it: and
that the said Inhabitants were not able to repair the same, without some
assistance from others; by the advice of his Council, granted unto them for
their better help in undergoing the said work, these several Customs, to be,
for the space of the three next ensuing years, assessed and collected; viz. for
every Horseman being a stranger that should come into or go out of the same
Isle by the said Bank, i d. And for every Footman an half penny: For every
loaded Horse i d. and every one empty an half penny.

In 10 H. 4. George Ballard, Stephan Betenham, Rob. Oxenbregge, Vincent Fynche,
Thomas Oxenbrigge, Will. Merchant, John May, and John Lonsford were
constituted Pat. 10. H. 4. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, etc. on the
Seacoast, and in the Marshes, betwixt the Towns of Romeney and Promhull, then
ruinous by the rage of the Sea; and to proceed therein according to the Law and
Custom of the Marsh, and Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 13 H. 4. Rob. Clifford, Thomas Remys, John Martyn, Thomas Elys, Thomas
Merchant, John VVhitehed, and John Bertone had the like Commission Pat. 13. H.
4. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
for those Banks etc. lying betwixt Pekesend and Stonore, near Sandwiche;
wherein they were commanded to act according to the Law and Custom of the
Marsh.

In 3 H. 5. John Darelle, Roger Rye, Thomas Elys, Henry Horn, and Will.
Merchant had the like assignation Pat. 3 H. 5. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
for those betwixt the Towns of of Smalhede and Romene; and to act according to
the usage of the Marsh, and Law and Custom of this Realm.

The next year following, John Drylond, John Brynkle, Peter Hall, John
Salisbury, John Pecock, and the Shiriff of Kent, were appointed Pat. 4. H. 5.
p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
in like sort to view and take care of those Banks etc. lying in Ward mershe,
within the Parish of S. Nicholas in Tanet, then broken by the violence of the
waves; and to proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of Romney Marsh.

In 6 H. 6. John Bamburghe, Will. Cheyne of the Isle of Shepeye, John May,
Thomas Betyngham, and Thomas Groveherst, had the like appointment Pat. 6 H. 6.
p. 2. m. 8. in dorso.
, for the Banks etc. betwixt the City of Rochester and Whitstaple; and for
those in the said Isle of Shepeye; and to make Statutes and Ordinances,
besitting the defense and preservation of the Seacoasts, according to the Laws
and Customs of Romney marsh;
as also to do and determine all things touching the premises according to the
Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeney Marsh aforesaid: And
moreover to take such and so many diggers and laborers upon competent wages,
in respect of the present necessity, as should be requisite for that work.

In 17 H. 6. John Bamburgh, Richard Bruyn, Valentine Baret, Thomas Burges, and
Will. Garnet were appointed Pat. 17 H. 6. p. 1. m. 29 in dorso.
in like manner to view the Banks etc. on the Sea coast, from Feyrhede to
Hencle, then broken by the violence of the waves, and to take order for their
repair; proceeding therein according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm,
and the Customs of Romeney Marsh: And to take Laborers upon competent
salaryes, in respect of the great necessity, as aforesaid.

The next year following Richard VVakeherst, Will. Bertyne, Thomas Betenham,
Thomas Hordene, Walter Colepeper, and John Derham, had Pat. 18 H. 6. p. 1. m.
7. in dorso.
the like appointment for the Banks etc. betwixt Smalhithe, and a certain place
called the Pendynge, and likewise betwixt Farnehille, and a Bank leading from
Mayteham to Pendynge aforesaid, in the Parishes of Tenterden and Rolveldene:
with power to make Statutes and Ordinances for the preservation of those places
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romney
marsh: As also to take so many Diggers and Laborers, in respect of the instant
necessity, as should be needful for that work.

In 28 H. 6. Will. Kene Esquire, John Bamburgh, Stephan Slegge, and others,
were in like fort constituted Commissioners Pat. 28 ^. 6. p. 2. m. 22. in dorso.
for the view and repair of those Banks etc. betwixt the Town of Redyng and
Redehille; thence to Huntebornebrigge; thence to the up-land of Bregge, and
thence to the said Town of Redyng, in the Parishes of Tenterden, Apuldre, and
Wodechirche; and to make Statutes and Ordinances etc. as abovesaid.

In 13 E. 4. Sir John Fogge, Knight, Sir Will. Haute, Knight, Roger Brent, John
Fyneux, Will. Brent, John Nethirsole and John Heart, were Pat. 13 E. 4. p. 2.
m. 20. in dorso.
in like manner appointed, for those Banks etc. betwixt Tenterdene and Lyde: as
also to make Laws and Ordinances etc. as abovesaid.

In 14 E. 4. the King having received advertisement, that the Banks, Ditches
etc. lying on the Seacoast and Marshes betwixt Robertsbrigge in Sussex, and
the Town of Romney in this County of Kent, were by the raging of the Sea and
violence of the Tides, much broken and decayed, to the great damage of those
parts; and being therefore desirous that some speedy remedy should be used
therein, did by his Letters Ex vet. membr. in bi^l. Colloni^na.
Patents, bearing date at Westminster 16o Iulii, in the year abovesaid,
constitute Sir John Fogge, Sir William Haute, and Sir John Gilford Knights, and
John Elryngton, John Brumston, Henry Auger, Will. Belknap, and Robert
Oxenbregge Esquires; as also Bartholmew Bolney, Roger Brent, John Fyneux,
Vincent Fynche, John Nethersole, and John Heart, his Commissioners, giving power
to any four, three, or two of them, whereof the said Bartholmew, Roger, John
Fyneux, Vincent Fynche, John Nethersole and John Heart to be one; to take view
of the said Banks etc. and to enquire upon the Oaths as well of Knights as other
honest and lawful men of the before-specified Counties, as well within Liberties
as without, by whom the truth in the premises might be the better known,
through whose default these damages had there happened; and who they were that
had Lands and Tenements, or common of Pasture or Fishing in those Counties, or
had or might have preservation and benefit any manner of way by those Banks
etc. or loss for want of them; as well those that were remote as those that
were near to the danger; and to distrain all such, according to the quantity of
their Lands and Tenements, or number of Acres or Carucates, proportionable to
what they held; and so likewise for their common of pasture or fishing; and,
together with the Bailiff of the Liberties and other places of the Counties and
parts aforesaid, for the repair of those Banks, Ditches, Gutters, and Sewers;
and to make them or some of them new, where need should require: And likewise
for clensing the Trenches, and, if cause were, to stop them up; so that no
favor should be showed to any person whatsoever, rich or poor; or of what
state, degree, or dignity soever, who might have advantage by the said Banks,
or detriment for want of them.

And moreover to make agistments upon the Sea-Ditches for the safeguard of
those parts, according to the number of acres or perches; and as often as it
should be needful to renew them. And likewise to depute certain diligent and
faithful Guardians, for the preservation before mentioned; and to hear the
Account of the Collectors of moneys, which were to be levied for that occasion,
and for the repair of the said Banks, or obstruction of those Trenches: And
that they the said Commissioners, or any four, three, or two of them, whereof
the said Bartholmew, Roger, etc. to be one, to take distresses, either by
themselves, or others whom they should think fit to depute for that purpose,
for the arrerage of what ought to have been Collected, as often as need should
be.

And also to make and ordain fit and necessary Statutes and Ordinances for the
defense of the Seacoasts and Marshes aforesaid, and the adjacent parts,
according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm of England, and of Romeney
Marsh. And to hear and determine all the premises, as well at the said King's
suit, as the suit of any other whasoever, which should come in question before
them, according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of
Romeney Marsh aforesaid.

As also to take, and employ in the said works and repairs as many Ditchers,
and other workmen and laborers, as should be expedient for the works and
repairs before mentioned, upon competent salaries to be paid to them in that
behalf; in regard of the great urgent and instant necessity for expedition
therein.

Futrher requiring the said Commissioners, and any four, three, or two of them;
whereof the said Bartholmew, Roger etc. to be one, to accomplish the premises
in form aforesaid; and whomsoever they should find, either negligent or
refractory, in making their proportionable repairs belonging to them, to
compel them thereto by distresses and amerciaments, and such other ways and
means, as they should deem most expedient, to the end the said defects might be
suddenly made good. And to cause whatsoever they should ordain and determine
therein to be firmly observed; acting therein as to Justice appertained, and
according to the Law and Custom aforesaid: Saving to the said King all
amerciaments, and other things herein to him belonging.

Whereupon afterward, viz. on the tenth day of April, in the xviijth year of
the reign of the same King, the said Justices were informed; that all the Lands
and fresh Marshes, lying within the subsequent limits; viz. betwixt the Marsh
called Cowelese, toward the North; the lands in the Ree, leading from the said
Marsh to the place called Lynkehoke, near Romeney, toward the East; the way
leading from the said place called Lynkehoke, by the inside of the Bank at
Lyde; and through the midst of the high street of that town, to Pigwell, and a
place called the Holmestone, lying without the Bank called Wikewall; the Land
of Promhill, situate without the Banks called Simondes Wall and Kent Wall, and
the gulf of salt water, running from the Camer unto the said Marsh called
Cowelese toward the West; excepting the Marshes called the Kete, Denecourt
mershe, and Bourghser's mershe, and other Marshes then lately taken in by the
before-specified John Elryngton and Richard Gilford Esquires, with the Banks
belonging to them, were daily subject to the danger of inundation by the Sea
and salt water, for default of repair and support of the Banks of the Marshes,
called Estmersh and Becard, and of diverse other Marshes, which lying within
those limits (except before excepted) served for the defense and safeguard of
the same Land and Marsh, from the peril of the Sea, and inundation of the salt
water; were, through the violence of the tides; and overflowings of the fresh
waters, running to the Sea, broken in many places; so that inestimable losses
would very likely happen in a short time, unless a speedy remedy were taken.

By reason whereof, by virtue of the said Letters Patents, the Shireeve was
commanded, that he should not neglect for any Liberty, but cause xxiiij as well
Knights as other honest and lawful men of this County, by whom the truth might
be the better known, to come before the said Justices at Apuldore, in the said
County, on the Thursday before the Feast of the holy Trinity, then next
ensuing, to enquire and make certificate to the said Justices concerning the
Premises, and touching other Articles and circumstances specified in the said
Letters Patents; and lastly to do and receive what should be enjoined them on
the said King's behalf.

At which day came before the said John Fogge, John Scotte, Will. Haute, John
Elryngton, John Brumstone, and John Nethersole (six of the before-specified
Justices, at Apuldore aforesaid) William Brent, who prosecuted for the King in
this business. And Richard Haute, then Shireeve of Kent, made return of the
said Precept to him directed, executed; together with two several Panells
affixed thereto, containing the names of the Jurors, to enquire in form
aforesaid: All which being performed, as of right it should be, Robert Godfrey,
Thomas Ieffe, Will. Hikke, and others of the first Panell, made their
appearance; and being severally sworn, as is evident by those Panells, and
charged to enqui^e of the premises; and not being agreed on their Verdicts,
did severally request a farther day for the delivery up thereof, to the intent
they might in the mean time make more diligent enquiry of the premises, and
then present the same before the said Justices. All which upon that their
desire, and by the assent of the beforespecified Will. Brent, then the said
Kings Attorney in this business, was granted: and thereupon a day was given to
the said Jurors to come before the said Justices, at Lyde, in this County, upon
the Friday then next following. And the said Jurors were then advertised, that
they should in that interim enquire diligently of the premises, and then to
appear severally to deliver their Verdict; each man upon the penalty of xl s.

Upon which Friday, the said Sir John Fogge, and the other Justices last
mentioned, did all of them personally go to the said Land and Marsh, to take
view of the Banks, lying within the before-specified limits, touching the
danger whereof the said Justices had received information, as aforesaid: And
then and there the Bailiff and diverse of the Jurats of Romeney Marsh, mentioned
in the said Letters Patent, as also other discreet persons (to apply a fit and
proper remedy for avoiding this danger and loss) being expert men in the
Statutes, Ordinances and Customs of the said Marsh; as also very many others,
who had and might have by those Banks safeguard and defense for their Lands,
within the said bounds (except before excepted) and then and there, in their
presence, did take deliberate and diligent view of all those Lands and Marshes,
as well at a distance as nearest to the danger; and likewise of all the Banks,
and whatsoever else was necessary for the safeguard and preservation of those
Lands and Marshes; and did then desire of the beforementioned Bailiff and
Jurats of the said Marsh of Romney, and of the other discreet and expert men,
advice and counsel for applying a fit and speedy remedy in this behalf.

And afterward on the before-specified Friday, at Lyde aforesaid, came the
said Will. Brent (who then prosecuted for the King in this business) before
the said Sir John Fogge, and the rest of his said fellow Justices before named:
And as well the said Jurors of the first panell, as those of the second, being
impanelled in form aforesaid, as also sworn and chardged to enquire of the
premises, came, and severally said upon their Oaths; that in the said Lands
and Marshes within those limits before mentioned, except before excepted, the
wall of the Marsh of the Becard, called Becard Wall, leading from the Marsh
called the Kete unto the Marsh of Estmarsh: And also the Bank of the said
Marsh, called Estmarsh Wall, leading to the Ree Wall, were defective and stood
in need of repair, for resisting the Sea and salt water: And if that the salt
water of the Sea, should enter on any part of the said Banks, or in any place
from thence to Holmystone aforesaid (which is at the East part of the Bank,
called New Wall, lying betwixt the Sea and the Land of Promhill aforesaid) and
that a resistance thereof could not be easily made, all the Lands and Marshes
before mentioned, situate within the precincts before-specified, except before
excepted, touching the danger whereof information was given, in form aforesaid,
unto the said Justices, would be in a very short time overflowed with the salt
water, to an inestimable damage.

And the said Jurors did likewise severally express, that it would be proper
for the safeguard and defense of all those Lands and Marshes (except before
excepted) called Becard Wall, and Estmarsh Wall, to be sufficiently repaired as
soon as conveniently could be, and continually sustained against the violence
of the Sea, Storms, and Tides, lest the salt water should get in at any of
them, and thereby all these Lands and Marshes (except before excepted) be
drowned. And they farther said, that it would be very expedient, that the said
Bank called New Wall, which is without the said Banks called Kent Wall and
Simonds Wall, and within the bounds aforesaid (except before excepted) should
be sufficiently repaired as soon as might be, to withstand the rage of the Sea,
storms, and Tides, for the defense of the said Banks called Kent Wall and
Simondes Wall; and afterward continually maintained for prevention of the
peril of the Seas inundation, whereunto those Lands and Marshes were subject.

And likewise the said Jurors, in form aforesaid sworn, and severally chardged,
did say upon their Oaths; that it seemed to them expedient, that the Lands and
Marshes, called Cheyncourt, Saint Thomas Innyng and White kempe, which were
within those precincts and liable to the said danger, should be drayned by one
Sewer in the Land of Thomas then Archb. of Canterbury, at Round mershe,
running into the Sea where the Gutter then was; and that there should be made
in that place Sluices and Gutters, fit and proper for that purpose: And that
there should also be Bailiffs, Jurats, and other Officers, within the said
limits (except before excepted) for the view and conservation of the Marish
grounds and Banks within those bounds, except before excepted. And that there
should be had for every Sea-bank there, a common Forland, as before that time
had been used, upon which such carriages as should be necessary for the repair,
maintenance, or making of those Walls, might, without impediment be made.

And likewise the said Jurors, being in form aforesaid sworn, did severally
say; that the Land-holders in the said Marsh, called the Becard, who ought to
pay and contribute to the repair and maintenance of the Banks within those
limits, except before excepted, had not any way, by which they might go, ride,
or drive to that Marsh nor from it, except over other men's Lands, or upon the
Banks or Forland leading thence to and from the said Marsh. And they said, that
according to the Custom of the Marsh-law there, in all such cases before that
time used, the Tenants of that Land, at their pleasure, might go, ride, and
drive to and fro to the said Marsh, and from the said Marsh, over and upon the
Forland of the Banks leading to the said Marsh and from the same. And as to the
number of Acres, or partition of the Lands and Marshes etc., within those
limits (except before excepted) or of the certainty of the Land-holders, and
how much land every such Tenant had or held of the said Lands and Marshes,
within the said limits (except before excepted) the said Jurors did severally
present the certainty thereupon, according to the form, and as it was contained
in the Books of Sewers within those limits (except before excepted) then
exhibited before the said Justices.

And thereupon the said John Fogge, John Scotte, and others to the number of
eight of the said Justices, forasmuch as upon their said view and inquisitions
aforesaid made and taken, in form aforesaid, it evidently appeared to them;
that the said Lands and Marshes within those limits (except before excepted)
were liable to the danger of drowning by default in rep^ir and maintenance of
those Banks; whereupon in short time inestimable damage might accrue, unless a
fitting remedy in that behalf were the sooner had: and that all the Lands and
Marshes within those limits (except before excepted) might very well be
preserved and defended, by the repair and support of those Banks, and by the
making of Sewers, Ditches and Gutters in those Marshes, from the danger of the
Sea, and the floods of fresh waters, to the great commodity of all the
Landholders within those precincts (except before excepted:) and that in
default of such repair and support of those Banks and every of them, all the
lands and Marshes, those excepted as aforesaid, would be in peril of the Sea,
and easily overwhelmed, to the inestimable loss of all the Landholders there;
whereby all those Tenants, except before excepted, ought equally to contribute
to the cost and chardge of such repair and maintenance, for the safeguard and
defense of their lands and Marshes there, from this peril and inundation; viz.
every one of them according to the proportion of what he held, as his number of
Acres and Perches of land, there, as in the said Marsh of Romeney, according to
the Ordinances, Statutes and Customs thereof, had and to that time used, in
the like case there had wont and ought to be done.

Considering besides, that the said lands and Marshes,
lying within those limits (except before excepted) were never before settled
under any certain and fit Statutes or Ordinances, by any Authority, for their
secure defense and preservation: And moreover, forasmuch as the said King,
desiring seasonably to provide for the safeguard of this his Realm, and chiefly
for those parts upon the Seacoasts, in his Parliament held at Westminster the
sixth of October in the xijth year of his reign, and by diverse prorogations
continued till the first day of May in the xiiijth year thereof, by the assent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, sitting in the said Parliament, at the
Petition of the Commonalty of this his Realm, then and there exhibited to him,
amongst other things; ordained and constituted, that several Commissions of
Sewers, should be issued out to sundry persons by the Chancelour of England for
the time being, throughout all the parts of this Realm, where need should
require, according to the form of a certain Commission in a Statute made in the
Parliament of Henry the sixth (in Deed but not in Right King of England) held
at Westminster in the sixth year of his reign: And that the said Commissioners
should have full Power and Authority, to make, ordain and constitute Statutes
and Ordinances; and to perform all other things according to the power and
effect of those Commissions, as in the said Statute of the said xijth year
published, is more fully contained. Whereupon the said King issued out his
Letters Patents to the before-specified Sir John Fogge and the rest of the
Justices beforementioned, in form aforesaid; the tenor of which Petitions and
answers thereto; and of the Statutes, Ordinances and Customs of the said
Romeney Marsh, were contained in a certain Roll annexed thereunto.

Having also regard to the public advantage and common profit, as well by
virtue and authority of the said Statute, published in the said xijth year, as
of the said Letters Patents, as aforesaid, hereupon made to the
before-specified Justices, in form aforesaid, and other premises, that it
would seem just and equal to them in this behalf, and most consonant to reason,
to establish and ordain what should be most proper for the avoiding of the
perils and damages abovesaid; calling together such as the business concerned,
for the perpetual safeguard and preservation of the said lands and Marshes,
within those limits, except before excepted; by the assent as well of all those
Jurors of the Enquest aforesaid, appearing before the said Justices, who had
lands within the limits aforesaid, liable to the said danger, to be preserved
in form aforesaid; as also of very many Lords of Fees and other Land-holders
there being, on the said Friday, at Lyde aforesaid, in pursuance of the said
King's Royal purpose, for more advantage and less detriment, the said
Justices, did provide, make, and publish certain proper and commodious Statutes
and Ordinances for the King's people; and especially for all the Land-holders
in those grounds and Marshes, within the said limits, except before excepted,
not favoring any person therein; to endure and be observed for ever as
follows.

First it was decreed and ordained by the The Statutes and Ordinances of Sir
John Fogge, Knight, and his Fellow Justices.
with the consent aforesaid; that thenceforth and for ever, there should be,
within the Lands and Marshes aforesaid, within the limits aforesaid (except
before excepted) two Bailiffs, twenty four Iurats, two Collectors, and two
Expenditors, of the Land-holders within those limits (except before excepted)
for the preservation, safeguard, and defense of the said Lands and Marshes
(except before excepted) and of the Banks belonging thereto: By the
consideration of which said xxiiij Iurats, ten or eight of them at least, the
said Lands and Marshes (except before excepted) ought to be governed, kept,
defended, and preserved from the peril of the Sea, and inundation of the fresh
matters, by Banks, Watercourse, and other necessary means. And for execution
of that their Statute and Ordinance in this behalf, the said Justices, by the
said assent, upon the said Friday, at Lyde aforesaid, did nominate, choose,
ordain, and constitute, of the Land-holders, within those limits (except before
excepted) Henry Bate, and Simon Godard Bailiffs; Andrew Bate, John a Bregges,
and others, Iurats; Peter Fermour, and Will. Aleyn, Collectors; and Stephan
Lovecock, and John Inglet, Expenditors, of and in those Lands and Marshes,
except before excepted, for the preservation, safeguard, and defense of those
Lands and Marshes (except before excepted) and the Banks thereof. And the said
Bailiffs, xxiiij Iurats, Collectors and Expenditors, so named, chosen, ordained
and constituted, personally and severally before the said Justices, upon the
same Friday at Lyde aforesaid, did take their Oaths, and were chardged, viz.
every of them to his Office, and to all which thereto pertained or should
pertain in that business, to do, exercise and perform well and faitfully; that
is to say, the said Bailiffs, according to the form and effect of the Oath of
the Bailiffs, whereof mention is hereafter made; and the before-specified
xxiiij Iurats, according to the form and effect of the Oath of the Jurors,
afterward also recited; and the said Collectors, according to the form and
effect of the Oath of the Collectors, afterward likewise noted; and the said
Expenditors, according to the form and effect of the Oath of the Expenditors,
in like sort hereafter specified.

Also forasmuch as it did evidently appear to the said Justices, by the view
and Inquisitions aforesaid, made and taken in form aforesaid; that the said
Banks, called Symondes Wall and Kent Wall; and also the said Banks of those
Marshes, called Est mersh aad Becard, within the limits aforesaid, were
defective, and broken in diverse parts, to the great peril of inundation,
thereby like to befall all the said Lands and Marshes, within the limits
aforesaid (except before excepted) unless a speedy remedy were applied; it was
ordained and decreed, by the consent aforesaid, that the said Banks, should be
sufficiently repaired and new made with all possible haste, and so repaired and
made new, to be kept and continually maintained for the defense and safeguard
of the said Lands and Marshes, within the limits aforesaid, except before
excepted.

And as to the reparation and renewing of the said Banks, called Symondes Wall,
and Kent Wall, to be forthwith, for the present, made; it was upon certain
reasonable considerations moving the said Justices, decreed and ordained, by
the consent aforesaid; that every person having Land within the said Banks
called Symondeswalle, and Kent Wall, and the Bank called Goneswalle, within
the limits aforesaid, for every acre of his Land there: And likewise every one
having Lands in the Marsh called Ockolt, within those limits, for every Acre of
his Land there, should pay two pence more than any other Land-holder within the
Marshes aforesaid, except before excepted, should pay for one acre there, to
the assessing of the Tax, for the instant repair and new making of those Banks,
called Kent Wall, and Symondes Wall: And then afterward for ever, according
to the Ordinances and Statutes of Romeney marsh aforesaid, all the
Land-holders, within the Lands and Marshes aforesaid (except before excepted)
for the time being, equally to contribute, to the repair, maintenance and
custody of all the Banks of those Lands and Marshes, within the said limits
(except before excepted) for the repairing, sustaining, and making what should
be for the defense and safeguard thereof; viz. every of the said Tenants
according to the proportion of his tenure, and number of his Acres and Perches
there: And that the reparations, scowring, and making, of all the Sewers,
Ditches, Water-gangs, Gutters, and Bridges in the said Lands and Marshes,
within the limits aforesaid (except before excepted) then being, or to be made
for the safeguard and defense of the same, should be done at the chardge and
expenses of such, as anciently they had wont to be.

Also it was ordained and decreed, that

And if it should happen, that any Land-holder, within those Lands and Marshes
(except before excepted) who ought to contribute to the premises, for his
Lands therein, in form aforesaid, to be deprived or hindered of any way, to go,
ride, drive, or carry to his Lands there, or other Lands adjoining, by reason
of the inundation of salt water, or the raising of any Bank, or other thing for
the defense and safeguard aforesaid, there made, or to be made; or so to be
stopped or prevented, that he could make use of the said way; and having no
other passage either to go, ride, drive or carry, in form aforesaid; it should
be lawful to him for the future, during the time of such his hinderance, to go,
ride, drive and carry upon and over the Land called the inner Forland adjoining
to the Bank, or Banks, wheresoever in the said Lands and Marshes, within the
beforementioned limits (except before excepted) where he should think most
meet, to go, ride, carry, and drive to his Land there, or to his adjacent Land;
and over the said Bank or Banks, overthwart them, to such his Land, without the
impediment of any person whatsoever; repairing and maintaining at his own
proper chardges the said Bank or Banks sufficiently, in that part, where he the
said Land-holder should so happen to go, ride, drive, or carry.

Also it was decreed and ordained; that twice every year, for ever, there
should be held a principal and general Last, within the said Land and Marsh,
except before excepted, by the said xxiiij Iurats for the time being, or ten or
eight of them at the least, viz. once within the xvme of Easter, and again
within the xvme of S. Michael the Archangel, at Brokland, or in another place
within the precinct of those Lands and Marshes, except before excepted, to be
summoned and appointed by the Bailiffs aforesaid, for the time being: and that
other several Lasts should be there held, when and as often as there might be
occasion, by the summons of their Bailiffs.

The manner of choosing the Bailiff.
xxiiij Iurats, Collectors or Expenditors, of and in the said Lands and
Marshes, within the beforementioned limits (except before excepted) for the
time being, should decease, or be removed from his Office; that then in the
room of the said Bailiff so deceasing, or removing, another of the Landholders
and residents within those Lands and Marshes (except before excepted) to be
chosen and constituted by the common assent of the Lords of the Fees, having
authority there for that time, or by their Attorneys. And where the greater
number of them should consent, the said election to stand in the said principal
and general Last, to be held in form aforesaid; unless upon necessity or cause
reasonable, any of those Bailiffs, for the time being, should sooner, within
the same year, be removed; and that it were expedient, before the said
principal and general Last ought to be held in form aforesaid, that another
were put in his place; and that then an election be made of a Bailiff, in form
aforesaid, in any other Last, as aforesaid to be held. So likewise in the stead
of any of the said xxiiij Iurats, Collectors, and Expenditors, so deceasing, or
removed from his Office, as aforesaid, another of the said Land-holders and
residents to be chosen and constituted; so that the said election be made, by
the said Lords of the Fees and Bailiffs, and ten or eight of the Iurats
aforesaid, out of the most trusty, discreet and wealthy Land-holders, within
those Lands and Marshes, except before excepted.

The Penalty of the Bailiff elected, not consenting thereto.
Also it was decreed and ordained, that if xl s. to be levied of his Goods, and
Catalls,
Lands, and Tenements, wheresoever they should be within the County of Kent, to
the common benefit, reparation, and maintenance, as aforesaid, and other things
to be performed by the said Bailiffs: and then that forthwith there be a new
election of a Bailiff made in the said Last, in form aforesaid, instead of him
that so refused; who should take his Oath in manner before specified, and
undergo the Office.

How those that are absent in the general or principal Last ought to be amerced.
Also it was decreed and ordained, that if xxiiij Iurats should make default in
any such general and principal Last, to be held in form aforesaid, unless he
had a reasonable and allowable excuse, he should be amerced in xij d. to the
common profit aforesaid, to be levied by the before-specified Bailiffs.

The penalty of the Collectors, Jurors, and Expenditors not submitting to their
election.
xxiiij Iurats, Collectors, or Expenditors, in form afore^aid, who did refuse
to accept of the said Office, and to take his Oath on that behalf, he should be
amerced in xx s. to be employed to the benefit aforesaid, and to be levied by
the said Bailiffs; and forthwith another made choice of in his stead, in form
aforesaid. And if the said Iurats should be summoned within those limits
(except before excepted) to be at the said several or special Last, to be held
in form aforesaid; where at the least eight or ten did not come, so that such
Judgments and Decrees, for the safeguard of the said Lands and Marshes (except
before excepted) could not be made, for want of a greater number of the said
Iurats so absent, that then every one of the said Iurats, so absent, to be
amerced in vid. to the common benefit aforesaid, to be levied and expended by
the Bailiffs of those Marshes: Of which said amerciaments, and other the like
above specified, the said Bailiffs to make account for, in the said principal
Last in form aforesaid.

The receiving of double, by the Bailiff.


The penalty of hindering the Bailiffs, so that they dare not exercise their
Offices.


In what sort he that is absent, and chosen Bailiff, ought to be compelled to
receive his Office.
Also it was decreed and ordained, that Canterbury, the Prior of Christs-Church
in Canterbury, or the Abbot of Robertsbrigge, for the time being, or some one
of them, and accept of the said Office, and take their Oaths thereupon; and
upon this did bring the Letters of the said Archbishop, Prior, and Abbot, or
one of them, sealed, unto the preceding Bailiffs; or the said Bailiffs being
dead, then unto two of the said xxiiij Iurats; and this within six days next
after the said distress so taken: otherwise to be punished, as is before
expressed of the said Bailiffs so refusing; and then to be a new election at
some other Last there to he held.

In what sort the Collectors and Expenditors should render an Account of their
Receipts.
It was also decreed and ordained, that at Lasts, yearly, all the Collectors of
all the precedent general assessments, within the limits aforesaid, except
before excepted; and the Expenditors of whom mention is before made, should
make their Account before the Lords of the Fees above-specified, or their
Attorneys, in case they be present; and before the the said Bailiffs; and those
of the said I^rats and Commonalty, of the said Lands and Marshes, within the
precincts aforesaid (except before excepted) and the said Account to be made in
writing, by Indenture betwixt them and the said Bailiffs, Iurats, and
Commonalty: And in like manner at either of the said principal and general
Lasts, there should be yearly made an Account of the Bailiffs aforesaid, before
the said Lords of the Fees or their Attorneys, if they would be present
thereat, and before those of the Iurats and Commonalty as would also be there
present; viz. of those things whereof it should happen, or concern the said
Bailiffs to make Account; that is to say, to be made by Indentures betwixt them
the said Bailiffs, and the said Iurats and Commonality.

The Oath of the xxiiij Jurats.
xxiiij Iurats, to be elected in form aforesaid, should swear; that he,
together with his Fellows, would make right Judgments, Decrees, and Awards;
not favoring any rich or poor, as well for making distresses, and assessing of
Taxes, as of the Banks, Land waters, Watercourse, Sewers, Ditches, Gutters
and Bridges, to be made, repaired and maintained, or taken away; and of all
other impediments whatsoever within those limits, which should happen to be
removed; and for punishing offenders. And it was farther ordained, that the
said xxiiij Iurats should make, exercise and perform; and have full power and
authority in making, exercising and performing, all and singular the things
specified in the said Oath, to be by them done, exercised and performed.

That the xxiiij Jurats be observant to the Bailiff.


The Oath of the Collectors and Expenditors.


The Oath of the Bailiffs, and executions to be made by them.
It was also decreed and ordained, that the xxiiij Iurats, ten or eight of
them; and of those things which did or should belong to them to judge,
determine and award. And that the said Bailiffs, in their proper persons,
should chardge all the Collectors, as well of the general Assessment, as of the
several (as aforesaid) upon their Oaths, that they should faithfully levy,
collect, expend, and account for the same. And that the same Bailiffs, in their
proper persons, should take view of all the Banks, Watergangs, Sewers, Gutters,
and Bridges, within the before-specified limits, except before excepted, as
often as need required, at least twice in the year; viz. once in the month of
January, and again in the month of May. And that they, at the going out of
their Office, should deliver unto their successors all the evidences in their
custody; that is to say, the Charters of the Kings of England, if they had any
such in their hands; the Ordinances and Statutes of the Lands and Marshes
within those limits before-specified (except before excepted;) the Copies, or
Exscripts of the said Statutes and Ordinances; the Roules of Judgments,
Considerations, Decrees, and Awards of the said xxiiij Iurats, ten or eight of
them; and the Rents, with all the process of Accounts of the Bailiffs,
Collectors, and Expenditors whatsoever, had in their time. And it was also
decreed and ordained, that the same Bailiffs should do, exercise, and perform,
and have full power and authority of doing, exercising and performing all and
singular the things specified in this Oath, which were for them to be done,
exercised or performed.


It was likewise decreed and ordained; that it should not be lawful to any one,
for the future, in the said Lands and Marshes, within the limits aforesaid
(except before excepted) to make Dams, or other impediments in any Lands, or
Land-eas, Water-gangs, Ditches, or common Gutters there, whereby the common
course of the waters might in any sort be hindered, or any public damage grow
there: and if any such thing were done, and the same witnessed by the said
Bailiffs, and six of the said xxiiij Iurats, the party delinquent be amerc'd,
and the amerciament levied by the said Bailiffs, to the common profit
aforesaid. And moreover, if any other than the Commonalty of those Lands and
Marshes, within the said limits, except before excepted, did receive prejudice
therein, he should make satisfaction to the party wronged, at the discretion of
the said Bailiff and six Iurats aforesaid.

That the Taxes Assessed be proclaimed.


The buying of Acres.
xl s. and measured by a rod of twenty foot: And that if before that present
Friday, any Bank called a See Wall, should be raised within those Lands and
Marshes (except before excepted) upon, or of, any man's land there; or that any
Forland, or in-ditch should be made for the defense and safeguard of the said
Lands and Marshes (except before excepted) from the peril of the Sea; and that
it were fit or expedient, that the said Bank, Forland, or in-ditch, for this
defense and safeguard, to be longer maintained and kept, so that the
Land-holde^ upon whose ground that Bank was raised, or where the said Forland
or in-ditch were made, could not occupy the said Land, and receive his peculiar
profit thereof; and that such Tenant had never any satisfaction for the said
Land; it was decreed and ordained, by the consent abovesaid, that the same
Bank, Forland, and in-ditch should be raised and kept in form aforesaid, as
long as it should be meet so to be done for the safeguard and defense
aforesaid: And that for every acre, of the common measure, xl s. as aforesaid,
be paid to the Tenant of the said land, where the same Bank, Forland, or
in-ditch was so placed.

And if it should happen so hereafter, that there were any other defense, on
the outside the said Bank and Forland, by the casting up of the Sea, or
otherwise, to be made, for the avoiding the danger of the Sea; so that
thenceforth there were no need of maintaining any such Bank, Forland, or
in-ditch; nor longer keeping thereof in form aforesaid; it should then be
lawful for the said Land-holder and his Heirs to repossesse his said Land
again, and use it as he pleased, paying to the Bailiffs aforesaid, for the
public commodity, as much as ought to be paid to the said Tenant for the same
Land, in form aforesaid. And in like manner to be done concerning the Land upon
which or where any Bank, Forland or in-ditch, by virtue of the Statutes and
Ordinances aforesaid, within those limits, should happen to be made, in form
aforesaid to be avoided. And that it should not be lawful for any man to take
away to his own peculiar work, or any other place, any workmen employed in the
public work, for the safeguard of the said Lands and Marshes, except before
excepted, before such time as the said public work were completed: And if it
happened that any person were convicted hereupon, by the testimony of the said
Bailiffs, and six of the said Iurats, that he be amerced in the common Last in
x s, which money to be levied forthwith by the said Bailiffs, to the common
utility aforesaid.

Likewise it was decreed and ordained; and general Last, be convicted thereof,
by the testimony of the said Bailiffs, and six of the said xxiiij Iurats.

viz. in the premises and all other things, for the continual conservation,
defense, and safe custody of those Lands and Marshes (except before excepted)
and of the said Banks, and other things, fit and profitable for the defense,
safeguard and custody thereof; viz. in making orders and doing other things in
the Lasts aforesaid; in laying of Taxes and Lots, and the taxing and levying of
them, their Wanes, and double taking of distresses; detaining, prizing and
selling thereof; choice and removal of all Officers; as also of imposing of
penalties and punishments; and of all other things necessary and profitable for
the safeguard and defense of the said Lands, Marshes and Banks (except before
excepted) and of all other things proper for those safeguards and defenses;
viz. according to the form of the Ordinances and Statutes aforesaid; and in
such sort, as according to the form of the beforementioned Statutes,
Ordinances, and Customs of the said Romeney marsh, and the Concessions for the
preservation, defense, and safe custody of the said Marsh of Romeney, had used
there to be done; no Custom, by any person formerly introduced,
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that if hereafter, at any principal and general Last, within
the limits aforesaid, in form aforesaid, it should seem more expedient to the
Lords of the Fees, within those limits (except before excepted) for the time
being, or the greater part of the Lords of the Fees, to have one Bailiff, than
two, of and in the said Lands and Marshes (except before excepted) to do and
exercise all things there according to the form and effect of the Oath and
chardge of the Bailiffs above specified; that then it should be performed in
that behalf, as it should happen to be ordained and decreed by the said Lords
of the Fees, or the major part of them. And in like sort, if thenceforth it
should seem more expedient to the said Lords of the Fees, or the greater part
of them, and to the said Iurats, or the major part of them, to have fewer
Iurats than xxiiij, or one Collector, and not two; or one Expenditor, and not
two, of and in the Lands and Marshes, within the limits aforesaid (except
before excepted) to do, exercise and perform in the premises, according to the
form and effect in the Oaths of the said Iurats, Collectors, and Expenditors
specified; that then thereupon it should be so done on that behalf, in such
sort by the said Lords of the Fees, or the major part of them, and the said
Iurats, or the major part of them, as should happen to be ordained, done, or
decreed, any thing in the premises notwithstanding.

The Penalty of making rescue from the Bailiffs, xxiiij. Jurats, or any of the
Officers aforesaid.
It was likewise decreed and ordained; that xs. of his goods and Catalls, Lands
and Tenements, by the Bailiffs aforesaid, to be levied for the common profit
aforesaid.

And it was farther decreed and ordained;

And lastly it was decreed and ordained; Last, within the limits aforesaid,
(except before excepted) by reason of the premises; and proclaimed in form
aforesaid: and that at the day and place of payment, thereupon limited and
assigned, any part of the said Tax were unpaid to the said Collectors; that
then the said Bailiffs, for the time being, should lay out of their own proper
moneys,
so much as the part so being in arear, called Wanys, might amount unto, for
the common profit aforesaid: And the said Bailiffs, as well for the said
parcel, so in arear, called Wanys, as for the double thereof, to distrain in
all the Lands and Tenements of him or them, who ought to pay the same, by all
their goods and Catalls; and the distresses so taken to keep for three days, or
more. And if the said part so being in arear, called UUanys, together with the
double thereof, should not be paid within the said three days; that then the
goods and Catalls so distrained, by two or one of the Iurats aforesaid, to be
sold in some place within the said limits (except before excepted) thereunto
assigned: and the said part so in arear, called UUanys, together with the
double thereof, out of the money arising of the said goods and Catalls so sold,
to be delivered to the same Bailiffs to their own use.

And having now done with these Laws and Ordinances for those Marshes
before-specified, I shall say no more concerning this part of Kent, but that in
19 E. 4. the King by his Letters Patents, Pat. 19 E. 4. p. unica. m. 22. in
dorso.
dated at Oburne 17o Iunii, directed to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury,
Cardinal of England; Will. Prior of Christ-Church in Canterbury; Richard Prior
of Hortone; Robert Prior of Bilsyngtone; William, Master of God's house in
Dovor; Sir John Fogge; Sir William Haute; Sir John Scotte Knights. Will.
Cheyne, John Broomston, Hen. Hoorne, Gervase Hoorne, John Fyneux, Vincent
Fynche, Rog. Brent, Will. Brent, and John Nethersole, constituted them
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. from Appuldoure to
Cawmbury; and from Cawmbury to Fulstone, then ruinous by the violence of the
Sea: and to make Laws and Ordinances for the same, according to the Laws and
Customs of Romeney marsh. And lastly to take so many Diggers and other
Laborers to be employed therein, upon competent salaryes, as should be thought
requisite, in respect of the urgent and instant necessity of the work.

CAP. XIII.
I Now come to the remanent Marshes in this County, which are those that border
on the River Thameo: Concerning which, the first mention that I find, is in 8
E. 2. John Abel, and John de Hortone, being then, by the Kings Letters Pat. 8
E. ^. p. 2. m. 20. in dorso.
Patents, dated the 10th of April, at Wyndsore, constituted Commissioners for
to view and take order for the repair of the Banks, Ditches, etc. for the
safeguard of those, from the overflowing of the Tide, which lie betwixt
Dertford, Flete, and Grenewich. And not long after this (for it was in February
ensuing) John de Ifeld, John de Hortone, and Will. de Northo had the like
Commission Pa^. 9. E. ^. p. 1. m. 5. i^ dorso.
for the very same Marshes.

In 13 E. 2. John de Evredon and John Abell were also appointed Pa^. 13 E. 2.
m. 12. in dors^.
to view the broken Banks betwixt Grenewich and London Bridge; and to apply
speedy remedy for their repair. In 15 E. 2. Robert de Bardelby, Will. de
Leicestre, John de Merton, and Robert de Kellesteye had the like assignation
Pat. 15 E. 2. p. 1. m. 18. in do^so.
for the view of a certain breach then newly made in the Bank betwixt
Grenewiche and Wolwiche, by the violence of the Tides; and to provide for the
sudden repair thereof. And the next year following Robert de Ashele, and
Robert de Swaleclyve were made Pat. 16 E. 2. p. 2. m. 15. in ^o^so.
Commissioners for the view and repair of those about Grenewiche, and the parts
adjacent.

In 17 E. 2. there happening another breach betwixt Grenewiche and Wolwiche,
Robert de Bardelly, Will. de Leycestre, Robert de Kellesey, and John de Merton,
were appointed Pat. 17 E. 2. ^. 2. ^. 13. in dorso.
to view the same; and to distrain all those persons, through whose default it
had happened, to the making good thereof: Farther enjoining them; that if they
should find the persons, through whose neglect it came, not able to repair it
so speedily as that the damage and peril, which would be occasioned thereby,
might be prevented; that then they should distrain all those which had Lands
and Tenements in those parts, who might have safeguard by the making up of that
breach, to the end that they should contribute thereto.

Within two y^ars after, the King being informed of another breach in the Bank
above Grenewiche, toward Bermondseye; which, through the violence of the
frequent tides, and neglect of some persons, who were obliged, in respect of
their lands in the adjacent Marshes, to have made good, upon all occasions; had
then newly happened, to the great damage of all those that had lands there; did
assign Pa^. 19 E. 2. p. 1. m. 24. in dorso.
Adam de Brom, William de Leycestre, Laurence de Rustyngton, and Robert de
Kelleseye, or any three or two of them, to veiw the said breach, and all other
defects in those Banks, which by reason of the floods had happened; and to
enquire by the Oaths of honest and lawful men, of this County, upon whose
land the said breach first began, and through whose default; and who ought to
repair and maintain the said Banks; as also how and in what sort; and likewise
what other persons had Lands, Tenements, or Common of Pasture in those Marshes,
and had or might have defense and safeguard by the said Banks in any sort. And
moreover, with the Bailiffs of the Liberties, to distrain all those through
whose default that breach had so happened, and who were obliged to the repair and
maintenance of that Bank, according to such a proportion as might be sufficient
to make good the said breach with all possible speed. And if it should so fall
out, that those persons so liable to the repair thereof, were not able to
perfect the work with that haste as the case required; that then, for the
avoiding of greater damage and mischief, to compel all such persons, who had
or might have loss thereby, to contribute thereto, for that present time; every
one according to the proportion of what he held, as well in Common of Pasture
as Land, not favoring rich or poor therein: And to levy the money upon those,
who were obliged to the said repair, so as restitution might be made to those
who had contributed thereto, being not obliged, with all speed that could be.

After this, diverse years, viz. in 10 E. 3. I find that Henry de Secheford,
Reginald del Dyk, and John de Heyton were appointed P^t. 10 E. 3. p. 2. m. 25.
in dorso.
Commissioners to take view of a certain Sewer, called Erlesthron, near
Grenewich, and to repair the Sluices thereof where need should be. And in 27 E.
3. Otto de Grandisone, Thomas de Lodelowe, Simon de Kegworth, and Will. de
Roderham, were assigned Pat. 27 E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. in do^so.
to take view and make enquiry touching certain breaches in the Banks and
Marshes of Dertford, Erde, and Stone; and of the stopping of the Gutters and
Sewers there; forasmuch as by that obstruction, the Corn sowed in those
Marshes, as also the Meadows and Pasture grounds thereof, became often drowned,
by the Tides; And to use some speedy remedy for the same. In that year
likewise, Will. Vaghan, Richard de Birton, Thomas de Ludlowe, John de
Dielleston, and Simon de Lee were appointed Ibid. m. 3. in dorso.
to oversee the Banks betwixt Grenewiche and Plumstede, and to take order for
their repair: whose Commission bears date the 7th of May. And upon the 25 of
the same month (such was the necessity incumbent^) the King issued out another
Commission Ibid. m. 2. in dorso.
unto Will Stury, Simmon at Lee, and Roger de Byshell, requiring them to take
in and impressed such and so many Laborers, as well within Liberties as without,
for competent wages, as they should have need of, for the repair of those
Banks, Ditches and Sewers, between Grenewiche and Plumstede aforesaid; provided
that such Laborers were not then employed in his the said Kings own work, nor
retained in the service of others.

In the next year ensuing, Otto de Grandisone, Will. de Waure, Richard de
Stone, and John de Rous were appointed to Pa^. 28 E. 3. p. 2. m. 15. in do^so.
view the Banks and Ditches adjoining to the Marsh of Stone, then ruinous,
through the violence of the Sea, and neglect of the Land-holders therein.

In 31 E. 3. Will. de Notton, Richard de Birton, Thomas de Lodelawe, Thomas
Moryz, and Simon de Keggeworth, had the like appointment Pa^. 31 E. 3. p. 2. m.
8. in dorso.
concerning those Banks etc. lying betwixt Grenewiche and Dertford. So also in
34 E. 3. had John the Son of Sir John Cobham Knight, John the Son of Sir Raphe
Cobham Knight, and Pat. 34 E. 3. p. 2. m. 4. in do^so.
others, for the view and repair of a certain breach of a Bank near Stone,
whereby a great part of the Marsh of Stone, and the adjacent parts, were
overflowed and drowned by the Tides.

In 36 E. 3. Thomas de Lodelowe, Will. de Holdone, and some others, had
Commission Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
in like sort for the view and repair of those betwixt Grenewyche and Plumstede.

And in 40 E. 3. John de Cobham of Kent, Thomas de Lodelowe, Thomas Morice,
John Dyngeleye, and others, for Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. in dors^.
those in the Marshes of Dertford and Eard: wherein they were required to
proceed according to the Marsh-law.

In Pat. 42 E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. in do^so.
42 E. 3. Simon de Kegworth, Richard de Norwiz, Robert de Eareth, and others,
for the Banks betwixt Wolwiche and Eareth; and to do all things therein,
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. And in the same year, the
before-specified John de Cobham of Kent, Thomas de Lodelowe, and Roger
Godchestre, for those in the Marshes of Derteford and Eard.

So likewise the next ensuing year, had Pat. 43 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
the same John, and Thomas, with Will. de Halden, and others, for the Banks in
the Marshes of Derteford and Stone; and command to hear and determine all
things therein, according to the Marish Law.

In 47 E. 3. the Abbot of Lesnes, Sir Thomas de Lodelawe, Knight, Simon de
Kegworth, and Will. de Horn had Commission Pat. 47 E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
to view and repair those Banks etc. betwixt Plumstede marsh, and the marsh of
Lesnes. The next year following John de Whitwell, John Chertseye, and John
Wroth junior, had the like Commission, to take view, and see to the repair of
diverse other Banks etc. in several places bordering on the before-specified
River of Thames. And in Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
the same year Will. de Haldene, Roger Dygge, Thomas de Shardelowe, and Nich.
Heryng, for those in the Marshes of Derteford and Stone. So likewise had Ibid.
Will. Halden, Adam de Bury, Nicholas Heryng, and Thomas Shardelowe, for the
Banks etc. betwixt Hecham and Dertford.

In 1 R. 2. the said Will. Halden, Nich. Hering, Will. Horn and John Tender,
were assigned Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 4. m. 30. in dorso.
to view and take order for the repair of those betwixt Dertford and
Grenewiche; wherein they had direction to proceed according to the Marsh Law.
And the next ensuing year Robert Bealknap, Will. Halden, Nich. Hering, and
Henry Vannere, had Pa^. 2. R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
the like assignation for those Banks etc. betwixt Comb and West-Grenewiche.
In 3 R. 2. Robert Bealknap, Nich. Hering, Thomas Illeston, and Robert Loxle,
had Pat. 3. R. ^. p. 1. m. 44. ^n dorso.
the like for those betwixt Grenewiche and London bridge. So Pat. 6 R. 2. p. 1.
m. 31. in dorso.
likewise in 6 R. 2. John Cobham, Robert Bealknap, John Philippot, John
Fremyngham, Henry Vannere, Will. Brenchesle, Thomas Shardelowe, and Peter
Hereford, for those in the Marshes of Dertford and Stone; and to hear and
determine all things therein according to the Marsh Law. And in 8 R. 2. Sir
Will. Waleworth, Knight, Rob. Walbelton, Roger Ashburnham, John Olyver, and
Will. Brynchesle had Pat. 8 R. ^. p. 2. m. 35. in d^rso.
the like assig^ation for those betwixt Grenewich and London bridge: So also
had Pa^. 11. R. 2. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Sir John Fallesey Knight, Roger As^burnham, Will. Staunden, Citizen of London,
Thomas de Skeleton, Will. Brynchesle, and John Olyver; and to proceed therein,
according to the Law of the Marsh, and the Laws of this Realm.

In 16 R. 2. Sir John de Cobham Knight, Will. Rikhill, Will. Makenade, Will.
Skreene, John Colepepir, Walt. Roo, and Will. at Wode had Pat. 16 R. 2. p. 3.
m. 14. in dorso.
Commission for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches etc. betwixt
Plumstede and Northflete, with direction to act therein, according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeneye marsh. And the next year
following Will Rikhill, Sir James de Peckham, Knight, Will. Makenade, and John
Fox of East-Grenewiche, had Pat. 17. R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in dorso.
the like for those betwixt Depford and Charleton, and to proceed therein as
aforesaid. In Pat. 20 R. 2. p. 2. m. 3. in do^so.
20 R. 2. Will. Makenade, Richard Mariell, Thomas Frisby, John Lufwyk, Thomas
Arthington, Richard Cliderhowe, Will. Hesille, and John Newport, the like, for
those Banks etc. in the Marshes of Dertford and Stone; and to proceed according
to the Marsh Law.

In 22 R. 2. Will. Makenade, Robert Oxenbrigge, Will. Frye, Will. Skreen, John
Preston, Thomas Lexham, and John Hall were assigned Pat. 22 R. 2. p. 2. m. 2.
^n dorso.
to view and take order for the repair of all the Banks etc. betwixt Wollewyche
and Suthwerke; and to act therein according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm, and the Custom used in the Marsh: and to impressed so many Laborers
therein, upon competent wages, in respect of the then great and urgent
necessity, as might serve for the performance of that work.

In 1 H. 4. Will. Rikhill, Richard Muriel, Thomas Erdyngton, Will. Cressewyk,
John Martyn, Will. Hesell, John Mayhewe, and Solomon ^Fresthorpe were appointed
Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 6. m. 13. in dorso.
to view and take course for the repair of those in the Marshes of
Est-Grenewyche, Comb, Charleton and Wollewyche; and to proceed therein
according to the Marish Law. And Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 8. m. 13. in dorso.
in the same year John Colepepir, Will. Makenade, Stephan Batenham, John
Martyn, and John Newport, for those in the Marshes of Derteford and Stone; and
to act as aforesaid. In Pat. 3 H. 4. p. 2. m. 8. in dorso.
3 H. 4. John Colepepir, Will. Hesyll, Thomas Lodelowe, John Urban, John
Crepyn, John Martyn and Thomas Appelton, for those in Derteforde marsh; and to
act according to the Law of the Marsh, and the Law and Custom of England.

In 5 H. 4. Will. Brenchesle, Nich. Carreu, Will. Makenade, Will. Askham,
Robert Oxenbrigge, and Thomas Remys, had Pat. 5 H. 4. p. 1. m. 29. in dorso.
the like appointment for those betwixt London bridge and Grenewyche; and to
proceed therein according to the Custom of Romeney marsh, and the Law and
Custom of this Realm. In 7 H. 4. Will. Hankford, Thomas Tildeslegh, Nich.
Carreu, Walter Hoke, Will. Crowemere, John Westone, and Richard Wakehurse had
Pa^. 7 H. 4. p. 1. m. 34. in do^so.
the like; and to act according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. And in 8
H. 4. Sir Arnald Savage Knight, George Ballard, Richard Clitherowe, Stephan
Bettenhamme, John Martyn, Will. Elys, Will. Notebem, and Thomas Ikham, were
constituted Pat. 8 H. 4. p. 2. m. 5. in dorso.
Commissioners, as aforesaid, for the view and repair of those Banks etc. lying
betwixt West-Grenewyche and S. Margarets ^tte Clyve; and to proceed therein
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of ancient time
used in Romeney Marsh.

In 10 H. 4. Sir John Oldcastell Knight, George Ballard, Richard Clyderhowe,
John Martyn, and John Urban, were constituted, Pat. 10 H. 4. p. 1. m. 13. in
dorso.
in like sort, for the view and repair of those Banks etc. situate betwixt
Grenewyche and Depford; and to perform all things concerning that business,
according to the Marish Law till then used, and Law and Custom of this Realm.

And Pat. 12. H. 4. p. 1. m. 23. in do^so.
in 12 H. 4. the said Sir John Oldcastell, John Martin, John Urban, John
Krepen, John Weston, Walter Roo, and James Dyngle, for those betwixt Northflete
and Grenewyche; and to do all things therein according to the Law and Custom
of England.

In 15 H. 6. Richard Bamme, Reginald Pekham, John Bamburgh, John Chymbeham,
Rob. Reynold, and Walter Groveherst, Pat. 15 H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
for those in the Marshes of Dertford and Stone, and in Swainescompe; with
power to make Laws and Statutes for the same, according to the Laws and
Customs of Romeney marsh, and the Law and Custom of England: As also to
impressed as many Laborers etc. upon a competent salary, as might accomplish the
work, considering the great necessity, in respect of the damage impending.

In 14 E. 4. Sir Edward Nevill of Bergenny Knight, John Abbot of Bermundsey,
William Abbot of Lesnes, Will. Hatteclyf, John Bromstone, John Grene, John Bam,
Roger Appiltone, Rob. Ballard, et John Alfegh were constituted Pa^. 14. ^. 4.
p. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
Commissioners for the viewing and repairing the Banks from West-Grenewich to
Gravesend; and to proceed in all things tending thereto, according to the Laws
and C^stomes of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeney marsh.

The same year the like Commission Ibid.
was issued, unto Will. Abbot of S. Augustines in Canterbury, Sir Edward Nevill
of Bergavenny Knight, John Abbot of Lesnes, Will. Hatclyf, James Haute
Esquire, John Bromston Esquire, John Grene Esqui^e, Richard Page, John Bavyn,
Roger Appeltone, Roger Brent, John Alfegh, Will. Swan, Robert Balard, Roger
Shelley, John Nethersole and John Hurt, for those Banks betwixt Wolwiche, and
Northflete; and to act therein as aforesaid.

Howbeit notwithstanding Rot. Pa^^^ de anno 22. H. 8. n. 10. cap. ^.
these good Laws and Customs, and the care of the Commissioners in seeing them
put in execution, such has been the backwardness of some, that, for want of
timely repair of those breaches, which through the violence of the tides, were
made in the Banks of Plumsted, Lesnes, and Erith; the Marshes of Plumsted and
Lesnes, were not only suffered to be drowned; but, after several Taxes made for
regaining of them (and for making a new cross wall, from the Thames to the
upland, for inning of the said Marsh called Plumsted marsh, and a certain
number of Acres in the level and Marshes of Lesnes; and defending them from
the overflowing of the water, which entered at Erith breach; and for further
maintenance of the old Marsh-walls by the Thames side, from the said new cross
wall nigh unto Wolwiche) diverse that were assest, paying not their proportion,
the same Marshes and level would have been irrecoverably lost, had not the
Bailiff of the Marsh and others, by his assignment, laid down the money: For
recovery therefore of the said Assessments, and the better levying of such
sums of money, as had been before employed for the inning and defense of those
Marshes; upon complaint made in Parliament, in 22 H. 8. it was then enacted
Ibid.
; that the Bailiff of the Marsh should cause Proclamation to be made upon any
Sunday afterward, in the Parish Church of Plumstede, for the payment of all
such arrears of the said Taxes, within xx days then next ensuing; and that he
who made payment of the same accordingly, should be dischardged of his doubles;
otherwise not: And, if the said Tax and Doubles should not be paid by the Feast
of S. Michael the Archangel then next following; that then every possessor, or
Tenant of any lands, lying within the said Marshes, or any other who would pay
that Tax to the said Bailiff, his Executors, or Assigns, might enter into the
Lands and Tenements, so assessed, and hold the same to himself and his Heirs
for ever; except it should be redeemed within three years then next following.

And in 37 H. 8. upon the like complaint made in Parliament, that the Marshes
called the New Marshes, and Comb Marshes, in the Parish of East Grenewiche,
were often in peril of overflowing, through the neglect of some persons
chardgable with the repair of those Banks, which had anciently been raised for
their preservation from that danger; it was also enacted Ror. Parl. 37 H. 8. c.
11.
; that all and every such person and persons, as then were, or which
thenceforth should be owners of the said Marshes, or of any parcel thereof,
should at all times, after the end of that Session of Paliament, pay, and be
contributory, toward the reparation of the said Marshes from time to time,
after the rate of the Acre, as other owners had before that time been chardged:
And, that the Expenditors and Collectors, or one of them, from time to time,
when any Assessment or Tax should be had or made in that behalf, to distrain
the goods and Cattle of such persons, that should refuse to pay after such
rate; and the same distresses to retain, keep and use, according to the Laws of
Romeney Marsh, in such behalf, of ancient time used.

But notwithstanding that care taken by the Act of Parliament of 22 H. 8.
before recited, touching the Marshes of Erith, Plumsted, and Lesnes; it was
represented R^^. Parl. 5 Eliz. n. 36.
to the Parliament in 5 Eliz. that there was a certain ground, containing about
two thousand Acres, lying in the Parishes of Erith, Lesnes, and Plumstede
before-specified, which in former times were good Pasture grounds and meadows,
but by certain breaches, within the space of xxx years then past, laid waste,
by the inundation of the Thames: And that one Iacobus Acontyus, an Italian,
(and servant to the Queen) had undertaken at his own chardges, the recovery
thereof, in consideration of a moytie of it, for his chardges: but that the
Lords and owners thereof were many, and had several kind of estates therein,
whereby their assents and good assurances could not be procured: It was
therefore enacted, that the said Iacobus, and his assigns, and their Servants,
Factors, Laborers etc. should, at the costs and chardges of the said Iacobus,
after the tenth day of March, in the year MDLxii. for the term of four years,
then next following, inn, fence, and win the said grounds, or any parcel of
them: And, that, having so won and fenced the same, or any of them; that he the
said Iacobus and his heirs, or such person or persons, and their heirs, as he
or his Executors should nominate, by their writing enrolled in one of the said
Queens Courts of Record at Westminster, or by his the said Iacobus his last
Will and Testament, in consideration of such recompense, should have and enjoy
the one moytie thereof, to be severed from the residue within two years next
after the said winning thereof, by four or mo discreet Commissioners, to be
nominated and appointed by the Lord Chancelour of England, or Lord keeper of
the great Seal, for the time being: and being so severed, Lots to be cast for
concluding of each proportion to either parties.

After which about two years, Queen Elizabeth issued out a Commission Ex bund
n^o de Seweris in Capella Rotul^rum n. 16.
to Thomas Wotton, George Moulton and others, bearing date at............ 7
Eliz. to enquire, whether the said James Aconcius, who so undertook the inning
of those Lands, lying in the Parishes of Erith, Lesnes, and Plumstede marsh
had, in pursuance of the said Act of Parliament, so held at Westminster, 12
Ian. 5 Eliz. accordingly performed the same; and for which he was to have the
inheritance of the one moytie of the said Land so won and inned.

Whereupon the said Commissioners certified Ibid.
, ult. Ian. 8 Eliz. that six hundred Acres thereof, were then won, and inned
with Walls, Banks etc. from the water and flood of the River of Thames,
according to the tenor of the before-specified Statute.

All which is more particularly taken notice of, by another Act Ro^. Parl. 8
Eliz. n. 22.
of Parliament, made in the 8th year of Queen Eliz. reciting; that whereas the
said Iacobus did win some part thereof, which was by the violence of the floods
shortly after lost; and being not able to recover the same, he did depute John
Baptista Castilion, one of the Grooms of the said Queens privy Chamber, John
Gresham Mercer, Francis Robinson, Richard Young, Grocers; Simon Horsepoole, and
Henry May, Drapers (Citizens of London) at their costs and chardges to inn,
fence, and win the same, or some convenient portion thereof: by authority of
which deputation, they the said John, John, etc. did inn and win part thereof,
containing about six hundred Acres; whereof a division was made, and the one
part, called the Eastmarsh, allotted to the said Iacobus, and his assigns; and
the other, called the Westmarsh to the owners etc. Which part called the
Eastmarsh, he the said James assigned to the beforementioned John, John etc.
in consideration of their chardge, which amounted to five thousand pounds:
Whereupon it was enacted, that the said John Baptista Castilion, and the rest
of the undertakers abovementioned, should have and enjoy the same, to them and
their heirs for ever; to be held of the chief Lord of the Fee, by such services
as it was formerly held: And moreover, that they should have power to inn and
win the rest of the surrounded grounds, from the tenth of March next ensuing,
during the space of eight years; and being so won, to enjoy a moytie thereof,
to be divided by Lots, as in the former Act.

And in 14 Eliz. by an Act Ro^. Parl. 14 Eliz. n. 15.
of Parliament then made, which recited the former Acts; and that six years of
the eight years before limited, were expired, and yet the work not finished; it
was farther enacted, that he the said John and the rest of the undertakers,
should have eight years more, from the tenth of June following the date
thereof, for to accomplish their work in: and to have the moytie thereof so
won, and divided as aforesaid.

And after this, viz. in 23 Eliz. by another Act Ro^. Parl. 23 Eliz. n. 13.
of Parliament at that time made, and reciting all the beforementioned Acts:
as also, that whereas since the making of the Statute in 14 Eliz. the said said
John Gresham constituted one Thomas Allen to be his assignee; and the said
Henry May constituted Walter Fisher his assignee, to and for the said affairs:
and whereas six years, parcel of the said eight years, were almost expired the
8th of May in 14 Eliz. and thereupon eight years more added to that term as
abovesaid. And moreover, that since the making of that Statute in 14 Eliz. all
the parts of the said undertakers were come to the hands of the said John
Baptista Castilion, and of Thomas Smith, George Barn, the said Richard Young,
Thomas Fisher, Ferdinando Pointz, James Guichardine, and Roger James: And
whereas the said eight years were fully expired; and that the inning thereof
had by floods and tempests been hindered, that it could not be finished without
longer time: It was therefore enacted, that it should be lawful for the
parties abovesaid, to inn the same within two years, after the end of that
present Session of Parliament, and then to enjoy the moytie by such partition
as aforesaid; and to take such Reed and Earth upon the premises, for the
inning thereof, as should be most needful.

And in consideration that they should maintain the Banks of the same, by the
space of one whole year after the wining thereof, it was further enacted, that
they should have an half of the eighth part of the other half, so won as
aforesaid, to be divided as aforesaid: And moreover, that in consideration of
the great chardges in and about the same, the premises should be dischardged of
all titles whatsoever, for the space of seven years next after the inning,
fencing, and winning of the same. And that all Shelves and Forelands, then
being, or that afterward should be, betwixt the said Banks and the River of
Thames, should be kept and maintained at the common chardge of the said owners
and Inners, their heirs and assigns: and that no Earth or Reeds should be taken
from the said Shelves and Forelands, or other thing, to any use, than for the
repairing of the Banks for defense of the said Marshes, upon penalty of five
pounds for every such offense, to be forfeited to the said Inners or owners, or
any of them; who by the said Act were authorized to sue for the same, by Action
of Debt, Bill, plaint, or information, in any Court of Records, etc.

In the 4th year of King James, upon a Petition then exhibited in Parliament,
for inning and winning of certain Marsh grounds, lying in the drowned Marshes
of Lesnes, and Fants, in this County, which had been of long time overflowed:
it was enacted Ro^. Parl. 4 Iac. cap. 8.
, that William Burrell of Ratcliff in the County of Midlesex Gentleman (who had
covenanted with the owners of those surrounded grounds, by Indentures made
betwixt them and him, dated the seven and twentieth of February Ao D. 1606. for
the consideration in the said Indenture expressed, to do his best endeavor
therein) should have power to enter upon the work, and to take Reed and Earth
in any part of the said drowned Marsh, so as he the said William, nor any
employed therein under him, should digg within xx Roods of any wall already
made within that Marsh: And that immediately after his accomplishment of the
same, he the said William, his Heirs and assigns, to have the one half of all
the said grounds so to be inned, according to the purport and true meaning of
the said recited Indenture (the other moytie to belong to the owners of the
said Marsh grounds, according to the several proportion of their quantities,
which they then had in those grounds) to be holden of Edmund Cook Esquire, his
heirs and assigns, as of his Manno^r of Lesnes and Fants, in free Socage, by
fealty and one penny Rent for every Acre; and not in chief, nor by Knights
service.

And that in consideration of the great chardge of this work, the said inned
Marshes to be dischardged from all Tithes and Tenths whatsoever, for and during
the term of seven years next after the inning, winning, and fencing of the same.

CAP. XIV.
AND now, Surrey:
though by what has yet been instanced, touching the improvements made by
Banking and Drayning, upon the Verge of this River, the first Commissions,
which I have vouched, bear not date above three hundred and fifty years since;
yet do I make no question, but that this good Husbandry was far more ancient:
for notwithstanding the like Commissions, for the defense and safeguard of the
other Marshes, situate higher upon this stream (whereof I shall give instance
by and by) are not much elder; it will, by great circumstances be evident, that
some of these Banks are not of less antiquity than the time of the Romans,
here in Britain; otherwise how could that ancient Borough of Suthwarke have
been built, the ground whereon it stands, being at first naturally flat and
low, and within the power of the usual tides, as the adjoining Marshes still
would be, were not they defended by the like Banks, though now, by reason of
the vast buildings there, which do stand upon artificial ground (it being in
the nature of a Suburb to that great and ancient City of London) there be
little notice taken, that it has been so raised: where, besides diverse Roman
coins, that are still frequently dug up, I my self in the year 1658 saw, in
those fields (on the backside of Winch^ster house) called Suthwark Park^ upon
the sinking of diverse Cellers, for some new buildings, at about two foot below
the present level of the ground, a Roman pavement, made of Bricks, not above
an inch and an half square; and adjoining to it a more curious piece, of the
like small bricks (in length about ten foot, and in breadth five) wrought in
various colors; and in the midst thereof, betwixt certain borders, in the
fashion of wreathed columns, the form of a Serpent, very lively expressed in that
kind of Mosaique work.

I now come to the Commissions. The first whereof our public Records do take
notice, is Pat. 23 E. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
in 23 E. 1. which was directed to John de Metingham, and Will. de Carleton,
for the view and repair of the Banks etc. betwixt Lambehethe and Grenewiche.

After this about three years, through the neglect of those, who ought to have
maintained the Banks near Retherhithe, the breaches thereof were such, as that
a great part of those Marshes became drowned: Whereupon the King committed the
managing of their repair to his trusty and beloved Will, Haward (soon after one
of the Justices of his Court of Common Pleas) to whom he assigned a certain
sum of money for that purpose: which not being sufficient for the
accomplishment of the work, though he the said William, even beyond his
abilities, added thereto of his own purse; the said King, by the advice of his
Counsel, ordained Pat. 34 E. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
; that all those Lands, which through the before-specified neglect, were thus
overflown and drowned, should be seized into his own hands, and committed to
some such honest and trusty person, as would be willing to take upon him the
chardge of the said repair, and new making of the said Bank; to have and enjoy,
by an extent to be made thereof, until he should reimburse himself, out of the
profits of the said Lands, to the full of whatsoever he might lay out upon that
work.

In 2 E. 2. John de Foxle, Walter de Gloucestre, with some others, were
assigned Pat. 2 E. 2. m. 5. in dorso.
to take view of a certain breach of a Bank near Bermundsey, and to provide for
the repair thereof. In the same year it happened, that by reason of the said
breach, the Prior and Covent of Pat. 2 E. 2. m. 5. in do^so.
Bermondsey, received great loss by the drowning of certain grounds belonging
to that House: the King therefore, at the request of Isabell his Queen, granted
Pat. 2 E. 2. m. 5. in do^so.
this favor to the said Prior and Covent, that nothing of the Corn, Hay, or
any the Good; or Catalls belonging to the said Priory, should be taken to the
use of the King, or any other, without the assent of them the said Prior and
Covent.

The like breach also happening in the Banks of the Marshes, in Suthwarke, which
not long before pertained to the Knights Templars, but then were in the King's
hands, he being advertised thereof, directed his Precept Claus. 4 E. 2. m. 7.
, bearing date at Barwick upon Twede 23o Maii, 4 E. 2. unto William de Montalt
(at that time Guardian of those Lands) commanding him, that out of the profits
of them, he should cause them to be speedily repaired. And in 9 E. 2. Richard
de Repham and Edmund de Passele were constituted Pa^. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m. 7. in
do^s^.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. betwixt London bridge,
and the Manor called Fauxes-Halle, as also of a certain Bank in the Land of
the Bishop of Winchester, in Suthwerke; which having been anciently made, for
the safeguard thereof, was then ruinous and broken: And likewise of certain
Ditches, whereby the fresh waters had formerly used to descend into the Thames,
which were then choked up. And to distrain all such persons for the repait of
the said Banks and Ditches; who, in respect of any lands that they held, or
otherwise, were obliged thereto.

In 13 E. 2. upon an Inquisition Ex bun^. de Brevibus and Recordis Wallias
and^. tangentibus. ^. 3.
taken before John de Everdon, and Geffrey de Hertelpole, then the Kings
Justices assigned to enquire of the defects in repair of those Banks which were
situate betwixt London bridge and Grenewiche; the Jury presented upon their
Oaths, that part of a Bank at Retherhethe, containing thirteen perches in
length, was then broken; and that Sir John Latimer Knight, in respect of a
certain message that he had there, was and had been chardged with the repair
thereof, time out of mind.

It was likewise presented, that at a place there, called Milnewardstrete,
there was a Gutter, called Mouse goter, so obstructed, that the water which had
used and ought to pass through it into the Thames, was stopped: and that one
Richard le Chaundeler, was obliged by right to cleanse and scowr the same, by
reason of his Lands there.

And moreover, that there was another Gutter, in the Land lately belonging to
Richard de Dunle, so stopped likewise; the clensing whereof belonged to Agnes
his widow, then Tenant to the said Lands. As also, that there was another
Gutter, in the grounds, whereof Richard de Ashwy had been lately possessed;
which Gutter being then likewise choak^ up, did endanger the drowning the
adjacent Marshes; and that the clensing thereof pertained to the heirs of the
said Richard. And lastly, that there was a certain Sewer, called Ozflete,
pas^ing from the water of S. Thomas, unto the Thames, stopped up also, for want
of clensing, to the great annoyance of the Lands of John Capsho, and Robert
Allard; which Sewer ought to have been scoured by the said John and Robert. It
was therefore ordained by the before-specified Justices, that the said Sir John
le Latimer, and the rest of the persons, so presented as aforesaid, should be
distrained to make good the several repairs abovementioned, so belonging unto
them.

In 26 E. 3. Will. Thorpe, James H^fee, and Will. de Fifhide were appointed
Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 3. m. 18. in dorso.
(...) view and repair the Banks a^ ^he Stews, and in other places adja^^^^^
by the breach whereof diverse ground^ and meadows lay then totally drowned. And
in 37 E. 3. Edmund Chelreye, Thomas Morice, and Michael Skillyng had Pat. 37 E.
3. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
the like appointment for those Banks near the said Stews, which were opposite
to the Manor House of John de Mo^bray. Before which Commissioners, diverse
presentiments were then made touching those Banks and Sewers, near the same
Stews; where diverse persons, being found faulty, paid fines to the King;
others acknowleged that they ought to repair them by the perch; and others had
made good what belonged to them to do; whereof the Prior of S. John's of
Jerusalem, was one; who had two Mills there, and other lands to the value of xl
Plac. coram Rege term. Pasch. 37 E. 3. Ro^. 19, 20 and 23. Surr.
. per annum. The like was certified Plac. coram Rege de eodem anno Term. Mich.
Rot. 26.
of Sir John de Moubray, Knight, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heir of
John de Segrave.

In 42 E. 3. John Lovekin, Will. Ta^ke, Will. de Neudigate an^ others, had the
like assignation (...) 42 ^ ^. p. 1. m. 15 i^ do^s^.
for the Banks etc. extending from a place called D^nielissewalle in this
County of Surrey, to Roddis^orne in Kent. And in 48 E. 3. Robert Bealknap,
Will. Halden, Roger Dygge and others, for Pat. 48 ^ 3 p. 1. m 30. in dorso.
the same Banks, betwixt Danyeleswalle, and the Land of the Prior of S. Marie
de Overe, and about a meadow called Cro^chemede: by which Commi^sion ^h^y ^ere
directed to proceed according to the Law and Custom of this Realm of England.

In 4 H. 5. John P^eston, Sir John D^ayton Knight, Thomas Rothewell junior,
Thowes Drew, Richard Wydeforde, and Thomas Coventre were constituted Pa^. 4 H.
5. p. unic^ m 15. in do^s^
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches etc. all along the
Verge of the Thames, on both sides, from Reading to Oxford, which were then
broken in many places; with appointment to proceed therein according to the Law
and Custom of England.

The next year following, John Preston, John Martyn, John Corf, John Appulton,
Robert Skyrne, and Nicholas Pa^. 5 H. 5. p. unica m 34. in do^s^
Conyngston had the like Commission for those Banks etc. betwixt Depford
strond, and Bermundsey, wherein they were directed to act according to the
Custom of ^he Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 22 H. 6. Sir John Burcestre Knight, Ric^ard Bamme, Richard Com^e, Will.
O^^urne, Adam Lynelord, John Martyn, John Malton, and Will. Kyrton were
assigned Pa^. 22 H. 6. ^. 1. m. 17. in d^^so.
to view all those Banks on the side of Thames, and marshes adjoining as well
within the Lordships of South Lambehithe, North Lambehithe, Lambehithe mershe,
and Parysh-garden, as in Southwerk, Bermundsey, Retherhithe, Depford stronde,
Peckham, Hacham, Camerwell, Stokwell, Clopham, and Newyngton, in the Counties
of Surrey and Kent, which were at that time broken and in decay, and to take
order for the repair of them: As also to make necessary Laws and Ordinances for
the safeguard and preservation of them, according to the Laws and Customs of
Romeney Marsh: And mor^over to impr^st so many Diggers and Laborers, to be
employed th^rein, upon comp^^ent salaryes, as should be necessary, in resp^ct
of the great necessity at that time for the speedy dispatch of that work. The
like Commission Pa^. 25 H. 6. p. 1. m. 8. in do^so.
and direction had John Bamburgh, Richard Bamme, Richard Drax and Philip
Leweston in 25 H. 6. for the Banks in the same Lordships and places.

And in 31 H. 6. Sir John Burcestre Knight, Richard Waller Esquire, Will.
Laken, Philip Leweston, and others, had Pat. 31 H. 6. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
the like, for the view of all the Banks from East-Grenewiche in Kent, to
Wandesworth in Surrey: So also had Ibid.
the said Sir John Burcestre, Sir John Cheyne Knights, Richard Waller Esquire,
Will. Laken, and others, for those betwixt West-Grenewiche, and Wandesworth,
aforesaid; viz. to the Sluices called Harescluse, R^therhithe, Suthwerke,
Bermondsey, Parysga^dyn, L^mbehythe, Lambehythe mersh, Batersey, Wandesworth,
Clopham, Pekham, and Camberwerwell.

The like Commission Pat. 33 H 6. p. 1. m. 17. in do^so.
, for the same Places, and to proceed accordingly, had Sir John Bourgchier of
Barners Knight, Sir John Burcestre, Sir John Cheyne Knights, and others, in 33
H. 6.

So also had Pat. 5 E. 4 p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
Sir Raphe Iosselyn Knight, Mayor of the City of London, Sir Walter Moile
Knight, Sir John Burcestre Knight, Nich. Gaynesford Esquire, John Wode, and
others, in 5 E. 4. And likewise Pat. 14 E. 4. p. 1. m. 20. in do^so.
Sir Richard Fenys Lord Dacres; John, Abbot of Bermundsey, Henry, Prior of S.
Marie Overey, in Suthwerk; Will. Cross, Master of the Hospital of S. Thomas
the martyr in Suthwerk, and diverse others, in 14 E. 4.

CAP. XV.
HAving now done with the Marshes on the South part of Thames, I come to those
on the North side, lying in the Counties of Midlesex and Essex: beginning with
Middlesex: where the first mention I find of any thing in this kind, is, that
in 26 E. 1. Robert de Retford and Henry Spigurnell were assigned Pat. 26 E. 1.
m. 28. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks and Ditches in Stebbenhethe and the parts
adjacent. After this, viz. on Wednes^ay next after the Feast of S. Martin Plac.
de ^erm. (...). 18 E. 2. ro^. 174. Midd.
the Bishop in 18 E. 2. there was an inquisition taken at the Hospital of S.
Kathrines near the Tower of London, before Will. de Broke, and Robert de
Kellesey, then the Kings Justices for view of the Banks, Ditches, etc. lying
betwixt the said Hospital and the Town of Chadewelle, and for repair of the
same; before whom the Jurors did present upon their Oaths; that a certain
person of ancient time Lord of the Manor of Stebenhethe beforementioned,
whose name they knew not, did by his industry recover a certain Marsh there,
containing about an hundred Acres of Land, which Marsh was then drowned by the
overflowing of the Thames, and at the time of the said presentment so made had
Banks, Ditches, etc. and did so lie betwixt the said Hospital and Shadwelle;
but through the want of their repair, was then frequently overflowed, and in
diverse places drowned to the great damage of the people in those parts.

Which Lord of the said Manor of Stebenhethe, did afterward grant by Charter
to certain of his free men, xlij acres and a half of Land, with the
appurtenances, severally, by parcells, to be held by them and their heirs, by
certain services for ever; and to repair and maintain, the said Banks, Ditches,
Sewers, etc. viz. each man upon his own proper ground, bordering on the said
River of Thames: of which xlij Acres and a half, John Gisors, John Peyrun, and
Maude de Cauntebrig, held xxxij Acres; the Master of the Hospital of S. Thomas
the Martyr, of Acon, in the said City of London, ten acres; and Walter Crepyn,
half an acre: and that the said Lord of that Manor, dimised the residue of
those hundred Acres, to the Bondmen of the said Manor, to hold at will, and
to repair and maintain the Banks, Ditches, etc. aforesaid; every man, at his
own proper costs, upon the said Lands so to him demised.

And they farther said, that the said Lord and his Court of Stebenhethe, did
then decree and ordain, by the assent of those his Tenants, two men, called
Wall Reeves, to oversee the said Banks etc. upon the ebbing and flowing of the
Tides; and to warn all the Tenants of the said Lands, as often as need should
require, to repair them; and likewise to present the defaults in the Court of
the said Lord at Stebenheth, to the end that the defects might be thereupon
amended by the said Lord and his Tenants. And that the said Lord ought to have
of every such Tenant, so in default, for the repair aforesaid, for every penny
three p^nce. And so to settle the order of defense, repair, and maintenance of
the said Banks etc. in time to come; and likewise the manner of cho^sing and
constituting the two men aforesaid, in the said Court of the Lord, to oversee
those Ditches etc. and to warn the Tenants when need should require, from that
time forth, for ever.

Which Custom and usage had ever been exercised from that time, from time to
time, by the Tenants of the Lords of that Manor, until that present day; the
state and Title of which Lord was then in the Bishop of London.

And the said Jurors moreover presented, that through the default of the
Bondmen of the said Bishop, who then held the said Lands in Stebenhethe of him
the said Bishop, in form aforesaid, and were so obliged to those repairs, but
could not perform them; the Banks and Ditches were broken and torn, and the
Lands and Tenements as well of the Freeholders as others, pe^ilously, and with
great damage overflowed.

And it was farther enquired, whether any of the said Tenants did ever
contribute to the aid of any other Tenant for the repair and maintenance of
those Banks etc. upon any such breach happening in former times: And it was
answered no: For they said, that every Tenant had wont to repair and sustain
all the Banks etc. upon his own proper land, at his own chardge, upon peril
which might befall. And because that the before-specified Freeholders, who
were not guilty of the said breach, nor the default thereof, as by the said
inquisition was found; whereas they should have had benefit by the repair of
those banks, as in reason they ought, and contrariwise sustained great loss;
that they might have their action therefore, if they saw good: And that the
said Bishop and his Bondmen, through whose neglect, those breaches, drowning,
and damages came, should be distrained from day to day for the repair and
maintenance aforesaid.

By reason of which Inquisition, for that the King was informed that the said
Bishop and his Bondmen did refuse to perform those repairs, at their proper
costs and chardges, upon their lands bordering on the before-specified River,
the Shireeve had command, that he should summon the said Bishop, to appear in
the Court of Kings Bench, in the xvm^ of S. John Baptist, to show, if he could,
why etc. who came accordingly; and alleged, that soon after the said
Inquisition was so made, all the defects in the Banks, upon his and his said
Bondmens Lands, were by him and them sufficiently amended and repaired; and the
judgment given upon the same Inquisition, ^ully executed: and therefore says,
that the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, were not overflowed and drowned through
the default of the Bishop and his Bondmen, in not repairing and maintaining the
Banks etc. aforesaid, upon those their Lands. But he said, that on the Even of
the Circumcision of our Lord, in the xviith year of the said Kings reign, there
happened a mighty flood, proceeding from the tempestuousnesse of the Sea, which
overflowed all the Banks, as well those that were against other men's lands, as
those against the lands of the same Bishop and his Bondmen; and drowned all the
said grounds: Which flood afterward in it is retreat to the Sea, made a certain
ground-breach upon the Land of the said Bishop, which could not be repaired by
the labor of one Tenant; so that every man having any land so overflowed,
ought to be chardged equally, for his proportion, toward the repair thereof,
according to the Custom of the Marsh. And farther said, that if all the
Land-holders there, would join together for the repairing and maintaining of
the said ground-breach in common, he the said Bishop and his Bondmen would be
ready, for their proportions, to assist and contribute thereto.

And Adam de Fyncham the King's Attorney, then said, that the said Walls etc.
were so broken and torn, through the default of repair by the said Bishop and
his Tenants, upon their own grounds; that all the before-specified Lands and
Tenements were thereby overflowed, and in diverse places drowned, as aforesaid,
to the great damage and peril of all those Land-holders: And that this he was
ready to make proof of. And the Bishop said as he did before; and that if there
were any overflowing at all, it was occasioned by the said impetuous flood,
which went over all the said Banks and Ditches; and which made that
ground-breach before-specified in it is retreat; and not by the default of him
and his Bondmen aforesaid; and desired that this might be enquired of by the
County. And so likewise did the said Adam, then the Kings Attorney. Whereupon
the Jurors in the said Court of Kings Bench, in the xvme of S. Michael: and
said upon their Oaths; that the Banks, Ditches etc. upon the coast of Thames,
situate betwixt the said Hospital and the Town of Shadwell, were not broken
through the default of the Bishop and his bondmen; and that the said Lands were
not so overflowed and drowned through any defect in repair of them: For they
said, that all the Land was so overflowed by the means of that huge flood
beforementioned, occasioned through the vehement tempests from the Sea, about
the Feast of the Circumcision of our Lord before-specified; which ran over all
the said Banks and Ditches; and which in it is fall to the Sea, made the said
ground-breach, whereby those Lands became afterward often overflowed, and
drowned.

And the said Jurors being asked who ought to repair that ground-breach;
answered; that according to the Custom of those parts,
every man having any part in the said Land, lying betwixt the said Hospital
and Shadwell, ought and had wont to contribute, according to his proportion, to
the repair and maintenance of such a ground-breach, when it should happen: And
therefore the Shireeve was commanded to distrain not only the said Bishop and
his bondmen, but all other persous having Lands between the said Hospital and
the Town of Shadwell, lying within the before-specified peril, for the repair
and amendment of the Ditch, where the said ground-breach was made by that great
flood; and likewise to repair the Banks, Ditches, Sewers and Gutters, which, by
means of that ground-breach, were so broken and torn.

In pursuance of which verdict, the said King in the same 18th year of his
reign (wherein the pleading abovementioned was) assigned Pat. 18 E. 2. p^ 2.
m. 4. in dorso.
Raphe Hereward, Robert de Ashele, and John de Doure to view the said banks,
betwixt the before-specified Hospital of S. Katherines and Shadwell, and to
take order for their repair.

In the 15th of E. 3. Robert de Sadyngton, Thomas de Blaston, and Gervase de
Wilford had Commission Pat. 15 E. 3. p. 1. m. 45. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. on the coast of the said River, being within
the precincts of Westminster and the parts adjacent, betwixt a place called the
Neyt, and Temple-barr, in London, then broken and in decay by the force of the
tides. And in 28 E. 3. Will. de Thorpe, Will. de Notton, John Bray, Thomas
Ludlowe, Will. de Hatton, and Thomas Morice had the like Pat. 2^ ^. 3. p. 1. m.
24. in dorso.
Commission for those in the Town of Stebenhethe before mentioned; as also upon
the River of Lie, in the confines of Middlesex and Essex, in a certain part of
Hakney, near to a Mill called Crachehegge, betwixt the said Town of Hakney, and
the Town of Welcomstowe in Essex.

In 36 E. 3. Will. de Fyncheden, Will. de Wynchingham and others were in like
sort assigned Pa^. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in d^^so.
for all the Banks etc. betwixt the Chapel of S. Katehrine in Middlesex, and
the Town of Est-Tilbury in Essex. So also the next year following, were Pa^. 36
E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in d^^so.
Thomas Morisse, Thomas Frowyk, and George Fanillore, for those banks etc. in
the Marshes of Stebenhithe, Brambeleye and Redclyve, and elsewhere within the
Lordship of the Bishop of London, upon the verge of the Thames. And in 38 E. 3.
Thomas Morice, Thomas Frowyk, and John Brikclesworth, for those in Stebenhithe
and Brambeley, from the Tower of London, to the River of Leye.

In 41 E. 3. John de Bampton, John de Sudbury and Thomas Brette were
constituted Pat. 41 E. 3. p. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks etc. betwixt the
before-specified Chapel of S. Katherine and Berkynflete in Essex; and to do all
things therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. In 43 E. 3.
Thomas de Lodelowe, Will. Halden, John Sundbie, and John Chertsey had Pat. 43
E. 3. ^. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
the like, for all those, as well upon the coast of the River of Leye, as of
Thames, which were in the parish of Stebenhithe. So likewise, the same year,
had Pat. 43 ^. 3. p. 2. m. 33.
Solomon Wauter and Nich Cartere, for those in the said parish, upon the River
of Thames only; with power to take so many Carpenters^ and other Laborers as
should be necessary for the work, upon competent wages.

In 1 R. 2. John Bampton, Will. Rykhill, Thomas Aspale, and Thomas Mylende had
the like Commission Pat 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 25. in dorso.
for those betwixt Blakewale, and the beforementioned Hospital of S.
Katherine. In 4 R. 2. Will. Cheyne, Helmingus Leget, Will. Rykhill, and Will
Cressewyke, for Pat. 4 R. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
those upon the River of Lie, betwixt Stebenhythe and Bramle.

In 6. R. 2. the Prior of the Hospital of S. John's of Jerusalem, being
questioned Plac. coram R^ge term. Mich. 6 R. 2. rot. 206 Mid^.
for the not clensing of a Ditch near Mileford, for an hundred perches; and
could not deny, but that he ought to do it; and therefore the Shireeve of
Middlesex was appointed to compel him by distress for the performance thereof
at his own proper chardges. In the same year Will. Cheyne, Will. Rykhill, John
Shorediche and Will Cressewyke were Pat 6 R. 2. p. 1. m. 9. in dorso.
appointed to view and repair the banks upon the River of Lie, betwixt
Stebenhethe and Bramle.

In 19 R. 2. Will Rykhill, Will. Skrene, Thomas Cherleton, John Shoredyche
senior, and John Ongham had Pat. 19 R. 2. p. 1. m. 5. in dorso.
the like appointment for those betwixt the Town of Stratford at Bow and the
Tower of London, and to perform all things therein, according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm. So also in 22 R. 2. had Will. Thirnyng, Will. Rykhill,
John Cokaine, Thomas Charleton, John Shoredyche, senior, and John Ongham (the
Shireeve of Middlesex being associated to them) for Pat. 22 R. 2. p. 1. m. 2.
in dorso.
the view and repair of those banks etc. in Stebenhithe marsh; and to proceed
therein as aforesaid.

Which Commission was renewed Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 4. m. 3. in dorso.
in 1 H. 4. to all the parties before mentioned, excepti^g John Cokayn. In 5 H.
4. John Cokain, Will. Skrene, Thomas Tyldeslegh, Robert Rykedon, and John
Hogham, with the said Shireeve of Middlesex had Pat. 5 H. 4. p. 1. m. 29. in
dorso.
the like. And in Pat. 9. H. 4. p. 2. m. 21. in dorso.
9 H. 4. Will. Cheyne, John Selman, John Profyt, and John Hogham: and to act
therein according to the ancient Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 8 H 6. Henry Somer, Robert Frampton, John Thwaytes, Walter Grene, and
Alexander Anne were assigned Pat. 8 H. 6. p. 2. m. 20. in dorso.
in like sort, for the banks etc. in the Marshes of Stebenhithe, and Walmershe;
and to make Statutes and Ordinances, for the defense thereof, according to the
Laws and Customs of Romeney marsh: as also to impressed so many Laborers for
that employment, upon competent salaries, as they should see necessary, in
respect of the imminent danger, by the breaches in those banks, which required
their speedy repair.

In 26 H. 6. John Fortescu, chief Justice of the common Pleas, Robert Wellys
Abbot of Graces near the Tower of London, John Fyloll, Thomas Burgoygne, John
Wylton, Walter Grene, John Harpour, Robert Tanfield, Edmund Plofeld, John Eton,
and Thomas Croxton had the like Commission Pat. 26 H. 6. p. 2. m. 23. in dorso.
for the banks etc. betwixt the Mill of S. Katherines near the Tower of London,
to the Chapel of S. Marie Matfelon; thence to the Church of S. Dunstans in
Stepenhithe; thence to the Church of S. Leonard in Bremley; thence to the River
of Leye; thence to the Thames, and thence to the said Mill: and to make Laws
etc. according to the Laws and Ordinances of Romeney marsh: as also to impressed
Laborers etc. as abovesaid.

Upon an inquisition Esc. 27 H. 6.22. ^. penult. Midd.
taken in 27 H. 6. the Jurors presented, that by the violence of the tides upon
the banks of Stebenhithe marsh, a great part of the said banks, adjoining to
that marsh, was then ruinous and broken through the neglect of the Land-holders
there: And that through the default of one John Harpour Gentleman, in not
repairing his bank, opposite to Depford strond, there was, on the Monday, being
the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, in the 26 year of the
reign of the said King H. 6. a breach made in the said bank of the
before-specified John Harpour, for the length of xx Rods, unto the land of John
Fyloll, in so much as a thousand Acres of land, lying within the said marsh,
were drowned. And that he the said John, and all those whose estate he then
had, were obliged, in respect of their land adjoining to the said bank, to take
care of it is amendment.

In 34 H. 6. Sir John Fortescu Knight, then chief Justice of the Kings bench,
John Fylolle, Thomas Burgoyne, Walter Grene, John Harpour, Robert Tanfeld,
Will. Chadworth, Thomas Cornwalys, and Thomas Croxton, were appointed Pat. 34.
H 6. pa^te unica, m. 23. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks etc. lying betwixt S.
Katherines Mill, before mentioned, unto the Chapel called S. Marie Matfelone;
thence to the Church of S. Dunstans in Stepenhithe; thence to the Church of S.
Leonard in Bremley; thence to the River of Leye; thence to the Thames, and so
to the said Mill: And to make Laws and Ordinances according to those of Romeney
marsh.

The like Pat. 7 E. 4. p. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
Commission in 7 E. 4. had Thomas Abbot of Graces, near the Tower of London,
Thomas Urswyk, Thomas Frowyk Esquire, and others.

In 14 E. 4. Sir Thomas Urswyke Knight, John Elryngtone, Thomas Frowyk, Will.
Essex, and others, were assigned Pat. 14 E. 4 p. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
to view and take order for the repair of all those banks etc. lying betwixt
the Tower of London, and the Town of Stratford at Bow; and to proceed
therein, by making Laws etc. and otherwise, according to the Laws and Customs
of Romeney marsh. In 20 E. 4. Thomas Bishop of London, Edmund Abbot of Graces,
Will. Wirsley Dean of Paul's, Sir John Elryngton, and Sir Thomas Frowyk Knights,
Richard Gardener, and others, had Pat. 20. E. 4. p. 1. m. 8 in dorso.
the like assignation for those betwixt the Town of Lymeostez, and the wall,
called Black Wall. So Ibid.
also, in the same year, had the said Thomas, Edmund, and William, together
with Henry Sharp Dean of the free Chapel of S. Stephan within the Kings Palace
at Westminster, John Harding Master of the Hospital of S. Thomas of Acon in the
City of London, Sir John Elryngton Knight, Sir Thomas Frowyk Knight, Richard
Gardner and others, for all the banks upon the River of Thames and Leye,
betwixt the metes and bounds of the City of London, and the bridge of Stratford
at Bow, on the North and West side of those Rivers, and the Road-way which
lies betwixt White Chapel parish, and the Town of Stratford at Bow
before-specified.

CAP. XVI. Marshes in the Suburbs of LONDON.
AND that some places in the very Suburbs of the City of London it self, have
originally been Fenny and Moorish, though now (by no small industry and cost)
equalling the chiefest; which were naturally otherwise, is apparent from
undoubted testimony; Fitz Stephan (who lived above five hundred years since)
speaking of that place now called Stow's survey of Land. p. 707. b.
Moore Fields, saying thus; Cum est congelata palus illa magna, quae moenia
urbis Aquilonalis alluit, exeunt lusum super glaciem densae juvenum turmae.
etc. When the great Fen, which waters the walls on the North side of the
City, is frozen, multitudes of young people go to play upon the Ice. Some,
taking a little room to run, do set their feet a good distance, and glide a
great way. Others sit upon thick pieces of Ice, as big as Millstones, and
being drawn by many, who hold hand in hand, when the foot of one slippeth, they
all tumble down together. But others more expert in sporting thereon, fix bones
under their heels; and taking a Pike-staff, do shove themselves forward with
so much force, that they glide with no less swiftness, than a Bird flies, or
an Arrow passes out of a Bow.

This Fen, says Ibid. p. 47^. a.
Stow, stretching from the wall of the City, betwixt Bishops-gate and the
Posterne, called Cripple-gate, to Finsbury and to Holy-well, continued a waste,
and an unprofitable ground a long time, so that the same was all letten for
four Marks the year, in the reign of King Edward the second: But in the year
MCCCCxv. 3 H. 5. Thomas Fawconer, Mayor, caused the wall to be broken toward
the Moor, and builded the Postern, called Moore gate, for ease of the Citizens,
to walk that way upon Causeys, to Iseld^n and Hoxton. Moreover, he caused the
Ditches of the City, and other the Ditches, from Shoresditch to Deep Ditch, by
Bethlem into the Moore ditch, to be newly cast and cleansed; by means whereof
the said Fen or Moor, was greatly drained and dried.

And in the year MDxij. Roger Atchley, Mayor, caused diverse Dikes to be cast,
and made, to drain the waters of the said Moore fields, with bridges arched
over them; and the grounds about to be levelled; whereby the said field was
made somewhat more commodious; but yet it stood full of noisome waters.
Whereupon, in the year MDxxvij. Sir Thomas Seymour, Mayor, caused diverse Sluices
to be made, to convey the said waters over the Town ditch, into the course of
Walbrooke, and so into the Thames: and by these degrees was this Fen or Moore,
at length made main and hard ground, which before, being overgrown with Flaggs,
Sedges and Rushes, served to no use.

Nor was the ground in Fleetstreete, and thereabouts, long since, much better
than a Marish; for the same Author Ibid. p. 436 a.
says, that in the year MDXCv. he observed; that when the Laborers had broken
up the pavement against Chancery lane end, up toward S. Dunstan's Church, and
had dug four foot deep, they found another pavement of hard stone, more
sufficient than the first, and therefore harder to be broken; under which were
in the made-ground, piles of Timber, driven very thick, and almost close
together, the same being as black as cole, and many of them rotten.

And now to manifest, that not only the Law, but the usual practice is, where
disobedience or neglect has been found in those as be chardgable with the
maintenance of any Banks or Sewers, made for the common defense of such Marshes
as are in danger of surrounding; that coercion is to be exercised for the
performance thereof; I shall here exhibit the testimony of a Decree Ex bund
Decretorum in officio nuncupato the Petti^ag.
, made in a Session of Sewers, held at Ilford in Essex 19o Aprilis, Ao 1639.
which reciting an Ordinance made in the like Session, at Ilford
before-specified, for raising the sum of seventeen hundred and six pounds, for
repairing a breach in the Banks or Marsh-wall of Bromley marsh, in this County,
whereby ninety four Acres of land were surrounded; and the neglect of certain
persons, therein named, to pay their proportion thereof, which were assessed
upon them; a Lease, for xli years was made of several parcels of ground,
belonging to those so neglecting, unto others, at the Rent of one pepper corn
yearly.

CAP. XVII.
HAving now done with the Marshes in Middlesex, Essex.
I come to those in Essex, which Counties are divided by the River of Lie,
anciently called Luye.

Of this River it is memorable, H. Hunt. hist. l. 5. f. 201. b. n. 10.
that the Danes in the year of Christ 894. and 23 of King Alfred's reign,
sailed up it with their Ships, and built a Castle on the Bank thereof, about xx
miles from London. Near which, the Londoners giving them battle, and having
the better of the day, put them to flight; so that they were constrained to
fly to that Hold: whereof the King having notice, he caused this River to be
cut into three branches, to the end that they might not get their ships back:
who discerning what was done, left them and fled toward Severne. That which is
here called a Castle, is supposed to be some Fort, made at or near Hartford,
situate upon the Bank of this River: for, before the tides were kept back at
Stratford Bow, by a large Sasse there made, to keep the level above it from
drowning; no question but that they flowed above Ware, and brought up small
Vessels near to Hartford; there being, betwixt Ware and Hartford a Hill, which
to this day bears the name of Shipman's Hill, and a tradition of the Country
people, that ships did, in ancient time, lie at Anchor in that Valley.

The first mention wherewith I have met, concerning the Marshes of Essex, is
Plac. temp. ince^i Regis Ioh. Essex.
in King John's time, Roger de Crammavill being then attached to show cause,
why he did not stand to the determination made in the said King's Court, by a
Fine, betwixt himself and the Prior of S. John's of Jerusalem, touching the
Banks, Gutters, and Ditches to be made in Renham marsh: at which time the said
Prior produced the beforementioned Fine so made betwixt them; which testified;
that the said Roger did then agree, that he and his heirs would make and repair
those Banks etc. according to the proportion of his Land in that Marsh, so that
every Acre, which the said Roger did possess, should be taxed as those that
belonged to the Prior. And the said Roger came and acknowleged the agreement;
and justified, that he had fully made those Banks according to what belonged to
his Tenement; and thereupon put himself upon the view of those who knew the
Laws of the Marsh.

Upon complaint Pat. 8 E. 1.
made to the King in 8 E. 1. by the Abbot of Stratford; that, whereas he did
use, yearly, to repair the Banks and Ditches of the Marshes of West-Hamme, as
often as need required, for the preservation of his Lands and the Lands of his
neighbors, lying within those Marshes, againts the over-flowings of the Rivers
of Thames and Luye: and that his said neighbors did neglect to do the like,
for what belonged to them; the said King directed his Precept ^ m. 13.
to the Shireeve of Essex, commanding him to distrain all those that were
faulty therein, to the end that the said Abbot might have contribution in that
behalf.

In 15 E. 1. John de Lovetot and Will. de Lamburne had Pat. 15 E. 1. m. 6.
Commission to view and repair the Banks and Ditches, in this County, upon the
side of Thames and parts adjacent, then in decay; and to enquire through whose
default they became so ruinous.

In 20 E. 1. the Abbot of Stratford made a new complaint Pat. 20 E. 1. m. 22 in
dorso.
to the King, in the like manner as abovesaid. Whereupon the said King required
the Shireeve to distrain all those who were obliged to such repair of their
Banks and Ditches, and had not accordingly done their duty therein: as also
those who did refuse to contribute to the said Abbot, according unto their due
proportions.

In 31 E. 1. Walter le Baud, Richard de Perneford, and John de Dovor were
assigned Pat. 31 E. 1. m. 31. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks, Ditches etc. in this County, and those at
Wolwyche, in Kent. The like Commission Pat. 34 E. 1. m 36. in dorso.
had John le Bretun and Will. de Wauton, in 34 E. 1. for those in Essex, only.

Several other of the same kind (for this County only) were in King Edward the
second's time; viz. to Pat. 3 E. 2. m. 26. in d^^so.
H. Spigurnell, John de Dovor, and John de Malegraffe in 3 E. 2. To Pat. 6 E.
2. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Walter le Baud, Will. Fitz Robert and John de Norton in 6 E. 2. To Pat. 7 E.
2. p. 1. m. 9. in do^s^.
the same William, Henry Gernet, and Thomas Dakenham in 7 E. 2. To Pat. 8. E.
2. p. 1. m. 13. in do^s^.
Will. de Hanyngfeld, John le Burser and Thomas de Ultyng in 8 E. 2. To Pat. 9
E. 2. p. ^. m. 9. in dorso.
Nich. Frembaud, Henry Gernet, John de Davor, and Richard Bastard, in 9 E. 2.

In 14 E. 2. Henry Grene, John de Dovere and Thomas de Chene had the like Pat.
14 E. 2. p. 2 m. 9. in dorso.
Commission, for the view and repair of the Banks etc. at Renham, Benington,
and Alvitheley.

In 17 E. 2. John de Doure, Robert de Ashele and Nich. de Scotford the Pat. 17.
E. 2. p. 2. m. 25. in dorso.
like for all the Marshes, upon the Thames, in this County. So also had Pat. 17
E. 2. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
the said John, John de Wydefeld and Walter de Hegham, for the Banks etc.
betwixt Stretford at Bough, and Est-Tilbury, and the parts adjacent.

In 18 E. 2. John Boteler, and John de la Hay were appointed ^^t. 18 E. 2. p.
2. m. 18. i^ do^so.
to view a certain Causey betwixt Maldon and Hebrugg; under which, through an
arch, the fresh waters had used to run into the Sea; which waters were then
stopped: And likewise Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 2. m. 12. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. in the Marshes of Esthamme in Essex, and
Wolwiche in Kent.

So also in 5 E. 3. had Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 2. m. 16. in do^so.
Robert de Rochford, and Will. de Stanford for all the Banks etc. within the
Hundreds of Densey and Rochford.

In 10 E. 3. Henry Gernet and his fellow Justices, assigned for the view and
repair of the Banks etc. on the Coast of Thames, in this County, sat at West
Hamme on Wednesday, being the Feast of S. Edmund the King; where the Prioresse
of Stratford made complaint Ex bund. de Brev. and Recor. Wallias etc.
tang^ntibus 10 E. 3. ^. 4. Et. Pa^. 13 E 3. p. 1. n. 7
before them, that Will. de Masun, Bailiff of the Marsh of Westhamme, had
distrained her for C s. for the repair of a certain Bank, called the Prior's
Wall: for she said, that she neither had nor held any land nor ground in the
said marsh, for the which any wall ought by her to be repaired; and therefore
required judgment. But she said, that one John de Covele, long ago, viz. in
the time of King Henry the third, held in the said Marsh, as of the fee of
Muntfichet (which then belonged to Sir John de Handlo) fifty acres of land,
together with the said Bank, then called Coveles Wall, and a certain piece of
Pasture, called the Hope, lying near the said Bank, without the precinct of the
said Marsh, viz. between the same Bank and the course of the River of Thames:
which land, together with the said Bank of Hope, were before that time, ever
assessed together, for the repair of that Bank, whenever it stood in need.
And the said John de Couele, being so seized, aliened the said Bank and Hope,
to Robert le Ku, to hold to him and his heirs, for the repairing and
maintaining of the said Bank, for ever; the said Hope then being sufficient for
the Pasturage of six Kine, as it was reported.

And afterward the said John de Couele, long before the Statute, entitled
Quia emptores terrarum, sold the said Land by parcells to diverse Tenants, to
hold to them and their heirs, of him the said John and his heirs, for a certain
yearly Rent and suit of Court to be thereupon performed: And afterward the
said John did wholly sell from himself and his heirs, all the demesne of the
before-specified Tenements, together with the whole Rent and service, which he
had wont to receive of his said Tennants, unto one Simon de Passelewe: and the
said Simon sold them to one Cecelie de Lancaster: And she the said Cecelie
granted the said whole Lordship, together with the Rents and services before
mentioned to the Church of S. Leonard of Stratford, and to the Nunns there
serving God; to hold in pure Alms: And so the said Prioresse then had and
possess^d the said Lordship, together with the Rent and service aforesaid.

And she farther alleged, that the said Robert le Ku, whilst he lived and held
those Lands and Hope, always repaired that Bank. And after his decease, the said
Bank and Hope, descended to Ioane his daughter and heir, who was wedded to one
Will. de Rokesle; in whose time all the said Hope, by a great inundation of the
Thames, was wholly destroyed and drowned. And the said William then
considering, that the chardge of repairing of that Bank, would much exceed the
profit of the said Tenement, wholly relinquisht all that Tenement, and would
not meddle any more with the said Bank; and so the said Bank lies unrepaired.
And she alleged moreover, that the said Prioresse only received of her Tenants
of those lands in that Marsh, of the said Fee of Covele, a certain Rent of
xiiij s. over and above the service due and accustomed to the said John de
Handlo, then chief Lord of that Fee: and that she was ready, according to the
quantity of that Rent, to contribute to the repair of that bank: and therefore
required justice to be done to her in the premises.

And hereupon came the Abbot of Stratford, by his Bailiff, as also John de
Brumpton and Thomas le Bret in their proper persons; and as Tenants of the
lands in the said Marsh, lying within the danger of the same bank, alleged,
that the said Prioresse did unjustly prosecute that Writ, forasmuch as she
thereby endeavored to excuse her self from the repair of the same Bank; and to
lay the burden thereof upon the said Abbot and others. They also alleged, that
the said Prioresse, and all her Predecessors, from the time that the said
Lordship of the Fee of Covele came to their hands, did use, till that very
time, to make and repair the said Bank; and that as often as they refused so to
do, they were ever thereto compelled; and this, they said, they were ready to
prove, whereupon they required judgment.

And the said Prioresse, saying as she did before, added, that forasmuch as she
had been thus disquieted and molested, by grievous and intolerable distresses,
she then did complain and brought her action; and as before she did, so she
still required remedy, acccording to the Precept of the said King.

Whereupon the said Justices, having heard her complaint in this business, and
having respect to the said Kings Precept, were willing to enquire and be
informed touching the premises; and therefore yielded that an Inquision should
be taken; which was accordingly done by the said John de Dakenham and his
fellow Jurors: who said, upon their Oaths, that there had been time out of
mind, and then were certain Lordships in the Town of Westhamme; viz. the
Lordship of Handlo, the Lordship of Lancastre, the Lordship of Placetz, and the
Lordship of the Prioresse of Stratford; and that anciently all the Lords of
those Lordships met together, and agreed amongst themselves, that each Lord
should have a certain part of the Bank of Thames belonging to his Lordship. And
they said, that to the Lordship of the said Prioresse, there was assigned a
certain parcel of that Bank, now called Priores-Wall; and that the said
Prioresse was obliged to make and repair the same Bank, at her own proper
chardges, in such sort as the other Lords before-specified are theirs. And they
said farther, that the defects then in that Bank might be made good for Cs.

And the said Prioresse, having heard the verdict of the said Jurors, alleged,
that they had not in any thing made answer to what they had in chardge:
Whereupon she required, that they might make a further answer. And therefore
because the said Justices were not satisfied, that the abovementioned verdict
was sufficient for them to ground any judgment upon, by the tenor of their
Commission, they appointed that the said Jurors should appear before them
again, and have a new chardge for a better enquiry.

Whereupon they the said Jurors, together with Nicholas le Forestere, Richard
le Saltere etc. also sworn and associated with them, came, and said upon their
Oaths, that the said John de Covele, long ago, viz. in the time of King Henry
the third, held xliij Acres and a half, of Land, in the marsh of West Hamme,
together with the said Bank, now called Prioreswall, which was then called
Coueles-wall; as also with a Hope adjoining: which Land and Hope were then
wholly chardged with the making and repair of the said Bank. And that
afterward the said John, long before the Statute of Quia emptores terraram
etc. being so seized, demised all the said Land, particularly, to diverse
Tenants, to be held of him the said John and his heirs, by certain services, to
be performed to him and his heirs for ever; and that then he reserved to
himself, the said Bank and Hope, together with the chardges of the same Bank;
and that he afterward dimised the said Bank and Hope, to one Robert de Ku, to
hold for ever, because that the said Hope did then afford Pasturage for ten
Kine yearly in Summer time. And that afterward the said John did totally
alienate all those his services, together with all his Fee and Lordship of all
his Tenants and their Tenements, unto one Simon de Passelewe: And that
afterward, by diverse alienations, so made from hand to hand, the same
services, with the whole Fee and Lordship aforesaid, came to the hands of the
said Prioresse, who did then enjoy the said services, and so likewise the said
Fee, and service of all that Land.

And they farther said, that the before-specified Robert le Ku, whilst he held
the said Banks and Hope, did undergo the chardge of the said Bank, all his
time, as aforesaid: And that after his decease, the said Bank and Hope, came to
the hands of one William de Rokeslee, and Ioane his wife, daughter and heir of
the said Robert: in whose time, by reason of an extraordinary flood of the
Thames, it was much spoiled and almost drowned: so that the said William and
Ioane, considering the chardge of the Bank to be great, and that they should
not for the future receive any more benefit of the said Hope, forasmuch as
there was little of it left, they wholly relinquished the said Bank, and
rendered it into the hands of the same Prioresse, then Lady of that Fee, as
aforesaid.

And hereupon the said Jurors being asked, whether any part of the Hope did
then remain, or not, they answered that there did not. And being farther asked
who were then the Tenants of the said Lands, which had so belonged formerly
unto the said John de Covele; and they said, that John de Brumpton held xiij
Acres thereof, Walter le Rooke two Acres etc. And being asked if the said
Prioresse held any part of the said Marsh in demesne, or not; they answered
that she did not; excepting a certain Rent of xiiij s. which she received of
her said Tenants in the same Marsh, over and above the service due and
accustomed unto Sir John de Handlo chief Lord of the Fee.

And because it was found by the said Jurors, that at such time as the said
John de Covele held those Tenements in that Marsh, he then held them wholly
chardged with the repair of the said bank etc. And that though by the
alienation, which he made of the same Bank, together with the said Hope, he
only chardged them with the repair of the said Bank as aforesaid; by reason
whereof, forasmuch as the said Hope was then gone, the same Bank lay so
unrepaired, and became dangerous; of necessity and according to the assize of
the said Marsh, recourse ought to be, to all the said Tenements, formerly and
of ancient time, as aforesaid, chardged therewith; and to lay a new chardge
upon them for that repair: therefore it was decreed, that all the said
Tenements, which formerly did belong to the said John de Covele, within that
Marsh, to whose hands soever they had come, should be retained and chardged,
for the future, to the making, repairing, and maintaining thereof. And, that
all and singular the Tenants of the said Lands, for the time being; as also all
others who were to have any benefit of them, should be assessed for the repair
of whatsoever defects should afterward happen in the said Bank, as often as
need required; viz. every Tenant or person receiving such benefit, according to
the proportion of his holding, for ever: And that the said Prioresse should not
thenceforth be distrained and compelled to any repair thereof, or contribution
thereto, above the rate of her due proportion of what she held.

And that these, and all other the Banks in this County, might be the better
preserved for the future, several Commissions were frequently issued out to
sundry persons of note in these parts; viz. in 12 E. 3. to Pat. 12 E. 3. p. 3.
m. 16.
John de Brianzon, Henry Gernet, Humfrey de Northwode, Benedict de Ditton,
Will. de Tendering, and Richard de Henham. In 15 E. 3. to Pat. 15 E. 3. p. 1. m.
22. in dorso.
Will. de Wauton, Henry Garnet, Henry Darcy, Will. de Treye, Benedict de
Ditton, and William de Tendering. In 19 E. 3. to Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. in
dorso.
Richard de Kelleshull, Henry D'arcy, Will. de Tey, and Benedict de Ditton; and
in 24 E. 3. to Pat. 24 E. 3. p. 3. m. 15. in dorso.
Richard de Kelleshull, Thomas Tirell, John de Bergholt, and John Samkyn of
Berkyng.

In 26 E. 3. upon a suit Plac. in term. Pasch. 26 E. 3. ot. 12. Esse^.
touching the clensing of the River betwixt Haveryng and Reynham, the Jurors
found, that the Prior of S. John's of Jerusalem ought to do one half thereof,
which was then choakt up, to the midst of the stream, toward the Land of the
said Prior, in Reynham, only: And that every Tenant on that side toward
Haveryng, should do the like for that toward their own Land.

In 27 E. 3. John de Staunton, Henry Darcy, Thomas Young, John de Rokewode,
William de Rokeswelle, Will. de Horneby and John de Tendering were appointed
Pat. 27 E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. betwixt Berking and Est-Tilbury. In 29 E. 3.
upon several breaches in the Banks, within the Hundred of Dansey, through the
violence of the tides, John de Coggeshale, John de Newport, Simon de Ogremount,
and John Gamen of Tyllingham, were constituted Pat. 29 E. 3 p. 1. m. 19. in
do^so.
Commissioners for their repair. By which Commission to take so many laborers,
as should be needful for that business, as well of those as had been before
employed therein, as others, born within Liberties and without, where they
should see fit (the Fee of the Church excepted) and to settle them in the work:
as also to arrest and imprison all such as they should find refractory therein,
till the said King should think fit to dispose of them otherwise.

In 30 E. 3. John de Haveryng, Henry Darcy, Thomas Young, John de Rokewode, and
others, were Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
assigned, in like sort, for those betwixt Berkyng and Est-Tilbury: So also in
32 E. 3. were Pat. 32 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
John de Haveryng, John de Bolyngton, and others.

In this 32 year of E. 3. it was by the Jurors at Stratford-Langthorne, Inter
Brevia and Recorda de Walliis and fossatis etc. de an. 32 E. 3. p. 1.
presented; that the Tenants of Haveryng had suffered the Chanel betwixt the
said Lordship of Haveryng, and the Lordship of Reynham, to be so stopped up, as
that the stream, which ought to pass that way, was so much hindered thereby,
that it almost drowned the Pastures of the Commonalty of Havering, lying near
that Channel, to the great damage of the said Commonalty: which Chanel every
Tenant, on Havering side, ought to cleanse, toward his own Land: The Shireeve
therefore was commanded to summon the said men of Haveryng to answer thereto.
Who appeared accordingly in the Kings bench at Westminster, on the Octaves of
S. Hillarie; viz. the master of the House of Hornchirche, John at D^une etc.
And being required to say what they could for themselves, why each of them
ought not to repair and scour the said Chanel, on Haveryng side, toward their
own Land, as it was presented; the said Master, and the rest said; that neither
they, nor any of their Predecessors, or Ancestors, Tenants of the lands
aforesaid, did ever scour or repair the same, nor of right ought so to do; and
thereof they did put themrelves for trial, upon the Country. And Simon de
Kegworth, then the Kings Attorney, said; that they the said men and Tenants
ought to repair and cleanse the same Chanel, as it was before presented; and
this he offered to prove on the said King's behalf, by the Country. Whereunto
the said Tenants assenting, the Jurors were brought; and upon their Oaths,
said; that the said Master and others ought of right to repair and cleanse the
said Chanel, toward Haveryng, against their own land, as it was before
presented: Therefore it was adjudged, that they should be distrained so to do
etc.

After this about two years, the like Presentment Plac. coram Rege term. Trin.
34 E. 3. rot. 20. Essex.
was made against the Prior of the Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem, and Sir
John de Staunton Knight, viz. that they had injuriously suffered the said River
betwixt Haveryng and Reynham to be choakt up, so that the course of the water,
which had wont to pass through that Chanel, did by the said obstruction, drown
the Pastures of the Commonalty of Haveryng, which lay near the same River.
Which John being dead after that presentment so made; it was decreed, that his
heirs should be distrained. But it being proved, that his wife then held those
his Lands, and that she gainsaid not, but that she was ready to cleanse the one
moytie of the said Chanel, to the mid stream, on her own side; and likewise
that the Tenants of Havering ought to cleanse the other moytie, on their side,
the said Prior was dismissed.

In 36 E. 3. Sir John de Haveryng Knight, John de Cavendishe, John de
Gildesburgh, and others, were made Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Commissioners for the repair of the B^nks etc. betwixt Berking and
E^t-Tilbury; with direction to proceed therein according to the Laws and
Customs of this Realm. The next year following,
Sir Will. de Wa^ton Knight, Thomas Torell, and Thomas Belhouse had Pat. 37. E
3. p. 1. m. 46. in dorso.
the like Commission, for the Banks at West-Thurrok. So also in 43 E. 3. had
Pat. 43 E. 3 ^. 2. m. 19. in dorso.
Thomas de Lodelowe, Hugh de Badewe, Thomas Young, John A^brey and Will.
Naffe^ton for those at Est-Hamme West Hamme and Berkyng. The like Pat. 44 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 33. (...) do^so.
in 44 E. 3. had Sr Hen. de Gray of Codnore Knight, Sir Rob. de Marny Knight,
John de Goldesburgh, and others, for those upon the water of Markediche; and
others, upon the coast of Thames, betwixt Berkyng and Est-Tyllebury aforesaid.

Other Commissions in the same Kings time, were these; viz. Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 1.
m. 30. in dorso.
in 48 E. 3. to Robert Bealknap, John de Bampton, and others, for the Banks
between Stratford at Bow and Est-Tilbury.

In 49 E. 3. to Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 1. ^. 10. in dorso.
Sir Hugh de Badewe Knight, Sir John de Sutton Knight, Sir Raphe de Poley
Knight, and others, for those in Bradwell. As also to Ib^d. m. 9. in dorso.
the Abbot of Stratford, Nich Carreu, John Aubrey and Roger Germeyn, for those
at Est-Hamme and West-Hamme; with appointment to act therein according to the
Law and Custom of this Realm. And likewise to Ib. m. c. in do^s^.
Nich, Carreu, Robert Bealknap, Will. Tank, and others, for those in the Marsh
of the Abbess of Berkyng. And moreover to Ibid. m. i. i^ do^so.
the said Nicholas, Robert Bealknap, and Robert de Teye, for several other
Banks in diverse Marshes within this County.

In 50 E. 3. to Pat. 50 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in do^so.
the Abbot of Stratford, Nich. Carreu, and Will. Halden, for those from the
Town of Stratford at Bow to Berkyng: So also to Sir Will. de Wanton Knight,
Roger Mareschall, Thomas de Belhous, and Roger Germayn, for those at West
Thurrok. In 51 E. 3. to P^t. 51 E. ^. p. 1. m. 41. in do^so.
Robert Bealknap, Thomas Maundevill, Rob. de Teyes^ and others, for the Banks
in several Marshes and places of this County. And in 1 R. 2. to Pat. 1 R. 2. p.
1. m. 25. in dorso.
the Abbot of Stratford, Nich. Carreu, Will. de Halden, John Auberey, John
Bampton, William Rykhill, and Roger Gremyn, for those from Stratford a^te Bow
to Berkyng.

In 2 R. 2. Sir Henry de Gray of Wilton, Sir Albred de Vere, Sir Will. Berland,
Sir Will. Wauton, Sir John Symond, Sir John Chaneeux Knights, Geffrey Darsham,
Rob. Rigdon, and others, had the like Pat. 2. R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
Commission for the view and repair of the Banks in sundry Marshes through this
County, which were then in decay; and power to choose and take so many
Carpenters, with other Artificers and Laborers, as should be needful for that
work, wheresoever they might be found in this County, as well within Liberties
as without, excepting the Fee of the Church; and excepting such as were
assigned for the said King's special service; and to employ them therein;
imprisoning such as they should find refractory. The next year following Sir
Will. de Wauton Knight, John de Middleton, Roger Marescall, Roger Germayn and
John Stody, were Pat. 3 R. 2. p. 1. m. 44. in dorso.
in like sort assigned, for those upon the coast of Thames, and the Garden of
Farndon, unto the Church of West Thurrok. So also in Pat. 4 R. 2. p. 1. m. 17.
in dorso.
4 R. 2. were the Abbot of Stratford, Henry Asty, and Laurence Allerthorpe, for
those at Esthamme and West-Hamme.

In 8 R. 2. the Abbot of Stratford, Nich. Brembre, Mayor of the City of London,
Robert Bealknap, Nich. Carreu, Will. Rykehill, Richard Ryall and Roger Germyn,
were Pat. 8 R. 2. p. 1. m. 39 in dorso.
appointed, as aforesaid, for the view and repair of the Banks from Stratford
at Bow to Berkyng. So also were Pat. 8 R. 2. p. 2. m. 29. in dorso.
Rob. Bealknap, Will. Wauton, John Guldesburgh and others, for those in the
Marshes of Barking and Dakenham; and to act therein according to the Law and
Custom of the Marshes, before that time exercised in those parts. And in 15 R.
2. John Radyngton Prior of the Hospital of S. John's of Jerusalem in England,
Sir John Deyncourt Knight, Will. de Horbury Clerk, Thomas Newenton, and others,
had Pat. 15 R. 2. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
the like appointment for those betwixt Reynham and Alvytheley; and to act as
aforesaid.

But though by the great care, which the Kings of this Realm had, for the
preserving of diverse coasts from inundation, that lay thus in danger of the
tides; and the safeguard of those as had by great iudustry been won from the
overflowing of the Sea; much advantage did accrue to the Common wealth: yet
such has been the violence and irresistible force of that element, being
agitated by high and boisterous winds, that notwithstanding the utmost
endeavors that could be used for prevention thereof, it sometimes wasted and
consumed much in other places; of which, sundry examples might be given, were
it requisite; but I shall only instance in one; viz. of the Lands and Marshes
belonging to the Abbey of S. Osithes in this County, whereof I find Ex aut^gr.
in bibl. Cott^nian^.
mention in a Petition exhibited unto Robert de Braybroke, Bishop of London, in
the time of King Richard 2d. and to the Dean and Chapter of that Church, by Sir
Albred de Vere Knight, who thereby shows, that whereas that Monastery was
situate near the Sea coast, and had in it an Abbot and twenty Canons of the
Order of S. Augustine, serving God there devoutly every day; and that the
revenues thereof were, through various mishaps, without their default, so
diminished, that a great part of their sustenance was abated; viz. in
Southflete C Acres of their arable land, by the overflowing of the Sea, totally
drowned: As also there and at their Beckarie of Coketwyk, in one Pasture,
wherein at sometimes a C Kine and a thousand Ew-sheep might be kept, through
the breach of the banks', and inundation thereof, then scarce Lxx Kine and
eight hundred Ewes could be maintained. And moreover, that two Marshes, called
Wyggebergh mers, and Holewyke mersh, in which six hundred Muttons might be
yearly kept, were then through the continual tides daily overflown, that scarce
four hundred could be maintained. And that the Water-Mill situate in the Town
of S. Osiths, and belonging to that Abbey, which had been worth xxl. was by the
Sea-tides so spoiled that it could not be repaired under an hundred pound
chardge. And lastly, that the Marsh walls in that Town, in length three miles,
which included a Pasture for Lxx Kine, and a thousand Muttons and Ewes, were so
torn and broken at that time, that for the preserving of the same, there must
be other banks made anew, and those old ones quitted; so that a great
proportion of the said Pasturage being for that respect to be left out, scarce
fifty Kine and six hundred sheep could be there maintained: In consideration
therefore of these losses, he petitioned that the Church of Elmestede might be
appropriated to that religious House.

Very many Commissions have I afterward also seen, for the view and repair of
the Banks etc. in this County; which I shall here only in a brief manner point
at; viz. in 9 H. 4. to Pat. 9. H. 4. p. 2. m. 21. in dorso.
Will. Gascoigne, Will. Thirnyng, John Cokayn and Robert Tirwhit, for those
betwixt Stratford at Bow and Reynham. In 8 H. 5. to Pat. 8 H. 5. p. 1. m. 7.
in dorso.
Richard Baynard, Will. Cheyne, Richard Read and John Cornewailles, for those
betwixt Stretford at Bow and Stretford Langthorn, on the South part the Road
between those Towns, and the River of Thames: By both which Commissions they
were to act according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 17 H. 6. to Pat. 17 H. 6. p. 1. m. 29. in dorso.
John Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Sir Raphe Crumwell Knight, John Fraye, Nich.
Dykson and others, for those from Stratford at Bow to Horndone; thence to
Hokley; and thence to Tolles^ery and Wybergh; with power to make Laws and
Statutes etc. according to those of Romeney marsh; and to do all things
touching the same repairs, according to the Law and Custom of that Marsh: As
also to impressed so many laborers etc. for competent wages, as should be
needful for that work etc.

In 18 H. 6. to Pat. 18 H. 6. p. 3. m. 5. in dorso.
Sir Raphe Crumwell Knight, John Fray, Robert Rollestone Cl^rk, and others, for
all those betwixt the town of Ware and the River of Thames, upon the River of
Leye.

In 26 H. 6. to Pat. 26 H. 6. p. 2. m. 23. in dorso.
Peter Arden one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and chief Baron of the
Exchequer, Sir Thomas Tyrell, and Sir Maurice Bruyn, Knights, John Bamburgh,
John Lymyngton, and others, for those betwixt Portflete mylle to Reynham flete;
thence to Reynham Church; thence to Wenyngton Church; thence to the message of
Thomas Bernerde; and thence to Portflete mylle before mentioned.

In 30 H. 6. to Pat. 30 H. 6. p. 1. m. 22. in do^so.
the Abbot of S. Osithes, John Godmanston Esquire, John Grene, Robert Tanfield,
and others, for those in the Hundred of Tenderyng. In 33 H. 6. to Pat. 33 H. 6.
p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Sir Thomas Tyrell Knight, Will. Notyngham, Robert Heworth, Will. Tyrell
Esquire, Matthew Hay Esquire, and Will. Pert, for those betwixt S. Katherines
Chapel upon Bow bridge, in the Parish of West Hamme, unto Est Tilbury. In 34
H. 6. to Pat. ^4 H. ^. part^ (...) ca m. 23. in dors^.
Sir Thomas Tyrell Knight, Will. Tyrell junior Esquire, John Grene, John Geney,
and others, for those within the limits of Stratford at Bow to Horndone;
thence to Hokley; and thence to Tolles^ery and Wyggeberghe.

In 1 E. 4. to Pat. 1 E^ 4. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
Will. Notyngham, Rob. de Heyworth, Thomas Heytone, Walter Wretille Esquire,
and Will. Pert Esquire, for those from the Mill called Tempylmylle to the
Chapel of S. Katherine upon Bolwebrigge, thence to Horndone etc. as in the
last. In 9 E. 4. to Pat. 9 E 4. p. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
Sir Will. Tyrell Knight, Thomas Urswyk, Humfrey Sterkey, and others, for those
Banks from Est Hamme to Horndone; and thence as afor^said. The like Commission
Pa^. 49 H^ 6. pa^t^ unica m. 9. in dorso.
, for the Banks in those very places, had John Earl of Oxford, Sir Will. Tyrell
Knight, John Grene, Thomas Urswyk and others, in 49 H. 6.

In 16 E. 4. Sir Thomas Urswyk Knight, Sir Thomas Montgomerie Knight, Sir John
Say Knight, John Elryngton, Will. Alyngton, and diverse others, were appointed
P^t. 16 E^ 4. p. 2. m. 18. in dorso.
to view and take order for the repair of all the Banks etc. upon the River of
Leye, both above and below the Town of Ware, unto it is confluence with the
Thames. And the next year following, the said Sir Thomas Urswyk, Peter Courtney
Clerk, Alured Corneburgh Esquire, Hugh Bryce, and others, were in like sort
appointed Pat. 17 E. ^. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
for those Banks from Bowebridge to Raynham. In all which, from 6 H. 6. the
said Commissioners were directed to proceed according to the Law and Custom of
Romeney marsh; and to make Statutes and Ordinances for the regulating of all
things touching those Banks, Ditches, Sewers etc. in such sort as those are,
which concern that Marsh, as by an Act of Parliament made in the same 6th year
of King Henry the sixth, they were empowered; which Act continues in force at
this day.

Forbearing therefore to give instance in more particulars, I shall cloze up
this Chapter, touching the Marshes of the before-specified County, with what I
have met with, An 36 El^z.
touching the level of Havering and Dagenham, at a Session of Ex^uod. de
Sew^ri in Ca^ell R^tu^o^am. n. 4.
Sewers held at Romford, xvi Maii 36 Eliz. before Sir Henry Gray Knight, Sir
John Peter Knight, Richard Warren Esquire, and others; where, for the recovery
of Havering marsh, then overflown and drowned, and preventing the like to
Dagenham level, it was decreed; that Dagenham Creek should be immediately
inned: and that whereas the said drowning had been occasioned by a breach in
the wall of Will. Ayloff of Hornchurch Esquire, he the said William to pay the
sum of ^ive hundred pounds, and the Land-hold^rs of Dagenham certain rates by
the Acre, for all their marsh grounds lying in the said level; viz. the Lands
on Dagenham side, against the said Creeks at CCLxv l. and the Lands in Havering
level the sum of DCC l.

Howbeit, these Banks being not made strong enough to withstand those
tempestuous storms and violent tides, which happened Ex bund. Decretorum in
officio vocato the Petti-bag.
in the month of September An. 1621. ( viz. 19. Iac.) Cornelius Vermuden
Gentleman (an expert man in the Art of banking and drayning) being treated
withal by the Commissioners of Sewers, appointed for the view and repair of
the breaches then made, undertook Ibid.
the work, and p^rfected it: but such being the perverseness of those, as were
owners of the Lands assessed by the Commissioners ^o undergo the chardge
thereof, that they neglected to pay their proportions thereof: upon complaint
therefore made to the said Commissioners, he the said Cornelius in recompense
of his chardges, had parcel of the said Lands assigned Ibid.
unto him: which assignation, was by the Kings Letters Patents, bearing date 1o
Aug. 1o Caroli [reciting the Act of Parliament of 13 Eliz. cap. ix. viz. that
where any person should be assessed by the Commissioners of Sewers, to any lot,
and refuse or neglect to pay the same, the Land to be leased or past in fee
simple, in recompense to the undertaker] confirmed Ibid.
to him the said Cornelius and his heirs.

CAP. XVIII.
HAving now done with the Marshes in Essex, of which, by reason of their
adjacency unto the Thames, I thought fit to take notice in this order as I have
done; I must, according to my designed method, return Southward, and before I
come to Sussex of it self, observe what I have found touching that County and
Kent, promiscuously.

In King John's time, upon a suit Plac. de tem. Regis Ioh. Fragmenta sc. [B]
rot. 3.
betwixt the Archbishop of Canterbury and Prior of Jews Plantiffs; and Rob. de
Denton, and others, concerning certain Sea-banks in those parts; Robert de
Marti (who was one summoned upon that business) appeared; and did put himself
upon the men of the Archbishop, in Mauling, and of the Earl Warren in Pidingho
and Metinges, for the repair of those banks, in such sort as they ought and had
wont to be.

A multitude of Commissions, through the reigns of sundry Kings, I do find,
upon this occasion; whereof the most are in general terms, for the view and
repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sew^rs, in both those Counties; but some do
express particularly in what places: unto all which I shall briefly point
according to the course of time when they issued out; viz.

To Pat. 27 E. 1. m. 12. in do^so.
Robert de Setvans, William de Hastings, and William Maufe, in 27 E. 1.

To Pat. 28 E. 1. m. 25. ^n dorso.
Henry de Appletrefeld, Robert de Setvans and others, in 28 E. 1.

In 30 E. 1. to ^at. 30. E. 1. m. 13. in do^so.
Lu^as at Gate, Robert de Setvans, Will. Maufe and William Colebrand.

In 31 E. 1. to Pat. 31 E. 1. m. 34. in dorso.
Robert Paulyn, Robert de Septem Vannis, Will. de Hastings, and Lucas at
Gate. In 32 E. 1. to Pat. 32 E. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
Will. de Echingham, Robert de Passeleye and Henry VVardeden. As also to Ib.
m. 15. i^ dorso.
John de Buran, William Maufe and Lucas at Gate.

In 34 E. 1. to Pat. 34 E. 1. m. 6.
John Malemeyns, Lucas at Gate, and Robert Paulyn, for those Banks, Ditches
etc. in the Marshes of Pychardesbroke, and Kechenhammebroke, and elsewhere in
the said Counties.

In 35 E. 1. to Pat. 35 E. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
Will. Pyrot, John Malemeyns, John de Gosehale, and Henry de Bugthorpe.

In 1 E. 2. to Pat. 1 E. 2. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
John Malemeyns, Lucas at Gate, and Robert Paulyn, for the Banks etc. in the
Marshes of Mayhamme and Losenhamme.

In 7 E. 2. to Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 1. m. 24. in do^s^.
John Malemeyns of Stoke, Robert de Echynghamme, and Matthew de Knelle, for
those on both sides the River of Newendene, betwixt Matthew and Bodihamme bridge.

In 10 E. 2. to Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 15. in dorso.
Robert de Bardelby, and Edmund de Passele, for those in the Marshes betwixt
the Redehulle and the Town of Roberts-Brigge, on each side the River Lymene.

In 14 E. 2. to Pat. 14 E. 2. p. 2. m. 5. in dorso.
John de Ifeld, John Malemaynes of Hoo, and Richard de Echi^ham, for those in
the Marshes betwixt the Town of Apuldre and Roberts-Brigge, on each side of the
said River of Lymene.

In 17 E. 2. to Pat. 17 E. 2. p. 1. m. 3. in dorso.
Stephan de Cobham, John Filoll, and Will. de Robertsbrigge, for the same. So
also to Pa^. 17 E. 2. p. 1 m. 3^. in dorso.
Will. de Echyngham, Robert Bataill, and William de Robertsbrigge.

About the beginning of E. 3. time, it being found by an Inquisition, Pat. 6 E.
3. p. 1. m. 2^.
taken before Will. Truslell, then the King's E^ca^tor on this side Trent,
that the Chanel of a certain River, running betwixt the Lands of Geffrey de
Knelle, and Isabell Aucher, between a certain place, called Knellesflete, in
the confines of these Counties, and the Town of Robertsbrigge in Sussex, was so
much enlarged, by the flowing of the Sea-tides into it, that six hundred and
fifty acres of land, part belonging to the said Geffrey, and part to others,
were thereby totally drowned and consumed: And that a certain Causey, which is
the common high way lying betwixt the Land of John de la Gate, in the said
County of Sussex, and the bridge of Newendon; as also the said bridge, were
broken and demolished by those tides; and moreover, that diverse lands, in the
said parts, would in a short time be drowned and destroyed, except a speedy
remedy were had: And likewise, that it would not be to the damage or prejudice
of the said King, or any other, if he did grant license to the said Geffrey and
Isabell, and to other persons having lands contiguous to those places, to
exclude the said tides; and to raise a Bank at Knellesflete aforesaid betwixt
the lands of the said Geff. and Isabell, in that place, to resist the said
tides, for preservation of the lands, way, and bridge aforesaid; to the end
that the ancient course of that River, might be preserved by sufficient
Gutters, placed in that Bank: And, that unless it were by such an exclusion of
the Tides, by making of such a Bank, that the said Lands, way, and bridge could
not be in safeguard. The King therefore, being careful in all respects to
provide for the defense of this his Realm, as was fit; granted license to the
said Geffrey and Isabell; as also to all those who were like to have advantage
by that exclusion; that they should raise a certain Bank at Knellesflete
beforementioned, for that purpose; and to make sufficient Gutters therein, for
the issuing out of the said fresh water; and to repair the same Banks and
Sluices, being so made, when and as often as ne^d should require.

In 10 E. 3. Will. de Robertsbrigge, Will. de Recolvere, Ioceline de Gatele,
and Robert Bataille were constituted Pat. 10 E. 3. p. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
Commissioners to oversee the making of certain Sluices, Banks and Gutt^rs for
the safeguard of the lands of diverse Tenants in the Towns of Wightresham,
Idene, and Pesemershe; and to assesse all such as had lands in those parts,
which were to take benefit thereby, for the performance of that work, according
to the proportion of what they held.

About the same time, upon another Inquisition taken, it being certified, that
Pat. 10 E. 3. p. 2. m. 9. in dorso.
by the ebbing and flowing of the tides, into a certain stream of fresh water,
running betwixt the Lands of the before-specified Geffrey de Knelle, and
Isabell Aucher, between Knelleflete abovementioned, and the said Town of
Robertsbrigge, six hundred and fifty Acres of Land, belonging to the said
Geffrey and others, were drowned; the King thereupon granted the like license
to the said Geffrey and Isabell, to raise a certain Bank, at Knellesflete, to
restrain those Tides; as also to make Sluices, and sufficient Gutters, for
evacuation of the said fresh water, so that the ancient course thereof might be
preserved. And afterward did appoint Roger de Bavent, Roger de Hegham, Thomas
de Lincoln, and Will. de Northo, to oversee the making of that Sluice, and
raising of the said Bank; and ^o ordain assessments, and to distrain all such,
as by the said Inquisition should be thought needful, to contribute to the
chardge of that work, according to the proportion of their holding: which
Banks, Gutters, and Sluice being accordingly made; and the said King informed,
that they were grown to decay, did by his Letters Ibid.
Patents, bearing date at the Tower of London on the 8th day of January, in the
said tenth year of his reign, constitute Will. de Orlauston, Thomas de
Gillingham, Stephan de Padiham, and John de Betenham, to take view of them, and
to provide for their repair.

But in 22 E. 3. there being Pat. 22 E. 3. p. 1. ^. 11. in dorso.
a Petition presented to the King, on the behalf of James de Echingham; and on
the morrow after the Feast of S. Hillarie, exhibited before the said King and
his Council, in his Parliament then held at Westminster; importing, that those
Lands might have been preserved, by the repair of the old Banks, on the verge
of that River; and that the Bank made, by virtue of the said King's Letters
Patents, before mentioned (which thwarted the said stream) was raised as well to
the damage of the said King, as of him the said James; forasmuch as thereby,
such ships and Boats, which had used to pass with victual and other things,
from diverse places in these Counties of Kent and Sussex, unto his Manor of
Echingham, through this Chanel, were then hindered: as also to the destruction
of his Market Town of Salehurst, situate upon the said River, and of his Market
there, which by the course of that water had been supported; and out of which
the said James and his Ancestors had used to receive Toll and many other
commodities: the King therefore, taking the same into consideration; and that
the said James was no party to the before-specified Inquisition; nor at all
called at the taking thereof, did revoke his said Letters Patents, and command,
that the said Bank should be demolished. And desiring to be certified, whether
the said lands, might be preserved by the repair of those old Banks on the
verge of that stream, or not; and whether the said Bank, so raised athwart that
stream, were to his damage, or the damage of any other person; did by his
Letters Ibid.
Patent, bearing date the 8th of April in the year abovesaid, assign John de
Strode, John de Ore, Robert de Sharnedene, and Philip en la Wyke, to enquire,
and certify the truth thereof.

And after this about two years, Tho. de Passele, Thomas de Pympe, Stephan
Scappe, Will. de Haldene, and Will. de Wystresham, were also appointed Pa^. 24
E. 3. p. 3. m. 13. in do^so.
to take a new view of these Banks.

In 25 E. 3. Stephan Scappe, Will. de VVightresham, Will. de Pageham, and
Stephan Donet, were assigned Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 2. m. 5. in do^so.
to view and take order for the repair of the Banks etc. in Promhell marsh,
betwixt Long Shotteswall, and West-hevedeswall, Newlandeswall, Uetereswall, and
Scalloteswall, in the confines of these Counties. In 27 E. 3. Will. de Clinton
Earl of Huntingdon, Will. Fifhide, Reginald del Dik, John de Ore, Stephan
Scappe and John de Hodlegh, had Pat. 27. E 3. p. 2. m. 22. in do^so.
the like assignation, for the Banks betwixt Apuldre and Robertshrigge. So
also, the year following, had Stephan de Valoignes, Will. VVaver, John Broad,
Stephan Scappe, and William de VVightresham, for those in Promhell Marsh,
before men^ioned.

In 30 E. 3. upon the complaint Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 1. m. 23. in do^so.
of diverse persons in the Marshes on the Sea coast, betwixt Hethe, near
Saltwood in Kent, and Jews in Sussex, and the parts adjacent; that many men of
those Counties, who had levied and collected great sums of money of the
Land-holders in the said Marshes, for repair of the Banks, Ditches etc. in the
same, in the twentieth year of the said King's reign, and at other times; and
having so done kept the money to themselves; so that the Banks, for default of
that timely repair, which they should thereby have had, being grown ruinous,
exposed the said Marshes and Lands to overflowing and drowning: the King
therefore, by his Letters Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 1. m. 23. in do^so.
Patents bearing date at New Castle upon Tine, the 30th of January, in the year
abovesaid, assigned Geffrey de Say, Raphe de Frenyngham, Will. de Fifhide, and
others, to enquire ther^of.

In 37 E. 3. Rob. Belknap, Will. Haldene, Will. Top^live, Henry Gosebourne, and
John Lyvet, were made Pat. 37 ^. 3^. p. 1. m. 5. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. in Promhell marsh. So
also, the same year, were P^t. 37 E. 3. p. 1. m. 28. in do^so.
Will. de VVightresham, Stephan Donet, and others.

And the next year following, Sir Andrew Sakevill Knight, Will. Haldene, and
Will. Batesford had the like Commission Pat. 38 E 3. p. 1. m. 8. in ^orso.
for those betwixt Hastyngs and Newendon.

So also in 40 E. 3. had Pat 40 E. 3. ^. 1. m. 24. in do^so.
Rob. Bealknap, Will. Haldene, and Will. Horn, Robert de Ore and John Lyvet,
for those in the Parishes of Wightrisham, Eb^ene, Stone in Oxene, and Idenne.

In 42 E. 3. Thomas de Lodelowe, Robert Bealknap, Will. Batesford and others,
Pat. 42 E. 3. ^. 1. ^. 3. in dorso.
for those in Promhell marsh. In 44 E. 3. Thomas de Lodelowe, Rob. Bealknap,
John Colepepere, Will. Horn, Roger Ashburnham, and John Edward had Pat. 44 E.
3. p. 1. m. 33 in do^so.
the like for those betwixt Knellesflete beforementioned, and the Town of
Roberts^rigge. So also in 5 R. 2. had Pat. 5 R. 2. p. 2. m. 29. in dorso.
Robert Bealknap, Edward Dalingrugg, Roger Ashburnham, Robert Echyngham, John
Edward and John Broke. The like in 7 R. 2. had P^^. 7 R ^. p. 1. ^. 26. in
do^so.
Robert Bealknap, Will. Ri^hill, Will. Batesford, and others, for those
betwixt Newendon and Echingham. So also, the same year, had Pa^. 7. ^. 2. p. 1.
m. 26. in do^s^.
the said Rob. Bealknap, Will. de Halden, Will. de Horn, Will. Makenade,
John Lynot, and John Franceys, for those in the Marshes of Lyde, Promhill,
Middele and old Romeney. With direction to act according to the Law and Custom
of this Realm, and the Custom of Romney marsh. And li^ewise Pat. 7. R. ^. p.
1. ^. 26. in do^so.
the same Robert Bealknap, Will. Horn, Will. Betesford, Stephan Batenham,
Will. Makenade, Will. Brenchesle and John Fraunceys, for those Banks etc.
betwixt Robertsbrigge and Smallyde.

In 31 R. 2. John Devereux Constable of Dovor Castle, and Warden of the Cinque
Ports, Thomas de Hungerford, Will. Rikhill, Will. de Horn, and others, were
constituted Pat. 13 R. 2. p. 1. m. 34. in do^so.
Commissioners for the view and repair of those Banks etc. between Bourne in
Sussex, and Apuldre in Kent, and empowered to proceed therein according to the
Custom of the Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 1 H. 4. William de Makenade, and his fellow Commissioners, sitting at
Apledoure on the Thursday next after the Feast of S. Valentine, to enquire of
the defects in the Banks and Sewers within the Precincts of Small Lyde and
Promhelle, it was then and there found Ex ipso auto. penes Orland. Bridgeman,
Eq. aur. anno 1659.
; that six hundred twenty and eight Acres of Marish, lying in a place called
the Becard, which had long layn in danger of the Sea, and at that time were
often overflowed, ought to be preserved and defended by a certain Bank,
beginning at Fayrefeld's hole, in the said place called Becard, and so
extending it self by the Seaside, unto the Bank of the Prior and Covent of
Christs-Church in Canterbury, toward the North; which Bank ought to be made on
that Seacoast, at the common chardge of all persons receiving advantage and
benefit thereby: and that the Abbot and Covent of Robertsbrigge, were then
possessed of CCLxxi Acres and an half of the said Marshes, for which they ought
to contribute to the said chardge of making that Bank: and that Thomas then
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the said Prior and Covent of Christs-Church, and
certain other persons, were possessors of the r^s^due thereof; for the which,
every one of them, according to the proportion of what he so held was to
contribute.

Upon which verdict there grew a dispute, betwixt the said Prior, and the Abbot
of Robertsbrigge, the Abbot and his Covent alleging that their proportion of
the said Marsh, so to be defended, was much greater than by that Inquisition
the Jurors had found it to be; for they said, that Henry sometime Earl of Augi,
by a certain grant of his, gave to the then Abbot of Robertsbrigge (Predecessor
to the present Abbot) and the Covent of that House, seven hundred Acres of
Marish, in the Town of Snergate, as well within the Bank as without; of which
they said that the marish then to be taken in, was parcel; and to make good
this their claim, did exhibit the Charter of the said Earl made time out of
mind; as also the Letters Patents of King Richard the first, and King Henry the
third, with other Kings, ratifying the said grant.

Whereunto the Prior of Canterbury answered; that upon the making of that
Charter by the said Earl of Augi, there arose a controversy betwixt Alan then
Prior of Christs-Church and his Covent, as Lords of the Manor of Apuldre,
within the Precinct whereof the said Marsh lay situate; and Dionyse then Abbot
of Robertsbrigge, and the Covent of that Monastery, for the title of that whole
Marish; and that, upon an amicable agreement then made betwixt them, the said
Abbot and Covent did quit all their title thereto, unto the before-specified
Prior and Covent of Christ-Church: But the said Prior and Covent, out of a
pious regard to the wants of the said Abbot and Covent, did by their special
favor, then grant them and their successors, one hundred Acres of those seven
hundred; viz. one hundred lying next to the Bank of the said Abbot and Covent,
near unto the Land of Adam de Cherringe, which at that time they had enclosed
about the Newewodrove: and that this Agreement was by the beforementioned Earl
then ratified and confirmed, as the Instruments testifying the same, then
exhibited, did fully manifest; so that the said Abbot and Covent ought not to
challenge any thing more in that marish, other than in those C Acres, so given
to them as afor^said.

In consideration therefore of all the premises, and circumstances thereof,
and especially of the Antiquity of the Evidences produced on each part; as also
to the obscurity of the bounds and limits of the said Towns of Snergate and
Apuldre, the perfect knowledge whereof, by reason of the great and continual
inundation of the Sea, could not, or was ever likely to be well discovered: all
parties therefore more desiring peace than strife and contention; did
unanimously agree; that the said Prior and Covent of Christs-Church should
release unto the Abbot and Covent of Robertsbrigge, and their successors, all
their title to that parcel of land, called the Newewoderove, and in xxviij
Acre of land, then newly enclosed in the B^ecarde, toward Apuldre; and in the
said CCLxxi Acres and a half of Land, then to be enclosed, in the Becarde,
adjoining to the said parcel of land, called the Newewoderove, lying in length
under the Bank dividing the said Land of the Newewoderove, and the said Marsh
so to be enclosed in the Becard, so that the said Prior and Covent of
Christs-Church, nor their successors should have power to claim any right
therein after that time.

And in like sort the said Abbot and Covent of Robertsbrigge, did release unto
the said Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the Prior and Covent of
Christs-Church, and their successors, all their right and title to the residue
of that Marish, lying next to the Church of Fayrefelde toward the East, and
the course of the Sea, passing from Rye to Apuldre toward the West; and the
bounds dividing the Counties of Kent and Sussex, toward the South; so that
they should challenge no title therein from thenceforth.

Which agreement was so made by the said Instrument under their public Seals,
and bears date at Canterbury on the xxth day of March, in the year
beforementioned.

In 2 H. 4. Thomas Erpyngham, then Constable of Dovor Castle; Will. Brenchesle,
Robert Oxenbrigge, Will. Merchant and others, had Pat. 2 H. 4. p. 3. m. 4. in
dorso.
Commission for the view and repair of those Banks and Sewers lying betwixt
Farlegh in Sussex and Apuldre in Kent: with power to act therein according to
the Custom of the Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

The next year following, Will. Rikhill, Will, Makenade, Stephan Betenham,
Will. Bertyn, Henry Horn, and John Proud, had Pat. 3 H. 4. p. 1. m. 19. in
dorso.
the like, for those in the Marshes of Lyde, Promhull, Middele, and old Romney:
with direction to do all things therein, according to the Law and Custom of
this Realm, and the Custom of Romney marsh.

In 2 H. 5. Sir John Pelham Knight, Richard Nortone, Thomas Colepepir, William
Cheyne and others had the like Commission Pat. 2 H 5. p. 2. m. 37. in dorso.
for the view and repair of the Banks, betwixt the Port and Town of Rye, and
Bodyham bridge; and to act therein according to the Custom of the Marsh, and
the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 5 H. 5. Robert Oxenbrigge, William Marchaund, John Halle junior, William
Cheyne, and Adam Iwode, had Pat. 5 H. 5. part unica, m. 34. in dorso.
the like appointment for those betwixt the Town of Rye in Sussex, and Ebbeneye
in Kent: and to act according to the Custom of the Marsh, and the Law and
Custom of this Realm of England.

So also in 7 H. 6. had Pat. 7 H. 6. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
Sir Roger Fenys Knight, Henry Hoorne, Robert Oxenbrigge, Thomas Auger, Richard
VVakeherst, and others, for those betwixt Bodyhain bridge in Sussex, and
Smalhyde in Kent: with direction to proceed therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romney marsh: as also to take up so
many laborers, upon competent wages, as should be necessary for the said work.

CAP. XIX.
I Now come to Sussex alone. Sussex.
Where the first Commission Pat. 17 E. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
of Sewers, that our Records do take notice of, was in 17 E. 1. being directed
to Roger de Leukenore, and Lucas de la Gare.

The next year following, upon complaint Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
made by the Abbots of Bataille and Bekeham; as also by the Priors of Okeburne,
Jews, and Hastings, together with Baldwin de Aldham, and many others, who had
Lands about Pevenesel marsh; that whereas the King had assigned the
beforementioned Roger de Leuknore, and Lucas de la Gare, to take view of the
Banks and Sea-diches near the said Marsh, and to provide for the safeguard and
defense, of all persons, as well rich as poor, as had lands thereabouts; the said
Lucas, together with the Prior of Michelham, Will. de Done etc. not
prosecuting the said King's appointment and order, did begin to raise a certain
Bank overthwart the Haven of Pevenesel, as also a Sluse; intending to finish
them; so that the fresh water could not pass, through the midst of the said
Marsh, to the Sea, by the same Haven, to the great peril of all persons there
dwelling, and apparent drowning of their lands by the frequent overflowing of
the said fresh water: For remedy thereof, the King therefore, by his Letters
Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
Patents, dated at Westminster 15o Iulii in the 18th year of his reign,
constituted John de Lascy, and Will. de Echingham his Justices, to make
enquiry, by the Oaths of honest and faithful men, touching the same; and then
to do therein according to their discretion.

In 23 E. 1. Will. de Stoke was associated Pat. 23 E. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
to the beforementioned Roger and Lucas, for the viewing and repair of the
Banks etc. in this County.

In 31 E. 1. the King being informed, Claus. 31 E. 1. m. 2.
that the Banks and Ditches, which had been made in the Marsh of Wynchelse, for
the defense of his lands there, and preservation of the adjacent parts, were
then so broken, by the overflowing of the Sea, that the said Lands were in
danger to be drowned and lost: and that his Tenants of those lands, by reason
of a certain ancient composition made betwixt them, and the Tenants of other
lands in that Marsh; which was, that the said Kings lands, should be defended
in such reparations, by the other Landholders there, refused to contribute to
the repair of those Banks and Ditches: And being also informed, that the
Tenants of the other lands, were not able to undergo those repairs, by reason
of the great expense, which would be requisite thereto: Taking care therefore,
of his own indemnity, and the preservation of those Marshes, he directed his
Precept Claus. 31 E. 1. m. 2.
to Thomas Alard, Guardian of his lands of that Marsh, commanding him, that he
should, for the present occasion, cause an equal contribution to be made, out
of those his lands, according to a just and proportionable Tax, with the said
other Land holders; lest for want thereof a greater loss might afterward
happen; for which he the said Thomas was to receive allowance out of the
Exchequer.

But after this, the very next ensuing year, upon an Inquisition Claus. 32 E.
1. m. 17.
taken by Rob. de Septem Vannis, Will. de Hastyngs, and Robert Paulyn, whom the
King had assigned to take view of the Banks and Ditches in this County, and to
cause them to be repaired (which was returned into the Chancery;) it was found,
that the said Marsh of Winchelse, could not be defended and preserved by the
old wall, situate toward the East: and that if it ought to be defended, it
would be necessary to have a certain new Bank there, of the length of CCCL.
Perches: and that the said new Bank, could not be made by those, who according
to the ancient composition beforementioned, had wont to repair that old bank;
forasmuch as they, who were in that sort liable to the repair of the said old
bank, were not able, in regard of the diminution of their lands, to bear the
whole chardge thereof themselves: He therefore directed another Precept Claus.
32 E. 1. m. 17.
unto the said Thomas Alard, requiring him to take care, that such contribution
should be made thereto, out of his own lands, and the lands of others, as is
above expressed. And hereupon the said King issued out a Commission to the said
Robert, William and Robert, to see that the contribution which the said King's
Bailiff was to make therein, should be well and also faithfully assessed.

A multitude of other Commissions were afterward granted to sundry persons,
for to take care of the banks in the other Marshes of this County; viz. in 1 E.
2. to Pat. 1 E. 2. p. 1. m. 10. in dorso.
John Malemeyns, Lucas at Gate, and Robert Paulyn, f^^ those in Pevenese
marsh.

In 2 E. 2. to Pat. 2 E. 2. m. 22. p. 2. in d^^so cedula.
Will. de Echingham, Henry de Wardeden, and John Fylol, for those in the
Marshes of Wylting. And the same year, to Pat. 2 E. 2. p. 2. m. 23. in dorso
cedu^ae.
Robert de Clyderho^, and John Fillol, for all the Marshes in this County.

In 3 E. 2. to Pat. 3 E. 2. m. 38. in do^^o.
the said William, Henry and John, for those in the Marshes of Fothie, and
Wyltyng. And the same year to Ib. m. 26. in dorso.
Robert de Clyderhou, John Fyliol, and John de Brydeney, for those in Pevensey
marsh.

In 4 E. 2. to Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
Robert de Passel^y, Henry de Wardeden and John Filliol, for those Banks in the
parts of Tillingham, by which the Marshes of Tillingham and Est-Wytenham were
wont to be defended both from the overflowing of the fresh and salt waters.

In 5 E. 2. to Pat. 5 E 2. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
Henry de Wardeden and John Fillol, for those in the parts of Northie and
Lullingtone.

In 7 E. 2. to Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 2. m. 18. in dorso.
John Heringod, John Filol, and Will. de Sneylham, for all those upon the
Seacoasts, throughout this County. And so also the same year, to Ib. m. 2. in
dorso.
Andrew Peverell, Will. de Northo, John Filiol, and Will. de Snaytham.

In 8 E. 2. to Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
John Heryngaud, John Filiol, and John de la More, for those in the Marsh of
Filesham, Boxle, Wyltyng, and Crawherst.

In 9 E. 2. to Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m. 17. in dorso.
Edm. Passheleye, Stephan Alard of Wynchelse, and Matthew de Knolle, for those
in the parts of Tillingham beforementioned.

In 10 E. 2. to Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 1. m. 38. in dorso.
Will. de Echyngham, Andrew Peverell, John Filiol, and Will. de Sneylham, for
all those upon the Seacoasts, throughout this County. The like Commission Pat.
11 E. 2. p. 1. m. 9. in dorso.
had Will. de Echyngham, John de Ifeld, William de Northo, and William de
Snaylham, in the same year.

In 13 E. 2. to Pat. 13 E. 2. m. 27. in dorso.
Henry Beaufiz, John de Bergham, and John Dalingrugge, for those in the parts
of Pevenesey and Hastings. So also the same year, to Ib. m. 36. in dorso.
the said Henry, Andrew Lutterell, and John Dalingrugge.

In the tenth year of Edward 2. the said King, at Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 35.
the request of Robert de Sapy, in consideration of his good and faithful
service, granted by Charter, unto the said Robert and Aliva his wife, liberty
to enclose as much of Pevenese marsh as was then overflowed, and in the
occupation of no man; and to hold it of the said King and his heirs during
their two lives, for a pair of gilt Spurs, to be paid into the said Kings
Exchequer every year upon the Feast day of S. John Baptist. But forasmuch as
the said Robert and Aliva did take no benefit of that grant, but delivered in
their said Charter into the Chancery, to be cancelled; the King by his Precept
Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 35.
, dated at Westminster 13 August, in the 15th year of his reign, commanded the
Barons of his said Exchequer, to supersede their demand of the said Spurs.

In 16 E. 2. Edmund de Passele, Will. de Northo, and Will. de Robertsbrigge
were Pat. 16 E 2. p. 2. m. 12. in do^so.
appointed to view and take order for repair of the banks etc. at Wortling and
Pevenese, and elsewhere in this County.

In 18 E. 2. Giles de Briaunzon, John Filol, Will. de Robertsbrigge, and John
de Dalingrigge had Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 2. m. 5. in dorso.
the like appointment, for those in the parts of Pevense and Hastings.

In 5 E. 3. Will. de Robertsbrigge, Robert de Sharden, and Thomas de Wyvill,
had Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
the like for those in the Rape of Hastings. So also in 6 E. 3. had Pat. 6 E.
3. p. 3. m. 3. in dorso.
Thomas de Faversham, Richard de Grosherst and Robert de Bataille, for those in
Northmershe, near Rye, and Spadelond mersh, betwixt Wynchelse and Damse wall.
The like in 8 E. 3. had Pat 8 E. 3. p. 2. m. 19.
Thomas de Faversham, Will. de Robertsbrigge, and Gosceline de Gatele.

About two years afterward, the King, directing his precept Claus. 10 E. 3. m.
28.
to Will. de Robertsbrigge, Robert de Shardenne, and Robert Bataille, wherein
he recited, that whereas he had assigned them the said William, Robert and
Robert, or any two of them, to view the Banks and Watergangs in the marsh
called Northmershs, near Rye, and in the marsh of Spadelond, betwixt Wynchelse
and Daunswall, and in other Marshes adjoining; and to enquire by the Oaths,
as well of Knights as others, through whose neglect the defaults in those
Marshes had happened: And that whereas by Inquisition, taken by the said William,
Robert and Robert, it was, amongst other things found, that there were Cxxviij
acres of land in the said marsh, which did belong to the King's Manor of
Ihamme; and that the said King's Bondmen there, held of him xxx acres of land,
called Spadelond, in the said Marsh; as also that the said King's lands and the
lands of others, could not be preserved, except a contribution were made out of
them for necessary chardges tending to such their safeguard: And that they the
said Commissioners had forborne to proceed farther therein, because they had not
power to compel the said King thereto, as by the ^^nor of the said Inquisition
appears. He therefore, for prevention of the damage and peril, which for
default of such repair of those banks etc. might happen being willing, that in
what concerned himself, all should be done according to reason; commanded them
the said William, Robert and Robert, that they should assesse his said Lands,
for contribution to those repairs, according to the quantity of them, as they
did others for theirs. And moreover gave command to Stephan Padiham, his
Bailiff of Ihamme, that he should contribute, out of the profits of that
Manor, toward those repairs, according to the proportion of what the said
King held in those Marshes, in such sort as others did; to the end that the
said repairs might not any ways be retarded.

In 14 E. 3. Geffrey de Cotes, Thomas de Weyvill, and Philip de Ellevenwyk, had
Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Commission for the view and repair of the banks etc. on the Seacoast, in the
Marsh near Pevenesey and Willingdon, and those adjacent. And the like
Commission Pat. 15 E. 3. p. 3. m. 11. i^ dorso.
, in 15 E. 3. had John de Frenes, Will. de Notton, Rob. de Sharenden, and
Thomas de Battenham, for those betwixt Bremesley in the Parish of Bixle, and a
place called the Slough, lying betwixt Pevenesey and North Eye.

And in 16 E. 3. the King, by his Precept Claus. 16 E. 3. p. 2. m. 26.
, directed to John Clynde, then Bailiff of his Manor of Ihamme, wherein he
recites his commands to Stephan Padiham, his Bailiff of the same Manor, in
the 10th year of his reign (as I have already showed) and the necessity of the
repair of those Banks in North mershe and Spadelonde, gave him also strict
chardge, that he should not omit to contribute, out of the revenue of that
Manor, according to the proportion which he the said King had in those
Marshes, in such sort as others did for their Lands; forasmuch as the said
Banks were at that time, for the most part, very ruinous.

But notwithstanding this great care, which it appears the King had, the work
was not perfected of three years after: for in 19 E. 3. I find the like Precept
Claus. 19 E. 3. p. 2. m. 12.
directed to the same Stephan, who was, again, his Bailiff of the said Manor
in that year.

In 17 E. 3. Sir Andrew de Sakevill, Sir Andrew Peverell, Sir John de Fiens
Knights, and William de Sessingham had P^t. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6. in dorso.
Commission to view and repair the Banks etc. in Wretling, Hoo, Nonfield,
Ashburnham and Bixle, Pevenesey, Shipegongebrigge, and also Piglynde.

What was done in that Marsh of Spadelonde, before mentioned, in pursuance of
the said Kings Precept, I cannot say: but this is certain, that within few
years after, through the force of great Tempests, the Sea-banks betwixt
Winchelse and Dauneswalle; and betwixt Pykammyll and Treachery, were so broken
and decayed, that as well the Kings Lands, as the Lands of diverse other
persons, in that Marsh, were overflowed at every Tide; to the danger of their
utter ruin, and the apparent depauperation of the Town of Winchelse, and the
parts adjoining: The King therefore, for the speedy repair thereof, did in the
25 of his reign assign Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
John de Ore, Stephan de Horsham, Robert Arnald, and Will. de Pageham his
Commissioners, to view them, and to take order therein.

In like sort, in 32 E. 3. were Pat. 32 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
Sir John Waleys, Sir Hugh de Boucy Knights, Thomas de Thorpe, and others,
appointed Commissioners, for the view and repair of those, in a certain place,
called Pende, betwixt the Towns of Brembre, Shorham and Launcyng. So also in 33
E. 3. were Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 1. m. 29. in dorso.
John de la Lee, Andrew Saukevill, and others, for those Banks in the Marshes
of Pevenesey, Bourne and Wylyngdon. The like Pat. 34 E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. in
dorso.
Commission had they, the year following, for those in the Marshes of
Peveneseye, Wylyngdon, and Estburne, between Hastings and Sefford and the parts
adjacent. So also Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 2. m. 18. in dorso.
in 36 and Pat. 38 E. 3. p. 2. m. 13. in dorso.
38 E. 3.

And in 40 E. 3. Raph Spigurnell, Robert Bealknap, Andrew de Guldeford, and
others, were Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. in dorso.
assigned to view and repair the Banks of those Marshes, within the liberty of
the Town of Rye, toward the East, unto the Kings high way, which leads from
Pladen unto the same Town of Rye; and toward the South, to the said Town of
Rye; and toward the West, to the Sea-bank, called Melflet; and toward the
North, to the lands which are called Bernardeshill, from Kyngeswyst: with
direction to determine all things therein, according to the ancient Law and
Custom of this Realm.

Upon an Inquisition Ex bundello de Brev. and Recordis, Wallias etc.
tangentious, temp. E. 3. n. 11.
taken in 42 E. 3. the Jurors presented upon their Oaths, that one William
Fishburne Clerk, had then newly made a stone wall, upon the Seacoast, at
Boseham, in pure alm^, and of his mere and free will, without any cohercion
whatsoev^r; whereas before that time, there had not been, in the memory of man,
any Bank or defense there against the Waves of the Sea; but the ground lay
waste, through the ebbing and flowing of the Tides. And they farther said, that
the Bishop of Exeter was then Lord of the Town of little Boseham, and that his
Lordship there lay abutting on the Seashore in length; viz. from the Prebend
of Fouctone to.............. of Boseham, on the East part, to the Prebend of
Westebroke, in the said Church on the West part; excepting one Watermill, a
Smiths Forge, and a Cotage: and that the said Bishop had diverse edifices there,
in the hands of Bondmen, which were then worth by year, beyond reprises, xiij
s. iiij d. And that several other persons had also Lands there. And moreover,
that the said Bishop, and the rest of the Land-holders there, were bound to
contribute toward the making defense against the Sea-tides there, according to
the proportion of what they held.

And in the said 42 year of E. 3. it appears, Pat. 42 E. 3. p. 2. m. 14. in
dorso.
that Robert Bealknap, Robert Churchehull, William Merlot, John VVyn, and
others, were appointed to see to the repair of those Banks etc. at Boseham.

In 44 E. 3. Godfrey Folejaumbe, Robert Bealknap, Roger Ashburnham, and others,
were constituted Pat. 44 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, betwixt the Towns of Borne
and Rye. In the like sort were Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
the Abbot of Battle, Rob. Bealknap, Roger Ashburnham, and others, in 48 E. 3.

In the same year, the King being informed Pat. 48. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
that the Burgers of Wynchelse, had, for the advantage of that Town, and
benefit of the whole Country, built a certain Bridge at Pypewel, over a water,
called the Chanel of Wynchelse, upon the said Kings soil, on both sides of the
water, for the passage of people, and all carriages; which was not done with
little chardge: And that by the violence of the Tides, and floods of fresh
water passing to the Sea, the said Bridge and banks, on each side the said
water, betwixt the said Town of Wynchelse, and the Towns of Odymere and Rye,
were so broken down and ruined; and all the Highways about the said Town of
UUynchelse so overflowed, that scarce any one could come in or out thereof: he
granted Commission Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
to the Abbot of Bataille, Thomas de Reyns, Lieutenant to the Constable of
Dovor Castle, Will. Batesford, Roger de Ashebornham, and others, to view the
said Bridge and Banks, and to take order for the repairing of them.

In 2 R. 2. Will. Horn, Roger de Asheburnhamme, and John Edward, were
appointed Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks etc. betwixt UUortlyng and
Catesfelde.

In 3 R. 2. upon complaint Pat. 3 R 2. p. 1. m 40. in dorso.
made to the King, by the Commonalty of the Town of UUynchelse; showing, that
there was a common way, called Copgreys, then lately leading from the said
Town, unto Bataille; as also a certain Marsh called Dynsoale, lying betwixt the
Towns of UUynchelse and Hastyngs; which way and Marsh, through the neglect of
some persons in those parts, who of right ought to repair and maintain them,
were destroyed and overflowed by the Sea; the said King, by the assent of his
Prelates, Barons etc. then sitting in Parliament, assigned Pat. 3. R 2. p. 1. m
40. in dorso.
the Abbot of Bataille, Rob. de Bealknappe, and Will. de Battesford to take
view of the said way and Marsh^ and to enquire by the Oaths of honest and
lawful men etc. through whose default, those damages had happened, and who had
used, and ought to repair them; and to compel them thereto in such sort, as in
Romeney marsh, in the like case had been accustomed: And moreover to do and
perform all things therein, according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and
the Laws and Customs of Romeney marsh, aforesaid.

In 4 R. 2. Sir Thomas de Hungerford Knight, John Prior of Michesham, Will.
Horn, Roger Ashburnham, and others, were made Pat. 4 R. 2 p. ^. m. 17. i^
dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of those banks upon the Seacoasts,
betwixt the town of Bourne and the Towns of Helyng and Bixle. And the next year
following, Sir Edward Dalyngrugge Knight, Sir Edmud Fitzherbert Knight, John
Edward, Will. Olmested, and Thomas Blast, were in like sort constituted Pat. 5
R. 2. p. 2. m. 29. in dorso.
for those within the Rape of Pevenese.

In 6 R. 2. the King directed his Precept Claus. 6 R. 2. p. 2. m. 27.
to Adam de Limbergh, Guardian of his Manor of Idene; commanding him, that out
of the form of the said Manor, he should cause the banks and ditches belonging
thereto, to be repaired where need was, according to the judgment of honest
and lawful men, of those parts.

Other Commissions in this King's time were these; viz. in 7 R. 2. to Pat. 7 R.
2. p. 1. m. 26. in dorso.
Robert de Ashton Constable of Dovor Castle, Robert Bealknap, Sir Edward
Dalingrugge Knight, Will. de Horn, Peter Read, and Will. Batelesford, for
those banks etc. in the Towns of Idenne, Rye, Odymer, Broad, Farlegh, Pette,
UUynchelse, Iclesham, Gestling and UUestfield.

In 8 R. 2. to Pat. 8 R. 2. p. 1. m. 39 in dorso.
Sir Robert Bealknap, Sir Tho. Hungerford Knights, Roger Ashbournham, Will.
Batisforth, and John at Broke, for those betwixt the Town of Bourne, and the
Towns of Helyngham and Bixle.

In 14 R. 2. to Pat. 14 R. 2. p. 1. m. 36. in dorso.
Sir Thomas Colepepir Knight, Will. Rikhill, Roger Ashburnham, Stephan
Bettenham, and John Edwards, for those betwixt the Town of Kentbregge and
Newenden, then much broken by the violence of the Sea: And to act therein
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeneye
marsh.

In the same year, to Pat. 14 R. 2. p. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
Hugh de Sowches, John Falwesly, Will. Percy, Will. Brinchesle and others, for
those betwixt the Town of Ifeld and the main Sea; upon the River of Jews, and
Passage of Pulberowe and the main Sea; and upon the River of Arundell on both
sides of the banks; and to do all things therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm.

In 15 R. 2. to Pat. 15 R 2. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
the Abbot of Begehame, the Prior of Michelhame, John Devereux Constable of
Dovor Castle, Sir Will. Fienles and Sir Roger Newent Knights, Will. Batelesford
and others, for those upon the Seacoast and Marshes, in the Towns of
Peveneseye, Aylesham, UUrotlynge, Hoo, Herst Monceaux, Mankesheye, UUylyngdon,
UUesthamme, Horsye; and elsewhere, from the head of Godyng to Clune of Bourne.
And so likewise, by another Commission, Ibid.
for those within the Precincts of the Townships of Ashbournhamme and Bourne.

In 17 R. 2. to Pat. 17 R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in do^so.
Will. Rikhille, Will. Brenchesle, Vincent Fynche, Robert Oxenbrigge and John
Lynot, for those in Farlegh, Pette-Gestlyng, Bread Westfeld and Odymere: and to
act therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of
Romene marsh.

And in 20 R. 2. to Pat. 20 R. 2. p. 1. m. 12. in dorso.
the Abbot of Bataille, Prior of Hastyngs, Will. Brenchesle, Robert de Ore and
others, for those betwixt Hastinges and Bulwerheche; and to proceed therein as
abovementioned.

The next year following, upon a Commission Ex bund. de B^ev. and Recor^dis,
Wallias ta^gentibus, temp. R. 2. part 2. n. 123.
issued out to the Abbot of Begeham, Prior of Michelham, Sir Will. Fienles
Knight, Will. Makenad and John Broke, touching the repair of the banks etc.
betwixt Ashebournehamme and Bourne; the Jurats ( inter alia) presented, that
the bank, beginning at Borham brigge, and going to the land of Sir Will. de
Hoo Knight, was in decay, through the default of the Abbot of Begeham and his
partners. And from thence, the Bank leading to the land of Stephan Plasted,
through the neglect of Sir Will. de Hoo Knight. And from thence the banks
reaching to the bounds of Marcopson through the default of Stephan Waller, and
Walter Sumpter. And the banks reaching from that place to the Land of John
Sweteblod, in default of Sir Philip Sencler Knight: And thence the bank tending
to the land of Sir Philip Mested Knight, in default of the said John Sweteblod:
And thence the bank stretching to the land of Sir Will. Fienles Knight, in
default of the said Sir Philip Mested. And thence the bank tending to the land
of Simon Lot, in default of the said Sir William Fienles. And thence the Bank
tending to the old sluice of Pevenese, in default of the said Simon Lot. All
which persons by reason of their Land-holdings within the said Marsh, were
obliged so to repair and maintain those banks by parcells; their Ancestors, and
those whose estates they had, having time out of mind so done: And that then,
through such their neglect, many losses had befallen those parts.

And they also certified, that the Sewer beginning at the bounds of Squabber,
and extending it self to Gorebreggs, and so to Sakevylestrow; and so to
Yortham; and thence to Rikenebrigg; and so to the old Sluice of Pevenese; and
thence to Wyllendonestrow; and so to the Gutter made through the midst of a
Hillock, by which the fresh waters descending to the Sea, from six thousand,
three hundred fifty eight Acres, three Rodes and a half of Land, Meadow and
Pasture, had wont to pass, and of ancient time ought so to do; an^ from the
said bounds of Squabber, to the said old Sluice of Pevenese, was then filled up
and obstructed with grass, reeds and other filth, for a long time suffered
there to grow; and from the said old Sluse of Pevenese, to the said Gutter, in
such sort, as that by the shallowness thereof the course of the water was much
hindered, and obstructed, through the default and neglect of all the Tenants of
the beforementioned 6358 Acres, 3 Rodes and a half of Land, with the
appurtenances, who according to their proportions were also obliged to those
repairs.

That is to say, the Tenants of two hundred and nine Acres of land, Meadow and
Pasture thereof, lying in the Mar^h of Megeham; two furlongs and seventeen
perches of that Sewer; in length beginning at the said place of Squabbar, and
so going on unto............And all those Tenants from the said place of
Gorebreggs, to the place called Sakevylestrow, for the said Tenements, one
moytie of the said Sewer toward the North. And all the other, holding an
hundred fourscore and ten Acres of land, Meadow and Pasture, in the Marshes of
Megeham and Whelpole, the other moytie of the said Sewer, toward the South,
containing in length sixteen furlongs. And the Tenants of three hundred and
sixteen acres of land, Meadow and Pasture, in the Marshes of Boghele, Balle and
Herst-Monseux, from the place called Sakevylestrow, to the place called
Ladytrowe, seven furlongs of the said Sewer. And from the said place called
Ladytrowe, all the said Tena^ts of the Lands and Tenements aforesaid in the
Marshes of Megeham, Whelpole, Boghele, Ball, and Herst-Monseux, for those their
Tenements, seven furlongs of the said Sewer, unto the said place of Yortham.

And from thence the Tenants of eight hundred......... and four Acres in the
Marshes of Horsye and Down, for their Tenements, three furlongs and nine
perches of the said Sewer, unto the said bounds of Rikenebrigg; and from that
place to ^^e old sluice of Pevenese, and thence to the place called
Wyllindonestrow, the said Sewer to be repaired by all that hold the said lands
in the Towns of Wortling................ Horsye, Mankesye, Haylesham, Westham,
and Pevenese in common; and that in the evacuation of the fresh waters by the
said Sewer, if tha^ Sewer should be enlarged, they should have benefit and full
safeguard, without any contribution from the other Lands and Tenements, lying
in the Towns of Bourne, Langenere, and Willyndon: which from that time, by the
law of the marsh, ought not to contribute to their repair; forasmuch as those
lands could not in any wise be preserved by the said Sewer.

And they farther certified, that there was another Sewer, beginning at a place
called the Hokes, and extending to the Clyne of Langene; and so to the said
place called Wyllindonestrow, by which the fresh waters, of the said Lands and
Tenements in the Marshes of Bourne, Langeneye, and Wyllingdon, descending to
the Sea, were voided away: Which said Sewer, the Tenants of those lands and
Tenements in the Towns of Bourne, Langeneye, and Willyndon ought to repair and
maintain, for evacuation of the fresh waters; and that they and their Ancestors
did time out of mind so do: And that the said Sewer, in that place called
Willindonestrow, unto the said Gutter, ought to be repaired by all the
land-holders, except within the before-specified limits; so that the fresh
waters being conjoined by both the said Sewers, might pass to the said Gutter,
and be thereby evacuated, which Gutter to be repaired at the common chardge.

And that from.......... unto the house called Wyllindonestrow, and to the
Sluice of Pevensey, it ought to be repaired at the chardge of all the said
Land-holders in the Towns of Wortling, Otham, Hurst-Monceux, Horsie, Mankesie,
Haylesham, Westham and Pevenesey only: and that thence to the said Gutter, it
would be necessary for the safeguard of the whole Marsh to enlarge the same
Sewer in breadth two perches, and in depth three foot, at the chardge of all the
Tenants of the whole Marsh, within the bounds and limits aforesaid.

And they presented moreover, that from the said place called Wyllendonestrow,
by the side of the said old Sewer, on the East, it would be fit to have a a new
Sewer made, in the common Marsh, in breadth three perches, and in depth xv foot,
extending to the said Hillock; as also a new Gutter through the midst of that
Hillock, in length xx perches, in breadth eight foot, and depth two foot and an
half; and to enlarge the old Gutter unto sixty foot in length; the chardge of
all which was then esteemed at CC libr.

And they farther certified, that if the said Sewers and Gutters should be so
repaired, great profit and safeguard would accrue thereby; but if speedy remedy
were not had, the loss in a very short time would be inestimable.

Whereupon command was given as well to the Constable of Dovor Castle, and
Warden of the Cinque Ports, or his Lieutenant, as to the Shireeve of Sussex,
to summon the Abbot of Begeham and his participants; as also all and singular
the land-holders in the Villages aforesaid, to appear before the said Justices,
at Westham, upon Monday next after the Feast of the Purification of the blessed
Virgin, to answer why etc. as also all the land-holders within the said marsh,
that they should likewise then and there meet, to perform and do what should be
directed by the King's Writ so sent unto the said Lieutenant etc.

And the said Shireeve did make his return at that appointed day, before the
said Justices; that he had given notice accordingly unto the Abbot of Begeham
etc. as also to the land-holders in the said Marsh, to appear at Westham, upon
the day before-specified. Diverse others were then also summoned by the said
Shireeve in like sort; some whereof appeared; but the Abbot of Begeham and many
others came not: And those that appeared, answered, that neither they nor their
Ancestors, whose estate they then had in those lands, with the other lands and
tenements lying in the said towns of Wortlyng, Otham, Herst-Monceux etc. had
used to repair, in common, the beforementioned Sewer, from the place called
Rikenebrig, unto the old Sluice of Pevenese; and that in case they had so
repaired those Gutters and Sewers, they should have had no benefit by the
evacuation of those fresh waters, as by the said Presentment was then supposed.

VVhereupon by virtue of another Writ directed to the said Constable of Dovor,
a Jury was impanelled, and Sir William Hoo Knight, with diverse others, being
summoned, did appear in person; and did severally say (as to their Tenements
lying in the said Town of Mankesye, without the liberty of the Cinque Ports)
that there was a Sewer called Mankesey streme, beginning at a certain boundary
called Herstbolt, and extending it self under Walleres Haven, unto the old Port
of Coding; by which Sewer the fresh waters descending into those parts were
evacuated: and that they and their Ancestors, whose estate they had in the
beforespecified lands, did use time out of mind to repair the said Sewer, and
had commodity and ample safeguard thereby; without that, that they and their
Ancestors, and those whose estate they had in the Tenements aforesaid, did in
common repair and maintain that Sewer, beginning at the boundary called
Squabber, tending to Gorebreggs, and so to Sakevylestrow, and so to Yortham,
thence to Rikenebrigs, and so to the old Sluice of Pevenese, time out of mind,
with the rest of the Tenements in the said Town of Wortlyng, Eltham,
Herst-Monceux etc. And without that, that by evacuation of the fresh waters by
those Gutters and Sewers, though they should be so repaired and made, as by the
Presentment was supposed, they should have benefit and safeguard: and this they
were all ready to justify etc.

And William Grangiam, the King's Attorney there at that time, said; that the
Sewer beginning at the boundary called Squabber, tending to Gorebreggs, and so
to Sakevylastrowe, and thence to the old Sluice of Pevenese, had been usually
repaired in common by the Landholders in the said Towns of Wortlyng, Otham,
Herst-Monceux etc. and that by such evacuation of the fresh waters by those
repairs, they had commodity and safeguard, as in the said Presentment was
alleged etc.....................................................

In 3 H. 4. Thomas Erpyngham Constable of Dovor Castle, the Prior of Michelham,
John Pelham, William Fenys, Will. Makenade, and others, were constituted Pat. 3
H. 4. p. 1. m. 26. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks in Pevensey Marsh, betwixt
Birle and Bechief; and to perform all things therein according to the Custom
of that marsh, as of the marsh of Romeneye, and the Law and Custom of this
Realm.

Whereupon Ex ver. cod. MS. penes Will. le Neve Clar. Regem Armorum. an. 1659.
the said Prior, John Pelham, and William Makenade went unto Westham, in the
Parish of Pevensey, upon Friday next before the Feast of S. Gregory, by the
consent of the Lords of the Towns, the Bailiff, and the xii Jurats (otherwise
called Skawers) and of the Commons of the said Marsh; and ordained these
following Statutes for the due governance of the same marsh, and salvation
thereof in the time to come.

First, because there was no certain Law of the said Marsh ordained nor used
before that time, Ordinances for Pevensey Marsh.
but at the will of those Lords who had Lands within the same; so that diverse
perils and hurts intolerable daily grew: therefore, for eschewing thereof, and
for increasing of the common profit, they ordained, and fully agreed; that a
principal Court should be yearly held in the said Marsh, within xv days of the
Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, whereat one Bailiff, xij Skawers, as also
Collectors and Expenditors of the Scotts (or Assessments) should be chosen by
the Lords of the Towns of the said Marsh, or by their Attorneys, for the
safeguard thereof; which Bailiff to oversee the defects, and the xij Skawers to
make Orders and Decrees, according to the Law and Custom of Romney Marsh: and
also, that every man, by lawful quantity of his holding of common of Pasture
and Fishing, within the bounds of the said Marsh, shall contribute by equal
portions to the reparation and maintenance of the Banks, Gutters, Sewers,
Bridges, and all other necessary things within the said Marsh, by the
consideration of the xij Skawers; and that all the reparations of the said
Banks, Watergangs, Gutters, and Sewers, be done as often as needs; the costs
whereof to be made and raised in this form; viz.

That every man that has any land, subject xij Skawers, shall be kept for
three days; and if the owner be obstinate or negligent of his payment during
that time; then that the said distress be sold and the money reserved for the
safeguard of the said Marsh against the violence of the Sea.

And that the common Bailiff of the said xv days of the Feast of S. Michael
beforementioned, yearly, upon the summons of the Bailiff, except the said
Bailiff, for some reasonable cause happen to be changed within the said year,
and another be chosen in his stead.

And if the said Bailiff be present, at such his election, and will not accept
of that Office, that then he shall be amerced by the Electors in xl s. which
the succeeding Bailiff shall levy of his Goods and Catalls to the comman profit
of the said Marsh, and so forthwith a new choice of another Bailiff to be made,
who shall accept of that Office and take his Oath, and have for his labor the
Wanes that fall in his time of the Scotts so assessed and levied. And if the
said Bailiff so chosen be hindered by any man, so that he dare not accept of
that Office by reason of any threats; that then he which so threatens him, or
by any suggestion causes him to decline that Office, shall be punished by the
Electors, in such sort as the Bailiff himself should be, in case he refused the
same Office.

And if the Bailiff be absent at the time of his election, that then he be
distrained by the Bailiff of the Marsh his Predecessor, by all his Goods and
Catalls, the which shall be pounded in certain places ordained by the said
Electors, and there kept unto the time the said Bailiff go to the Constable of
the Castle of Pevensey, the Abbot of Begham, or Prior of Michelham, or to one
of them, and make his Oath accepting of his said Office; whereupon he shall
receive. Letters of him who has so taken his Oath, sealed with his Seal, and
directed to the Bailiff his Predecessor: And thus shall he do within six days
after his election; and if he do not so, he shall then be punished as
aforesaid, and forthwith a new choice made.

And at this principal Last or Court, the common Collectors and Expenditors of
all the general Scots beforementioned, shall make their accounts before the
Lords of the Marsh, or their Attorneys, if they be present, before the
Bailiffs, xij Skawers, and the Commons of the said Marsh, which Accounts to be
written and indented betwixt them, the Bailiff, the xij Skawers and all the
Commons of the said Marsh; and so in like wise the Bailiff to make his accounts
of such things as pertain unto him to account for.

And if any of the said xij Skawers make default at the said Last, or principal
Court, except they have a reasonable excuse, they shall be amerced in xij d. to
the common work, to be levied by the Bailiff. Likewise, if any of the Skawers
dye, or be put out of his Office within the year upon any reasonable cause,
that then another be chosen and put in the principal Last or Court, by the
Lords of the Fee, the Bailiff, the xij Skawers, and the wisest eldest and most
discreet men of the Commons of the said Marsh. In like manner that election be
made of the Collectors and Expenditors, so that they be not chosen of the
before-specified xij. if any other may be found able within the said Marsh.

And if any of the said xij Skawers, Collectors, xx s. to be levied for the
common work, as aforesaid: and after that another be forthwith chosen and sworn.

And moreover, if the xij Skawers be summoned

Likewise every man, singularly, of the said Skawers shall swear, that he
shall, with his fellows, make true Judgments and Awards, not sparing rich or
poor, neither of their Distresses, Banks, Landings, Watergangs, Sewers,
Ditches, Gutts, Bridges, Nets, or other impediments within the bounds of the
said Marsh, but that the trespassers be punished: and also that they in their
proper persons be attendant on the Bailiff of the said Marsh, to take
distresses, and to impound them for three days; and after that to prize and
sell them, according to the Custom of Romney marsh.

And the said Collectors and Expenditors xij Skawers, or of the greater part of
them: and so in this manner to be made and kept in all In-streams within the
bounds of the said marsh, before the Lords of the towns, of what In-stream
soever it be, if they be present.

Also the said Bailiff shall swear, that he

And likewise the said Bailiff, in proper shall swear and chardge them truly,
to gather and expend the said Scottis, and thereof yield a true account. And
the said Bailiff in his proper person shall oversee all Banks, Landings,
Watergangs, Sewers, Guts, and Bridges as often as need is: And shall deliver to
his successor in that Office, all manner of Evidences, Records, Payments, and
Exemplifications, which contain the Customs of the Marsh; with all the
Court-Rolls, Judgments, Considerations and Awards of his time, made by the
Skawers and judged; with all manner of Accounts of receipts and disbursments.

Furthermore, the Bailiffs Clerk shall have for his labor of the Commons of
the said Marsh, vi s. -- viij d.

Also it shall not be lawful hereafter to any man to make Dams, Fords, set
Nets, or any other impediments, in the Landings, Watergangs, Ditches or common
streams in the said Marsh, whereby the right course of the water may be let:
and if the right course of the water be hindered by any man in such manner as
aforesaid, and testimony given thereof by the Bailiff and six Skawers, or the
Commoners of the In-streams where the hurt was made; that the trespasser shall
be amerced forthwith, according to the proportion of his trespass, by the said
Bailiff and the xij Skawers; which Bailiff shall levy the said Amerciaments to
the common benefit as aforesaid.

And if any other man than the said Commons be damaged in like sort, and
testimony made thereof by the said Bailiff and six Skawers; recompense of the
same shall be given, and the harms amended to him that is so wronged, according
to the discretion of the Bailiff and the Skawer.

Likewise every Scot assessed shall be proclaimed in certain places; and days
of payment assigned, where and in what place they shall be paid, so that those
that are assessed may have no excuse, but that payment be duly made at the day
prefixed.

Moreover, every acre of land, lying by the said Walls and Watergangs, where
Guts or Floudgates ought to be made, shall be bought for xl s.

No man shall take away from the common work, any Labourer or Workman, to his
own private employment, until such time as the said common work be finished:
and if any man shall do contrary to these Ordinances, he shall be amerced in
the common Last or Court, by the Bailiff and the Skawers, in x s. to be levied
by the said Bailiff, forthwith, to the common profit, as is before expressed.

Also, that all manner of In-streams, by

And if any man do make an assault, or rescue xij Skawers, or against any of
them, or their servants, for the taking of distresses, or for any other manner
of Article appertaining to the execution of their Offices, for the common
profit, according to the Ordinance before-specified; that then the said
trespassor shall be amerced by the Bailiff, and six or eight of the xij
Skawers, in xx s. which shall be levied by the said Bailiff to the common work.

Lastly, it shall be lawful to the said Bailiff xij Skawers, during their
term, to distrain the trespassers by their amerciaments, for all manner of
Articles before rehearsed; and to keep the distresses three days, except the
owner pay what is due within that term: And if he so do, that then it shall be
lawful for the Bailiff to sell the said distresses, and keep the money unto
the common profit of the said Marsh.

In 4 H. 4. the same Thomas Erpyngham, and Prior of Michelham, Will.
Brenchesle, and others, had the like Commission Pat. 4 H. 4. p. 2. m. 27. in
dorso.
for those Banks within the Precincts of Batesford, Asheburneshammesmylie, and
Goddyngeshavene; and to act therein according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm. Before which Commissioners the Jury presented Ex bund, de Brev. and
Recordis, Wallia^ etc. tangentibus, temp, H. 4. n. 13.
upon their Oaths, that the common Watercourse, betwixt Asheburnehamesmyll and
Batesford, to Godyngeshavene, was so obstructed, by sand, mud, grass, and
other filth, that three thousand seven hundred eighty and three Acres of land
were by this stoppage of the course of the fresh waters, drowned: and that it
would be necessary and profitable for the safeguard and restoration of those
lands, that the common current from Morespicheswalle to the Mark dyke, were
newly cleansed, which contained six furlongs, by estimation, and might be
scoured for xij Marks. Which Chanel all the Landholders as well above Borham
bregge, as Rokland, Morhale, Hoo, Ladyland, Cralle, and of the Land of
Christian at Mershe, ought to make, cleanse, and scour.

And they also said, that the current from Markdyke, to Pevenese bridge,
contained in length xiij furlongs, which being then likewise filled with mud
and sand, by the ebbing and flowing of the tides, might be cleansed and scoured,
according to their estimation, for xl l. And that there was need of a new Sluse
at the said Pevenese bridge, in length xx foot, in breadth xiiij, and in height
four foot; which might be made for x l. by estimation: to the scouring of which
Chanel and making the Sluice, all the Land-holders, above Borham bregge, in
Brodewyshe and Cornbroke, ought to make full contribution: and the Land-holders
above Tonleghebregge to Condennesbregge, half contribution, according to the
proportion of their lands. And likewise, all the Landholders, on the South side
of Morespicheswalle, half contribution, according to the quantity of their said
lands: And that all the Land-holders in the marsh of Mankesye, Bestenovere,
Marchalls, Bakers, and Wykham, to contribute for the purposes abovesaid, a
fourth part, for this present occasion; but not to be claimed as a due, in time
to come. And they farther said, that it would be necessary and profitable for
all the Land-holders aforesaid, and for the security of Pevense Haven, that all
the Banks on the other side, upon the Saltes, from Morespicheswalle to the Sea,
should be broken and taken away, without any impediment of the Tenants of those
Banks.

And they said moreover, that if the said Port of Pevenese, had not been stopped
up with mud and sand by the ebbing and flowing of the Tides, so that the fresh
water, from the said Sluse could not have it is course; then would it have been
needful, that the said Sluice should be pulled up, and set down anew, at
Wyldemershe, betwixt the Sluice of Hoo, and the Sluice of Mankeseye; and that a
new Sewer should be made from the said Sluice so placed anew, through the midst
of the Lands of John Ask, unto the Kokyr of Mankesye; allowing for the Land of
the said John Ask, according to the Law and Custom of Romene marsh.


Also they said, that it would be necessary and beneficial for the Abbot and
Covent of Begham, for his lands at Roklond, that they and their successors have
one little Sewer, with a bolt, fastened, under the common Watercourse into the
Brook of Hoo, for evacuation of the dead water, arising from rain and springs
in the said grounds of Roklond, and this to be made at their own proper
chardges. And the said Abbot and his successors, to maintain the said
VVatercourse, from that bolt called Morespicheswalle, at their own proper
chardges. And if the said current, through the increase of the water, should go
out of it is course, by the neglect of the said Abbot or his successors, that
then it might be lawful for the Tenants of Hoo to shut up the said bolt, until
he the said Abbot and his successors did make full satisfaction to the said
Tenants of Hoo, for their losses thereby occasioned.

And the said Jurors did likewise affirm, that it would be necessary to have
one Bailiff, one Collector, one Expenditor, and other Id est Jurats.
Skawers of the most sufficient land-holders, who might have power to do all
things therein, according to the Law and Custom of Romene marsh; and to make
new Ordinances of Pevense marsh, and to return them into the Chancery, to be
exemplified with the said Kings great Seal: so that if the said Sewers or
Floudgates should be so repaired, they might have benefit and full safety
thereby. And that in case a proper remedy were not the sooner had therein, an
inestimable loss would be like to happen, within a very short time.

VVhereupon there was a Precept issued out, both to the Constable of Dovor
Castle, or his Lieutenant, and to the Shireeve of Sussex; that both of them
should give warning to all and every the land-holders of the Tenements within
those Towns, to appear before the said Commissioners, at Marchalleswalle, near
the......... of Pevense upon the Thursday being the Eve of S. Margaret the
Virgin, then next ensuing, to show what they could say for themselves, why they
ought not to be chardged with the performance of those repairs, according to
the proportion of their holding, and form of the said Inquisition; and to do
and undergo what the Kings Court should further appoint in that behalf.

And accordingly John Colbrond was elected to the O^fi^e of B^yliff, and sworn
to act according to the Custom of the Marsh; And Richard Palmere to the Office
of Collector and Expenditor, and sworn as aforesaid: And Thomas Colbrond,
William Bulk, and others, to the Office of Skawers, and sworn likewise to
undergo that Office according to the Law and Custom of the said Marsh.

At which day, the said Lieutenant to the Constable of Dovor Castle, made his
return to the before-specified Prior of Michesham, and his Fellow Justices,
that he did summon John Ask, Robert Redyng, with diverse others, to appear
before them: and likewise the Abbot of Begham. But the said John Ask, and many
others, appeared not. But John Wodelond, and some others who did appear, were
ready to contribute to those repairs etc.

In 8 H. 4. Sir John Dalingrugge Knight, George Ballard, Stephan Bettenhamme,
Will. Snayth, Henry Horn, and others, were constituted Pat. 8. H. 4. p. 2. m.
5. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks upon the Seacoast, from a
certain place called Blakwose, in Kent, unto Rye, in this County, and the
coasts of the water, called Apoldreflete, from the Sea to Bodihamme, on both
sides the said water; which at that time were much broken with the Tides: And
to perform all things therein, according to the Law and Custom of England, and
the Custom of Romeney Marsh.

And the next year following, the same Sir John Dalingregge, Sir John Pelham
Knight, Robert Oxenbrigge, John Hall the elder, and John Hall the younger, had
the like Commission Pat. 9 H. 4. p. 2. m. 21. in dorso.
for the Banks upon the Seacoast betwixt Hastynges and Boxle, within the
Parishes and Towns of Wyltyng, Holyngton, Boxle, Crowherst, Hastynges and
Bulwerhythe; and to transact all things therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm.

In 2 H. 5. upon an Inquisition taken before Thomas Erpyngham Constable of
Dovor Castle, Will. Brenchesle, Robert Oxenbrigge and others, for the view and
repair of the Banks betwixt Farleghe in this County, and Apul^re in Kent; the
Jurors presented E^ bund. de Brev. and Record^^, W^l^i^s etc. tang^ntibus,
temp. H. 5. n. 17.
upon their Oaths, that there was a certain small M^rsh, near unto the Town of
Rye, within the liberty of the Cinque Ports, called S. Mary Croft, containing
by estimation xlviij acres of land, which could not be well defended against
the force of the Tides, except an old Gutter therein were stopped up. And they
said, that it would be necessary and profitable for the preservation and
clearing of the said Marsh, that there were a new Gutter and Sewe^ made, beyond
the bank of the said marsh, and the land of John Chitecrofte, in a certain
Marsh, called Corboylesmarshe, containing...........about a quarter of an acre
of land; and so to pass into the Watercourse coming from Leveshameswall, unto
the Sluice at Melfl^t. All which said work, viz. the stopping up of the old
Gutter, and making of the new Sewer and Gutter, might be performed, as they
estimated it, for xij l.

And they farther said, that the Land-holders of the said Marsh called S. Marie
Croft, should pay to the said John Chitecroft, for the said land, according to
the Custom of Romeney marsh,
for every Acre xl s. And they likewise said, that the said Land-holders should
be liable to make contribution, for their portions, toward the diverting of
the VVatercourse in Curboylesmarshe, for the maintenance of the Sluice there;
and the Bank beyond the said Sluice, not taxed; as also to the making of the new
Sewer in Curboylesmarsh, when occasion should be; viz. for every Acre of
theirs, as the Land-holders of Curboylesmarsh for theirs: which water so
diverted, was not to the hurt or damage of the said Marsh, called
Curboylesmarshe: And therefore the Mayor and Bailiff of Rye had command, that
they should summon the said John Chytecroft, to appear before the Lieutenant to
the Constable of Dovor Castle, at Rye; upon the Wednesday next before the Feast
of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, to show etc. As also the land-holders of
the said Marsh, called S. Mary Croft. Who severally said, that they could not
gainsay, but that they were obliged to make contribution according to the
Inquisition aforesaid: And likewise the said John Chitecrofte, who said nothing
thereto. Therefore it was decreed, that the said new Gutter and Sewer beyond
the said Bank, and over the land of the said John Chitecrofte, should be made,
according to the purport of the said Inquisition; and that the said John
Chitecroft should have for his said land, according to the Custom of Romeney
marsh,
x s,

In 3 H. 5. Sir John Pelham Knight, Richard Wakeherst, Robert Oxenbrigge,
Vincent Fynche, Adam Iwode, and Will. Merchant were constituted Pat. 3. H. 5.
p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Commissioners for to view and repair the banks etc. betwixt the Towns of
Pesemersh, Rye, Farlegh, and Pette: and to do all things therein according to
the Custom of the Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm. So also in 9
H. 5. had Pat. 9 H. 5. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
Robert Oxenbrigge, Henry Hoorne, John Halle junior, Will. Cheyne and Adam
Iwode, for those betwixt Ashewalle, and the course of the Seawater, running
from the town of Rye to Appuldre and Bodyam, in the Towns of Wytresham and
Stone, in Kent; and to Idenne, Pesem^rshe, and Bekkele, in this County; and to
do all things therein according to the Custom of Rumney Marsh, and the Law and
Custom of England.

The like Commission, the same year, had Pat. 9 H. 5. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
Robert Lord Poynings, Thomas Prior of Jews, John Preston, Sir John Pelham
Knight, John Darell, and others, for those betwixt Flecchyng and Seford, on the
Seacoast: and to perform all things therein according to the Custom of the
Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm. So also, the same year, had Ibid.
Sir John Pelham Knight, the Prior of Michelham, Robert Oxenbrigge, Adam
Iworde, John Nelonde and John Halle, for those betwixt Hastyngs and Boxele, in
the Towns of S. Leonard, Holyngtone, Wyltynge, Bexele, Croweherst, and
Bulwerhithe; and to proceed therein as abovesaid. The like had Ibid.
Will. Westbury, Robert Oxenbrigge, John Hall, Richard Wakehurst; and others,
for those betwixt the Parish of Berghestede, on the west part, and the parish
of Felgham on the East; and from those Parishes, to Westregate: and to do all
things therein, as abovesaid.

So also in 1 H. 6. had Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
Sir John Pelham Knight, the Prior of Michelham, Robert Oxenbrigge, and others,
for those Banks betwixt Hastyngs and Bexele, as abovesaid. And the like had
Robert Lord Ponynges, Thomas Prior of Jews, John Preston, Sir John Pelham
Knight, and others, for those betwixt Flecching and Seford; and to proceed
therein as abovesaid.

But in such sort did the said Sir John Pelham and his Fellow Commissioners
proceed therein; that, in 6 H. 6. upon information Pat. 6 H. 6. p. 1. m. 6. in
dorso.
made to the King, that they had, by color of that Commission, raised certain
new Banks, which did so obstruct and hinder the ancient course of of those
fresh waters, that had used to run, betwixt the said towns of Hastyngs and
Boxle, by certain Sewers and Trenches to the Sea, that much land was thereby
drowned; the said King assigned Pat. 6 H. 6. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
the Abbot of Bataille, the said Sir John Pelham Knight, Sir Roger Fenys
Knight, Adam Iwode, John Corffe and others, to view the same, and to take such
course for the rectifying thereof, as should be consonant to the Custom of the
Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 10 H. 6. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, Sir Thomas Echyngham Knight, John
Halle, Will. Fynche, and others, were appointed Pat. 10 H. 6. p. 1. m. 1^. in
do^so.
to view and repair the Banks betwixt Farlegh in this County, and Derlandes
Knokke in Kent; and to make Laws and Ordinances therein according to the
Custom of Romeney Marsh: As also to impressed so many Laborers, upon competent
wages, as there should be cause for to employ in that work; considering the
great necessity of expedition therein. The like appointment Pat. 12 H. 6. ^. 1.
m. 24. in dorso.
in 12 H. 6. had John Earl of Huntendon, Robert Prior of Jews, Sir Robert
Poynings, Sir Thomas Echyngham, Sir Thomas Leukenore Knights, John Darell,
Richard Wakehurst, and others, for the Banks betwixt Flecchynge and Seford,
upon the Seacoast; and to proceed as abovesaid; as also to impressed such and so
many Laborers, upon fitting wages etc. as abovesaid. So also in 21 H 6. had
Pat. 21 H. 6. ^. 1 m. 3. in dorso.
Edmund Mill, Will. Sidney, John Leyle, John Wode, Richard Dalingrugge
Esquire, and Will. Breys for those betwixt the Parish of Berghstede on the
West part, and the Parish of Folgham on the East; and from those parishes
extending to Westgate: And to do all things therein according to the Custom of
the Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

The next year following, had Sir Rog. Fenys Knight, Richard Dalyngrugge
Esquire, John Faukes Clerk, John Denysh Esquire, Edmund Mill, and Adam Iwode
the like Commission Pat. 22 H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in do^so.
for those banks etc. betwixt Hastyngs and Bexele, within the Towns of S.
Leonard; Holyngtone, Millynge, Bexele, Croweherst, and Bulwerhithe; and to
proceed therein as the last Commission directed.

In 33 H. 6. Richard Abbot of Bataille, Will. Westbury^ Provost of Eton College
near Windsore, John Faukes Clerk, Thomas Hoo Esquire, and Bartholmew Bolney
were assigned Pat. 33 H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks etc. within the Precincts of Batesford
Ashburnehammesmille, and Godyngeshaven; and from Pevenese bridge, to
Newestclewes of Waltershaven; and from Newestclewes, by the Sea, to the point
of Godyngeshaven; and from the point of Godyngeshavene to Romestrete; and from
Romestrete to Bellamsgutte; and from Bellamsgutte to Densexgote; and from
Densexgote to Pykeledbrigge; and from Pykeledbrigge to Swynesham brigge: and to
act therein according to the Law and Custom of Romeney marsh.

Several other Commissions there were, in this King's time and afterward; in
all which the Commissioners were directed to proceed according to the Law and
Custom of Romeney marsh; viz. in 34 H. 6. to Pat. 34 H 6. part unica m. 23.
in dorso.
Sir Richard Fenys Knight, Thomas Echyngham, Richard Dalyngregge, and John
Passele Esquires, Bartholmew Bolney and Martin Oxenbrigge, for the Banks
betwixt Sedlescombebregge, in the Parish of Sedlescombe, on the West part, to
Snaylham; and the place called the Pyke, in the Parishes of Bread and Gestlyng,
on the East part, on both sides the common Watercourse, betwixt the said Town
of Sedlyscombe and Wynchelse.

In 36 H. 6. to Pat. 36 H. 6. p. 2. m. 4. in dorso.
Sir Richard Fenys Knight, Sir Roger Leukenore Knight, Nicholas Huse, Thomas
Hoo, Barth. Bolney, and others, for those from Coleworthe to Fleghambrigge, and
thence to the Sea.

In 37 H. 6. to Pat. 37 H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Sir John Pelham Knight, Thomas Echyngham, Henry Hall, Robert Oxenbrigge, and
John Copeldyke Esquires, Bartholmew Bolney and Martin Oxenbrigge, for those
betwixt a place called Fodyr, and the Town of Wynchelse.

In 3 E. 4. to Pat. 3 ^. 4. m. 8. in dorso.
Sir Roger Leukenore Knight, Will. Sydney, John Ernely, Thomas Tawcke, Humfrey
Hewester, and John Goryng, for those Banks from Coleworthe to the Sea.

In 5 E. 4. to Pat. 5. E. ^. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
Sir Thomas Echyngham Knight, Barth. Bolney, Henry Halle, Rob. Oxenbrigge and
Will. Baker for those from Yham, in the Parish of S. Leonards; and from Yham to
the Lands called Cregge, and the Lands of John Fynche.

In 6 E. 4. to Pat. 6 E. 1. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Sir Roger Leukenore Knight, Nich. Huse Esquire, John Fuyst, John Goryng, Will.
Ernele, and others, from the water of Coleworth to the Sea. And in 14 E. 4. to
Pat. 14. R. 4. p. 1. m. 10. in do^so.
Sir John Fogge, Sir John Scotte, Sir Will. Haute, and Sir John Gilford
Knights, John Elryngton, John Bruaston, Henry Auger, Will. Belknap, and Robert
Oxenbrigge Esquires; Barth. Bolney and others, for those betwixt Roberts
brigge, in this County, and the Town of Romeney in Kent.

In 17 E. 4. upon an Inquisition Esc. 17 E. 4. n. 70.
taken at a place called Dencourt's marshe, the Friday next after the Feast of
the Nativity of S. John Baptist xvij E. 4. before Sir Thomas Echyngham Knight,
Henry Aucher, Gervase Horn, Robert Oxenbrigge, Will. Belknap, Henry Belknap,
John Bradford, John Copeldyke, John VVody, and Thomas Oxenbrigge, Commissioners
to view and repair the Banks, betwixt the River of Apildoure, to Rye, on the
West part; and thence to the Wall, called Fresh wall, on the East part; and
the Wall of the Monks of Christs-Church in Canterbury, called New Wall, as
far as the lands belonging to the Abbey of S. Augustines did reach, on the South
part: the Jurors did, then and there, present upon their Oaths, that it would
be very necessary and profitable, for the safeguard, amendment and clearing of
the said Marsh, and prevention of drowning to that part of the Country
adjoining thereto, that there were a new Bank made from the said Wall, called
New Wall, by the Chanel leading from Apyldore to Rye, and to the said water,
called Moreflete; and thence to the said place called Freshe-walle, as far as
the lands then belonging to the Abbey of S. Augustines did extend. And that the
said Bank should be in length from the said Wall, called New Wall, unto
Moreflete aforesaid; and thence to the said place, called Fresh Wall, upon the
flat Marsh, MCCiiijxx. Rods and an half; and in Crekes and Flets Lxix Rods. And
they say, that every Rod of the said Bank, upon the plain Marsh, might be made
for two shillings and four pence; and every Rod in the Crekes, for xi s.

And they farther said, that within the same Marsh, by the making of that Bank,
there might be saved from the overflowing of the Tides, MCCCCxij Acres of good
Marsh; of which number Miiijxx. and two Acres were in Kent, and CCGxxx. Acres
in this County: and that all the said Acres, in both Counties, did lie
together, and contigious to the bounds of those Counties, and adjacent to the
said Marsh; and that no one Acre could be conveniently taxed to the making of
the said Bank, without the other; the assessment of them having been so, time
out of mind: whereof were Tenants, the Abbot of S. Augustines in Canterbury,
the Prior of Christs-Church in Canterbury, Sir John Elryngton, and Sir John
Scott Knights, John Engham, Thomas Ian; the heirs of James Marshall; the heirs
of Robert Marshall; the VVidow of Stephan Dene; the heirs of Thomas Thurder,
and Robert Fermor. Of which, the Abbot of S. Augustines aforesaid, was seized,
in the right of his Church, in his demesne as of Fee, in the said Marsh, in
Kent, of CCij. Acres; the Prior of Christs-Church, of Ciiijxx. and xvi Acres.
Sir John Elryngtone Knight, of Dxxxiij Acres; whereof CCLvi Acres in this
County of Sussex. Sir John Scott Knight, of Lxxiiij Acres, in this County;
whereof Walter Roberd claimed a part, but how much, the Jurors knew not. John
Engham of Lix Acres and one Rode, of that part which lies in Kent: Thomas Ian
of xix Acres and an half of the like: The heirs of James Marshall, of half an
Acre and a Rode: The heirs of Robert Marshall of viij Acres and a Rode: The
VVidow of Stephan Deine of two Acres and a Rode: The heirs of Thomas Thunder of
xxiiij Acres; and Robert Fermour of xxxvi Acres; all lying in Kent.

And moreover the said Jurors affirmed, that it was both reasonable and just,
that all the said Tenants should make contribution, every man according to what
he held in the said Marsh, for the making and maintenance of those Banks.

And the said Commissioners, by the consent of the said Jurors, Bailiffs of
Franchises, and all others who were concerned in the making of the said Banks,
and repair of them, ordained, decreed, and assessed upon every acre of land
within the said Marsh a tax of nine shillings, to be paid at the Feast of S.
Peter ad vincula, and at the Nativity of our Lord then next following, by equal
portions.

And they farther said, that it would be most necessary and profitable for the
preservation and good Government of the said Marsh, that there should be chosen
one Bailiff and one Collector, and other Skawers Id est Jurats.
of the principal Land-holders there, who should have power in all things to be
done therein, according to the Law and Custom of Romeney marsh.

VVhereupon the said Commissioners, by the assent aforesaid, made choice of Sir
John Elryngton Knight, to be Bailiff and Guardian of the said Marsh: who was
accordingly sworn for the performing of that Office faithfully, according to
the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeney Marsh aforesaid.
Also John Engham, the heirs of Thomas Thunder, Robert Thunder, Thomas Ian; the
heirs of James Marchall, the heirs of Robert Marchall, and the heirs of Stephan
Deine, being likewise elected, were sworn to execute that Office of Skawer,
faithfully within the said Marsh, according to the Law and Custom aforesaid:
The Shireeve of Kent therefore had command that he should give several summons
to the said Abbot of S. Augustines, Prior of Christs-Church, Sir John Elryngton
Knight, and the rest, who held lands within that part of the said Marsh, within
the County of Kent, that they should appear at the said Mars^, upon Monday next
after the Feast of the Translation of S. Thomas the Martyr, then next ensuing,
to show why each of them ought not to contribute to the said work, for what he
held, according to the proportion thereof, in such sort as he was assessed.

And in like manner had the Shireeve of Sussex command, that he should summon
Sir John Elryngton Knight, and the rest, who held that part of the said Marsh,
in this County of Sussex.

And the said Abbot, and all the other Land-holders, though they were severally
so summoned, did not appear, but made default. But the said Sir John Elryngton,
and others of this County, did appear, and were ready, every one of them to
contribute, according to the proportion of what he held within the said Marsh,
according to the tenor of the Inquisition and Tax aforesaid. And therefore it
was ordained by the said Commissioners, that as well the said Sir John
Elryngton, and the other land-holders, who then appeared with him; as the said
Abbot of S. Augustines, and all those other, who did not appear, should every
one contribute, according to the proportion of what he held, to the making and
maintenance of the said wall, in manner and form as in the said Presentment was
contained; and should observe and keep the Laws and Customs specified in the
said Presentment. And because before that time, there was no certain Law of
that Marsh constituted nor used; and that the said Marsh being drowned, lay to
the Sea; therefore the said Commissioners, by virtue of their Commission, by
the assent of the Bailiffs, Jurats, and Commonality of the said Marsh, did
ordain, that for the future, the Bailiff for the time being, should have one
principal Last, in the said Marsh, yearly, at the least, within the Octaves of
S. Michael the Archangel, in such place where he the said Bailiff should think
most expedient.

And at a Last Ex v^t. cod. MS. pen. Will. le Neve C^at. Regem Armorum an. 16^0.
holden at West Ham the third day of October, in the xxiiijth year of the reign
of King Henry the eighth, before John Prior of Jews, Rich. Abbot of Begham,
John Prior of Michelham, Thomas Lord Dacre, and others, by virtue of the Kings
Commission to them directed; it was decreed and ordained; That no manner of
person or persons, should thenceforth set any Nets, Pots, or Engines; or make
any Damms, or other impediments, in Landings, Watergangs, Ditches or common
streams; or any Insews, or setting or fis^ing before any Gut or Guts within the
bounds of Pevensey Mars^, upon penalty of forfeiting to the use and profit of
the said Marsh, such Net or Nets, Pots, or Engines, as they or any of them shall
so set, and likewise ten shillings when and as often as any of them shall so
offend: the said Net or Nets, Pots or Engines, to be seized on by any person or
persons to the use aforesaid; which person or persons so seizing them, to have
the one half of the same to his own use: but the forfeiture of the said ten
shillings to be so levied by the Bailiff for the time being, to be to the
behoof of the whole marsh: Provided nevertheless, that every owner of land
within the said Marsh, have full and lawful power to fish within his grounds,
so it be not prejudicial or hurtful to the said Marsh.

CAP. XX.
FRom Sussex, I come next to Somersetshire. That the overflowings both of the
Sea, and fresh Rivers, in some parts of this County, were heretofore likewise
exceeding great, I need not seek far for testimony; the rich and spacious
Marshes, below Wells and Glastonbury (since, by much industry, drayned and
reduced to profit) sufficiently manifesting no less. For, considering the
flatnesse of those parts, at least twelve miles Eastward from the Sea, which
gave way to the Tides to flow up very high; as also, that the ^ilt and sand,
thereby continually brought up, did not a little obstruct the out-falls of
those fresh waters, which descend from Bruton, Shepton-Malet, and several other
places of this Shire, all that great level, about Glastonbury and below it (now
for the most part called Brentmarshe) was in time past, no other than a very
Fen; and that place, being naturally higher than the rest, accounted an Island,
by reason of it is situation in the bosom of such vast waters. Haec itaque
Insula (says Will. Monast. Anglic. p. 2. col. 1.
of Mames^ury speaking of it, then known by the name of the Isle of Avalon)
primo a Britonibus dicta est Ynwyrtrin etc. Insula vero dicta est, quoniam
marisco profundo est undique Clausa. This Island was first called by the
Britons Ynswyrtrin etc. and termed an Island, because it was enclosed, on every
side, with a deep Marsh or Fen, as doubtless it would be, were it not for that
famous and costly Sluse, at Highbridge, whereby the Tides, that there usually
rise no less than xx foot in full height, are not only kept back; but the
fresh waters evacuated with such a force, as, grinding out the silt, which
would otherwise choke up that Ostiarie, the obstruction of their current, and
consequently the overflowing of that large plain, Eastwards, is happily
prevented.

Let me also add hereunto what the learned Leland Lel. Itin. M S. in bibl.
Bodl. vol. 2. f. 42. a.
(in his Itinerarie, made temp. H. 8.) observes; viz. that near Coscumbe
(betwixt Shipton Malet and Wells) there was anciently a Castle on a Hill,
called Fenne Castle, the ruins whereof he saw: And as to the Banking and
Drayning in these parts; that a mile above Hartlake bridge, he took notice of
an arm cast out by force, out of Sowey River, and a Marsh wall made by
industry, betwixt it and the principal stream of Sowey: which wall continued to
Hartlake bridge and a mile lower; and then both (soon after) ran into the mere.
And moreover affirms, that if the said Marsh wall should not be kept up, and
the Chanel on each part of Sowey preserved from weeds, all the plain ground, at
sudden Rains, would be overflown, and the profits thereof lost.

And, by the Charter Ex Registro de Glaston. penes Rad. Sheldon de Beol^y Arm.
f. 149. b.
of Eddi Bishop of............ made to the Abbey of Glastonbury in the year of
Christ DCLxxx. it appears that Ferramere was then an Island, environed with
the Fens.

But concerning these and the other Marshes of this County, the first
Commission Pat. 32 E. ^. m. 2. in dorso.
of Sewers, wherewith I have met in our public Records, is in 32 E. 1. which
was directed to Robert de Clare, Gilbert de Bear, and Master Gereberd, who were
thereby assigned to view and take order for the repair of the Banks, Ditches,
Gutters, and Sewers in Brentmershe, Pederham, Wringemershe, and Saltmershe; and
to cleanse the Gutters and Channels in such sort, as that the streams as well of
the fresh water as salt, might have thenceforth their right and ancient course
in all those places.

In 2 E. 2. Matthew de Furneaus and Will. de Burn, were constituted Pat. 2 E.
2. m. 22. in dorso cedulae.
Commissioners in like sort, for all the Banks etc. in general, both upon the
Seacoasts and elsewhere in this County. The like Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 1. m. 25. in
dorso.
Commission, in 4 E 2. had John Randolf, John the Son of Tho. de Beauchamp and
Will. de Burn. So also in 9 E. 2. had Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
John de Meryet, Richard de Rodeneye, and John de Clivedone. In which year
likewise John Randolf, Will. de Harden, John de Westcote, and Richard de Rodney
were appointed Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 1. m. 23 in dorso.
to enquire of the breach of the Banks and Ditches of John de Goddeleigh, Dean
of Wells, in the lands belonging to his Deanery, at Merk in this County, which
very anciently, in the time of his Pred^cessors, had been raised for the
preservation of the lands of the same Deanery, Modesse, Wodmore, and Bydesham,
against the power of the fresh waters, which descended by a certain Chanel, in
the said Town of Merk, toward the Sea. And also of certain Sluices of the said
Dean, in his said Town of Merk, built for the evacuation of water, in flood
times; which S^uses were then broken down by Philip de Columbers, Robert de
Burnt, John his Brother, and others.

The like Commission Ibid.
was then directed to the said John Randolf and the rest, to enquire of the
breach of the Banks etc^ of John Bishop of Bathe and Wells, in the lands of
his Bishopric, at Blakeford, near Merke before-specified.

Many other Commissions for the view and repair of the Sea-banks and others, in
this County, were afterward granted to several persons; viz. in 10 E. 2. to
Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 15. in dorso.
John de Beauchamp, Will. de Burn, and John de Fosse. In 18 E. 2. to Pat. 18
E. 2. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
John Randolf, Elias de Godele, and the said John de Fosse. In 19 E. 2. to Pat.
19. E. 2. p. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
John de Clyvedon, Hugh de Langelond, and Elias de Godele. In 20 E. 2. to Pat.
20 E. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
John de Mohun, and John Randolf.

In 3 E. 3. to Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. in dorso.
John Inge, Hugh de Langlond, and Peter Coleswayn, for those Banks betwixt
Bristoll and Muchaney. In 14 E. 3. to Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
Richard Lovel, Henry Power, and Roger de la Wall for those in Brentmershe,
betwixt the Town of Stert and Burcle, in length; and Wollavyngton and Hegh
brugge (now called High bridge) in breadth.

In 17 E. 3. to Richard Lovel, John Inge, John de Mere and Henry Power, for
those betwixt Bristoll and Dunstere, and the parts adjacent. So also in 22 E.
3. to Pat. 22 E 3. p. 1. m. 21. ^n do^s^.
John Inge, John de Clyvedon, Henry Power and Adam Bret.

In 25 E. 3. to Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 3. m 5. (...).
Sir John de Clyvedon, Sir John de Seintlo Knights, John de Somerton, and
Nicholas de Ledrede for the Banks in diverse parts of this County.

In 32 E. 3. upon a pleading Plac. coram Rege term. Pasch. 32 E. 3 Rot. 23.
Somerset.
, occasioned by an Indictment against the Dean of Wells and Richard de Cogan,
and their Tenants, for the not scouring the Watercourse near Hakmede and
Holimede; and against the Dean alone for two Sluses, called Netherpound and
Southerpound; and for a Floud-gate, called Hakewere, they were then acquitted.

In the same year Matthew de Clivedon, Sir John de Clivedon Knight, Sir Walter
de Paveley Knight, and others, were assigned Pat. 32 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in
dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. betwixt Bristoll and Taunton, and betwixt
Bruton and Severne.

In 34 E. 3. Sir Richard de Acton, Sir John de S. Lo Knights, and others, had
Pat 34 E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
the like assignation, for the Banks betwixt Bristoll, Martok, and Taunton, and
betwixt Bruton and Severne.

In 36 E. 3. Sir Richard de Diton Knight, Walter de Aldebury, Sir John de
Seintlo Knight, Matthew de Clivedon, and others, had Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 2. m. 18.
in dorso.
the like for those at Bristoll, Mertok, and Taunton; as also at Welyngton,
Dunsterre, Bruton and Severne. So also in 1 R. 2. had Pa^. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 25.
in dorso.
Sir Richard Acton Knight, Henry Percehay, Sir John de la Mare Knight, Sir John
L'orly Knight, Robert Syddenham, Robert Cheddre, and John Panet.

In 2 R. 2. Sir James de Audeley Knight, Lord of Hely, Sir Will. Botreaux
Knight, Sir Henry Percehay Knight, Sir Richard Acton Knight, Walter Clopton,
and others, were constituted Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks etc. in Brentmershe, and
Wryngemershe, and in other places upon the Seacoast and water of Severne,
betwixt Bristoll and Dunsterre.

After this, diverse Commissions for the Banks, Ditches etc. in general
throughout this County, were issed out; viz. in 5 R. 2. to P^t. 5 R. 2. p. 1.
m. 2.
Sir Maurice With, Sir Will. de Bonvile, Sir John Weyland Knights, Richard de
Sydenham, and John Manyngford. And in the same year to Pat. 5 R. 2. p. 2. m.
29. in dorso.
the before-specified Sir James de Audeley, Sir Guy de Bryan, Sir Will. Cogan,
Sir John Trivet, Sir John Rodeney, and Sir John de la Mare Knights, John Carry,
Will. Carry, John Domere, and John Bar.

By virtue of which Commission, the said Sir Guy de Brien, Sir Will. Cogan, Sir
John Tryvet, Sir John Rodeneye, and Sir John de la Mare Knights, John Carry,
John Domere and John Baree, met Pat. 8 R. 2. p. 2. m. 36.
at Bridgwater, on Monday next after the Feast day of S. Margaret the Virgin;
where the Shireeve of the County, having received the said Kings Precept to
that purpose, caused xij honest and lawful men within his liberty, to appear,
viz. John Ivethorn, John Eyr etc. who did, Ibid.
upon their Oaths present, that there was a certain bank, called Southlake
Wall, lying betwixt the Path and Tutte yate trees, in Weston; by which, diverse
Watercourses, called Runes, were obstructed by the Abbot of Glastonbury and his
Tenants, insomuch as the said water overflowed and drowned the Meadows and
Pastures of many men, to the damage of the whole Country; and that the said
Abbot and his Tenants ought to reform the same.

And they also said, that there were in the River of Peret two VVeres, called
Tappyng Weres, whereby the course of the water was straightened, which ought to be
amended and removed by the Abbot of Glastonbury, and Bishop of Winchester.

And that there was a certain pleck of Osiars at Tutte yate in Weston,
appropriated by the said Abbot and his Tenants, by which the water course was
straightened and stopped, to the damage of the Country; and that it ought to be
amended and totally removed by the said Abbot and his Tenants. Whereupon the
said Abbot and his Tenants, constituted John Panes and John Fitelton their
Attorneys, to answer to this chardge.

By another Inquisition Ibid.
taken at that time before the said Justices, upon the Oaths of John Strache
and others, it was then likewise presented, that the course of the water called
Wythyrne, was stopped by sand and weeds, through the neglect of the said Abbot
of Glastonbury and his Tenants of Wythyes, on the one part, and Sir Will.
Cogan and his Tenants of Honyfpull on the other part. And that afterward the
said Abbot and his said Tenants, constituted the said John Fytelton and John
Panes their Attorneys to answer thereto. And by another Inquisition taken at
Taunton the Thursday next after the Feast of S. Giles the Abbot, in the sixth
year of the said King, the Jurors, upon their Oaths, did say, that the said
Abbot did, at Monketon, maintain certain Trees hanging in the River of Tone,
overthwart the same stream, insomuch as Boats could not pass there, betwixt
the Mill of Tobrigge and Bathepole, as they had wont to do, to the great damage
of the whole Country. And they farther said, that the Mill, called Bathepole,
for grinding of Corn, was built in the midst of the River of Tone, with stone
walls six foot higher than they had formerly been, by Sir Richard de Atton
Knight. Which Mill the said Abbot then had and supported. And they also said,
that there was likewise a Fulling Mill built in the said River, by the said Sir
Richard de Atton, after the great Plague, which was then also in the possession
of the said Abbot; by reason whereof the said stream could not have it is
passage as formerly; but overflowed both the Corn ground, Meadows, and Pastures
adjacent, to the damage of all the Country. And likewise, that the Kings High
ways, betwixt Taunton and Bathepole-brigge, were so overflowed and spoiled, by
the flowing back of the said water, that people could not travel that way: and
that the said Abbot ought to amend the same.

And they also said, that by the building of those Mills and VValls, the Boats
which had wont to have passage that way with Merchandise, from Bridgewater to
Taunton, were stopped; and that the Fish were also thereby hindered of their
course to and from those places.

And they said moreover, that a certain piece of ground, on one part, in
Monketon, was appropriated to the said Abbot, by the planting of VVillows and
other Trees by the said Abbot and his Predecessors, their servants and Tenants
there. And also that the said Sir John Poulet Knight, had appropriated the
ground on the other side, by the like plantations; so that the Chanel which had
been anciently xxx foot wide, was not then above x or xij foot in breadth, from
the said River of Bathepole to Criche, by reason whereof, boats could not pass
therein as they had wont, to the great damage of the Country.

To answer all which chardge, the Abbot and his Tenants appeared, by their
Attorney, upon the Wednesday in Easter week, in the seventh year of the said
King: and as to the bank, called Southelake wall, first presented, said, that
it was in Othery, and not in Weston, which is parcel of his the said Abbot's
Manor of Sowy. And farther said, that he held a certain piece of ground,
called Southlakemore, in Othery aforesaid, containing about xl Acres of land,
Meadow and Pasture, and that it was parcel of the said Manor, and lay betwixt
the same Bank, and a certain Bank, called Burwall, which Manor the said Abbot
held as parcel of the foundation of his Church of Glastonbury; and that he and
all his Predecessors were seized thereof time beyond memory, as in the right of
their said Church.

And he alleged moreover, that there was a certain River, called Paret, which
is adjacent to the said ground called Southlake mere, into which River the Sea
water did flow and ebb; and that the said Bank, called Southlake wall, was and
had been there time out of mind, for safeguard of the same ground, called
Southlake mere, as well to defend it from the inundation of the Tides, flowing
in by the said River, as of the fresh waters descending by that and other
Channels, to the damage thereof: And that there was in that ground a certain
high way, called the Drene, extending it self through the midst thereof: And
that the said Abbot and all his Predecessors and Tenants of Othery, had time
out of mind maintained the said Bank, called Southlake wall, for the defense of
that ground and way, as aforesaid; without that, that there had been any Runes,
Sewers, Gutters, Trenches, or Ditches in the said Bank, called Southlake wall,
or of right ought to be: and without that, that any Runes were obstructed by
that bank, or any bank elsewhere in Weston, called Southlake wall, as it was
supposed by the said presentment: and this he was ready to justify by the
Country.

And as to the Presentment of the two Weres, called Tappyng Weres, in the River
of Paret, by which the current of that water was hindered; he said, that he held
the Manor of Sowy, as parcel of the foundation of his Church of Glastonbury;
as also a certain Floudgate, called Tappyng Were, in the said River, which is
parcel of that Manor, and so supposed to be to the damage of the Country: And
said, that the same Floud-gate had been there time out of mind; and that he the
said Abbot and all his Predecessors were seized thereof, as parcel of the said
Manor; and that it then was in breadth, height and depth, as much as it had
been time out of mind; and that the current of the said water was not any
otherwise stopped, than it had been time out of mind; and that he was ready to
make proof thereof by the Country.

And as to the presentment of the said pleck of Osiars so appropriated by him
the said Abbot and his Tenants in Weston; he said that it was amended, and
totally removed, and that this he was also ready to prove.

And as to the planting of the said Trees, and appropriating of the soil, he
said, that he was not guilty; and that he was ready to prove it. And because
the said Tenants could not justify, that the said nuisance was removed, at the
time of the said presentment, they were amerced at half a Mark.

And as to the Wat^rcourse, called Wythyrune, which was obstructed as
aforesaid, the said Abbot and his Tenants of Wythies, answered, that the said
nuisance was amended at the time of the said Presentment, and long before; and
that this he was ready to prove.

And as to the Presentment that he had suffered Trees in Monketan to hang over
the River of Tone, and overthwart the same, so that Boats could not pass to
and fro; he said, that those Trees grew above Bathepole mills, where Boats
never used to pass, neither could or ought to do; and that the said Trees were
not any nuisance; all which he was ready to justify.

And as to the Presentment, that Bathepole mill was built in the midst of the
River of Tone, with stone VValls higher by six foot, than they formerly had
been: And that there was also a Fulling Mill, built there etc. And likewise,
that the Kings High way betwixt Taunton and Bathepole brigge was spoiled by the
reflowing of the said water. And that the Boats, which had wont to have their
passage with Merchandise from Briggewater to Taunton, were hindered etc. the
said Abbot answered, that the said Richard de Atton was seized of the said
Mills and those other Lands, and held them of the Abbot of Glastonbury, his
Predecessor, as of his Manor of Monketon, and in right of his Church of
Glastonbury: and that he the said Richard and all they whose estate he then had
in those Mills, Lands etc. had held them of the Predecessors of him the said
Abbot, by certain services, time out of mind: And forasmuch as the said Mills
were grown old and ruinous, he the said Richard did new build them, and made
them of the same height, breadth and depth, as they were before he so pulled
them down; and that this he was ready to prove. Which said Mills, with the
Lands and Tenements aforesaid, the said Richard, by the Kings license, then and
there exhibited, gave to one Walter Abbot of Glastonbury, the preceding Abbot;
to hold to him and his Successors for ever: And so said, that the then Abbot
held those Mills, in form aforesaid; without that, that they were built higher
in any sort, other than is before alleged; and that this he was ready to prove.

And he said, that before those Mills were so new built by the said Richard,
the fresh waters, descending into the said Chanel in great floods, did overflow
the Meadows and Pastures adjoining, and also the before-specified Road-way
betwixt Taunton and Bridgwater: so that the overflowing of those grounds, and
prejudice to the same way, was not at all worse, after the said new building of
those Mills, than it had been before; and that this he was likewise ready to
prove.

And the said Abbot farther answered, that he was not obliged to repair the
said Kings high ways, so spoiled, as by the beforementioned Presentment was
supposed; in regard, that neither he nor any of his predecessors, nor any one
whose estate he had in any of the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, he used to
perform such repairs in those ways time out of mind: and that this he was
ready to prove. And he said moreover, that there was a certain place, below the
said Mills, called Bathepole Cross, whereunto all the Boats, coming from
Briggewater toward Taunton, by the same water, and not above, nor farther in
the said River of Tone, ought of ancient time to go up or pass, or could so
do; but had used to be unloaded there; and this he was ready to prove.

And he likewise said, that one Walter late Abbot of Glastonbury, his
predecessor, then Tenant of those Mills, within eighteen years before, did of
his own good will, and not of right, make a certain Chest of boards, for the
ease of the then Bishop of Winchester (Lord of Taunton) and put it into the
poole of those Mills, by which Chest, the boats in time of floods, might be
drawn up into the said poole: by which means the boats being drawn by that
Chest, sometimes got up to the said Bishop's Mill, called Tobrigge Mill;
without that, that the said Boats did use to pass up toward Taunton, in the
same River of Tone, any farther than the place called Bathepole Cross, time
out of mind. And without that, that the Fish in the said River were more
hindered in their passage toward Taunton, than they had wont to be before the
new building of the said Mills.

And as to the Presentment of certain ground in Monketon, appropriated to the
before-specified Abbot, by the planting of VVillows and other Trees thereon, by
his servants and Tenants; the said Servants and Tenants affirmed, that the said
nuisance was amended and totally removed, and that this they were ready to prove.

And the said Abbot likewise answered, that as to the planting of the Trees,
and appropriating the soil in Monketon aforesaid, he was not at all guilty; and
that he was ready to prove it. And because his servants and Tenants did not
deny, that the said nuisance was not removed, at the time of the said
presentment; they were therefore amerc'd in half a Mark.

All which things, they the said Abbot, with his servants and Tenants, being
ready to prove, they required judgment there in. Whereupon a Jury being
summoned, to appear before the said Justices on Thursday in Easter week, and
there sworn; did say, that the said Bank, called Southlake wall, was in Othery
(which is parcel of the said Abbot's Manor of Sowy) and not in Weston; and so
was and had been time out of mind, as the same Abbot had before pleaded: And
they said, that there never were or ought to be any Sewers, Gutters, Trenches,
or Ditches in the said Bank: and that no Runes were stopped by the said Bank,
as he the said Abbot and his Tenants had also pleaded. And as to the two Weres,
called Tappyng Weres, in the River of Peret; they said, that the said Abbot
held the Manor of Sowy, as parcel of the foundation of that Monastery; and
that he had a Floudgate, called Tappyng were in the same River, which was
parcel of the said Manor, and had been time out of mind: And that the
Watercourse there was not otherwise stopped, than it had been from the said
time, as he had formerly pleaded and alleged.

And as to the Presentment of those Mills, called Bathepole mills; they said,
that they were old and ruinous, and new built by the before-specified Richard,
after the great plague; and of the same height and depth as they had been time
out of mind, and not otherwise; so that neither the Lands, Meadows, and
Pastures beforementioned; nor the High way betwixt Taunton and Bridgewater, in
Bathepole, were drowned or prejudiced by the said new building of them, in any
other manner than as they had used to be in great Floods, and time out of mind,
as the said Abbot had also pleaded and alleged.

And as to the Presentment concerning the passage of Boats and fish, from
Bridgwater to Taunton; they said, that there was a place, called Bathepole
Cross, on the lower side of those Mills; and that there all the Boats, coming
from Briggewater toward Taunton, had used to be unloaded time out of mind; and
that they neither could, nor ought of right to go farther: And likewise, that
the said Chest for the drawing up of Boats, near to the said Mill, was made by
the said Walter late Abbot of Glastonb^ry, Predecessor of the then Abbot, about
xvi years before, voluntarily, and not of any right, for the ease of the said
Bishop of UUinchester (Lord of Taunton) to draw his Boats to Tobrigge mill. And
they said, that the Fish were not at all hindered to swim in that River, any
otherwise, than what they had been time out of mind, as the said Abbot did
before plead and allege.

And as to the course of the water, called Wythrune, which was stopped; they
said, that the before-specified nuisance was amended at the time of the
presentment made, and long before, as the said Abbot and his Tenants of
UUythies had also pleaded. And as to the Trees growing athwart the River at
Monketon; they said, that they did grow above those Mills, ^here boats never
came nor ought of right to come, as the said Abbot had also pleaded. And
touching the pleck of Osiars, they said, that the same nuisance was amended and
totally removed, as the Tenants of the said Abbot had also pleaded. And as to
the ground in Monketon appropriated by the said Abbot, his Servants and
Tenants, by planting of VVillows and other Trees thereon, they likewise said,
that the said nuisance was also amended and totally taken away, as the said
Abbot had alleged.

Upon all which considerations, it was determined that the said Abbot and his
Tenants, and Servants, excepting the before-specified amerciaments, should be
dischardged.

In 11 R. 2. there was another general Commission Pat. 11 R. 2. p. 1. m. 33 in
dorso.
, directed to the Abbot of Glastonbury, Nicholas de Audley, Guy de Brienne, and
others, for the view and repair of all the banks, Ditches etc. in this County.

In 2 H. 4. Sir Peter Courtney, Sir Humfrey Stafford, Sir William Bonville, Sir
Thomas Brook Knights, John Strech, and John Manyngford, were appointed Pat. 2.
H. 4. p. 4. m. 10. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks etc. at Bristoll, Mertok, Taunton, Yevelchestre,
Welyngton, Dunsterre, Bruton and Severne; and in all places betwixt Bristoll
and Dunsterre; and betwixt Bruton and Severne; and to do all things therein
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 6 H. 4. the Master of S. Marks House in Bristoll, was dischardged Plac.
coram Rege term. Much. 6 H. 4. Ro^. 5. Somerset.
from the repair of the Bridges, scouring of the Ditches, and making of Sluses,
in the Towns and places of Powlet, Combwich, Pyriton, Huntspill, and betwixt
Blakbrig and Purytonbrugg: as also from the clensing the Channel, called
Hyburne; and likewise that which goes from the Town of Cork, running to
Hyburne, betwixt the Manor of Stokeland, which belonged to the said Master;
and the Manor of Wyke, which was the Lord Poynings: And likewise for the
Sluice of Thele, for shutting out the Seawater; and moreover for the stone
bridge in the VVarth of Wyke.

In 5 H. 5. Sir Will. Botreaux Knight, Thomas Chaucer, and Richard Chedder
Esquires, John Stourton, William Sparow, and John Gregori of Bruton, were
assigned Pat. 5 H. 5. part unica m. 34. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks betwixt the Cities of Bathe and Bristol; and
from Yilcestre, Lamport, Briggewater, and Taunton: and to proceed therein
according to the Custom of the Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.
The like assignation Pat. 2 H. 6. p. 1. m. 32. in dorso.
in 2 H. 6. had N. Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Sir Will. Botreaux, Sir Thomas
Stowell Knights, William Westbury, John War, John Stourton, and John Beaf,
for the banks in Brentmershe, Wryngemershe, and Pouldon; and to do all things
therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm: As also to take so many
Laborers, upon competent wages, to be employed therein, as should be
requisite, in regard of the great necessity of expediting the work.

So also the next year following, were Pat. 3 H. 6. p. 1. m. 16. in do^so.
Sir Thomas Broke Knight, Richard Cheddre Esquire, John Merchant, and William
Newetone, for those betwixt Yevelchestre, Burneham and Wells; and to act
therein, and impressed Laborers, as aforesaid.

And in 33 H. 6. Sir Thomas Seymour Knight, Robert War Esquire, Alexander
Hody, Roger Fitz James, John Sidenham junior John Porter and William Bodesham
had Pat. 33 H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
the like appointment for the banks etc. betwixt the Town of
Langeport-Estoner, on the East side, and the Town of Thurlokeston on the West;
as also betwixt the Town of Cory-Malet on the South part, and the Town of
Briggewater on the North; and to make Laws and Ordinances therein, and to
proceed in all things touching the same, according to the Law and Custom of
Romeney Marsh. And in 3 E. 4. Richard Chokke, Sir Theobald Gorges, and Sir
Walter Rodeney Knights, John Fitz James senior, and Robert Stowell Esquire, had
the like for the Banks etc. from Ryngwelle to Haylake Yoo; thence to Shestrygge
Yoo; thence to Colestoke; and thence to Blakstake in the Sea; and to proceed
therein as abovesaid.

Thus much for the Commissions: I next come to the Watercourses Ex R^gistro
Glaston. coenobii, penes Radulphum Sheldon de Beoley, in com. ^igorn. arm. an.
1659.
of Brent marsh, and who did anciently repair them.

The Lord of Bageworthe ought to repair the Chanel from Blakelake unto the Sea.
And the Lord of Bitesham that from Winesbrugge to the Sea. Philip the Son of
Corbin that from Winesbrugge to Blakelake. Hugh the Son of Auger, and the same
Philip, from Hengestes mere to the Sea. The second course from Hengestesmere to
the Sea, the same Hugh the son of Auger: and the third course from
Hengestesmere to the Sea, Raph de Seinbarbe.

From the mouth of Mere to the Sea, the Church of Glastonbury: and from another
part, from Blakeswelleshevede to the Sea, the Church of Glastonbury. From
Schipperide to Wakefen the Dean of Wells; and so from Wakefen, to the Land of
Robert de Ewyas Lord of Hewisch; and from Brodecrofte to the Mill of Geffrey
Lord of Burham.

From Thipride to Baggepole, the Dean of Wells, and Lord of Blakeforde. Also
from Baggepole to Watebrok, the said Lord of Blakeforde.

From Wathebrok the Dean of Wells upon his own Land; and Robert de Countvile,
also, for as far as his Land extended. After him the Lord of Alnodestone,
beyond Aldodestone were, beyond Wereham, Bagerde superior and inferior, to the
Sea. So also from Bethepulle unto the Land of Chalftone: and from Ewendone and
Chalftone unto Cosingtone; and from Cosingtone to Honispel, and thence to the
Sea.

The Lord of Bageworth likewise ought to repair Hukelbrigge, Bidesham and
Wrinlesbrig. Philip Cortin the bridge of Tornoc; William fitz Angel the bridge
of West Tornoc. Raph de Seinbarbe the bridge of South tinet, and Drente,
Michaels Bridge, and the bridge beyond; and likewise Mapesbrugge: And the Dean
the Brigge.

Sedgmore.
There is also in this County, a large Fenny plain; which, being covered with
water for the most part of the VVinter, and in Summer affords nothing but
Rushes, Reeds, and Sedge, has thence the name of Sedgmoore.

Over this level there is a fair Causey of stones and gravel (from Somerton to
Bridgwater) about eight miles in length, anciently made by one of the Abbots of
Glastonbury (as tradition says) which still bearing his name, is called
Graylock's fosse.

I do not find, from the authority of any Records, or other credible testimony,
that there was ever any endeavor used for the improvement of this Moor by
drayning, till of late days, that King James (of blessed memory) making title
to the soil, resolved to do it: But, as in most other places, there be a
perverse generation of people, who, of themselves are not content to sit still,
but will hinder others that would promote such laudable works for the public
good; so was it here; for diverse there were that made opposition thereto: But
after a Bill exhibited in the Exchequer, those opponents and the rest of the
owners of the adjacent Lordships commoning with their Cattle upon this Moor,
discerning, that they could make no justifiable claim to the soil, offered to
assign unto the King four thousand Acres in lieu of his right thereto, and to
lay out the residue (being nine thousand five hundred twenty and two Acres)
unto those their Lordships: which being accepted of by the King, there were
Allotments then made, according to the proportion of each Manor.

Nevertheless, after this fair entrance to so good and beneficial a work,
nothing was done therein: To give some encouragement therefore to posterity, in
case this present age shall still decline it, I have here exhibited a perfect
Map thereof, with the particular Allotments assigned to each of those bordering
Lordships.

The Division and Allotment of King's Sedgmore, to the several Mannours and
Freeholders thereunto adjoining, according to the Survey thereof taken.
Quantity of the Manors. Allotment of Acres in the Moor. Names of the Manors.
Acres. Acres. Dunwere Bower. To the heirs of Sir Robert Chichester, 600 171 To
William Hinkmore Esquire, 350 100 To Brent's Lands there, 260 75 Stawell. To
Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bathe, 960 274 Sutton Mallet. To John Mallet
Esquire, 820 234 Bawdrippe. To Walter Long Esquire, 765 218 Brodney. To Thomas
Muttlebury Esquire, 246 70 Middle Zoy. To Richard War Esquire, 1714 488 To Sir
^ichard Strode, 194 56 To the Freeholders there, 80 23 Mourlinch. To the heirs
of Mr. Floyer, 1240 354 Higham. To Henry Lord Gray 2485 708 Netherham. To the
heirs of Sir Edward Hext, 928 264 Aller. To Sir John Stawell, Berre. To Sir
William Courtney, 400 114 To James Northover, Gentleman, his Farm there, 300 86
To the Parsonage, and other Freeholders there, 100 29 ^ishcot. To Sir Thomas
Cheek, 1846 526 Horsey To Sir George Horsey, 1293 370 Ched Zoy. To William
Earl of Pembroke, 1440 411 Wes^on. To Sir Peter Van Lore, 2038 582 To the
Parson and Vicar, John Brag and Nicholas Watts, Othery. To Edward Trint
Esquire, 1378 393 To Mr. Balle, Mr. Harris, and Mr. Sanders, their Freeholds,
121 35 Somerton. To Thomas Hill Esquire, 1430 408 To James Rese Esquire, 464
132 To the heirs of Sir Edward Hext, 3159 901 To the Parsonage there, 171 49 To
the Church-Burgages, 52 15 Graynton. To the heirs of Mr. Watts, 1019 291
Pitteney. To William Earl of Northampton, 1114 318 To the heirs of Sir John
Hanham, 882 251 Cumpton. Dondon. To Sir John Strangways Knight, 1921 548 To
Baronet Portman his Freehold there, Walton. To Sir Thomas Thin, 1893 540
Street. To Andrew Whittington, 1711 488 To Mr. Alexander Deyer, To
Freeholders, omitted, Memorandum, that these Allotments were rated
proportionably after the rate of xxviij Acres and a half of the Moor (by the
perch of xv foot) to every hundred Acres of the severals. The total 32374
Acres. The total 9522 Acres, besides 4000 Acres intended for the King.

CAP. XXI^
TOuching the Marshes in this County, the first Commission, Pat. 5 E. 2. p. 2.
m. 4. in dorso.
that I have found, was in 5 E. 2. and directed to John de Wyllington, Robert
de Clyderhom, and Stephan de Salt-marsh, for the view and repair of the Banks
etc. in the parts of Hambury in Saltmersh. The like, Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 2. m. 16.
in dorso.
about two years after, was directed to Nich. de Kyngeston, Richard de
Rodeneye, and John de Dunstaple.

In 33 E. 3. Thomas de Berkelee of Coberlee, Simon Basset, William de
Chiltenham, John de Yate and John de Clifford were assigned Pat. 33 E 3. p. 1.
m. 19. in dorso.
to view and take order for the repair of all those which were bordering upon
Severne, betwixt Bristoll and Gloucester. So also in 36 E. 3. were Pat. 36 E.
3. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Thomas Moygne, John Tracy, John Clifford, and John Sloghtre. And in 38 E. 3.
the said John Tracy, Pat. 38 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. in dorso.
John Clifford, and John Sloghtre. Who accordingly sat at Thornbury, upon
Monday next after the Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula: where the Juro^s presented
Ex bund. de Brev. and Recordis, Wallias etc. tangentibus, 38 E. 3. n. 8.
unto them upon Oath; that John Fitz Nicholl, Lord of Hull, was bound to
receive the watercourse of the Rendyche, lying betwixt the Lordships of
Roehampton and Hull, and to lead the same upon his own land unto the Severne;
which he had not done; and that the Country was dampnified by such his neglect.
And the same John, being thereupon distrained to come before the said Justices
at Sobbury, on Wednesday next after the Feast of Peter and Paul, in the 39th
year of the said K. E. 3. to answer thereunto, came; and said, that he ought
not, nor ever did receive and lead the said Watercourse upon his own proper
soil unto Severne, as it was alleged; and therefore did put himself upon the
Country: And accordingly was dischadrged thereof by the Jurors.

In 44 E. 3. John Moubray, Will. Wakebrigg, John Sarjaunt, Robert Palet, and
William Church hill were appointed Pat. 44 E. 3 p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. in Saltmersh, near Bristoll.

In 2 R. 2. it was certified Plac. coram domino Rege apud Glou^. term. Mich. 2
R. 2. rot. 8. Gl^uc.
, that there was, and anciently had been a certain standing water, occasioned
by rain, in the Meadows and Fields of the Towns of Aylbrighton, Olveston,
Auste, near Cotes and Littelton, in the Winter season every year; for the
drayning whereof, there likewise was, and anciently had been a certain Trench,
wholly out of the land the Abbot of Malmesbury, extending from the waters of
the said Towns to a certain place called Holpole; and from thence to another
place called Holpole; and thence to a place called Pynkenhampspull, and thence
to another place called Cakepull; and thence to Severne, which is an arm of the
Sea. Which trench the said towns of Aylbrighton, Olveston, and Auste near Cotes
were obliged to scour. And they said, that neither the waters of Aylbrighton,
Olveston, Auste, near Cotes, and Littelton, nor any other waters coming upon,
or overflowing the Lands and Meadows of those Towns, by rain, or any other
means, before the twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the first, did use
to run to Boyston, nor from thence to Severne, no^ Littelton's pull; nor to the
trench which the said Abbot claimed only for the drayning of the waters
overflowing his Lands, unto Severne, as by the allegation of Thomas Shardelowe,
then the said King's Attorney, was supposed.

Several other Commissions there were, in this King's time, for the repair of
the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers in this Shire; viz. in 4 R. 2. to Pat. 2 R. 2.
p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Sir Thomas de Berkele and Sir John Thorpe Knights, Raphe Waleys and John
Stanshawe for those in the Towns of Albrighton, Olveston, Luttleton, and Aust,
near Cotes.

In 6 R. 2. to Pat. 6 R. 2. p. 1. m. 9. in do^so.
Sir John Beauchamp of Powyk, and Sir Will. Castelacre Knights, John Cherleton
and William Heyberer, for all in general throughout this County.

In 8 R. 2. to Pat. 8. R. 2. p. 1. m. 39. in dorso.
Sir Thomas Berkele, Sir John Berkele, and Sir Edward de Bradeston, Knights,
Robert de Cherletone, John Sergeant, Raphe Weleys, and John Stanshawe, for
those on the coast of Severne, in the Hundred of Berkele, Grumbaldesash,
Thornebury and Hembury.

In 9 R. 2. to Pat. 9 R. 2. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
Thomas Berkley of B^rkley, Robert Bealknap, John Berkley, John Tracy, John
Sergeant, and John Lucy, for those on the coast of Severne, and parts
adjoining. So likewise in 13 R. 2. to Pat. 13 R. 2. p. 1. m. 34. in dorso.
Sir John Berkele Knight, John Cassey, Raphe Waleys, and others.

In 16 R. 2. the King, directing his Precept Claus. 16 R. 2. m. 4.
to the Shireev^ of this County; wherein he recites, that whereas Sir Robert
Bealknap Knight, and John Lucy, lately constituted his Justices of Sewers, for
the Banks etc. on the coast of Severne, and the parts adjoining; did ordain and
appoint, that the breach made by the men of Aylberton, in a certain Causey
dividing the Fields of Luttelton and Aylberton, should be repaired and made
good, in as perfect a manner as it was before. And that for the drayning of the
waters out of the Towns and Fields aforesaid, a certain Ditch, which extended
it self from the South side of the said Causey, from the town of Aylberton unto
Severne, should be competently amended in such places where need required, at
the chardge of those who had estates in the Lands and Tenements adjoining; that
is to say of those who had used to make and repair them; and that this should
be done as often as need required. And moreover, that six sufficient men,
having lands in those parts, and also one Bailiff should be chosen and sworn to
view, as often as they should think fit, all the said Ditch, from the one end
thereof to the other; and to cause it to be amended and repaired from time to
time, according to the tenor of the said Ordinance and Decree.

And that a certain Sluse, anciently set in the said Ditch, at the common
chardges of all those who had benefit by the drayning of those waters, which
did descend thereby, should be competently maintained by the view of the said
six men and the Bailiff before-specified. And that certain men of those parts,
specified in the said Process, ought severally to scour and cleanse some
perches of the said Ditch; and that they should be distrained there^o, by the
said six men and the Bailiff, as often as occasion required; as by the Record
and process thereof had on that behalf, and by the said King's Letters
Patents, exemplified under his great Seal, more plainly might appear.

And forasmuch as at that time, upon the relation of diverse of the said King's
faithful Subjects, he was informed, that, through the neglect in observing the
said Ordinance and Decree, much loss had happened to diverse of his Loyal
Subjects, and others residing in those parts; and many worse, in process of
time were like to fall out, except a more speedy remedy were used therein: the
said King, for prevention thereof, commanded the said Shireeve, to view the
exemplification of that Record and process; and calling before him those six
men and the Bailiff, and fully declaring the premises unto them; to warn and
distrain them for the performance of all things, which did belong to them
therein.

In 11 H 4. Sir Gilbert Denis Knight, Robert Poynns, John Grevill, John
Giffard, John Russell, Will. Godefelawe, Gilbert Gylberd, and Will. Merbury,
were assigned Pa^. 11 H. 4. p. 1. m. 3. in do^so.
to view, and take order for the repair of all those Banks etc. betwixt
Gloucester and Bristoll, which were then broken by the violence of the tides;
and to do all things therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm,
and the Customs used in those places. As also to take so many Laborers upon
competent wages, in respect of the great necessity, as should be needful for
that work.

And in 1 H. 5. Robert Poyntz, Alexander Clevedone, Thomas Mill, John
Derhurst, Robert Stanshawe, and Nich. Alderlegh were appointed Pat. 1 H. 5. p.
1. m. 21. in do^so.
to view and repair all those Banks etc. in Salt marshe, betwixt Olston and
Hembury: and to act therein according to the Law and Custom of the Marsh.

CAP. XXII.
FROM Gloucestershire I must make a large step, the more Western parts of this
Realm affording no considerable Marshes; nor the North West nearer than
Yorkshire; but that Country is well stored with such Fenny grounds, especially
near the Rivers of Ouse, Darwent, Air, Done, Crent, and Humber; some part
whereof do lie in the East Riding, but the greatest proportion, in the West
Riding of that County: for in that flat about Hoveden, and bordering upon it,
it has been observed Lel. Itin: vol. 1. p. 58.
, that there are no less than fifty eight Villages, and that it has
heretofore been vulgarly called Lel. Itin: vol. 1. p. 58.
Waulyng fenne; though now (as I think) Dikes marsh, and Hatfield Level are
the most noted names whereby it is commonly known.

Pursuing therefore my accustomed method, in discoursing of the improvements
here likewise made by banking and drayning; I shall observe, that the first
Commission Pat. 23 E. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
for that purpose, wherewith I have met, is in 23 E. 1. and directed to H. de
Cressingham, and I. de Lithgreines; who, upon complaint made to the King, by
Walter de Langeton, then Master of the Hospital of S. Leonards at York; that
diverse persons, having lands lying near the River Ouse, betwixt the towns of
Houke and Rednes; who, in respect of those their said lands, ought to repair
and maintain certain Banks and Sewers upon the borders of that stream, for the
securing of them from inundation, as they and their Ancestors in times past had
done; did neglect so to do, whereby great loss accrued to many other
Land-holders in those parts; the said King assigned them the said Hugh and
John, to enquire the truth thereof, and to take such course for the redress of
the same, as should be consonant to the Laws and Custome^ of this Realm.

The like Commission I^. m. 15 in dorso.
had the said Hugh and John touching the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches
etc. upon the same River of Ouse, from Cawode to Faxflete, on both sides the
water. So also in 27 E. 1. had Thomas de Burnham and Gerard Salveyne, for the
same Banks etc. betwixt Cawode and Faxflete.

In 28 E. 1. upon information Pat. 28 E. ^. m. 7. in dorso.
made by the Land-holders of Brunkestet and Faxflet, that one Peter Betard and
the townsmen of Beleby, had diverted the stream of Beleby Wathe out of it is
ancient Chanel, into the Watercourse of Fulnathe: and likewise that the
Inhabitants of Estringtone and Portingtone, had turned the course of those such
waters, as passed near those towns, by several trenches, so variously, that,
upon any great rain they drowned the great^st ^art of the lands adjacent; so
that neither passengers could travel in the common Road betwixt Beleby and
Pokelington, nor the said men of Brunkeflet and Faxflet, till and sow their low
grounds, or dig turf in the Moor of Walingfen, or depasture their Cattle in the
parts thereabouts; the King therefore assigned the beforementioned John de
Lythegreyns, and Robert de Boulton to view those places, and to redress the
said nusances.

Several other Commissions for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and
Sewers in those parts, were afterward issued; viz. in 32 E. 1. to ^at. 32 E.
^. m. 20. in do^so.
Thomas de Burnham, William de Hake, and Thomas de Fisheburne, concerning
those, upon Ouse, betwixt Cawode and Brungflete. In 2 E. 2. to Pat. 2 E. 2. m.
22. in dorso cedulae.
Alexander de Cave and Geffrey de Hothum, for those upon the verge of Humber
and Ouse, betwixt Ellerker and Barneby, near Hoveden.

In 4 E. 2. to Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 1. m. 25. in dorso.
Will. de Huke, Gerard Salveyn, and John de Metham, for those betwixt Faxflete
and Cawode. And in the same year to Ibid^ m. 18. in dorso.
Will. de Vavasur, Will. de Houk, and Thomas de Fisheburne, for those in the
parts of Merskland, Inclesmore and Hovedenshire, then much broken and in decay.

In 8 E. 2. upon complaint Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m. 2.
made by the men of Merskland, inhabiting upon the River of Done; that the said
River, whereunto the Sewers of the neighboring parts did use to run, was
partly by reason of the Sea-tides, and partly by undue straightnings, so
obstructed and stopped, that most part of the lands thereabouts were overflowed.
Which complaint being exhibited to the King in Parliament, then sitting at
Westminster, he constituted Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m. 2.
John de Doncastre, Roger de Cloherne, and Robert de Amecotes, his
Commissioners, to enquire thereof, and proceed to the redress of the same.

In 9 E. 2. the said John de Doncastre, Peter d'Eyvill, and Alexander de Cave
were assigned Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 1. m. 4. in do^so.
to enquire of the defaults in repair and clensing of certain Ditches in the
parts of Spaldyngmore, within the Bishop of Duresme's liberty of Hovedene,
whereby the low grounds, there, were overflowed. And in the same year, the said
John, and Alexander, together with Hugh de Louthre, Adam de Midleton, and Adam
de Hopton, had the like assignation Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m. 29 in dorso.
for the view and repair of those Banks, upon Ouse, betwixt Rikhale and Hoveden
dyke.

In 12 E. 2. Hugh de Pykworth, John Travers, and Adam de Hopertone were
appointed Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 2. m. 1. in dorso.
to view the Banks etc. in Merskland upon the River of Done, and to make them
new in such places where they should think fit. The like appointment Pat. 13 E.
2. m. 16. in dorso.
in 13 E. 2. had John de Doncastre, Adam de Haperton, and Nich. de Sutton, for
those upon Ouse, betwixt Bardelby and Hemingbrough. So also in 14 E. 2. had
Pat. 14 E. 2. p. 2. m. 24. in dorso.
Alexander de Cave, Thomas de Houke and Hugh de Pikworth, for those betwixt
Faxflete and Cawode. And in 16 E. 2. the same Thomas de Houke, Gerard de
Ufflet, and John the Son of Richard de Whitgift, had the like for Pat. 16 E.
2. p. 1. m. 14. in do^so.
those on the verge of Ouse in Merskland, betwixt the River of Air and Trent
fall. So likewise Ibid. p. 1. m. 10. in dorso.
, the same year, had the said Thomas de Houke and Will. Basset for those upon
the said stream of Ouse, from Berlay Water-house to Ayremynne; and thence upon
the water of Air to the passage of Carletone near Snaythe. In that year also
did the King send his Precept Claus. 16 E. 2. m. 1.
to Adam de Strikeland, then Guardian of his Manor of Hathelsay (at that time
in his hand) that he should cause the banks upon the River AEre, belonging to
that Manor, to be repaired in all places needful, according to the view and
testimony of honest and lawful men of those parts.

In 17 E. 2. Will. Basset, Thomas de Egmanton, and John the Son of Richard de
Whitgift and Commission Pat. 17 E. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
to view the defects in repair of all the banks upon Ouse, in the parts of
Mersklond, betwixt the River of Air and Trentfall. And the same year, had
Alexander de Cave, Thomas Houke, Peter de Saltmersh, Robert D'amcotes, Will.
de Lincoln, and Geffrey de Edenham the like Pat. 17 E 2 p. 1. m. 18. in do^so.
Commission, for the view and repair of those betwixt Suth Cave, and Barneby,
near Hoveden, then broken in diverse places. As also for the VVater-courses and
Ditches of Beleby wyk, Fu^nath, Ragolf dyke, Lange dyke, Skelflete,
Hingbriksik, Blaktoft damme, Thornton's damme, Temple damme, Miklestek,
Hebewisgote, Trakput, Mulnedam of Broukflet, Frisdike, and Hoddeflete, all
which were diverted out of their right courses; by which diversions and
obstructions, and the want of repairing those banks, the low grounds betwixt
Thornetone, Muleburne, Cathwayt, Suth Cave, Yverthorpe, North Cave, and Barneby
near Hoveden were overflowed: And in case, that they who had thus diverted and
obstructed these VVater-courses, were not able to repair them again; then to
distrain all such to give assistance therein, as by such reducing them to their
former Channels, and deobstruction of those stops, should receive benefit and
safeguard.

The next year following had Roger de Somery, Hugh de Pikworth, and Robert de
Babthorpe the like assignation Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 1. m. 23. in do^so.
, for the view and repair of those banks, Ditches etc. on the East part of
Ouse, betwixt Turneheved and Barneby ferry: As Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 2. m. 36. in
dorso.
also for those on the West part, betwixt Cawode and Ayremyn; and betwixt
Feribrig and Ayremyn, on the South and West part.

In the same year likewise were Alexander de Cave, Thomas de Houke, Peter de
Saltmersh and John de Kilvyngtone, constituted Ibid. m. 8. in dorso.
Commissioners for those banks etc. upon the coasts of Humbre and Use, betwixt
the towns of Suth Cave and Barneby, near Hoveden, then broken and ruinous; and
also of the VVater-courses from Wartre, Brunnom, Brunneby, Hayton, Beleby,
Beveldale, Myllington, Ulvesthorp, Killingwyke, Pokelington, Arnethorpe,
Wappelington, Thorneton, Melborne, and Cathwayt, then obstructed and diverted
out of their right courses; by reason whereof, the low grounds betwixt Beleby,
Suth Cave, and Barneby, viz. Fulne, Rageldyke, Langdyke, Skelflete,
Hingbrigstike, Blacktoft dam, Thornton dam, Temple dam, Mychelsyk, Helewysgot,
Crakeput, and the Mylndam of Bromflet Frisdyke, were drowned. And to compel
all those, who had so diverted and stopped the said waters, to reduce them to
their ancient courses, and where need should be, to make new Channels for that
purpose.

The like Commission Ibid. m. 10.
had they for the banks etc. betwixt the River of Done and Bykerdyke, within
the Isle of Axeholme in Lincolnshire.

In 5 E. 3. John Travers, Peter de Midleton, Peter de Saltmersh, and Simon de
Baldreston were assigned Pat. 5. E. 3 p. 1. m. 35. in dorso.
to enquire concerning the breach of a certain Causey, called Foxholedyke, made
by certain malefactors in the parts of Merskland in this County; by which
breach, the lands of the inhabitants of those parts were drowned.

In 7 E. 3. Will. de Hathelse, John de Clif, and Hugh de Bradeford were
appointed Pat. 7 E. 3. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks etc. betwixt AErmyne and Selby. So likewise in 11
E. 3. were Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Will. Basset, Thomas de Brayton, and John de Lacy of Gateford, for those
betwixt Temple hirst, and Ayrmyne, on the North side of Air; as also upon both
sides of the River Ouse, betwixt Ayrmyne and Selby.

In 13 E. 3. the King directed his special Precept Claus. 13 E. 3. p. 2. m. 21.
to Richard de Aldeburgh and Will. Basset, whereby he made recital; that,
whereas he had by his Writ, under the Privy seal, commanded Simon de Grimesby,
then Guardian of his Manor of Brustwyk, that he should cause his demesne
Lands, Meadows, and pastures; and likewise the Lands of his Tenants within that
Manor, to be drayned, which had been drowned by the overflowing of water; and
to make a certain trench there, whereby the water might pass away, and have a
direct course, as before that time it had: And the said Simon, together with
his Freeholders and Bondmen of that Lordship, did, by virtue of that precept,
make a trench there, in a certain place, where long before there had been one.

And the said King being informed, that Margerie, the VVidow of Robert de
Botheby of Rihill, conspiring cunningly to supplant him in his right, caused
the same trench, in the said Kings absence from England, to be stopped up; and
his Tenants of that Manor, who were at the making thereof, to be impleaded,
by diverse Writs, as trespassers to the said Margerie; alleging that they had
broken the Banks of a certain Sewer at Rihill aforesaid; so that the water
thereof, by that breach, did drown her lands, that she could have no profit by
them: And that certain Writs of Nisi prius for to take Inquisition upon the
premises, were granted to the said Richard and William: by which, in case
they should be taken, or that there should be such proceedings therein, he the
said King might easily receive prejudice and disherison; especially, if thereby
his said Tenants should be convicted of those trespasses; for then it would
appear that he had no right to make that trench: Therefore the said King, being
desirous, by all ways he could, to prevent such damage and disherison;
commanded the before-specified Richard and William, that they should wholly
supersede the taking of any such Inquisitions, by virtue of his said Writ of
Nisi prius.

In 17 E. 3. Sir Thomas Ughtred, Sir Gerard de Useflet, and Sir Will. de
Kednesse Knights, John de Bekingham and John de Langeton were assigned Pat. 17
E. 3. p. 1. m. 40. in dorso.
to view the banks betwixt Turnbrigg, near Rouclif, and the ancient course of
the River of Done, in the parts of Merskland: as also those upon the Rivers of
Air, Use, and Done, thereabouts, which were then much broken by the floods of
fresh waters; and to take order for the repair of them.

In the same year upon a Petition exhibited to the King in Parliament, by the
Inhabitants of Merskland, in this County, and they of ^xholme in Lincolnshire;
showing, that whereas King Edward the second, at the suit of them the said
Inhabitants; suggesting, that the River of Done, which is the division betwixt
the said Counties, where the course of the water had wont to be, as well for the
passage of ships from the town of Doncastre, unto the River of Trent, as for
the drayning of the adjacent lands, was obstructed by the Seatides; and
thereupon gave Commission to John de Donecaster, and others, to clear the same,
and reduce it to it is ancient course. Which Commissioners did accordingly
cause a trench of xvi foot, and one grain of Barley in breadth, to be thereupon
dug at the chardge of the men of those parts, from a certain place, called
Crulleflet hill, unto Denmyn; and did thereby reduce that stream into it is
ancient course: And that since the said trench so dug, there were bridges,
floud-gates, and diverse other obstructions, made anew in the said stream, so
that it had not sufficient breadth, but that the passage of ships was hindered,
and the adjacent grounds overflowed: he therefore constituted Ibid.
Roger de Newmarsh, Thomas de Levelannor, John de Ludington, and John de
Redness his Commissioners, to remove those obstructions.

In the same year, upon Pat. 17 E. 3. p. 1. m. 12. in dorso.
information by the Inhabitants of Rykhale, Skipwith, Eskrik, Styvelyngflet,
Duffeld, and Bardelby, that the banks of a certain Sewer, which passes from
the River of Ouse unto Rikhale, were so low and ruinous at Rikhale; that, by
the flowing of the Ouse, entering that Sewer, and going over the banks thereof,
diverse lands and Meadows of the said Inhabitants of those places; as also a
certain Road-way which goes from Hoveden to York, and another which comes
from Selby to York, through want of repair of those banks, and raising them
higher, were many times overflowed, so that the before-specified Inhabitants,
for many years past, had lost the benefit of their said lands: the King
therefore assigned Pat. 17 E. 3. p. 1. m. 12. in dorso.
Will. Basset, Sir Will. de Redness Knight, Robert de Haldanby, and John de
Bekyngham, his Commissioners, to enquire thereof, and to redress the same.

By virtue of which Commission, they the said Robert and John, sat at Rikhale
upon Friday, being the Feast of the decollation of S. John Baptist, in the year
abovesaid; before whom Henry de Moreby, and his Fellow Jurors, being impanelled
and sworn, did present upon their Oaths; that there was a certain Sewer at
Ryhkale, called Rykhaleflete, in the land of the Bishop of Duresme, and the
Prebendary of the Prebend of Rykhale, by which the waters that descended from
the Fields of Eskrik, Skipwith and Rikhall, fell into the River of Ouse, and
had done so time out of mind: and that the banks of the said Sewer, and those
lying near thereto, upon the said River, were so low; and the same Sewer by the
frequent ebbing and flowing of the Ouse, so worn away and enlarged, in regard
that the course of that River from Rikhale toward the Sea, was then more
straightned than formerly, by banks upon the verge thereof newly made for the
safeguard of the Country, in diverse places; which causing it in Floud-times to
rise higher than usually, did by it is entrance of that Sewer, over those banks,
drown much land, meadow, wood, and pasture, belonging to the Inhabitants of
Rikhale, Skipwith, Eskrik, and Thurgramby; so that they often lost their
benefit of those lands, through the want of repair and raising the banks of the
same Sewer; viz. of the Bishop of Dure^me his Lands, about Lxiiij Acres; of the
Lands belonging to the Prebendary of Rikhale, and his Tenants, about an hundred
Acres; of the land of John de Manesergh about xxx Acres; of the lands belonging
to the Abbey of S. Marie in York, lying in Escrik Park, about Lx Acres; of the
lands pertaining to Sir Raphe de Lascels, Avice la Constable, Nicholas Damory,
the Prioresse of Thikheve and her Tenants, about Cxx Acres; of the lands of
Edmund de Averenges, and John de Skipwith, about Cxx Acres.

And they also said, that the Roadway, which leads from Hoveden to York, as
also that High way from Selby to York, were, by reason of that overflowing of
the water, entering by the said Sewer, so often drowned, that no man could pass
them.

And that one Will. le Mareschall, by reason of the said overflowing, was
drowned in that Road betwivt Seleby and York, the year before; and so likewise
was one Walter Redhed, at another time, in a place called Welebrig, overflowed
in such sort by the said water.

And being asked through whose neglect it was, that those banks were not
repaired, and who ought to repair them; they answered, that the Prebendary of
the Prebend of Rikhale, had, in times past, a certain Mill, which stood in the
said Sewer, in a place called Rikhaldrun, for his own private commodity, and a
pool raised to a certain height; upon which pool was a Causey for the passage
of Carts and Waines, and under that pool a Sluse, six foot in breadth, for
evacuation of the water descending from the before-specified fields; by which
Causey and Sluse, the tides of Ouse, coming up the same Sewer, and flowing over
the banks thereof, entering the said pool, were hindered, so that they could go
no farther, except casually in the time of an exceeding great flood of the said
River.

And they said moreover, that the beforementioned Prebendary (owners of that
Mill, time out of mind) had a Mill there for their proper benefit, and kept the
Mill-pool to the height above expressed, until that one Bartholmew Florentyne,
Prebendary of that Prebend, in the reign of King Edward the first, deeming,
that it would be more for his profit to pull down the said Mill, than maintain
it, demolished both the Mill and the pool; so that the tides of Ouse, entering
the before-specified Sewer, and going over the Banks, passing through the said
pool so demolished, did in every great flood of that water, thenceforth till
that time, drown the before-specified lands, and the lands of many others.

And they also said, that there were never any other Banks nor Sluses for
defense of that water, nor was any one obliged to repair any banks there,
except they whose lands were so overflowed as aforesaid: but they said, that it
would be more profitable and beneficial for the Inhabitants of those places, to
have banks raised to a fitting height, and Sluses of a certain breadth, for to
keep back the tides of the said River, at the entrance thereof; that is to say
upon the banks of Ouse, at the mouth of the said Sewer, where the said Bishop
of Duresme is Lord of part of the soil, and the said Prebendary Lord of the
other part. And they said moreover, that they believed, that the said water of
Ouse, did enter by that Sewer, and pass over those banks, by reason they were
too low, to the damage of the Inhabitants of those parts, through the default
and neglect of the men of those Towns, which had their grounds so overflowed
and not of any other: And that all they who had lands overflowed by the floods
of that water, ought to repair those banks, as also to raise them higher.

In 23 E. 3. Sir Thomas Ughtred, Sir Gerard O^sflet Knights, Robert de
Midelham, Robert de Haldenby, Thomas Proctour of Redness, and Will. Gatorest,
were P^^. 23 E. 31 ^. 3. m. 13. in dorso.
assigned to view and repair the banks upon the River of Ouse, Done, and Air,
in the parts of Merskland. The next year following, Will. de Percy, Brian de
Thornehull, Raphe de Lassel, Will. de Ayrmyn, Will. de N^tton, Will. de
Hinchden, Illard de Usflet, and Thomas de Egmanton had Pat. 24 E 3. p. 3. m. ^^
dorso.
the like assignation for those upon the Rivers of Humbre, Use, Derwent, Air,
Skelflet, Langdyk, Fulne and Done, in the parts of Spaldingmore, Hovedenshire,
Draxsoken and Merskland^ and in the Wapentakes of Barston and Herthill, betwixt
Use and Derwent, So also had Ibid.
Thomas de Ughtred, Robert de Pikering, Robert de Middelham, Will. de
Gateresse, and Thomas Proctour of Redness, for those upon the streams of Use,
Air, and Done, in the parts of Merskland, and Osgodcrosse.

The like Commission Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
in 26 E. 3. had William Basset, Sir Miles Stapleton, Knight, Illard de Usflet
and John de Lasingcroft, for those banks etc. on the North side of Air,
betwixt Ayrmynne and Ferybrigg. So also the same year, had Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 3.
m. 11. in dorso.
Thomas de Metham, Alan de Shutlingden Parson of the Church of Hemyngburgh,
John Moubray, and Peter de Richmund, for those upon Ouse, within the Liberties
of the Bishop of Duresme.

Other Commissions to the like purpose were shortly after directed to others;
viz. in 30 E. 3. to Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
John de Moubray, Illard de Usflet, John de Walton, and John de Feriby for the
Banks etc. upon Humbre, betwixt Faxflet and Paulesfl^t. In 31 E. 3. to Pat. 31
E. 3. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
Rob^rt de Herle, Will. de Skipwith, John de Moubray, John Knyvet, Nich. Gower,
and Thomas Levelance, for those in the VVapentakes of Strafford and Osgodcrosse.

In 33 E. 3. to Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
John Moubray, Sir Marmaduke Constable, Sir Will. de Aldeburgh, Sir Raphe de
Lascels Knights, and others, for those upon Use, Derwent, Air, Skelflete,
Langdyke, Fulne, and Done, in the parts of Spaldyngmore, Hovedenshire,
Draxsoken, and Merskland; as also in the VVapentakes of Barston and Herthill;
and betwixt Use and Derwent.

In 36 E. 3. to Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
the same John de Moubray, Thomas de Ingelby, William de Fyncheden, and others,
for all the last mentioned places.

In the same year, there were diverse Presentiments Plac. coram Rege term. Much.
36 E. 3. Rot. 33. Ebor.
made against those who ought to repair and maintain the depth of a Goul in
Houk, upon the River of Ouse, within the parts of Merskland, through whose
neglect the Banks were broken, to the nuisance of the King's High way, betwixt
Houk and Swynflet: So also for Ib. rot. 35.
neglecting to repair the said Banks upon Ouse, to the damage of the Road-way
betwixt Usflete and Ayrmyn.

Upon the pleadings Ib. rot. 44.
whereunto, the Town of Roucliff could not deny, but that it ought to repair
the VVatercourse at Langholme got; and therefore were fined for their default.

In 39 E. 3. Thomas de Ingelby, Miles de Stapelton, Illard de Usflete, and
others, were constituted Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 1. m. 32. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. on the North side of
Air, betwixt Ayremin and Ferybrigg. The like Commission, Ib. m. 30. i^ dorso.
the same year, had Will. de Skipwith, Rich. de Ravensere, Provost of
Beverley, Godfrey de Folejaumbe, and others, for those upon the Banks of Use,
Air, and Done, in the parts of Merskland and Osgodcrosse; and to proceed
therein according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm: So also had Pat. 39
E. 3. p: 2. m. 12. in ^orso.
Hugh de Hastyngs, Will. de Fyncheden, Will. de Reygate, and others, for
those on the North side of Air, betwixt Selby and Castelford brigge.

In 40 E. 3. there was a Presentment Plac. apud Wes^m. coram Rege, term. Hill.
40 E. 3. rot. 26. Ebor.
made in the VVapentake of Anesty against the Prior of S. John's of Jerusalem
for obstructing the watercourse called Langedyke, in the 37th year of the said
Kings reign: who alleging, that there was error therein, it came to be pleaded
in the Kings Bench; where the Jurors found, that the said VVatercourse was
stopped in the pasture of Temple Wetherby, so that it over^lowed the Pasture
and land of Thorparth, and other Towns adjoining: and that the said
VVatercourse ought to be repaired and cleansed by the same Prior, as in right of
his Manor of Temple Wetherby; which being not done, he was amerced in xx s.

In the same year, Thomas de Ingelby, Will. de Fyncheden, Miles de Stapelton,
Thomas de Metham, and others, were appointed Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in
dorso.
to view and repair the banks etc. on the North side of Air, betwixt Ayrmyn
and Ferybrig: and to perform all things therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm. So also Ibid.
were Will. de Fyncheden, Godefrey de Folejambe, Thomas de Bradwell, and
others, for those betwixt Eyrmyn and Whitley, on the South side of the said
River. And likewise Ibid.
Thomas de Roos of Hamlake, Thomas de Ingelby, Will. d^ Aton, and others, for
those upon Humbre, Use, Derwent, Air, Skelflete, Land dyke, Fulne and Done, in
the parts of Spaldyngmore, Hovedenshire, Draxsoken, and Merskland, and the
VVapentakes of Barston and Herthill; and betwixt Use and Derwent. And the next
year following, John Moubray, Thomas de Ingelby, Henry de Barton, and others,
had the like assignation for Pat. 41 E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
the Banks etc. betwixt the Rivers of Air, Ouse, and W^erfe, and to act
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

Several other Commissions also were directed to others, for the view and
repair of the same Banks, and all such as were in decay, in those parts; viz.
in the same year to Ibid.
Richard de Ravensere Provost of Beverly, Will. de Fyncheden, and others, for
those upon the Rivers of Use, Air, and Done, in the parts of Merskland and
Osgodcrosse. And to Ibid.
Thomas de Ingelby, William de Fynchedon, Will. de Galby, Parson of Epworth,
and others, for those in the parts of Balne and Mersland.

In 43 E. 3. to Pat. 43 E 3. p. 1. m. 33. in do^so.
Sir Thomas de Metham, Sir Roger Lascells Knights, Roger de Fulthorpe, and
others, for those upon the the coasts of Humbre, Ouse, Derwent, Fulne,
Langedyke, and Skelflete, within the Liberty of Hoveden and VVapentake of
Herthull; and betwixt the Rivers of Ouse and Derwent. In 44 E. 3. to Pat. 44 E.
3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Richard de Ravens^re Archdeacon of Lincoln, Will. de Fyncheden, Gerard de
Usflet, and others, for those upon the Rivers of Air and Done, in the parts of
Merskland and Osgodcrosse. And in the same year to Ibid.
John de Moubray, Thomas de Ingelby, Henry de B^rton, and others, for those
betwixt the said Rivers of Air, Ouse and Wherfe.

In 49 E. 3. to Pat. 49 E. 3 p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
Thomas de Metham, Wll. de Mirfeld, Henry de Barton, and others, for those
betwixt the Rivers of Wherf, Eire, and Ouse.

In 50 E. 3. to Pat. 50 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
Roger de Fulthorpe, Will. the Son of Will. Skipwith, John de Brakenholme, and
others, for those betwixt Ouse and Derwent.

In 51 E. 3. to Pat. 51 E. 3. p. 1. m. 41. in dorso.
Richard de Ravensere Clerk, Roger de Fulthorpe, John Cunstable, and others,
for those upon Use, Air, and Done, in the parts of Merskland and Osgodcrosse.
So also to Ibid.
Roger de Fulthorpe, John de Ask, Will. the son of Will. Skipwith, and
others, for those betwixt Ouse, Derwent, Spaldyngmore, and Hovedenshire.

To the said King Edward 3. succeeded his Grandson Richard the second; who in
the second year of his reign, directing his Precept Claus. 2. R. 2. m. 33.
to Robert de Haldanby, wherein he recited, that his said Grandfather,
considering the waste and spoil whereunto the Country of M^rskland in this
County, was subject to, by the inundations of Humbre, Ouse, and Trent; and that
the chardge, whereat the Inhabitants ther^of had been, for the defense thereof,
and still ought to be, was so great through their losses, by many floods, as
that they were not able to withstand the approaching perils without help from
others: and therefore, being most willing to provide for their succor, did on
the twenty fourth day of June, in the 43th year of his reign, grant unto them,
all Fines, Issues, Forfeitures, and amerciaments then adjudged by virtue of his
Commission to the said Robert and his associates, or which might for the future
be adjudged, before them the said Commissioners, then his Justices of Sewers in
those parts, in their several Sessions, to be received and levied by the hands
of the Deputies for the Commonalty of that Country, toward the support of
their said chardge and expense: By which Precept he commanded the said Robert,
that he should deliver the Extracts of the said Fines, issues, forfeitures,
and amerciaments, adjudged before him and his said associates, from the date of
that Commission, unto the death of the said King; to the end that they might
cause them to be levied by those their Deputies, and have them according to the
tenor of the same Letters Patents.

In 4 R. 2. Richard de Ravenseere Clerk, John de Botheby Clerk, Roger de
Fulthorpe, John Constable, Gerard de Usflet, Thomas de Redness, John de Ask,
Robert de Haldanby, John de Sadyngton, William de Swynflet, and Thomas de
Egmanton^ were assigned Pa^. 4 R. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in do^so.
to view and repair those ba^ks etc. upon the Rivers of Use, Air, and Done, in
the parts of Merskland and Osgodcrosse. So also in 6 R. 2. were Pat. 6 R. 2. p.
1. m. 9. in dorso.
Roger Fulthorpe, Thomas de Metham, John de Ask, Thomas de Saltmershe and John
de Kirkeby, for those in the parts of Howedenshire.

In the same year the Inhabitants of Merskland before-specified, and of the
Isle of Axholme in Lincolnshire, by their Petition Ib. m. 37. in dorso.
to the said King, wherein they showed, that whereas King Edward the second did
at their humble suit constitute John de Doncastre, and others, his Justices to
clear the River of Done (which is the division betwixt those Counties) as well
for the passage of ships from Doncastre to the River of Trent, as for drayning
of the Lands adjacent: which said Justices, did accordingly cause the said
Chanel to be dug from a place called Crulfrethill unto Demmyn, in breadth xvi
foot and one grain of Barley, at the chardge of the said Inhabitants of those
parts; and thereby reduced the same water into it is ancient course: and that
since the said clensing thereof, there were certain bridges, and other
obstructions made therein, so that the passage of ships was again hindered: The
said King therefore issued out his Commmission Ibid.
to Roger de Fulthorpe, Robert de Morton, Robert de Haldanby, Will. de
Swynflete, and Robert Ga^ke, to enquire thereof, and to make such redress
therein, as should be expedient in that behalf.

In 7 R. 2. the same Roger de Fulthorpe, Stephan del Fall, John de Ask, Thomas
de Saltmersh, and John de Kirkeby were constituted Pa^. 7 R. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in
dorso.
Commissioners to view and repair the Banks etc. in the parts of Howedeneshire,
and Wapentake of Herthill, and betwixt the Rivers of Ouse and Dexwent. The like
Commission Pat. 12 R. 2. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
in 12 R. 2. had Sir Philip Darcy, and Sir Will. Fitz Knights, John Woderove of
Dransford, and Thomas Maunsell for those betwixt Ayrmyn and Ferybrigg. So also
in 15 R. 2. had Pat. 17 R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in dorso.
Sir John le Scrope, Sir Gerard de Ousflet, Sir Thomas de Redenesse, John
Woderove, and others, for those upon Ouse, Air, and Done in the parts of
Merskland and Osgodcrosse in this County; and to do all things therein
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. And in 17 R. 2. Sir Philip
Darcy Knight, John Wod^ove, William Gascoigne, Thomas Maunsell, and John
Nevill, had Pat. 17 R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in dorso.
the like, for those banks etc. betwixt Eyrmin and Feribrigg, on the South part
of Air, and Brotherton and Neweland on the North side; with direction and
power to proceed therein, according to the Law and Custom of England,
and the Custom of Romeney Marsh, till that time used: As also to impressed so
many Diggers and other Laborers, as they should think fit to employ in that
work, allowing them competent wages, in regard of the urgent necessity for the
expediting thereof.

In 21 R. 2. upon a Plac. coram Rege term. Mich. 21 R. 2. rot. 25 Ebor.
suit in the Kings Bench for the clensing of a certain Sewer called Poldike,
betwixt Hamercon and Non Monketon, the Abbot of Fountains was dischardged from
the making and repairing a bridge, called Wethington brigge, lying betwixt
Wethington and Thorpe Underwode.

In 1 H. 4. upon a Commission directed to Laurence de Allerthorpe, then one of
the Barons of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Metham, Sir Will. Chetwyn, Sir Gerard
Ursflet Knights, Will. Gascoigne, Robert Thyrwhyt, Robert de Waterton, Hugh de
Ardern, Will. Hundegate and William Lodyngton, for the view and repair of the
Banks, Ditches etc. betwixt the Town of Pokelyngtone and the Rivers of Humbre
and Derwent; as also within the VVapentake of Herthill and liberty Hovedene;
whereby they were appointed to act according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm; the said Justices sat at Hovedene upon Thursday in Easter week, in the
year abovesaid; before whom the Jurors presented upon their Oaths, that there
was a certain VVatercourse, called Poklyngton b^k, which had used to run
directly.....................................

[ H^re the Record is obliterated by moisture and dust, in at least xl lines.]

...... And the said Robert........ ought to repair all the VVatercourse of
Foulnay aforesaid, in form aforesaid, unto the North part of Morgramenge, for
his Tenements in Holme aforesaid. And that from thence, Sir Gerard Salveyne
Knight, was obliged to repair the said VVater-course in form aforesaid, unto
the water of Peter de la Hay, called Botelere water: and from the beginning of
the said Boteler water, the said Peter was to repair the same in form
aforesaid, unto the water called Mallorys water, for his lands in Spaldyngton:
And from the beginning of the said Malloryswater, Sir John Mauleverere Knight,
was bound to repair that whole VVatercourse of Foulney aforesaid, in form
aforesaid, unto the water of the said Robert Constable, for his lands also in
Spaldyngton. And from the beginning of the water of the said Robert Constable,
the said Robert ought to repair all the said Chanel of Foulney, unto the water
of the Prior of Ormesby, for his Lands in Holme aforesaid. And from the head of
that water of the said Prior, he the said Prior to repair all the course
thereof, in form aforesaid, to W^llumbrygge, and Spaldyngholme: And from
thence, Joan the Widow of John de Ask, for the lands which she held for term
of her life, by the grant of Sir Hugh le Despenser Knight, in Birsay; the Prior
of Ormesby for Spaldingholme; Sir Robert Constable Knight, for his Te^ements in
Holme aforesaid; Sir Thomas Bosvyle Knight, and Anthony Bosvyle, for his lands
in Birsay; and Peter de la Hay for his lands in Spaldington, to repair the same
VVatercourse of Foulney, toward the West, from the mid-stream thereof for xij
foot in breadth, unto the traverse of Hebeldyke

And that the Prior of Wartre, ought to repair the said VVater-course of
Foulney, on the East part, from Wellumbrygge aforesaid, toward his own Land,
unto Hebeldyke aforesaid, for xij foot in breadth. And from thence Sir Thomas
Bosvyle Knight, and Anthony Bosvyle, and Joan the VVidow of John de Ask, for
their Tenements in Birsay, to repair the same, for the breadth of xxiiij foot,
to a certain water belonging to the said Joan. And she the said Joan, to repair
hers, to a place called Foch^eneere, for her lands in Birsay. And from thence
she the said Joan [, and they the said Sir Thomas and Anthony, for their lands
in Birsay, to repair the same, unto the water of Peter de la Hay, there. And
the said Peter to repair his water, for his lands in Spaldyngton, in the land
of the said Sir Thomas and Anthony Bosvyle. And the said Sir Thomas and
Anthony, to repair theirs, unto the water of Will. de Waldeby, in Portington:
And the said William to repair the same, from the head of his water, for one
Rode, toward Metham enge.

And they said moreover, that from thence, Sir Thomas Metham Knight, was bound
to repair all the current of the before-specified water, to Stokholme, in
Birsay; toward a Meadow called the Hal enge, otherwise called Metham enge, in
respect of that Meadow; and thence to the West part of Constable Enge.

And that Sir Thomas Metham Knight, for his Tenements in Birsay, Joan the
VVidow of the said John de Ask, for her Tenements there; and Sir Gerard
Salveyn Knight, for his Tenements in...... ^me, were to repair the same in form
aforesaid.

And that Sir Robert Constable Knight, was to repair the same Chanel, toward
his said Meadow, called Constable enge.

And they said, that the before-specified Beatrice, the Prior of Wartre, the
Prior of Ell^rton, William Wright, Robert Constable, Isabell, Will. de Thoxe,
Richard Simolfe, Will. Peresson, John Hastynges, the Abbot of Seleby, John de
Pothowe, John Wiltshire, and Blanch; Peter de la Hay, Robert de Bevere, Gerard
Salvaine, John Maleverer; the Prior of Ormes^y; Joan the VVidow of John de
Ask, Thomas and Anthony Bosvyle, Will. de VValdeby, and Thomas de Metham, who
ought to repair the said VVater-course of Foulnaye, ought of right to have
several fishing in those places, where they or any of them did cleanse or
maintain the same,

VVhereupon the Shireeve was required to summon the said Beatrice, the Prior of
Wartre, and all the rest, abovementioned, to answer, etc.

Who came accordingly; by their Attornyes; and it being demanded of them, what
they had to say, why they ought not to repair the said Chanel of Foulney, in
such sort as they had been presented: they answered, and severally said; that
they could not deny, but that the same Chanel was obstructed, and not scoured
in those places, in such manner and form as was presented; and that they ought
to cleanse and repair the same: therefore they were severally amer^'d etc. And
the said Shireeve had command to distrain them, to the end that he might be
secured, that the same watercourse of Foulney should be well repaired, as
often as need did require.

And they presented moreover, that Sir Robert Constable Knight, th^n Lord of
Holme in Spaldyngmore, ought to repair the whole watercourse, called Langedyke
from Constable Enge, unto Whalsaye Ditch; and that the same Chanel from
Langedyke to Skelflete, and from thence to Humbre, ought to be xij foot broad,
and six foot deep. And that the Prior of the Hospital of S. John's of Jerusalem,
in England, ought to repair the said watercourse of Langedyke, below Whalsaye,
to Hotham Kerre, in respect of his Lordship of Whalsaye; and that the said
watercourse was then stopped, and not scoured. VVhereupon the Shireeve was
commanded to summon the before-specified Robert Constable to answer etc. who
appearing accordingly, could not deny; but that he ought to repair and maintain
the said watercourse; and therefore he was amerc'd.

And they likewise presented, that there was a certain watercourse, called
Alderwent, descending from a place called the Both hill in Queldryk, unto the
land belonging to the Chapel of our Lady of Storthwayt; and thence to a place
called the Halle bank in Storthwayt; and thence to Middilhilbrygge in Est
Cottyngwithe; and thence by the space of one Rode of land in the same Town; and
thence to a Close called Thom Parrok, in the same Town of Est Cottyngwithe;
which Watercourse was so obstructed, that the adjacent lands, for default of
clensing thereof, were d^owned: And that Robert Abbot of Fountains, ought and
had used to repair the said VVatercourse from that place called Both hill, to
the Halle bank: And that Thomas Abbot of S. Mary's in York, ought and did use
to repair the same from thence, unto Middilhylbrigge: And that Will. Woderowe
of Queldryk ought to repair the same, from thence for the space of one Rode:
And that the Prioresse of Thikhed, ought to repair it, from that Rode, unto the
Close, called Thom Parrok: And that the Chanel of the said watercourse, being
cleansed, ought to be xiiij foot in breadth, and six foot in depth: The Shireeve
therefore had command to summon the parties abovesaid, to answer etc. who
appearing accordingly, could not gainsay, but that they ought to repair the
same: Wherefore they were amerc'd, and the Shireeve required to distrain them.

And they also presented, that there was a certain watercourse, called
Newlandyke, in Telburne, descending from Landryk mose on the East part unto the
Channels, called Dubbeldykes, in Melburne; which said Channels do run to a place,
called Skategraves in Seton; and thence by the current of two Sewers, called
the Fossedykes (running betwixt Seton on the East part, and Lathum and
Folkerthorpe on the West) unto the River of Foulnay: and that the said Channels
were obstructed for want of scouring; as also that the lands there sowed with
corn, together with the Meadows and Pastures adjacent, were overflowed, for
want of repairing the same: And that the Town of Melburne ought to scour and
cleanse the same, from Landrykmose to Skategreves; and from thence, the great
Ditch, unto a place, called Doderesse, on the North side: And the Town of
Seton, Alice Hay, Lady of Lathum, the Prior of Ellerton, the Town of Lathum,
John de Pothowe, and the Town of Folkerthorpe, to repair all those other
Channels beforementioned; that is to say each of them for their lands, and
against their lands unto the said water of Foulnay: And that the said Sewers
ought to be xij foot in breadth, and six foot in depth from Folkethorpe bridge,
unto the said water of Fo^lnaye. VVhereupon the Shireeve had command to summon
them, to answer etc. who appeared etc. and were amerc'd etc. as abovesaid.

And they likewise presented, that the VVatercourse, called Blaktoft damme,
otherwise Haunsardamme, which reaches from Foulnay to the River of Ouse, was
then also obstructed, and ought to be repaired by Richard Haunsard, and the
Town of Blaktoft, for their Lands in Blaktoft: and that the same ought to be
xvi foot in breadth, and viij foot in depth. VVhereupon the Shireeve had command
etc. as abovesaid.

And they farther presented, that the said Richard Haunsard ought to repair the
same Chanel from Hunsardamme to Foulnay, unto the South end of Gyl^erdyke; and
therefore that he was amerc'd. And that the Village of Blaktoft ought to repair
the same from Haunsardamme, as abovesaid: therefore the Shireeve had command to
distrain etc.

And the said Jurors also presented, that the watercourse of Langedyke, from
Whalsey to Skelflete, ought to be xij foot in breadth, and six foot in depth;
and that the same, as also the watercourse of Ragolfdyke ought to be repaired
by the towns of Spaldyngton, Gripthorpe, Wylughtoft, Fowerthorpe, He^l^thorpe,
Melburne, Bubwithe, Lathum, Seton, Everyngham, Herswell, Holme, Birsay, Beleby,
Estryngton, Portyngton, Kaynyll, Birland, Ous^thorpe, Hythe, Sandholme,
Blaktoft, Yneflete, Cotnesse, Saltmersk, Skeleton, Sandhall, Hothom, Southclyff,
Northclyff, and Scalby; and that the said watercourses were obstructed:
wherefore the Shireeve was commanded to summon the Inhabitants of the said
Towns; who appearing could not gainsay the chardge; therefore they were
amerc'd, and the Shireeve commanded to distrain them for the complete
performance of all those repairs.

And they likewise presented, that the watercourse, called Thornton damme,
which extended it self from Langdyke to the River of Ouse, was obstructed, so
that the adjacent grounds were thereby drowned: and that the same ought to be
repaired by the Abbot of Thorntone, for Thorntone house: and also that
Thorntone damme and...... damme ought to be xvi foot in breadth, and viij foot
in depth: The Shireeve therefore had command to summon the said Abbot etc.

And they also presented, that the said Abbot was obliged to repair, cleanse and
maintain the watercourse from Langedyke unto the Town of Skalby, and thence to
the River of Ouse; as it was before alleged: wherefore he was amerc'd; and
command given to the Shireeve to distrain him by all his Lands.

And they moreover presented, that the watercourse called Temple damme, which
lately belonged to the Master of the Temple, in England, was obstructed, so
that the lands adjacent were thereby drowned; which watercourse ought to be
repaired by Sir Stephan le Scrope of Masham Knight (Lord of the Manor of
Faxflete) from Mikilsyke, with the Ditches in Helwysgote and Crakeputte, to the
water of Humbre: wherefore the Shireeve had command to summon the said sir
Stephan; who appearing by Thomas de Waldeby his Attorney, said, that he could
not deny but that he ought to repair the said watercourse called Temple damme,
from Carbrygge, unto the River of Humbre: but said, that he ought not to repair
the same from Mikilsyke, with it is Ditches in Hewysgote, and Crakepitte, to the
said bridge, called the Carbrygge, any otherwise than a Commoner in Wallyng
fen; and desired that it might be enquired of by the Country etc. Whereunto
the Jurors said, that the said Stephan was not bound to repair the same
watercourse from Mikilsyke, with the Ditches in Helwysgote and Crakepi^te, unto
Carbrigge, otherwise than a Commoner in the Marsh of Wallyngfen, in such sort
as he the said Stephan had in his pleading alleged: and therefore he was
dischardged thereof: but because the said watercourse from Carbrygge unto the
Riv^r of Humbre, was not repaired at the time when the before-specified
presentment was taken, he was amerc'd, and the Shireeve had command to distrain
him.

And the said Jurors presented, that a certain watercourse called Parkdyke,
descending from Haunsardamme, Eastwards, to Thornton damme; and thence, betwixt
Scalby and Scalby grene, unto Temple damme, ought to be repaired by the Town of
Blaktoft from Haunsardamme to Thornton damme, and thence to the Temple damme by
the Abbot of Thorntone and the Town of Scalby: And that the said watercourse
was obstructed toward Skalby by Henry de Kelme and others, who threw earth
into it by the command of Sir Stephan le Scrope of Masham Knight. Wherefore
the Shireeve was required to summon the said Sir Stephan and Henry, to answer
etc. Who accordingly appeared; and said, that there then was and had been time
out of mind a certain Road-way, from the Town and Manor of Faxflete, unto the
same place where, by the above-specified presentment, the said obstruction was
supposed to be, and thence unto Hovedene and diverse other places. And they
said, that the same Henry and others, by the appointment of the said Sir
Stephan, did cast earth and sand there, for the amendment of that way; without
that, that there was any ancient watercourse, descending, as abovesaid, into
Temple damme, as it was presented; and desired that the Country might enquire
thereof. And the said Jurors also said, that there was not any common or ancient
watercourse descending from Thornton damme aforesaid, unto Temple damme, as had
been alleged; wherefore the said Sir Stephan and Henry were dischardged.

And the same Jurors likewise presented, that a certain watercourse called New
Derwent, from the end of Hovedene Town; viz. from the way from Hale to
Dykysmin, was obstructed and ought to be repaired by the Towns of Hovedene,
Knedelyngtone, Askylby, Kylpyn, Neusome, Brend, Spaldyngtone, Kayvill, and
Thorpe. VVhereupon the Shireeve had command to summon the Inhabitants of the
said Towns etc. whereof they of Hovedene, Knedelyngtone, Kylpyn, Kayvill, and
Thorpe, appearing; severally said, that they could not deny, but that they
ought to repair the same watercourse in manner and form aforesaid: therefore
they were amerc'd. And the said Towns of Askylby, Neusome, Brend and
Spaldyngtone, severally answered, that they ought not to repair that
watercourse, as it had been presented; and did therefore request that the
Country might enquire thereof. VVhereupo^ the Jurors, being called, said, that
the before-specified Towns of Askylby, Newsome, Brend, and Spaldingtone, ought
not to repair the same; and therefore they were then dischardged.

And they moreover presented; that a certain watercourse, called Ruddeflete,
descending from Wallyngfen to Ruddeflete; and so by the Milne damme of
Brounflete to Humbre, was obstructed; and that William, then Master of the
Hospital of S. Leonard in York, ought to repair the same. And that there was a
certain watercourse, called Hodflete, descending from Wallyngfen to Humbre,
which ought to be repaired by the said Master: whereupon the Shireeve had
command to summon the said Master etc. who appearing, could not gainsay, but
that he ought to repair the same: therefore he was amerc'd etc. and the said
Shireeve was commanded to distrain him.

And they also presented, that there was a certain watercourse, called
Frisdyke, which was totally obstructed, so that the adjacent grounds were
thereby drowned; and that it ought to be repaired by Sir Stephan le Scrope of
Masham Knight, Lord of the Manor of Faxflete.......................... And as
touching the plaae called Whitenge to the River of Humbre; they said, that the
before-specified Master of the Hospital of S. Leonards in York, ought to
repair the same: whereupon the Shireeve had command to summon him the said Sir
Stephan: who accordingly, appearing by his Attorney, answered, that he could
not gainsay, but that he ought to repair the said watercourse from that place,
called Whitenge, unto Oxmer dyke, as it had been presented: therefore he was
amerc'd, and the Shireeve commanded to distrain him etc. And the said Master
also, by his Attorney, answered, that he could not deny, but that he once did,
together with the said Stephan, repair the same watercourse, from that place
called Whitenge unto the River of Humbre; that is to say, the said Master the
one half thereof, and the said Sir Stephan the other half: therefore he was
amerc'd etc.

And they lastly presented, that a certain watercourse, called Daneldyke,
through which the water of Neusome Park did pass to Alderwent, near Lostsome,
was stopped, and ought to be repaired by the Town of Newsome; and by the
Landholders in Neusome, bordering upon the said watercourse: whereupon the
Shireeve had command to summon the Inhabitants and Land-holders abovesaid: who
appearing, accordingly, said; that they could not deny, but that they, togeth^r
with the Towns of Lostsome, Askylby, and Barnby near Hovedene, ought to repair
that watercourse: therefore they were amerc'd.

In the same first year of King H. 4. Sir John le Scrope Knight, Sir Gerard de
Ouseflete Knight, Thomas Egmantone, Robert de Haldenby, Richard de Nortone,
Will. de Lodyngtone, and Nich. Rosselyn were assigned Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 5. m. 13.
in do^so.
to view and repair the Banks and Ditches etc. upon Ouse, Air, and Done, in
the parts of Merskland and Osgodcrosse in this County: and to proceed there
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

So also in 3 H. 4. were Pat. 3 H. 4. p. 2. m. 22. in dorso.
Edmund Duke of York, Sir Gerard Sothill Knight, Robert Tirwhyte, John Rome
Clerk, John Gaytesford, Thomas Brunham, Will. Ludyngton, Edm. Fitz William,
Thomas Sheffield, and Thomas Egmanton, for the banks etc. in the Isle of
Axholme in Lincolnshire; and betwixt the water of Bykersdyke, on each side, in
the County of Notingham; and the River of Done, on each side, as well in this
County as in Lincolnshire, and the confines of them, from the Town of Doncastre
to the River of Trent: and to do all things therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm. And in 8 H. 4. Henry le Scrope of Ma^ham, William,
Gascoigne, Alexander Metham, Thomas Bromeflete, Richard Tirwhyt, Alexander
Lounde, Hugh Arderne, and Will. Ro^^elyn had the like Pat. 8 H. 4. p. 2. m. 20.
in dorso.
assignation for those banks, upon the coasts of Humbre and Ouse, from the
River of Derwent to Hesyll; and to proceed therein likewise, according to the
Law and Custom of this Realm.

By virtue of which Commission, the said Henry le Scrope, with his associat^s,
met Ex bund. de Brev. and. Reco^dis, Wallias etc. tangentibus, tem^ H. 4. n. 14
Ebo^.
at Hovedene upon Saturday next after the Feast of S. Laurence, in the year
abovesaid; before whom the Jurors of diverse Wapentakes of this County, on the
coasts of Humbre and Ouse, from the River of Derwent to Hesill, did present;
that there was and had been time out of mind, a certain common Sewer, called
Aldederwent; which did reach in length, directly, from the town of Hovedene,
betwixt the marsh and town of Knedellyngtone, Askilby, and Barne^y in
Hovedenshire on the South part; and the land of the Tenants in Hoveden,
Bernhill, the Towns of Newsome and Lostsome in Spaldyngmore, on the North part,
to the River of Derwent toward the West; and so by the said River of Derwent
unto the Ouse; which ought to be xii foot in breadth, and six in depth. Which
said Sewer the towns of Neusome, Lostsome, Birnd, Knedyllyngtone, Askilby and
Barneby, of right ought to cleanse and maintain by reason of their Lands and
Tenements lying in those ^owns: And that the said Sewer was not then repaired,
through the default of the Tenants of N^wsome, Lostsome, Birnd, Knedyllyngtone,
Askylby, and Barn^by aforesaid.

And they also said, that the before-specified Sewer, betwixt Barneby mersh, on
the South part of the same, and the land of Thomas Haukesworth in Lostsome, on
the North part, a^ the head of the said Sewer toward the West (near the said
River of Derwent) had been newly obstructed by the said towns of Newsome,
Lostsome, Birnd, Knedyllyngtone, Askylby, and Barneby; insomuch as the lands on
each side the same Sewer, were overflowed, to the great damage of all the
Country adjacent. VVhereupon the Shireeve had command to summon the said Towns
of Newsome, etc. who appearing accordingly, answered, that they could not deny,
but that they ought to repair and cleanse the said Sewer; and that the same was
not stopped by the making of certain Clows therein: therefore they were amerc'd.

And the Inhabitants of Lostsome, for their said Town of Lostsome, also said,
that they could not deny, but that they^ together with the towns of Newsome,
Birnd, Knedillyngton, Askelby and Barneby, ought to cleanse and repair the same
Sewer: but they said that the current thereof was not stopped by the setting
down of those Clows, as it had been supposed; and of this they requested that
inquiry might be made by the Country. Which being accordingly done, the Jurors
found, that the said town of Lostsome, together with the towns of Newsome,
Birnd, Knedillyngtone, Askelby, and Barneby, had by making of those Clows
obstructed the before-specified Sewer: therefore the said town of Lostsome was
amerc'd; and it was decreed by the said Justices, that those Clows should be
taken away, at the chardge of the Inhabitants of that place, and of the rest
beforementioned. And the Shireeve was required to see the same accomplish^,
and the Sewer repaired.

In 11 H. 4. Thomas Knight of Arkesey was attached Plac. coram Rege term. Much.
11 H. 4 Rot. 69. Ebor.
by John Fastolf, who alleged that he the said Thomas ought to repair certain
Banks upon the River of Done, in respect of his lands in Bentley: To which the
said Thomas pleaded, that he ought not.

In the same year, it appears Ib. rot. 21.
that the Abbot of Thornton was distrained for the repair of Thornton damme,
and Hamister damme, which do r^ach from Langdyke to the River of Ouse. But the
Abbot pretending errors in the judgment formerly given, required Ib. rot. 22.
and 23.
that it should be revoked: and so he did likewise for Blaktoft damme, alias
Hansardamme, which extends it self from Fulney to the stream of Ouse; which
Chanel Sir Richard Hansard Knight, and the town of Blaktoft ought to repair.

In 13 H. 4. Gerard Usflete, Will. Lodyngton, Richard Gascoigne, Thomas
Egmantone, Guy Rouclyff, Will. Rosselyn, Rob. Haldenby and John Garton were
Pat. 13 H. 4. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
constituted Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. upon the
Rivers of Ouse, Done, and Air, in the parts of Merskland; and to proceed
therein according to the Law and Custom of the Marsh.

The like Commission Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 3. m. 44. in dorso.
in 1 H. 5. had Richard Norton, Will. Lodyngton, Peter de la Hay, John
Dronsfeld, Robert Barneby, Will. Shirewode, Thomas Saynpole, and Nicholas
Braytone, for those banks etc. from little Smitone to the River of Done; and to
do all things therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. So also
in 6 H. 5. had Pat. 6 H. 5. p. 1. m. 21. in dorso.
William Lodyngton, Richard Gascoigne, Guy Rouclyf, Guy Fairfax, Gerard
Lodyngton, and others, for the banks upon the said Rivers of Air, Ouse, and
Done, betwixt Turnbrigg, near Rouclyf, and the ancient course of the said River
Done, in the parts of Merskland; and to proceed therein according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm.

In 9 H. 5. Robert Tirwhit, John Preston, John Ask, Thomas Clarell, Peter de
la Hay, Richard Gascoigne, Guy Rouclif, Guy Fayrfax, John Pigot, Robert
Rudstane, Thomas Bank, and Thomas Aungere were appointed Pat. 9 H. 5. p. 2. m.
4. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. upon the Rivers of Air, Ouse, and Done,
betwixt Ouerfmouth, and the ancient Chanel of Done, in the parts of Merskland;
and to proceed therein as abovesaid. The like appointment, Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 1.
m. 30. in dorso.
in 1 H. 6. had John Preston, James Strangwayes, Richard Gascoigne, Guy
Rouclyff, Guy Fairfax, John Portyngton, Thomas Aunger, William Stansfeld and
Will. Outhorpe, for those banks upon the coasts of Air, Ouse, Done, and Went,
betwixt Snayth and the ancient course of the River of Done, in the parts of
Mersland: and to proceed therein as abovesaid. So also the year following Pat.
2 H 6. p. 2. m. 16. in dorso.
had Robert Tirwhit, John Prestone, Sir Henry Bromflet Knight, John Ask, Peter
de la Hay, John Ellerker, Guy Rouclyf, and John Portyngton, for those etc.
upon Ouse, Derwent, Humbre, and Hull; within the VVapentake betwixt Ouse and
Derwent, the liberty of Hovedenshire, and VVapentake of Herthill: and to do all
things therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 6 H. 6. James Strangways, Thomas Fulthorpe, Guy Rouclyff, Guy Fayrfax,
Will. Ashowe, John Ask, and Thomas Beaulieu, were constituted Pat. 6 H. 6. p.
1. m. 6. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. upon the Rivers of
Air, Ouse, and Went, betwixt Snaythe, and the old Chanel of Done in Merskland:
and to act therein as abovesaid. And in the same year Sir Robert Bapthorpe, and
Sir Henry Bromflete Knights, James Strangwayes, John Ellerker, John de Ask,
Guy Rouclyff, and John Portington had the like Commission Pat. 6 H. 6. p. 2. m.
15. in dorso.
for those banks etc. within the liberty of Hovedene, and VVapentake of
Herthill; as also betwixt the Rivers of Use and Derwent: with power to make
such Statutes and Ordinances for the safeguard and preservation of the coasts
within those limits, as should be necessary and fit, according to the Laws and
Customs of Romeney Marsh: and to do all other things therein according to the
Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeney Marsh aforesaid: As
also to impressed so many Diggers, and other Laborers, upon competent wages, in
respect of the great and urgent necessity to expedite the work, as they should
think fit to employ therein.

So also had Pat. 10 H. 6. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
John Ellerker, Tho. de Metham, Thomas Clarell, Robert Willughby, Guy Roclyff,
Richard Wyntworth, John Maleverer, and John Portyngton, for those betwixt.
Turnbryg, and the Rivers of Done and Ouse: And to make Statutes and Ordinances;
and to proceed etc. as aforesaid.

And likewise Ibid.
Sir Will. Babyngton, Sir Henry Bromflete, and Sir Robert Bapthorpe, Knights,
Thomas Metham Esquire, Guy Roclyff, John Portyngton and Will. Moston, for those
within the Wapentake of Herthill, and the Wapentake betwixt Ouse and Derwent,
and liberty of Howedon: and to act therein as aforesaid.

So also the year following had Pat 11 H. 6. p. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
Sir Will. Rither Knight, James Strangways, Thomas Clarell Esquires, Guy
Fairfax, John Thwaytes, Robert Maleverer and Thomas Lyndeley, for the Banks
etc. upon the Rivers of Air, Ouse, and Yore; and to proceed as abovesaid. And
the like in 13 H. 6. had Pat. 13 H. 6. part unica. m. 27 in do^so.
John Ellerker, Thomas Metham, John Constable, John Portyngton, Will. Mustone,
and Robert Cawode, for those in Mershlonde betwixt the Rivers of Owese, Done,
Air, and Went: and to proceed therein as abovementioned.

Many other Commissions there were to the like purpose; and to make Laws and
Ordinances, according to the Laws and Customs of Romeney Marsh etc. viz. in 23
H. 6. to Pat. 23 H. 6. p. 2. m. 25. in dorso.
John Portyngton senior, John Nevill, Guy Roclyff, John Portyngton junior, Rob.
Roclyff, Geffrey Blakey, and Peter Perc, for those Banks etc. in Mershlond,
betwixt the Rivers of Owese, Done, Air, and Went.

In 27 H. 6. to Pat. 27 H. 6. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
John Portyngtone, Rob. Bapthorpe Esquires, Guy Roclyff, Alexander Lound, Will.
Mostone and Thomas Manners, for those in the Wapentakes of Hertelle, and betwixt
Ouse and Derwent, and the Liberty of Holdenscire.

In 30 H. 6. to Pat. 30 H. 6. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
John Portyngton, Sir Thomas Metham, Sir James Pykering Knights, Raphe
Babthorpe, Guy Roclyff, Henry Thwaytes, John Vavasour, Will. Moston, and Thomas
Manners, for the same Banks, etc. In 33 H. 6. to Pat. 33 H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in
dorso.
John Nevill Esquire, Nich. Girlyntone, John Vavasoure, Geffrey Blakey, and
Henry Bury for the same. So likewise in 37 H. 6. to Pat. 37 H. 6. p. 1. m. 19.
in dorso.
the said John Nevill, John Thwaytes, Rob. Drax, Raphe Reresby, and Richard
Knight. And in 1 E. 4. to Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
Guy Fairfax, John Vavasour, Rob. Shefelde, Edw. Saltmarshe, Geffrey Blakey,
John Haldynby, John Barker, and John Yeland.

In 5 E. 4. to Pat. 5 E 4. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
John Earl of Northumberland, Sir Robert Constable Knight, John Pilkyngton, one
of the Esquires for the Kings body; John Vavasour, Alexander Lounde, Rob.
Sheffeld junior, Edw. Saltmersh, Rob. Portyngton senior, and Leonard Knight,
for those Banks etc. in the Wapentakes of Herthyll, and betwixt Ouse and
Derwent and liberty of Holdenshire. In 6. E. 4. Pat. 6 E. 4. p. 1. m. 15. in
dorso.
to the same Earl, Guy Fairfax, John Vavasoure, Rob. Sheffeld, Edw. Saltmershe,
Rob. Portyngton senior, Geffrey Blakey, John Haldenby, John Berker and John
Yeland, for those in the parts of Mersland, betwixt the Rivers of Ouse, Done,
Air, and Went.

In 49 H. 6. to Pat. 49 H. 6. part unica m. 9. in dorso.
John Marquess of Montagu, Sir Robert Constable Knight, Guy Fairfax, John
Vavasour, Rob. Sheffelde, Edw. Saltmershe, Rob. Portyngtone senior, Rob. Lucas,
and Leonard Knight, for those in the Wapentake of H^rthill, and betwixt Ouse
and Derwent, and liberty of Hoveden^shire.

In 13 E. 4. to Pat. 13 E. 4. p. 2. m. 20. in dorso.
Sir Thomas Borough Knight, Thomas Fitz William, John Haldenby, Richard
Portyngtone, John Egmantone, Rob. Haldenby, Rob. Sheffeld, Edward Saltmershe,
John Vavasour, senior, and Thomas Belwode, for those within the bounds of
Marshland, betwixt the Rivers of Ouse, Went, and Mardyke; as also within the
Isle of Arholme in Lincolnshire. In 19 E. 4. to Richard Duke of Gloucester,
Pat. 19 E. 4. p. unica m. 22. in dorso.
Henry Earl of Northumberland, Sir Robert Constable Knight, Sir Tho. Metham
Knight, John Vavasour senior, John Vavasour junior, Rob. Sheffeld, Edw.
Saltmersh, John Ask Esquire, Rob. Portyngtone and Leonard Knight, for those in
the Wapentake of Herthill; as also betwixt Ouse and Derwent, and liberty of
Houdenshire. And in 22 E. 4. to Pat. 22 E. 4. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
the same Commissioners for all the places abovesaid.

CAP. XXIII.
NOr were the improvements of this kind less ancient in that part of the
County lying nearer to the Sea: for in 13 E. 1. the King being informed, that
both his own Lands, and the Lands of diverse of his good subjects, were often
drowned, for the want of repairing certain Banks in Holdernesse, on which the
violence of the River of Humbre had made sundry breaches, assigned Pat. 13 E.
3. m. 28.
Thomas de Normanvill, to take a view of them, and to see them speedily
amended. The like Pat. 23 E. 1. m. 7. in dorso.
Commis^^on, in 23 E. 1. had Thomas de Weston, then Guardian of all the said
Kings lands in that part of this Shire. So likewise in 1 E. 2. had Pat 1 E. 2.
p. 1. m. 14.
Miles de Stapeltone and Raphe Lelle: and in Pat. 2 E. 2. p. 1. m. 19.
2 E. 2. Will. de Vaus, and the said Raphe Lelle.

In 4 E. 2. John de Lisle, Thomas de Fisheburne, John de Sutton, and Adam de
Hoptune were constituted Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 1. m. 18. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks etc. betwixt Hull and
Paphel.

In 5 E. 2. the King being informed that the Sewer, betwixt the Port of Hedone
and his Manor of Brustwyk, wanted clensing and repair; and that the chardge
thereof, in regard of his Demesnes there, belonged to himself, directed his
special Precept Cl^us. 5. E. 2. m. 9.
to Edmund de Mauley, then his Guardian of that Lordship, commanding him to
take order for to scour and repair the same.

In 6 E. 2. Will. de Houke, Alexander de Cave, and Robert de Sandale, gover^our
of the Town of Kingston upon Hull, were assigned Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 2. m. 4. in
dorso.
to view and repair the Banks upon the coasts of the Rivers of Humbre and Hull.
So also, the same year, were Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 7. in dorso.
Robert Tiliol, and Gilbert de Stapelton, for those upon the coast of Humbre,
betwixt Esingtone and Hedone. And the next year following, the same King
directed his Precept Claus. 7 E. 2. ^. 16.
to the said Robert de Sandale, then likewise governor of Hull, and Guardian
of the said Kings Manor of Mitone, that he should take xl l. of the Ferm of
the same town of Hull, and issue of the Manor of Mitone aforesaid, and employ
the said money, in the repair of the Banks and Ditches upon those Rivers of
Humbre and Hull, according to the discretion and view of Richard de Gretford,
and other honest men of that town. And the same year, had Walt. de Faucumberge
the elder, Herbert de S. Quintin, and John de Barton of Oswaldkirke appointment
Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 2. in dorso m. 23.
to view and repair the Banks, that were then in decay, either upon the
Seacoast, or coast of Humbre, within the precinct of Holdernesse, in this
County.

In 9 E. 2. John de L'isle, John de Donecaster, and Robert de Sandale, were
directed Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 1. m. 27. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks etc. for safeguard of the Manor of Mytone, near
Kingston upon Hull, which had forcibly andriotously been broken in the night
time, by Gerard de Useflet, Rich. de Anlouby, Raphe de Nevill and others; and
to enquire touching that misdemeanour. The like Commission Pat. 10 E. 2. in
dorso m. 12.
in 10 E. 2. was directed to Robert de Hastang, Alexander de Cave and Robert de
Hedon, to enquire of the breach of those Banks, by Loretta the VVidow of John
de Usflete, John her son, Gerard de Usflete, and others.

In 12 E. 2. Robert Constable of Burton, Gilbert de Rishetone, and Rob. de
Hetone were assigned Pat. 1^ E. 2^ p. 2. m. 4. in do^so.
to view and repair the Banks and Ditches upon the coast of the Sea, and water
of Humbre in these parts; and in the Wapentake of Dykering in Yorkshire-

The like appointment Pat. 1 E. ^. p. 2. m. 12. in do^so.
in 1 E. 3. had Robert de Constable, Robert de Hedon, Rob. de Burton, and John
de Thwaits. So also in 10 E. 3. had Pat. 10 E. 3 p. 2. m. 22. in dorso.
John Sutton of Holdernesse, Simon de Grimesby, Thomas de Burton, and Amand de
Forthingham.

In Pat. 12 E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. in do^so.
12 E. 3. Margerie the VVidow of Robert de Botheby, and the Burgesses of Hedon
in Holdernesse, did by diverse Petitions exhibited to the King and his Council
in Parliament, represent unto them; that, whereas by a certain Sewer, called
the Sturch, which goes from the Town of Bond brustwyk, through the midst of
Hedon, unto the River of Humbre, and betwixt the lands of the said Kings
Te^ants of his Manor of Brustwyk, residing at Bond brustwyk, on the one part,
and the Lands of the said Margerie, at Ryhill, on the other; all the said
lands, on both sides, had been drayned time out of mind, and not by any other
Sewer: And that by pretense of a certain Mandate from the said King, under his
privy Seal, obtained at the suit of some of his said Tenants, threatening to
oppress the said Margerie, and alleging that the course thereof had been newly
diverted by her, out of it is ancient Chanel: which Mandate being directed unto
Simon de Grimesby, the said Kings Steward there, requiring him to reduce the
same into it is old course, diverse trenches were made upon the banks thereof, in
the grounds of her the said Margerie, at Ryhill, through which it extended, in
several places, where no current of water had ever been till that time, by a
number of armed people in those parts; insomuch as the Lands and Meadows of her
the said Margerie, which lay near to that Sewer, were totally overflowed by the
tides of Humbre; and as well she the said Margerie, in danger to lose the whole
profit of her said Lands and Meadows, as those Burgesses, who held the said
Town of Hedon of the King, by a certain yearly Ferm, and for their better
paying thereof, used to receive much Commodity by Boats and other Vessels, that
had wont to be carried to that Town by the water of the said Sewer; which by
the making of those trenches was then dried up. The King therefore, for remedy
thereof, gave Commission Ibid.
to John de Stonore, John de Molyns, Robert Parnyng and Hugh de Berwyk, to view
the same, and to rectify what was amiss therein.

In 14 E. 3. Raphe de Bulmere, John de Sutton, John de Meux, Thomas de Burton,
and Thomas de Cayton, were assigned Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. upon the coast of Humbre, in the Towns of
Frismersh, Tharlesthorpe, Kayngham, Ryel, Burton, Pidse, and Halsham.

The like assignation in 16 E. 3. had Pat. 16 E. 3. p. 1. m. 29. in do^so.
Robert de Hilton, Will. L'engleys, John le Constable of Halsham, and Walter de
Waldegrave, for those in the Towns of Patrington, Frisemersk, Tharlesthorpe,
Otrygham, Weynestede, Frothingham, Newsum, Rymmeswell, Outhorne, Wythornes,
Redmayr, Holaym, Risum, Holmton, Thorpe juxta Wellewyk, and Penysthorpe. So
also had Pat. 16 E. 3. p. 2. m. 34. in dorso.
Herbert de S. Quintin, Richard de Ros, John de Sourdenhale, and Robert de
Wythornwyk, for those from Lamwath bridge Northwards, within this liberty of
Holdernesse.

The chardge in supporting of which Banks and Sewers, was such, that the
Inhabitants of Frismerk finding it very burdensome, did in 18 E. 3. by
Petition Pat. 18 E^ 3. p. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
to the King and his Counsel in Parliament exhibited, complained; that their
lands were often overflowed by the tides of Humbre; and that they had been at a
constant and very great chardge for the safeguard of them, so that they could
not pay such taxes and impositions as they had done, being less able to
maintain their said Banks for preservation of their Town, than formerly: and
therefore humbly besought him; that, taking the premises into consideration,
he would command, that the Fifteen then granted to him in Parliament by the
Commonalty of this Realm, for two years ensuing; as also all other Assessments
for the future, might be rat^d according to the value of the goods and Catalls,
which they then had in that Town. VVhereupon the King, compassionating their
condition, assigned Pat. 18 E^ 3. p. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
Michael de Wathe, John de Constable of Hasham, Robert de Sprotle Clerk, and
John Sturmy his Commissioners to enquire thereof.

Who did accordingly; and certified, Claus. 18 E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
that the said lands were very often overflowed by the before-specified River
of Humbre, as also that the third part thereof were totally destroyed and
consumed by the tides; and that the said Inhabitants had often been at
inestimable costs for the safeguard of that their town, and must still be: the
King therefore deeming it not consonant to right^ that they should be unduly
chardged in any Tenths, Fifteens, or other Assessments, for their lands so
wasted and destroyed; directed his Precept Claus. 18 E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
to the Assessors and Collectors of the Tenth and Fifteen, granted to him by
the said Commonalty of this Realm in that Parliament beforespecified; requiring
them, that having farther information touching the value of the movables which
they then had in that town, they should assesse them accordingly; and supersede
the collection thereof according to the tax of the old Fifteen.

By virtue of which Precept the said Inhabitants of Frismerk, being assessed
Claus. 20 E. 3. p. 2. m. 9.
at xxvi s. viij d. per annum, for each of the said two years; the King sent
his Mandate Claus. 20 E. 3. p. 2. m. 9.
to the Barons of his Exchequer; requiring them, that in that Fifteen, nor the
like for the future to be granted, they should not be rated at any greater sum.

The like Claus. 21 E. 3. p. 2. m. 14. and Claus. 22 E. 3.
Mandate was also directed to the Collectors of VVools, for the Est-Rithing of
this County, for a proportionable abatement to the Inhabitants of the said Town
of Frismerk, upon the same considerations.

In 26 E. 3. Thomas Metham, William Playce, and Henry Greystoke were
constituted Pat. 26. E. 3. p. 1. m. 20.
Commissioners for to set up certain metes and bound-marks in the Kings Marshes
and Fishings, within the parts of Holdernesse, in the presence, and with the
advice of honest and trusty persons of the Country; so that the said King and
others might have full knowledge of their severals in those Marshes and
Fishings. In the same year John Sutton of Holdernesse, Thomas de Seton, Will.
de Skipwith, and John de Wilton were appointed Ibid. m. 20. in dorso.
to view the Banks etc. upon the coast of Humbre, betwixt the Towns of Hesele
and Ravensere; as also upon the coast of Hull, betwixt Beverley and Kingston
upon Hull. So also were Ibid.
Sir Robert de Hilton Knight, Illard de Usflete, John de Bilton, Peter de
Grymesby, and Will. de Hoton, for those within the Precincts of Holdernesse and
Ravensere, unto Wistede in this County.

In 30 E. 3. the King being informed Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. in do^so.
, that the tides in the Rivers of Humbre and Hull did then flow higher by four
foot,
than they had wont to do; by reason whereof the common Road-way leading from
the Town of Anlaby to Kingston upon Hull, as also the lands and Pastures lying
betwixt both those places, and the Town of Hesell, were overflowed and
consumed: And being also advertised, that it would be necessary, that the
ancient Ditch which had extended from the said Town of Anlaby to Anlaby ker,
should be new cleansed and enlarged for the space of twelve foot in breadth: and
that from thence a new Ditch of xxiiij foot in breadth should be made; extending
to the Pasture of Miton (near unto the said Town of Kingston upon Hull) and so
through the midst of that Pasture, unto the same town of Kingston; by which
Ditches the said waters at every tide might pass to and fro: And that the said
way ought to be raised much higher; the said King by his Letters Pat. 30 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 6. in do^so.
Pa^ents, bearing date the tenth of May, in the year abovesaid, assigned Thomas
Ughtred, Gilbert Chasteleyn, Will. de Skipwith, Thomas de Ingelby, John de
Bentele, and John de Wilton, to cause the premises to be effected.

How long the tides, upon this coast, kept their course so much higher than
they had formerly done, I am not able to say; but it is like that they did so
for no short time after; there being scarce a year in the succeeding part of
this Kings reign, that one or more Commissions were not issued out for repair
of the Banks in some place or other upon this great River. For in 31 E. 3.
Robert de Hilton, John de Faucoberge and John de Wilton were assigned Pat. 31 E
3. p. 2. m. 18. in do^so.
to take care of those at Kaynghamflete, then torn and broken by the violence
of the Waves. The like Commissions were directed as follows, viz. in 33 E.
3. to Pa^. 33 E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. in do^so.
John de Botheby, John de Faucomberge, Will. Fililod, and others, for all the
Banks etc. upon the coast of Humbre in these parts of Holdernesse: So also to
Ibid.
John de Monceaux, John de Boutheby, John Sturmy and Peter de Grymesby, for the
same Banks etc. and those in the VVapentake of Dykering.

In 34 E. 3- to Pat. 34 E. 3 p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Sir Thomas de Meaux and Sir John Monceaux Knights, John de Botheby Clerk, and
others, for those from Hull briggs to Ravensere. And likewise to Pat. 34 E. 3.
p. 2. m. 3. in dorso^
Nich. Damory, Will. de Skipwith, and Will. Rys for those throughout both the
VVapentakes of Holdernesse and Dykering.

In 36 E. 3. to Pat^ 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Will. de Skipwith, Thomas Tirel, Sir John de Meaux Knight, and others, for
those from Hullbrigge to Ravensere.

In 38 E. 3. to Pat. 38 E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. in do^so.
Thomas Tyrell, Will. Estfeld, Thomas VVythornwyk, and Will. de Hoton. In 39
E. 3. to Pa. 39 E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. in dorso.
William de Skipwith, Richard de Ravensere, and others, for those betwixt a
place called the Stelle of Sudcote and the town of Kingston upon Hull; through
the breaches whereof, the lands and meadows adjacent were much overflowed. In
40 E. 3. to Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
John de Bentele, Will. de Estfeld, John de Wandesford the elder, Thomas de
Wythornwyk, and Will. de Hoton, for those throughout the whole Est Rything of
this County.

In 41 E. 3. to Pat. 41 E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
Thomas Tyrell, Robert Twyer, Will. de Estfeld, John de Wilton, and others, for
all those throughout the whole liberty of Holdernesse. The like in 42 E. 3. to
Pat. 42 E. 3. p. 2. m. 15. in dorso,
Thomas de Ingelby, Will. de Fyncheden, Roger de Kirketon and others. So also
in 43 E. 3. to Pat. 43 E. 3. p. 1. m. 34. in dorso.
Will. de Fyncheden, Simon de Heslarton, John de Estbury, Roger de Fulthorp,
and Will. de Estfeld.

In 47 E. 3. the Abbot of Meaux having been presented Plac. coram Rege term.
Much. 47 E. 3. rot. 16. Ebor.
for not clensing and repairing the Ditch^s and Sewers in these parts; viz.
Lambwath, Munkedike, Holdike, and others; pleaded Plac. coram Rege term. Much.
47 E. 3. rot. 16. Ebor.
, that diverse towns and persons, whom he there names, ought to contribute,
with him, thereto, and that he alone was not bound to undergo that chardge: but
the Kings Attorney replied, that he alone ought to do it: therefore a Jury was
summoned.

In the same year Sir Simon de Heselardton Knight, Roger de Fulthorp, Thomas de
Beverlee, and Walter de Ruddestone were appointed Pat. 47 E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. in
dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. in the Towns of Lokyngton, Watton,
Scorburgh, Kilingwyk, and Besewyk; which, by the descent of the fresh waters
from the Woldes into the Riv^r of Hull, were broken. And in 49 E. 3. Roger de
Fulthorp, Sir Thomas Tyrell and Sir Thomas Sutton Knights, with others, had the
like appointment Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
for those betwixt Cammeryngton Well, near Bonne Brustewyke, unto Hedon, and
thence to Pauleflete, upon Humbre directly on each side.

In 51 E. 3. Peter Hildyard commenced a suit Plac. coram Rege term. Pasc. 51 E.
3. rot. 49 Ebor.
against the Abbot of Meaux, for not clensing of a certain Ditch, called
Munkedyke, at Arnold and Ristone, by reason whereof his Meadows and Pastures
were drowned. Whereunto the Abbot answered Plac. coram Rege term. Pasc. 51 E.
3. rot. 49 Ebor.
, that he had sufficiently scoured the same; but that the said Peter and his
Tenants, for their better passage with Carriages, did fill up the said Ditch
with Timber, Hay, Straw and Dung, so that the water was thereby obstructed in
it is passage: a Jury therefore were summoned etc.

In 2 R. 3. Will: Skipwith, Roger de Fulthorpe, John Constable of Halsham,
Robert de Hilton, John de S. Quintin, Robert de Plesyngton, and Will. de
Holme, were constituted Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks etc. throughout the whole
precinct of Holdernesse.

In 8 R. 2. the same Will. de Skipwith, with Will. de Burgh, John de Lokton,
Walter Frost and Will. de Holme, had the like assignation Pat. 8 R. ^^ p. 2. m.
35. in dorso.
for those betwixt Kingston upon Hu^le, and the Towns of Hesil and Anlaby. So
also in 10 R. 2. had Pat. 10 R. 2. p. 2. m. 2. in dorso.
Sir John de S. Quintin Knight, John de Lokton, Will. de Holme, Robert Sturemy,
Hugh de Arderne, and William Hundegate, for those upon the River of Hull and
parts adjacent, from the towns of Killingwyk, Scoreburgh, Watton, Besewyk,
Lokyngton and Rotsee, to the Towns of Ache, Eske, Erughome, and the Manor of
Berghe.

In the same year, the King having received information Pat. 10 R. 2. p. 2. m.
3.
, that there was a certain Ditch at Rosse and Burton-Pydese, newly made,
whereby diverse Brooks were hindered of their ancient course, and the rain
descending thereinto, overflowed the Queens lands and meadows at Burton
aforesaid, and in other places; he assigned Ibid.
Sir John Conestable and Sir John de S. Quintin Knights, John Frankish, Rob.
Sturmy and John Redenesse to enquire thereof etc.

In 11 R. 2. Sir Peter de Bukton, and John de Thornholme, together with the
said Sir John de S. Quintin, and others, were appointed Pat. 11 R. 2. p. 2. m.
13. i^ dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. from the said towns of Kyllyngwike,
Scorburgh, Watton, Besewyke, Lokyngton, and Rotsee, to Eske, Erughome and the
said Manor of Bergh. In 13 R. 2. Sir John Constable, Sir John Kentwode, and
Sir Robert Plessynton Knights, Thomas Claymond, and John Frankysh, were Pat. 13
R. 2. p. 1. m. 34. in d^rso.
assigned to view and repair all the banks etc. in these parts of Holdernesse.
The like assignation Pat. 17 R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in do^so.
in 17 R. 2. had Sir John Constable of Halsham Knight, William Gascoigne, John
VVodrof, William Holme, Will. Hundegate, and Hugh Arderne. So also in 18 R. 2.
had Pat. 18 R. 2. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
Sir Robert de Hilton, Sir John Constable of Halsham, and Sir Robert Twyer
Knights, John Markham, Will. de Holme, Robert Tirwhit, and John de Rednes;
with direction to proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm.

And (...). 19 R. 2. (...) 5. in (...)
in 19 R. 2. Sir Robert Nevill, Sir John de Routhe Knights, Peter de Nuthill,
James de Hotone, Rob. Tirwhit, Will. de Nafreton, Hugh de Ardern, John de
Redness, and Will. Skyerne for those at Tyktone.

In 20 R. 2. Sir Stephan le Scrope of Masham, Sir Robert Nevill, Sir John de
Routh, Robert. de Garton Clerk, Peter de Nuthill, James de Hoton, Rob. Tirwhyt,
Will. de Nafredon, Hugh de Ardern, and John de Redenesse, were constituted
(...). 20 R. 2. (...) m. 12. in (...).
Commissioners for the view and repair of all those within this liberty of
Holdernesse; with appointment to act therein according to the Law and Custom
of this Realm,
and the Custom of Romeney marsh. The like Commission (...). 1 H. 4. ^. 5. ^.
13. in (...).
in 1 H. 4. had Sir Robert Hilton, and Sir Gerard Usflete Knights, Will.
Gascoigne, Rob. Tirwhyt, Rich. Beverley and John Redness; and to do all things
therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm. So also had (...). 1
H. 4. ^. ^. m. 1. in (...)
Laurence de Allerthorp Clerk, Will. Gascoigne, Rob. Tirwhit, Will. Newesome,
Will. Hundgate, Richard de Beverley, and Will. VVandesforde, for those upon
the River of Hull and parts adjacent, from the towns of Etton, Lokyngtone,
Scorburghe, Ache, and Berghe; to Beswyke, Wattone, Hotone, Crauntewyke, and
Skerene.

Upon a pleading in the Kings Bench 2 H. 4. it was adjudged Plac. co^^m Rege
(...) Pasch. 2 ^. 4. ro^. 17 Ebor.
, that the Chantry Priest of Preston ought to repair and cleanse a Ditch, called
Skyrthdyke from Levergote unto Hedon, and from Harphoc to Northoc: And that the
Towns of Brustwyke and Skeklings ought to do the like, from Brustwyke,
Hallebridge, to Middle gar; and the Town of Ryell, from Cambertonwell, to Stoke
holney land: the Shireeve therefore had command to distrain them.

In 3 H. 4. there was an Inquisition taken, Es^. Ad quod (...) 3 H. 4. ^ 14.
E^or.
by virtue of a Writ of Ad quod Dampnum, touching a Sewer in those parts; upon
which the Jurors presented; that it would be no damage to the King, or any
other, if a new Ditch, by the name of a Sewer were made in the Meadows and
Pastures of Anlaby, xij foot in breadth, and v foot in depth, measured according
to the Kings Ell; and in length from a certain Well, called Iulians Well,
situate in the said meadows and Pastures of Anlaby, to the Waldkerr of
Swanland; and so descending from the said Waldkerr, according to the length,
depth and breadth aforesaid, unto Miton Kerdyke; and thence, by Miton Kerdike,
on the North side the pasture of Miton kerr, to a certain Ditch then newly
made, near to the Road-way, which leads from the said Town of Kyngeston,
toward Beverley, in length, descending to the Ditch, called the Town dyke,
under the VValls of Kingston upon Hull; and thence, by a sufficient Chanel to
the Gate of that Town: And that a substantial stop should be there made, to
keep back the salt water, at the end of a certain Ditch, lying betwixt the
pasture of Swanland, called the Wald-kerr, and the pasture called Miton kerr;
as also other stops to be afterward made, whersoever the Mayor, Bailiffs and
Commonalty of the said Town should think necessary, for the preservation of the
fresh water, and keeping back any salt water from thence, for ever: And that
all such stops, so made, or to be made, to be made and repaired by the said
Mayor, Bailiffs, and Commonality, at their own proper chardges, without any
cavil, molestation or impediment for ever.

By which said Sewer so to be made anew, and thenceforth called Julian dyke,
all the current of fresh water, both from the said spring called Julian well,
as of all other currents of Wells in Dernyngham Enges in Anlaby, together with
the current of a certain Ditch betwixt Dernyngham Enges aforesaid, and the
North kerr of Anlaby; as also the curr^n^s of two springs in Anlaby and
Hautempris; one in the Ditch sometime of Peter de Anlaby, in Anlaby, descending
thence unto the said Ditch called Julian dyke; and of another spring in the
field of Hautempris, in the North west Enges (descending thence by diverse
Channels unto the said Ditch called Julian dyke) to have their course in the
said Ditch, called Julian dyke as abovesaid, without any diversion or
impediments of the said currents to be made for ever, contray to the form and
tenor of the premises, for the support, maintenance and relief of the Town of
Kingston upon Hull beforespecified.

In 7 H. 4. Sir Peter de Bucton Knight, Will. Gascoigne, Sir Alexander Metham
Knight, Robert Tirwhit, John Radenesse, Will. Skerne, Richard Tirwhit, and
William Waldby were assigned Pat. 7 H. 4. p. 2. m. 15. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. in these parts of Holdernesse; and to do all
things therein, according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom
of the Est Rything of this Country before that time used.

Upon a su^e in the Kings bench 13 H. 4. the Jurors presented Plac. coram Rege
term. H^ll. 13. H. 4. rot. 20 Ebor.
, upon Oath, that there was a certain Watercourse, which came from the
Springhead in the fields of Anlaby, by Warlinghamdyke, unto the Town of
Kingston upon Hull, so stopped at the gate of that Town, toward Anlaby, that
it overflowed the Meadows and Pastures of Gerard de Usflet, and of the Towns of
Anlaby, Swanland, Hesil and Feriby, to the common damage of all those Villages:
which Watercourse ought to be scoured by the Town of Kingston upon Hull, but
was not. Howbeit in this there was no judgment then given, in regard that the
Townsmen of Kingston upon Hull pleaded Plac. coram Rege term. Mich. 1 H. 5.
rot. 19.
again in Michaelmasse Term 1 H. 5. by reason of the former Kings death.

In 5 H. 5. Robert Tirwhit, Peter del Hay, John Ellerker, Will. Waldeby, John
Holme, John Disnay, Christopher Boynton, Robert Rudstane, and the Shireeve of
Yorkshire were appointed Pat. 5 H 5. part unica m. 34. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks then in decay, throughout the whole Est Rithing
of this Country: and to proceed therein according to the Custom of the Marsh,
and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

The like appointment Pat. 5 H. 6. p. 2. m. 14. in dorso.
, in 5 H. 6. had Sir John Scrope, Sir Robert Babthorpe, Sir Thomas Brounflete,
and Sir Henry Brounflete Knights, John Ellerker, and others. So also in 11 H.
6. had Pat. 11 H. 6. p. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
Sir Rob. Babthorpe and Sir Rich. Hastyngs Knights, John Ellerker, John
Constabill of Halsham Esquire, John Holme senior, John Portyngton, Robert
Rudstane and Will. Muston: with direction to do all things therein, according
to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeney marsh: As also
to impressed so many Laborers, upon competent wages, to be employed in that
work, as should be necessary for the same; considering the great and urgent
necessity in expediting thereof, for prevention of farther damage.

Other such general Commissions for the said Est Rything had Pat. 13 H. 6.
part unica m. 27. in dorso.
these persons hereaf^er named; viz. in 13 H. 6. the same Sir Rob. Babthorpe
and his associates. In 14 H. 6. Sir Rich. Hastyngs Knight, Pat. 14 H. 6. p. 18. m.
1. in dorso.
John Constable of Halsham, John Ellerker, Rob. Hatfield, John Portyngton, John
Holme senior, Robert Rudstane, and Thomas Wylton. And Ibid.
in the same year, the said Sir Robert Babthorpe, John Ellerker, Raphe Babthorp
Esquire, Guy Roclyff, John Portyngton, Robert Rudstone, Will. Mustone, and
Alexander Lounde.

In 18 of this Kings reign, Sir John Constable Knight, John Portyngtone, Robert
Hatfield, and Thomas Wilton, being constituted Commissioners for the repair of
the banks etc. within the liberty of Holdernesse, and the VVapentakes of
Bokeres and Dykering, sat at Tiktone, upon Friday next after the Feast of the
Exaltation of the Holy Cross: before whom the Jurors presented Ex bund. de
B^ev. and Recordis, Wallias etc. tangentibus, de ^em. H. 6. n. 20.
, that there was a certain common Sewer in Hornese, extending in length from
Hornesemare to the Sea: and over it a bridge for foot and Horsemen, at the East
end of Hornese: which bridge ought to be in breadth six foot, and in length ten,
and repaired, whenever need should be, by the Abbot and Covent of S. Mary's
in York, as it had been time out of mind, it being at that time in decay, to
the great damage of the said Kings Liege people. VVhereupon the Shireeve having
command to impanel a Jury, to enquire etc. he did accordingly. Who appearing,
said upon their Oaths, that there was not then nor ever had been any such
common Sewer in Hornese^ as was presented; and therefore, that the said Abbot
and Covent, neither did, nor had used to repair any such bridge over the same.
But they said, that the said Town of Hornese had wont to repair a certain
bridge there, of one foot in breadth, for foot folk, for their own proper use^
and therefore the said Abbot and Covent was dischardged.

In 23. H. 6. John Portyngton, Sir John Constable, Walt. Gryffith, Robert
Hatfield, Rob. Rudstone, and Thomas VViltone were assigned Pat. 23 H. 6. p. 2.
m. 25. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks etc. within this liberty of Holdernesse; and the
Wapentakes of Bokeres, Dykeryng, and Herthill, in the Est Rything of this
County: And to make Laws and Ordinances therein according to the Laws and
Customs of Romeney marsh. The like Pat. 24 H 6. p. 2. m. 20. in dorso.
assignation in 24 H. 6. had Sir John Constable Knight, Rob. Hattefield,
Alexander Lounde, Rog. Rodestone, Henry Thwaytes, Thomas Wilton and John
VVencelagh; and to proceed therein as aforesaid. So Pat. 28 H. 6. p. 1. m. 4.
in dorso.
also in 28 H. 6. had Sir John Melton Knight, John Constable of Halsham
Esquire, Rob. Hatfield, Alexander Lound, Henry Thwaytes, and the rest.

In 33 H. 6. Robert Aunsell, Mayor of the Town of Kyngston upon Hull, Hugh
Clyderowe, John Haynson, and others, were constituted Pat. 33 H. 6. p. 1. m.
17. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of those banks etc. from Dripole in
Holdernesse to Elytone; and to act as aforesaid. The like Commission Pat. 37 H.
6. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
in 37 H. 6. had Sir John Melton Knight, John Constable of Halsham Esquire,
Rob. Hattefield, Alexander Lounde, Henry Thwaytes, Guy Fairfax, Will. Eland,
and Thomas VViltone, for all those within the liberty of Holdernesse, and in
the VVapentakes of Harthill, Dykering, and Bukrose; viz. on the East part of
the way, which leads from Hesyll to Bayntone; thence to Driffelde; thence to
Bridyngton, adjoining to the said liberty of Holdernesse. And in 4 E. 4. Sir
Rob. Constable and Sir John Constable Knight, Robert Hilliard, John VVenslagh,
Rob. Sheffield and Will. Eland, were assigned Pat. 4 E. 4. p. 1. m. 7. in
dorso.
to view and repair all those, which were then in decay, on the West part of
the said way from Helyll to Baynetone; and from thence to Bridlyngtone, and
thence to the Sea; and so in all Holdernesse and other parts on the East and
South side of those places. So also in 13 E. 4. were Pat. 13 E. 4. p. 2. m. 20.
in dorso.
Rob. Sheffelde, Edward Saltmershe, John Copyndale, Roger Kelk, John
Middiltone, and Thomas Minskip, for those on the East part of that way, which
leads from the Lordship of Lekynfield unto Cotingham, and from the Lordship
of Cotyngham to Waghene; and thence to the River of Hulle, unto the Lordship of
Eske: and also to proceed therein as aforesaid.

CAP. XXIV.
FOr the repair likewise of diverse banks and Sewers, Yorkshire.
in several other parts of this County, there were, upon occasion sundry
Commissions issued; viz. in 16 E. 1. to Pat. 16 E. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
Thomas de Normanvile and Simon le Conestable, touching those upon the Seacoast
and Verge of Humbre. And so also the year following, for Pat. 17 E. 1. m. 12.
those betwixt the River of Humbre and Lambflete.

The like Commison Pat. 31 E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
in 31 E. 3. had Robert de Herle, Thomas de Seton, John de Moubray, and Will.
de Routhe, at the request of John of Gaunt, then Earl of Richmund; a great part
of his lands, Meadows and Pastures, from the Mill at little Hoton, to the Towns
of Yafford and great Daneby, being by the overflowing of the River Wyske, for
want of clensing the Chanel thereof, much dampnified. And in 34 E. 3. Robert de
Herle, Godfrey Fuljaumbe, John Moubray and others were appointed Pat. 34 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 17. in do^so.
to view and repair the Banks and Sewers upon the River of Wyske from Stokedale
heved to Brakenbergh, and thence to the River of Swale.

In 38 E. 3. it was by an inquisition Esc. 38 E. 3. n. 57. Ebor.
found, that through the extraordinary overflowings of the river Ouse, which
broke the banks very much, the Manor of Moranwick was totally drowned. And
upon a pleading in 44 E. 3. the Jurors presented Plac. de c^rm. Mich. 44 E. 3.
rot. 14 Ebor.
, that the Sewer called Fosse, which runs to the great river of Fosse, from
a place called the Walbot enge, without the Town of Strensale, unto the Abbots
milne in the Suburbs of the City of York, was so filled up with mud and weeds,
that the rain descending thereabouts could not pass therein, as it had wont to
do: And that it ought to be scoured by the Towns of Strensale, Esterwyk,
Touthorp, Haxby, Huntingdon and Clifton. Neither was it gainsaid by the said
Towns of Strensale, Esterwyk and Haxby, but that they ought to cleanse and
repair the same wheresoever their land lay adjacent thereto: therefore the
Shireeve had command to distrain them.

In 3 R. 2. Will. Latimer, Roger de Fulthorpe, John de Clifford, Thomas Lovel,
and John de Sadyngton, were constituted Pat. 3 R. 2. ^. ^. n. 44. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks etc. in the Wapentakes of
Bulmere, Ridwell, and Bridford. The like Commission in 6 R. 2. had Pat. 6 R. 2.
p. 1. m. 9. in dorso.
Henry Percy Earl Northumberland, Sir Robert Conestable Knight, Sir Peter de
Bukton Knight, John de Ask, Thomas Lovel, and Thomas de Beverley, for those
betwixt Kingston upon Hull and Darwent, and the parts adjacent.

Upon a pleading in 5 H. 4. the Jurors found, Plac. coram Rege term. H^l. 5. H.
4. rot. ^^ Ebor.
that there was not any common Road-way in Skakilthorp and Popilton, through
the pasture of Skakilthorpe: and that the Abbot of S. Mary's in York, ought
neither to cleanse the Sewers there, called Fowlfosse, nor repair the said way:
the Abbot therefore was dischardged.

Upon the like pleading in 14 H. 4. it was also found, Plac. coram Rege term.
Hill. 14 H. 4. rot. 21. Ebor.
that the River of Derwent at the Conyngdyke, and over against the Calf gate,
was so obstructed, that it did overflow the Meadows of Knapton, Skamston and
Wintringham; and that the Abbots of Rivaulx and his Predecessors ought to scour
it. But the Abbot having seen the said Presentment and pleading; that forasmuch
as mention was made in the Presentment, that the damage done thereby, was only
to that Town (in which case a particular action lay, by the said town, against
him by the Law of the Land) and not to the King, except it had been a common
nuisance, which was not supposed by the same Presentment; therefore the said
Presentment, being insufficient of it self, he was dischardged.

In 7 H. 5. Will. de Lodyngton, Sir Richard Redmayn Knight, Rob. Waterton, Rob.
Maleverer, Guy Roclyff, and John Dawney were appointed Pat. 7 H. 5. p. 1. m.
26. in dorso.
to view and repair the banks, and Sewers, betwixt the Rivers of Use and Air
in this County; and to do all things therein according to the Custom of the
Marsh, and the Law and Custom of this Realm.

The like in 11 H. 6. had Pat. 11 H 6 p. 1. m. 1. in dorso.
John Archbishop of York, Rich. Duke of York, Rich. Earl of Salisbury, James
Strangeways, Sir Rich. Stanhope Knight, Raphe Bapthorpe, and others, for all
those betwixt the River of Trente, and the Kings High way, which leads from the
town of Ferribrigge, unto the town of Worsoppe, called Watlyngstrete: and
thence by the common high way, which leads from the said town of Worsoppe to
the Town of Dunham; and from thence to the Rivers of Ouse and Air, on both
sides the Rivers of Idul, North-Idull, Done, Wyk, and Went, in the Counties of
York, Notingham and Lincoln: And to make Statutes and Ordinances, necessary
thereto, consonant to the Laws of Romeney Marsh etc. As also to take up so many
Laborers, upon competent wages, in respect of the great and urgent necessity
of the work, as should be requisite for that employment.

So also in 17 H. 6. had Pat. 17 H. 6. p. 1. m. 29. in dorso.
John Portyngton, Guy Rouclyff, Raphe Bapthorpe, Peter Arderne, Rob. Rouclyff,
and others, for those upon the Seacoasts and Marshes at Scardeburgh, betwixt
Southstele, and the Hospital of S. Nicholas at Scardeburgh.

CAP. XXV.
Derbyshire.
IN this kind of improvement there was something also in Derbyshire, as it
seems, and that very anciently, though the particular places be not expressed:
for in 12 E. 2. there were two Commissions issued to certain persons of quality
in this County, for to view the banks, Ditches and Sewers, then broken and in
decay in several parts thereof, and to cause them to be repaired: the first to
Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 1. m. 10. in dorso.
Will. de Herle, Richard de Wylughby, John Deincourt, and Richard de Whatton;
and the second to Ib. m. 8. in dorso.
the said John Deincourt and Richard de Whatton, together with William de
Gretton, and Roger de Breton.

CAP. XXVI.
Notinghamshire.
TOuching the Banks and Sewers in this County, the first mention that I find, is
in 11 E. 3. there being then a Presentment Plac. coram Rege term. Trin. 11 E.
3. rot. 109. No^^.
made in the wapentake of Bersetlawe, against several persons for diverting the
stream of the River of Iddle into the Hel-dyke; without any penalty imposed
upon them for so doing: but they being summoned to appear in the Kings Bench,
to answer their doings therein; said, that the Shireeve had a Writ to levy x
l. upon them for damage: the said Shireeve therefore was required by that Court
to transmit the said presentment thither.

In 16 E. 3. the King being informed, Pat. 16 E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
that the Rivers of Deven, Smite, and Kersyk; as also certain Ditches and
places, through which diverse waters, in certain parts of the vale of Belvoir,
within the Wapentakes of Bingham and Newerke, betwixt the towns of Flintham and
Orston, so descending into the said River of Devene, and thence into Trent, did
then run and had used to do; were so much straightned, by sand, mud and
plantation of trees; that, by reason thereof, and for lack of certain trenches,
which would have been very necessary in those parts, for the drayning and
preserving the low grounds and meadows there; the Lands, Meadows, and pastures
of many people in those parts, had been often overflowed by those waters, and
did so continue: he constituted Pat. 16 E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
John de Vaux, Geffrey de Staunton, and John de Ker his Commissioners to view
the said waters and Ditches; and to cause new trenches to be dug in any of
the said lands, meadows, or pastures there, where need should be; so that
competent satisfaction were made to all such in whose grounds those trenches
might happen to be cut, according to the true value of the damage, which would
be thereby done thereto.

And in 25 E. 3. upon farther information, Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. in dorso.
that the said Rivers, passing through the VVapentake of Newerk, betwixt the
towns of Staunton, Kilvington, Flanbergh, Shelton, Sibethorpe, Syreston,
Eyleston, Stoke, Farmedone, Thorpe, Cotum, and Houton; and from those towns
descending to the said River of Dyvene, and thence into Trent, were also in
such sort obstructed, as that the Lands, Meadows and Pastures of diverse persons
were overflowed: And moreover that the Bridges and Causeys at Wendl^sford,
Horscroft, Bourbrig, and Langbrig, and diverse other bridges and Causeys in
those parts, that there was scarce any passage at all, by them, in the VVinter
time, to the great peril of such as travailed over them: the King appointed
Ibid.
Geffrey de Staunton, Thomas de Sibethorpe, John de Sutton, Will. de Leyk, and
Simon de Leyk to view them; and to cause new Channels to be made, where need
should require, making reasonable satisfaction to the owners of those lands,
through which they were to cut, answerable to the damage which they might have
thereby.

In 37 E. 3. John Power, Robert de Morton, Oliver de Barton, and John Stirapp
were assigned Pat. 37 E. 3. p. 2. m. 20. in ^orso.
to view the passage of the River of Idel, through the towns of West-R^tford,
Bolin, Tilne, Sutton, Lound, Matherseye, Scroby, Skaft^worth, Claworth,
Everton, and Herewell; and to cause them to be cleansed and scoured, in regard
that by their obstruction, with sand, weeds, and the like, the lands and
meadows of diverse persons had been overflowed and drowned. The like Commission
Pat. 51 E. 3. p. 1. m. 41. in dorso.
in 51 E. 3. had Raphe Lord Basset of Drayton, Will. de Skypwith, Roger de
Kirketone and others for to view the Banks and Sewers betwixt Bykers dyke, on
both sides, in this County, and Done hevede; and to cause them to be repaired,
where need was.

In 1 R. 2. Will. de Skipwith, Robert de Morton, Oliver de Barton, Elias de
Thoresby, John de Bekering, Will. Power of Tylne, and John de Whetlay were
constituted Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 2. m. 27. in dorso.
Commissioners for to view the course of the River Id^l, through the towns of
Elkeslay, Gamelston, Eton, Ordeshale, Est-Retford, West-Retford, Bolum, Tylne,
Sutton, Lound, Mathersay, Thorpe, Scroby, Scafteworth, Claworth, Everton,
Harewell and Hayton; which, for want of clensing, had drowned the Lands of
sundry persons, and to cause the same to be scoured.

The like Commission Pa^. 18 R. 2. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
in 18 R. 2. had Henry de Codyngton Clerk, John de Markham, Sir John de Burton,
and Sir Will. Nevill Knights, Robert Martell and Thomas de Sutton, for certain
Gutters in the vale of Belvoir, and in the VVapentakes of Bingham and Newerk,
betwixt the towns of Langar and Bingham, by the towns of Flyntham and
Hokesworth, and Hokesworth Thurvarton and Orston, and other places descending
unto the River of Dyvene, and thence into Trent; which Gutters were then also
obstructed, with sand, weeds, and other impediments, to the great damage of the
adjacent grounds, by overflowing etc.

So also in 20 R. 2. had Pat. 20 R. 2. p. 2. m. 22. in dorso.
the said John de Markham, Sir John Bozoun Knight, and Richard Bercotes, for
the same Gutters and trenches, which by reason of the like obstructions, for
lack of certain trenches that ought to have been made, for the drayning of the
grounds lying near them; especially overthwart Sireston meadow,
unto the said River of Devene: with power to make new trenches where they
should find it necessary; and to compel every man having land, capable of any
benefit thereby, according to the proportion thereof, for to assist therein.

In 30 H. 6. John, Cardinal, and Archbishop of York, John Vicount Beaumont,
Sir Raphe Cromwell Knight, Raphe Byngham, John Portyngton, and others, were
appointed Par. 30 H. 6. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks and Sew^rs, betwixt Bykers dyke and the River of
Done, on every side; lying within this County; and the Counties of York and
Lincoln, and Confines of the same; and in the VVapentakes of Mauley and
Coryngham; and in the Soke of Kirketone in the said County of Lincoln; and in
the Soke or Hundred of Bas^tlawe in this County. And to make Statutes and
Ordinances therein, consonant to the Laws of this Realm, and the Laws and
Customs of Romeney marsh: and to do all other things touching the same
according to the Law of this Realm, and the said Customs of Romeney marsh: As
also to impressed so many Laborers upon competent wages, to be employed in the
said work, as should be needful, considering the great and urgent necessity
for the speedy accomplishment thereof.

The like Commission P^^. 14 E. ^. p. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
in 14 E. 4. had Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, Will. Lord Hastyngs, Sir John
Scrope of Bolton Knight, Sir Robert Markham Knight, John Stanhope, Gervase
Clifton, Robert Willughby, Thomas Molineux, Thomas Nevill, and John Metheley,
for the view and repair of the Banks and Sewers^ from Broughton-Sulny unto the
River of Devene in this County; and from Feldyke in Bingham, unto the said
River of Devene: as also by and about the same River, from the County of
Leicester, beyond Kilvyngton, unto the River of Trent, in this County: And to
proceed therein as abovesaid. So also in 22 E. 4. had Pat. 22 E. 4. p. 1. m.
22. in dorso.
the same Archbishop and most of the beforementioned persons.

But farther touching the Fens in this County, I have not seen, other than what
a Law Ex bund. Decret. in officio nuncupata the Pettibag.
of Sewers, made at Stockwith 14 Aug. 5 Caroli mentions; which is, that
whereas John Lyens and other Dutch men, had undertaken to the King and his
privy Council, to drayn the Carrs and Marshes in the Lordship of Hatfield in
the County of York, Axholme in the County of Lincoln, and other great Carrs
in this County of Notingham, and had made diverse great Rivers and drayns to
that purpose; it was decreed, that for the better conveying away of the waters,
one Sluice should be erected on Bikersdyke, within the Parish of Misterton, at a
place lying over the bridge, called Bleesford bridge, and to make a cut over
the common grounds called Bleesford, to Mifterton firm grounds.

And that whereas the said John, and his Participants, became undertakers for
the drayning of certain Carr grounds, in Everton, in this County of Notingham,
in consideration thereof they were to have, to them and their heirs and
assigns for ever, five hundred Acres of land, laid out from Everton
enclosures, all along by Gryngeley bank side, unto the Tofte, Carr bank, or
New bank, to be set out by Surveyors chosen on each part.

CAP. XXVII.
BEing now come into Lincolnshire, I shall first begin with the Isle of
Arholme, which, for many ages, has been a Fenny tract, and for the most part
covered with waters: but more anciently not so: for originally it was a woody
Country, and not at all annoyed with those inundations of the Rivers that
passed through it, as is most evident by the great numbers of Oak, Firr, and
other Trees, which have been of late frequently found in the Moor, upon making
of sundry Ditches and Channels for the drayning thereof; the Oak Trees lying
somewhat above three foot in depth, and near their roots, which do still stand
as they growed, viz. in firm earth below the Moor; and the bodies, for the most
part North West from the roots, not cut down with Axes, but burnt asunder
somewhat near the ground, as the ends of them, being coaled, do manifest. Of
which sort there are multitudes, and of an extraordinary bigness; viz. five
yards in compass, and sixteen yards long; and some smaller of a greater
length, with good quantities of Akorns near them: and of small Nuts so many,
that there have been found no less than two pecks together in some places.

But the Firr Trees do lie a foot, or eighteen inches deeper; of which kind
there are more than of any other; many of them being above xxx yards in length:
Nay, in the year 1653. there was a Firr pole taken up, by one Robert Brown of
Haxey, of xxxvi yards long (besides the top) lying near the root, which stood
likewise as it grew, having been burnt, and not hewed down: which tree bore at
the bottom ten inches square, and at the top eight.

About xx years since also, in the Moors at Thurne (near five foot in depth)
was sound a Ladder of Firr, of a large substance, with about xl staves, which
were thirty three inches asunder; but so rotten, that it could not be gotten up
whole. And in Haxey Carr, at the like depth, a Hedge, with stakes and bindings.

The truth is, that there are so great a number of Trees, thus overgrown with
the Moor, through a long time of stagnation by the fresh waters, in these
parts; that, the Inhabitants have for the space of diverse years last past,
taken up, at least two thousand Cart Loads in a y^ar.

As to the time when this woody Level (which extends it self into Dikes mersh,
and Hatfield Chase in Yorkshire) became first thus overflowed, I can say
nothing, there being not any memorial thereof transmitted to us, from the light
of History or Records: but that it has been so, for diverse hundreds of years,
the depth of the Moor does sufficiently manifest; which could not, in a few
Ages, grow to that thickness it is of. Howbeit, as to the occasion thereof, I
may rationally conclude it to have been, through the muddinesse of the constant
tides, which flowing up Humbre into Trent, did in time leave so much silt to
obstruct the currents of Idle, Done, and other Rivers; that, having not their
free passages as formerly, they flowed back and overwhelmed that flat Country
with water; insomuch as the high ground became an Island, as it is still (we
see) called; and a place so defencible, in respect of the spacious^esse and
depth of the waters environing it, that Roger Lord Moubray, an eminent Baron of
this Realm in K. Henry the second's time, and then Lord thereof, adhering to
young Henry, upon his ^ebellion in those days, repaired hither, and fortified
an old Castle, which had been Flores Hist. in anno 1174.
long ruinous; for reducing whereof to the Kings obedience, the Lincolnshire
men, having no other access thereto, transported themselves by shipping, in
the year 1174 (20 H. 2.) So likewise in 50 H. 3. after the battle of Evesham,
wherein the rebellious Barons were discomfited, some of them fled Ib. in anno
1276. Math. Paris. simi^i^er.
hither, as to a place of security, for the reasons above expressed. But after
that time, it was not long, ere the Inhabitants of these parts, imitating the
good Husbandry of those in other Countries, who had by banking and drayning
made good improvements in such Fenny places, did begin to do the like here: For
in 1 E. 3. I find, that Robert de Notingham, and Roger de Newmarch were
constituted Commissioners Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 3. m. 10. in dorso.
to view and repair those Banks and Ditches, as had been made to that purpose,
which were then grown to some decay: So also were Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. in
dorso.
John Darcy of the Park, Roger de Newmarch, and John de Crosholme.

Several other Commissions there were, afterward to the same purpose; viz. in
25 E. 3. to Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 1. m. 5. in dorso.
Will. Basset, Thomas de Swinford, Will. de Clive, Thomas Levelance, Will.
Wascelyn, and Thomas Degmanton, for all the Banks and Sewers within this Isle.
In 26 E. 3. to Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 3. m. 22. in dorso.
Raphe de Wilughby, Will. Basset, Will. de Skipwith, Illard de Usflete, Robert
de Haldanby, John de Lasing croft, and John de Flete of Bulwiche, for those
upon the Rivers of Trent and Done, within the Hundred of Crulle. In 39 E. 3. to
Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 1. m. 12. in dorso.
John Tours, Will. Wascelyn and Raphe de Burnham, for those upon the Rivers of
Done, Idel, and Bekersdik, in this Isle: Wherein they were directed to proceed
according to the Law and Customs of this Realm. In 40 E. 3. to Pat. 40 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
Thomas de Ingelby, Will. de Fyncheden, Will. de Galby, Parson of the Church of
Epworth, and others, for those in the parts of Balne and Mersland, and Lordship
of Haitfield in the County of York, as also within this Isle and Soke of
Crulle, in this County. The like Commission Pat. 41 E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
had the said Thomas and William, with Roger de Kirketon, and others in 41 E.
3. So also in 43 E. 3. had Pat. 43 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Master John de Burnham, Will. de Galby Clerk, Richard Poutrell, and others,
for those in this Isle, betwixt Butterwyk, and Gunthorpe.

In 2 R. 2. to Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, Will. de Skipwith, Roger de Fulthorpe,
Henry Asty, John Poucher, Thomas de Burnham, and William de Topclyf, for those
betwixt Bykerdyke and Doneheved, throughout all this Isle and the Soke of
Crulle, then in decay through the forc^ of Trent. And in 7 R. 2. to Pat. 7 R 2.
p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Thomas de Moubray Earl of Notingham, Sir Will, de Willughby Knight, Will de
Skipwith, and others, for all those in this Isle, as also betwixt Bykersdyke,
on both sides, in Notinghamshire, and the River of Done in Yorkshire.

In 1 H. 5. Will. Lodyngton, Thomas Egmanton, and John Dowenay, Rob.
VVaterton, and Edmund Fitzwilliam, being constituted Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 1. m. 21.
in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks and Sewers in the Soke of
Crulle, and this Isle of Axholme; and betwixt Bekerdyke, on each side; sat Ex
bund. de Brev. and Recordis, Wallias etc. tangentibus, tem. H. 5. n 15. Lin.
at Crulle upon the monday next after the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed
Virgin, in the year abovesaid: before whom the Jury then presented Ex bund. de
Brev. and Recordis, Wallias etc. tangentibus, tem. H. 5. n 15. Lin.
, that one Geffrey Gaddesby late Abbot of Selby, did cause a strong Sluse of
wood, to be made upon the River of Trent, at the head of a certain Sewer,
called the Mare dyke, of a sufficient height and breadth, for the defense of the
tides coming from the Sea; and likewise against the fresh waters descending
from the West part of the before-specified Sluse to the said Sewer, into the
same River of Trent; and thence into Humbre: and performed the same upon his
free good will and Charity for the ease of the Country. Which said Sluse,
certain unknown persons (Inhabitants of the Lordship of Haytfield) pulled down,
in the time of John de Shireburne, late Abbot of that place, and next successor
of the said Geffrey.

And whereas the said John de Shireburne, did new make the same Sluices of
stone, sufficient (as he thought) for defense of the Sea tides, and likewise of
the said fresh waters; the Jurors said, that they were not strong enough for
that purpose, being both too high and too broad: And that it would be
expedient, for the advantage of the Country, that the then Abbot, if he
pleased, would in the place where those Sluices of stone were made, cause
certain Sluses of strong timber to be set up, consisting of two Floud-gates;
each Floud-gate containing in it self, four foot in breadth, and six foot in
height; as also a certain bridge upon the said Sluses, in length and breadth
sufficient for Carts and other Carriages, which for the future might pass that
way: And being so made, and having stood firm, for the space of one whole year,
against the force of those tides, by the view of Richard de Amcotes, and Robert
Lyulf of Waterton, elected and sworn by the before-specified Commissioners, or
some others, to be chosen by them; that thenceforth the said Abbot of Selby,
Richard Amcotes, and other of the Freeholders of Crull, Amcotes, Waterton,
Garlethorpe, Ludington, and Eltoft in this County of Lincoln; as also all the
said Towns in common, should, in respect of their Lands and Tenements, lying
within that Soke, be ob^iged, of right to keep them in repair.

And they said farther, that it would be very necessary, that the
beforementioned Abbot, if he pleased, should cause to be there made, without
the said Sluse, toward the River of Trent, at the Feast of Easter then next
ensuing, one demmyng, for that present. And they also said, that, for the
future, the said Freeholders, as also the said Towns, and every of them, might
cleanse and scour the said Sewer called the Mare dyke, according to the
proportion belong^ng to each of them therein, from the said Sluse, to the
bridge of Ludington, called Lane end brigg.

VVhereupon the Shireeve was commanded to summon the said Abbot, Richard
Amcotes and the rest, to appear before the before-specified Commissioners at
Crutl aforesaid, on the Tuesday next before the Nativity of the blessed Virgin,
then next ensuing, to answer etc. At which day they all came accordingly, and
could not gainsay, what had been so presented by those Jurors.

And long after this, scil. in 5 E. 4. Sir Thomas Burghe, and Sir Robert
Constable Knights, John Nevill, Robert Sheffield junior, Thomas Moigne, Richard
Haunserd of Ouresby, and others, were constituted Pat. 5 E. 4. p. 1. m. 23. in
do^so.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks and Sewers throughout this
Isle; as also betwixt Bykersdyke, on each side, in the County of Notingham; and
the River of Done, on both sides, in the County of York: and within the
VVapentake of Manley, Yereburgh, Coryngham, Aslakhowe, and Walshcroste in this
County of Lincoln: and to make Statutes and Ordinances therein, consonant to
the Laws of the Realm, and Custom of Romeney marsh: As also to impressed so many
Laborers, as they should think necessary for that work, upon competent wages,
in respect of the great necessity for hastening thereof.

Having thus traced down the successive Commissions for improvement of the
Marshes in this Isle, by banking and drayning, until after the St^tue Cap. 5.
of 6 H. 6. Which Statute prescribing a form for all that should be issued out
after that time, throughout this whole Realm; wherein direction and power is
given to those who are to be employed therein, to make and ordain necessary and
convenable Statutes and Ordinances, for the salvation and conservation of the
Sea-banks and Marshes, and the parts adjoining thereto, according to the Laws
and Customs of Romeney marsh^ and likewise to hear and determine all and
singular complaints, that shall come before them, touching that business,
according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and the Customs of the said
Rom^ney marsh: appointed also, that upon great and urgent necessity, they
should take and put into the said works and reparations, as many Ditch-makers
and other Laborers, upon competent wages, as might be sufficient to perform
that service; it will not be necessary (as I conceive) to give farther
instances of this kind; I shall therefore descend to that great and no less
commendable work, which was undertaken shortly after the beginning of the late
King Charles his reign; not only for the drayning of all the surrounded Marshes
of this Isle, but of the adjacent Fenny grounds, lying in Yorkshire; viz.
Hatfield Chase and Dikesmersh: VVherin I may not omit to observe, Ex d^v^rsi^,
deposi^ionibus, ^n lingu^ a Brevium de term. Pasch. 24 Ca^oli penes Remem,
Scace^
that the overflowings of the fresh waters over that whole Level, was such, by
reason that the before-specified Rivers of Idel, Bickers dyke, Turn, Done, and
Air were obstructed in diverse places, with so much silt and other impediments,
chiefly contracted by the daily tides, as I have before declared; that not only
in winter, but even in the Summer time, Boats laden with plaster have passed
over that part thereof, called Hatfield Cha^e, to a place called Hollen brigge,
near Hatfield Woodhouse, the water upon the drowned grounds, being about three
foot deep: and the Fishers house, called Steere's lodge, standing on ground
thrown up and raised three or four foot above the level, often drowned.

Neither was Haxey Carr less overwhelmed, large Boats laden with xx quarters
of Corn, usually passing over it, from the River of Idel to Trent bank; men
rowing also with lesser Boats, to look Swans, over all parts of it, betwixt
Lammas and Michaelmasse: And in like sort over Starr Carr, and Axholme Carr;
insomuch as there was no less than sixty thousand acres of land thus
overflowed by the said fresh waters.

The said King therefore, being seized of this Island, and of diverse lands and
waste grounds, belonging to the same; as also of and in the Chase called
Hatfield Chase, with Dikes mersh, together with the Lordships of Wroote and
Finningley in the County of York, all lying upon the same flat; out of his
Royal and Princely care for the public good, in regaining so great a
proportion of surrounded land; which, at the best, yielded little or no profit
to the Common wealth, but contrariwise nourished beggars and idle persons: and
having a Chase of Red Deer through a good part of this Fen, which much annoyed
and oppressed the residue; resolving by the advice of his Counsel; partly for the
easing of his chardge, and increase of his revenue, and partly for the
improvement and reducing of so great a quantity of drowned and boggy ground, to
be made good Meadow, Arable, and Pasture, for the general good; did under the
great Seal of England, contract with Cornelius Vermuden, An. 1626.
then of the City of London Esquire, by Articles bearing date the twenty fourth
day of May, in the second year of his reign, the substance whereof was as
follows.

Cornelius should, at his own chardge drain and lay the same dry; beginning the
work within three months, after the said King should have agreed with those
persons that had interest of common therein; and finish it with all possible
expedition.

That he the said Cornelius, in consideration East Geenwiche, in free and
common socage.

That he the said Cornelius should pay England, for the time being; and the
other two by him the said Cornelius.

That the work being finished, there Cornelius and his heirs did nominate.

That within three years after they viz. three by the Lord Treasurer of
England, for the time being; and three by the same Cornelius, his heirs etc. to
view them, and estimate what the future yearly chardge might amount unto, for
the perpetual maintaining of them: whereupon the said Cornelius to convey and
assure the Inheritance of lands to such a value, as might be thought sufficient
to support that chardge.

And that whereas diverse did claim common of Pasture in sundry of the said
grounds, it was agreed that the King should issue out his Commission under the
great Seal of England, to certain persons, to treat and conclude with those
Commoners, by way of composition, in land or money, concerning the same.

VVhereupon Commissions were accordingly directed The state of the case printed
at London, an. 1656.
to several Gentlemen of those Counties, to treat and agree with all such as
pretended right of Common within any of the Mannours abovementioned: which
took effect with each of them, except those of the Manor of Epworth, in this
Isle: But Sir Robert Heath, being the then Attorney General, exhibiting an
information in the Exchequer Chamber against them, three hundred and seventy
(who were all that at that time could be discovered to have right of common
there) came and submitted to such an Award, as Sir John Banks (the then
Attorney general) should make therein: Who, upon several hearings of all
parties and their Council, made this Award; viz. that of thirteen thousand and
four hundred Acres, belonging to that Manor (which was then to be drayned,
with the rest of the level) six thousand Acres should be allotted to the
Commoners, as their part or portion, lying next to the Towns; and so preserved
for ever, at the chardge of the said Cornelius Vermuyden; and the remaining
seven thousand and four hundred Acres to be set out in the remotest parts of
those wastes to Sir C. Vermuyden and his participants, for their third part,
and for the said late King's part, in right of his interest as Lord of the
soil: which, by consent was decreed in the Exchequer Chamber, and possession
thereupon established with the said Cornelius Vermuyden, and his participants,
and to their assigns.

The agreement being therefore thus made, this great work was accordingly
begun, and had so successful a progress; that, with the chardge of fifty five
thousand eight hundred twenty five pounds, or thereabouts, it became fully
finished, within the space of five years; the waters which usually overflowed
the whole level being conveyed into the River of Trent, through Snow Sewer,
and Althorpe River, by a Sluse; which issued out the drayned water at every
ebb, and kept back the tides upon all comings in thereof.

And now that the world may see what an advantage accrued to the public by
this noble, though chardgable work, I shall here, from the before-specified
Haxey Carr, a great part thereof has been sowed with Rape and other Corn, for
three years together, and born plentiful crops.

That some part of the said Carr, not worth above six pence an Acre, per annum,
was after the said drayning worth x s. the Acre.

That several houses have been since

That since the drayning, the gounds xiij s. iiij d. an Acre, than they were
two shillings an Acre before.

That of ten Acres of drayned land, xxx s. the quarter.

That of the said drayned grounds,

That before this drayning, the Country

Hereunto I shall add what I find in that printed Relation, beforementioned;
viz. the State of the Case; id est, that the said Cornelius Vermuyden, together
with his participants and their assigns, being in quiet and peaceable
possession of what belonged to them by virtue of the Agreement abovesaid, did
build and plant a Town called Sandtoft, with a Church therein; placing a
Minister there; whereunto resorted above two hundred Families of French and
Walloon Protestants (fled out of their native Country for fear of the
Inquisition, only to enjoy the free exercise of their Religion here) who
erected and planted above two hundred habitations for Husbandry, and plowed and
tilled much of the said twenty four thousand and five hundred Acres of land, to
the great benefit of the Common wealth. All which they enjoyed till about the
Month of June, in the year 1642, An. 1642.
that some of the Inhabitants thereabouts, pretending they had right of Common,
said they were not bound by the before-specified Decree: and therefore taking
advantage of the present distractions: for then it was that the Parliament
began to raise a powerful Army for the safety of the King's person, defense of
both Houses of Parliament, and of those who had obeyed their Orders and
commands; and preserving the true Religion, Laws, Liberties and peace of the
Kingdom (as their votes and Remonstrances did set forth) a vast proportion of
money and plate, being brought in, by the Citizens of London, and others, for
that purpose; the King being at that time at York, with some slend^r guards
(which they voted to be a levying of war against his Parliament) they arose in
tumults, brake down the fences and enclosures of four thousand Acres, destroyed
all the Corn growing, and demolished the Houses built thereon.

And Ex praefatis depositionibus.
about the beginning of February ensuing, they pulled up the Floudgates of Snow
Sewer, which by letting in the tides from the River of Trent, soon drowned a
great part of Hatfield Chase; diverse persons standing there with Muskets; and
saying, that there they would stay till the whole level were drowned, and the
Inhabitants forced to swim away like Ducks: and so continued guarding the said
Sluse for the space of seven weeks together, letting in the tides at ev^ry full
water, and keeping the Sluse shut at an ebb. And about that time, likewise,
some of the Inhabitants of Mi^^erton, pulled down another Sluse, near that
Town; which occasioned the River of Trent to break down the Banks and overflow
the whole level, so that the Barns and Stacks of Co^n were drowned a yard
high, at the least.

And thinking this not to be mischief enough, the Ibid.
Inhabitants of the Isle of Axholme, did about Michaelmasse in the year 1645
tumultuously throw down a great part of the Banks, and filled up the Ditches,
putting in Cattle into the Corn, and Pastures of those that had been
Adventurers for the drayning.

Whereupon the said Participants in this great and costly work, by their humble
Petition The state of the case ut supra.
, exhibited to the Parliament in December following; presented, that after the
expense of at least two hundred thousand pounds in those works, the Tenants of
the Manor of Epworth, notwithstanding their consents to that Decree
before-specified, which had been passed in the Excheque^ for settlement of what
had been agreed on, and set out of that Manor, for the said Participan^s and
their Tenants; had in a tumultuous manner thrown down and laid waste a
proportion of at least 74000 Acres of land, and destroyed a great quantity of
Rape, and Corn growing, by forcible keeping and depasturing their Cattle
thereon; as also demolished very many Houses, burnt others, cut and burned the
Plows, beat and wounded those that were Plowing, or resisted them in any of
those their outrageous acts; and then threatened the drowning of the whole by
cuttng of the Banks, and misusage of the Sluses: and moreover, that they
resisted the said P^rticipants, in levying taxes for the repair of the works,
to the great damage of the Common wealth in general, and scandal to the Justice
thereof, in case these things should not be restrained, and the offenders to be
punished.

For preventing therefore of the like mischiefs, and preservation of the peace
of the Country, it was then ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that the
Shireeve of the said County of Lincoln, and Justices of peace there, should,
upon complaint made to them therein, punctually pursue the Statutes made in 13
H. 4. for suppressing of Riots and Routs, and call to their assistance, if need
required, the Trained bands of the said County, and the Parliaments forces next
adjoining, to be aiding and assisting to the said Participants, in guarding and
keeping these Sluses and Sewers; and in repairing what had been so demolished;
and in levying the Taxes legally imposed, tending to the preservation of so
good and beneficial a work to the common wealth: And for the settling of this
business, they farther ordered, that the Shireeve of the County of Lincoln,
for the time being, should, upon request to him made by the said Participants,
appoint such a Deputy, within the limits of the same level, for the sudden
aiding and assisting of them (when need should require) as they from time to
time did desire.

And that this Order should be forthwith published, in the several
Parish-Churches and Market Towns of this County.

Which course being thus taken for restraint of those their tumultuous and
riotous practices; seven of the Inhabitants of the said Manor of Epworth,
brought their actions at Law against the said Participants, for recovering of
what had been so formerly settled by the before specified Decree, with their own
consents.

Whereupon the said Participants exhibiting their Bill in the Exchequer
Chamber, for establishing their possession against those seven, obtained this
Order Ibid.
; viz. that the Kings Solicitor general should proceed upon the same in that
Court, with all convenient speed; and in the mean time the possess^ion of the
lands in question to be held in quiet by the Plantiffs, as it had been formerly
settled by the said Court, and enjoyed at any time since the said Decree made:
and likewise, that their suits at Law should be stayed by the Injunction of the
same Court, until the hearing of the cause, or that the Court gave farther
order therein.

Upon which Injunction the Shireeve had a Writ of assistance, and came with
near a hundred persons to quiet the possession, and set up the Banks of those
4000 Acres first laid waste: But one Daniell Noddel, Solicitor for the
beforementioned Inhabitants, hearing of the said Shireeve's coming, got
together about four hundred men, and forced him, with all his assistants, to
fly; and having so done, demolished what he the said Shireeve had before
caused to be set up.

The Participants therefore, being thus forcibly kept out of possession,
brought their Bill to hearing; which the said Noddel discerning, he drew in, to
his aid, Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne (a person of a most turbulent
Spirit, and who since dyed a Quaker) and Major John Wildeman; and, whilst the
cause was hearing, joined with the said Inhabitants in a farther Riot, on the
remaining 3400 Acres, which till then had been kept up; impounding the Tenants
Cattle, and refusing to admit of Replevins, and so forced them to what rates
they pleased for their redemption.

Whereupon the said Participants, not knowing otherwise what to do, complained
several times to Michael Monkton, a Justice of Peace in those parts: who not
only refused to grant any Warrants, or pursue any legal course for their
preservation; but on the contrary gave ^n^ouragement to the Riotors; and upon
an Indictment exhibited against some of them, in the Sessions, for these
outrages, which was found by the Jury, some of the Justices there sitting,
thinking it fit to fine the Delinqnents at 4 or 5 marks a piece; the said
Monckton moved openly that their fines might be but six pence a piece; and
insisted so earnestly thereon, that the fine imposed on them was no more than
twelve pence a man.

Howbeit after this, viz. in February 1650. upon a full hearing in the
Exchequer, a Decree was made for establishing the possession with the
Participants; which being published on the place, in presence of diverse of the
said Inhabitants; they having gotten the influence of the said Lilburne,
Wildeman, and Noddel; declared, that they would not give any obedience thereto,
nor to any order of the Exchequer or Parliament; and said, that they could make
as good a Parliament themselves: Some expressing that it was a Parliament of
Clouts; and that if they sent any forces, they would raise men to resist them;
and thereupon proceeded to the defacing of the Church at Santoft; and within
ten days time, did totally demolish the Town it self, with other Houses
thereabouts, to the number of fourscore and two habitations, besides Barns,
stables and Outhouses; as also a Windmill; and destroyed all the Corn and Rape
then growing on the said 3400 Acres: the damage of all which amounted to
fourscore thousand pounds, as appeared by the Testimonies of sundry witnesses.

All which waste and spoil being done; the said Lilburne, Wildman, Monckton,
and Noddel, confederating together, made an agreement with several of the
Inhabitants of Epworth, that in consiration of 2000 Acres of the said land, so
wasted, to be given to Lilburne and Wildman, and 200 Acres to Noddell, they the
the said Libburne, Wildman, and Noddel, should defend them from all those Riots
past, and maintain them the said Inhabitants, in possession of all the rest of
the 7400 Acres, before laid waste, and keep them dry; and in accomplishment of
that agreement, sealed Deeds accordingly. Which being done, the said Lilburne
and Noddel, with some others came to Santoft Church, on the Sunday, and forced
the French Congregation from thence, telling them that they should not come
thither, except they were stronger than they.

And after this, the said Lilburne and Noddel went to another Lordship, called
Crowle, where they agreed with some of the Inhabitants thereof, to get their
Commons again, as Epworth had done; advising them to impound the Tenants
Cattle; and that if any Replevin were brought, they should impound them again,
and break down their Fences, and eat up their crops; and so tire them till they
had attorned Tenants to them; all which they did accordingly. The Tenants
therefore being thus terrified, and seeing their condition no better than their
Neighbors, took Leases from Jasper Margrave and George Stovin (two of
Lilburnes Confederates) who gave bonds of save them harmless: by which
practice and the former force, the Petitioners became outed of their
possessions in both these Mannours. And at the making of those Leas^s Noddel
declared openly, in the presence of diverse persons, that he would lay xx s.
with any man, that as soon as Lilburne came to London, there should be a new
Parliament; and that Lilburne should be one of them, and call that Parliament
to account: Farther adding, that they having now finished this of Lincolnshire
(meaning gotten the land from the Petitioners) they would go into Yorshire ( id
est the rest of the level) and do the like there; and then they would give the
Attorney General work enough to do.

And Noddel said at another time, that now they had drawn their case, they
would print it, and nail it at the Parliament door; and if they would not do
them justice, they would come up; and, making an outcry, pull them out by the
ears. And having thus possessed themselves of the proportions above mentioned,
they dimised several parts thereof to sundry persons; Lilburne himself
repairing the House, which had been built for the Minister, and almost pulled
down by the Rioters, put his servants to reside and keep possession in it, and
employed the Church for a stable and Barn.

A Narrative of all which barbarous outrages and high insolences of the
before-specified Lilburne, Wildman, and Noddel, with their confederates, were
drawn up in writing by a Committee of the said Parliament to be represented to
the House: but that Parliament being dissolved by the power of the Army, April
10th 1653. which was before this Report could be made by that Commitee; the
Council of State (which was set up about ten days following) did send for it;
and made reference thereof to a select Committee of the same Council; who also
farther examining the business, and finding what had been so deposed and
reported, to be true, signified as much to the said Council of State; whereupon
they did order, that the forces of the Army, quartering in the level of
Hatfield Chase, or within the Counties of York, Lincoln, and Notingham, or
any of them; or any other that then were, or might be in those parts, should be
aiding and assisting to the Officers of Justice, and the said participants, for
settling and establishing the possession of the 7400 Acres of those late
improved lands, within the Manor of Epworth, in the said Report mentioned,
with the said participants; and also for executing the Decrees and Orders of
the said Court of Exchequer, or any Courts of Justice touching their possession
therein; and likewise for preventing such Riots and outrages for the future.
And in respect of the great damage suffered by the said participants and their
Tenants; they farther ordered, that the Commissioners of the great Seal, for
the time being, should award a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer to the
Judges of Assize for the said respective Counties, to try the Ryotors and to
punish them according to Law and Justice; and to enquire of the damages
suffered, as aforesaid, by the said participants and their Tenants; to the end,
that they might have just reparations for the same. Which order bears date
at White Hall the 31th of August 1653.

But notwithstanding this, and the former Orders and Letters of the Parliament
and Council, the said Inhabitants still continued in their riotous and
rebellious posture, not giving any obedience thereto, nor to the Decrees and
Orders of the Court of Exchequer, nor Precepts of the Court of Sewers; standing
in defiance and opposition to all Authority.

Upon another Petition, therefore, presented by the said participants and their
Tenants, together with a Remonstrance of the Commissioners of Sewers unto the
Lord Protector and his Council; an Order of reference was made upon the xvth of
April 1656. to the Lord Fienes then one of the Commissioners of the great Seal,
the Lord Lambert, Major General Desborough, the Lord Lisle and the Lord
Strickland (for so they were then called) or any three of them, to consider of
the said Petition, and report their opinion therein to the Council.

The said Lords therefore requested Major General Whalley to call both parties
before him, and to examine the whole matter set forth in the before-specified
Petition, and make report thereof unto the said Committee; which he did
accordingly; manifesting, from sufficient Testimony, the guilt of those
Ryotors, in all the outrages before expressed.

VVhereupon the Council of State, by their Letters dated at Whitehall 21o
Augusti 1656. and directed to the said Major General Whalley, recommended the
redress thereof to his care; and to that end desired him to improve his
endeavor upon all occasions, to prevent any farther Ryots and misdemeanors in
those places; and in order thereto, to punish such their scandalous
disobedience, according to his instructions; and not to suffer the said
Inhabitants to keep by them any Arms or other Instruments for their future
acting of the like; and moreover to appoint some of his Regiment to be
effectually aiding and assisting to the Shireeves of the respective Counties
within his association, or the Deputies and Collectors of the Court of Sewers,
for the putting in execution from time to time, the Decrees, process, and
Orders, of any the Courts at Westminster, or of the Commissioners of Sewers; to
the end that the improvers just Rights might be restored according to Law, and
the said Strangers have the peaceable exercise of their Religion, in the place
designed for the public meetings to that purpose.

CAP. XXVIII.
FRom Axholme I come next to those Marshes upon the River of Ankolme, lying in
the Northwest part of this County: concerning which, the first mention that I
have seen in Record, is in 16 E. 1. the King then directing his Writ Esc. 16
E. 1. n. 47.
of Ad quod dampnum to the Shireeve of this County, to enquire, whether it
would be hurtful to him or any other, if the course of that water, then
obstructed from a place called Bishop's Brigge to the River of Humbre, were
opened; so that the current of the same might be reduced into it is due and
ancient Chanel. VVhereupon a Jury being impanelled accordingly, and sworn, did
say Esc. 16 E. 1. n. 47.
upon their Oaths, that it would not be to the damage of the said King, nor of
any other, but rather for the common benefit of the whole County of Lincoln,
if the course of that River, obstructed, in part, in diverse places, from
Bishop's Brigge to the River of Humbre, were open. And they farther said, that
by this means, not only the Meadows and Pastures would be drayned, but that
Ships and Boats laden with Corn and other things, might then more commodiously
pass with Corn and other things from the said River Humbre into the parts of
Lindsey, than they at that time could do, and as they had done formerly.

VVhereupon, about two years following, the King did constitute Pat. 18 E. 1.
m. 30. in dorso.
Gilbert de Thorntone, John Dive, and Raphe Paynell his Commissioners to cause
that Chanel to be so scoured and cleansed.

The like Commission Pat. 23 E. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
had the said Gilbert and Raphe in 23 E. 1.

And in 6 E. 2. the King being informed Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
that the Chanel of the said River of Ancolme, from Bishop's Brigge to the
Bridge at Feryby, which ought and had wont to be forty foot broad, was then
grown so narrow for fault of clensing and scouring, that in some places it
extended not to three foot in breadth; so that a great part of the adjacent
lands, were thereby frequently overflowed and drowned: and that men and Cattle
passing over Glaunford brigg, in the time of such Floods, were seldom out of
danger; he assigned Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
the said Raphe Paynell and Henry Bajocis to enquire the truth thereof, and to
cause redress therein to be made.

Diverse other Commissions also do I find to the same purpose; viz. in 3. E. 3.
to Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 1. m. 31. in dorso.
John de Heselarton, Peter de Ludington, Simon de Grimesby, and Richard de
Navilton, for the clensing thereof, from Glaunford brigge, before-specified, to
the River of Humbre: And likewise for the scouring of certain Sewers, betwixt
Elsham and Feriby, for default whereof the Lands thereabouts were overflowed.

In 19 E 3. to Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. in dorso.
Richard Byroun, Will. Disny, Will. de Hardesbull, Will. Darcy, John de Arches,
and Roger de Nevill, for the clensing of those Sewers betwixt Bishop's Brigge
and Feryby brigg.

In 23 E. 3. to Pat. 23 E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
John de Hothum of Bondeby junior, Richard Paynell, Will. de Skipwith, John de
Arches, Raphe de Redford, and John Cokand, for scouring the said Chanel from
Glaunford brigge to the River of Humbre, to the breadth of xl foot as it ought
and wont to be; as also of the Sewers betwixt Elsham and Feriby: and to make
enquiry concerning certain new Sewers, made from the said Town of Elsham to
Feryby by some of the Inhabitants of those parts, by their own authority, which
had occasioned much overflowing of the waters thereabouts.

In 30 E. 3. to Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
Adam de Everyngham of Rokleye, Will. Disny senior, Will. de Bray, and William
Wascelyn, for clensing the Chanel of Ancolme, as aforesaid.

In 36 E. 3. to Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
Raphe Paynell, William Bray, Will. Wascelyn, and Raphe de Redford, for the
same purpose.

In 39 E. 3. to Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 2. m. 31. in dorso.
Will. Drax, William Wascelyn and Will. Darcy, for clensing thereof betwixt
Bishops brigge and Humbre. So likewise in 40 E. 3. to Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 1. m. 34
in dorso.
John de Boys, Thomas de Fulnetby, Raphe de Redford, William Wascelyn, and
others.

And in 15 R. 2. to Pat. 15 R. 2. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
Sir Philip le Despenser, Sir Philip Darcy, and Sir Henry Retford Knights, John
Poucher, Will. Crosby, Gerard Sothill, Rob. Tirwhit, and Will. de Garton, for
the view and repair of the Banks, betwixt the Town of West-Rasyn, and the River
of Humbre, then broken in diverse places through the force of the Tides, and
floods of fresh waters descending down the Chanel of Ancolme.

Upon a pleading Plac. coram. R^ge ^^term. Tr^n 4 H. 4. rot. 13. Linc.
in 4 H. 4. it was found, that the Presentment made in the Shireeves turn, at
Castre, against the Abbot of Roche, that he ought to repair and cleanse the
Chanel of Ankholme, was insufficient; in regard it did not specify, that the
said water did overflow the Banks thereof, to the damage of the neighboring
Villages; neither specially, nor generally. And also because that the said
Shireeve did amerce the same Abbot in xl l. which amerciament ought to be
affered by four or two of the Jurors.

In 6 H. 5. Rob. Tirwhit, Will. Ludington, Richard Haunsard, Thomas Handley,
Walt. Talboys, John Talboys, Thomas Enderby, Richard Hawe, John Veer, and Rob.
Feryby were appointed Pat. 6 H. 5. p. 1. m. 21. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks and Sewers upon the said River of Ankholme, from
Bishops brigge to the water of Humbre, and the interjacent places: And to
proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

And in 22 E. 4. Will. Tirwhit Esquire, Robert Shefeld, Thomas Moigne, John
Moigne, Thomas Hanserd Esquire, and John Barde had Pat. 22 E. 4. p. 1. m. 22.
in dorso.
the like appointment: And to make fit and covenable Laws and Statutes for the
preservation of those Banks and Sewers, according to the Laws and Customs of
Romeney marsh: As also to take and employ so many Diggers and other Laborers
in that work upon convenient wages, as should be needful for the same, in
regard of the urgent necessity of expedition to be had therein.

Howbeit, after this time, till the xith year of the reign of the late King
Charles, I have not observed any thing else of moment, concerning these Marshes:
but then, at a general Session of Sewers, held at Glamford brigge, upon the
last day of March, 11o Car.
in the said year, for drayning of the Fenns and Carrs, lying on both sides of
the before-specified River of Ancholme, in the Lordships of Glentham, Bishops
Norton, Atterby, and several other; it was then and there ordered Ex ejusdem
Decreti exempli pe^e^ Ioh. Mounson m. l. de balnce. an. 1659.
by Will. Tirwhit, Will. Anderson, Marmaduke Darell, Samuel Owfield, Stephan
Anderson Esquires, and Richard Nelthorpe Gentleman, his Majesty's
Commissioners, that a Tax of xiij s. iiij d. should be assessed upon every acre
of land, found in a verdict of the said Session, in the Towns and places
aforesaid, for the drayning of those Fenns etc. and making a Sluse, or Clow,
near the out-fall of the said River.

Which said sums being not paid accordingly, the before-specified Fenns could
not be taken in hand: there was therefore another Commission shortly after
directed to Sir Robert Bell Knight, Sir Edward Ascogh, Knight, Sir William
Pelham Knight, Will. Tirwhit, Will. Anderson, Edmund Anderson, George
Glapthorne, and Edward Tourney Esquires, who, by virtue thereof sat at
Glamford brigge aforesaid, upon the xxiiijth day of August, then next
following: where they the said Commissioners, did decree Ibid.
and ordain, that those Fens should be forthwith taken in hand; and to that end
treated with some Foreign Undertakers; whose demands being found too high, and
all other Gentlemen refusing, Sir John Munson, Knight of the Honorable Order
of the Bathe (a person eminently qualified with learning, and sundry other
ample endowments) having a fair estate in this County, and no small proportion
of these surrounded Marshes; out of a noble desire to serve his Country;
declared, that he would be the undertaker thereof himself, upon the terms that
had been proposed by the Commissioners unto those Foreiners: and, to lay the
greater obligation upon them, left every Freeholder at liberty to adventure
for his own share, if they thought fit upon the same rates, and giving them a
months time to consider of it. Of which offer most of the great Lords and
owners of that Level accepted.

Whereupon the said Commissioners Ibid.
; First, that he the said Sir John Monson should and might forthwith set upon
the work, and accomplish it within the space of the six next ensuing years.

CC acres, which was to be left for Lakes and sikes, for the reception of
superfluous water within the same.

John, his heirs and Assigns, should at their own costs repair and keep all
Drayns and Sluses which were to be made conducing thereto: And, for the better
preserving of the said work, to make such new Drayns and Sluses, with Cart
bridges over them, where need should be, in such places as any six
Commissioners of Sewers, for the time being, should think fit.

John, his heirs and Assigns should have and enjoy five thousand eight hundred
and twenty seven acres of the said Fenns and Marshes; dischardged from all
Commons, Titles, Chardges, Interest and demand of all or any persons
whatsoever, to be assigned and allotted to them out of the said Lordships, or
any six of them, before the Feast Day of S. Michael the Archangel, in the year
of our Lord 1636. to be enjoyed from the time that the said grounds should be
adjudged to be drayned by the before-specified Commissioners.

John Monson, after the end of those six years, the abovementioned grounds
should happen to be again surrounded, and so continue for the space of one
whole year together; and that by view and judgment of the Commissioners, the
same should be so certified into the Chancery; that then, in case it were not
again inned, and made fit for erable, within six months after such certificate
transmitted into the Chancery, it should be lawful for the owners of the said
grounds, and their heirs, to enter into two thousand Acres of the said five
thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres, until the said grounds, so
drowned, should be again recovered by the said Sir John Monson etc.

Sixthly, that every person who had John, his heirs or Assigns, for every Acre
so improved, so much as by six of the Commissioners of Sewers, for the time
being, should be adjudged fit.

Seventhly, that in case the said River Ankolme, should, in order to this
drayning, be diverted by any new cut, such Lords of Mannours, and others, as
have had liberty of fishing in the old Chanel, should in lieu thereof, have the
like benefit and liberty in the new.

Eighthly, that where any man's ground

Which Decree of the before-specified Commissioners was exemplified under the
great Seal of England, by the Kings Letters Patents, bearing date 27o Octobris
14o Caroli.

After which, at another Session of Sewers, held by adjournment, at Glamford
brigge aforesaid, the fourth day of May in the xiiijth year of the said K.
Charles, by and before William Amcot, John Broxholme, Marmaduke Darrell, Thomas
Nethercot, Roger Gregory, and Mich. Mounckton Esquires; Tho. Hely, Hen-ry
Sandwith, John Barnard, Edw. Nelthorpe, Tho. Farmery and William Darvin
Gentlemen, Commissioners appointed for this Level upon the River of Ankolme,
extending from Bishops brigg, on the South, to Ferriby brigg on the North; and
from thence to the low water mark in Humbre, and into the Mannours of Glentham,
Bishop's Norton, and diverse others; after recital of the Decrees and Ordinances
made in the two former Sessions of 11o Caroli,: before taken notice of: And,
that at a Session of Sewers held likewise at Glamford brigg aforesaid, by and
before William Amcott, Marmaduke Darrell, John Broxholme Esquires, and others,
it was adjudged and declared, that the said Sir John Monson had, with the
expense of great ^umms of money, well and sufficiently drayned and recovered
those Fens and surrounded grounds, according to the tenor of the said Law, made
the 24th of August in the said 11th year of King Charles; the said Will. Amcott
and his associates abovementioned, did declare Ibid.
; that upon view and perambulation through the said level, they adjudged that
the said Sir John Monson had sufficiently drayned, and recovered those
surrounded grounds, according to the first undertaking therein.

And that therefore, considering the great chardge, which he the said Sir John
ha^ been at therein; and the advantage which had already accrued, and would
farther accrue to the Lords and owners, and all others interessed in the same:
as also the further chardge, which he the said Sir John was like to sustain
therein, did adjudge to him the said Sir John and his heirs, the
before-specified quantity of five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven
acres, according to the Statute de terris mensurandis, of the said Fenny
grounds; to be severed and divided in such sort from the said other grounds, as
he the said Sir John Monson, his heirs or assigns should think most convenient.
Which said number of Acres were accordingly assigned out of the several
Lordships etc. so drayned; according to a particular schedule, whereby the
number out of each is expressed. All which was exemplified in the said Kings
Letters Patents, dated at Westminster 24o Februarii 15o Caroli, the said
Commissioners and every interessed person seeming very well satisfied therewith.

Nevertheless, of such pernicious spirits were diverse of the Freeholders and
Commoners, that, taking advantage of the late troubles in this Realm, they did,
about the beginning of the late wars, re-enter upon those lands; by reason
whereof, not only the works became neglected, but the drayns have been filled
up, and Sluses decayed. And though the said Sir John Munson made his complaint
to those, who of late years took upon them reg^l power under the name of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; yet did he obtain no redress
therein.

CAP. XXIX.
I Now come to those Banks and Sewers, Lindsey.
in the other parts of this Province of Lindsey, whereof some do lie upon the
South side of Humbre, and the residue upon the Sea coast.

The first mention of these, wherewith I have yet met, is by a Fine Ex ve^.
membra^a pen^s M^untaga ^omi m^de Lindsey. an. 1660.
levied at Lincoln, upon the morrow after the Feast of the blessed Virgins
Purification in 41 H. 3. before John Abbot of Peterborough, Roger de Thurkelby,
Peter de Perci, Nicholas de Hanlou, and John de Wyvile Justices Itinerant and
others, betwixt Raphe Abbot of Croyland, Gilbert de Gaunt, Robert de Well,
Robert de Wilgeby, Nicholas de Grendale, Iollane de Hamby, and Gilbert de
Orreby Plantiffs; and William de Gaunt, and Alice his wife deforciants,
concerning a certain Sewer, which they claimed to have in the lands of the said
William and Alice, in Munby, and Hoggesthorpe: By the which Fine the said
William and Alice, did grant, for themselves and the Heirs of the said Alice;
that the before-specified Abbot and his successors, as also the said Gilbert de
Gant, and the rest, and their heirs; together with all the Tenants of the Fee
of Guy de Crun, Gilbert de Gaunt, and Robert de Tatersale, betwixt the Towns of
Brunthorpe and Orreby, should have a certain common Sewer, through the midst of
the lands of the said William and Alice, and the heirs of the said Alice, in
Munby and Hoggesthorpe, of xxiiij foot in breadth, for the drayning of all their
lands within that Fee (saving that the said Gilbert de Orreby, and his heirs,
should not drayn above three hundred Acres of land:) so that the same Sewer
should begin from Frethermersklide, and so extend it self to the Sea, by these
following bounds; viz. from Frethermersklide to Kamericroft; thence to
Grimescrike, and so through the midst of Haverholm, and the midst of Boyntoft
Common, unto the Sea-bank; thence to a certain bank, called N^w Haven, through
the middle of the Fen, unto the Sea; and that the said Abbot and his
successors, as also the said Gilbert, Robert etc. and their heirs, should have
liberty to scour, cleanse, and repair the said Sewer, and cast the earth on each
side thereof, at their pleasure, without the impediment of the said William and
Alice, and the heirs of the said Alice, for ever: For which grant and
concession, the said Abbot, Gil^ert, Robert etc. gave to the said William and
Alice the ^umm of xx l. sterling.

And the said Abbot, for himself and his successors; as also the said Gilbert,
Robert etc. for themselves and their heirs, did then Covenant to make and
maintain three Bridges, over the same Sewer, at their own proper costs and
chardges, by which Carts and Carriages might have passage; and likewise one
bridge betwixt Frethemskilde and Camericrofte; and two bridges betwixt
Haverholme and the Sea-bank; and one bridge for foot folk, betwixt the Church
of Munby, and the Chapel of S. Leonards in that Town: and moreover a certain
Gutter at the Sea-bank, by which the water which comes through the said Sewer,
may always pass into the Sea: so that if the said Abbot or his successors,
and the said Gilbert, Robert etc. or their heirs, should fail in maintaining
and repairing the said S^wer, Bridges, or Gutter, it might be lawful for the
said William and Alice, and the heirs of the said Alice, to distrain their
Cattle found in any of the lands of the said Fee, until the repairs of the
said Sewer, Bridges, and Gutter should be repaired.

After this, viz. in 8 E. 1. the King directed his Writ Es^. 8 E. 1. ^. 73.
to John Beke and the Shireeve of this County; commanding them to enquire by
the Oaths, as well of Knights as other honest and lawful men, within his
precincts, whether it would be to the damage of the said King, and the
Inhabitants of this Country, if the course of the River of Friskeney were
diverted, and brought into the Town of Grimesby, for the better opening of that
Port, which was then so filled up with silt and mud by frequent inundations,
that ships could not have free ingresse and egresse out of it.

VVhereupon a Jury being accordingly impanelled and sworn, did say upon their
Oaths, that the said River might be so diverted, without any damage to the
King, but to the prejudice of diverse of the Country; viz. of William de
Apeltrefeud, who then had the seat of a Mill, which he might, if he pleased,
new build, whereby it would yield him four pounds and t^o shillings by the
year: And that it would be to the damage of Sir Walter de la Lynde two
shillings, which he had wont to receive for drying of Nets upon his land: And
to the damage of Gilbert of Little Cotes, Robert de Kirketon, Sir Walt. de la
Lynde, Philip de Wynelesby, and their Tenants, four shillings; and four
shillings yearly, for two acres and an half of pasture.

And they said, that if it happened the same water of Friskeney to pass by
Milnewell Creek, the Town of little Cotes would lose it is Common of pasture of
two hundred Acres and more, except they should have a sufficient Bridge for
Carriages and Cattle to their said pasture: And moreover that if the same water
should be brought to Milnewel Cryke, as the Inhabitants of Grim^s^y desired, it
would be forced back by the Sea-rides, and overflow the land at great Cotes,
little Cotes, and Lysceby, to the damage of those Towns xl l. per annum; exc^pt
the Chanel of Mylnewelcryke were sufficiently dug, and strong Sluses made to
keep back the tides.

And they moreover found, that the said water was near to the same town of
Grimesby; and that the Chanel, so made, ought to contain in length Cxl perches,
and every perch to be xx foot in length, and in breadth xij perches: And that
the Burgesses of that Town might have benefit by the said current of water, for
the clensing of their Haven; and that it might be yearly worth vi s. viij d.

Upon a pleading Plac. coram Rege term. M^^h. 18 E. 1. rot. 45. Linc.
in 18 E. 1. touching the repair of a Sea-bank at Thedelthorpe, in a certain
place there, called ^othun, it appears, that the King assigned Will. de
Carleton and Will. de Candelesby to view the same, and to take order for the
repair thereof; who thereupon ordained, that every Acre should be taxed alike
for supporting the chardge thereof, notwithstanding any Custom to the
contrary: but the business was not fully determined at that time, Vide Plac.
de term. M^c^. 19 ^. 1. ^o^. 14.
because the Jurors appeared not till the Octaves of S. Martin.

In 26 E. 1. upon a suit plac. de Banco term. Mich. 26 E. 1. rot. 43. Linc.
concerning the repair of the Ditches and Sewers at Waynflete, the Jurors
found, that the Custom of that Town was such, that the Ditches there ought to
be cleansed every year for the drayning the lands belonging to that place; and
that every Inhabitant thereof, having lands there, ought to be assessed and
taxed according to the quantity of his lands, to contribute to the chardge of
such clensing and scouring of them. And they also found, that one Roger the Son
of Walter de Waynflet, being then assessed at two shillings for xxiiij Acres of
land, which he held there, denied not the said Custom; but alleged that the
money taxed for those repairs, ought, according to the said Custom, to be
levied and collected by certain of the Inhabitants of the said town, called
Dyke-rieves, and not by any others.

The next year following, upon a suit Plac. de Banco 27 E. 1. ot. 50. Linc.
comm^nced by Alan the son of Peter le Toller of North Weynflete, against
William le Toller, for the distraining of his Cattle at South Weynflete, in a
certain place called the Sale ham; the said William justified the taking of
that distress; and said, that such was the Custom in that Town^ of North
Waynflete, that as often as the Sewers there made for drayning of their lands,
did want repair, they ought to be viewed by the Commonalty of that place: and
that thereupon, every person having lands and Tenements there, ought to be
assessed for the repair of those Sewers according to the proportion of his said
lands. And the said William farther affirmed, that the said Alan was assessed,
by the before-specified Commonalty, for the repairing of seven Perches of a
certain Ditch, opposite to a place called Cannon dayle, by reason of seven
acres of land, which he held, that in former time belonged to the Ancestors of
one John de Bardne, and lay abutting upon that Ditch where the said seven
Perches wanted repair; and that he the said Alan neglecting to repair the same,
was distrained as abovesaid. Wher^unto the said Alan made answer, that he did
acknowledge the before-specified Custom; yet said, that he was not to perform
those repairs in respect of the seven Acres abovementioned, but for other
Tenements, viz. xl Acres of land, with the appurtenances, lying in Waynflete
aforesaid.

And in the same year, upon another suit Plac. de Banco Octab. Mich. 27 E. 1.
rot. 141. Linc.
betwixt the said par^ies, upon the taking of the like distress, the
before-specified William avowed; that such was the Custom in that Town of
North Waynflete, that certain of the Inha^itants ther^of were assigned to view
the Marsh-Ditches therein, every year on the Feast day of S. Andrew, and to
present the defaults which they should find in them, at the next Court of Henry
de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, then Lord of that Town: And that every Tenant of
that Lordship, who ought to make any repairs there, to be amerced in xvi d. at
the said Court. Whereunto the said Alan answered; that there might have been a
sufficient distress found by the same William, and not to have taken his
Cattle, which were for the Plow.

In 28. E. 1. Thomas de Burnham and Raphe de Friskeneye were constituted Pat.
28 E. 1. m. 13. in dors^.
Commissioners to view and repair the Banks and Sewers, in the Marshes of
Mers^e and Lindeseye; and chiefly the obstruction of a Sewer in those Marshes,
called the Flete.

So also were Ib. m. 12. in dorso.
Thomas de Burnham and Gilbert de Toutheby for those Ditches and Gutters in
North Weynflet.

Diverse other Commissions, of the like nature, do I find, viz. in 32 E. 1. to
Pa^. 32 E. 1. m. 2. in d^rso.
William Howard, Thomas de Burnham, and Raphe de Freskeneye, for the view and
repair of all the Banks, and Ditches, upon the Seacoast, in these parts of
Lindeseye. In 33 E. 1. to Pat. 33 E. 1. m. 3. in dorso.
the said Thomas de Burnham and Thomas de Gunneys for those in the parts of
Malberthorp, Thedilthorpe, and Saltfletby.

In 34 E. 1. to Pat. 34. E. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
the same Thomas de Burnham, Henry de Bayeux, and Roger de Cubbledike for those
at Little Cotes upon Humbre. In 35 E. 1. to Pat. 35 E. 1. m. 12. in dorso.
Raphe de Friskenay, Henry de Bayeux, Gilbert de Toutheby, and Robert de
Malborthorp, for all the Banks and Sewers in this Province of Lindsey.

In 2 E. 2. to Pat. 2 E. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
the said Henry de Bayeux, Nich. de Bolyngbrok, and Walter de Stalynburgh for
those at Northcotes, Tetenay, Humberstan, Thernesco, Itterby, Hole, Grymesby,
little Cotes, and great Cotes upon Hombre. As also to Ibid.
Rog. de Scotere, Walt. de Freskeneye, and Alan de Reytheby, for those at
Malberthorp and Thedilthorpe.

In 4 E. 2. to Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 1. m. 25 ^n dorso.
John de Kyme, Adam de de Well, Will. de Malberthorp, and others, for those
betwixt Mumby and Saltfletby. In 6 E. 2. to Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 3. in dorso.
the said Henry de Bayeux, Nicholas de Bolingbrok, and Walter de Stalingburgh,
for those betwixt Grimesby and Hotoft, and upon Trent, betwixt Burton-Stather,
and Torkesey.

In 7 E. 2. to Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 1. m. 3. in dorso.
Philip de Kime, Roger de Cubbeldyk, Walter de Friskenay and Rob. de
Malberthorp, for those Banks, Ditches, and Sewers throughout this whole
Province of Lindsey. The like Commission had Pat. 11 E. 2. p. 2. m. 4. in dorso.
Thomas Wiloughby, Walter Friskenay, Robert de Malberthorpe, and Robert de
Rigge, in 11 E. 2. So also in 12 E. 2. had Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
Simon de Chamberlayn, Gilbert de Toutheby, and Robert de Malberthorpe.

In the same 12 year of E. 2. to Ib. m. 17. in dorso.
Roger de ^ubbeldyke, Simon le Chamberleyn, and Walt. de Friskenay, for those
Banks and Sewers upon the Seacoast, betwixt Friskenaye and Thorpe, near
Waynfl^te..

In 14 E. 2. to Pat. 14. E. 2. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
Robert de Malberthorp, Simon Chamberleyn, and Thomas VVill^ghby, for those
betwixt Cokhill and North cotes. In 18 E. 2. to Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 1. m. 13. in
dorso.
Walter de Friskeney, Robert de Malberthorp, Peter de Skremy and Gilbert de
Toutheby, for those betwixt Grimes^y and Boston.

In 2 E. 3. the Burgesses of Grimesby, by their Peti^ion Esc. 2 E. 3. n. 119.
to the King and his Council, did represent; that whereas diverse Ships had
used, in time past, to land in that Port, with goods and several kinds of
Merchandise, to the great bene^it of the said Town, and of the parts adjacent:
And that the same Port, was then so choakt up with mud and filth, that they
could not come in at all: Whereupon they humbly besought him, that he would
grant to the said Burgesses, their h^irs and successors, for the advantage of
that Town, the water of Friskeneye, near thereto, with liberty to cut a Chanel
unto their Port, through the midst of a certain common of Pasture belonging to
those Burgesses; (which Common was the said Kings soil) to the intent that by
the current thereof, the mud and other impediments might be scouted out of the
said Haven. The King therefore, desiring to be certified, whether he might
condescend thereunto without any damage or inconvenience to himself or any
other, did assign Esc. 2. E. 3. n. 119.
Robert de Malberthorpe, Peter de Ludyngton, and Gilbert de Toutheby to enquire
thereof.

About two years after this, the Abbot of Louth park impleaded Plac. coram
Rege term. Pasch. 4 E. 3. rot. 82 Linc.
diverse of the Inhabitants of Somercotes, for stopping a certain Sewer there,
with dung and earth, by which means the water overflowed two hundred Acres of
his land, sowed with Corn there, and at Cokerington. Whereunto they answered,
that the said Abbot had caused a certain trench, called Skiterfletdyke, to be
made at Cokerington, by which trench the water went out of the before-specified
Sewer, and passed to Somercotes, and drowned the lands and meadows of that
Town; and that they observing what damage accrued thereby, it being made xl
years before, ^or preservation of the lands belonging to the said Abbey; did
then stop it up for the safeguard of their own lands: but what determination
was made therein, I find not.

In 8 E. 3. John de Brenkelde, John de Crosholme junior, Roger de Nevill and
Robert de Grenefeld were constituted Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 1. m. 42. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of those Banks and Sewers betwixt Burton
Stather and Gaynesburgh.

In 14 E. 3. the King being informed Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m. 40. in dorso^
that there was a certain Sewer, called Calsaa, in Merskland (within this
Province of Lindsey) which extended it self from a certain place called
Herleholme, unto the Sea; and which had been anciently made for preserving the
adjacent parts against the floods of fresh waters descending that way, was then
so straightned and obstructed by diverse persons inhabiting in those Towns,
which do lie on each side thereof, that the water which ought to pass through
it to the Sea, could not have such a current as it wont: he therefore assigned
Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m. 40. in dorso^
Adam de VVelle, John de Kirketon, Will. de la Land, and John de Brynhill,
his Commissioners to view the same, and to take order for the speedy clearing
thereof.

In 16 E. 3. the said Adam de VVelle, John de Hardreshulle, Thomas Priory of
Markeby, Richard Parson of the Church of Wythurne, John de Binkhull, and John
de Somercotes, were appointed Pat. 16 E. 3. p. 1. m. 29. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks, Ditches and Sewers upon the Seacoast, in the
Wapentach of Coleswath. The like appointment in 19 E. 3. had Pat. 19 E. 3. p.
2. m. 19. in dorso.
John de Wylughby, Peter de Scremby, Will. de Lokborne and John de Somercotes,
for those betwixt Grimesby and Boston.

In 21 E. 3. the King being informed, Pat. 21 E. 3. p. 2. m. 26. in dorso
that the course of the River of Wytherne, from Wytherne bridge to Herleholme,
and so to Thedelbrigg; thence to Saltflet Haven, was so choakt up with dung and
filth, as also through planting of Trees on the banks thereof, by diverse of the
Inhabitants thereabouts; that the lands and Tenements, of sundry persons, lying
near the said River, were overflowed by the fresh waters, which could not, by
reason of those obstructions, descend through that Chanel as they had formerly
done: he therefore constituted Pat. 21 E. 3. p. 2. m. 26. in dorso
Simon Fitz Rau^^ Richard de Goushill, John Totill of Lincoln, and Robert
Totill his Commissioners to view the same, and to cause it to be enlarged to as
great a breadth as it had in times past been of.

Diverse Commissions likewise had diverse persons, for the view of other banks
and Sewers in this Province; viz. in 23 E. 3. Will de Friskeney, Alexander de
Gibthorpe, and Hugh de Braytoft for Pat. 23 E. 3. p. 1. m. 31. in dorso.
those near Waynflete. In 25 E. 3. John de Willughby, John de Orreby, John de
Kirkton, and others, for those betwixt Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 3. m. 18. in dorso.
Ingoldmels and Germethorpe. So also had Gilbert de Umfravill Earl of Angos,
John de Sutton, Peter Bav^nt, John le Druyne and Will. de Stayne, for Ib^d.
those upon the Seacoast, betwixt Malberthorpe and Trossethorpe.

In 26 E. 3. the said Gilbert Earl of Angos, Nich. de Cantilupe, Will. de
Skipwith, Robert de Kirkeswold, and others, for Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. ^^
dorso.
those betwixt Boston and Barton. In 28 E. 3. Sir John de Willughby, Sir Will.
de Toutheby and Sir Peter Bavent Knights, Robert de Elkyngton, and Stephan
Toures, for Pat. 28 E. 3. ^. 1. m. 27. in dorso.
those betwixt Ingel^m^^s and Grimesby.

In 30 E. 3. Will de Skipwith, John de Gaunt, Adam de Wodethorpe, and Robert de
Elkyngton, for Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 2. m. 15. in dor^o.
those from Waynflete to Grimesby: and to proceed therein according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm.

In 32 E. 3. upon diverse complaints Pat. 32 E. 3. p 2. m. 16. in dor^o.
then made unto the King, that there was a certain Causey, called Hildyke,
which is the Kings High way from Boston toward the River Humbre, and diverse
banks in the Town of Sibceye so ruinous and broken, that the men of those parts
suffered much damage thereby: he appointed Pat. 32 E. 3. p 2. m. 16. in dor^o.
Simon Symeon, John de Alkebarowe, Robert de Elkyngton, and Robert Malbys to
enquire by the Oaths of lawful men of this Province, and of Holand, who ought
to repair the same.

The next year following, Will. Ha^lay, Rob. de Elkyngton, John de Hagh and
Rob. Gunnays were assigned Pat. 33 E. 3. ^. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
to view the Banks and Ditches from Saltflet Haven to Waynflet, and to cause
them to be repaired where need ^equired. The like assignation Pat. 34 E. 3. p.
1. m. 17. in dorso.
in 34 E. 3. had Peter Bavant, Will. Haulay, Rob. de Elkyngton, Will. de
Stayne and Thomas de Cumberworth for those from Anderby Haven to the Haven of
Germethorpe. So likewise in 36 E. 3. had Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Will. de Huntyngfeld, Will. de Skypwith, Will. de Swynythwayt, and others,
for Ib. m. 33. in dorso.
those betwixt Wrangle and Grymes^y.

In 37 E. 3. Will. de Huntyngfeld, Godefrey de Foljaumbe, Will. de Hauley, and
others, were appointed Pat. 37 E. 3. p. 1. m. 46. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks and Sewers within the Soke of Munby.

And in 38 E. 3. William de Skipwith, G^defrey de Foljaumbe, and others, had
Pat. 38 E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
the like appointment for those from the Town of Wrangill to Barton upon
Humbre; and to hear and determine all things therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm.

In 40 E. 3. upon a Writ Ex bund. de Brev. and R^co^dis Wall as and^.
tangentibus temp. E. 3. n. 9.
of Certiorare, directed to Gilbert de Umframvill, Earl of Angos and others his
associates, then Justices of Sewers in this County, touching their proceedings
in a Commission directed to them for the view of the Banks and Ditches, betwixt
Boston and Barton aforesaid; and enquity through whose default the breaches and
decays therein were not repaired, they certified, that the Jurors impanelled
and sworn before them, by virtue of that Commission, did upon their Oaths
present Ibid.
, that it would be much to the benefit of the North Common of Burghe near
Waynflete; and of the Tenants of the lands, Meadows, and Pastures in Wynthorpe
and Ingoldmels, on the West part of a certain Wardyke, called D^fdyke, that
there should be a new Sewer made in Wyntho^pe, cont^ining in breadth xij foot by
the Kin^s El^; for the drayning of the lan^, meadow, and Pastur^s there; viz.
from a place called Nedderhowe, in Wynthorpe, u^^o a com^on High way called
Ch^lg^t^; beginning first from Nedder^owe at the lands sometime belonging to
Robert Herrier of Wynthorpe, on the East and West part, and the lands of Robert
the son of William Buttercake of W^nthorpe on the East part: and thence betwixt
the lands of the said Rob. on both parts, to the common high way called
Chelgate. And that one Floudgate should be new made and fixed athwart the same
high way, by which the said Sewer might run; whereupon a Bridge to be erected
by which travailers and Carriages might securely pass too and fro: and from
that Floudgate the said water to pass into an old Sewer made in Skegnes, to
Whete croft got, within that town, and thence to the main Sea.

And they said, that the quantity of the Lands, Meadows and Pastures aforesaid,
which had preservation and benefit by the said Sewer, were MCLxix Acres and 1
Rode, whereof every Acre was assessed at xij ^. for making of the said
Floud-gate, and bridge; the name of every Land-hold^r and the particular number
of Acres then held by him being there expressed.

In 41 E. 3. Sir Godefrey Foljaumbe, Sir Will. Croiser, and Sir John D^mock
Knight^, Simon Simeon, and others, were appointed Pa^. 41 E. ^. ^. 1. m. 19. in
^ors^.
to view and repair the Banks and Sewers upon the Verge of the River of Wythom,
from Marton dyke to Boston. The like Pat. 42 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in dors^.
appointment in 42 E. 3. had Thomas de Ingelby, Godefrey Foljaumbe, Simon
Simeon, with others, for those betwixt the Towns of Skidbroke and Humberstone.
So also had Ibid.
the said Thomas de Ingelby, John Moubray, Godefrey Foljaumbe, Will. Croiser,
and others, for those betwixt Boston and Stikeswald.

Several other Commissions do I find, afterward to the like purpose; viz. in
42 E. 3. to P^t. 43 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. in dors^.
the said Godefrey Foljambe, John de Staf^ord, and John de Nessefeld Cl^rks,
John de Haghe and John Amery, for those from Sa^tdet haven to Waynflet.

In which year it was presented Ex Collect. p ^^ Com^^^ de Lindsey.
; that the Sewer, pas^ng on the West part of of the High Road, which drayned
^heves Creke, South lade, Northlade, Lusdyke, and Bullingbrooke Fenn, ought to
be repaired by the Tenant of the Duke of Lancasters fishing in Waynflete.

In 44 E. 3. to Pat. 44. E. ^. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
Richard de Rave^sere Archdeacon of Lincoln, Sir John de Well Knight, Thomas
de Ingelby, and others, for those betwixt Ingoldmels and Grymesby. Pat. 47 E.
^^ p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
In 47 E. 3. to Henry Asty, John de Boys, Will. Wascelyn, and others, for those
betwixt Buterwyk and Doneheved. In 48 E. 3. to Pat. 48 ^. ^. p. 1. m. 30. ^^
dorso.
the same Henry and John, with Thomas de Brunham, and others, for those betwixt
Gaynesourgh and Doneheved.

In 49 E. 3. to Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. ^^ dorso.
Robert de Wylughby, Rob. de Crumwell, Will de Skipwith, and others, for those
betwixt Skegnes and Grymesby.

In 3 R. 2. to Pat. 3. R. 2. p. 1. m. 44. in dorso.
Sir Robert de Wylug^by, Sir Raphe de Cromwell, and Sir Will. de Skipwith
Knights, John de Hagh, and others, for those betwixt Skegnes and Goushull. In 4
R. 2. to Pat. 4 R. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
John K. of Castile and Leon, Robert de Wylughby, John de Well, Raphe de
Crumwelle, Will. de Skipwith, and other^, for those betwixt the Towns of
Wrangell and Barton upon Humbre.

The like in 6 R. 2. to Pat. 6 R. ^. p 1. m. 9. in dorso.
the same John K. of Castile etc. Henry de Percy Earl of Northumberland, Robert
de Wilughby, and others. So also to l Henry Asty, Will. de VVilughby, John
Bussy, John de Hawe, Robert de Haldanby, and others, for those betwixt
Gaynes^urgh and Doneheved, upon the Verge of Trent.

In the same year to Ibid.
Sir Will. de Skipwith, Sir Will. de Wilughby, and Sir Raphe Paynell Knights,
and others, for those betwixt the Towns of Coryngham and Frethyngham: And
betwixt Gaynesburgh and Coryngham.

In 12 R. 2. to Pat. 12 R. 2. ^. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
John Markham, Gerard de Sothill, Hugh de Mitford, and others, for those
betwixt Gaynesburgh and Burton Stather, on the East side of Trent; and betwixt
a certain place called Pressed croft dyke and Donehed, on the West part thereof.

In 13 R. 2. to Pat. 13 R. 2. p. 2. m. 9. in ^orso.
Sir John de Well, Sir Thomas Hungerford, and Sir Will. Skipwith Knights,
John de Rochford and John Hawe, for those betwixt Tedeney and Skegenay. In 15
R. 2. to Pat. 15. R. 2. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
Sir Philip Spenser, Sir Henry Retteford, and Sir John Powether Knights, Will.
Crosby, John Hawe, Will. Holme, and John Redenesse, for those upon the coast
of Humbre in the Marshes of Stallyngburgh, betwixt the Towns of Imyngham and
great Cotes.

By an Inquisition Ex collect. praeno. Mo^^tagu^ Comi^^s de Lindsey, an. 1660.
taken at Bullingbroke, before John Rocheford, John de la Land, and John
Wallis, in the 17th year of King Rich. 2. and in the presence of John Bushey
high Steward of the Duchy of Lancaster, it was found; that the Sewer called
Goodike, extending it self through the East fenne unto the Eas end, had wont
and ought to be xvi foot in breadth, betwixt the banks, and in depth eight foot;
but was then stopped by a VVear which Walter de Athall, and Walter Randson
had made there, North lade Sewer.
for that it was not then four foot deep: and that it ought to be scoured and
cleansed by the said Walter and Walter, Fermours of the fishing there; or
whomsoever else should be the Fermours thereof, by the assignation and dimise
of the Lords of Bus^ingbroke and Dalby, or their Bailiffs.

And it was also presented, that the Sewer called the South lade, South lade
Sewer.
extending from the Eastfenne aforesaid, unto the Eas end, ought and had used
to be in breadth xvi foot, and in depth eight foot; and likewise to be repaired
by those Fermours as aforesaid; but was then also stopped by those Fermours of
the Fishing. And that the Banks of a third Sewer, called Lyme, Lyme S^wer.
beginning at Stepinge mill, and extending it self to the Clow, betwixt Steping
and Thorpe, ought to be repaired and raised higher by the Township of Thorpe:
And thence to the Ease end (called Lusdyke) the bank on the East side, to be
repaired by the Towns of All hallows, and S. Mary's, so that the water running
into the said Sewers, might no way enter the Fenn.

And that the said Sewer from the Clowes of Thorpe to the Eas end, ought to be
xvi foot in breadth, and eight foot in depth, being then obstructed by a VVear,
which those Fermours of the Fishing had set up. And that Henry Earl of
Northumberland, of right ought to repair the same Sewer from the Clowes to the
Southdykehyrne, by reason that he held the Fishing there, in severalty, as
belonging to his Manor of Thorpe. And that the Lords of Bullingbroke and
Dalby, or their Fermours, ought to cleanse the said Sewer, from Southdike hirne
unto the Eas end, because they had the fishing there in severalty.

And they likewise presented, that there was a fourth Sewer, Theviscri^ Sewer.
called Theviscrik, beginning in the Mosses of Friskenay, at William
Barnagates, and extending it self to the Eas end, where the four streams do
meet; and that it ought to be in breadth ten foot, and dept five; but was then
also obstructed by a certain Were which the Fermours of the fishing had made;
and ought to be repaired by the said Town of Friskenay.

And that the Sewer, Eas end Sewer.
called Eas end, where the four streams meet, ought to be in breadth forty
foot, and in depth fourteen to the Sea; and repaired by the Soke of
Bullingbroke, as often as need should require.

And they farther presented, that it would be requisite that a new pair of
Floud-gates should be made at the Damme, in breadth xij foot, and depth
according to the discretion of skilful persons: And that all the Towns within
the Soke of VVapentake of Bolingbroke; as also the towns of Wrangle, Leake,
Leverton, Benington, Butterwick, Freston and Tofte, ought of right to repair,
maintain, open and shut those Floud-gates, at proper times, on their own costs
and chardges for ever, excepting in Timber, Iron Work, and also Wages of
Carpenters.

And to the end that all discord, betwixt those Towns, touching the repair of
the said Floud-gates, might for the time to come be prevented, it was then
accorded, by and between them, with the common assent as well of the said Duke
of Lancaster's Counsel, the Lord of Willughby and Abbot of Revesby, as of all
other Lords and Inhabitants, or their Freeholders, dwelling in those Towns, in
form following; viz. that every of the said Townsmen, should then, at the
first, levy and collect for the said repair, the fourth part of such a sum, as
the same Town had anciently been assessed at to a Fifteen granted and payable
to the King by the Commons of England: Which said sum, so levied, to be
delivered unto two discreet men, to be chosen by four, throughout all those
Towns; who should be obliged from year to year as follows. First, two of the
Soke of Bullingbroke, at the next Court of the Duke of Lancaste^, at
Bullingbroke, before Michaelmasse yearly, to be held before the Steward, or his
Deputy there: And two other of the Towns within the Wapentake of Skirbeck above
named, to be chosen from year to year, at the said Duke's Court, next before
Michaelmasse, at Wrangle, before the Steward thereof or his Deputy: which four
so to be elected, to be as well of the Tenants of the said Lord, as of the
Tenants of any other Lords, according to discretion: And they to meet at
Waynflete twice every year; viz. once within a month after Easter and
Michaelmasse, and then to oversee those floud-gates, and all the Sewers
aforesaid; and if any defect should be found in them, then to cause them to be
repaired and amended, with all speed, according as in their discretions they
should think most meet. And, that at such their meeting, after Easter, the said
two, so elected for those disbursements, as aforesaid, to render their Account,
before the said four, touching those common repairs, and expenses.

And in 17 R. 2. to Pat. 17. R. 2. p. 2. m. 37. in dorso.
Sir Philip Tilney Knight, John de Crosby, John de Rocheford of Boston, John
Laund of Pynchebek, Thomas de Tofte, and John Waleys, for those betwixt Hildyke
and Bolyngbroke; and to hear and determine all things therein according to the
Law and Custom of this Realm,
and the Custom of Romeney marsh: as also to take up so many Laborers, upon
competent wages, as they should think needful for that work, considering the
necessity of expedition therein.

In 19 R. 2. there was a Presentment Plac. cora a Rege term. Pasch. 19 R. 2.
rot. 27. L^nc.
made in the Kings Bench, in Easter term (which was then held at Lincoln) by
the Jurors of diverse VVape^takes in this County, that the Marshes of Est Fenne
and Westfenne; as also diverse Lands, Meadows and Pastures lying in the towns of
Leek, Wrangel, Fr^fkeneye and Waynflete, betwixt the waters of Wythom and
Waynflete, were drowned by a great ^undation of water, so that all the
Inhabitants of those towns, and of the Soke and VVapentake of Bolingbroke, did
wholly lose the benefit of their lands and Marshes there, through the defect of
a certain floud-gate at Waynflete, which was so narrow that the course of the
waters passing that way, could not go to the Sea; and that the town of
Waynflete ought to repair that floud-gate, as anciently they had wont to do.
And the said Jurors farther alleged, that the same floud-gate, was not of
breadth and depth sufficient to convey the said water to the Sea; and that it
would be necessary to have another floud-gate new erected, near unto the same,
of xviij foot in breadth; and that the towns of Leek, Wranghill, Friskeney, and
Waynflete, together with the Soke and VVapentake of Bolingbroke; as also all
th^se which had Common of Pasture in the said Marshes, ought to contribute to
the making thereof. And that when is should be made, then the said town of
Waynflete, to repair and maintain it, at their own proper costs, until it
should be necessary to make it anew, excepting timber and Iron: And they said
moreover, that except this were done, both the Marshes, lands, meadows, and
Pastures aforesaid, and Commons in those towns, Soke and wapentake
before-specified, would wholly be lost. And they also said, that there was a
certain Sewer, from Hasend at UUaynflete, unto the said Floud-gates, wherein
the Duke of Lancaster and the Lord of Dalby had fishing; who in respect thereof
ought to repair and cleanse the same. The Shireeve thereof had command to summon
all those Towns to answer this their neglect.

The next year following, the Towns of Dunham, Scothorne, Reres^y and Staynton,
being presented Plac. coram Rege term. Mich. 20 R. 2. tot. 16. Linc^
for neglecting to repair the Sewer called Fen dyke, which extends it self from
the town of UUelton to Langwath; and not denying but that they ought to
maintain the same, were each of them amerc'd at xl d.

In the same year the Inhabitants of Wytherin, Scrubby, UUodethorpe, Malteby,
Besby, Hamby, Markeby, Billesby, Alford, UUelle, Salby, Thoresthorpe, Riggesby,
and Aby, being presented Plac. coram Rege term. Hill. 20 R. 2. ^ot.... Linc.
for not repairing the Sewer, called the South g^ist, lying betwixt
Malberthorpe and Trusthorpe, which extends it self from a place called
Axiltrehirne to the Sea; and by which all the course of the water of those
towns, had used of right to run to the Sea, for the safeguard of the said
Towns: which said Sewers, together with the Got, called UUall-gote, was then
stopped up; did put themselves upon the Country: the Shireeve therefore had
command to summon a Jury thereupon.

In the same year also Will. Lord Wilughby, Raphe Crumwell, Philip Spenser,
Robert Tirwhit and Robert Cumberworth were appointed Pat. 20 R. 2. p. 1. m. 12.
in do^so.
to view and repair the Banks and Sewers betwixt Grymesby and Waynflete; and to
do all things therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the
Custom of Romney marsh.
The like appointment Pat. 21 R. 2. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
the next year following, had the said William, Raphe, and Philip, with Richard
Muriell and Albine de Endirby for the same Banks and Sewers; and direction to
proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of the Marsh.

In which year, I find it presented, that Ex collect. praef. Comitis de Lindsey.
the Sewer, called the Ea, ought to be repaired, from the West end thereof,
unto the Sea, by Walter Athall, Fermour of the Duke of Lancaster's ^ishing,
and Walter Ranson, Fermour of the Lord of Dalbye's fishing. And, that the
South-west bank of Lusdyke, ought to be repaired by the village of All Saints
in UUaynflete. As also that the Chanel of Lusdyke from Stordyke unto the Eas
end, ought to be repaired by the same village: And that the Ea, from the West
end thereof, unto Normandeepe, ought to be repaired by the Fermours of the
fishing belonging to the said Duke, and to the Lord of Dalby.

In 1 H. 4. Henry Earl of Northumberland, Sir Will. de Wilughby, Sir Walter
Pedwardyn, and Sir John Rochefort Kts. Robert Tirwhit, Will. Michel, and Albine
de Enderby, had Commission Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 4. m. 32. in dorso.
for the view and repair of those Banks and Sewers betwixt Boston and
Friskeney; with power to hear and determine all things therein according to the
Law and Custom of this Realm,
and the Custom of Romeney marsh: and to take so many Diggers and other
Laborers, upon competent wages, in respect of the great and instant necessity,
as they should think requisite to be employed in the said work.

Other Commissions of the like kind, were, shortly after, directed to sundry
persons; viz. in 6 H. 4. to Pat. 6 H. 4^ p. 2. m. 14.
Will. de VVylughby, John de Rocheford, Rob. Elkyngton, Will. de Ludington,
Thomas Somercotes, Thomas de Enderby, John Symons and Robert White, for those
within the precincts of UUrangle, to Barton upon Humbre; with appointment to
proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm: and so likewise
in 7 H. 4. to Pat. 7 H. 4^ p. 2. m. 24. in dorso.
the same William, John, Albine de Enderby, Will. de Ludington, and others.

In 9 H. 4. to Pat. 9 H. 4. p. 2. m. 21. in ^orso.
Will. Lord VVylughby, Sir Walter Talboys, and Sir Richard Haunserde Knights,
Robert Tirwhit, Will. de Lodyngton, Will. Michel and Thomas Enderby, for those
betwixt Boston and Trent.

In 10 H. 4. to Pat. 10 H. 4^ p. 1. m. 13. (...) dorso.
Sir Will. de Wylughby, and Sir John de Rocheford Knights, Will. Lodyngton,
Thomas Wace, Richard de Bradlay, and Will. Boleyne, for those betwixt Boston
and Skegeneys, and in diverse towns and places within the Sokes of Bolyngbroke
and Horncastre; with direction to proceed therein according to the Custom of
the Marsh, and the Law and ancient Custom of this Realm.

In 11 H. 4. to Pat. 11 H. 4. p. 1. m. 3. in dorso.
Robert Tirwhit, Sir John Rocheford Knight, Robert Waterton, John Waterton,
John Skipwyth, Will. Lodyngton, Richard Tournay, Richard Bradley, and Thomas
Wace, for those betwixt Boston and Friskeney, and to act therein according to
the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom anciently used in that
place. In 12 H. 4 to Pat. 12 H. 4. part unica m. 41.
Robert Lord Wylughby, Sir Thomas Wylughby Knight. Robert Tirwhit, Robert Waterton
and others, for those betwixt Boston and UUaynflete; with appointment to do all
things therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm: The like
Commission Pat. 12 H. 4. part unica m. 23. in dorso.
, the same year, had Rob. Tirwhit, Sir Richard Haunsard Knight, Will.
Lodyngton, Nich. Tournay, Thomas Claymond, Henry Morley, John Skipwith, and
Robert Feriby, for those Banks and Sewers, from Littulburgh all along the River
of Trent to Humbre: and from Bishops brigges (on the River of Ancolme) to
Humbre.

So also had Ex collect. praefati Comitis de Lindsey.
Thomas VVace, Richard Bradley, and others, for all the Banks and Sewers
throughout this whole Province of Lindsey, as also for those betwixt Boston and
Friskeney: before whom (sitting at Bullingbrooke, on Friday being the Feast day
of S. Ambrose) the Jurors presented upon Oath; that it would be fit, for the
preservation of the Eastfenne, that the Dam of Waynflete be shut throughout the
whole year, that the salt water being kept out of the wash, the grass and
weeds growing therein might be totally destroyed: and to be thus stopped up, by
the towns of the Wapentake of Bullingbroke, and the Inhabitants of UUrangle,
Leake, Leverton, Benington, Butterwik, Freston, and Tofte, in such sort, that
the water descending from the mountainous parts of Lindsey, and running into a
certain Sewer called Lusdyke, in Lindsey, viz. in Thorpe, UUainflete, and
Stepinge, should be so kept within the bounds of a certain trench, that it
might not enter into the said Wash of the Est fenne, but keep it course to the
Haven of UUaynflete, and thence to the main Sea.

In 13 H. 4. the King, by his Attorney, impleaded Plac. coram Rege term. Hi^^
13 H. 4. rot. 53. Linc.
Will. Leveryk of Irby, and Isabell his wife, for making of a Ditch in a
certain place in UUaynflet called Hall dale, by means whereof four Sewers which
passed the fresh waters from Bullingbroke and other Towns adjacent, in Est
fenne and UUest fenne, became obstructed, to the prejudice of the said Kings
fishing there, and the overflowing of four Acres of his said land.

In 1 H. 5. Robert Tirwhit, Sir Richard Haunsard and Sir William Frank Knights,
Thomas Enderby, Richard Hawe and Simon Louthe were constituted Pat. 1 H. 5. p.
1. m. 21. in do^so.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Sewers and Ditches, from
Wytherne to the Sea, and betwixt Saltfletby, and Trusthorpe; and to do all
things therein according to the Law and Custom of the marsh. Diverse other
Commissions to the like purpose, were shortly after directed to sundry other
persons; viz. in 6 H. 5. to Pat. 6 H. 5. ^. 1. m. 21. in do^so.
the same Rob. Tirwhit, Will. Lodyngton, Tho. Cumberworth, Roger Flore, Thomas
Enderby, Thomas Somercotes, John Kyme and John Langholme, for all the Banks and
Sewers in this Province of Lindsey: In which Commission they had direction to
proceed according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

In 1 H. 6. to Pat. 1 H. 6. p 1. m. 30. in dorso.
the same Robert Tirwhit, Thomas Santone, Robert Feryby, Robert Wasselyn, Henry
Morlay and Thomas Belwode, for those betwixt the Rivers of Trent and Ankholme:
wherein they were to act according to the Custom of the Marsh, and the Law and
Custom of the Realm. In 4 H. 6. to Pat. 4 H. 6. ^. 1. m. 9. in dorso.
Sir Robert Wylughby, Sir Raphe Crumwell, Sir William Crumwell, and Sir Raphe
Rochford Knights, Walter Talboys, Robert Tirwhyt, John Kyme, Richard Hawe and
John Veere for all the Banks, Ditches and Sewers throughout this coast of
Lindsey. In 6 H. 6. to Pat 6 H. 6. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
John Beaumont, Sir Will. Tirwhit Knight, John Ellerker, Robert Feryby, John
Tourney, and others, for those betwixt Grymesby and Burton Stather.

In 9 H. 6. to Pat. 9 H. 6. p. 1. m. 23. in dorso.
Sir Robert Wylughby, Sir Raphe Crumwell, and Sir Raphe Rocheford Knights, John
Ellerker, Walter Talboys, and others, for all within this whole Province of
Lindsey; with direction and power to make Laws and Ordinances for the safeguard
and preservation of the Seacoasts and Marshes of the same, and of the adjacent
parts, consonant to the Laws and Customs of Romeney marsh; and to hear and
determine of all things touching the same, according to the Law and Custom of
this Realm, and the Custom of the said Marsh: As also to impressed so many
Artificers and other Laborers, for that work, upon reasonable salaries, as
they should deem necessary to employ therein, considering the great and urgent
necessity to hasten the same. The like Commission Pat. 1^ H. 6. p. 1. m. 16. in
^o^so.
in 11 H. 6. had the said Sir Robert Wylughby, Sir John Beaumont, Sir Raphe
Cromwell, and Sir Thomas Cumberworth Knights, James Strangways, John Ellerker,
and others.

In 12 H. 6. it was found Ex collect. praef. Comi^^^ de Lindsey.
by Inquisition, that the Haven of Waynflete ought to be repaired by the
Tenants of the Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord of Dalby. And so likewise the
Ea, from that bridge, which is toward the Church of All Saints, toward the
Dam.

And in 15 H. 6. I find Ibid.
that there was an allowance of xxij l. iiij s. ix d. for the repair of that
Haven; whereof the Lord of Dalby, for his third part, allowed vij l. viij s.
iij d. and the Lord of Bullingbroke xij l. iij s. ij d. over and above Liij s.
iiij d. to be paid by the Bailiff, upon agreement. At which time it was
likewise presented, that the said Haven of Waynflete, from the Dam unto
Lymgreynes, and thence to Norman d^epe, ought to be repaired by the Lords of
Bullingbroke and Dalby.

In 17 H 6. at a Session of Sewers held at Louthe, upon Saturday next after the
Feast of the Epiphany, before Richard Haghe and John Langholme, with their
associates, then in Commission for the view and repairs of the Banks, Ditches,
and Sewers in these parts, there was a presentment Ex bund. de Brev. and
R^cordis W^llias etc. tangenti^us. ^. 19.
exhibited by the Jurors; showing, that it would be most profitable and
necessary for the drayning and evacuation of the superfluous water, from the
North Common of Wynthorpe toward the Sea, that there should be made one new
and competent Sewer in that common, extending it self from Tonlond gate, in
Wynthorpe, unto a certain Sew^r there, called the Old Sewere, and so descending
toward the North, unto the Fee of the Duchy of Lancaster, called Fivescore
acres in Ingoldmels: thence toward the East into a certain Sewer there, called
the Old Sewer, where it would be commodious and expedient, for the conduct of
the superfluous water toward the Sea, to make a new Gutter in that very place,
where the Chanel called the Old Got, in Ingoldmels was, unto the said Old
Sewer; and so descending to the Fee of the Lord Wylughby and Sir John Gryffith
Knight, called Redelandes, in Sk^gnes; and thence into a certain Sewer, called
the Old Sewer in Skegnes, to the Sea. And that the said Sewer and Gutter, ought
to be made, and afterward repaired by all those who had lands or Tenements in
the North Common of Wynthorpe, and the North Common of Skegnes, in respect of
what they enjoyed in those places; that is to say, every one according to the
number of his Acres there: and by the Land-holders of Fivescore Acres, in
Ingoldmels aforesaid; viz. every man according to the number of his Acres
there. The Shireeve therefore of this County, was commanded to summon all the
said Land-holders, in the said places called the North Common of Wynthorpe; and
the North Common of Skegnes, and likewise in the Fivescore Acres in Ingoldmels
beforementioned, to appear before the abovementioned Commissioners, at
Louthe, upon the Monday before Palm Sunday then next ensuing, to show what
they could say for themselves, why they ought not to make and repair those
Sewers according to the form of the before-specified Presentment.

At which day Robert Etton, then the Kings Attorney, came to Louthe aforesaid;
but the said Shireeve not receiving his Precept soon enough, could not summon
those Land-holders to be there as abovesaid: therefore he was required to give
them warning to appear at Burwell on the Monday in Whitson week, then next
following: which he did do accordingly, but none of them came: the Court
therefore ordered that the before-specified Sewers and Gutter should be made
and repaired by all the said Land-holders, at their own proper costs and
chardges, according to the form of the same Presentment.

In 22 H. 6. Sir Robert VVylughby, Sir Leon Wells, and Sir Raphe Cromwell Kts.
Robert Sheffield, John Langholme, and others, were constituted Pat. 22 H. 6. p.
1. m. 17. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of all the banks etc. in these parts of
Lindsey; and to determine all things therein according to the Custom of the
Marsh till that time used and approved, and according to the Custom of this
Realm.

In 24 H. 6. John Viscount Beaumont, Sir Raphe Cromwell, Sir Thomas
Cumberworth, and Sir William Tirwhit Knights, John Tailboys, Richard Waterman,
Robert Sheffield, and others, had the like Commission Pat. 24 H. 6. p. 2. m.
18. in dorso.
for the view and repair of all the Banks, Ditches and Sewers in the Wapentakes
of Yarburgh, Mauley, Coryngham, We^le, Lanres, Haslokhowe, and Walsh croft,
within this Province; and to make Laws and S^atutes proper for the same,
consonant to the Laws and Customs of Romeney marsh: As also to do all things
therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of that
Marsh: And to take so many Laborers, upon competent wages to be employed in
the said work, as should be necessary for the same, considering the great
necessity of expedition to be used therein.

Many other Commissions for the Banks and Sewers as well throughout this whole
Province as in sundry places thereof, were afterward issued out to several
persons of the superior rank, in these parts, viz. in 29 H. 6. to Pat. 29 H.
6. p. 1. m. 13. in dorso.
Sir Robert Wylughby, Sir Leon Wells, and Sir Raphe Cromwell Knights, Richard
Welles Esquire, John Taylboys, Rich. Waterton, and others, for those Banks
etc. throughout this coast of Lindsey; with direction and authority to proceed
therein as abovesaid. So likewise in 31 H. 6. to Pat. 31 H. 6. p. 1. m. 22. in
dorso.
John Viscount Beaumont, Sir Leon Wellys, and Sir Raphe Cromwell Knights, John
Tailboys, and others. As also to Ibid.
the said John and Raphe, with Sir Hugh Wythom Knight, Richard Bedyngton, and
others, for those within the Precincts of Skegney, Dodyngton-Pygote, and
Tydgote, in this County.

In 34 H. 6. to Pat. 34 H. 6. pa^te unica m. 23. in dorso.
the said John Viscount Bea^mont, John Taylboys, Richard Waterton, Robert
Sheffield, and others, for those in the Wapentakes of Yarburghe, Manley,
Coryngham, Well, Laures, ^aslokhowe and Walshcrofte in these parts of
Lindeseye.

In 35 H. 6. to Pat. 35 H. 6. p. 2. m. 19. in dorso.
the said John, Sir Richard Wells, Lord Wylloughby, John Taylboys, Robert
Sheffield, Richard Benyngtone of Boston, and others, for all those throughout
this whole coast.

The like Commission Pat. 2. E. 4. p. 1. m. ^o in do^so.
in 2 E. 4. had Sir Humfrey Bourchier, Lord Cromwell, Sir William Skipwith
Knight, Thomas Burghe, Thomas Blount, John Whichecote, and diverse others.

In 6. E 4. to Pat. 6 E. 4. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Richard Pynchebek, Richard Welby, John Pynchebek, Thomas Meres, Leonard
Thornburgh, and others, for those Banks and Sewers from Skegnes and
Dodyngton-Pygot, to Tyddegote.

In 7 E. 4. Thomas Kyme of Friskeney, and others, had the Ex coll^ct. prae^.
Co^itis de Lindsey.
Port of Waynfl^te to ferm, with Market and Windmill; as also the Court of the
said Market and Haven, and fishing within the same; paying xx l. yearly, and
supporting all chardges belonging to the said Haven, Mill and fishing.

In 49 H. 6. Pat. 49 H. 6. part unica m. 9. in dorso.
John Bishop of Lincoln, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Earl of Warwick and
Salisbury, Sir Humfrey Bourchier, Lord Cromwell, Sir Gervase Clyfton, and Sir
Will. Skipwith Knights, Robert Taylboys Esquire, and others, had Commission for
the view and repair of all the Banks and Sewers throughout this whole Province.

The like Commission Pa^ 12 E. 4. p. 1. m. 12. in do^so.
in 12 E. 4. had Sir Richard Hastyngs, Sir Thomas Burgh, and Sir Will. Skipwith
Knights, Robert Taylboys, Robert Ratclyf, and others.

So also, the same year, had Ibid.
Thomas Prior of Spaldyng, Richard Welby, Leonard Thornburgh, Richard
Pynchebeck, John Bolles, Robert Dokkyng, and others, for those from
Dodyngtone-Pygot to Tyd-gote; and thence to Skegnesse.

By all which Commissions, since 6 H. 6. power was given to the persons
beforementioned and their associates, to act therein according to the Custom
of Romeney Marsh, as abovesaid.

In Ex collect. praefari Comitis de Lindsey.
4 E. 6. William Lord Willoughby of Parham, S^r Edward Dymok, and Sir John
Copeldyk Knights, George S. Poll, and others, Commissioners of Sewers, by a
Decree made at Wrangle, on the first day of September, ordained; that the
Inhabitants of the Soke of Bullingbroke, together with Sir William Brereton
Knight, the Lord of Dalby, and the Kings Fermour of his fishing at Waynflete,
and all others drayning thereby, should cleanse, scour, and dyke the Haven of
Waynfle^e, from the AE end unto the Sea, in breadth xxij foot at the top, and in
the bottom xiij. And in depth from the Chanel downwards, three foot; to be
done before the Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula, then next following: And that a
sufficient Got or Clow, set up at the outer end of the same Haven, for
stopping of the salt water out of the North part thereof, should be made there,
at the costs of the Inhabitants of the said Soke, the Lord of Dalby, and the
Kings Fermours of his fishing there. And moreover, that an old Got an^
Dreyner, called Symond's got, extending in length from the deep of the East
Fen, unto the Fen bank; and from that Fen bank to the Sea, which was then
decayed for lack of scouriug, should be sufficiently cleansed: So likewise the
Dyke and Sewer, extending from the Deep of the Fen, unto the Fen bank: Also,
that there should be two Gotes made of the said Drayner and Sewer; the one at
the Fen bank, and the other at the out end of the Sea, at the costs of the
Inhabitants of the said Soke, and the Inhabitants of such towns, and the
Landlords therein, who had, before that time been chardged, betwixt the Fen
bank and the deep of the said Fen; and all to be done before Martinmasse then
next ensuing.

And farther than this, wherein I have given instance, I shall not descend to
any more particulars till the time of Queen Elizabeth, that Thomas Quadring,
Hamond Upton, Thomas Marsyngberd, and others, then Commissioners Inquis. in
capella Ro^ulo^^m. n. 66.
of Sewers, sat at Partenay on the 22th day of July in 2 of her reign, for the
settling of all things touching the repair of the Banks and Ditches in this
Provicne: before whom the Jurors then presented; that there was one Sea-bank
new made, in Skegnes, to begin at a place called Ranson hyrne, and to be xl
falls in length, from the North end of the said Ranson hyrne toward the South;
and so to be joined and closed unto the old bank: which said Sea-bank to be
fifty foot in the skirt, fourteen foot broad on the top, and xij foot in
height, and to be made by the Land-holders in Skegnes aforesaid. And they
likewise, at that time presented, that the old Sea-bank ought then to be
repaired for it is better withstanding the rage of the Sea. Also that another
new Sea-bank should be new made, within the limits of Skegnes aforesaid, from
one slaver there, which goes up the lands late belonging to Charles Duke of
Suffolk, unto the South end of the Gild Hall; which new bank to be xx falls in
length, and to stretch from the said Gild-Hall to the old Bank, and be made by
the said Land-holders.

Likewise, that the old Sea bank, in Skegnes, called the Haven bank, should be
repaired where defect was.

Also, that Wainflet haven, being defective for want of scouring, from the
Cross, at the Eyes end into the Sea; that being a necessary drayn for the Soke
of Bullingbroke, and heretofore diked and scoured by the Inhabitants thereof;
and to be done before the Feast of S. John Baptist next following. Moreover,
that a place there, called Guddyke, which leads from the Eyes end to the Fen,
be also scoured; viz. two parts thereof by the said Queen or her Fermour for
the fishing there; and the third by the Lord of Dalby, as had been accustomed.
And that a new Got, or Clow, be set in Waynflet haven, within ten falls of
Thorpe and Waynflet Sea-gote; and a Bank on the South side of the said Haven,
from the said new Got unto the.......... and that the Inhabitants of the seven
towns in Holland should be at the chardge of setting up the said new Got, in
respect of their benefit of common in the East and West fenns.

Also, that the Bank to be then made between the new Got and Thorpe be done;
viz. three parts thereof at the chardges of Hamond Upton Esquire (one of the
Commissioners abovementioned) and the fourth at the chardges of John Whiting
and Rob. Whiting; and the bank on the South side of the Haven to be don by the
Soke of Bullingbroke. Likewise, that a new Got be set at the Fen Dyke bank, to
take in fresh water by it, to be done by the Inhabitants of Waynflete S. Mary:
And another Got, called Dayles got: and another to be set fourscore falls
beneath the old Sea Got; both to be done by the Land-holders in Waynflet S.
Mary aforesaid. And that a new Cryke of xxx foot wide, and six foot deep, be
made from the said new Got unto the old Got; and beneath the said new Got
another new Cryke made, from the said new Got unto the old Cryke, to be done
by the Lords and Land-holders in Waynflet S. Mary: and on either side the said
Cryke a sufficient Sea-Bank to keep out the floods of water.

And they also presented, that one petty Got should be made in Cross gate,
against nine Acres of Mr Dyghtons: and another in Westgate, against Thomas
Harrysons Acre; as also a spout in Hall gate, another in Somergate, and another
in Acregate.

Likewise that a spout be made in Waynflete All Saints, over the gate on the
North side of Burflet, at the chardge of the holders of the Lands which did
drayn it.

And that another spout be laid at the higher end of Collyson gate, at the
chardge of lands that should drayn by it. As also another between Hall toft and
Richard Lowys his land, by the lands that were to drayn by it. And another
against one Dyke end of John Holydays, by all the lands which should drain by
it.

All which things were then decreed by the before-specified Commissioners; and
several other Orders by them made for the clensing and repairing of sundry
Drayns, Sewers, and Gotes, which were then defective.

There was also in the same second year of Queen Eliza. reign, a Decree Ex
collect. praef. Comitis de Lindsey.
made in the Duchy Court, that the Port and Haven of Waynflete, from the West
end of the Eye, unto the Sea, or the place called Norman diepe, should be
repaired, diked and scoured of sufficient depth and breadth, as before that time
had been accustomed; and this to be performed by the said Queen or her Fermours
of her fishing at Wainflete, the heir of Sir William Brereton Knight. or his
Tenants; and by the Soke of Bullingbroke; viz. two parts of the said Port, ^^om
the said place, called the West end of the Eye, unto the Sea, or pla^e called
Norman diepe, at the chardges of the said Queen, or her Fermours; the heir of
the said Sir William Brereton Knight, a fourth part; and the Inhabitants of the
Soke of Bullingbroke, the other fourth part.

After this, viz. 4o Aprilis Anno 1571. (13 Eliz.) there was a view Ibid.
taken of the fresh and salt water banks in Waynflete S. Mary, by Tho. Quadring
Esquire the high Shireeve of Linco^nshire, Hamond Upton Esquire, William Derby, and
Anthony Kyme, and other Justices of Sewers; at which time it was presented,
Ibid.
that the North end of a bank called the Fen dyke in Waynflete S. Mary's,
extending to Deacon gappe against the South in Friskeney, being in l^ngth three
hundred rode, ought to be repaired by the Commoners of Waynflete S. Mary's, for
that the said Commoners got Reed, and did fish in two Fens adjoining to both
sides of the bank; and because the said Commoners had bit for their Cattle in
the said two Fens.

And that from the said Deacon gappe, unto the Clow called the Fen Clow, and
thence unto Strange place, the said bank being in length about three miles, and
in decay, so that the Inhabitants of Friskeney were thereby surrounded, ought
to be repaired by the owners and Commoners as were before that time accustomed
to do it.

Likewise, that Simon got, being used as before had been accustomed, might
serve for a whole Drayn, as well for the taking away of the head of the waters
out of the East fen, as for the low grounds adjoining to the same, in Friskeney
and Wrangle; and the said low grounds in Friskeney and Wrangle, to bear such
reasonable chardges in the same Drayn, as by the Bench should be thought meet.

Also that New got in Friskenay was a sufficient Drayn for the said Town, so
that it were scoured and cl^nsed, with the petty Drayns belonging thereto.

And lastly, that Waynflet S. Mary was then destitute of any Drayn; whereupon
they desired, that it might have a Drayn into Waynflet haven. All which were
then decreed Ibid.
accordin^ly.

And in a Session of Sewers held at Alford 4o Iunii 23o Caroli, there was a
Decree Ex bund. Decre^. in o^ficio vocato the Petti-bag.
made, that the new Sea bank of Ingoldmels should be raised and skirted to the
height of Hogstrop new Sea-bank; viz. nine foot and an half, twelve foot
square, and sixty foot in the skirt, from the said Hogstrop Sea-bank to
Watson's house in Ingoldmels, at the chardge of Croft, Burgh, Bratoft, Irby,
Frisby, great St^eping and Gunby, the Landlords bearing three parts thereof,
and the Tenants the fourth.

CAP. XXX.
Fosse dyke
ON the South West side of this Province is Fosse dike, an artificial tr^nch,
extending from that great Marish below the City of Lincoln, unto the River of
Trent, at Torkley, which is about seven miles. This was made R. Hoved. p. 273.
b. n. 20.
by King Henry the first, in the year 1121. (21 H. 1.) for the bringing up of
navigable Vessels from the said River unto that City, for the Commodity
thereof. Which trench, as it was of special consequence for that purpose, so
did it no less benefit to the parts adjacent, by drayning that Fenny Level
from the standing water then much annoying it.

But this Ditch, standing in such a flat, that it had no quick current of water
through it, to scour out the mud and filth, which by little and little
increased therein; it came in time to be so choakt up, that it stood in need of
clensing: for supporting therefore of that chardge, certain sums of money were
assessed upon those Land-holders which had benefit thereby, and Collectors
appointed for the same: which Collectors converting a great part thereof to
their own use, King Edward 3. in the 9th year of his reign, assigned Pat. 9 E.
3. p. 2. m. 29. in dorso.
Adam de Lymberg, Geffrey de Edenham, Thomas de Sibethorpe, and Nicholas Below
to enquire thereof.

What was then done therein I find not: but certain Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33.
in (...).
it is, that within thirty years after, it was grown so full of weeds and
grass, and the earth so trodden into the same, by driving of Cattle over it in
se^^^^ places, and the mud increased to such a thickness, that the Citizens of
Lincoln, as well in behalf of themselves and other Tradesmen of the City of
York, towns of Notingham, and Kingston upon Hull, as several other places, did
in 39 E. 3. make a great complaint thereof to the King, in Parliament;
representing the damage which accrued to them thereby, in regard that ships and
Boats could not pass too and fro, therein, with Merchandises and Victuals, as
they had wont to do. The said King therefore, much tendering the good of that
City, and the benefit of all other persons who had occasion to pass through
the same with Boats and other Vessels for their better advantage in the way of
commerce and trade; and to that and being willing to apply a speedy remedy
thereto, constituted Philip de Lymbury, Will. de Skipwith, Adam de Lymbergh,
Illard de Usflet, Robert de Morton and Walter de Poynton, or any four, three,
or two of them, to view the said Chanel and the defects thereof; and to enquire
by the Oaths of honest and lawful men of this County, as well within liberties
as without, who they were that ought and had used to cleanse the same, and for
how long time, and in what manner they had so done; and to distrain them and
every of them, whom they should find liable thereto, to repair and make good
those defects as often as need should require; and to compel them thereto by
amerciaments, and such other ways and means as they should think most fit: and
to hear and determine of all and singular the premises, according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm.

But if these Commissioners did any thing therein, it amounted to little; for
about ten years after (the Term being then kept at Lincoln) the Jurors of
diverse VVapentakes in this County, did exhibit a Presentment Plac. coram R^ge
de term. Mich. 49 E. 3^ rot. 17.
in the Court of Kings Bench; importing, that this Chanel called Fossedike,
extending it self from the River of Trent at Torksey, unto the City of
Lincoln, having been anciently open and full of water, so that ships and
boats, laden with Victual and other vendible Commodities, did use to pass to
and from Notingham, York, Kingston upon Hull, and sundry other places and
Counties, by the said River of Trent, and so by this Chanel to Lincoln; and
from Lincoln to Boston, to the great benefit of the said City of Lincoln, and
advantage of all Tradesmen passing that way, as also of the whole Country
adjacent; was then choakt up for want of clensing and repair. And that the
Prior of Torkesey, and town of Torksey, with the members thereof; the Prioresse
of Fosse; John Bishop of Lincoln, Gilb. Earl of Angos and his Tenants, Sir
Raphe Daubney Knight and his Tenants; the Abbot of Newsum; John Frunell^ the
Tenants of the lands of Gilbert de Bridshull; the Tenants of the lands of Hugh
de Normanton of Saxelbie; the Lady Katherine Swinford; John Brett of Thornhagh,
in the County of Notingham; Sir Raphe Painell Knight, and all other the Lords
of the Towns, lying on each side the said Channel, and their Ancestors whose
Lordships lay on either side and abutting on the same, every man according to
the proportion lying against his own Lordship, did and ought to cleanse and
repair the said Chanel. And they said moreover, that it had been so choakt up
and obstructed, for above thirty years then last past, to the great damage of
the King, as also of the whole Country, and City aforesaid.

Notwithstanding which Presentment, the King issued out a Commission Pat. 50 E.
3. p. 1. m. 20. in dorso.
the very next ensuing year, unto Sir Michael de la Pole Knight, Mr Geffrey le
Scrope, and John de Stafford Clerk, to enquire touching the obstruction
thereof. But I make a question whether it was thereupon cleansed: for in 8 R. 2.
(which was about nine years after) I find that John Duke of Lancaster, John
Bishop of Lincoln, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, Sir Michael de la Pole
Knight, Sir Philip Darcy Knight, and others, were appointed Pat. 8 R. 2. p. 1.
m. 33. in dorso.
by the said King, to cause it to be repaired and scoured, so that ships and
boats might have a clear passage through it, as anciently they had used.

CAP. XXXI. The Marshes on Withom.
ON the South side of this Province, lies the River of Witham, extending it
self from the Suburb of Lincoln to Boston; by which stream great Vessels have
anciently come up from Boston to that City, as the Inhabitants thereof do, by
tradition, affirm; and as may seem by large ribs of them, which, within memory,
have been there dig'd up: But the descent of this stream, from the said City to
the Sea, is so little, that the water having a slow passage, cannot keep it
wide and deep enough, either for navigation, or drayning of the adjacent
Marshes, without the frequent helps of digging and clearing the same; the mud
and weeds increasing so much therein: I shall therefore in the next place take
notice of what I have met with, tending to that purpose, as also of it is course
above that City: whereof the first mention that I find, is in 6 E. 3. Henry de
Fienton, Will. Dysney, and Thomas de Sibthorpe being then constituted P^t. 6 E.
3. p. 2. m. 27. in dorso.
the Kings Commissioners, for the viewing thereon, betwixt the Town of
Bekingham and the City of Lincoln; it being turned out of it is right Chanel in
sundry places; and so obstructed with sand, mud, and plantation of Trees; as
also by Floud-gates, Sluses, Mills, Causeys and Ditches, that the course of the
same being hindered, caused frequent inundations to the lands adjacent.

After this, viz. in 37 E. 3. there was a Presentment Ex bund. de Brev. and
R^cordi^ Wallias etc. tangentibus^ n. 7.
exhibited to John de Repynghale and H. Asty, then the said Kings Commissioners
of Sewers, sitting at Newerk, upon Monday next after the Feast of S. Laurence,
for the view of the said River of Withom, and removing all obstructions and
impediments, whereby the free current thereof, from the Town of Claypole unto
the said City of Lincoln, was hindered.

Which Presentment being made by the Jurors for the Wapentakes of Boby and
Graffow, imports; that the East Mill at Bracebrigge, belonging to the Knights
Hospitalars of S. John of Jerusalem in England, standing in the right course of
that River, did obstruct the current thereof, to the great damage of the said
King and the Country; and that this was through the default of those Knights
Hospitalars: And they farther said, that the same River then had not sufficient
depth nor breadth, from the Sheep-cote belonging to the Prior of S. Katherines
unto the bridge at Bracebrigge; and that the said Knights Hospitalars had
certain Floud-gates ther^, which did turn the right course of that River out of
it is proper Chanel: whereupon the Shireeve of Lincolnshire was commanded to
summon the Prior of the said Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem, to appear before
those Commissioners, at Newerk, the Wednesday next after the Feast of the
Assumption of the blessed Virgin, then next ensuing, to answer to these
particulars. Who appearing, accordingly, did allege; that he and his
Predecessors had been seized of the said Mill time out of mind, as in the right
of their House; and that the said Mill then stood as it had anciently used to
do, without that, that either he or his Predecessors had built any new Mill
there; and that this he was ready to justify. And as to the Floud-gates, he
said; that it was erected there, time out of mind, with this Order; viz. that
the Gates thereof should be yearly removed from the Feast day of S. Elene, in
the month of May, unto the Feast day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross; but
that after that day, until the Feast of S. Elene, they should stand in their
places. And if the said River of Withom should happen, upon any occasion, to be
so much raised, as to be above a certain stake, standing on the South side of
the said Floudgates, then the same Gates to be removed, until the water should
abate to the height of that stake: which said stake had been there made and
placed, for a gage, time out of mind; without that, that any Floud-gates were
raised higher than that stake, or that the same Floud-gates ought to be removed.

The business therefore being come to this issue, the said Commissioners
sitting at Carleton in Moreland, on Friday next after the Feast of S. John
Baptist, in the year abovesaid, it was found by a verdict of the Jurors, that
the said Prior of S. John's, and his Predecessors, were not seized of the said
Mill and Floud-gates time out of mind, as had been before alleged; but that
they were erected there after that time, though not by the said Prior:
therefore it was decreed, that the said Mill and Floud-gates should be removed;
and the Shireeve of Lincolnshire had command to remove them accordingly, and to
make certificate of his doings therein to the said Commissioners, at Sleford.

And about two years after this, there was a Presentment Plac. cora^. Rege term
Mich. 49 E. ^o^ 43. Linc.
made in the Court of Kings Bench, that the Chanel of this Riv^r, in Wildemore,
near Coningesby, was bending and defective, betwixt the said River and a Sewer
called Muardyke, in Coningesby, so that the Marshes of Wildemore and
Bolingbroke were overflowed and drowned thereby: and that this was through the
default of the said Town of Coningesby who ought to repair the same.

In 1 R 2. William de Skipwith^ Raphe de Threske, William Vincent and William
de Candelesby were constituted Pat. 1. R. ^^ p. 2. m. 24. in dorso.
Commissioners for to view the defects in repair of a certain Ditch, lying
betwixt Snartford bridge, and the before-specified River of Wythom; and to
enquire who ought to repair the same. And in 6 R. 2. the King being informed
Pat. 6. R. 2. p. 1. m. 1. in do^so.
, that the said River of Wythom; Pat. 6. R. 2. p. 1. m. 1. in do^so.
as also that of Brant, and certain Ditches and places, whereby diverse waters
in the County of No^ingham and this of Lincoln, did and had used to run from
the Town of Cleypole, and so down by Lincoln, unto the same River of Wythom,
were so choked up with mud, and obstructed with the planting of Trees, that,
by reason thereof, and of certain Floud-gates, the current of the said water
being hindered, the lands, meadows and pastures of diverse persons, had been very
often overflowed, and did at that time so continue; he assigned John Bussy,
Henry Asty, Thomas Claymond, and others, to view the same, and to make the said
Channels and Ditches larger, so that they might be xl or xxx foot wide, betwixt
the Banks, and ten foot in depth.

The like assignation Pat. 18 R. 2. p. 2. m. 14. in dorso.
had William de Crosseby, John de Rocheford of Boston, John de la Launde of
Pynchebek, Thomas de Tofte, and John Waleys in 18 R. 2. for the view and repair
of those Banks and Sewers betwixt Hill dyke and Bullingbroke, and betwixt this
River of Wythom and the Sea; and to do all things therein, according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm, and according to the Custom of Romeney marsh:
As also to take so many Diggers and Laborers, upon competent salaries, in
regard of the then urgent necessity, as should be sufficient to accomplish that
work. So also in 3 H. 5. had Pat. 3 H. 5. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Sir Robert de Wylughby and Sir Thomas de Wylughby Knights, John Cokayn,
William de Lodyngton, James Strangways, and others, for all the Banks and
Ditches from this River to the Sea; and to proceed therein according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm.

CAP. XXXII. Observations touching the whole Great Level.
HAving now done with all the Marshes situate within the Province of Lindsey,
in this County; and continning still my course South-East wards, I come next to
that Great Level, which extends it self from about Halton and Toynton in
Lincolnshire, through a good part of six Counties, viz. Lincoln, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntendon, and Northampton; being in length no less than
Lx miles; and in breadth, from Peterborough in Northamptonshire, to Brandon in
Suffolk, near forty miles: all which, excepting the Isle of Ely, and some few
places of that Kind; as also Holland in Lincolnshire, and Marshland in Norfolk
(both which have been long ago, by great industry gained from the Sea, as I
shall clearly show by and by^ were for the space of many ages, until of late
years, a vast and deep Fen, affording little benefit to the Realm, other than
Fish or Fowl, with overmuch harbor to a rude, and almost barbarous, sort of
lazy and beggarly people.

But before I begin to manifest how and by what means the drayning and
improvement thereof has been accomplished, it will be proper (I conceive) to
show, 1. First what this large and spacious tract originally was. 2. Next how
it came to be overflowed by the Sea. 3. How Holland and Marshland were first
gained from the Sea. 4. How the main Level, beforementioned, came first to be
a Fen. 5. The rise, course, and outfalls of the several Rivers passing through
it. 6. How those their outfalls became obstructed. 7. The vast extent, and
great depth of the fresh waters, occasioned by these obstructions of their
out-falls.

What this great Level was at first.
THat this vast level was, at first, a firm dry land, and not annoyed with any
extraordinary inundation from the Sea, or stagnation of the fresh waters, I
shall now endeavor to manifest; which may, perhaps, seem strange to many: but
when it is well considered, that Timber Trees will not grow and thrive where
water, for the most part, stands; or in Moor, which by tract of time is bred
and increased in such moist places, both the one and the other may with much
probability be granted. The casebeing then thus stated, it nowremains for me to
prove, that such have heretofore been bred, and prospered in sundry parts of
this now Fenny Country: which is no hard matter to do, diverse persons, yet
living being able to testify, that in the late digging of those Channels an^
Drayns, as have been made for the exsiccation thereof, great numbers of such
Trees, of several kinds, have been found; most of Oak and Firr, and few of them
severed from their Roots: but of such as be so severed, the Roots are observed
to stand in the firm earth below the Moor; of which sort I my self have seen
some, that were taken up in the Fens near Thorney; and have had credible
information of multitudes found in other places; whereof some were dug up,
at the cutting of that large Chanel, called Downham Ea, which extends it self
from Salters lode, about four miles Northwards, toward Linne.

Moreover, in Marshland, about a mile VVestward from Magdalen bridge, at the
setting down of a Sluse, very lately, there was discovered at xvij foot deep,
diverse Furze bushes, as also Nut-trees, pressed flat down, with Nuts sound and
firm lying by them; the bushes and Trees standing in solid earth, below the
silt, which has been brought up by the inundations of the Sea, and in time
raised to that great thickness. Add hereunto what I have already observed in
the Isle of Axholme, touching the Trees of Oak and Firr found in such great
numbers, at the making of those Ditches and Sewers for drayning of that Fenn:
which, though it lie not contiguous to this, out of all doubt is on the like
level, and was apparently a woody Country at the first. To give farther
instance, therefore, to demonstrate so evident a truth, there will be no need;
so that I shall hence proceed, and in the next place manifest upon what
occasion this great alteration grew.

CAP. XXXIII. How it became overflowed by the Sea.
GRanting therefore, that this Country, though lying flat and low, was not
originally annoyed with the inundations of the Ocean, or any stop of the fresh
waters, which might by overflowing and drowning make it fenny; and considering
the situation thereof to be such, as that it is bounded on all parts by the
high lands, in the form of an Horshoo, excepting toward the Sea, from that
point of land, about Hunstanton in Norfolk, to Wynthorpe in Lincolnshire, which
makes it much like unto a Bay; I am now to demonstrate by what means it came
to pass, that the Ocean, at first, brake into it with such violence, as that
the woods then standing throughout the same, became turned up by the roots; and
so great a proportion of silt brought in, as not only for diverse miles, next
toward the Sea, did cover the ground to an extraordinary depth (as I shall
plainly show anon) but even to the remotest parts on the verge of the High
lands, as is apparent from that discovery made of late years, at the skirt of
Conington down in Huntendonshire; where, upon making of a pool, by the famous
Sir Robert Cotton Baronet, he found the skeliton of a large Seafish (near xx
foot long, as was then conjectured) lying in perfect silt, above six foot below
the superficies of the ground, and as much above the present Level of the Fen;
which, by so long a continuance in that kind of earth, was petrified, as is
evident from diverse of the bones, both of the back and other parts, which are
still preserved by Sir Thomas Cotton Baronet, his worthy son, amongst other
extraordinary rarities, that were collected by that learned person.

But when and by what means that violent breach and inundation of the Sea was
first made into this Country, I am not able positively to affirm: therefore I
must take leave to deliver my conjecture therein, from the most rational
probabilities: Which is, that it was by some great Earthquake, for, that such
dreadful accidents have occasioned the like, we have unquestionable testimony.

Coss. Valentiniano and Valente (says the tripartite Lib. 7. c. xv.
History) terrae motus factus multas diruit Civitates, An. Christi CCCL^viij.
sed etiam mare terminos proprios mutavit; and in quibusdam locis in tantum ibi
fluxit, ut loca quae pridem ambulari poterant, remigarentur; ab aliis vero
locis tantum recessit, ut arida tellus inveniretur. In the time of the
Consulship of Valentinian and Valens, there was an Earthquake, which not only
overthrew diverse Cities, but altered the very bounds of the Sea; which so flowed
in some parts, that men might sail in those places, where before they did walk;
and forsook other, that they became dry land. The like relation of the same
Earthquake, but somewhat more largely, does Ammianus Lib. 26.
Marcellinus make. And to the like purpose also is that of Ovid Ovid. Meta.
lib. xv.
.

Vidi ego quod fuerat quondam solldissema tellus
Esse fretum, vidi factas ex aequore torras,
Et procul a pelago Conchae jacuere marinae;
Et vetus inventa est in montibus anchor a summis.
Quodque fuit campus, vallem decursus aquarum
Fecit, and eluvie mons est deductus in aequor,
Eque paludosa siccis humus aret arenis.
Thus translated into English by G. Sandis.

Where once was solid land Seas have I seen,
And solid land where once deep Seas have been;
Shells far from Sea, like Quarries in the ground,
And Anchors have in Mountain tops been found.
Torrents have made a valley of a plant,
High hills by De^uges born to the main,
Deep standing Lakes sucked dry by thirsty sand,
And on ^ate thirsty Earth now Lakes do stand.
Who would imagine, that the City of Gant, in Flanders, had been an Haven
town? yet that so it was, about DCCC. years since, appears in the life of
Charles the great, written by the Hist. Franc. t. 2. f. 48.
learned Du Chesne. So likewise S. Omers, as Ortelius In theatro Orbis.
testifies: S. Audomari oppidum (says he) olim fuisse Oceani portum, atque
sinum maris latissimum, vel praealta littora, quae ipsam Civitatem quasi
cingunt, demonstrant, aliaque innumera argumenta, and antiquitatis vestigia
etc. That S. Omers was a Sea port, and an ample harbor, as well the high shore,
which as it were compasses that City, as also a multitude of other arguments
and badges of antiquity do manifest.

Neither do we want examples here, in some parts of England, of this kind;
Ratesborough, otherwise called Richborow, in Kent (sometime a Colony of the
Romans) was, or ever the River of Sture did turn his botome, or old Canale,
within the Isle of Thanet (as Leland Lel. col. vol. 3. p. 138.
affirms) and by likelihood the main Sea came to the very foot of the Castle;
but now it is off from it a mile, by reason of the wose, that has there
swollen it up.

Ib. s. 141.
So also Lymme hill, or Lyme, was sometime a Haven and good for ships, that
might come to the foot of the hill. And Rumney (four miles distant from Lymme
hill) one of the Cinque Ports, has been a meetly good Haven, insomuch (says
Ibid. p. 142.
the same Leland, who lived in King Henry the 8th's time) as within remembrance
of men, ships have come up hard to the Town, and cast anchor in one of the
Churchyards; but is now two miles from the Town; which is so sore decayed
thereby, that were there were three great Parishes and Churches, sometime,
there is now scant one well maintained.

And concerning Eye, in Suffolk, it is not a little observable, what he
likewise expresses; viz. that Le^. col. vol^ 3. p. ^4.
it should seem anciently to have been, in a manner totally encompassed with
waters; Eye in our old English signifying an Island: but now (says he) there
is no such store, though it be a moist place, especially in the winter season;
which manifestly shows, that it was heretofore^ a standing Fen. Adding, that
in old time Barges came up thither from the Haven of Chromar, or some Creek
near unto it; there having been found by the Monks of Eye, in scouring of their
Ditches, large Rudders, done over with pitch; as also Barge-nailes with other
naval Instruments, though then no Vessels came nearer to it than Burstan, which
is xij miles distant.

And as some places have got from the Sea, so some other have lost, as may seem
by Skegnesse in Lincolnshire, which was Ib. p. ^04.
heretofore a great Haven Town (as the before-specified Author relates) and
walled, having a Castle; but the old Town is clean consumed and eaten up of the
Sea. Not unapplicable hereunto is therefore that of the Ovid. Metam^ lib. 8.
Poet.

Haud procul hinc stagnum tellus habitabilis olim,
Nunc celebres mergis fulicisque palustribus undae.
Hard by a Lake once habitable ground,
Where Coots and fishing Cormorants abound.
CAP. XXXIV. How Holland and Marshland were first gained from the Sea.
BUT though the Sea, by some such strange accident, made that irruption into
those parts; yet did not the tides, for any long continuance of time, flow
wholly over it (as I presume:) for most evident it is; that as all floods, do
from the muddiness of their streams, leave on the Verges of their quickest
currents, a sandy settlement; so by these daily fluxes, did a vast proportion
of silt fix and settle somewhat within the mouth of this Bay; which silt, in
tract of time, increased to such a height, as that it exceeded the ordinary
flowings of that watery Element; and thereby checking the usual tides, got
ground so fast upon the Ocean (as it is the nature of most places to do, where
the Sea has any stop) that those active and industrious people, the Romans,
who made all use of art and skill to the advancement of their profit, finding
the soil, thus raised above the usual tides, to be much more rich and fertile
than any upland ground, bestowed the pains and cost to raise strong banks of
earth, on that side toward the Ocean, to defend it from the overflowing of the
Spring-tides, which commonly happen about xx or xxx times in the revolution of
one year; and some much higher than other, through the power of the North east
winds; by which means the Counties of Holland and Marshland were thus won and
gained. For that this was a work of the Romans, that expression of Tacitus In
vita Agricolae.
, whereof I have taken notice in my discourse concerning Romeney marsh, does
not only imply; but the coyns found in those parts, with the large heaps of
earth still to be seen there (which without all doubt were raised for Monuments
of some eminent military persons, whilst their Colonies remained in this
Nation) do more than probably show.

I cannot deny but that our Ancestors, the Saxons, made use of this way of
sepulture; Saxones gens Christi ignari, in hortis amaenis, si domi forte
aegroti moriebantur; si foris au^ bello occisi, in aegestis per campos terrae
tumulis, quos Burgos appellabant, sepulti sunt, says Leland. The Saxons a
Heathen people, if by reason of sickness they dyed at home, were buried in
their Gardens; but if abroad and slain in war, then in the fields, under heaps
of earth, which they called Burrows. So likewise the Danes (once Masters of
this Realm for awhi^e) as Adolphus Cyprius testifies In Annal. Sl^swic.
; Danos olim, in memoriam Regum and heroum, ex terra coacervata ingentes moles,
montium instar eminentes erexisse, credibile omnino and probabile est (says
he) atque illis in locis, ut plurimum quo homines commearant, atque iter
haberent, ut in viis publicis, quo posteritati memoriam conservarent, and
quodamodo immortalitati mandarent. That the Danes anciently, in memory of their
Kings and Nobles, did raise exceeding great heaps of earth, cast up together,
like unto hills, is both credible and probable; and for the most part in places
where people traveled, whereby they might perpetuate their memory to
posterity, and in some sort make them immortal.

But that these were rather of the Romans erection, I do most incline to
believe; partly in respect that they were the most likely persons for their
ingenuity, experience and industry, to gain these Countries from the Sea. Next
by reason that many of their Coyns have been found there: and lastly because so
many of those Tumuli, of a very great magnitude, are still to be seen; it being
T^citus in ^^ta A^ricolae.
the Custom of the Romans so to interr, as is confirmed to us by an eminent
Historian, from the practice of Germanicus, who thus disposed of the unburied
bones of the slain Soldiers of Varus (whereof I have, at large, elsewhere
An^iq. of Warwicksh. i^lustr.
, taken notice;) as also from that passage in Lucan -- Et Regum Cineres excelso
monte quiescunt.

Nor does it a little conduce to the proof hereof, that there have been diverse
Urnes One on the North side of Wisbeche, another about Prakirk.
dig'd up of late years, in the cutting of some drains through the adjacent
Fens: So likewise in a place called Ford Ea (near Sotham within the Isle of
Ely) wherein were found In an. 1658.
burnt bones, ashes, and coals; all which are undoubted testimonies, that some
of their Colonies had residence in these parts.

Touching which kind of Urne Burial see farther in that excellent discourse of
the learned Dr Tho. Brown of Norwich, printed at London in An. 1658. from whom
I acknowledge to have received much direction for my better guidance in this
present work.

Neither is that long Causey made of gravel, of about three foot in
thickness, and sixty foot broad (now covered with the Moor, in some places
three, and in some others five foot thick) which ex^endeth it self from Denver
in Norfolk (near Salters lode) over the great wash, to Charke; thence to March
Plantwater and Eldernell, and so to Peterborongh, in length about xxiiij miles,
likely to be any other than a Roman work, as may seem from the words of
Herodian Lib. 3.
in the life of Severus the Emperor; where taking notice how hardy and warlike
a people the Britans were, and of their expertnesse in swimming, he says --
Sed inprimis tamen curae habuit pontibus occupare paludes, ut stare in tuto
milites, facile per eas discurrere possent, atque in solido praeliari; siquidem
pleraque loca, frequentibus Oceani alluvionibus paludescunt: per eas igitur
paludes barbari ipsi natant etc. He therefore ( viz. Severus) first took care
to make Causeys over the Fenns, that his Soldiers might stand on firm ground,
and with ease passing over them, fight on the dry land; there being many places
Fenny, by reason of the frequent inundations of the Sea, over which those
barbarous people did swim.

CAP. XXXV. How the main Level came first to be a Fenn.
BY what has been said, it being evident enough, that those Counties of
Holland and Marshland were first the gift of the Sea, and afterward defended
with strong banks made by the industry of the Romans; it would therefore not be
improper for me to go on, and show with what care and cost, as also by what
means those Banks, so made for their safeguard and preservation, have been for
many ages supported and maintained till this present: but because I conceive it
may better conduce to the more perspicuous carrying on of my story, to show how
that spacious Level, lying Southwards toward the continent, and bounded with
the high land (as I have already observed) came at first to be a Fenny Lake,
and then increased, by tract of time, in depth, I shall reserve what I have to
say touching the repair and strengthening of those banks, till I speak of the
attempts and endeavors, which have in several ages been made, for the gaining
or improving of the sundry parts thereof, by the skill and labor of the
Inhabitants and borderers, or any other who have been Adventurers in those work.

CAP. XXXVI. Of the rise, course, and outfalls of the several Rivers passing
through it.
AND now, in order to this demonstration, being to consider, that there are
diverse Rivers, which rising in the adjacent high-land Countries, have their
issues to the Sea through several parts of this vast Level; I am next to take
notice which those Rivers are; whence they come; and where they have their
out-falls. First therefore I shall begin with Grant, whence Cambridge
(anciently called Grantbrigge) took it is name.

Grant.
This, having it is original about Ashwell in Hartfordshire, bringing with it the
down-falls of part of that Country, and part of Essex, passes through
Cambridgshire; and at Stretham mere (on the borders of the Isle of Ely) unites
it self to a branch of the Ouse, being about xxij miles from it is first head.

Ouse.
Which River (of Ouse) rising near Sisam in Northamptonshire, and passing
through part of Buckingham and Bedford shires (whence it takes in several
petty streamlets) at length descends by Huntendon to Erith, where it divides
it self into two branches; the one falling East and by North (near the bounds
of the Isle of Ely) to Stretham mere aforesaid, where it receives the Grant
abovementioned; and the other now called the West water, North (at the
partition of Huntendonshire and the said Isle) under Chateriz, to Benwick; and
there in former ages, meeting with a part of the River Nene, at a place called
Shreweshiste, it joined with the first branches thereof (descending from
Stretham aforesaid, by Ely, Littleport and Wallenea) at which place, so united,
they passed by Outwell (at the partition of the Isle of Ely and Marshland) to
Wisheche, and so to the Sea. But at this present it is otherwise (as I shall
show in due place, as also when and how that alteration grew:) for the first
banch, whereunto Grant did unite, does now descend from Stretham to Ely; thence
to Littleport, and so by Priests houses, and Rebbech to Salters lode: receiving
into it, betwixt Priest houses and Salters lode, these other streams; viz.
Swafham lode, and Rech lode out of Cambridgshire; Mildenhall River out of
Suffolk; and Ouse parva out of the confines of Suffolk and Norfolk; the River
of Wissey falling in by Helgay; and at Salters lode the other branch of Ouse
and Nene (united from Outwell) which comes in there by the new Pow dike; and
from thence in one course into Lynne deep, and so to the Sea; the same deep
being now the best receptacle and most fit place for conducting the waters out
of the Fenns and low grounds. So that by this River of Ouse, all the springs,
downfalls, rills and brooks of Huntendonshire for the most part, Bedfordshire
totally, and some part of Buckingham, Oxford, and Northampton shires, are
brought to the Sea; the compass of ground, affording descent to them, being
sixscore miles at the least.

Nene, Nene.
whose head is about Catesby in Northamptonshire, passing through a large tract
of ground in that County, and at length to Peterborough, enters the Fens near
that place (having in it is course taken in diverse petty streams:) In which
Fenny flat it divides it self into sundry branches, whereof the chiefest now
falls under Stranground and Horsey bridge, into Wittlesey mere; and so
passing through that mere, together with Ubmere and Ramsey mere, runs to
Benwick, where it unites it self to the second branch of Ouse,
before-specified: and so goes to the Sea, as I have already showed. The second
branch of this River did take it is course by Thorney bar, Singlesholt, and
Nomans land, and so to the triangular bridge at Croyland, where it did unite
with Weland, and passed away with it to Spalding, and so to the Sea: But this
Chanel of Nene is now utterly decayed, and likewise that of Weland; for whereas
it did anciently fall into Weland, now Weland makes a fall backwards, by the
same course, to Nomans land and the South Ea; to Dowesdale, Clowescrosse, and
Guy hyrne; and so by Wisbeche, and Weile (as it can) to the Sea.

Other branches of Nene there have been in ancient time within the Fens; viz.
Kings delph, passing a little below Stanground, by Ravens Willow (athwart the
Fens) to Ramsey grounds, where it falls into the Nene. Wittlesey dike, a
little above Horsey bridge, which falling by Whittlesey Town runs into Nene
below Benwick. Diverse other currents of it there are by and through the bounds
of Thorney; chefly Knorlake, the Wride, and South Ea, which have heretofore
dischardged themselves into the Sea (as some suppose) by Clows Cross; but of
later time, since the new Leame was made by Bishop Morton, from Stanground to
Guy hyrne, and so to Wisbeche, their chiefest and best passage has been by
that Chanel.

This River of Nene brings with it into the Fenns, the downfalls of the
greatest part of Northamptonshire, and then having no present issue into the
Sea, divides it self, as I have showed: and being bounded on one side with the
Ouse, on another with UUeland, and on a third with South Ea bank, and other
banks in the Isle of Ely, it is a principal cause of the surrounding of a great
part of the body of the Fenns: and not only so, but occasioneth abundance of
^ock, wherewith the greatest part of South Holland and UUisbeche (which have
made Banks against the same) are afflicted.

Weland.
UUeland, having it is rise near Sibertoft in Northamptonshire, and taken in
some petty streamlets, comes at length to Market Deping, and S. James Deping,
where it enters the Fenns, and burdeneth them with all the water and downfalls
of part of Northampton, Leicester, Rutland, and Lincolnshires; whence passing
to Croyland bridge, it divides it self into two branches; the one leading by
South Ea toward UUisbeche, the other, in a most slow course, to Spalding and
Surflet, where receiving the water of Glen, it goes on to Fosse-dike-Stow, and
so into Boston deep.

Witham, Witham.
having it is head at South UUitham in Kesteven (a Province of Lincolnshire) and
received into it diverse petty rivulets; as it runs on toward Boston, takes
in, at Anthony got and Newgote, the water from the drowned grounds of
UUildemore, UUest fen, and part of East fen; together with a streamlet falling
from the Castle of Bullinbroke; and lastly at Boston (by Trinity got, and
through Hammon beck, and Skirbeck got) diverse rills and downfalls out of
Kesteven, between Hekington burn and the River of Glen: and then passing from
Boston by UUilberton rode, does run into Norman deep, and so to the Sea, after
at least Lxvi miles progress. Which River of Witham, bringing with it the
springs and downfalls of a great part of Kesteven and Lindsey, whereby in the
winter it cannot be contained within it is banks, overfloweth a large proportion
of the Fenny grounds lying in Holland, Kesteven and Lindsey.

Glen, Glen.
being the least River of all the rest, serves almost to none other use, but
to carry away so much of its own water, with the rill descending from Burn, as
can be kept between two defensible banks, by which it is carried through the
fenns into Pinchbek; The bottom of this River being for the most part higher
than the fenny grounds by which it passes; And therefore can be no drayn for
the same, except the out-fall under Surflete, toward Fossedike, were recovered.

CAP. XXXVII. How those their out-falls became obstructed.
HAving thus described the rise, course, and out-falls of these several
streams, I now come to the cause and occasion of their inundation and drowning
of this great level; Whereby, instead of the benefit which it might receive
from their overflowings, in case they had enjoyed their free and natural
passages and out-falls, it has been made, for the most part, for diverse ages,
a most unhealthy stagnation of waters, yielding no considerable profit to the
Inhabitants, or those that border upon it. That the obstruction, which the
before specified Rivers has had in passing out freely, to the Sea, has been
the only cause of those inundations and drownings already spoken of, is
apparent enough: I shall therefore, in the next place make manifest what it is
that has thus stopped and choakt up these their out-falls.

Whosoever has observed the constant tides, which flow up the River of Ouse,
at Lynne, will find the water always very thick and muddy there; because the
Sea bearing a large breadth Northwards from thence, works with so much
distemper: It is no wonder therefore, that a great proportion of silt does
daily settle in the mouth of that ostiarie, and likewise in the other; viz. Of
Wisbeche, Spalding and Boston, so that in time it could not but grow to that
thickness; without some artificial helps to quicken the current, upon its
evacuation at every ebb, whereby it might be carried out again; that it must
needs force back the fresh waters, and cause them not only to overflow, but at
length to drown the whole level, through which their streams did pass. And
this we see apparently was the case here: for to such an height is the silt
grown, that in the year 1635. upon the deeping of Relation touching the Fens,
published by Andrew Burrel an. 1642. p. 2.
Wisbeche River, the Workmen at eight foot below the then bottom thereof, came
to another bottom, which was stony; and in it at several distances, found
seven Boats, that had lain there overwhelmed with the silt for many ages.

So likewise at Salters lode, at the digging of a foundation for the Sasse,
which was there set up (of late years) by the Adventurers in that great work of
the present drayning, the silt was observed to be ten foot deep; and next below
that, three foot thickness of firm Moor; then bluish gault, which the workmen
judged to have been silt originally; because being dry, it not only crumbled
like it, but had the Roots of Reeds in it: then below it, moor of three foot
thickness, much firmer and clearer than the other; and lastly whitish Clay,
which is supposed to have been the very natural and bottom soil at the first,
before those changes happened, either from the alteration of the course of the
Sea, or choking up these out-falls, as I have already showed.

Add hereunto what likewise has, of late years been observed at Witlesey, in
the casting of those Moats by Mr. Underwood, for the fencing in of his new
plantation of fruit Trees; viz. that digging through the Moor at eight foot
deep, they came to a perfect soil, and swaths of grass lying thereon as they
were first mowed: which clearly manifests, that some great Land-floud, many
ages since, meeting with an obstruction at the natural Ostiaries toward the
Sea, by reason of much silt, which after a long drouth had choakt them up, did
then spread it self over the face of the whole Level; and that the waters,
till this general drayning, ever since covering the same, have produced a moor
now grown to this thickness.

And moreover, that at the setting down of Skyrbeck Sluse, near Boston, there
was found at xvi foot deep, covered with silt, a Smiths forge, and all the
tools thereunto belonging, with Horshoos and other things made of Iron, as
some that saw it have affirmed to me.

CAP. XXXVIII. Of the vast extent and great depth of the fresh waters,
occasioned by these obstructions of their out-falls.
TO manifest this, though there needdeth nothing more than the ocular view of
the whole Level, and the observation to what a depth the Moor is increased,
which is merely grown from the long stagnation of the waters, it being found in
some places ten, in some twelve, and in some fourteen or fifteen foot deep (nay
four foot higher than the Level of Marshland,) yet will I exhibit diverse
evident testimonies thereof, from several undoubted authorities; therewithal
discovering some notable pieces of story, which being not commonly known to the
world, may not (I presume) seem tedious to any Reader.

In regione Gyrviorum est nobile Mona^ sterium etc. In the Country of the
Gyrvi, (says the Register of Peterborough) there is a famous Monastery, In
bibl. Cotton. sub ^f f^^e Othonis A. 16. f^ 2^. b.
heretofore called Medeshamstede, but now usually Burch: the Gyrvii being those
which inhabit near the Fenns: because Gyr in English, is the same as profunda
pa^us (a deep Fen) in the Latin: For by the inundation and overflowing of the
Rivers, the water, standing upon the level ground, makes a deep Lake, and so
renders it uninhabitable, excepting in some high places, which God of purpose
raised (as may be thought) to be habitations for his servants, who chose to
dwell there: For in such places, within the Fen do thoy (viz. the Monks) of
Ram^sey, Thorney, Crouland, and many other reside, to which there is no access
but by navigable Vessels, except unto Ramesey, by a Causey, raised with much
labor on the one side thereof. Within the same Precincts also is Ely placed,
being an Island, seven miles in length, and as much in breadth, containing in it
self, xxij towns, compassed on every side with Fenns and waters; and whereunto
there are only three Causeys.

Having thus at Peterborough, made my entrance into this vast Fenn, my next
observation thereof shall be at Crouland the horror of which place is lively
represented in the story of S. Guthlake, a devout Hermit; who many ages since
chose it for his retirement.

There is in the middle part of Britain (says the Writer of that Saints life)
a hideous Fen of a huge bigness; Ex MS. cod. de vita S. Guthlaci in bib.
Cotto^. sub e^fig^e Neronis C. 7.
which, beginning at the Banks of the River Gronte, not far from a Castle
bearing that name, extends it self from the South to the North, in a very long
tract, even to the Sea; oft-times clouded mith moist and dark vapors; having
within it diverse Islands and woods, as also crooked and winding Rivers. When
therefore that man of ble^^ed memory, Guthlac, had found out the desert places
of this vast Wilderness, and by Gods assistance had passed through them; he
enquired of the Borderers what they knew thereof; who relating several things
of it is dreadfulnesse and solitude; there stood up one amongst them, called
Tatwine, who affirmed that he knew a certain Island, in the more remote and
secret parts thereof, which many had attempted to inhabit, but could not for
the strange and uncouth Monsters and several terrors wherewith they were
affrighted. Whereupon S. Guthlac, earnestly entreated, that he would show him
that place: Tatwine therefore yielding to the request of this holy man, taking
a Fishers boat (Christ being his guide, through the intricacies of this
darksome Fen) passed thereunto; it being called Cruland, and situate in the
midst of the Lake, but in respect of it is desartnesse, formerly known to very
few: for no Country man, before that devout servant of Christ S. Guthlac, could
endure to dwell in it, by reason that such apparitions of Devils were so
frequently seen there.

Not long after, S. Guthlake, being awake in the night time, betwixt his hours
of prayer, as he was accustomed; of a sudden he discerned all his Cell to be
full of black troops of unclean Spirits, which crept in under the Door, as also
at chinks and holes; and coming both o^t of the Sky, and from the earth, filled
the Air as it were with dark Clouds. In their looks they were cruel, and of
form terrible; having great heads, long necks, lean faces, pale countenances,
ill-favored beards, rough ears, wrinkled foreheads, fierce eyes, stinking
mouths, teeth like Horses, spitting fire out of their throats, crooked jaws,
broad lips, loud voices, burnt hair, great cheeks, high breasts, rugged thighs,
bunched knees, bended legs, swolen ankles, preposterous feet, open mouths, and
hoarse cries; who with such mighty shrikes were heard to roar, that they filled
almost the whole distance from heaven with their bellowing noyses: And by and
by rushing into the house, first bound the holy man, then drew him out of his
Cell, and cast him over head and ears into the dirty Fen; and having so done
carried him through the most rough and troublesome parts thereof; drawing him
amongst ^rambles and briers, for the tearing of his limbs.

CAP. XXXIX.
FRom Crouland I come to Ely, an Island situate in the main body of this Fen;
concerning which I have met with sundry memorable passages, that do notably set
forth the vastness and depth of the waters, which did environ it many years
since; whereof I shall give instance as they happened in order of time.

That this Island was made choice of for a place of voluntary retirement, by
those who out of great piety, forsaking the vanities of this transi^ory world,
be^ook themselves wholly to the service of God, in devout prayers, frequent
watchings, and strict abstinence, I need not go about to manifest in
particulars; it being so clear a truth, evidenced unto us from all antiquity,
that such persons did sever themselves in the like kind from the world, to the
end that they might with the less disturbance apply themselves to those
religious and holy duties; S. Hierom, in his Epistle to Rusticus, telling us,
Praecipui inventores and cultores Monachatus, fuerunt filii Prophetarum in
veteri te^^amento, qui aedificabant casulas prope fluenta Jordanis, and turbis
and urbibus derelictis, polenta and herbis agrestibus victitabant. That the
principal beginners and lovers of a Monastique life, were the Sons of the
Prophets in the old Testament, who left the towns and conversation with people,
to the end that they might feed upon coarse bread and herbs of the field; and
built themselves Cotages near the stream of the River of Jordan.

And though this was a special reason why these pious Votaries first se^led in
this Island, as a place of so great retirment and solitude; yet was there
another, viz. the convenience of Fish, that being the chief part of their food:
for after the Rule of S. Benedict became to be taken notice of in the Christian
world, which forbad the eating of flesh to any of those Monks, it had so high
an esteem, that not only all the Monasteries then in being in this Realm, did
with great reverence entertain it; but such as were erected for diverse ages
afterward, were of no other order.

As to the erection of this, I shall only give a brief touch, with the
occasion; in regard it was in so great veneration whilst it stood, by reason of
the sanctity of S. Audrey the first foundresse thereof; to whose shrine not a
few resorted, for the many miracles there wrought, as was then; not only with
much confidence affirmed, but undoubtedly believed.

^x hist. MS. Elien. Eccl. in bib 1. Cotton. sub ^f^^gie Neronis A. 15. Et
Monast. Anglic. p. 89. col. ^.
Etheldreda (vulgarly called Audrey) daughter to Anna King of the East Angles,
being through the persuasion of her Father, married to Tombert a Prince of the
Southern Gyrvii (or Fen-men) had this Isle of Ely given her in dower by her
said husband: unto which after his death, she retired a pure Virgin,
notwithstanding she was his wife almost three years: And affecting the place,
both in respect of the difficulty of access to it; as also, that it was in the
nature of a Wilderness, severed from the pleasures of the world, she there
settled her self, taking to her company certain persons, with whom she had
contracted friendship for Religions sake: But so it happened, that about five
years from the beginning of such her retirement, Egfrid K. of Northumberland,
being highly enflamed with her beauty, through the power of her friends^
obtained her for his wife. Howbeit, after she had been wedded about xij years,
she resolved no longer to de^er the doing of that which she had set her heart
upon; and without any free leave of her said husband, as a Queen and a Virgin,
she repaired to the Monastery in Coldingham in Scotland, where Ebba her
husbands Aunt was then Abbess, and there was veiled a Nunn by Bishop Wilfrid,
where for the space of one whole year, she learnd, that the yoke of Christ was
pleasant, and his burden easy. But then K. Egfrid, desiring to have her again
as his wife, endeavored to take her out of the said Religious house; and to
that end forthwith went thither: whereof the Abbess having notice, presently
advised her to hasten thence, and to make no stay till she came to her own
habitation at Ely. Whereupon she departed, much lamenting and sorrowing; and
accompanied with two holy Virgins, viz^ Selbe^na and Selbera, ascended a great
Hill near Colburthesheved; at which time it pleased God to send such a rain,
that King Egfrid, who pursued her, could not have access thereto in any place
for the wat^rs: where they continued, without either meat or drink, in prayer,
for the sp^ce of seven days; till the King, without hope of getting to her,
returned with much amazement, and went to York: After which he could never
endure S. Wilfride, but long harboring re^enge toward him, did at length
deprive him of his Bishopric.

But these Nuns still continued on the top of that Rock; where, almost fainting
for lack of water, Ebba the venerable Abbess abovementioned, advised Audrey,
that she should pray devoutly unto God, that he who supplied his people in the
Wilderness, from the Rock, would vouchsafe water unto them in this their great
necessity. VVhereupon she pouring out her prayers unto God with much fervency,
there immediately gushed out a clear Spring, which not only satisfied their
thirst at that time, but ever since has been of such virtue, that infirm
people drinking of it, have thereby received health. To which Miracles my
Author adds one more; viz. that the footsteps of this holy Virgin are still
to be seen on the side of this Hill, both as she ascended and descended from
it, in as perfect a manner as if she had trodden upon soft wax.

After this, Saint Audrey (for so mine Author now calls her) taking with her
the two maids beforementioned, went thence; and passing the River Humbre,
landed at Wintringham in Lincolnshire: about ten furlongs from which Town, they
came to a little village, called Alfham, almost compas^ed about with the Fen;
where continuing a few days, she erected a Church unto the Lord. Thence taking
her journey, being much wearied with travel, she lay down in a shady place to
sleep; and when she awaked, found her staff, which was, when she stuck it down
at her head, old and long withered, not only clothed with a new green bark, but
budded with verdant branches and leaves: which being by her l^ft there, grew to
be the largest Ash tree in all those parts; and the place ever afterward
called Etheldredes stowe, id est, the resting of S. Etheldrede, wh^re a Church
afterward was also built in honor of our blessed Lady, and Jesus Christ.

But at length S. Audrey came to her own estate at Ely, with her two maids; and
was there received with great honor, Huna a Priest shortly following her:
where desiring to erect a Monastery, many persons strove to have their Children
instructed by her: amongst which Werburge (the daugher of Wolpherus then King
of Merica, and of Queen Ermenilde his wife) was one: and in that place, by the
help of King Athulf her brother, she built a religious House of Nuns, in the
year of Christ DCLxxiij. and giving the whole Island unto it, sent her dear
friend S. Wilfride, to Rome, for confirmation thereof; who obtained the same
from Pope Benedict, with great immunities and privileges.

And having accomplished this foundation, being also made Abbes^e there, it is
observed, that she never after did wear any linen, but contented her self with
woollen Garments; and very seldom, except on the great Festivals, did eat
oftener than once in one day. And moreover, if by some infirmity she was not
hindered, from the, time of Mattens until break of the day, she always
continued at her Prayers in the Church. But about seven years after that she
had taken upon her the degree of Abbess, she departed this life, on the ixth
Kalends of July, in the year of Christ DCLxxix. and was buried in a wooden
Coffin in the midst of her fellow Nuns, as she her self had appointed; that
Holy man Huna the Priest beforementioned, celebrating her Funeral; who soon
after her death, retiring to a little Island, not far from this of Ely, founded
a Church there, and lived in great solitude, the same being thereupon called
Huneye.

To this holy woman, in the place of Abbess succeeded that devout Virgin
Sexburge, her sister; who sixteen years after, took up her body; which, with
the linen, wherein it was wrapped, being found incorrupt, and cu^ing many
diseased people with the touch thereof, having washed the body again, and put
new vestments upon it, she brought it into the Church of our Lady (so built by
her as has been said) and there placed it in a new Coffin of white Marble,
found at Grantcester, and brought thither: it being not a little observable,
that in the place where her body was first buried, there streamed out a
fountain of pure water, upon that translation thereof; which still remains,
says my Author.

To these famous Virgins succeeded others, under whose strict Rule and holy
discipline this Monastery flourished with great honor, till the year DCCCLxx.
( id est CXCvij. years) that the Danes (then Pagans) led by Inguar and Ubba,
made an invasion into this Realm, and destroyed it: for such was the depth of
the waters, which, compassing this Isle, extended to the Sea, that they had an
easy access unto it by shipping, as the M^. History thereof, In bibl. Cot^on.
sub es^igie Dom^iam A. 15. f. 7. b.
speaking of that their incursion, in these words, imports -- Hujus siquidem
communis tribulationis and miseriae nullatenus expers fuit Eliensis Insula;
praesertim cum paludes and aquae, quibus circumcingitur in mare porrigantur,
sit ab ipsis aestuantis aequoris fluctibus quorumlibet navium ad eandem Insulam
non difficilis accessus. In hanc vecta est aliquando gens eadem, cum multis
navibus etc. At which time, such was the savagenesse of that barbarous people,
that having turned out the Nunns, and ransackt the Church of all the Ornaments
and wealth then in it, they burnt it to the ground: and one of them, more
inhuman than the rest, supposing some treasure to have been hidden in the Tomb
of S. Audrey, made an hole into it with a Pick-Ax; whereupon, through the
divine vengeance, his eyes presently fell out of his head, so that he dyed.
With which judgment the rest were so terrified, that they durst not presume
to meddle there any more: But such was their cruelty, that they also fell upon
the Clergy, killing some, and imprisoning many others; insomuch as this place
lay wholly desolate, until that after some years, eight of them coming thither
again, repaired the Porches of that ruined Church, and celebrated divine
service therein.

Howbeit to these Priests there succeeded those, who lived not only
irregularly, but irreligiously: Nay the superior himself, out of a wicked
curiosity, desiring to be satisfied, whether the body of that Holy Virgin S.
Audrey was corrupted or not; said, that if it were not, God would have wrought
many miracles thereby. VVhereupon one of his fellows told him that diverse
miracles had been there done, by virtue thereof; making instance of these
several cures; viz. of a woman that was troubled with a Palsy for six years; a
young man dumb for seven years; a Maid blind from her birth, after ten years
restored to sight; a youngman that had a withered had; a Maidservant, unto
whose hand, a tool whereof she made use to get up Roots out of a Garden on the
Lords day, stuck so fast, for the space of five years, that it could not be
pulled out. But notwithstanding these instances, the said superior, calling to
him four young men of his society, thrust into that hole of the Coffin (which
the Danes had formerly made) diverse branches of Fennel, that lay upon the
floor: and desiring to see whether her Vestments were perished, took a Candle,
and fastening it to a stick, put it into the said hole; which falling from the
stick, continued flaming till it was totally consumed yet burnt not any part of
them.

Neither did they yet cease, but sharpning the stick at the one end, thrust it
into the said Vestments, and drew them to the hole: and being imboldned because
they had no hurt, one of them took a knife, and cut off a piece; others laying
hold on the remainder, endeavored withal their streng^h to pull it out, but
could not; it being drawn back again with so much force as if two strong men
had tugged at it. But see the event of this sacrilegious practice; a great
plague seizes by and by, upon the family of that Priest, whereof his wife and
Children, with all his Offspring dyed, and carried him likewise, within a few
days, to Hell (as says my Author) because he had not by great penance purged
himself from this wicked deed. And of his associates therein, two of them
happened to be slain; the third, after he was made Priest, lost his senses at
every Wane of the Moon; and the fourth, being stricken with a Palsy, continned
so, until his parents, with great sorrow, brought him to the Tomb of S.
Audrey; and there watching one night, and promising upon the Sacrament to make
satisfaction, he became restored by the intercession of that blessed Virgin.

Neither was this Church possessed by any other than these wicked Priests, until
the tenth year of the reign of King Edgar. For it happening in that King's time,
that one Sigewold a Bishop (a Greek by nation) and Thurslane a Dane, taking
notice of the eminency of this place; and becoming both of them suitors for it,
more out of covetuousness than devotion; one Wlstan de Delham, Secretary to the
King, informed him of the fame and sanctity thereof; and told him, that such
persons were not worthy of it: and moreover declared unto him the life and
miracles of the glorious Virgin S. Audrey, in the presence and hearing of
Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, then the Kings Confessor; who taking notice
thereof with great delight, forthwith purchased it of the said King, with such
immunities and privileges, as that it should for ever be free from any Regal
tribute or exaction. And having so done, did put out those secular Priests; and
repairing the Church, which had been destroyed by the Danes, and continued
desolate for an hundred years, introduced Monks thereinto, constituting
Brythnod (Provost of the Church of Winchester the first Abbot. All which was
performed in the year after the Incarnation of our Savior DCCCCLx. and from
the time that S. Audrey first built it CCXCvii. receiving into it those Priests
which were content to undergo a Monastique life; and augmenting it is
possessions with diverse other lands purchased by himself; as also diverse rich
ornaments. And obtained some of the said Kings grant. And moreover bought of
the said King, not only the whole Isle; scil. xx. hides of land which he had
therein; but the dignity and soke of seven Hundreds and an half; viz. two
within the Isle, and five and a half in the territory of the East Angles; ^ive
at Meldeburne; three and an half at Hernyngforde; and twelve at North would:
for which he gave in exchange Lx. hides in Hertyngham, given unto him by K.
Athelstan: bestowing other things for which he paid an hundred pounds; as also
a Cross of gold, beautified with merveilous work, and filled with Relics;
which the said King, in confirmation of his said grants and privileges to this
place, had offered here, upon the Altar of S. Audrey, with an admirable book.
So that the whole, that this devout Bishop gave to God and S. Audrey within
this Isle, Marshes, and Fen^s, was no less than Lx. hides.

And to these concessions did the same K. Edgar add the grant of xl. hides of
land, lying in the town of Hatfeilde: and moreover gave to the said Bishop the
manor of Sudburne; upon condition, that he would translate the Rule of S.
Benedict out of Latin into English: which he did, and offered it to S. Audrey.
And lastly bestowed on the said Church his garment of fine purple, made after
the fashion of a coat of mail, and wrought throughout with pure gold, whereof a
Miter was made. And out of his own Chapel several little Chests and Scroules,
with the Relics of diverse Saints.

CAP. XL.
HAving now done with this second foundation of the said Monastery, so made by
that devout Bishop (as has been observed) I must not forget the gift of Staney
thereunto.

This was bestowed Ex hist. MS. Elien. Eccl. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Tui
A. 1. f. 8. b.
on it by the before mentioned Wulstan de Delham, who had it, with the Fen
belonging thereto, of the grant of one AEscuen a VVidow: which Fen the Monks
afterward dimised for the Rent of two thousand Eeles, unto a certain Kinsman
of the said AEscuen: who, having been tenants to it formerly, and continuing so
likewise during the life of the said King Edgar, did at length hold it as their
own, without any sentence or law of the Citizens and Hundreders. Upon complaint
made therefore of this injury to AEgelwine the Alderman (who was then chief
Justice to the King over all England) the said AEgelwine came to Ely, and
summoned Reigmund de Holand and the rest, that so held it, to come before him
to answer the same^ but they, though often warned, refused to appear;
nevertheless the said Abbot continued his suit, and renewed his complaint to
the people, for that wrong, upon all occasions. At length the said Alderman
sitting at Cambridge, there was a great Court of those Citizens and Hundreders,
before xxiii. Judges, held under a c^rtain place called^ Thirningfeld, near
Maideneberge; where the Abbot declared openly to them all, how unjustly the
said Reimund, and the rest, had dealt with him, in dispossessing S. Audrey of
this Staneye; and how that they would never appear, though frequently summoned.
VVhereupon the Judges decreed, that the before specified Abbot ought to have
the same again; as also the whole fen and fishing: and moreover, that he the
said Reigmund, and the other defendants, should pay to the same Abbot the
arrear of fish, due for six years, and likewise give a forfaiture to the King:
and that if they did not freely do so, they should be distrained by their
Cattle. And thereupon also did the said Alderman command, that Oskytel, and
Osmund Bece, with a Godere de Ely should perambulate that land, and put the
Abbot in possession thereof; who did accordingly.

Of the before specified Abbot Brithnod I also find; Ex hist. Eli. Eccl. in
bib^. Bodl. [L. 69.] lib. 2. f. 14. b.
that by his care and industry the limits of this Isle were first set forth;
viz. Ex hist. Eli. Eccl. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Domi^iani A. 15. f. 7. b.
from Cotingelade to Litleport, or Abbotes delfe (since called Bishops delfe)
being in length seven miles: And from Cherche were to Straham mere, in breadth
four: within which compass diverse petty Isles are included. Moreover, as a
member thereof, (though lying without this circumference) is Dudintone; as also
Chateriz, where was a House of Nunns; with the town of Wittlesey, and Abbey of
Thorney, which Abbot calling together the Inhabitants on every part thereof,
assigned Ex hist. E^^. Eccl. in bi^^. B^d. ut sup^^.
them their several portions of land: and for a perpetual evidence of the
possessions belonging to his Church, he caused that large and deep ditch to be
cut through the main body of the Fenn, which was then called by the name of
Abbot's delfe (as I have observed) to the end it might remain as a boundary in
that deep mud and water.

This Monastery being therefore so amply endowed with lands, and otherwise
richly beautifyed through the bounty of many zealous people, who then thought
nothing too much for the glory of God and his service: and growing more famons
every day than other, by reason of the miracles which were done at the tomb of
that renowned Virgin S. Audrey; multitudes of people, for devotions sake
flocking thither; it happened that (about fifty years after) King Canutus, a
Prince of great wisdom, valor, and p^ety; being desirous, together with Queen
Emma his wife, and the Nobles of this Realm, to keep the feast of the
Purification of our Lady, here at Ely, with high solemnity, as the custom then
was; the Abbots of Ely in their turn, performing the service in the King's
Court, as they had used to do; there being no other access to it (considering
the breadth and depth of the Fenn) but by shipping; he set sail thitherward: and
when he came near to the land, raising up himself, commanded the Mariners to
make what have they could to a little Port, but to go stedily: and fixing his
eyes toward the Church, which stood on high, on the top of the Rock, he heard
a pleasant voice on every side: where listening farther, the nearer he
approached to land^ the more sensible he was of the melody: and at length
perceiving that it was the Monks then singing in the Qui^e, and with shrill
voices performing their divine Offices; he commanded all the rest that were in
the next ships to come nearer to him; and exhorting them to sing with him,
became so transported, that, expressing the joy of his heart, he presently
composed and sung this Hymn.

Merry singende Monekes ben in Ely
tha chut singende thereby
Royal chites noer the land
And here yve these Moneks sang.
Which in Latin is thus, Dulce c^ntaverunt Monachi in Ely,
Dumi Canutus Rex navigat prope ibi^


And now my Knights (quoth he) sail ye nearer, and let us jointly hear the
harmony of these Monks. All which were long afterward publicly sung in the
Quire, in memory of that devout King, and kept in mind as Proverbs; the King
thereupon ceasing not thus to sing, with his venerable College, till he came to
land: where being received with solemn Procession (as the Custom had been to
the Prince or any eminent person) and brought into the Church, he ratified all
the donations conferred thereto by his Royal Predecessors Kings of England, and
established them with their immunities and privileges in the face of the Church
(where the body of the holy Virgin S. Audrey lay entombed) upon the high Altar,
before all the persons there present.

Not long afterward it so happened Ibid.
, that at the solempnity of this Feast the Fen was so much frozen, that the
said King could not repair thither, as he desired; nevertheless it did not
alter his purpose, though he was sorrowful and much troubled: Howbeit, putting
his trust in God, being then upon Soham mere, he contrived to be drawn upon a
slead over the Ice; and for his better security (considering the danger of the
passage) that one should go before him, to try the way. But it so fell out,
that as he stood thus consulting, a lusty and big man, and an inhabitant of the
Isle, who for his corpulency was called Brithmer Budde, came before him, and
offered to lead the way; whereupon the King followed on the Slead, all that
beheld him admiring his boldness; and coming safe thither, celebrated that
solempnity, according as he had wont, with great joy: and in gratitude to the
said Brithmer, made him, with all his posterity, ^ree m^n for ever.

In further testimony likewise of the security of this place, by reason of the
vast and deep waters wherein it was situate; I find M^tthe^ P^ris. in v^t.
A^batum S. A^i^i p. 43. ^. 40.
, that in the time of King Edward the Confessor, the English, having
advertisement of great preparations then making by the Da^es, for another
invasion of this Realm, bestirred themselves in fortifying their Cities and
Castles, hiding their treasure, and mustering of soldiers for their defense:
And that Alfric, the Abbot of S. Albans, much fearing the danger, did not only
take care to convey the Shrine of that glorious prothomartyr ( S. Alban) into a
secret corner, where he immured it; but the better to disguise the business,
wrote Letters to the Abbot of this place, humbly requesting him, that he would
take chardge thereof, till all things should be in a quiet condition again: ^or
(says my Author) erat eorum Insula intransmeabilibus circundata paludibus, and
arundinetis, unde hostium incursus nequaquam timuerunt. id est. This Isle of
Ely is environed with Fenns and Reed-plecks unpassible; so that they feared not
the invasion of the Enemy. Whereunto the said Abbot assenting, Alfric, like a
politic and wary man, fearing that these of Ely, having gotten such a treasure
into their hands, might deny to restore it when it should be again required,
sent, instead of S. Albans Shrine, the relics of an old Monk, put up in a
rich Chest, as if they had been S. Albans bones; and kept the before-specified
Shrine walled up in their own Abbey, as has been said.

But the most signal testimony of the strength of this place, by reason of the
said waters encompassing it, is that recourse, which diverse of the principal
nobility of the English Nation had unto it, as their greatest refuge against
the strength and power of the Norman Conqueror: as also the defense that they
then and there made against a powerful Army, brought by that King for the
subduing of it; the substance of which story, because it is but briefly pointed
at by our public Writers, I suppose it will not seem tedious if I here
succinctly deliver.

After that William Duke of Normandy, invading this Realm with a puissant Army
(in the year MLxvi.) had subdued the forces of K. Harold in open batail,
wherein that King lost his life; Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, whom the
Conqueror affected not, fled Ex hist. Elie. Eccl. in bibl. Cotton. sub effige
Titi A. 1. f. 87. a.
into this Isle for safety: So likewise did Ibid.
Egfrid then Abbot of S. Albans, with the Relics of that Saint, and treasure
of his Church; As also Math. Paris. p. 7. n. 20.
Edwine and Morkere, two great and potent Earls of this Nation, with Math.
Paris. p. 7. n. 20.
Egelwine Bishop of Durham, besides many thousands Math. Paris. p. 7. n. 20.
of the Clergy and Laity. And understanding, that Hereward Lord Ingulphi hist.
p. 511. n. 20.
of Brunne, in Lincolnshire, a younger son to the famous Leofrike Earl of
Mercia, being a person much renowned Ibid: n. 50^
for his valor and military skill [for Ex ver. membr. penes Georgium Puref^y
de Wadley in com Berks. arm. an. 1653.
at the age of xviij years, being banished the land by King Edw. the Confessor
for his extraordinary dissoluteness toward his parents and others, he went
into Flanders and other foreign parts, where he gained most high repute of his
prowess and noble exploits] was returned from beyond Sea, they forthwith sent
Ex Regist de Peterborough penes Will. Pierpont arm. f. 234.^.
for him; desiring that he would repair thither with all his power, and join
with them in the defense of their native Country, and redeeming their just
liberties: And in particular they importuned him, in behalf of Thurstane then
Abbot of that place and his Monks, whose the said Island wholly was, and on
whose behalf the same was then fortified against the King, that he would make
no delay, because the said King brought in a foreign Monk out of France, to
obtrude upon them as Abbot there; and that he purposed to do the like in all
other Churches throughout England.

To which request of theirs he willingly condescended, and forthwith began his
journey toward them accordingly: whereof the Earl Warren having notice, whose
brother, long before, the said Hereward had killed, he laid ambushes for him on
the outside of the Fens belonging to this Isle, and kept guards about the
waters near to the land, hoping to take him cunningly without any slaughter of
his own men: But Hereward being aware thereof, as also that some of those
guards had encountered with part of his soldiers, and pursued them, he came in
to their aid, and by taking some of them, discovering that the said Earl had
set these ambushes for him; and likewise that he was on the morrow to be at
Hoherhed, he hastened thither with his ships; and placing some armed soldiers
near the bank of the River, went himself with three Horsemen and fou^ Archers,
well armed, unto the mouth thereof; where the Earl himself with his men was
then also come on the other side; and seeing them, sent some of his party
nearer; who enquiring whether they belonged to Hereward, and finding that they
did^ endeavored to persuade them to forsake him^ but prevailing not, they
returned to the Earl, and told him, that Hereward himself was on the other side
of the water. Whereupon the said Earl animated his soldiers to swim over with
him presently, and revenge his brothers death: But they told him, that it was
not possible so to do; saying, that his coming thither was purposely thus to
delude them: whereupon the Earl sighing, said to them on the other side of the
water, Oh that I had that Devilish fellow (your Master) here, I would certainly
torment him to death. To which words of his Hereward replied, If we should
happen to be so fortunate, as to meet alone in any fit place, you would not
wish me in your feeble hands, nor like well of my company: and having so said,
stooping a little, he bent his Bow, and letting f^ye an Arrow, hit the Earl on
the breast; but his Coat of mail would not suffer it to enter; nevertheless it
came with such a force, that it struck him off his Horse, so that his servants
took him up for dead in their arms. In the mean while Hereward went away, and
came with his company into the Isle the same day, where he was received with
great honor by the Abbot and his Monks, as also by those noble persons that
were there; viz. Edwine Earl of Leicester, and Morkere his brother Earl of
Warwick, and other eminent men of the Country, who having been much oppressed
by the said Conqueror, fled thither.

Whereof the King hearing, and being much enraged thereat, he resolved to get
the Isle by assault; and to that end caused a rendezvous of his whole Army at
Alrehede (near which place there is a military rampire yet to be seen) where
the Fen was four furlongs in breadth: and having brought store of wood, stone,
and fagots of all kinds, with a multitude of Trees and great pieces of timber,
fastened them together underneath with Cow-hides; and to the end that they might
the better pass over them, they stripped off the skins of beasts, and filled
them with wind like bladders: which being done, there were so many that pressed
on to get over, being greedy of the gold and silver whereof they supposed store
to be in the Isle, that they that went foremost were drowned, with their Bridge;
and those in the midst became swallowed up in the depth of the Fenn: but of
those that were hindmost, a few, throwing away their weapons, made a shift by
the mud to escape: Nevertheless multitudes perished in this adventure, whose
bodies were long after found, putrified in their Harness, and dragged out from
the bottom of the water; but one only man (whose name was Beda) getting into
the Isle.

The King therefore beholding this lamentable disaster, and much grieving
thereat, departed thence with those few which he had left, without any hope to
conquer it; placing guards of soldiers about it, to prevent those within from
wasting the Country. In the mean time the said Beda being taken, and brought
before the chief persons that were in the Isle; and asked why he so boldly
adventured himself; told them, that the King did promise, that whosoever should
first enter, and do some notable exploit there, to the danger of those that
defended it, let him ask what he would of any man's therein, and he should
obtain it: which, when they heard, they commended his valor, and kept him
there with them for certain days, using him with great respect. Having
therefore had this experience of their civilities, and observed how secure the
place was, by reason of the fortifications there made; as also the number and
valor of the soldiers therein; he professed, that as he had often heard them
reputed to be persons more expert in war than others, he now found it to be
true; and faithfully promised them, upon liberty to go back to the King's camp,
that he would there relate as much: which he accordingly did, all being joyful
to see him safe returned^ even the King himself, for he was one of his most
eminent soldiers: unto whom he related the strength of the Isle, and his own
adventure; and that those Earls beforementioned, were there, with two noble
men; viz. Orgar, and Thirchitell, surnamed Child; but extolled Hereward not
only beyond them all, comparing him with the most famous Knights, which he had
seen through France, the whole Roman Empire, or Constantinople.

At which story the Earl Warren took no small offense, not enduring to hear
such a commendation of him, that had slain his brother (as has been observed)
and suggested the King, that the relator was bribed to make so partial a
report. But the King going on in making more enquiry of his particular
observations there, had this farther account from him; That the Monks of this
place, ^earing to be subject to a soreiner, in regard the King had designed to
bring over such out of France, to be chief in all Monasteries and Churches of
England; did entertain those persons there for their defense; and thereupon
fortified the said Isle; affirming, that they were much more willing to live by
the labor of their hands, than to be reduced to such a servitude. And that the
same Isle was not then at all burdened by those forces^ For (quoth Ex ^is^. E
cl. Elie^. in bible Bodl. ^. 30^^.
he) they matter not the siege, the Husbandman not neglecting his Plow, nor the
Hunter his sports; neither does the Fowler cease from his employment:
concluding, that they were securely d^fended by their own Soldiery. Nay, I
shall tell you more (says he) both what I know and saw. This Isle it
extraordinary fruitful in all sorts of grass, there being no place in England
that has a more fertile turf. Moreover, it is compassed about with huge waters
and Fenns, as it were with a strong wall; and abounds not only with
domestique Cattle, but with a multitude of wild beasts; viz. Hearts, Does,
Goats and Hares, both in the woods and near the Fens: as also Ermines,
Pole-Cats, Weesels, and the like Vermin, which are taken with traps and other
Engines in the winter time. And of Fish and foul, which there breed, what shall
I say? At the Floud-gates upon the skirts of those waters, what a vast company
of Eels do they take in Nets? as also mighty Pikes and Pickerells, Perch,
Roche, and sometimes greater and Royal Fishes. Of Birds likewise there be
innumerable: So also of Geese, Bitterns, Sea-fowl. Water-crows, Herons and
Ducks abundance; especially in the winter season, or when they moult their
feathers, whereof I have seen three hundred taken at one time.

Adding Ex R^gist de Peterborough ut supra.
, that every day whilst he stayed with them, the fashion of their sitting at
dinner and supper, in the common Hall, was a Knight and a Monk; and at the
upper Table the Abbot himself, with the said Earls; as also Hereward and
Turkill before-specified. Likewise, that above the head of each Knight and
Monk, hung a Target and Lance upon the wall: and in the midst of the room, upon
forms, lay Coats of mail and Helmets, with other Arms; that when any occasion
should be, the Monks always as well as the soldiers might be ready to go to
fight; whom he fo^nd to be most expert men at their weapons. And moreover,
magnified their plenty of all things there, that he said he thought it much
better and more safe for the King to come to peaceable terms with them, than to
adventure to assail them by ^orce, and miscarry in the attempt.

Which speech of his being thus ended, there stepped out one of those Soldiers
that the King had employed to keep the Fort made at Reche, in order to the
siege of this Isle: who being but newly returned from thence, having heard this
relation of the beforementioned Beda, said; Do you think this to be a vain
report, and not to be believed? I assure you, that yesterday I my self saw a
party of the Enemy make a sally out of the Isle, whereof but seven of them were
armed; and all Monks except two, who behaved themselves in every point like
Soldiers, and fired the Town of Burwell, doing much mischief otherwise: which
when our men saw, ten of them issued out of the Fort, with a purpose to take
them in their return, because they were fewer in number; but in the skirmish
they slew all our men, except one, a stout Soldier, whose name was Richard,
and nephew to Osbert the Shireeve, with whom one Wenothus had a single
encounter; wherein neither prevailing, though they fought a good while, some of
our men went to part them; whereof the famous Hereward taking notice (for he
was within view) he would not suffer any one to meddle; saying, that it was not
just, that two or three should set upon one man, and that he would not suffer
ser any of his to do so base a thing: But our men followed them to their ships,
and killed one of their Mariners with a dart; and taking another prisoner, he
told us who they all were, and their names; viz. Hereward the General,
Wenothus, Thurstane (a youngman, afterward surnamed Provost) Boter of S.
Edmunds Bury, Siward, Leuric; and Ac^r for his stoutness surnamed Hardy. These
notwithstanding they were Monks, being skillful men in Arms, often gave
testimony of their valor in presence of the said Hereward.

All which the King hearing; as he would not speak an evil word of them,
deeming it a most unworthy thing to give bad language of such valiant men, so
did he forbear to commend their courage above his own soldiers; but considered
to make peace with them, in regard the Isle was so strongly fortified, and that
he knew not how to prevent their coming out thereof, or return. VVhereupon,
calling together his Nobles and Counselors, he told them his thoughts;
alleging, that now he was to march against the Army of the Danes, and soon
after of necessity to go into Normandy, it would not be safe to leave such an
enemy behind him in the midst of the Land, at his back. But some of his Nobles,
then present, and which were most of his privy Council, diswaded him from so
doing; urging, that if he dealt thus favorably with those that had imbroiled
his Kingdom for so long a time, others would not be afraid to do the like.

To whom the King, in anger, replied, that he was not able to conquer them,
considering the place naturally so defensible. VVhereupon one Ivotael le Bois,
moved with some indignation, told him, that he had long known a certain old
Witch, who if she were there, would by her Art soon destroy their whole
strength, and places of defense; and drive them out as Cowards out of the
Island: which was no sooner said, but that all who stood by, became earnest
suitors to the King, that he would make no delay to encourage, and well reward
whomsoever, that could by any Art or skill vanquish his Enemies. The King
therefore yielding to these their persuasions, caused this old woman to be
privately sent for, that it might not be talked of; and brought his Army
together again, placing it on all parts of the Isle, making Fortifications on
every side thereof, and appointing strict guards to prevent the issuing forth
of any that were within, lest they should know what was in hand, and use any
means to hinder the same.

All which being done, and understood by those that were within, it put them to
no little disturbance of mind, and likewise fear; they not knowing what to do,
because the King had learnt some new way of warring against them: they
therefore consulting what was best to be done, concluded to send out some fit
person to make a discovery, what it was that their Enemies were in hand with:
but finding no man fit for such a task, the Valiant Hereward resolved to
undergo it himself; either as a Scout, or Travailer; or to alter his habit,
though all were against it: and at length did set forwards, taking with him
only his Mare called Swallow, which was always very lean and ill shapen; but of
pace exceeding swift, and nimble for action.

And when he went out, he changed his clothes, cut his hair and beard; and
being so clad, m^t with a Potter, whose Pots he took from him; and feigning
himself a Potter took his way to the King's Court, then at Brandon in Suffolk:
And being got thither, it happened that he lodged at the House of a Widow, where
that old Witch was entertained, who was to be brought privily, for the
destruction of all those in the Isle; where he heard them discourse in Latin,
what Art was to be used for the subduing thereof, they deeming him to be a
plain Country fellow, and ignorant of what they then discoursed. And about the
dead time of the night, discerning the Woman of the House, and that old
Sorceress to go out of doors, he secretly followed them, and saw, that they
went to a certain Spring, which was by the side of a Garden, and ran toward
the East; and hearing them discourse, he understood that they designed to
murder him: but to prevent their purpose, he got away very early in the
morning, with his Pots; and wandering about the King's Court on every side, he
cried (as Potters use to do) Pots, Pots, good Pots and Pitchers; all good
earthen ware. Whereupon, being called into the King's Kitchen, that they might
buy some of his Pots, there came in one of the Constables of the Town, and
looking upon him said, that he never saw any man in favor of face and stature
so like Hereward, as a poor man might be like to a rich, and a Country man to
Soldier: insomuch as diverse came about him, desiring to see a man like so much
famed a person; and thereupon brought him into the King's Hall, amongst the
Knights and Souldi^rs, that they might behold him: But some when they saw him,
said that a man of no greater limbs could not be of that valor and courage as
Hereward was said to be. Others asked him if he knew, or had ever seen that
wicked fellow, scil. Hereward. To whom he answered; I wish that he were now
here amongst us, he being the greatest Enemy that I have: for he took a Cow and
four sheep from me, which were all the goods in the world that I had, except my
Pots, and this Mare; and the only livelihood for my self and my two Sonns.

About this time the King's Dinner being making ready, Hereward retired into
the Kitchen; and after Dinner the Servants, Cooks, and Grooms of the Kitchen
gave him Wine and Beer, that they might make him drunk and laugh at him,
scoffing at him diversely; having a purpose to shave his Crown, and pull off the
hair of his beard; and then to hoodwink him, to the intent that he might break
his own Pots, which they had set about him. But refusing to be thus abused, one
of them struck him, whom he requited presently with a blow that knocked him
down; insomuch as the rest took up Tongs, and other things to beat him; which
he discerning, forthwith snatched up a fire shovel, and laying about him
stoutly, killed one, and wounded diverse of them. Whereupon it being made known
in the House, they apprehended him and put him in ward: and soon after, the
King being gone out to hunt, one of his Keepers came and brought a naked Sword
in one hand, and a pair of Fetters in the other, which he threatened to put upon
him: but Hereward, being too nimble for him, wrested the Sword out of his hold,
and slew him; and so, over hedges and ditches hasted to the King's outer Court,
where he found his Mare; and though some pursued him, got safe away to
Somersham wood; where he hid himself till the Moon shone after midnight, and
then came into the Isle.

But whilst he was thus in the wood, he chanced to meet with a person, whose
Horse was tired, and himself too: and demanding of him who he was; he told him
that he was one of the King's Servants, that had pursued a man, who had killed
one of the Kitchen Boys, and another that had the custody of him, after he was
apprehended for that fact: and desired him, that for the love of God, and
generosities sake, he would discover to him, whether he saw such a fellow or
not, whom he then described. To whom he replied; Because thou requirest me to
tell thee, for the love of God, and of generosity, I will. Know therefore, that
I am the man: And now, that thou may be infallibly assured, that I am so, and
that thou have spoken with me; take this thy Sword with thee for a testimony,
and leave thy lance with me. All which he reported to the King; who with those
that were the present, admired Hereward for an excellent Soldier.

The King therefore according to his former purpose, having prepared diverse
warlike Instruments, brought his whole Army to AElreheth (now Audrey) causing
great store of wood and stone, with diverse sorts of fagots, and such like
materials, to be carried thither: And summoned all the Fishermen in those
parts, with their Boats, to meet at Cotingelade, that they might transport
thither whatsoever was brought; and raise large hills and heaps on this side
Alreheth, whereupon to fight. Amongst which Fishermen came Hereward himself
also with a Boat, using all show of diligence: and the same day before Sun
setting, having set fire on what was so brought, and killed and drowned diverse,
he made his escape away: And to the end he might not be known, he colored his
head and beard red; neglecting no way to disguise himself, which might further
the doing of mischief to his adversaries: whereof the King hearing, commanded,
that if ever he could be taken, he should be brought alive to him without any
hurt.

But having warning by these losses, the King caused more strict guards and
watches day and night in every place; and within seven days raised four or
five mounts of earth and other materials, in which they placed certain warlike
Engines; intending, on the morrow, with all their force to assault the Isle;
and that they might the better succeed therein, set that old Witch before
mentioned, upon the highest place, in the very midst of them; that, being so
well guarded, she might exercise her wicked Art. Who being so got up, made long
speeches against the Isle, and all those that were in it, making signs and
shows of their being vanquished; and allways at the end of each spell, she
turned up her bare buttocks toward the Isle. Howbeit, as she was beginning
with her third spell, there were those of the Isle that set fire on the Reeds
growing in the Fen all thereabouts; which, by the help of the wind, spread it
self no less than two furlongs; and making a horrible noise of crackling
amongst the willows, and such like Vegetables, did so affright the assaylants,
that they hasted away as fast as they could; but being troubled with the smoke,
could not tell which way to betake themselves, insomuch as many were drowned,
the defendants having the advantage of the wind and smoke, getting out of the
Isle, and shouring multitudes of arrows upon them.

And in this prodigious rout and confusion of the assaylants, down tumbled the
old witch, from the place where she was set, and broke her neck: nay the King
himself hardly escaped death, there being an Arrow shot into his Target, which
he carried away with him to his Tent: which so soon as his Soldiers saw, they
feared he had been wounded; but he told them, he was not at all hurt, otherwise
than by evil Counsel, in being deceived and abused through the cunning of that
wicked Sorceress; expressing, that all the mischief which had happened, did
befall him deservedly, in putting any trust in her devilish Art.

At that time it was, that Raphe, surnamed Waer (Earl of the East Angles)
having privily got together a great strength, inviting diverse of the English to
his wedding, obliged them to his party deceitfully, by an Oath; and wasted the
whole Country, from Norwich to Thetford: whereof the two Earls, and all the
rest of the chief persons, who then were in this Isle, having notice, repaired
to them; leaving only Hereward, with the Monks and his own Soldiers, to defend
this place.

Things standing therefore thus; the King discerning that all his endeavors
were fruitless, as to the conquering this Isle by war or power, having lost so
many men in his attempt to that purpose; he at length; by the Council Ex hist.
E^un. Eccl. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Titi A. 1. f. 87. a.
of William, then Bishop of Hereford, and others, determined, that all the
goods and possessions belonging to that Abbey, which lay without the compass of
the Isle, should be seized on, and divided amongst his Soldiers; to the end
that they might keep guards on the outsides thereof. Of which the Monks having
knowledge, they forthwith consulted together, their Abbot being returned (who
dissembling to go with those Earls, fled with the ornaments and treasure of
the Church, to Angerhale;) and resolved, Ibid.
not only to yield peaceably to the King, in case he would restore unto them
freely and honorably all the lands belonging to their Church, but to give him
a thousand marks; and accordingly sent cunningly, without the knowledge of the
noble Hereward, to make that tender to him, the King being Ibid.
then at Warwick; who acceptably entertaining it, they gave admission Ex
Regist. de Peterb. u^ supra.
to him and his Soldiers, to come privately into the Isle, when Hereward was
gone out with his men to forage; to the end that the busine^s might be done
without resistance: which being discovered to Hereward, by one of the said
Monks, (whose name was Alwyne the Son of Orgar) he grew so enraged, that he
resolved to set fire on the Church and the Town: but at the earnest entreaty
and prayer of that Monk; wishing him rather to have regard to his own safety;
as also telling him that the King, with all his Army, was then at Wyccheford
(within the distance of one furlong) and desiring him, that he would secure
himself by flight, in case he had no mind to make his peace; he yielded to
those his persuasions, because he had often accompanied him in his military
adventures, and been faithful to him: and thereupon, presently, betook himself
to those his Ships, which he had to guard the Isle, into a certain large and
spacious Mere, called Wide, not far from Well (this being the seventh year of
their so holding of the same Isle against the King;) and sailed thither, in
regard there were free passages out of it: And there resolving to stay a while,
employed some of his Soldiers toward Saham, to plunder and pillage the
Country; to whom he sent out Scouts to bring them back to him, lest they should
be taken. Which Scouts, finding them in a little Island, called Stuntney,
thought them to be their Enemies; and therefore two of them ( viz. Scarfulte
and Broher) got amongst the Reeds; and with their Swords each shaved the
others Crown, expecting thereby to find the more favor being taken: but at
length, discovering that they were all of a side, they went away together, and
soon got to their Master: who had not been long in the said Mere, but that the
Country people and the King's Soldiers so beset him, that being forced to
flee, he killed his own Horse, lest any mean fellow should boast, that he had
taken him: and so getting away into Bruneswald, and the great woods of
Northamptonshire, he very much wasted the Country thereabouts with sire and
Sword.

And having thus left this Isle, where the vastness and depth of the waters had
yielded him such great, and so long security (for which respect I have made
this digression) I shall conclude with this Character^ which Ingulphus (the
then Venerable Abbot of Crouland) gives p. 512. b^^
of him; Porro cum supramemorati Comites (Edwinus and Morkerus, Rogerus Comes
Herefordensis, Radulfus Comes Southfolciae, and Waldevus Comes Northumbriae)
inclyt^ Regi Willielmo repugnarent, Helienses paludes, cum aliis multis
magnatibus, similiter exhaeredatis, occupantes; celiri nuncio Herwardus ad eos
accersitus, Dux belli and Magister militum efficitur; ubi tot bellica facinora
fecit, toties adversarios vicit, tot vicibus illusit, quod perpetuam laudem
meruit: quippe qui ruinas suae patriae pereuntis, quamdiu potuit sustentavit,
and inultos abire ad inferos non permisit. Caeteri optimates se, Regi dedentes,
ejus gratiam tentaverunt; solus hic omnibus hoc recusans, se, subdere distulit,
ac alias divertit^ id est. Therefore when the before mentioned Earls (Edwine
and Morkere; Roger Earl of Hereford, Raphe Earl of Suffolk, and Waltheof Earl
of Northumberland) not submitting to the King, had, together with diverse other
great men, in like sort disherited, possessed themselves of the Fenns at Ely;
they forthwith sent for Hereward, and made him General of all their forces:
where he did so many warlike exploits, so often beat his adversaries, and so
many times deluded them, that he obtained lasting renown for the same;
forasmuch as he did (so long as he could) sustain the tottering ruins of his
Country, and was not cruel to his Enemies. And when the rest of the Nobles,
rendered themselves, in hope of the King's favor; he only refusing; would not
submit; but got away.

Yet afterward he made his peace: And having issue one only daughter, called
Turfride, married Ex vet. Rot. MS. penes Georgium Purefey de Wadley, in com.
Berks. a. ^. 1653.
to Hugh de Evermue Lord of Deping (in Lincolnshire) with the Forest adjoining;
entertaining the said Hugh upon a time, at his House in Huntendon; it happened,
Ex vet Rot. MS. penes Georgium Purefey de Wadley, in com. Berks. a. ^. 1653.
that through a quarrel which arose then betwixt them, he was there wretchedly
slain by his said Son in law: And buried at Crouland.

CAP. XLI.
KIng William therefore, being now possessed of this Isle, which he found so
troublesome and chardgable in the gaining, thought it no small piece of policy
to secure the same from the like danger for the future: and therefore, having
afterward some difference with Scotland, compelled Ex hist. Elien. Eccl. in
bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Titi A. 1. f. 89. b.
the Abbot to maintain no less than xl. Soldiers for the defense thereof;
which being such persons (or their substitutes) as held of him by military
service, had their constant diet in his Hall, as also daily pay at the hands of
the Celerer.

But afterward it was not long ere that this Conventual Church of Ely became a
Cathedral, for Godw. d^ praesul.
in the time of King Henry the first, Richard the the^ Abbot, not being well
pleased to live under the Bishop of Lincoln, to whose Dioces Cambridgshire
(within which this Isle is situate) then belonged; suggesting to the King, that
this would be a fit place for an Episcopal see, and procuring the Popes consent
thereunto, obtained his desire therein; hoping to have been the first Bishop of
this new Dioces: but though he was prevented thereof by death, yet did not the
King neglect to do what he was so solicited unto; and therefore, bestowing
upon the Bishop of Lincoln the Mannours of Spaldwick, Bricklesworth, and
Bokeden, in recompense of the loss, which the said Bishop sustained, by
exempting of the said County of Cambridge from his jurisdiction, completed his
purpose therein. And to the intent, that the revenues of this Bishopric might
afford him an honorable support, they reduced the number of Monks, which were
Lxx. to xl. whereupon Hervaeus Bishop of Bangor in Wales, was made the first
Bishop here.

At that time (for ought I can find) there was not any other access into this
Isle than by Ships or Boats; this Bishop therefore, being desiro^s to have a
Causey through the Fenn (as it should seem) but doubting whether the Monks
would think the work fesible at all; or if so, with any indifferent chardge, so
contrived the business, that it was set upon without any fear of either, and
became accomplished accordingly. The story may, perhaps, to some seem fabulous;
but take it from the Authority of the Leiger in bibl. Bodl. [L. 69.] lib. 2. f.
26. a.
book of that Monastery.

There appeared, in a vision, unto a certain Countryman, who dwelt at Exning
in Suffolk, S. Edmund the King and Martyr (in honor of whole memory, that
famous Abbey of S. Edmundsbury had been long before founded;) and awakening the
man, said thus to him, Good man! listen well unto what I shall say unto thee;
and what I appoint thee to do, fail not with effect to accomplish. Arise and go
presently to the Bishop of Ely; and tell him in my name, that he must make a
way whereby I may visit S. Audrey. Who accordingly made haste to the Bishop,
and acquainted him with this his Vision and command: the good Bishop therefore
weeping for joy, delayed not to make enquiry how this business might be done;
and finding, that no man durst, for what chardge soever undertake to accomplish
it; there stepped out a certain Monk of that Abbey, called John (a soft man to all
outward appearance) who told the Bishop that he would, by God's help, perform
the work. Whereupon, setting in hand therewith, he began to measure the
distance from Soham to Ely, and to cut down the Reeds which stood in his way;
as also to make Bridges over the Rivers; and so went on in raising of the said
Causey, which he perfected in a very short time, to the wonder of all men that
then saw it; that Causey being still called Soham Causey.

Which place ( viz. Soham) is also famous W. Malm. de gestis Pontif. lib. 2. f.
135. a. n. 30.
for two other things; first for the great Mere, that heretofore made the
passage by Ships and Boats very dangerous to those, who came into the Isle that
way, before the said Causey was made: and next for that the body of Faelix
Bishop of the East Angles was translated from Domuc hither. Which Bishop dyed
almost a thousand years since.

To Hervaeus succeeded Nigel in that Bishopric; of whom I may not omit to
observe; E^ hi^t. M.S. E^ien. E c. in bibl. Cotton. su^ effige Titi A 1. ^. 9^
^.
that he, discerning this Isle to be a place of such great security, through
the advantage of the Fen, wherewith it is encompassed; that, joining with
Baldwine de Rivers in the Rebellion against King Stephan, he made a strong Fort
of lime and stone within the precinct thereof: but that Fort, being by the
power of S. Audrey (as mine Author says) often destroyed, he built one of
timber near to his Engines of war; and walled in the round hill (called the
Keep) which was committed to his custody by Geffrey de Magnavill Earl of Essex,
and Richard de Clare Earl of Hertford; whereof knowledge being given to certain
great men of that Country, they made a confederacy with him: But the King
having intelligence thereof, sent his Army to assault it; yet prevailed little
therein, till he himself came with his Ships; and then L^^. C^ll. vol. 1. p. 8^4
, having prepared a multitude of Hurdles, made with them a passage for his
Horse: which when they within discerned, they threw down their Arms and ran
away: but the Bishop escaped and got to Maud the Empress.

And as for the reasons before expressed, this Isle has been in those former
times of trouble, esteemed a place of such great security, so was it afterward
upon the like occasion: for after the death of Eustace Bishop of Ely (which
happened about the latter end of King John's time) the Monks Godw. de Praesul.
having elected one Robert, a Yorkshire man; who not only took the profits of
the Bishopric for five years, without any consecration; but adhered unto
Jews, Son to the King of France, at that time in this Realm and the King's
Enemy (as our Historians do at large set forth) King Henry the third, fearing
left he should receive the said Jews into this Isle, made a very great
complaint Claus. 3. H. 3 in do^so m. 13.
thereof to the Pope; whereby, representing that danger, he calls it optima
munitio Regni; the best Fort in all his Kingdom; and therefore humbly besought
the Pope, that he would provide a better Pastor for this Church: which he,
accordingly, did.

Nor had it less account, as it seems in 49o. of that King's reign: for after
the battle of Evesham, wherein the Army of the rebellious Barons was
vanquished; diverse of those that fled, betook themselves to this place; amongst
which John de Eyvile and Robert de Wileby were L^l. Col. vol. 2. p. 379.
the chief commanders: Against whom, I find, that the King, about two years
after, preparing an Army, appointed Pat. 51. H. 3. in do^so. m. 24.
his faithful subject Will. Charles, to bring Barges and Soldiers, from the Sea
coasts of Norff. and Suffolk, for the assaulting thereof: this being the time,
that the King himself, with some forces, came Annal. Math. Wellm. lib. 2. p.
345.
privately to Ramsey; near which place he slew and took Prisoners diverse of
those his Rebels, who had issued out of the said Isle, and plundered the parts
thereabouts. But notwithstanding this they were not yet subdued; for the next
year after, it appears, L^^. Coll. vol. 2. p. 379.
that Henry de Hastings was the principal Officer, and Governor of this Isle,
on the behalf of those Rebels.

And now, having by these sundry remarkable instances showed how vast and deep
a Fenn this great Level anciently was; my next endeavor shall be, to declare
what I have observed to have been done, in order to the drayning and
improvement thereof, or any part of the same; beginning where I left; viz. on
the Northside of it.

CAP. XLII.
Kesteven.
ON the Southern part of this Province lies Deping fenn, which is now at least
ten miles in breadth. Whereof the most ancient mention that I have met, is about
the beginning of King Edward the Confessor's reign: Egelric, who had been Hist
Inguph^ f. 510^ a. n. 30.
a Monk of Peterborough, (but at that time Bishop of Durham) then making Hist
Inguph^ f. 510^ a. n. 30.
a firm Causey of Wood and gravel over it, from Deping to Spalding, for the
advantage of passengers; opus sumptuosum valde, prim^que necessarium, quod
usque nunc and semper in futurum, quamdiu duraverit, de factore Egelrico
cognomen habet, id est Elriche rode, says Hist Inguph^ f. 510^ a. n. 30.
Ingulphus; A most costly work, but of extraordinary necessity; which now does,
and as long as it shall last, will bear his name.

At that time part of this Province was a Forest Ibid.
as well as a Fen, and possessed by Leofrike Earl of Mercia; for he was then Lord
Ibid. f. 511. a. n. 30.
of Brune, and the Marshes adjoining. From which Leofrike it came to Hereward
his younger Son (of whom I have made ample mention in my discourse touching the
Isle of Ely) and by his Daughter and heir, Turfrida, unto Ibid. n. 10.
Hugh de Evermi^e^ then Lord of Deping. So also, by the sole daughter and heir
of the said Hugh, unto Ibid. 515. b. ^. 20.
Richard de Rulos, Chamberlain ^bid f. 516. ^. n. 10.
to King William the Conqueror: And by his daughter and heir to Ex R^g^st.
Crouland (...) de S^ald^^g A^^. ^. 89. a.
Baldwin fitz Gilbert. Which Baldwin leaving also issue one only daughter and
heir, w^dded Ex R^g^st. Crouland (...) de S^ald^^g A^^. ^. 89. a.
to Hugh Wake; the said Hugh became in her right, Lord and owner of those
places ( scil. Bourne and Deping:) and was also principal Forester to the King
( H. 3.) for his whole Forest of Kesteven.

But the scope of my present discourse, being of improvements by Industry, I
must return to the said Richard de Rulos: Of whom I find, Hist. In. ^ulph^ ^.
515. b.
that he was much addicted to good Husbandry; viz. tillage and breeding of
Cattle, and took in a great part of the common Fenn adjacent, and converted it
into several, for meadows and pastures. The like enclosure Hist. In. ^ulp^^ ^.
515. b.
he also made, from the Chapel of S. Guthlake (which the Monks of Crouland
built before the invasion of the Danes, when the place where Deping now stands
was theirs) of all his lands Eastwards to Caerdike; and beyond Caer dike to
Clei lake, without Cram more; excluding the river of Weland with a mighty Bank;
because every year, almost all his meadows, lying near unto that stream, were
overflowed with the continual inundations thereof; for which reason, this place
called Deping, had first that name; id est a deep meadow: And erecting upon
that bank diverse tenements and Cotages, did, in a short time make it a large
town, whereunto he assigned Gardens and erable fields. And by thus banking Ibid.
the said River, reduced those low grounds, which were before that time deep
lakes and unpassible Fenns, into most fruitful fields and pastures; and the
most humid and moorish parts thereof to a Garden of pleasure. And having by
this good husbandry brought the soil to that fertile condition, he converted Ex
Ch^on. A^b. Croulan^di^e, co^posi (...) t^mp. ^ 7.
the said Chapel of S. Guthlake into a Church, the place being now called
Market Deping. By the like means of banking and drayning, he also made Ibid.
a Village^ dedicated to S. James, in the very Pan of Pudlington; and by much
labor and chardge reduced it into fields, meadows and pastures; which is now
called Deping S. James.

Of what extent the Forest, whereof I have already made mention, to have been
in these parts of this Province, and possessed by Leofrike Earl of Mercia, was, I
am not able to say: but it appears Ibid.
that King Henry the first, for the pleasure of Hunting, doing much hurt to the
Common Wealth by enlarging of Forests (as his Brother King William Rufus had
done) did afforest I^^d Vid^ cl^us. 18. R. 2. m. 33.
th^se Fenns between Ke^teven and Holand; viz. from the Bridge of East Deping
(now Market Deping) to the Church of Swaiston, on the one side; and from the
bridge of Bicker, and Wragmere stake, on the otherside; which met^s divid^d the
North p^rts, and the river of Weland the South; excepting the Fen of
Goggisland, in regard it was a Sanctuary of holy Church, as belonging to the
Abbey of Crou^and: which Fen the Monk^ of that House, having license Ibid.
from the said King, did cloze, for their own use; making the Ditches about it
bigger than ordinary, for the avoiding of discord.

And being thus made Forest, it continued so, until King Henry the third's
time, who in the xiiiith. year of his reign, granted Claus. ^4. H. 3. m. 1^.
unto all the Inhabitants within the same, that it should thenceforth be
dea^forested by th^se subsequent bounds; viz. in length on the one side from
Swaftone to East Deping, as Kares ^ike extends it self, betwixt Swantone and
East Deping. The De^^forestation of Kesteven.
And, in length, on the other side toward Holand, from the bridge at Bikere to
the great bridge at Spalding: And in breadth on the one part, from that great
bridge at Spalding to East Deping, as the river of Weland goes betwixt
Spalding and East Deping. And on the other side from the land of Swaftune, unto
the bridge at Bikere: So that all the Lands, Marshes, and Turbaries, within
those precincts^ were thenceforth to be quit of waste and regard.

In the 18 of King Edw. the first's reign, Henry then Abbot of Croyland and his
Monks were impleaded Ex R^^^^t. de Crouland praedi^^o ^^ 83. ^.
by Thomas Wake of Lidell (then Lord of Deping, by descent as aforesaid) for
fishing at Est Deping in the free fishing of the said Thomas; and for throwing
down a certain bank in his Fen there, which the said Thomas had made for the
safeguard of the said Fen from being overflowen by the fresh waters.

But to this the said Abbot and his Monks made answer, that being possessed of
the Manor and Town of Crouland, within which there is a certain River, called
Weland, running time out of mind, from the boundary called Kemisf stone, in the
West, unto the site of the Abbey within the said Town: and so from the said
Abbey, to Brother house toward the North; he the said Abbo^ and all his
predecessors Abbots of that place, were always, and till that time seized
thereof, and of the free fishing therein, as Lords of that Manor and Town.
And farther said; that the place where this trespass was assigned to be, was
within those limits, and precinct of that their Manor; acknowledging that he
di^ fish there, as the said Thomas had alleged.

And as to the said Ditch, he said^ that within the precinct also of the
Manor of Crouland, there was a certain Fen, called Goukeslaund, which then
was his proper soil, and so had been of his predecessors, time beyond memory,
as pa^cel of the beforespecified Manor. And moreover, that the course of the
fresh waters, flowing from the West, in the said Fenn, did then run, as always
they had used to do, from the same Fen into the said River of Weland, and so to
the Sea. And he likewise alleged, that because the said Thomas had raised a
bank upon the land of him the said Abbot, within his Manno^ of Croyland, in a
certain place where none had ever been before; by which bank, the course of
those fresh waters being stopped, the said Fen called Goukesland, and other Fens
adjoining thereto were overflown; and the Abbey and Town of Crouland in danger
to be thereby drowned; he the said Abbot perceiving that the abovespecified
bank was so raised, to the end that the said A^by and Town might be drowned,
did cause several parts thereof to be thrown down.

But notwithstanding this answer, the Abbot was, by the Jurors, found Ibid. ^.
85. a.
guilty both of the trespass in fishing, as abovesaid, and breaking that bank,
to the damage of the said Thomas Wake, no less than CCCC. marks.

In 9 E. 2. Edmund Deincourt, Lambert de Trikyngham, Roger de Cuppledyk, and
Robert de Malberthorp were constituted Pat. 9. E. 2. p. 1. m. 26. in dorso.
Commissioners to view and repair the Banks, Sewers, and Ditches within this
Province, by which the fresh waters in the Marshes betwixt this part of the
Country and Holand, had used to pass unto the Sea. And in the same year, the
said Edmund d' Eyncourt, Nich. de Widmerpole, and Richard de Whattone were
appointed Pat. 9. E. 2. p. 2. m. 15. i^ dorso.
to enquire touching the Rivers of Smite, Dyv^ne, Wycheme, Middelwynene and
Fulb^k, choakt up for want of scouring; by reason whereof the Inhabitants in
those parts did then suffer much damage.

In 16 E. 3. Gilbert de Umframvill Earl of Anegos, exhibited a Petition Esc.
16. E. 3. n. 70.
to the King, whereby he represented, that whereas there was a certain water,
called the Ee of Kyme, betwixt Doc dyke on the East part, and Brentfen on the
South (within this province) which did run through the lands of the said Earl,
for the space of six miles in length; but was so obstructed and stopped, by
reason of mud and other filth, that Ships laden with Wine, Wool, and other
Merchandise, could neither pass through the same in Summer nor Winter, as they
had used to do, except it were scoured and cleansed; and the banks so raised,
that the tops of them might appear to Mariners passing that way, whenever the
Marshes there should be overflowed. And that, as the said Earl had for the
common benefit of those parts, bestowed no small costs toward the repair of
the said place, called the Ee, and heightning of those banks; so he intended to
be at much more, in case the said King would please to grant unto him, and his
heirs for ever, certain Customs of the Merchandise passing in Ships through the
same, to have and receive in form abovesaid; viz. for every Sack of Wool
carried through that Chanel, four pence; for every Pocket of Wool, two pence.
For every Tun of Wine, four pence; for every Pipe of Wine, two pence. For
every four quarters of Corn, a penny; for every thousand of Turfes a penny. For
every Ship laden with Catel, four pence: and for every ship laden with other
commodities than aforesaid two pence. VVhereupon the said King directed his
Precept to William Fraunk, then his Eschaetor in this County^ that he should
forthwith make Inquisition, and certify, whether it would be to the damage of
him the said King or his Subjects, if the said Customs were granted unto the
beforementioned Gilbert, for the purposes above expressed.

And accordingly the said Eschaetor did certify, that it would not be
prejudicial to the said King or any others to make such grant.

Upon a Presentment Pl^c. coram R^ge term. H^ll. 28 E. 3. Ro^. 26. Li^^.
exhibited in the Court of King's bench in 28 E. 3. the town of Thurleby was
dischardged from repairing a certain Chanel, called Edyke, any farther than
from Catebrigg to Boston cote; and thence to the Cross next unto Boston cote.

In 40 E. 3. the Lady Blanch Wake complained Pat. 40. E. 3. p. 2. m. 4^. in
dorso.
to the King; that whereas she was then possessed of the Fen, called Depings
ei, as parcel of the Manor of Deping, which she held in dower of the
inheritance of Joan, at that time wife to Edward Prince of Aquitane and Wales
(commonly called the black Prince.) And that the said Fen, by reason of the
passages of the Rivers of Weyland and Nen, as also of other waters, to the sea,
which descending through those Marshes, were hindered of their right course, by
Floudgates, Mills, and Pooles, then newly raised upon those streams; as also by
piles and stakes therein fixed, and trenches made, and likewise by breaches in
the said banks, and for default of scowring the sewers, were so overflowed,
that the said Blanch or any other persons could scarce receive any commodity in
the same Fen, as they had used to do: He therefore assigned Ibid.
Simon Symeon, Roger de Meres, John de Repyngale, Thomas de Pinchebek, and
Reginald de Tykesore to view the same, and to take care for the amendment
thereof.

In 41 E. 3. the Abbot of Kirkstede was, upon a pleading acquitted Plac. coram
Rege term. Hill. 41. E. 3. Rot. 15. Linc.
from the scouring of a Ditch called Stopdyke, for which he was presented
before Gilbert de Umframvill Earl of Anegos, and his fellow Justices of Sewers.

In 50 E. 3. there was a Presentment Plac. coram Rege term. Trin. 50. E. 3.
Rot. 15. Linc.
exhibited against the said Gilbert, for taking of Toll, of all vendible
commodities, carried in Boats from Boston to Kesteven, whereunto he pleaded,
Plac. coram Rege term. Trin. 50 E. 3. Rot. 15. Linc.
that he did take that Toll for scouring the Chanel, called the Ee of Kyme,
which passed through the midst of his Manor or Lordship of Kyme, betwixt Doc
dyke and Brentfen, to the river of Wythom, and was the very water specified in
the Presentment, and there called Home milnedike, on both sides: which Chanel
was then so filled with mud, that Ships and Boats could not pass through it,
until that he the said Gilbert, by virtue of the King's writ of Ad quod
dampnum, did cleanse and scour the same; and by his royal Charter, granted
License to the said Gilbert and his heirs, to take Toll of such Vessels,
bringing those commodities.

As to the condition that Brunne Fen, and Deping Fen stood in, it was thus
certified Esc. 4 R. 2. n. 59.
in 4 R. 2. after the death of Blanch the Widow unto Thomas Wake of Lydel, (who
then dyed seized of the Castle and Manor of Brunne, which she held in dower,
for the term of her life) viz. that the Marsh called Brunne fen did extend it
self from a certain place called Arfth wenth, to Potter lane in Brunne: thence
to Merton; thence to Litildyke, and thence to the Ditch belonging to the Prior
of Spaldyng. And that the profit of the turfs, dug yearly there, amounted to
Cs. And the profit of Strangers Cattle there agisted annually, as much. And
moreover that there was a certain yearly commodity, called Poundage, taken in
the said Fen for the strange Cattle for Greshyre, from Morton to Sekholme, and
thence to the Gates of Wrigbolt; and thence to Dew hirne; and thence by Brunne
Ee to Goderhamcotes; and thence to Estcote; and thence to the Cross at Esthowe;
and thence to Medylhowe; and thence to Arfth wenth; which poundage was worth by
the year iiiis.

And that the Marsh called Deping fen, did extend it self from East Deping to
the middle of the bridge of Crouland, and the middle of the river of Weland;
and thence to the message of William at Tounesend of Spalding: and thence to
a certain place called Dowe hirne; thence to Goderhamkote; thence to Estcote;
and thence to Baston bar; thence to Langtoft outgonge, and thence to East
Deping in length and breadth. And that the agistments of all Cattle in the said
Marsh, did then belong to the Lord, and were worth annually xxl. And moreover
that there was a certain profit of turfs, yearly dug therein, worth xxl. And
likewise a profit of poundage, to be yearly twice taken of all Cattle within
the same Marsh; viz. one time of Horses, and afterward of Cattle; whereupon
all Cattle which have right of Common there are delivered with payment of
Greshyre: but of other Cattle the Lord had Greshyre, which was worth xxl. per
annum. Also that there was within the said Marsh, a certain profit of Fishing,
newly taken, by reason of the overflowing of the waters on the North part
toward Spaldyng; which was yearly worth viil. And that the other profits of
Fishing and Fouling throughout the whole Fen was then worth Cs. And lastly,
that the fishing to the midst of the river of Weland to Crouland, and thence to
Spaldyng was yearly worth Ls.

In 5 R. 2. upon a pleading Plac. cora^^ R^ge term. Hill. 5. R. 2. Rot. 26.
Linc.
in the Court of King's Bench, it was found, that neither the Abbot of Brune,
nor the Town of Brune ought to repair the Sewer called E-dike, from Goderamcote
to Estcote; and that their predecessors nor ancestors did ever repair the same,
nor any part thereof; therefore they were dischardged.

In 11 R. 2. Henry de Percy Earl of Northumberland, John de Beaumont, Sir
Nicholas de Hebden Knight and others, were constituted Pat. 11. R 2. ^. 1. m.
33. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches and Sewers, lying
betwixt Lincoln and Brig dyke, which by the overflowing of the Fresh waters
were then broken in diverse places: and to proceed therein according to the Law
and custom of this Realm.

The like Commission P^t. 14. R. 2. p. 2. m. 32. in dorso.
in 14 R. 2. had Will. Thorpe, Anketine Mallore, Will. Thirnyng, Richard
Sydenham, Will. de Crosseby, and John Goffron, for those Banks and Sewers from
Cadebrig to Dunn^sby, through the midst of Thorleby fen, and the parts adjacent.

In this year, upon Ex Chro^. de Crouland, compositis temp. H. 7.
question betwixt the Inhabitants of Kesteven and Holand, touching the bounds
betwixt those provinces, there was a Commission granted by the King to Robert
de Willughby, Philip le Spenser, Raph de Cromwell, Will. de Skipwith, Will.
Thirning, Richard Sidenham, John Markham, Edmund de Clay, and Robert de Mantell
to enquire thereof. Whereof a Perambulation was made, and an Inquisition taken
at Brigge dikes by the Oaths of Andrew de Leake and others of the parts of
Holland; and of John Paynell and others of this province of Ke^^even; which was
also exemplified under the great Seal. In pursuance wher^of there were ten
Crosses e^ected in several places, for me^es and divisions of them. But within
the s^ace of two years following, they were all thrown down again, and the
stones carried away by the men of Kesteven. Whereupon a Commission Vide Pat.
17. R. 2. p. 2. m. 5. in dorso.
was granted, and sat, at Donington on Thursday next after S. Matthew's day,
in 17 R. 2. by Robert Lord Willughby, and others, to make enquiry, and to
punish the offenders; sundry whereof were therefore hanged, some bani^hed, and
some fined in great sums; and command given for erecting new Cross^s of stone
at the chardge of these men of Kesteven.

In 10 H. 4. John Earl of Somerset (brother to the King) Will. Lord Roos,
Robert de Tame, John de Holand de Welysthorpe, with others, were constituted
Pat. 10. H. 4. p. 1. m. 13. in do^so.
Commissioners for the view and repair of all the Banks, Ditches etc. both upon
the seacoast and elsewhere within this province of Kesteven; and to proceed
therein according to the law and custom of the Marsh, there before that time
used, and the law and custom of this Realm.

In 7 H. 5. there was a Pr^sentment exhibited against the town of Brunne, Plac.
coram Rege Term. Much. 7. H. 5. (...) ^4. L^^c. Vide e^iam Plac. de term.
P^^ch. 8. H ^. Rot. 14. E^ de term. Trin. 8. H. 5 R t. 10.
with the hamlets of Dyke and Calthorp; and against the Town of Morton and
Hermethorpe, for turning the fresh waters toward the North, which ought to run
Eastwards into the Sea.

But notwithstanding the boundaries betwixt these Provinces of Kesteven and
Holand so set forth, as has been said, I find, that Margaret Countess of
Richmund and Derby, being Lady of Deping, in 16 H. 7. did then procure a new
Commission, directed unto Robert Lord Willoughby, Thomas Lord Rosse, Thomas
Lord Fitzwalter, George Lord Hastings, John Lord Fitz Warren, Sir Robert
Dimock, Sir George Taylboys, Edward Stanley, Christopher Willoughby and
Reginald Bury Knights, to hear and determine the controversy between the
Inhabitants of the parts abovesaid. Which was accordingly done by these Jurors;
viz. Sir Robert Hussy Knight, Sir John Digby Knight, Sir John Thimelby Knight,
Thomas Dimock, Richard Thimelby, Richard Harington, Will. Ermin^, Will.
Mounson, John B^ssy, George As^^^y, Robert Tirwhit, Richard Cecill, John B^ll^,
William Fitzwilliam, John Fol^ingham, Will. Leigh, Thomas Desney, Richard
Grantham, Edward Askew, George Mackwo^th, Thomas Billesby, Will. Thorold, Will.
Enderby, and John Walcot Esquires.

CAP. XLIII.
HAving now done with what concerns the Province of Kesteven alone, I come to
it and Holand jointly: whereof the first mention that I have met with, is of
the Claus. 18 R. 2. m. 33.
afforestation made by King Henry the first in these parts; Claus. 18 R. 2. m.
33.
which continued not long: for it appears, that King Richard the first, about
the beginning of his reign, by his Charter to the Monastery of Spaldyng, of the
Towns of Spalding and Hinchebec, with the lands, waters, and Marshes to them
belonging; did acquit the Inhabitants of those places, from all duties
belonging to the Forest; as also of Hearts and Hindes, with all other wild
beasts: and of all Forest Customs and exactions, which had used to be there do
^e or required; so that no Forester or any other might thereupon vex or
disquiet them.
And moreover gave them License Claus. 18. R. 2. m. 33.
to make Banks and Ditches to enclose their Lands and Marshes; as also to build
Houses and exercise tillage, as they themselves should think fit, within these
particular metes and bounds; viz. betwixt the river of Wailand and Chelebeche,
in length: and from Midfen dic (which is the division betwixt these two
Provinces of Kesteven and Holand) and Gudramesend, which is the boundary, as
far as Saltene, in breadth; and Hasmanespade, as the said river of Wailand,
coming from Crouland, descends to the Sea.

From this deafforestation abovemention^d, I shall descend to King Henry the
third's reign; in whose time I find, Claus. 25. H. 3. m. 10. in dorso.
that there was a Precept directed to the Shireeve touching the partition of
Hauthuntre-Fen, by the consent of those that had right therein: whereby the
said King gave special command, that each Town might have their due proportion
thereof assigned to them: but, in the first place, that a Perambulation should
be made, by the Oath of xij. lawful and discreet Knights, betwixt it and the
Fen, called Fenting fen; viz. in length from the Town of Swinefheved to a
little rivulet, called Barkesmere; and so from the Marsh of Stevening, as
Barkesmere goes betwixt the said Fen, called Hauthundrefen, and the Marsh of
Hale, unto the river of Kime: and so in length by the said river of Kime, to
Dockesdike; and from thence by the water Wuna, to certain land of Boston. And
that so soon as the said Petambulation should be th^s accomplished, then to make
partition of the before mentioned Fen, by the Oaths of those Knights, in such
sort as each Town might have an assignation of their particular share, to
dispose and make improvement of the same, according to their own best liking.

After this, viz. in 44 H. 3. the King then directing his Precept Claus. 44. H.
3. in do^so. m. 16.
to the Shireeve of this County; whereby, taking notice that not only the
Landholders in those parts, but himself had suffered inestimable damage, by the
overflo^ing of the Sea, and likewise of the fresh waters, through the default
in rep^ir of the Banks, Ditches, Gutters, Bridges, and Sewers, in the lands
which lately belonged to William Longespe, in these parts of Kesteven and
Holand; he commanded the said Shireeve for^hwith to distrain all such
Landholders, who had safeguard by those Banks and Ditches, and ought to repair
them, according to the proportion of their lands; to the end that they might be
speedily repaired, in such sort as they ought and had used to be.

And in 23 E. 1. Adam de Crokedayk and W. Inge were constituted Pat. 23. E. 1.
m. 15. in dorso.
Commissioners to view the Banks, Ditches and Sewers in these Provinces; and to
see that the currents of fresh waters in the Marshes thereof, might have their
due and ancient passages, as they had wont to have.

In 9 E. 2. Lambert de Trekyngham, Roger de Coppeldyk, and Robert de
Malberthorp, being then constituted Ex Regist. (...) Croyl^nd pene^ I^h.
Oldfeild arm. f. 46. a.
the King's Justices of Sewers for these parts, sat at Boston upon the Tuesday
next after the feast of the Exaltation of the holy Cross, there to make
enquiry, by the Oaths of good and lawful men, what persons of this County of
Lincoln had used to repair and maintain the Banks, Ditches, Gutters, and
Sewers, within the fens of Kesteven and Holand, and other places thereabouts;
as also the floudgates, by which the fresh waters that had used to run from the
parts of Kesteven into the said Fens, were hindered from so doing: and by whom
the said waters were turned out of their right and due courses; as also in what
sort. Whereupon Sir Will. d' Autre Knight, John de Holand, and several other
persons of quality, being sworn, did Ex Regist. (...) Croyl^nd pene^ I^h.
Oldfeild arm. f. 46. a.
upon their Oaths present.

That the Town of Danington ought Holand, with little Bridges and Ditches on
each part of the same, from the said Town of Donington to the new Ditch: And
from the said Ditch unto the Chapel of S. Saviors, the Prior of S. Saviors to
perform the like repair; there being at that time great defects in those
Bridges and Ditches.

And they also said, that the Town of Donyngton ought and had used to repair
the Sewer of Scathegrafte, Swyneman dam, and Swane lade, in breadth xvi. foot;
and of such depth as that the water running to the river of Byker, and so to
the Sea, were not hindered. Which Sewer ought to be open from the first day of
March until the feast of S. Martin in Winter; and so likewise from the said
feast of S. Martin until the first day of March, except so great an inundation
from the Sea should then happen, as that the said Sewer would not be
sufficient, but that the Province of Holand would be drowned: In case of which
inundation, that then it might be lawful for the said Town of Donyngton to stop
those Sewers, and presently upon the fall of the water to open them again.
Which said Sewers were then obstructed through the default of the said Town of
Donyngton, that ought to have scoured the same.

Byker ought to repair and cleanse the said Chanel, from Bondstake to Quadring
to the breadth of xxiiii. foot: and that the Town of Quadring, with the
Commoners belonging thereto, ought to scour and repair the said Chanel unto
Gosbirkirk, of the same breadth: And that the Town of Gosberkirk, ought to do
the like, from thence to the Sea; to the intent that the fresh waters might not
be hindered by the said Channels and Sewers. And they said that the stream of
Byker was then obstructed from Bondstake to the Sea, through the default of the
towns of Donyngton and Quadring, and the Commoners of Gosberkyrk, who ought to
have cleansed the same.

Byker, where the Dam was, ought to be open throughout the whole year: but that
it would be more expedient, that the town of Byker, for the particular
commodity thereof, and for the benefit of the whole Country, should make a
certain Clow, with two Doors, each of four foot in breadth; which Clow to be
always open, excepting in the time of mighty floods from the Sea.

Quadryng were then obstructed by the town of Quadring, and the Commoners
thereof; and that it ought to be in breadth xvi. foot; and of such depth, that
the current of the water might not be hindered; as also, that it ought to be
cleansed and repaired by the said town, and the Commoners.

And that the Sewer of Gosberkyrk, Risgate Ees; and the Sluse betwixt the Fen
and the Sewer, which ought to lie open all the year, as Scathegrafte and
Swanelade used to do, were then stopped by the Abbot of Peterborough and town
of Gosberkyrk: and that the town of Gosberkyrk, with the Commoners, ought to
cleanse, repair, and amend the said Sewer, Gutters and Sluse, in such places
where it had anciently wont to be, viz. through the midst of the Fen belonging
to that Abbey.

And they said likewise that the Sewer Beche, which ought to be repaired and
cleansed by the towns of Gosberkyrk, Hynsebek and Surfl^te, from the Fen unto
Surflete, and thence to the Sea, was obstructed through the default of those
Towns: and that one Richard de Hodell had raised a Bank in the course of the
said Sewer, by which the passage of the water was hindered.

And they farther said, that the Sewer Brigefleet, was obstructed by the Town
of Hekyngton; and that it ought to be cleansed and repaired by that Town, unto
the river at Swynesheved, the Chanel there being sufficient to carry the water
down to Kyme mouth Ee; where it was then stopped by Philip de Kyme to the great
damage of the Country.

And that the Sewer, called the Encluse, near Boston, ought to run at all times
of the year; and that it was stopped every Winter by the men of Boston, at the
West end of the Bridge; as also, that it ought to be three foot in breadth. And
that it ought to be repaired and maintained at the West end of the said
Bridge, by the Inhabitants of Boston.

And they likewise presented, that Hamondebek, on the South side of Boston, was
also obstructed by the Inhabitants of that Town, on the West part of the said
Bridge, and by the Inhabitants of Skyrbek: And that it ought to be repaired,
cleansed, and maintained by the said Inhabitants of Boston and Skyrbek, in
consideration whereof, the said men of Boston, living at the West end of the
said Bridge, ought to common in the Marsh of the eight Hundreds: and that the
said Sewer ought to run at all times in the year.

Swynesheved, from Blalberdeboche unto the North part of Swinesheved Town: and
that the said Town of Swynesheved ought to scour the same Chanel from thence
unto the stream of Byker.

Iwardeby and Onsthorpe ought to repair and maintain the South side of the
water, which runs from Happeltrenesse to Kyme; and that it was then in
decay, through the neglect of the Prior of Haverholme, who ought to repair a
great part thereof, and refused so to do.

Philip de Kyme, who ought upon his own ground, to repair a certain part of
that side, at the Wathe mouth, did fail in doing thereof; and so through the
default of the said Prior and Philip, the whole Marsh of Kesteven and Holand
was overflowen and drowned, to the destruction of all those Countries. And that
the said Philip did divert the course of that water, to the great prejudice of
the Country, and especially of the Prior of Kyme.

Haverholme ought to find a certain boat at the Both, near to the Wathe
mouth, for to carry over foot-folk, as well by night as day, whenever any one
should pass that way; and that he did neglect so to do, to the great damage of
such people that had occasion to pass that way: And they said that the said
water, was the public passage for all the Kings liege people from Kesteven to
the river of Wythum.

Old he, between the Marsh of Holand and the Marshes of Hekyngton and Kyme,
ought to be repaired and cleansed by the men of the eight Hundreds of Holand, on
the East part; and by Henry de Beaumont or the Lord of Hekyngton and Commoners
of that Town: And on the West part, by Philip de Kyme, from Blalberdebothe to
the water of Kyme; and that it was there obstructed by Philip de Kyme.

And they also said, that the Town of Hale, with the Commoners there, ought to
repair and maintain a certain Causey, from Gerwyk to Pyngelhyrne, both for Foot
and Horsemen. And that the beforespecified Town of Hekyngton, with Gerwyk,
ought to cleanse and repair the Chanel of Gerwyk, unto the water of Swynesheved;
that is to say, unto Blalberbothe, and that it was not cleansed: but the midst
of the said Chanel, next to the Park, on the Southpart, the parson of Hale
ought to repair.

And they likewise said, that Burton was the Kings high way; and that the one
half thereof ought to be repaired and maintained by the Town of Burton,
together with the Causey on the North part thereof: and the other half by the
Town of Helpryngham, with the Causey on the Southside thereof, so that both
Foot and Horse men might safely pass to and fro that way, at all seasons of the
year: and that it was then in decay.

And they farther said, that Care was a certain stream, which was called the
South Ee, and that it extended to Byker Fen: As also that it ought to be
cleansed and repaired by the Town of Little Hale and the Commoners thereof, on
the one part; and the Towns of Helpryngham and Byker, to Gobhenbothe on the
other part.

And they said, that Hachelade Scathegrafte did; but was then obstructed by the
Prior of Spalding: and that it ought to be at the entrance of the water from
the Marsh of the breadth of one foot, and in depth as much; and within, through
the Town, no less than six foot broad, till it came to the Sea: and that it
ought to be repaired by the Town of Pynsebek, to the Sea.

Also they said, that Baston Ee Towns of Baston, Thurleby, Obthorpe, and
Wywelesthorpe, from Catebryg to Estcote, by raising of the Banks higher, and
clensing the same on each part: and from Estcote by the Town of Pynsebek, to
the Town of Surflete: and thence to the Sea, by the said Town of Surflete.
Which Banks did then stand in great need of repair, and raising.

Burn Ald Ee ought to be repaired, raised, cleansed, and maintained by the Town
of Burn and the Abbot of Burn, from Brunne to Goderamescote: and that from
thence, the Town of Pynsebek ought to repair the same to Surflete; and the Town
of Surflete from thence to the Sea; and that through the defect thereof, the
whole Marsh of Kesteven and Holand was drowned.

Bollesgate of Multon was a Common Sewer, and obstructed by the Town of Multon:
and that the trough called the Got was carried away by the said Town.

In 18 E. 2. there was an Inquisition Ibid. f. 47. b. Et ex Regist. de Spalding
penes praef. Ioh. Oldseild, Arm. f. 265. a.
taken at Thetford, upon Monday being the Eve of S. Barnabas the Apostle,
before Will. de Fareford and Will. de la Launde then Justices of Sewers, for
the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches etc. in these parts of Kestevene and
Holand. Where the Jurors presented upon their Oaths, that all the Ditches and
Banks from Katebrigg in Kesteven unto the Sea in Holand, were broken on each
side; and did then stand in need of repair; that is to say, to be raised higher
by two foot, and thicker by xij. foot. And that the Towns of Thurleby,
Obthorpe, and Gylthorpe, lying on the North side of Catebrigge, unto the Cross
near Abbotescote, ought at their own proper chardges to repair, dig, and cleanse
them: And from the said Cross to Abbotescot, on that side, the Town of Brunne:
and that the said Town of Brunne had in that place, straightened the Chanel, which
ought to be made wider by xij. foot.

Narwe he, whereby the course of the water was hindered, from the Town of
Brunne to Estcote, ought to be taken down. And that all the Trenches, drawing
any water from the said Chanel ought to be stopped up, when occasion should
require. And that the Banks of the river of Brunne ought to be enlarged, from
Levebrigg in Brunne unto Tollon, and be made two foot higher than they were at
that time, and xij. foot in thickness. And likewise, that the said Town of
Brunne ought to cleanse the Narwe he from Brunne to Godram crofte, as need
should be.

And they farther said, that the Towns Baston and Langtoft, ought to repair the
Banks, from Catebrigg to the Estcote, two foot in height, and xij. foot in
thickness, on the Southside. And that the Town of Pincebec ought to make the
Banks from Estcot to Godramcote, on the same side: And from thence to the House
of Richard Nigh of Serflet, the said Town of Pyncebec, to do the like on both
sides: And thence to the Sea, the Town of Surflet on both sides also.

And they likewise said, that the Hirnyngbrigge in Pyncbek, to the Sea, was too
narrow; and that the watercourse there, ought to be xxiiii. foot in breadth at
the least; and to be repaired and enlarged from Hirnyngbrigge to the House of
Richard Nigh, by the Town of Pyncebek; and from thence to the Sea by the Town of
Surflet.

And that every Bridge over the river of Brunne be xiiii. foot in breadth. And
that a Sluse be made at Caponbrigg, in breadth xij. foot, at the chardges of
Surflet and others receiving the profits thereof: as also that the said waters
be kept within their Channels.

And they said, that the Causey betwixt Spalding and Crouland, was a Common
road way, and not repaired, through the neglect of the Abbot and Town of
Crouland; that is to say from the Clot unto Crouland.

And they likewise said, that it would Kne dyke and Halunleen dee, which were
the Common Sewers of the whole Fen betwixt Deping and Spalding; whereof each to
be ten foot in breadth; and to be made at the chardges of all those which had
common in the said Marsh. And they said moreover, that the great Bridge at
Spaldyng was then broken; and ought to be repaired by the whole Town of
Spaldyng: and that the ferm of the passage at Pekkebrigg should be bestowed on
that Bridge, by the Warden thereof.

Hoyland brigg, was a Causey betwixt these Provinces of Holand and Kesteven,
and then out of repair, through the default of the Town of Donyngton; viz. from
that Town to Newfen dyke; and from thence to S. Saviors by the Prior of that
Monastery.

Dunnesby had obstructed a certain Sewer, called the Sond, to the damage of the
adjacent Towns: And that the town of Hacumby had stopped another Sewer, called
the Fenbrigg.

Bas^on Ee was to be cleansed, it ought to be cut at N^uhalle. And that the same
Chanel, and Catebrigge to Estcote ought to be dug and cut as it anciently
used to be.

Saviors, did suffer ten Bridges, at Holand Bridge, to go to ruin, to the
damage of the whole Country; and that the said Prior ought to repair them.

And that the Town of Donyngton ought to cleanse and scour the Sewers of
Stakesgraft, Swynman dam and Swanelond, so that the current of the water might
not be hindered from the fen to the Chanel which carries it to the Sea.

Deping and Spalding, from the House of John the Son of Simon of Spalding to
Wodelode; to be made at the chardge of the Prior and Town of Spalding; so that
each a^re might be taxed alike: and that no Hoggs might come near that Bank,
nor any defensible Banks, in any place of Holand, nor the Sewers therein, by
the space of half a mile.

Kesteven and Holand: and that every Acre ought to be assessed alike in all
taxes and costs, for the necessary repair of the said Gutters, Sewers, Banks,
and Bridges.

In 25 E. 3. there was a Petition Pat. 25. E. 3. p. ^. m. 23. in dorso.
exhibited to the King, and his Counsel in Parliament, by those of these
Provinces of Kesteven and Holand, who resided in the Fenns; showing, that
whereas the ancient boundary called Midfen dike, and other metes, which go
through the said Fenns, from the river of Weland to the stream of Withum, which
had wont to be the old limits betwixt these two Provinces (as by certain
Crosses of stone, then continuing was very evident) were at that time, by
reason of floods and other impediments, so obscured, that no certain knowledge
could be thereof; insomuch as great controversies and debates were occasioned
betwixt the Inhabitants in those parts, upon execution of the Kings Writs, and
otherwise; the said King did therefore assign Pat. 25. E. 3. p. ^. m. 23. in
dorso.
Saier de Rocheford, Alexander Aunsell, Simon Simeon, Will. de Skipwith, Thomas
de Sibthorpe, and Thomas de Levelance, to take view of the said boundaries; and
to distrain all such persons for the scouring and clensing the same, who ought
to have performed that work.

After this, diverse years; viz. in 41 E. 3. Godfrey Fuljaumbe, Simon Simeon,
Walter de Campeden, and others, were appointed to view and repair the Banks,
Sewers, and Ditches, from Bardney ferry to Catebrig, within the Province of
Kesteven; and within the Wapentak of Ellowe, in the parts of Holand.

Upon a pleading Plac. coram Rege t^rm. Mich. 3^ H. 4. ^ot. 8. Linc.
in 3. H. 4. I find, that on Will. Wyting of Deping was pardoned for the
breaking down of two Crosses, which had been set up betwixt these Provinces of
Kesteven and Holand, by five of the Kings Justices upon the said King's
appointment.

In 3 H. 5. Thomas le War, Robert de Wylughby, Will. Lodingtone, Robert
Hagbecche, Geffrey Lutterell, John Belle, John Henege, and others, were
constituted Pat. 3 H. 5^ p. 1. m. 17. i^ dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, in
these parts of Kesteven and Holand, then in decay: with direction to proceed
therein according to the law and custom of this Realm,
and the Custom of Romeney Marsh: As also to take such and so many workmen and
Artificers, upon competent wages, as they should think fit to be employed in
that work, in respect of the great necessity for expedition therein.

The like Commission in 5 H. 5. had Thomas Duke of Clarence, Gilbert
Umframvill, William Lodyngton, John Cokayn, James Strangways, Thomas de la
Launde and others: and to act therein according to the custom of the Marsh,
and the law and custom of this Realm.

So also in 26 H. 6. had Pat. 26. H. 6. p. 2. m. 23. in dorso.
John Viscount Beaumont, Sir Robert Wylughby Knight, Sir Raphe Cromwell Knight,
Sir Leo. Wells Knight, Nich. Dixon Clerk, Thomas Merys and others; with
direction to make Laws and Ordinances therein consonant to the Laws and Customs
of Romeney marshe; and to hear and determine of all things touching the same,
according to the Law and custom of the said Marsh: As also to impressed Ditchers
and other Laborers; upon competent salaries, and to employ them in the said
work, as long as there should be occasion so to do, in regard of the great and
imminent danger, which might by delays accrue.

In 7 E. 4. Richard Earl of Warwick, Humfrey Bourchier, Lord Cromwell, Sir
Henry Stafford Knight, Sir Thomas Burgh Knight, Oliver S. John Esquire, Will.
Husee, Will. Coote, and diverse others, had the like Commission Pat. 7. E. 4. p.
1. m. 16. in dorso.
for the view and repair of all the Banks and Sewers etc. from Staunford in
this County to Dodyngton Pigot, and from thence throughout these two Provinces
to the Sea etc.

And in 34 H. 8. Charles D. of Suff. Rob. Dymmoke, Tho. Heneage, John Copledyk,
John Hussy and Rob. Tirwhit Knights, Edw. Dymoke, Ric. Themolby (and others)
Es^uires then Commissioners of Sewers, in these parts, sitting at Donington,
decreed; Ex ver. cartacco MS. pe^e^ Mo^^t^gu Comitem de Lindsey An. 1660.
that the Floudgate, or Sluse under Boston Bridge, should be repaired at the
chardges of the Wapentakes of Kyrton and Skirbek, in Holand, for the one half;
and the Wapentake of Ellow and Town of Boston, Law of Sewers made at Doningto^
3. Aug. 34. H. 8.
for the other half, to be performed before the Feast of All Saints then next
coming; in as complete a manner as it had been formerly done by Margaret
Countess of Richmund and Derby.

Moreover, that two great Sewers, xx. foot wide, and 5. foot deep, should be
made and dug in the divisions betwixt Kesteven and Holand; from the most
Western point at Gotheram coat corner, near the River of Glen, unto Wragmere
stake; thence to the River of Wythom at Langrake, where then lay a certain
Sluse in the said River; so as the said Sewer and Watercourses were no^ above
xxxvi. foot one from the other, until they come to Wragmere stake; and that the
menure should be cast betwixt the said Sewers, to raise a firm Bank: And from
Wragmere stake, both Sewers to run in one Chanel, of xxx. foot broad, in a
direct line (leaving the division of those Countries) to Gilsyke, to go wholly
in the Eight hundred Fen of Holand. And that the said Sewers, from the River of
Glen to Wytham, so intended from the South to the North, should ^all into,
enter, and go through all the loads and draynes in the Fenns aforesaid, which
came out of the parts of Kesteven to Hamond beck, alias Holand Fen dyke; to the
end, that all the water going together, might the better run, within its own
Brinks and Channels, and the sooner come to the Sluse at Skirbek got, and the
new Gotes, by that decree intended: And that those Sewers should be made in
manner following, and in places hereafter named; viz. first from the said place
called Gotheramscote, unto Nestilholm corner, by a right line on the outside of
Nestilholme aforesaid, where the Harth stead is, and the limits divyding Holand
and Kesteven; and that the said Sewer should come as near to the corner
aforesaid, as might be, so that it enterd not into the Dyke of Nestilholm
aforesaid: And that the said Sewers should be made from the place to the place
aforesaid, on the Westside, within the several Townships by the Inhabitants of
Burn cum membris, Moreton cum membris, Haconby cum membris, Dunsby, Repingale,
Ryngston, Kirkby, Dowsby, Grayby, Aslackby, Mylthorpe, and Pointon, in the
parts of Kesteven: and in like sort on the East part, by the Inhabitants of
Spalding, Pynchbee, Surflet, Gosberkyrke, and Quadring, in the parts of Holand,
by every of the Commoners in their own Precincts: And from the said place,
called Nestilholme Harthstede and corner, to the Cross on Brigdyke, by a right
line (for so the limits thereof do lie) and that this should be also done on
the West side, by the Inhabitants of Poynton, Sempryngham, Byllingborough cum
membris, and Horblyng, with Bryg-end; and such as have Common there: And on the
East side by the Inhabitants and Commoners of Quadring, and Donington, in their
Precincts.

And from the said Cross upon Brygdyke, by a direct line also, to Wragmere
stake; because the limits between Kesteven and Holand do lie under the said
line; the said said Sewer should be dyked and made on the West part, by the
Inhabitants of Swayton, Thorpe-Latymer, Helpryngham, Great Hale, and Little
Hale; every one in their own Precincts: And upon the East part by the
Inhabitants of Donyngton and Byker, in their Townships.

And although it did then appear by two Preambulations; whereof one was in the
xiiijth year of King Richard the second, and the other in the xvith year of
King Henry the seventh, that the boundaries dividing Kesteven and Holand,
extended by a direct line through Donyngton Inggs, from thence, that is to say,
from the Cross on Brygdyke unto Wragmere stake; yet it was agreed, that these
Sewers should be made, so as neither of them might reach into Donyngton Inggs,
for fear of wasting their several grounds; but be set in the Fen as near as
conveniently and necessarily might be: And from the said place called Wragmere
stake, then (leaving the metes and boundaries of the two Countries) the said
Sewers to be joined in one, and to be made of the breadth of xxx foot, and cut
straight through the West-Causey, directly to Gyl syke, at Langrake, at the
only chardge of the Inhabitants and Commoners in the Eight hundred Fen of
Holland, and of Skirbeck quarter; and of the Township of Boston within the
Wapentake of Kirton; and that the earth cast up in the said Eight hundred Fen
aforesaid; viz. between Wragmere stake and Langrake, should be cast upon heaps,
lest the water were hindered to fall into the Sewer aforesaid: All which to be
done before the Feast of S. Martin the Bishop in VVinter, then next ensuing.

Likewise, that in the said place at Langrake aforesaid, in the bank of the
said River, should be set up four new Floudgates or Sluses of Free stone, each
of eight foot wide, for drayning of all the Fens aforesaid, at the costs and
chardges of the Towns aforesaid in Kesteven, and of Dekyngton, Kyme and Ewarby,
and they by ^qual portions and due rate to make two of them; and the aforenamed
Towns, Commoners in the Fens North from the River of Glen in Holland side, unto
the River of Wytham, to make the other two, by equal portions; and that a rate
and proportion should be made in both the said parts; upon every Town, by the
said Commissioners, or any six of them, before the Feast of St. Bartholmew then
next also ensuing.

And lastly, that a drayn of xvi foot in breadth, and in depth four foot, should
be made in the Law fen, from a place called West bank, alias Holland dyke,
overthwart the Hyrn, unto Langrake aforesaid; that all the waters, falling from
the parts of Kesteven into the said Fens, might the more easily be brought to
run to the Gotes aforesaid, so to be made as was set forth at Langrake
aforesaid; and that the same Sewer should be made at the equal chardges of both
Countries, by the Inhabitants and Possessors of the Towns before remembered: And
likewise, that for all the said chardges so severally to be born in the parts
of Kesteven, the rate and portion set upon every Township, should be laid
according to the manner of laying the xvth granted to the King: And for all the
Towns in the parts of Holland, to be done according to the Custom of like
payments rated thereabouts: And that all this should be done before the Feast
of S. James the Apostle, then next ensuing, upon pain of xx l. to be levied
upon every Township, to the King's use, if they should presume to offend in
that case.

After this, viz. in 1 Iac. Thomas Lovell Esquire, represented R^r. ^arl. 1.
Iac. n. 15. Inter Acta ^rivata per Breve de Ce tiurare remota.
to the King, then sitting in Parliament, that forasmuch as for drayning of the
Fenns called Deping, Spaldyng, and Pinchebeck, South Fens; Thurleby Fen, Borne
South Fen; and Crouland Fen ( alias Gogisland Fen) in the County of Lincoln,
humble Petition had been made by the Inhabitants of Deping, and other Towns
adjoining, being Commoners in the said Fens, unto the Lords of the privy
Council to the late Queen Elizabeth, expressing the great decay of the said
Town, and Inhabitants there, with the benefit, which by the laying of them dry,
should redound to the said Queen and her whole Realm. And that the said Lords
having consulted with the said Queens learned Council, about the manner and
means of effecting thereof: and being, by their directions, by Writs of Ad quod
Dampnum, and Inquisitions of Jurors, thereabouts inhabiting, duly taken and
certified, and returned into the Chancery, and there remaining of Record,
informed of the truth of the said Petitions, and of the great benefit, both to
the said Queen, by the saving of a great yearly chardge, about the repair and
amending of the Banks invironing the said Fens, for defense against the Rivers
of Weland and Glene, running on both sides, and clean above the soil thereof: as
also, that the same was no ways prejudicial, either to the Navigation, or to
the Commonwealth etc. did direct their Letters to the Commissioners of Sewers
in the said County etc. requiring them to take care thereof, and according to
the Laws of Sewers, to see the same effected; commending likewise unto them (as
by the said Petition they were required) Thomas Lovell Esquire, a man skillful
in like works, wherein he had been beyond the Seas much used and employed, as
one fit and much desired by the said Inhabitants, to undertake the drayning of
the said Fens.

Whereupon the said Commissioners of Sewers etc. did make and establish certain
Laws etc. viz. at Borne the xxth of Aug. 41 Eliz. And at Market Deping xx Sept.
41 Eliz. and lastly at Mark^t Deping xxx Aug. 42 Eliz. by Tho. Lord Burghley,
Edw. Heron Sergeant at Law, Robert Wingfeld, Richard Ogle, Anth. Ireby, John
Wingfield, Henry Hall, Tho. Lovell, William Rigden, Tho. Lambert, William Lacy,
Edm. Mounsteven^ Leonard Bautre, Matthew Robinson, Tho. Ogle, and Robert Audley
Esquires, Commissioners of Sewers.

By which Laws it was decreed, that the said Tho. Lovell should undertake the
drayning of the said Fens abovementioned, viz. at the costs and chardges of
the said Thomas, his Heirs and Assigns, within five years, from the xxth of
Aug. in the said xlith year. And he to be chardged with the Banks compassing
the said Fens; with the diking, scouring, and roding of both the said Rivers
etc. with Bridges, Stakers, Drayns, and other things, by the said Laws imposed.

And that he the said Thomas, in consideration thereof, should have a full
third part of all the said Fens, to be laid out by metes and bounds, by certain
men thereunto appointed, under such conditions etc. for the drayning of the
other two parts etc.

And whereas the said Thomas, by virtue etc. of the said Laws, had taken upon
him the chardge of the said drayning, etc. and therein spent his whole estate,
to the value of twelve thousand pounds and more: and yet by reason of certain
questions wilfully stirred etc. between the Counties of Kesteven and Holand,
about the metes and bounds of the said Countries, lying in the said Fens,
whereby not only the said Thomas could not have his said third part allotted
and set out unto him, according to the time and manner set down in the said
Laws etc.

And whereas for the deciding those controversies, there was the 8th of April,
in xliiij Eliz. a solemn meeting of many Knights and Gentlemen, strangers to
both the said Countries; who did ^ot only set down and determine the cause of
the said bounds; but did also set out and assign the said third part belonging
to the said Thomas Lovell; as by the Laws etc. made at Spaldyng aforesaid, the
day and year aforesaid, by Sir Henry North Knight, Sir John Bolles Knight,
Valentine Brown, Henry Warner, Robert Bevill, Robert Wingfeld, Anthony Ireby,
Rob. Cotton, Richard Coxe, Robert Ietherell, and John S. George, appears.
According to which division, the same was, by men skillful in surveying,
divided and set out.

Since which there has been diverse Conferences and Agreements, for two several
Drove-ways through the said third part, which was lastly set down, by way of
Laws of Sewers 17th of March 45 Eliz. by Tho. Lord Burlegh, Edw. Heron etc.
Commissioners of Sewers, with allowance to the said Tho. Lovell of as much
ground out of the said Fenns, as the said Drove-ways contain: which, together
with the rest, making up a full third part, was by metes and bounds assigned to
the said Tho. Lovell, and which he begun to enclose, but could not perfect the
same, in regard of the unseasonablenesse of the times, and riotous lets and
disturbances of lewd people, casting down his Banks etc.

It was therefore enacted Ibid.
, that the said Thomas, his Heirs and Assigns, should for ever enjoy the same
third part so set out etc. upon condition, that if he did not fully perfect the
said drayning within the space of three years, from the 20th of August then
next ensuing etc. And after that, maintain and keep them etc. firm and
depasturable in Summer and Winter, except three hundred Acres, or thereabouts,
to be left in the said Fens, called Spaldyng and Deping Fens, and Gogsland, for
Lakes and Sikes; and xl Acres in Borne and Thurlby Fens, and excepting the
Drayns and Sewers then in the said Fenns, but should suffer the said two parts
to be drowned etc. by the space of a year together, after the expiration of the
said three years; and the same certified by xii Commissioners of Sewers,
whereof six of the parts of Holand, and six of Kesteven, in the high Court of
Chancery, and there Recorded; that then in case the said ground, within one
year following were not recovered etc. then the Lords and Proprietaries of the
said Fens,, to re-enter: And the Inhabitants of Holand and Kesteven enter upon
their Common in the said third part, according to their former right.

How far Mr. Lovell proceeded in this adventure, I know not: but his attempt
not succeeding (as it seems) I find, that the Commissioners for the general
drayning of the great Level (whereof I shall speak at large by and by) sitting
at Wisebeche on the xxiijth of May, 14 Caroli, for the imposing of several
Taxes upon the particular Fens and Marshes, throughout that vast tract; in
order to that work, assessed Inter Collect. Comitis de Lindsey.
xxxs. an Acre upon Deping Fen before-specified. And afterward, scil. in July
following, sitting at Huntendon, by their Letters, dated the xxiiijth of that
Month, and directed to the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, certified; that they had heard all that could be alleged by the
Learned Council of the Earl of Exeter, and the Adventurers, touching that Fen,
as well for ma^ter of Law, as fact and Equity; and upon full debate and advised
consideration thereof, were unanimously of opinion, that the Tax imposed by the
Commissioners at Wisebeche, beforementioned, was upon just grounds, and ^o
resolved: And forasmuch as the same was not paid, they might therefore lawfully
proceed to make a Decree, for the further and perfect drayning thereof; and
thereby to adjudge and order, as well from his Majesty being Lord of the soil,
as from the Adventurers and others interessed therein, such proportion of land,
as might sufficiently bear the chardge of the work, which would be very great,
notwithstanding what had been before that time disbursed by the said Earl and
Adventurers.

And they farther certified, that before they would enter into the making of
any such Decree, they humbly desired, that they might receive his Majesty's
pleasure, whether they should proceed therein, or not; and in case they should,
whether his Majesty would become the undertaker of the work himself, and so
dispose of it to the said Adventurers; to do, in respect of their great
disbursments therein, whereof they had or could receive little fruit, as the
state of the said Fens then stood; which they wholly did submit to his
Majesty's wisdom and pleasure; desiring, that the same might be speedily
signified unto them, to the end they might proceed accordingly: and humbly
offered this advice to their Lordships, that it might not be left to the power
of the Adventurers, or any others that should undertake the said drayning,
under his Majesty, ^o perform it by any ways or designs, other than such as
his Majesty or the Commissioners should approve, and direct by new Acts of
Sewers in that behalf, as the best and most convenient for the perfect drayning
of their Fens, and the benefit of other the Fens and parts of the great Level,
thereunto adjoining; in regard, otherwise the drayning of these, mig^t prove
very prejudicial to the general work: and they moreover desired, that care
might be taken, that no more time were lost in the prosecution thereof, but
that the same might proceed, that instant Summer, in such a way, as the King,
upon consideration thereof should please to direct.

In answer to which proposals, I find his Majesty's pleasure signified to the
said Commissioners by the Lord Bishop of London from Theobalds, in the same
month of July; which was to let them know, that they might proceed to make a
Decree, for the farther and more perfect drayning of the said Deping fen; and
thereby to adjudge and order, as well from his Majesty being Lord of the soil, as
from the Adventurers and others interessed therein, such proportion of land, as
might sufficiently bear the chardge of the work: And, that because his Majesty
intended to see that great work of the whole Level prosecuted according to his
first Princely design (it being for the Countries good, and his own service) in
such manner, as might have just regard to the perfecting of the same, with most
public and general advantage to the whole Fens, he was farther pleased to
declare himself the sole Adventurer, as well of this particular Fen, called
Deping fen, as of the whole great Level; and, that he would afterward, in
ordering the same, have a just respect unto such persons of Honor and others,
as had any former interest or engagement therein.

To conclude this Chapter, I find by a Law of Sewers, Inter Decreta in officio
vocato the Pettibag.
made at St. Ives, the xvth of October 17 Caroli; that the Commissioners,
therein reciting; that whereas the Earl of Exeter had a third part of this
Deping fen; as also of Spalding and Pinchbek fens, and of Gogsland belonging to
Crouland, by contract made with Captain Thomas Lovell, for drayning of the said
Fens, which being not performed, the said Fens did then remain drowned; they
then decreed; that the said Fens should be surveyed by the appointment of Sir
William Ayloff, See more of this in Cap. Liiij. an. 17. Iac.
and Sir Anthony Thomas, undertakers, and six Commissioners of Holand and
Kesteven; and a moytie assigned to the said Sir William and Sir Anthony and
their Heirs, in recompense of their chardges for drayning thereof: and two
thirds of all the grounds surrounded, lying in Spalding and Weston, called
Bellesmore, being the grounds of Sir Francis Jones Knight: and two parts of the
grounds called Turpitts, lying in Weston aforesaid; and a fourth part of the
ground, called East fen, lying in Moulton; and in Quaplode and Holbeche the one
half.

After which, diverse Gentlemen, whose names are expressed in the Map here
exhibited, became Adventurers for the exsiccation thereof; and in order
thereto, caused the River of Welland, from Waldram Hall to Spalding, and thence
to the out-fall, to be made wider and deeper. The drayn called the Staker
draine (about xx foot in breadth) for to ease the River of Glen, together with
Hill's drayne, and Uernat's drayne they likewise made new; and perfected Exeter
drayne, from Cubbet tunnell almost to the Sea. Near Spalding they also erected
a great fluce, and made all the partition dikes in such sort as the Map
shows: By which works the water was so well taken off, that in Summer this
whole Fen yielded great store of grass and Hay; and had been made winter
ground in a short time, but that the Country people, taking advantage of the
Confusions throughout the whole Kingdom, which ensued soon after the
Convention of the late long Parliament (as is very well known) possessed
themselves thereof; so that the Banks and Sewers being neglected by the
Adventurers, it became again overflowed, and so remains at this time.

CAP. XLIV.
HOw the greatest part of this Province was at first gained from the Sea, I
have already in the Chapter of this my discourse briefly manifested: that
therefore which now remains to be spoken, in reference to it, shall be
touching the farther improvement thereof by drayning and banking; and the
support of what was done in that kind before: Wherein I purpose to begin with
Crouland, made famous of old by S. Guthlake, an holy Hermit, who near a
thousand years since, for devotions sake, betook himself hither, as to a place
of the greatest solitude.

How terrible and hideou^ the parts hereabouts then were, considering the
vastness of the Fen, I need not to make farther relation, having elsewhere ^
so fully discours^d of them: I shall now therefore briefly point at what is
most memorable touching the same, in order to my present purpose.

After the death of this pious man S. Guthlake, Ethelbald then King of Mercia
(whose Confessor Hist. Ingul^^^ f. 484 b.
he had been) discerning how renowned he grew, for sundry Miracles, sought out
his Sepulture: and having sent for a Monk of Evesham, called Kenulph (who was
then eminent for his holy life) as also consulted with him for the gathering of
a Covent, did, in the year of Christ DCCxvi. begin the foundation of a goodly
Monastery, in this place: which he endowed with the whole Isle of Crouland,
bounded Ib. f. 485. a.
with these waters; viz. Schepishee toward the East; Nene toward the West;
South Ee on the South; and Asendik to the North, where the common Sewer then
was betwixt Spalding and the said Isle. Which tract of ground contains four
miles in length, and three in breadth: and whereunto belonged those large
adjacent Fens, opposite to the said Isle on the West part, lying on each side
the River of Weland; that toward the North, called Goggislond, extending two
miles in length from Crouland bridge to Asaph (where the entrance into the Isle
is) and one mile in breadth; viz. from the River of Weland, on the South side
thereof, unto Apenholt on the North, to the bank of the water. The other part
of that fen, lying Southwards of the said stream of Weland, contains also two
miles in length, from Crouland bridge to Southlake, near the Chanel opposite to
Aspath, having two miles also in breadth; viz. from the said River of Weland to
Fyns^tt, on the Verge of the River Nene, which is on the South side of the same
Fen.

And because Ibid f 485. b. n. 20.
the ground whereon the King designed to erect this Abbey, was so moist and
Fenny, that it could not, of it self, bear a building of stone; he brought an
infinite number of mighty piles, made of Oak and Alder, which he caused to be
driven deep into the ground; as also a great proportion of firm and hard earth,
dug nine miles thence; and upon those he raised that structure; that
Oratory, which S. Guthlake had there, being only of Timber.

And now, though I have already pointed at the extent of this Isle from the
words of the before-specified Charter of King Ethelbald: nevertheless, because
I find it afterward more exactly set forth, by the confirmation of other
Kings; and that the knowledge of those places therein expressed, may give a
clearer light unto what I am to say of th^se Fenny parts; I shall take notice
of two other descriptions of the said boundaries; that first whereof is by
Bertulph King of Mercia, in the year of Christ DCCCLi. viz. Ib. f. 4^9 a^
from Aswicktost hirne to Tedwarthar, the water of Sch^pish^e; having the said
Isle on the West part, and the fen of Cappelade on the East. And from
Tedwarthar to Namans land hirne, the water of the South Ee bounds it, having
the same Isle on the North thereof, and the wood of Ancarig (id est Thorney) on
the South. And from Namans land hirne to Crouland bridge, the River of Nene is
the limit thereof, having the said Isle on the East part, and the Fen called
Alderlound on the West: And from Crouland bridge to Wodelademouth, the River of
Weland is the fence thereto, having the before-specified Isle on the East part
of it^ and the Fen called Goggeslound on the West. And from Wodelademouth to
the common Sewer of Asendik, the said River of Weland is the limit thereof,
having the said Isle on the South part, and Spa^ding fen on the North. And from
the said Sewer to Aswiktost, does the water of Asendik bound it, having the
same Isle on the South part, and the Fens of Spalding, Weston, and Multon on
the North.

Moreover, of the Fens lying opposite to the said Isle, on the West side, these
were then the limits; viz. from Namans land hirne to Finset; thence to Groines;
thence to Folwardstaking; thence Northwards to the stream of Weland, where
South lake enters thereinto; and so passing over the said River of Weland, and
ascending to Aspath: thence Northwards to Werwerlake, and so by Harinholt to
Mengarlake; thence to Oggot, otherwise called Dedmans lake; and so by Apinholt
and Wodelake, Eastwards, to Wodelademouth, which is the boundary of the Isle,
on that side toward the North; as Namans land hirne is toward the South.
Howbeit the Common of Pasture for Cattle, extends farther than the
before-specified bounds of those Fens Southwards, even to the lands belonging
to the Monks of Medeshamsted (now Peterborough) and toward the West of the
Lands of the Monks of S. Pega (now Peakirke) in the South fens of Weland: and
in the North fens, toward the West, to the Town of Deping^ and Northwards to
Spaldeling.

The other boundary Ib. f. 497. b.
is by Edred, King of great Britain, thus described (in the year of Christ's
Incarnation DCCCCxlviij) viz. from the triangular Bridge at Crouland, by the
River of Weland toward Spalding, unto As^ndike, where Asendik falls into the
River of UUeland, on the North part of a certain Cross of stone, there erected
by Abbot Turketill: and so upwards to the East, by Asendick to Aswicktost:
Thence to Shepishee on the East side of the same Isle; and so to Tedwarthar:
and there, entering South Ee to Naman land hirne, where the said Abbot Turketill
set up another Cross of stone, six perches distant from South Ee; the division
of the Counties of Lincoln and Cambridge, being in that water; and the said
Cross being distant from the River of Nene, five perches VVestwards: And so
along the said River of Nene, as it runs to the before-specified Bridge at
Crouland. Whereunto belonged likewise the several fishing as well in all the
waters invironing the said Isle, as in the Pools and Fens within the Precincts
thereof; together with the Marshes and woods of Alderlound, situate VVestwards,
and opposite thereto; all which were annexed to the County of Lincoln,
according to these subsequent boundaries; viz. from Naman land hirne, by the
River of Nene, westwards, to Finset (where there is a Cross of stone set up
near the River) Thence to Grinis: thence to Folwardstaking; and thence to
Southlake, where it falls into Weland: And so passing over the said River of
Weland, and beginning at Kenulphston, near the stream, over against Southlake,
where Kenulph the first Abbot of this Monastery fixed a Cross of stone for the
limit betwixt Crouland and Deping: And thence tending Northwards, near Aspath,
unto Werwarlake; and so to Harinholt; and then up by Mengarlake and Lurtlake,
where the bounds of Holand and Kestevene are. Thence to Oggot; and so to
Apinholt (otherwise called Wodelade) where the same UUodelade falls into
UUeland.

Which ample possessions, though they yielded not much profit, in regard so
great a quantity of them, A^. 870.
lay then, for the most part under water; yet can it not be denied, but that
upon the invasion of those Pagan Danes, in the time of Beorred King of Mercia,
they happened to be their chiefest refuge, the lives of most of the Monks of this
Abbey, being then secured by means of these spacious Fenns; in the reeds and
thickets whereof they hid Ib. f. 493. a. b.
themselves, to avoid the cruelties of those barbarous people; whilst the rest
of their Covent were murdered, and the Abbey burnt. Which Monks so preserved;
and, after that woeful masacre, returning again, contented themselves with such
habitations, as the ruins, there left, would afford them. Nor had they better,
until the time of King Edred, that Turketill, then his Chancellor, taking to
heart those their sufferings, procured that King to rebuild it: and not only
so, but out of his singular devotion to God, and affection to this place,
giving Ib. f. 497. a.
six goodly Mannours thereto, and causing himself to be shorn a Monk, became
afterward Abbot there.

Whereupon (through the munificence of that good King, and the bounty of the
said Turketill) being thus restored to it is former splendour; there was no good
means unattempted, that might conduce to the bettering and improving of the
lands thereto belonging, for the most advantage, as may seem by those endeavors
of Abbot Egelric (in the times of King Edward the elder, and King Edgar) who
plowed up a large proportion of them for Corn; which could not have been done
without the help of drayning, I presume; for (says Ingulphus Ib. f. 505. ^. b.
) Fecit etiam, in annis sicciatis, culturam in suis paludibus etc. In dry
years, he tilled the Fens in four places, at the four corners of them; and for
three or four of years had the increase of an hundred fold of what seed soever
he sowed. Amongst which that Fen at Tedwarthar was the most fruitful; the
Monastery being so much enricht by these plentiful crops, that the whole
Country thereabouts was supplied therewith: and a multitude of poor people,
resorting thither for that respect, Crouland became a large Town.

The same Ingulphus (who was Abbot here in the Norman Conquerers time) says,
Ib. f. 518. b.
that in his days they had not any such Tenants residing here at Crouland, as
upon their other Lands, no man delighting to inhabit here any longer than he
was necessitated so to do; insomuch as those who in time of war betook
themselves hither for security (as great numbers of rich and poor from the
neighboring Countries did) afterward returned back to their particular homes:
none continuing here but their own domestique family, with their wives and
children^ to whom he did let to ferm a great proportion of the Marshes and
Meadows, belonging to this Abbey, for certain annual Rents, and other services.
For W. Malmes. lib. 4. f. 167. a. n. 10.
without Boats there was not then any access thereto, there being no path
farther than to the gate of the Monastery.

But notwithstanding, that the lands and possessions of this Abbey, were,
through the great bounty of several Kings, and others, given thereto with
diverse ample privileges and immunities; and not only so, but with fearful
curses pronounced by those pious Donours, against such as should violate any of
their grants: nevertheless it appears (...). Ab^^ tam (...) i^ b. ^l. Cot^o^.
[s^^ effigy O^^ ^^^ B. 13] f. 96. a.
, that the Inhabitants of Holand (bordering on the North-side of Crouland)
having drayned their own Marshes, and converted them to good and fertile arable
land, whereof each Town had their proper portion; wanting pasturage for their
Cattle, took advantage of a false rumor then spread of King Henry the second's
death (it being the xxxv. and last year of his Reign, and he then beyond Sea)
and bearing themselves not a little on their strength and wealth, thought that
they might oppress the poor Monks of Crouland, without any control.

Whereupon Gerard de Bamvill, Fulke d'Oiri, Thomas de Multon the elder, and
Conan son of Helyas, who were much displeased with the said Monks of Crouland
for other respects, associating to themselves Richard de Flet, and Walter, with
many others, came to Nicholas then Prior of Spalding, and moved him to be their
Leader: and to augment the number, all the chief men of Ellow Wapentake, some
few excepted, conspiring with them, sometimes had their meetings in the Prior
of Spalding's Barn, at UUestone, and sometimes in the Church at Holbeche. When
therefore the Abbot of Crouland, according to Custom, kept up his Marshes, as
every year he had used to do about Rogation week; and to the end that his Hay
might have the better growth, caused Proclamation to be made upon the Bridge at
Spalding, that the men of Holand and others should keep their Cattle from
coming thereinto; they not only refused so to do, but drove in many more than
they had formerly done. Whereupon the Abbots servants impounding them, the men
of Holand grew very angry; and having set a day, viz. the Feast of Nereus and
Achilleius, they then came into the said Marsh of Crouland, all armed, as it
had been to battle, to the number of above three thousand. Whereof the Abbot
having notice, he forthwith (accompanied with a few of his own Family) met them
at the Bank called Asendic (which is the boundary of Crouland Fen) and
earnestly entreated peace with them; for he feared that they had a purpose to
destroy the Abbey, and to that end were so come together. But they answered him
scornfully, and passing through the midst of the Fen, shared it among
themselves, according to the situation of their Towns. And having so done,
pitched Tents and made huts on every side the Abbey; wherein they placed guards
of armed men to keep each part thereof. And likewise dug turf, cut down a
great part of the wood and Aldergroves of Crouland, and burnt them; depastured
their Meadows, and carried away the Hay, with diverse other violences, by the
space of xv days: the Abbot and Monks with their servants being all this while
shut up, so that they durst scarce go out of their Church doors.

In this lamentable condition therefore, they resolved to make complaint to the
Kings Justices; and to that end dispatched a messenger to Geffrey Fitz Piers,
then dwelling at Clive in Northamptonshire: who hearing of these great
outrages, sent six Knights from Northampton, to be better informed thereof.
Which Knights coming first on the East side of the Abbey, there found the Tent
of Sutton men, who were Tenants to Geffrey de Canvill, and had all sorts of
weapons with them; and said, that they were there by their Masters command. So
likewise did all the rest answer, the Tent of Spalding men being the last.

But the Abbot himself, being most sensible of these high oppressions, got out
privately, and made all the haste he could to London; where he represented to
Hubert Walter (substitute to Ranulph de Glanvill, the Kings Chief Justice, then
beyond Sea with the King) and to his fellow Judges, these great injuries and
abuses; showing them the Kings Charter, which sets forth the bounds of those
their Fens. Who thereupon much compassionating the said Abbot and his Monks,
sent forthwith in the Kings name, to the said Geffrey fitz Piers; and required
him, that he should call before him, the Prior of Spalding, and all those men
of Holand; and to do the said Abbot right upon them: whereof these Riotors
hearing, they presently burnt their Cabbins, and went to their own homes.

At the summons therefore of the beforementioned Geffrey fitz Piers, the said
Prior of Spalding, and the other Delinquents, met him at Deping; to which place
the said Geffrey brought many eminent persons with him, upon the Friday in
Whitson Week; where the Abbot of Crouland chardged them with the breach of the
Kings Peace, and all the violence and wrong before-specified. There were
likewise seven particular men, who stood up, and on the said Abbots behalf,
laid to the chardge of seven of the principal offenders, that each of them had
damnified the Abbot to the value of xx Marks: Whereupon some of them were sent
to Prison to Northampton, some to Rokingham, and some to other places.

The particulars touching this suit; for it lasted five years, would be too
much trouble to rehearse: but at length the Abbot prevailed, and recovered the
possession of those Marshes; the business being determined in the year
MCXCxiij. (5 R. 1.)

But though this suit had then an end, the Prior of Spalding renewed his former
claim: yet in the end they came to an amicable agreement Ex Chro. A^b.
C^oulan^iae compositis tom. H. 7.
, by a Fine levied betwixt them in 18 H. 3. whereby it was concluded; that,
neither the one, nor the other should impound any Cattle of them the said Abbot
and Prior, or their Tenants of Crowland, Spalding, Pinchber, Langtoft, Baston
and Deping, depasturing within the Fens of the said towns; nor take in any
strangers Cattle into those Fens.

About this time Will. de Albinci (a great man in these parts) challenged right
of Common in diverse of these Fens. Whereupon, by a fine Ex Chro. A^b.
C^oulan^iae compositis tom. H. 7.
levied at Lincoln, in 24 H. 3. betwixt the then Abbot of Crouland, and Prior
of Spalding, and the said William, it was determined; that he the said William,
and his Heirs, should have Common of Pasture, for all manner of Cattle
belonging to himself and all his Tenants of Uffington, Caswike, and Tallington,
in the Fens of Crouland, Spalding, Pinchbec, Langtoft, and Baston.

In..... H. 3. there was a Presentment Ex Regist^i^ Croyland pene Io^. Old^eild
arm. f. 6^. a.
exhibited to the Justices Itinerant, at Lincoln, by the Jurors for the
Wapentake of Ellowe; setting forth, that there was two courses of water, in the
common River of Croyland; the one nearer, and the other more remote. And that
the nearer current was the right Channel, and of sufficient depth, wherein they
that did go with Barges and Boats might well pass too and fro: but that the
Abbot of Croyland, had by planting willows thereon, so obstructed and
straitghned the said course of that stream, that Boats and Barges could not
pass as formerly they had. But it was afterward adjudged, both by the said
Jurors, and likewise by the Justices Itinerants for this County (who passed
that way to view the same) that the current of the said water was much more
proper and commodious in the place where then it went, than there where the
Jurors presented the default to be; provided that it might continue as wide and
deep as it then was; and that it might be straight and not bending, as the old
one was: and therefore they concluded and ordered, that it should continue
where it then ran.

In 11 E. 1. there was a Commission Pat. 11 E. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
issued unto N. de Stapelton, W. de Brumpton, and E. de Bekingham to enquire by
the Oath of honest and lawful men of this County, whether the Abbot of
Croyland or Prior of Spalding ought to repair certain Bridges, Gutters, Banks,
and Ditches in those parts, concerning which there was some difference betwixt
them.

Pat. 10 E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. in dorso.
In 10 E. 3. there was a Petition exhibited to the King and his Council in
Parliament, setting forth the many perils and losses, which had befallen
several men, by reason of the ill way betwixt Crouland and Spalding; as also
that greater mischief was like to happen thereby, unless by the repairing of
those ways, a remedy were speedily used: And that all those dangers and losses
might well be avoided, in case there were a new Causey made betwixt the said
town of Crouland, and a place called the Brother house, by the said Abbot, upon
his own proper ground; for the making and repair whereof, he the said Abbot and
his successors were to take a certain Custom of all persons traveling that
way: the said King therefore, much affecting the safeguard and ease of his
people; and for that respect, desiring to be certified, whether the said Abbot
would be willing to undertake the making and repair of such a Causey or not:
and if so, then how and in what sort; directed his Precept to him, requiring
his answer thereto.

Whereupon the Abbot by his Letters signified to the King; that the distance
betwixt the great Bridge within the Town of Crouland, and the said place called
Brother-house (within which space these dangers in passage were) was no less
than three miles, and in a fenny soil, upon the one side of the River Weland;
where, by reason of the lowness of the ground in a Moorish earth, it would be
a difficult matter to make a Causey, fit and durable for passengers; because it
could not be made otherwise than upon the Brink of that River, where there was
so much water in winter time, that it covered the ground an ell and an half in
depth, and in a tempestuous wind two else: at which times the ground on the
side of that River, upon the brink whereof the said Causey ought to be made,
was often broke by Bargemen and Mariners; and by the force of the wind so torn
away, as that the earth was diminished and wasted: so that in case a Causey
should be there made, it would in a short time be consumed and wasted away, by
the power of those winds, except it were raised very high and broad, and
defended by some means against such dangers: and that for the safeguard and
ease of passengers, as well on that side the said River of Weland, within the
Precincts of the Town of Crouland, as overthwart the same Causey, there ought
to be made many high and strong Bridges, which would require no little chardge,
to the end that loaded Barges and Boats might pass under them; and that might
serve for necessary Sewers; over which Bridges loaded Carts, Horses, and others
might also travel. And for the supporting of this great chardge, ever Barge
passing that way in a tempestuous time, should pay xii d. every loaded Cart xij
d. every loaded horse vi pence; every man carrying a burden ii d. every Horse
not loaded iij d: every man singly going that way i d. And for Cattle and other
things carried by water, more or less, as should be agreed with the boat-men.
And in great storms and floods, double to what is before expressed to be paid for
all carriages by water, that way.

And forasmuch as the making and maintenance of the said Causey was like to be
so chardgable, in respect of it is length, height, and thickness, with
necessary bridges, as aforesaid; the said Abbot proposed then to the King,
whether he would please to grant unto him and his Monastery, for to undergo the
same, such a Custom, for the space of seven years, of every passenger, as well
by land as water, travailing within the compass of the Lordship of Crouland,
as might be suitable to such a work, though such Custom did not exceed the one
half of what passengers did at that time pay; and after those seven years
should be expired, a certain lesser Custom, apportioned to the chardge of such
necessary maintenance and repair thereof. And that in case the King would so
do, that then he would do his best endeavor to make and maintain the said
Causeys and bridges.

Which answer of the said Abbot had no reply made thereto for the space of two
years after: but then, the Parliament again sitting, the Inhabitants of
Kesteven and Holand, exhibited a Petition Ibid.
to the King, whereby they humbly besought him, that for the safety and
advantage of themselves and other passengers, he would take the answer of the
before-specified Abbot into consideration, and do what should be meet therein.
VVhereupon the said King much regarding the safety and welfare of his people;
and therefore desiring, for the better performance of the work, to be more
fully certified touching the premises, assigned Robert de Colevill, Adam de
Limbergh, John de Ros, Humphrey de Litlebury, Will. de Bayeux, and Ranulph de
Paris, to enquire by the Oaths of honest and lawful men of this Country, what
manner of Customs, and how much the barge-men and boat-men did then receive,
as well for men as Cattle; and had to that time usually received; and who ought
to make that way and take the benefit thereof: As also upon whose soil, on both
sides, the barges and boats had used to land, and whose the whole passage was.
And moreover what and how much Custom would be requisite for the said Abbot to
take for the space of seven years, in consideration of his chardge in making
the same Causey and Bridges upon his own proper soil: and how much after those
seven years were expired, to maintain them in repair. As also how many Causeys,
and Bridges, and of what length, breadth, height, and thickness each of them
ought to be, for the more safe and substantial benefit of passengers: And
lastly, whether it would be of any damage to the said King or others, if he did
grant to the said Abbot such Customs as aforesaid, for the considerations
above specified.

But what was done therein, I find not.

Memorandum Ex Regist. de Crouland penes Ioh. Oldfield ann.
, that from the time of the Foundation of the Abbey of Crouland, until the days
of Sir John Wake, who lived in the times of Edward the second and Edward the
third (Kings of England) nothing was done against the Abbey of Crouland for
raising of a bank in the marsh of Gokesland, in Holand. But in the time of
Thomas Wake, the son of the said Sir John, the said bank was made: and so the
Abbot of Crouland then made that bank from Kenulphston to Crouland hyrn, alias
Dyke end (from which place the Lordship of Deping began, and continued to Wode
lade) until the time of John Duke of Somerset: and then the said Duke, by his
own power, removed the said Abbot from that bank; and compelled him more by
violence, than any reason, to make a bank from Dyke end to Wodelode: which
banks the said Duke and his Lordship ought to have made; by reason whereof the
said Abbot and his Tenants were chardged more than they ought to be, almost by
three parts.

In Easter Term, which was held at Lincoln xxiij E. 3. the Jurors for diverse
Wapentakes in this County, presented Ib. f. 27. 2. Vide etiam Plac. coram. Rege
term. Hill. 24. h. 3. rot. 34. Li^^
; that a certain Sewer, called ShepEe, had anciently wont to run from South Ee,
from a place called Douvefdale, through the midst of the Precinct and circuit
of the Abbey of Crouland, by a place termed Sandistowe, and so directly to the
gates of the Brother houses (which is a Manor of the Abbots of Crouland) and
that it did there descend into an ancient Sewer, called the Old he; and so
Westwards, under the Gates and Bridges of Brother house, unto a Pool of the
said Abbots there where Henry, at that time Abbot of Crouland, had erected a
certain house for Oxen, upon the said VVatercourse and Sewer of Old he, where
it had used to run, by right, and so fall into the River of Weland, for the
benefit and Commodity of Cambridge, Lincoln, Northampton, and Huntendon
shires; and of all the grounds from Tydd S. Mary's, in Lincolnshire, unto
Baston on the borders of Kesteven; as also unto Surflet in Holand: and that it
ought to be xx foot in breadth.

And they said, that the same Sewer called Shep Ee, was first obstructed by
Roger sometime Abbot of Crouland; and that the same obstruction was at that
time upheld by the before-specified Henry, the then Abbot, to the great damage
of those Towns as lie betwixt the Town of Tydd S. Mary's and Surflet.

And moreover they presented, that there had wont and ought to be a certain
common high way from Spalding unto Brother house; and from thence to Crouland,
of such breadth, as that all passengers might travel thereon with Horses, Carts,
and usual droves of Cattle; which Road-way ought to be repaired by the Abbot
and Town of Crouland; who likewise ought to make Bridges thereupon over all the
Trenches, and repair them as often as need should require, so that the passage
of Travelers might not be hindered, as then it was, to the great damage of the
common people.

And they likewise presented, that the said Road-way from Brotherhouse, was
obstructed by a certain Dunghill, laid there by the said Abbots servants, to
the hinderance of all people passing that way.

And they farther presented, that the beforementioned Henry, then Abbot of
Crouland, with his Covent, had appropriated to themselves the particular soil
of that high way, at the end of Crouland town; and planted willows and other
trees thereon to the great hinderance of those that passed thereon.

And they likewise presented, that there was a certain Causey made by the town
of Spalding, for the benefit of that place, directly from Wode lode unto Midfen
of Deping, for safeguard of the Pasture of Deping; and that the said Henry
Abbot of Crouland, had in the night time broken down the same Causey, to the
damage of the towns of Spalding and Pyncebek; as also that the water of
Spalding could not be preserved, unless the same Causey were repaired and
maintained.

By reason of which presentment, the Shireeve had command to summon a Jury: who
appearing, accordingly, said upon their Oaths, that the Sewer called Shepee,
was a certain Ditch, and one of the bounds of the precinct of Crouland Abbey;
and so had been time beyond memory: which boundary did extend it self to
certain other limits of the said Abbey, called Asewygtoft, and from thence to
other limits of the same Monastery. And they said, that there was not then, nor
ever had been any common Sewer, running from South Ee, through the midst of the
precincts of that Abbey, since the time of memory.

And they also said, that there was not then any common Sewer at the
Brotherhouse: but that the Sewer there was only a drayn peculiar to the
Precinct of the before-specified Abbey, and within the several grounds of the
said Abbot and boundaries aforesaid; as also at the pleasure of the Abbot and
Commodity of the Abbey; viz. to make it and stop it again in what place soever
the Abbot and Covent should think fittest. And that the Ox-house there built
was in the several soil of the said Abbey, and within the beforementioned
limits.

And they said morever, that there was not any common Road-way, for passengers
by land, from Brot^erhouse to Crouland; but only for all passengers by Barges
and Boats in the River of Weland; and that in consideration of hire to be given
by those who were owners of the said Vesselss. And that the said Abbot and Town
of Crouland, ought not to repair any way there; nor make or maintain any
bridges. And they likewise said, that the servants of the said Abbot did not
obstruct any way at Brotherhouse by any Dunghill: but they said, that the place
where the same Dunghill lay, was the particular soil of the said Abbot, as in
right of his Church of Crouland, and within the limits of that Abbey: neither
was it laid there to the hinderance of any passengers.

And they also said, that there was not any common Road-way at the end of
Crouland town, excepting in the River of Weland, with Barges and Boats, for all
passengers upon hire. And that the place where the said Abbot had planted
willows, was and had been his own proper soil^, time beyond memory, in right of
his Church of S. Guthlake at Crouland.

And as to the Presentment, that there was a certain Causey made by the men of
Spalding, for the benefit of that Town, directly from Wode lade to Midfen of
Deping; they said, that the same Causey was wholly upon the land of the Abbot
of Crouland, and not to Midfen of Deping: And that the said Abbot was Lord of
the Manor and Town of Crouland, within the precinct whereof was a certain
Fen, called Goukeslound; which Fen was the proper soil of the said Abbot, and
so had been of his Predecessors time out of mind, as parcel of their Manor
and Town of Crouland.

And they said moreover, that the flood of fresh waters, descending from the
West, into the said Marsh, ^ad always used to pass from thence, into the River
of Weland, and so to the Sea. And that certain men of Spalding, and other
Towns, had raised the said Causey upon the soil of the said Abbot of Crouland,
where never any Causey was before; by which means the current of the fresh
waters flowing in the said Marsh was stopped, and by that obstruction the Marsh
of Goukeslound, and other Marshes adjacent thereto, were overflowed; and the
Abbey and Town of Crouland in danger of drowning. And the said Abbot perceiving
the said Causey to be so unjustly made, and to the danger of drowning the
before-specified Abbey and Town, came and caused it to be thrown down in diverse
places, as it was very lawful for him to do: and that he did not cast down any
Causey else: therefore both himself and his Covent were dischardged of the
beforementioned presentment.

In 40 E. 3. the Jurors for diverse Hundreds, presented Ex bund. de B^ev. and
Recordis, Wallias etc. tangen^ibus. n. 10.
before Gilbert d'Umfravill Earl of Anegos, and his fellow Justices for the
Gaol delivery, then sitting at Lincoln; that the Town of Spalding ought to
scour and repair a certain running River called Weland, from the house of
William at Touneshende of Spalding, unto a place called Brother house; which
they had not done; and that by reason thereof, great damage did accrue to the
Kings Liege people. Whereupon the Shireeve had command to summon the
Inhabitants of Spalding to answer this chardge. Who made their appearance
accordingly, by John de Kirketon, their Attorney; and said, that the River
mentioned in that presentment, then was and long had been an arm of the Sea,
whereinto the tides did eb and flow twice in xxiiij hours; and therefore, that
they ought not of right to cleanse and repair it, nor ever had done; and desired
that the Country might enquire thereof. VVhereupon a Jury was summoned.

In 11 H. 6. there was an Agreement Ex Regi^^ (...) Crouland (...) 4^. a.
made betwixt the Monks of Crouland and Spaldyng, and Sir Will. Bonevile Knight.
and Elizabeth his wife, by Indenture tripartite, touching the making and repair
of diverse Banks in Crouland aforesaid; whereof one extended it self from a
certain place, called Dovedale clote, unto Crouland brigg; and another from the
said bridge to a place called Brotherhouse; and the third, called Winter dyke,
in Crouland aforesaid, within the Precincts of South Ee, Nene and Weland: the
Monks of Spaldyng and Sir William Bonevill, with Elizabeth his wife, alleging,
that the Abbot of Crouland and his Predecessors, had time out of mind used to
repair and maintain the same; and the said Abbot utterly denied it. The tenor
of which Agreement was as follows; viz. that whereas there were certain Banks
in Crouland aforesaid, in a certain place called the Purceynt, betwixt
Brotherhouse and a bank called Quapelodes dyke, begun to be made in two
parcels, by Richard late Abbot of Crouland, Predecessor to John the then Abbot;
he the said John and his successors, should within three years next ensuing
that Agreement, support and repair them; and where need should require, raise
them higher. And moreover, that within the compass of those three years, he
should make a new bank, betwixt those other two; so as they meeting all in one,
and being of sufficient height, might extend as one bank, from the said place
called Brotherhouse to Quapelodsyd dyke, without any breach, gutter, or trench;
and be a sufficient defense against all the floods of water within that
compass, that might happen on the South side thereof; which bank to be also
made so high, as that the said floods should not overflow it, nor burden,
break, or overflow a certain bank called Lode dyke, belonging to the Prior of
Spalding, and to the said Sir William, and Elizabeth, and others; nor overflow
the lands of the said Sir William and Elizabeth, lying in the Towns of Weston
and Multon; provided that such floods, which might so happen, were not through
extraordinary tempests and rain, much greater than usual: And that the said
Abbot and his successors should repair and maintain the before-specified Bank,
so to be made as aforesaid, from Brotherhouse to Quapelodesyd dyke, well and
sufficiently, in every part, for the term of forty years, then next ensuing
the date of that Agreement.

And moreover, that the same Abbot and his successors, should from the Feast of
All Saints then next ensuing, well and sufficiently repair and maintain the
said two banks; whereof one did extend it self from Dovedale Clote
before-specified, unto the before-specified bridge at Crouland; and the other
from thence to Brotherhouse, until the said Bank from Brotherhouse to
Quapelodesyd dyke, should be sufficiently perfected; so that the usual floods
and overflowings of the waters of South Ee, Nene, and Weland aforesaid, might
not, in the mean time, do any hurt to the said bank called Lodyke, or drown the
lands in Weston and Multon before-specified: provided that such floods were not
much greater than usual, through excessive tempests and rain.

And the said Prior of Spalding, with his Covent, did then grant and agree,
that the beforementioned Abbot of Crouland, and his successors, should have
power and authority, to dig and take, within the soil of him the said Prior and
his successors, in Spalding sen, nearest to the said place called Brotherhouse,
so much earth, sand, and clay, for the making and repair of the said bank, thus
begun and to be new raised, as an hundred Boats could carry upon the River of
Weland, each boat containing six Cart loads.

Which Agreement being so made betwixt the parties abovesaid, by the special
mediation of Sir John Iuyn Knight, then chief Baron of the Exchequer, and one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, and John Cotesmore another of the
Justices of that Court, bears date upon the Thursday next after the Feast of
S. Michael the Archangel, in the year before-specified.

After this, viz. in 17 H. 6. upon a Session of Sewers held at Waynflete, upon
Saturday next after the feast of S. Michael the Archangel, before Richard
Haghe and John Langholme, there was a Presentment Ib. ^. 79. b.
exhibited against the Abbot and Covent of Crouland; ^hardging him, that he and
his Predecessors, time out of mind, had repaired, and so ought to do, a certain
bank in Crouland, extending it self from Brotherhouse, unto a place called the
Clote; and thence to the triangular Bridge, in that Town; and so unto Dovedale
Clote, in Crouland; and that the same was not repaired, to the great damage of
the Country. And that the said Abbot and Covent, and their Predecessors, had
likewise used to repair another bank in Crouland, called Sharpesdyke, within a
certain marsh there, called the Purc^yu^: which bank extended from
Brotherhouse, to a place called Plantefeld in Thorney. And moreover, that there
was a certain bank in Crouland, called UUynterdyke (within the said marsh
called the Purceynt) which did reach from the Clote, unto the side of the Abbey
of Crouland; and was then in decay, through the default of the same Abbot. And
also, that there was another bank, lying within the Purceynt beforementioned,
on the West side of Shepes Ee, extending it ^elf from Dovedale clo^e, near the
division betwixt Multon and UUhappelode; which bank ought likewise to have been
repaired by the said Abbot, as it had been by his said Predecessors, time
beyond memory. And lastly, that the said Abbot and his Predecessors had usually
repaired another bank in Crouland, called Moredyke (lying also within the said
Marsh called the Purceynt) which bank did reach from Shepes Ee to Asendyke, and
was then defective.

Whereupon the Shireeve of this County had command to summon the said Abbot to
appear at Alford, upon the Friday next after the Feast of S. Michael the
Archangel, to answer unto the particulars contained in the said presentment:
who came accordingly, and said; that he himself and some of his Predecessors,
with their Tenants and Fermours in the Towns and places adjacent to those
banks, had for their own Commodity and benefit, often repaired diverse parts of
them; but not at all for the advantage of the Country; and thereupon did put
himself upon the trial of a Jury. Which, being summoned to appear, came, and
said upon their Oaths; that the said Abbot and his Predecessors, as also their
Servants, Tenants, and Fermours of their Lands and Tenements, lying in the
places adjoining to those Banks, had very often for the avoiding of damage to
themselves, repaired those Bank, for their own private advantage, (as he the
said Abbot had pleaded) and not otherwise. And that neither the said Abbot, nor
any of his Predecessors had ever repaired them for the safeguard of the
Country, or keeping in the water within the said banks, for the benefit and
Commodity of the Kings liege people. Wherefore the said Abbot was dischardged
from that Presentment.

But after this, viz. in H. 6. time, there was an Inquisition Ib. f. 110. a. in
cedula.
taken at Staunford, in this County, before Sir John Beauchamp Knight, then
Steward of the Kings Household, and John Duke of Norfolk, Marshal of England,
and the Marshal of the Court of Marshalsi^ in the said Kings Household; where it
was found by the Jurors, that there was a certain Clough, called Shiphey, lying
at Dousdale in the parish of Crouland, then broken; by reason whereof, the
Lands and Tenements of diverse persons thereabouts were overflowed, to their
great damage and hindrance; and that the Abbot of Crouland ought to repair the
same, as he and his Predecessors had formerly used to do: which Clough had been
broken and out of repair, from the Feast of Easter, in the xxxvi. year of the
reign of King Henry the vi. and did so remain at the taking of this Inquisition.

Upon which presentment so made by the said Jurors, as aforesaid, the Abbot of
Crouland, by his Attorneys, appeared at Deping upon Thursday next after the
Feast of All Saints, in the second year of King Edward 4th, before the Steward
and Marshal of the Kings Household; and pleaded not guilty as to the said
chardge: but because he would not contest therein with the King, he submitted
himself, and desired that he might be admitted to his fine; and was
accordingly; which the Court assessed at vi s. viij d.

In 3 H. 5. there was an Award Ex Chron. de Cro^land compositis t^mp. H. 7.
made betwixt the Abbot of Crouland, and the Inhabitants of Spaldyng and
Pinchebec, by John Woodhouse Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, John
Leventhorp Receiver, and Will. Babington one of the Council of the said Duchy,
with the assistance of Richard Norton, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
the rest of the then Justices of that Court; who did decree to the said Abbot
and his successors, all the soil of Goggisland, together with the whole fishing
and fowling therein; and that the said Inhabitants of Spalding and Pinchebec
should be excluded from taking any other profits therein, excepting Common of
Pasture.



CAP. XLV.
HAving now done with what concerns that sometime famous Monastery of Crouland,
I shall proceed with the remainder of this Province: but before I descend to
speak in particular as to the support and maintenance of those ancient banks,
so long before made for the gaining thereof from the Sea, and it is defense
against the fresh waters; as also such works of drayning, or otherwise, as
tended to the better improving of all or any part of the same, I think it not
impertinent to take notice, that these following Marshes and Fens are observed
to have long since been within the limits of it; viz. (in the year of Christ
DCCCxxxij.) in Ingul^. f. 487. b.
Langtoft, to the extent of two miles in length, and as much in breadth. In Ibid.
Baston xvi furlongs in length, and eight in breadth. In Ib. f. 488. a.
Holbeche and Capelade (in the year DCCCLi.) five thousand acres: and in the
Norman Conquerors time, in Ib. f. 516 b.
Algarekirk ten Ox gangs, then waste by reason of the Seas inundation.

Next to observe, that King Henry the first did Vide cap. xlii
afforest a great part thereof, as well as of Kesteven (already spoke of) And
that King John did, in the fifth year of his reign, deafforest Car^. 5 Ioh. m.
6. n. 30.
all those lands that belonged to Surflet, Gosbercherche, Quadavering and
Dunnington.

As to the Sea-banks, in this Province, I find no mention of them till King
Henry the third's time; but then it appears that the said King directed his
Precept Claus. 38. H. 3. in dorso m. 15.
to the Shireeve, to distrain all those that held any Lands liable to the
repair of them, to the end that they might be repaired as they ought and used
to be: which Tenants were afterward to have allowance thereof from their
Landlords.

And about four years afterward, viz. in 44. H. 3. the said King, by his
Letters Pat. 42 H. 3. m. 14. in dorso.
Patents to Henry de Bathe (of whom I have had occasion to make signal mention
in my discourse of Romeney marsh) reciting, that whereas, through the
inundation of the Sea into these parts of Holand, inestimable loss had happened,
and more was imminent, as he had credible information; and that by reason
thereof he had sent his Precept to the Shireeve of this County, to distrain all
those, who held any Lands and Tenements in these parts, which ought to
contribute to the repair of the Ditches, Bridges, and Banks of the Sea, and
Fens therein, in order to the repair and maintenance of them, according to the
quantity of their said Lands: Nevertheless, for the manifestation of his
greater care of that work, he appointed Pat. 42 H. 3. m. 14. in dorso.
the beforespecified Henry, together with the said Shireeve, to provide
forthwith for those repairs; and to make distresses for the same, in such sort
as he should think most fit and conducing to the benefit and security of those
parts,

In 47 H. 3. there was a presentment Inter Brev^a Regis and Record^ temp. E. 3.
bund. 2. n. 8.
by a Jury exhibited to Martin de Litlebury and his fellow Justices Itinerant
at Lincoln, on the morrow after the Clause of Easter; showing, that anti^ntly
in the time of old Will. de, Rumare Earl o^ ^o^ius Lin^colne.
Chester, it happened, that two men carrying a Corpse from Stikeney to Cibecey, to
be buried in the Churchyard there, drowned it on North dyke Causey. Which being
told to the said Earl, Vid^ etiam R^gist. de Crouland, pen^s Ioh. O^d^ield arm.
f. 41. a.
he acquainted the Abbot of Revesby therewith; and advertised him, that he and
his Covent, ought at their own proper chardges to repair and maintain the said
Causey, in consideration of two pieces of ground, which he the said Earl had
given them, to that purpose for ever; whereof one was called Heyholme, and the
other West fewer, containing about sixscore Acres, and worth by the year vi l.
And the Jurors farther said, that the before-specified Abbot and Covent, which
then were, did receive that land of the gift of the said Earl, for the
maintenance of the same Causey, for ever; and that they did accordingly repair
it for a long time, until that one Robert de Ha^les Archdeacon of Lincoln, at
the re^u^st of the said Abbot and Covent, made a Collection throughout all his
Archdeaconry for the maintenance thereof; with which moneys so gotten, the said
Monks of Revesby repaired the same, until about ten years before the
exhibiting of the said Presentment; but after that time suffered it to go to
ruin. Wherefore they p^ecisely said, that the before-specified Abbot and
Covent ought to repair and maintain it still, and no other.

And being asked, whether that the Abbot and Covent could keep it in repair
with the yearly value of the said land: they answered, that they might. And
they said likewise, that William de Rumare, son of the said William, did after
the death of his Father, confirm to the before-specified Abbot and Covent, the
land abovementioned, in pure alms, for the maintenance of that Causey; at
which time he made the said Abbot and Covent swear, that notwithstanding the
said confirmation so made to them in pure alms, they must repair and maintain
the same Causey as they had before that time used to do: alleging, that for the
want of repair thereof, diverse persons were drowned every year.

And the said Jurors for the Wapentakes of Kirk^tone, Ellow, and Anelund,
chosen to enquire concerning a certain Causey, called Holand Causey, Sive Bryg
dyke.
and of the bridge called Peckebrigge, said upon their Oaths, that, in truth,
one Robert Iokem of Horbelinge, anciently gave to the Prior of S. Saviors, one
message, and one yard land, lying at the head of the said Causey, near to the
very site of the said Priory; to have and to hold to them and their successors,
for ever, for the reparation and maintenance of the before-specified Causey
from the head thereof, toward Kesteven, to the Innome o^ Douingtone. And for
that consideration were those Canons of S. Saviors enfeoffed of the said
message and land, to maintain the same Causey for ever.

And the same Jurors also said; that the beforementioned Canons did afterward
obtain a Bull from the Pope to exhort the people of the Country to contribute
toward the repair of that Causey; by means whereof they collected much money;
and that with those moneys, as also with the profit of that message and land,
and other moneys bequeathed unto them by several great men deceased, they used
to repair the same, till within twenty years then last past, that they were
hindered, by reason of a flood, that they could not do it. And since that time,
that they employed those moneys so collected and bequeathed as aforesaid, in
purchasing of lands. And they said directly, that those Canons ought to
maintain the same Causey, from the head of Holand bridge unto the Innome of
Doningtone, and not any other: And that with the revenue of that message, and
what they had so purchased, they might very well do it.

And they said moreover, that the Inhabitants of Doningtone ought to repair and
maintain the before-specified Causey, from that place called the Innome unto
the head of the same, toward Holand, in respect of their lands lying on each
side thereof, and by reason of the said ground called the Innome, granted to
them by the Country.

And as to the said bridge called Peckebrigg, they said; that before the
foundation of the Priory of Spalding, there was not any there: and that the
Prior of Spalding did anciently first build it; and being so built, that he and
his successors did ever afterward repair it; by reason whereof they took Toll
of all strangers passing over it; and at that time did also so do. For which
reasons, they said, that the same Prior and Covent of Spalding ought to
maintain the same, and no other person whatsoever. And being asked of what
breadth the said bridge and Causey ought to be; they said that the Causey ought
to be so broad, as that Carts and Carriages might meet thereon, and the bridge
of Peckebridge, so wide, as that men riding on Horse back, might also meet upon
it.

And because it was found by the said Inquisition, that the before-specified
Abbot and Covent of Reves^y ought to maintain the Causey called North dyke, by
reason of that land so given unto t^e^ by the beforementioned William de
Rumare: And that the Prior and Covent of S. Saviors ought to maintain that
part of the said Causey, called Holand bridge Causey, by reason of those their
Lands and Tenements, as aforesaid; and the men of Deningtone, the other part;
the Shireeve had command to seize the before-specified lands into the Kings
hands, and to retain them, until such time as they should give security for the
repairs abovesaid; and that this should be done before the Feast of S. Michael
then next ensuing.

The like command he had to distrain the Prior and Covent of Spalding, by all
the goods which he could find of theirs, within his Bayliwick, for the repair
of the said bridge called Peckebrigge, within that time.

In 50 H. 3. the King being advertised, Pat. 50. H. 3. m. 30. in do^so.
that as well his own lands, as the lands of the Prior of Spaulding, and others,
lying in this province of Holand, were in very great danger, through the decay
of the Banks, Ditches, Gutters, and Sewers in diverse parts thereof; did Pat.
50. H. 3. m. 30. in do^so.
assign John le Moyne, and Alexander de Montefort, to enquire by the Oaths of
honest and lawful men of the same Province, who they were that then had
safeguard and preservation by those banks and Sewers against the Sea, and ought
to repair the same: and also to distrain all those that were Land-holders
within the Wapentake of Ellowe, for to repair the same Banks, Ditches, etc. so
that every Acre might be equally assessed, whosoever held the same: and being
so repaired, to maintain them in such sort as they ought to do, according to
the proportions of their Tenements. The like Commission Pat. 3 E. 1. m. 21. in
do^so.
had Thomas de Frankton, John Beke, and the before-specified Alexander de
Montefort, in 3 E. 1. for the same Banks and Sewers.

In the same year, upon a pleading Plac. de Banco Octab. Trin. 3 E. 1. Rot. 8.
Linc.
, concerning the Banks, lying in a certain place called Cadenham toft, it was
found that they were in very good repair.

In 6 E. 1 there was a complaint Pat. 6 E. 1. in dorso m. 9.
made to the King, on the behalf of Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, that he had
received extraordinary damage within his Lordship and Lands in Swaneton, by
inundation of the fenns betwixt Swaneton and Dunnington, and other Towns
adjacent, by reason that the Sewers, Ditches, and Gutters, which had wont to be
there in the time of his Ancestors, were then obstructed, and the Bridges in
ruin, through the default of those that ought to repair them: The said King
therefore assigned Pat. 6 E. 1. in dorso m. 9.
Raphe de Hengham and William de Norburgh, to enquire who ought to repair the
same, and to distrain them thereto.

The next year following, upon inforformation Pa^. 7 E. 1. m. 8. in do^so.
that the Inhabitants within the Wapentake of Kirketou had sustained much loss
by the overflowing of Haute Hundre fen, in the said Wapentake, in regard that
the Sewers, Ditches and Gutters, formerly there, were then obstructed, and the
bridges decayed, by means of a certain controversy, which had long been
betwixt John de Britain Earl of Richmund, and Robert de Grelly, touching the
metes and bounds of that Fen; and through the default of those who ought to
have repaired those Sewers, Ditches, etc. the King therefore appointed Pa^. 7
E. 1. m. 8. in do^so.
John Beke, and N. Stapleton to enquire thereof etc.

What was done therein I find not; but the next year following, the King, by
the advice of his Justices, commanded John Beke, N. de Stapilton, and Roger
Loveday to enquire Ex Regist. de Spalding pene. I^h. Old^eild Arm. ^. 255. a.
who ought to repair the Bridge called Peccebrig, and the two Bridges in
Spalding; who finding by Inquisition, that the Abbot of Croyland, the Prior of
Spalding, and all men holding lands in Spalding were obliged to the repair of
them, according to the proportion of land which they held in the said Town, so
that every acre were assessed alike, summoned the Prior of Spalding and all the
Freeholders in Spalding to come before them: who all of them, excepting the
Abbot of Crouland, appeared, and consented for themselves, their successors and
heirs, to repair and maintain those Bridges, according to the quantity of their
lands that they had there; provided that the said Abbot would do the like for
his. And because the said Abbot absented himself, and refused, command was
given to the Shireeve, that he should summon him to appear before the
Commissioners before-specified, at Boston, upon the Eve of S. Laurence. At
which time he accordingly came; and in the presence of Raphe de Hengham, I. de
Metingham, W. de Burenton, and Roger de Leicestre, agreed for himself and his
s^ccessors, to do as the said Prior had done; viz. that they, with the consent
of the Freeholders of Spalding, would repair and maintain those Bridges,
according to the proportion of their lands in that Town; so that every Acre
should be assessed alike, of the demesnes as well new as old, and of the
Villenages: And that if any shops or stalls should be built upon the said
Bridges, all the benefit arising by them should redound to the repair and
maintenance of the same.

In 12 E. 1. John de Wigetost, having commenced a suit against John the son of
Osbert de Swyneheved, and diverse others, for making of Ditches in the said Fen,
called Haute hundre fen, Swyneheved, Wyktost, Sotterton, Algerkirk, Kirketon,
Fraunkton, Wyberton and Skyrbek, so that he could not drive his Cattle to the
said Fen; desired Plac. coram. Rege apud Linc. term. Hill. 12. E. 1. ^ot. 12.
Linc.
license to withdraw his suit: which was granted.

About two years after after this, there was Lel. Coll. vol. 2. p. 381
a great inundation in these parts, at which time the most of Boston was
drowned: and the Monastery of Spalding suffered much loss.

The King therefore having advertisement, that excessive damage had befallen
this Province by the want in repair of the Causey called Holand Causey; and by
the decay of the Banks, Ditches and Sewers in these parts, gave special command
Ex praef. R^gist. de Crou^land pe^e Ioh. Oldfeild arm. f. 42. 1.
to John de Vaux, and his fellow Justices itinerant in this County of Lincoln,
that they should search their Rolls, and send unto him, as well such Inquisitions
as had been made by them, touching the repair of that Causey, Banks, Ditches
etc. as those which were taken by Martin de Littelbury, and his associates,
Gilbert de Preston and his; as also of other Justices itinerant in this County,
in the time of King Henry the third. Who did accordingly: which Inquisitions,
so transmitted, as aforesaid, did then remain in the custody of Sir Raphe de
Hengham, upon a certain file of Records of the xxth year of this Kings reign.
Upon perusal whereof by the Justices of the Common pleas, they thought not fit
to proceed to judgment; nor to cause any distresses to be made; because it did
not appear, by what had been done therein, that any of the parties consented
thereto, but rather that they were taken in their absence: for which respect
they deemed it necessary, that all such persons, as were concerned in that
business, should appear in Court, that the matter might be argued and
determined in their presence. And because they thought, that it would be too
much trouble and inconvenience for so great a number of people to appear before
the King, wheresoever he might then be in this Realm; and therefore that it
might be better to have the same ^iscussed in these parts; the said King, did
by the advice of those his Justic^s itinerant, direct his precept unto John
Beek, Nicholas de Stapilton, and Roger Loveday, that they should enquire, who
ought to repair those Banks, Ditches, and Bridges, and to distrain them thereto.

Who accordingly making Inquisition, first concerning the bridge, called
Pekkebrig, and then of the two bridges in Spaldyng; and finding, that the Abbot
of Crouland, the Prior of Spalding, and all the Land-hol^ers in Spalding, were
obliged to those repairs, according to the proportion of land, which each man
had in that Town, so that every acre were alike; did th^reupon summon the said
Prior of Spalding, and the whole number of the freeholders in that Town: All
which, excepting the said Abbot, appeared; and agreed for themselves, their
successors and heirs, to repair and maintain those Bridges, according to the
quantity of their lands in that Town, though the said Abbot would not consent
thereto, for his portion. And because the said Abbot did absent himself and
refused; the Shireeve had command to give him special summons to appear at
Boston, upon the Eve of S. Laurence: at which tune he came thither before the
said Commissioners^ and in their presence, as also in the presence of Raphe de
Hengham, I. de Metingham, W. de Brumpton, and Roger de Leycestre, accorded, for
himself and his successors; that they, with the assistance of the Inhabitants
of Spalding, would repair and maintain the said Bridges, according to the
proportion of land, which each of them had in that Town; so that every acre
might be assessed alike of the demesnes as well old as new, and of those held in
Villenage: and that if any shops or stalls should be built or planted upon
those bridges, all the profit arising thereby, to be employed in their repair.

In 15 E. 1. W. de Carleton and Will. de Candlesby were constituted Pat. 15 E.
1. m. 14. in do^so.
Commissioners to enquire through whose default the Sea-banks in this Province
were in decay, and so consequently broken, by the violence of the tides, to the
great damage of the Inhabitants, much of their low grounds being thereby
drowned.

And by an Inquisition Ex Regist. de Spalding^ penes Ioh. Oldfield Arm. f. 256.
a.
taken at Scoft, near Trokenhou, before Simon de Ellesworth, and his fellow
Justices, upon Monday next after the feast of the Epiphany, in the xxiith year
of the reign of the said K. Ed. the first; it was found, that the Towns of Tid,
and Sutton, in this Province of Hoiland (in Lincolnshire) and of Tid, Neuton,
and Leverington in the County of Cambridge, could not be preserved, except the
fresh water of Scoft near Trokenhou were restrained unto the breadth of four
foot: and that the same water has no issue toward the Sea, except by a
certain Gutter, in breadth three foot and an half: therefore it was considered,
that the said Towns, according to the number of their Acres belonging to every
Inhabitant, should restrain the same, in manner aforesaid, and defend the ends
of those Towns abutting on the Fen: And there was a day assigned for making
such a restriction (or Dam) upon the borders of both Counties, within the
Quinzime of the Epiphany then next ensuing, upon the penalty of CC l.

And at the same time the Jurors for the County of Lincoln did present; that
there was a certain Gutter made in the Town of Multone, called Bollesgote, and
that it ought to be repaired by the men of that Town, according to the number
of their Acres for the quantity of what they held: it was therefore commanded
that the said Townsmen should repair that Gutter, in form aforesaid, before
Whitsontide following, upon pain of an C l.

And on the Thursday, being the Eve of S. Barnabas the Apostle, at the
suggestion of some of the Country, came the said Simon, and his fellow
Justices, to view that restriction, and to enquire by those Jurors, what had
been done upon the Ordinance aforesaid: Whereupon it was then presented; that
the Sewer which led from thence unto the Sea, betwixt the Counties of Cambridge
and Lincoln, ought to be enlarged to the breadth of twenty foot; scil. ten foot
on the Lincolnshire side, and ten on the Cambridgshire side: And because it was
found by the Jurors, that the said Ordinance for that restriction
beforementioned, could not be observed, as it ought to be, by reason of the
excessive floods of water; it was decreed, that as well the Dam, as the Sewer,
should be repaired by the view of those Jurors, as it had been ordained, before
the Feast of S. Peter ad vincula, then next following, upon penal^y of Cl.
every Town adjoining upon the same Sewer making good their particular
proportions abutting toward them. And Adam de Tid, with other the Inhabitants
of Tyd, came and condescended, that they would, for what they held, according
to the number of Acres, repair and make good the Banks of Sutton Marsh, betwixt
Scoft and Gedeney; provided that they were not chardged with their Acres lying
in Tid Marsh; before the said Marsh was defended by the Sewer and Dam
beforementioned.

In 21 E. 1. the Abbot of P^terborough brought an Assise Ex Regist. de
Peterborough quondam penes Rob. Wingfield Eq aur. f. 156. a.
of Novell disseisin against Ranulph de Rye, Philip Phiket and others, for
putting him out of possession of his freehold in Gosberkirk, viz. of xl. acres
of Marsh with the appurtenances: whereunto the said Ranulph and the rest of
those defendants pleaded, that the said Abbot had brought his action against
them unjustly; because he was not seized at all of the premises. And they
farther said, that the Custom of that Country was such, that whenever the
Sea, did by its raging, overflow any man's lands; and meeting with any
resistance, or upon its going back, waste away any of the said Land, and make a
hollow place, no man ought to fill up that place; but to cleanse, and drain it
for the common benefit of the Country; and so to let it remain i^ the same
condition that the Sea first left it.

And they moreover said, that about xviii. years then past, the Sea did make
such an hollow in the Land of the said Abbot; which so continuing for a long
time; they did afterward drain it, according to that Custom, without doing
any injury at all.

Whereunto the Abbot replied, that the said Ranulph could not, under color of
any Custom excuse himself; for he said, that the place beforementioned, was
his own several ground; and that it was not lawful for any man to dig in
another man's land; nor drayn the same, without the leave of the owner;
excepting only one Ditch which lay in the confines of the two Hundreds of that
Country, called Gotecrike; which Ditch, whosoever had a mind to do it, might
drayn it and scour it, at their pleasure. And he also said, that the
abovementioned Ranulph, had in his own particular land made a certain Ditch,
whereby the said Abbot was hindered from coming to his Marsh: and this he
desired might be enquired of etc.

VVhereupon the Jurors delivered in this verdict; viz. that the place
beforementioned was the several ground of the said Abbot, in which no person,
without his leave had any thing to do: And that there had been a kind of Ditch
there, which was xl years before filled up, and then reduced to firm ground.
And they said, that there did happen in that very year, such a flood in those
parts, as well of the fresh water as from the Sea, that it broke the Abbots bank
at each end thereof; which breach he the said Abbot did make up, as it was well
lawful for him to do. And they said, that the before-specified Ranulph, and
the other defendants, afterward made a Ditch of ten perches in length, upon
the soil of the said Abbot, against his leave; and did exclude him from coming
to that Marsh. Wherefore the said Abbot had judgment to recover his seisin,
and xx s. damage.

The next year following, the King being advertised Ex Regist. de Croyland
pe^es Ioh. Oldfeild arm. f. 49.^. Et Pat. 22 E. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
; that, by reason of the more than ordinary breadth of the River of Shoft, near
Trokenhout (which is in the confines of this County and Cambridgshire;) and
likewise through want of repair of the Banks, Ditches, Gutters, and Sewers in
those parts, great loss had happened to the Inhabitants thereabouts: the King
therefore, to contract the said Chanel, for the more security of the Country,
and for repairing those Banks and Ditches, did assign Ex Regist. de Croyland
pe^es Ioh. Oldfeild arm. f. 49.^. Et Pat. 22 E. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
S. de Ellesworth, R. de Chadeworth, and R. de Coupledik, to enquire as well by
the Oaths of Knights and others of the said Counties, of the course of that
stream, as of those Banks, Ditches, Gutters, and Sewers beforementioned; who
they were that possessed Lands and Tenements thereabouts, and had or might have
benefit by the contracting of the said Chanel, and repair of the Banks and
Sewers a^oresaid; and to distrain them thereto for the proportion of their said
Lands and Tenements, according to the number of Acres; so that no favor should
be used therein either to rich or poor.

Upon which Enquiry, the Jurors delivered this following Verdict; viz. that the
Towns of Tydd and Sutton, lying in Holand in this County; and Tidd, Neuton and
Leverington in Cambridgshire, could not be preserved from damage, except the
said stream of Shoft (near Trokenhout) were restrained to the breadth of four
foot, so that it might not run toward the Sea, but by a Gutter in wideness
three foot and an half: therefore it was concluded, that the Towns
beforementioned should streighten the said Chanel, according to the proportion
of their lands in those Towns; and likewise defend the hades of those Towns,
abutting upon the fen: And a day was thereupon given them to make the same
Chanel of that narrowness, viz. within the xv of the Epiphany, under the
penalty of CC l.

And the before-specified Jurors farther said, that there was a certain Gutter
made in the Town of Multon, called Bollisgote, which ought to be repaired by
the Inhabitants of that Town, according to the number of acres which each man
held: therefore summons was given them to perform the same accordingly, in form
aforesaid, before Whitsontide following, upon pain of an hundred pounds.

But upon Thursday, which was the Eve of S. Barnabas the Apostle, at the
request of some of the Country, the Commissioners above named, came to view the
before-specified Chanel, and to enquire by the said Jurors what was done in
order to their Decree. Where being met, the Jurors presented, that the Sewer
which led to that streightning, down to the Sea, lying betwixt both the
Counties abovementioned, ought to be enlarged to xx foot in breadth, viz. on
each side ten foot. And because it was found by the said Jurors, that the
before-specified Decree for that straightning of the Chanel abovementioned,
could not be done within that time prefixed, as it ought to be, in respect of
the great abundance of water, it was respited till the feast of S. Peter ad
Vincula (commonly called Lammas:) and so likewise was the making of the said
Sewer; and that each Town adjoining to the same Sewer should make it, so far as
their Land did extend. And thereupon came Adam de Tydd, and other of the
Inhabitants of Tydd, and consented to make and repair, the Ditch of Sutton
Marsh, betwixt Schoft and Gedeney, according to their number of Acres; provided
that they might not be chardged for their Land lying in Tyd Marsh before the
said Marsh was defended by those Sewers, and straightning that Gutter of Schoft.

In 23 E. 1. upon an Inquisition Ex Re^ist. de Peterborongh, pene praetatum
R^^. Wing^eld^ Eq aur. f. 161. a. u.
taken at Gosberchirche within this Province of Holand, on Friday in Whitson
week, before Adam de Crokedayk and William Inge; it was found, that all the
Landholders within Donyngton, in this Province, ought, according to the
proportion of what they held, repair and maintain the Causey of Holand, with
little Bridges; and likewise Ditches on each side thereof; from the said Town
of Donyngton to the new Ditch. And that the Prior of S. Saviors ought to
repair and maintain the same, in manner as aforesaid, from the said Ditch to
the Town of S. Saviors; in regard that the said Prior had Lands in that Town
worth xxl. a year for the repair thereof. And it was then presented by the said
Jurors, that there were very many defects, at that time, in the same Causey,
for default of its repair by the said Prior and Inhabitants of Donington; and
most of all for want of Bridges, which had been carried away on each side of
that new Ditch.

And they also presented, that the Sewers of Scathegarst, Swyneman dam, and
Swane lode, ought and had used to be xvi. foot in breadth; and so deep, as that
the water might have a free passage; and repaired by the Town of Donyngton,
unto the River to Byker, which runs to the Sea, and to be opened from the
first day of March until the F^ast of S. Martin; and so likewise from the said
Feast of S. Martin to the first day of March, except there should happen to be
such an a^undance of water at that time, that the Sewers could not suffice, but
that this Province of Holand would be drowned: and in such case, that it should
be lawful for them to stop the sai^ S^wers, opening them again at the c^asi^g
of those inundations.

And they said, that for default of r^pair of those Sewers, there was th^n
great damage in the Common Marsh adjoining; and that then, through the
surplusage of water, those Sewers were stopped, and not by any other means. And
they also said, that the before-m^n^ioned Chanel of Byker ought to b^ r^paired
by the said Town of B^ker, as often as need should require; and that it was not
then so deep as it had used to be, for carrying away the water of ^^e said
Sew^rs.

And they said moreover, that the Sewer of Quadring Ee had a Gutter; and that
the same Sewer ought to be of the before-specified wideness and depth, and to
be repaired by the Town of Quadring: and that it was stopped up by the same Town,
three years past. And that the Sewer of Risgate had Gutters, which ought to be
repaired and maintained by the Towns of Gosbercherche and Rysgate; and that it
was obstructed by Ranulph de Rye, toward the Marsh, but four days since: and
likewise that it ought to be of the said breadth and depth: And that there ought
to be a Sluse betwixt the Marsh and it, of sixteen foot wide; and also to be
o^en in such sort as the Sewer of Scalegarst, unless there should happen to be
so great an inundation as aforesaid; but that ceasing, then to be opened. And
that the course of that Sewer, which toward the Sea was called New Ee gate,
had wont anciently to run, directly, through the midst of the Marsh in
Gosvercherche, belonging to the Abbot of P^terborough, until thirty six years
before, that by the flowing of the Sea, and the fresh waters, it became
obstructed^ and thereupon by force made it self another current, which it then
held.

And they likewise said, that as well the water of the Sea, as the fresh, began
about three years then past to goul the ancient Chanel; and that the
beforementioned Abbot discerning the same, repaired it, for the safeguard of
his own land.

And the said Jurors being asked, whether that the Chanel which the water had
at that time, was sufficient for the delivery and evacuation thereof; answered,
that it was: but they said, that the ancient course thereof, would be more
proper and beneficial than the current which it then had; because it might be
repaired with the less chardge, running in a straight line, than by a circuit
and crookedly, and sooner dischardge it self. But whether it went in the old,
or the new Chanel, they affirmed, that it ought to be repaired and maintained
by the Town of Gosbercherche.

And being enquired of the damage which the Abbot might sustain, in case the
same water should be reduced into it is ancient Chanel; they said that he would
lose fourscore acres of marsh; in regard he could have no way to it by reason
thereof.

And they said moreover, that the Sewer of de la Beche ought to be three foot
in breadth, and as much in depth, at the head thereof toward the said Marsh;
and lower, toward the Sea, xvi foot in breadth; and wheresoever it was to be
narrower, to continue the same depth as abovesaid; and that it ought to run all
the year long; but was obstructed in the time of K. Henry the third, father to
the King that then was, by Henry de Bathe (at that time a Justice Itinerant)
which obstruction was continued till that time, by the Towns of Gosberchirche,
Pinchebec, and Surflet: and that it ought to be repaired and maintained from
the said Marsh to Surflet; on one side by the Town of Pynchebec, and on the
other by the Town of Gosberchirche, and thence to the Sea, by the Town of
Surflet; and that it ought to run at all times of the year, except in such
great inundations as aforesaid.

And they said, that the River of Surflet, into which the Beche did descend,
ought to be in wideness xvi foot; and that it was then so straightned by the
men of Surflet, and raised to such an height, that the water of Beche could not
have it is current to the Sea as formerly.

And they said also, that Hachelode was a common Sewer, and ought to run at
such times is Scathegarst did; and that it was obstructed in the time of Prior
William, Predecessor of the then Prior of Spalding, and did then so continue.
And that it ought, at it is entrance from the Marsh, to be one foot wide, and as
much in depth; but lower to be six foot in breadth, as far as the Sea; and
repaired by the Town of Pinchebec till it came to the Sea.

Likewise that Bastone Ee ought to be repaired by the Towns of Bastone,
Turleby, Obbesthorpe, and Wynelisthorpe, from Katebrigge to Escote; by raising
of the Banks, and clensing on each part, by the Towns of Pynchebec and Escote,
unto Surflete; and by the Town of Surflete to the Sea: which Banks did at that
time want much repair and raising higher.

Also that Brunne Ee, Tolhou, and Blakekyrk, ought to be repaired, raised and
scoured by the town of Brunne, from Brunne to Goderamescote, on the North side;
and on the South to Merehirne: from which places, viz. Goderamescote and
Merehirne, the Town of Pyncebek ought to repair it, unto Surflete; and the said
Town of Surflete from thence to the Sea: for default of which repair, great
damage was then sustained.

Also that the Sewer of Briggeflecter was then obstructed by the Town of
Helytone; and that it ought to be repaired, cleansed, and maintained by that
Town to the River of Swynesheved; whence that River was sufficient for
conveyance thereof to Kyme mouth; where it was then obstructed by Philip de
Kime, to the great damage of the Country.

And that the Sewer of Enclouse, near Boston^ ought to run all the year long;
but was stopped every winter by the Inhabitants of Boston, on the West part of
the Bridge there; and that it ought to be three foot in breadth.

Also that the Sewer of Long drove, was then in good repair, and ought to be
maintained by the Town of Pinchebek.

And they said moreover, that Bollesgate, in Multon, was a common Sewer, but
then stopped: and the Gutter, called Got, carried away by the Inhabitants of
that Town.

It was therefore decreed, that the said Causey and Ditches should be repaired
and made anew, at the chardges of the before-specified Town of Donyngtone; the
said Prior to be chardged according to his proportion, as aforesaid.

And as to those Sewers of Scathegast, Swynemandant, and Swanelode, that they
should be o^ened and repaired to the said River of Byker, in breadth xvi foot,
and of such a depth, as that the current of the water passing through them,
might not be hindered; and all this to be done at the chardge of that Town. And
that the said River be repaired by the Town of Byker, and made of such a depth,
as that the water of the before-specified Sewers might pass away. And that the
Sewer of Quadringe, and the Gutter belonging thereto, be cleared and repaired,
as formerly it had wont to be; and of the same breadth and depth, at the
chardges of the said Town; and the said Town to be amerc'd.

And that the Sewer of Rysgate, which had been obstructed by the said Ranulph,
should be opened at this chardge; and he to be amerc'd.

And that the said Towns of Gosbercherche and Rysgate should thenceforth be
distrained to the repair and maintenance of the same Sewer, in form aforesaid;
and to the making anew of the Sluse there, to the breadth of six foot, as
abovesaid.

And as to the current of New Ee gate, Gilbert de Sutton, Steward to the said
Abbot of Peterborough, and John de Trikyngham, a Monk of that house, were
appointed to give notice to the said Abbot, that he might appear before the
above-specified Adam and William at Westminster, upon Wednesday next after the
xv of S. John Baptist.

And that the Sewer of Beche should be opened and repaired (so that it might
have the like depth and breadth, and run throughout the whole year, as it had
used to do) at the chardge of the Towns of Gosberchirche, Pyncebec, and
Surflete, as aforesaid. And that the River of Surflet, into which the Beche
falls, to be widened and deepned, so as it might be xvi foot in breadth, and
so deep, as that the water might have it is course therein as formerly: and to
be done at the chardge of the same Town of Surflete.

And that the Sewer of Hachelode should likewise be cleansed, and run throughout
the whole year; and at it is entrance from the Marsh to be one foot in breadth,
and as much in depth; but lower, toward the Sea, six foot in breadth: and to be
repaired at the chardges of the said Town of Pynchebec, which ought to maintain
the same.

As also, that Baston Ee be repaired, cleansed, and raised, in the Banks and
otherwise, as it ^ad wont to be, at the chardge of the Towns of Baston,
Turleby, Obthorpe, and Wyvelesthorpe. Likewise, that Brunne Ee, Tolhou, and
Blakekirk be repaired, cleansed and maintain^d by the Towns of Br^nne, Pyncebek,
and Surfl^t in form afor^s^id, and at their chardges.

And that the Sewer of Buggeflet^ which was obstructed by the town of
Hokyntone, be opened at the chardge of that town, and the said town to be
amerc'd. And that the Sewer which was stopp^d up at Kym^ mouth, by Philip de
Kyme, be opened, at the costs of the same Philip, and he to be am^rc'd. And
that the Sewer, called the Encluse, near Boston, be opened every Winter by the
said Town, on the West side of the Bridge; and the said Town amerc'd. And
lastly, that the Sewer of Bollesgate and Molton, which was obstructed by that
Town, be also opened at the chardge thereof, and the said Town amerc'd.

In the same year Will. de Shaddeworth and Hugh de Walecote were constituted
P^t. ^3 E. 1. m. 4. in do^s^.
Commission^rs to view the Banks, Ditches and Sewers in this Province, and to
take order for their repair. The like Commission (...) 1. m. 23. in (...).
in 28 E. 1. had Will. Haward and Thomas de Burnham. So also in 33 E. 1. had
P^^ 33 ^. 1. ^n dors^ m. 1^.
Robert de Hakebeche, Raphe de Littylbury and Giles de Barentone.

And in King Edward the Second's reign there issued out very many Commissions
to the same purpose; viz. (...). 4 ^. 2. p. 1. m. 18. i^ ^orso.
in 4 E. 2. to Thomas de Newmarch, Alan d^ Ratheby, Richard de Haddele, and
Gilbert Remband, for the view and repair of those in the Wapentake of Kirton.

In 6 E. 2. to ^at. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 24. in do^so.
W. de Friskeney, R. de Cubbledyke, I. de Stikeneie, and A. de Cubledyk, for
those in the Wapentakes of Kirketone and Skirbeche, and the parts adjacent.

In 7 E. 2. to Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 1. m. 9. in dorso.
Roger de Cubeldyk, Laurence de Holebeche, and Walter de Freskeneye, for those
only upon the Sea coast in this Province. The like in 8 E. 2. to Pat. 8 E. 2.
p. 2. m. 4. in do^so.
the said Roger, Laurence, and William de Farforde.

In 9 E. 2. upon an Inquisition E^ Regist. de Spalding, pene I^^. O^dfield Arm.
f. 257. a.
taken at Boston, before Edmund Deincourt, Lambert de Trikingham, Roger de
Copildik, and Robert de Malbirthorp, then Justices of Sewers, upon Tuesday next
after the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, it was found, that the
Town of Donington ought to repair and maintain the Causey of Holand, with
Bridges, and Ditches on each side thereof; viz. from the said Town of
Donington, unto the new Ditch: and from the said Ditch unto the Chapel of S.
Saviors, the Prior of S. Saviors ought to do the like.

And it was likewise found, that the said Town of Donington ought to repair the
Sewers of Scoftgraft, Swinemandam and Swanislad, to the breadth of xvi foot, and
of such depth, that the current of the water should not be hindered, unto the
River of Biker, which leads to the Sea; and that they ought to be open, from
the first day of March, until the Feast of S. Martin in Winter; and likewis^
from the Feast of S. Martin, until the first day of March, unless so great an
inundation of the Seawater should happen at that time, that the Sewers would
not suffice to carry it away, but that the Country of Holand would be
ov^rflowed; and in case of such floods, that the town of Donington might stop
t^ose Sewers, and upon the fall of the water^, op^n them again: And it was
found, that the said Sewers were then stopped, for want of clensing by the said
Town of Donington.

And it was ^ur^^er found, that the said town of Biker oug^t to repair and
cleanse the said River of Biker unto Bondistac; and from Bandistac to Quadring,
the said town of Donington to do the like, to the breadth of xxiiij foot. And
that the town of Quadring, with the Commoners thereof, ought to scour and
repair the same River unto Gosberchirch to the same breadth: and the town of
Gosberchirch to do the like, according to the same breadth, unto the Sea, so
that the fresh waters might not be hindered by the said Rivers and Sewers.

And it was also found, that the River of Biker was then obstructed from
Bondistake unto the Sea, through the default of clensing it by the town of
Donington and Quadring and the Commoners of Gosberchirch: And that the said
River of Biker, where the Dam was, ought to have been open all times of the
year; but that it would be more proper, that the said town of Biker, for their
own benefit, and commodity of the whole Country, should make a certain Clow,
with two doors, each of them four foot in breadth, which Clow to be always open,
unless a great inundation of the S^a should happen.

And it was moreover found; that the Sewers and Gutters of Quadring, being then
obstructed by the town of Quadring, and the Commoners thereof, ought to be xvi
foot in breadth, and of such depth, that the course of the water might not be
hindered; and repaired and cleansed by the said town and Commoners. And that the
Sewer of Gosverchirche, called Risgate, and the Sluice betwixt the Fen and it,
which ought to be open throughout the whole year, as Scatisgraft and
Swannislade used to be, were obstructed by the Abbot of Peterborough and the
town of Gosberchirche; and that the town of Gosberchirche, with the Commoners
thereof, ought to cleanse, repair and new make the said Sewer and Gutter, called
New got, and the Sluse whereby the water did anciently pass, directly through
the midst of the said Abbots marsh.

And it was likewise found, that the Sewer of the Beche, which ought to be
scoured and cleansed by the towns of Gosberchirch, Surflet, and Pinchebec, from
the Fen to Surflet, and from Surflet to the Sea, was then obstructed tthrough
the default of those towns: and that one Richard de Heddil, had raised a Dam in
the said Sewer, whereby the course of the water was hindered.

And it was also found, that the Sewer of Briggeflet was then obstructed by the
town of Hekyngham; and that it ought to be amended by the said town, unto the
River of Swinesheved, and that there the River was sufficient to carry away the
water unto Kyme mouth, which was at that time stopped by Philip de Kime, to the
great damage of the whole Country.

And that the Sewer called the Encluse, near Boston, ought to run for the space
of the whole year, but was then obstructed in the Winter season by the
Inhabitants of Boston, on the West part of the Bridge; and that it ought to be
three foot in breadth, and repaired by the town of Boston on the West part of
the Bridge.

Likewise, that the Sewer, called Hamundbek, on the South end of Boston, was
then also obstructed by the Inhabitants of that town, on the West part of the
Bridge, and the Inhabitants of Skirb^k: and that it ought to be repaired by the
said men of Boston to inhabiting on the West of the Bridge, and the m^n of
Skirbek: and for that reason all the said Inhab^tants residing on that West
side of the Bridge, ought to Common in the Eight hundred f^n; and that this
Sewer ought to run by the space of the whole year.

And that the Inha^itants of the Eight Hundreds ought to cleanse the River of
Swynesheved from Balberdesbothe, unto the North end of Swynesheved town; and
the town of Swynesheved to do the like, from the said place unto the River of
Biker.

And moreover, that the towns of Iwardebi and Ousthorp ought to repair and
maintain the South side of the w^ter, called Apiltrenesse, unto Kime, and that
it was then in decay, through the default of the Prior of Haverholme, who ought
to repair a great part thereof, and did refuse so to do. And that Philip de
Kime, who ought of right to repair a certain portion of the side at Watemouthe,
did not do it; insomuch as through the default of the same Prior, and of the
said Philip de Kime, the whole Fen of K^steven in Hoiland, was overflowed and
drowned, to the damage of all those Countries. And it was likewise found, that
the said Philip ought to repair that current of the before-specified water, and
did neglect so to do, to the great damage of the Country, and especially of the
Priory of Kime.

And also that the Prior of Haverholme ought to provide a certain Boat at the
Both, near Watemouth, to transport foot-folks over that water, as well by night
as day, so often as any man should have occasion to pass that way; and that he
did not do it, to the great damage of passengers travailing there. And that the
said water was the common passage from Kesteven unto the River of Withum: And
that the Ditch which is called the Did he, lying betwixt Holand fen, and
H^kinton fen, and Kime Fen, ought to be cleansed and repaired by the Inhabitants
of the Eight Hundreds of Hoiland, on the East part, and by Henry de Beaumond
Lord of Hekinton, and the Commoners of Hekinton, and Philip de Kime, on the
West part: and from Balbardesbothe to the River of Kime, and that it was there
obstructed by Philip de Kime.

And it was then also presented, that the Town of great Hale, with the
Commoners, ought to repair and maintain the Causey of Gerwik unto Pingelhirne,
both for Horsemen and Foot-folk: And that the Town of Hekinton, with Gerdwik^,
ought to cleanse and repair the stream of Ge^dwike unto the water of Swineshed,
viz. unto Balberdesbothe, and that it was not then done: but the half of the
said stream, unto the Park on the South side, the Parson of Hale ought to
cleanse and repair.

And it was likewise then found, that Burtonebrigg was a common High way, and
that the one half thereof ought to be repaired and maintained by the Town of
Burton, together with the Ca^sey on the North part; and the other moytie by the
town of Helpringham, with the Causey on the South part, so that horse and
foot-folk might at all time pass securely there; and that it was then in decay.

And it was farther presented, that the head of Caresdik was a certain stream
which is called the South Ee, and ought to be repaired and cleansed by the Town
of little Hale, and the Commo^ers thereof on the one part, and by the Towns of
Helpringham and Biker, unto Gobion Both, on the other part. And that
Hatchtlode was a common Sewer, and ought to run at the same time that the Sewer
of Scathegraft did; but was then obstructed by the Prior of Spaldyng; and that
it ought at the entrance of the water from the Fen to be one foot in breadth,
and as much in depth, and within by the Town to be of six foot in breadth to the
Sea; and to be repaired by the Town of Pinceber to the Sea.

And moreover, that Baston he ought to be cleansed and repaired by the Towns of
Baston, Thurlebi, Obthorpe, and Winelistorpe, from Calebrigge to Estcote, by
raising of the Banks, and clensing the stream on each part; and from the Town
of Estcote, through Pincebec, unto Surflete; and from the Town of Surflet to
the Sea; which Banks did then stand in need of great repair and raising higher.

And that Brunne hold he, ought to be repaired, raised, cleansed, and
maintained by the town of Brunne, and the Abbot of Brunne, from Brunne unto
Goderamscote: and from Goderamscote the town of Pinceber ought to rerepair the
same to Surflet, and the town of Surflet to the Sea; for default whereof all
the Fen of Holand and Kesteven were overflown and drowned. And they lastly
presented, that Bollisgote in Multon was a common Sewer, and became obstructed
by the town of Multon; and that the Gutter, which was called the Got, was
carried away by the Inhabitants of that place.

In 10 E. 2. Roger de Cubledik, Laurence de Holbeche, and Hugh de Gorham were
constituted Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 4. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks and Sewers, in the Marshes
of Gedney, Holbeche, Sutton, and Flete.

The next year following, the Abbot and Covent of Peterborough came to an
Agreement Ex praef. Reg. de Peterborough quondam penes Rob. Wingfield Eque aur.
f. 164. b
with Sir Hugh de Cressey, Sir John de Ry, James de Bark, and other the
Inhabitants of Gosbercherche and Surflete, concerning a certain Sewer in the
Marsh of Gosbercherche, newly made from that place which is called N^we Got,
directly to Salten Ee: the tenor of which accord was as follows; viz. that
the said Monks of Peterborough, did for them and their successors release unto
the said Hugh, and the rest, and to their heirs, all the action which they had
in respect of any trespass done to them touching that Sewer. And moreover
granted, that the said Sir Hugh, Sir John, and the rest of the Commonalty of
the before-specified towns, and their heirs, should make the said Sewer,
through the midst of that Marsh, xx foot in breadth, according to the Kings ell,
as it then was; as often as there might be occasion for the same to run, for
ever. And if it afterward did happen, that it should be obstructed, either by
the flowing of the Sea, or otherwise; that in such case the said Sir Hugh and
the rest abovementioned, and their heirs, might have power to cleanse the same
to the before-specified breadth, with as little hurt or damage to the said Abbot
and Covent, as might be, so that the said water might have it is passage as
aforesaid.

In the same year Roger de Cubbeldyk, Walter de Friskeney, and Robert de
Malberthorpe were constituted Pa^. 11 E. 2. ^ 2. m. 15. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks and Sewers in these parts
of Holand. The like Commission Pat. 14 E. 2. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
in 14 E. 2. had Alexander de Montfort, Humphrey de Litlebury, Everard de
Flete, and William de Fayreford, for those upon the Sea coasts and parts
adjoining, betwixt Tidbriggge and Surflete brigge. So also in 15 E. 2. had Pat.
15 E. 2. p. 1. m. 25. in dorso.
Walter de Friskeney, Robert de Malberthorpe, and Roger de Cubledyke.

In 16 E. 2. Roger de Cubledyk and Alan de Cubledyk were appointed Pat. 16 E.
2. p. 2. m. 7. in dorso.
to view the Banks and Sewers betwixt the Bridges of Holand and Tid, and to
take order for their repair.

The like assignation Pat. 17 E 2. ^. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
had the said Roger and Alan, with William de Faireford, the year next ensuing,
for those betwixt the Cross of Wolmerstye and Tiddbridge; Ex Regist. de
Spalding penes I^^. Old^iel^ a^m. f. 59. b.
and for the preservation of the whole Country of Holand, within the Wapentake
of Ellowe; before whom the Jurors presented:

First, for the town of Pincheber; that all the Sea-banks, and those of the
Marshes, which were broken by tempestuous waves, should be repaired and made
higher and thicker than they had formerly been: And that, at that time, there
were many perches of those Banks, broken and ruinous, by reason, that the lands
which were chardged with the repair of them, had long been in the hands of
strangers: and therefore they deemed it necessary, that all the lands of the
said Town of Pinchebec, should be surveyed anew; and after such survey, every
man to be assessed, according to what he held.

And they also presented, that the water called Brunne Now Glene
he, which had it is course through the midst of the beforespecified Town, unto
the message of Richard de Cheile, should thenceforth be stopped below the
Weltres. And because that could not possibly be done, by reason of the water
coming from far, upon great falls of rain, against which the said Town could
not provide, except there were a reasonable outlet made from the said message
to the Sea, by the River of Surflete, which was too narrow by xx foot; and that
unless it were widened to that proportion, the town of Pinchbec would be
overflowed every year, in regard that the said current ought to be larger at
the outlet thereof, than at it is entrance: therefore, that those Weltres
should be viewed, on both sides from that message, by such persons who had the
frontiers, unto the place called Dounechirne, on the South side of the said
River, unto Matehirne; and on the North side of Douncechirne, unto Godramscote,
that they be new agisted, and every man assessed according to the proportion of
what he held; the Agistment anciently having been by Fees, and the residents
upon those Fees; which Fees, and residents, were then come to nothing, and far
off; nor was it known in whose hands they were; insomuch as every year, the
Marshes on each side the River were drowned.

And they said, that the current of water, passing under every Bridge of that
River, ought to be xij foot in breadth at the least, it being then too narrow.

And they likewise presented, that Galwe got ought to be repaired anew by the
said town of Pinchebec, and all the Land-holders in Spalding, on the North side
of Westlode; and that the Sewer thereof ought to be xvi foot in breadth; as
also, that neither Flax or Hemp should be watered in that Sewer, upon pain of
forfeiture thereof.

And also that Chillegote did then want repair; and that the Sewer leading
thereto should be made in breadth xx foot, from Bucifen gate unto that Gutter.

And they said, that the Sewer leading from Galwe got unto Chillegote, under
the bottom of the Sea-bank, by the town side, ought to be made twenty foot in
breadth. And that the Sewer, passing to the Gutter of Scobdyke, within the Town,
ought to be xij foot in breadth, unto Lostbridge; and from thence unto the said
Gutter, to be xx foot in breadth. And that the Watercourses, under every Bridge,
beyond those Sewers, ought to be made six foot in breadth, at the least: and
that the said River, and all the Sewers of the said town of Pinchebec, should
thenceforth be cleansed, and made of the before-specified breadth, by the
Inhabitants there, and all others who had benefit thereby, as often and
whenever need should require.

And they presented moreover, that for preservation of the Town of Spalding,
the Sewer of Pe^eholme got, unto the old Fen dyke, ought to be scoured and
repaired, as it had anciently used to be; viz. from the said Gutter to
Capelbrigge, twenty foot in breadth; and from that old current, unto the
Hergate, eighteen foot: and from the Hergate, in the ancient course, unto the
O^d-Fen dyke, in breadth xvi foot: and that the said Gutter and Sewer were in
decay, through the default of the Tenants of the Abbot of Croyland, and the
Freeholders of the Prior of Spalding, and the Tenants of the Abbot of Angiers.

And the said Jurors, by Decree of the beforementioned Justices, did then
value the several Acres of land, out of which the said Sewers and all the other
Sewers of that Town were to be enlarged, to the value of four Marks of silver,
more than they had wont to be rated at. And they presented, that Coldale got
ought to be repaired, and the Sewer belonging thereto, to be xvi foot in
breadth. And that Fulnegote stood in need of repair, and the Sewer thereof to be
xx foot in breadth from the Small gate to the said Gutter: And that the current
of water, under every Bridge of the said Sewer, was in breadth xij foot; and
that thenceforth, neither Flax or Hemp should be dieved in the said Sewers, nor
in any Sewers belonging to the said town: and lastly, that Stelegote should be
repaired in it is ancient place.

And the said Jurors farther presented, that all the Frontiers, from Fulnegote,
unto the Abbot of Croyland's Mill, in Spalding, were then broken, through the
default of the Inhabitants there; and therefore it was ordained, that they
should be repaired, as anciently they had wont to be, so that Horses with their
Furniture might pass that way, viz. from Peccebrigge to Coldealegote, on the
East side of the River; and from the great Bridge unto Ratun Row, on the West
thereof: And, that every man should defend his Frontier with Piles aad stones,
where need required.

And they said, that the Road-way, leading from Ratun Row, unto the House of
John fitz Simon, ought to be so broad, as that two Carts might meet thereon;
and therefore they decreed, that so it should be: So likewise from the House of
Emme Colin, unto the Bridge of Wectlode out-fall; and so to Peccebrigge: and
from Coldalegote to the Abbots Mill: And that, of necessity, the Fen-bank, from
the Abbot of Croiland's Mill, unto Pichale, should be raised two foot.

And that the great Bridge, called Spalding brigge, was then broken, and ought
to be repaired at the chardges of the whole Town, as well religious as secular
persons; and in like sort Batemannebrigg from Westlode. As also, that the Marsh
Banks being then broken in diverse places, should be repaired; and afterward a
new Agistment made of them, because many Lands and Tenements in that Town, were
never Agisted.

And they likewise said, that Halmergate, Newgate, Fulnedrove, Spaldingdrove,
and ^^e Old Fen dike ought to be repaired; and that turf, for that purpose, be
not dug in those places, to the damage of the Commonalty, nor....... And,
that the Hevidings betwixt Spalding and Weston, abutting upon Weston mere, by
the Frontiers; and to be made in thickness xij foot, so that the waters of
Weston enter not into the fields of Spalding, by means whereof the fields of
Spalding, on the East part of the River of Spalding, were drowned every year.

And they said, moreover, that the Gutter of Wike was then broken, and ought to
be repaired by Weston and Spalding: And that Cosnergate was also broken, and
ought to be made; and likewise the Sewer to be xij foot in breadth.

And they also ordained, that all persons dwelling near to the Causeys in the
Town of Spalding, and likewise in Newgate, were obliged to scour the Gutter,
against it is breach. And that, thenceforth, Fishermen should not prejudice the
Common Sewers, by Lepes, Weeles, or other obstructions, whereby the passage of
the waters of Spalding and Pinchbec toward the Sea, might be hindered.

And they said, that all the Ditches, carrying waters to the Common Sewers,
should thenceforth be opened, according to the Ordinance of the Wardens of
Spalding and Pinchbec: And that, from thenceforth, no man should stop the
course of Westlode, by dung or the like, it being a Common Sewer: as also, that
the Gutter, near the House of Thomas Kaunt in Ratunrow, should be repaired, and
the Sewer thereof, in breadth ten foot: and the Sewer of Aufinesgote, in breadth
xvi foot.

And they likewise said, and ordained, for the Town of Spalding, and for the
common profit; that all persons, as well rich as poor, should be obedient to all
Mene-works, to be made, as well in the Sewers, as in the Marsh; and that every
man having one message and ten acres of Land, should find, toward that work,
one Tumbrell; and he who had less, one able man, of eighteen years of age, at
the least: and if the tumbrell should make default, to pay, for every day four
pence, and a man two pence; which hire to be allowed of by the said Wardens,
for the behoof of those towns: and that once in the year an Account should be
given thereof, upon notice given in the Churches of the said Towns by the
Common Crier.

And they also presented, that the stream of Spalding should be made narrower
at Skitishirne, near Peccebrig, on the East part thereof; and opposite thereto
on the West part, with piles, rays, and stones, by those that received benefit
thereby: And that there was one passage at Peccebrig, the profits whereof the
Wardens ought to receive, for the benefit of the Commonalty of Spalding.

And they farther ordained, for the advantage of the Commonalty of Spalding,
that the Prior of Spalding should defend his corner, called Pes^holmehirne,
with piles and stones; and at the Coninge^ likewise: and they that had the Sea
Banks, to do the like over against the message of Gilbert at Stowe: And that
the Prior and his Bondmen should repair that corner in the River, which was the
Frontier in Getegodisplace near unto Coldalegote.

And they said, that the ancient Gutter, called Covenham got, ought to be
repaired; and the Sewer of the same Gutter, in the old current unto the Wardic:
and that from the Wardic to Pinegate, the said Sewer should be in breadth ten
foot.

And they likewise said; that all the Ditches on each part of Spalding drove,
from the Fen to the Sea, ought to be opened in Winter, so that the current of
the water might not be hindered toward the Sea. And that the ancient Sewer,
betwixt Robert le Organce and Maud at Bar, ought to be repaired and
cle^sed; and that the course of the water of Chaplgate and of Newgate,
descending by rain, might pass away and descend to Coldalegate: And moreover,
that the common way, which goes from the great Bridge, unto Westlode out-fall,
was too narrow, and ought to be repaired by those who had the Frontiers, so
that people might go and ride that way.

And they said moreover, that the common Road-way, betwixt Pichale and
Brotherhous, was cut in sunder with trenches, by the Prior of Spalding, and his
Bailiffs: they therefore ordained, that thenceforth Bridges should be made
thereon, to the end, that men might pass with Carts and Carriages, and ordinary
droves; and so from Brotherhous unto the Clote: And, that the common way from
the Clote unto Croyland, was then in decay, through the default of the Abbot
and Town of Croyland: and thereupon they ordained, for the common benefit of
the Country, that from thenceforth, there should not be any trenches made, in
those places, where Bridges were, to the hinderance of the Kings high way.

And they said, that Newgote ought to be repaired by the town of Weston: So
also the South dike of Quappelode and Holbeche by those two towns: And that the
Common dic and Chepdic, from Fletebridge to Asewicklade, ought to be repaired
by the same Towns.

So likewise the Sewer at Galwegote, running from Thomlande to the Sea; and to
be dug deeper, as in ancient time it had been, by those towns. And that the
Croffendic of Quappelode ought to be repaired by the Town of Quappelode: So
also the Bridge at Wikesdic in Quappelode, so that the passage of the water
running under that Bridge, might be in breadth ix foot; and the courses of the
others toward the Sea, be xij foot broad: And that the Sluses built in the
River of Quappelode^ from the Fen to the Sea, from thenceforth should be taken
away.

And the said Jurors, for safeguard of the town of Holbeche, said; that there
was a certain Sewer, called Pulv^rgote, which ought to be removed, because it
did damnifie the whole town: And that the stream of Holbeche, from
Bodinesbrigge to the Sea, ought to be cleansed: as also, that the said Town of
Holbeche could not be effectually drayned by one Gutter, except another were
made in Iocesaculand, by the midst of the Creek called Fouleflete.

And they likewise presented, that the Southhedic of Gedeney and Flete, from
the town of Sutton unto the Town of Holbeche, ought to be repaired, and made
thicker than it had wont to be, by three foot. And, that the Sewer, called the
Grist, was obstructed by Adam fitz Alan, and John fitz Alan: as also, that the
Bridge, called Igerambrigge, was broken and ought to be repaired by the town of
Multon.

And they said, that all these Ordinances were to the common benefit of the
Towns of Spalding and Pinchebec, and the other Towns beforementioned; and that
every acre ought to be equal in all Assessments and chardges, for the Gutters,
Sewers, Bridges, and other things necessary to be repaired; and that all the
defects in those Banks, and in the Frontiers which occasioned them, were
appointed to be surveyed in such sort as the Bills fixed to the said
Inquisition did assign.

And by another Inquisition Ib. f. 262. b.
, taken on Saturday, being the morrow after Holy rood day, in the xviiijth year
of the said King Edward the second's reign, before the said Roger, William, and
Alan, the Jurors presented, that the Sewer, which led from Peseholmgate in
Spalding, was very ancient; but that the course of the water was in part new
changed, the length of one furlong, for the more benefit than it had been
formerly (as 'twas believed:) and this by the assent of the Prior and Covent of
Spalding: And that the Gutter newly placed there, was in breadth three foot and
an half, whereunto a Sewer of xiiij foot in breadth did suffice, as well for
drayning the lands belonging to the Abbot of Croyland and his Tenants, as the
lands of the beforementioned Prior and his Tenants.

And they said, that the Gutter of Fulne, and that of Coldalegote, as also the
Sewer called Eusinersgote, and the Gutter called Stelgote, being principal
Gutters, were broken, and stood in need of repair, so that without the help of
Peseholme got they would not suffice, nor Peseholme got without the help of
the said Gutters, they all being in such great decay. And, that the Hevedinges
of Spalding, on Westone side, had used and ought to be whole, but then were cut
through in diverse places, upon the land of the Prior of Spalding, and others,
by reason of which cuts the water of Westone did overflow the lands of
Spalding, to the common damage of the said Town.

In the Same year had Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso.
the said Roger, Nich, de Leeke, John de la Gotere of Boston, and Roger de
Kymberle, for those on the Sea coasts and parts adjacent, within the Wapentake
of Skirbek.

Diverse other Commissions also were issued out, in the like kind, in King Edw.
the third's time, viz. in Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 3. m. 15. in dorso.
1 E. 3. to Humfrey de Litlebury, William de Dunton, and William de Farford,
for the banks in sundry parts of this Province.

In 3 E. 3. to Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. in do^so.
Richard de Castreton, William de Fairford, and John de la Gotere, for those
betwixt the Cross at Wolmerstye and Tyd bridge. In 4 E. 3. to Pat. 40 E. 3. p.
1. m. 40. in dorso.
the said John de la Gutere, William de Ros of Hamlake, John de Multon Parson
of Skirbek, and Will. de Farford, for those betwixt Wrangel haven and Boston:
and in 5 E. 3. to Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 1. m 36. in dorso.
Robert de Malbethorpe, Geffrey de Edenham, Will. de la Lound, and William de
Poynton, for those upon the Sea coast betwixt Kesteven and Holand.

In 7 E. 3. the King directing his Precept Claus. 7 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24.
unto Geffrey le Scrope and his fellow Justices of the Pleas before himself to
be holden; signified unto them, that whereas by an Inquisition, then lately
taken before Robert de Malberthorpe and his associates, Commissioners for the
view of the Banks, Ditches, Gutters, Sewers, Bridges, Causeys, and Floud-gates
in the parts of Kestevene and Holand; it was found, that the Prior of the
Chapel of S. Saviors ought to repair and maintain the Causey called Holand
brigg, and thirty Bridges upon the same, according to certain boundaries and
limits: and that, they the said Justices, at the suit of him the said Prior,
affirming, that he ought not to be charged with the said repairs, the said King
caused the Record and Process of the said Inquisition to be brought before him.
And, that afterward, by the Petition of the said Prior, exhibited to him the
said King and his Council, in the Parliament held at York; setting forth, that
upon their giving Judgment afterward in that business, there happening a
manifest error therein, to the no little damage of the said Prior; he the said
King caused the Record and Process thereof to be brought before him: and that
upon perusing the same, it clearly appeared; that one Godwine, a rich Citizen
of Lincoln, founder of that house of S. Saviors, gave the site of that
Monastery, and certain other lands, to the Canons of Sempryngham, there
residing; to the intent, that the profits thereof, should be expended to the
glory of S. Savior, and the brethren there serving God: and the surplusage
employed in the repair of the before-specified bridge. And that upon their
giving judgment therein, as aforesaid, there was an error; because by the
Charter of Foundation, beforementioned, the maintenance of the said Prior and
his brethren was first provided for; and the surplusage only, assigned for the
repair of the said Causey: but by that their judgment, they had put the
maintenance of the said Prior and his brethren in the last place, which ought
to have been in the first. The King therefore, for the rectifying thereof,
commanded the said Geffrey le Scrope, and his fellow Justices, to look upon the
Record before expressed, and cause it to be amended; and to inform him, both of
the value of the lands so given to that Monastery, by the said Founder; and of
some way, whereby the repair of that Causey might be ascertained: and lastly,
to supersede the distraining of the said Prior, for that respect, whilst the
business was thus undetermined.

In 11 E. 3. Sir Richard de Roos, Knight, Will. de la Launde, Will. de Poynton,
Laurence de Leeke, Thoma Levelaunce, and Will. de Thorpe, were constituted Pat.
11 E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. in dorso.
Commissioners, for the view and repair of those Banks and Sewers, betwixt the
Cross of Wolmersty, and the bridge at Tid. And in 13 E. 3. Roger de Cobledyk,
Roger the Parson of Framton, Lambert de Hiptoft, and John de Polincroft, for
Pat. 13 E. 3. p. 2. m. 27. in do^so.
those in the Wapentake of Kirketon.

M^morandum Ex Re^i^^. de Peterborough, ^^per pene^ Ro^. Wingfeld^ E^; au^. f.
157. a.
, that in the year of our Lord MCCCxlij. 16 E. 3. the Abbot of Swin^sheved, and
Sir Nicholas de Ry Knight, did implead the Abbot of Peterborough for CCCxl.
acres of marsh, with the appurt^nances, in Gosberchirche; viz. the Abbot of
Swinesheved for CC. and Sir Nicholas for Cxl. by two Writs. And the first day
of the Assizes at Lincoln, was on Wednesday b^ing the morrow after the Feast
of S. Peter ad vincula: at which time there cam^ thither Gilbert de Stanford,
then Celerer to the Covent, John de Achirche Bailiff of the said Abbots
Mannours; together with Sir John de Wilughby Lord of Eresby, Sir John de
Kirketon, and Sir Saier de Rocheford Knights, John de Multon Parson of Skirbek,
as also diverse others of the said Abbots Counsel. And because the defense of
this suit seemed difficult and costly to the Abbot, in regard that his
adv^rsaries had privately and subtly made the whole Country against him,
especially the Wapentake of Kirketon, he submitted to an amicable Treaty of
peace, on the day preceding the Assise, the place of their meeting being in the
Chapter House of Lincoln. At which Treaty, in the presence of Sir Nicholas de
Cantilupe (who was the principal Mediator betwixt them, as a friend to both
sides) and other Knights and friends above-specified, the said Abbot of
Swynesheved, and Nicholas de Ry, did set forth their claim in that Marsh;
affirming that it did belong to them of right by the Custom of the Country;
because that it was increased and grown to their own ancient Marshes by
addition of sand, which the Sea had by it is flowings cast up; insomuch as by
that means, coming to be firm land, they said, that they ought to enjoy it, as
far as Saltenee: and in regard that the said Abbot of Peterborough had
possessed himself thereof, contrary to right, and against the said Custom,
they had brought the Assise of Novell disseisin, in form aforesaid.

Whereunto the Counsel for the Abbot of Peterborough answered; that the Custom
of this province of Holand, so stated by the Plantiffs, ought thus to be
understood and qualified, viz. that when by such addition of any silt or sand,
there should happen an increase of land, and by the Seas leaving thereof,
become firm ground, it ought to belong unto him, to whose firm and solid ground
it first joined it self, without any respect, whether it grew directly to it,
or at one side. And they farther said, that the before-specified Marsh did
originally join it self to the ancient Marsh of the said Abbot of Peterborough,
whereof that Monastery had been seized time beyond memory, as it appears by
Domesday book, where it is recorded, that the Abbot of Peterborough had xvi
Salt pans in Donington. Moreover, in the Charter of King Richard the first,
there were confirmed to the said Abbot three Ca^ucates of land with the Salt
pans and Pastures, and all their appurtenances, in Holand. So that the said
soil increasing by little and little, ought not to belong unto the Abbot of
Swinesheved, and Sir Nicholas, according to the Custom of the Country;
because that a certain part of Salten Ee, which was not then dry land, did lie
betwixt the old Marsh belonging to the said Abbot of Swinesheved and Sir
Nicholas, and the Marsh whereof they pretended so to be disseised. Which part
of Salten Ee could not at all be drayned; because that the fresh waters had
used to run through that place from the parts of Kesteven to the Sea, until
Geffrey Abbot of Peterborough (Predecessor to the then Abbot) did, for the
better drayning of the Province of Holand, by his deed indented, grant unto the
said Country, a certain Sewer, directly running to the Sea, through his own
land: by which means, though the ancient Sewer, in another place, became less
than it had wont to be, by reason of the non-usage thereof, from the time that
the said new Sewer was granted; nevertheless it remained at that time
sufficiently open, and the Sea did flow and eb by it: and therefore it served
sufficiently for a division; because that anciently by the current of the fresh
water as aforesaid, and the checking thereof by the Sea, which continued till
that day, it could neither be drayned or stopped: And that, beyond that boundary,
the said Abbot of Swynesheved and Sir Nicholas, could not by the Custom of the
Country, for the reason aforesaid, claim or challenge any thing.

But at length, after diverse arguments, to and fro, therein used; it was
concluded, that xij trusty men, as well Knights as others, should be made choice
of; six on one side, and six on the other, to view the place in question, at
Michaelmasse then next following, and make a final determination therein.
Whereupon the trial at that Assizes was stopped: and at the day appointed, the
said Abbot of Peterborough came himself, in person, to Gosbercherche, together
with Sir John de Wylughby, and other of his friends and Counsel: And so
likewise did the Abbot of Swynesheved, but Sir Nicholas de Ry sent his
Attorney. Where the xij persons, so chosen, did take a view of the ground; but
not agreeing, they departed without making any conclusion therein.

In order therefore to a legal trial of the business in dispute, the Justices
of Assize appointed to sit again at Lincoln, upon Saturday being the Feast of
S. Thomas the Apostle. At which time the before-specified Gilbert de Stanford
and John de Achirche, together with Sir John de Wylughby and others, on the
behalf of the said Abbot of Peterborough, came thither: But the adverse party,
having in the mean time obtained a new Assize, being called upon the first
Writs, did not prosecute; so that they were amerc'd; the reason why they durst
not then prosecute, being, because they could not have a full Jury, out of the
Wapentake of Kirketon, of those whom they had labored: For Sir William Franc,
the then Shireeve of this County, had, at the special instance of Sir John
Wylughby, and for xx l. which he had given him, returned xviij of the most
trusty men, and of the best account, within the three Wapentakes of this
Province; viz. Ellow, Skyrbek, and Kirketon; who were essoyned upon the second
Writs. And upon the third Writ, the principal persons of the said three
VVapentakes were returned, by John de Hundon, then Shireeve, for ten Marks,
which he had given him: Nevertheless some of the said Abbot of Peterborough's
Counsel, excepted against those second Writs, because they were obtained,
whilst the first depended, and the land in question put in view; and therefore
they desired, that those their exceptions might be recorded; protesting, that
they would more fully urge that exception, upon the second day of the said
Assizes, they not being able to do it on that day; because their adversaries
had a day by Essoin: and they desired that the panell upon the first Writ
might be reserved, whereby it might appear, whether the lands which were then
enjoyed by those Writs, were put in view by the former Writ: others moving
the contrary, viz. that the said panell might be made void, and no prosecution
thereupon.

Besides, the form of those Writs was excepted against by reason of the
privilege which the said Abbot of Peterborough had by the Charters belonging to
that Monastery; because, that the said Tenements put in view, were parcel of
their Manor of Gosbercherche; and that chiefly by the words of King Henry's
Charter, Quicquid Vicecomes etc.

But it then happened, that through the mediation of Sir Adam de Wells, there
was another day of reference appointed, to be at Lincoln aforesaid, upon
Thursday next after the Feast of the Epiphany, then next following. At which
time the said Abbot of Peterborough's Officers, together with Sir John de
Wylughby, and the rest beforementioned, came: howbeit, after many disputes,
they went away without making any accord: so that then there was a third day
appointed for the Assize; viz. the Thursday next after the Feast of S. Gregory,
at Lincoln aforesaid: But in the interim it so falling out, that the Abbot of
Swynesheved, having for the repairing of all his Mill-pool at Casterton, dug
farther upon the Abbot of Peterborough's ground, at Ingethorpe, than he had
power to do by that liberty, which had been anciently granted to him by
composition; the said Abbot of Peterborough brought an Assize of Novell
disseisin against him, in the County of Roteland. At the day of which Asizes
came the said Abbot of Swinesheved, with five of his Monks, and others of his
Counsel; where, through the mediation of Mr. Alexander de Ounesby, Rector of
the Church at Castreton, all differences betwixt the parties beforementioned,
were concluded; the Abbot and Covent of Swinesheved being to release all their
interest in the said Marsh; and the Abbot and Covent of Peterborough to give
license to the said Abbot and Covent of Swynesheved to repair their pool at
Castreton, as often as occasion should require; and also xl Marks in money, by
way of agreement, for avoiding of any farther trouble and chardge for the
future. And the said Abbot and Covent of Swynesheved did thereupon remit all
their claim, whereunto they had any pretrence, in the said Marsh, for ever. All
which was perfected by deeds indented betwixt them.

And on the morrow before the Assizes (so appointed as abovesaid) came the said
Gilbert and John, on the behalf of the Abbot of Peterborough: where, upon
treaty betwixt them, and the said Sir Nich. de Rye, six persons were chosen to
arbitrate the business, viz. on the part of the same Sir Nich. Sir Rob. de
Colevill, Lord of Bytham; and Sir Philip le Despenser, Kts. and John Cleymunt:
And on the behalf of the Abbot, Sir John de Wilughby, and Sir John de Kyrketon
Knights, and Henry Grene; who awarded, that the said Abbot should give to Sir
Nicholas xl l. and he thereupon, to remise for himself and his heirs, all his
right and claim in that Marsh.

And as to the future increase of ground, which might happen to either party;
that it should be enjoyed by him to whose land it did lie most contiguous

Whereupon a day was assigned for writings to be made betwixt them, for
ratifying of this award, viz. the Monday after Palm Sunday: At which time,
meeting at Gosbercherche; where discerning, that the said VVritings did
express the said Marsh to be the right of the abovementioned Abbey; the said
Sir Nicholas, fearing that in case he did seal them, he might be indicted of
conspiracy for pleading both falsely and unjustly, the business was respited
till the next Parliament, which was in the xv of Easter in the xvijth year of
the said King Edward the third's reign: to which Parliament the parties
abovesaid came; and after diverse arguments in the presence of Sir Nicholas de
Cantilupe, Sir John de Wilughby, and others, the said Sir Nicholas de Ry, did
release all his right, as abovesaid: Which release bears date at
Peterborough upon the xvijth of May, in the year abovesaid.

In the same year Thomas de Lucy, Sayer de Rochford, Thomas de Sibthorpe, John,
parson of the Church of Benington, and Laurence de Leeke were appointed Pat. 17
E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
to view the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, within the VVapentake of Skyrbek, and
to take order for their repair.

But notwithstanding the before-specified agreement made by the said Abbot of
Peterborough, with the Prior of Spalding, and Sir Nicholas de Rye, he was not
yet at quiet for that land, touching which there had been so much dispute
betwixt them: For about six years after, there was a presentment Pla^. coram
Rege (...) Much. 23 E. 3. Rot. 26. Linc.
exhibited into the Kings Bench by diverse VVapentakes in this County, against
the said Abbot of Peterborough, for purchasing CCC acres of waste ground, in
Gosbercherche, without License from the King. Whereunto the Abbot pleaded,
that this Land was not purchased by him, but gained from the Sea; it being the
Custom of the Country, and so had been time out of mind,
that all and singular Lords, possessing any Mannours or Lands upon the Sea
coast, had usually silt and sand more or less cast up to their land by the
tides: and that this land so supposed to be purchased, was acquired in that
sort. All which being proved by the said Abbot, the Jurors gave up their
verdict (...) To. 22. (...). 36 E. 3. (...). 34.
accordingly. Nevertheless, the said Abbot could not yet be quiet, as appears
by several other (...) To. 22. (...). 36 E. 3. (...). 34.
pleadings therein, afterward; so that final sentence was not given therein
till Pas^. (...). 29.23.
Easter Term in 41 E. 3.

In 23 E. 3. William de Thorpe, Philip le Despenser, Nich. de Rye, Saier de
Rochford, and others, were constituted Pat. 23 E. 3. p. 1. m. 31. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks and Sewers in this
Province. And in the same year there were several Plac. coram Rege term. Pi^ch.
23 E. 3 Rot. 48. Linc.
presentiments exhibited against the Abbot of Crouland, by the Jurors of diverse
VVapentakes, for stopping of certain Sewers, and common highways within the
Fens. So likewise against the Prior of S. Saviors for the not repairing of
Brigedyke.

In 25 E. 3. Saier de R^cheford, Laurence de Leeke, John Moss, Roger de Meres,
and Will. Baiard were appointed Pat. 25 E. 3. p. 3. m. 8. in dorso.
to view the Sea-banks and Ditches of Skirbek and Kirketon.

Several other Commissions to the like purpose, were issued our shortly
afterward; viz. in 26 E. 3. to Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 1. m. 20. ^ dorso.
Sir Thomas de Lucy Knight, John de Litleburs, Roger de Meres, and John Rybrede
of Spald^ng, for the view and repair of all those in the VVapentake of Ellowe,
which were then in great decay. So also to Ibid.
Saier de Rocheford, Laurence de Lecke, John Moss, and John Claymond, for
those in the VVapentake of Skirbek. The like in 27 E. 3. to Pat. 27 E. 3. p. 2.
m. 20. in dors^.
Will. de Huntingfeld, and the rest last mentioned.

In 28 E. 3. to Pat. 28 E. 3. p. 2. m. 4. in dorso.
John Cleymond, Roger de Meres, Robert de Spaigne, and William de Spaigne, for
those on the South side of Wythum, from the Town of Skirbe^, to a place called
the Shuft.

In 30 E. 3. to Pat. 30 E 3. p. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
Henry Grene, Saier de Rocheford, Roger del M^re, Will. de Surflete, and John
de Nessefeld, for those betwixt the Towns of S. Saviors and Donyngton.

In 33 E. 3. to Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
Will. de Huntingfeld, Will. de Thorpe, Will. de Notton, and others, for those
in the VVapentake of Kirketon. And in 34 E. 3. Pat. 34 E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. in
dorso.
to Sir Nicholas de Rye Knight, John Claymond, Roger de Meres, and others, for
those within the Towns of Flete and Holbeche.

By a pleading Plac. coram Rege te^m. Mich. 35 E 3. Rot. 17 Linc.
in 35 E. 3. touching an Inquisition, taken about two years before, in the
presence of Sir Will. de Huntingfeld, and others, Justices of Sewers for the
Wapentake of Kirketon, at the prosecution of the Inhabitants of Gosberkirke and
Surflete, in which Inquisition certain errors were said to be; it appears,
that the Jurors then sound, that there was a Gutter, called Wistard got in
Sotterton, then in decay, which ought to be repaired by the said Town of
Sotterton. Also, that Wigtoft got ought to be repaired by the Towns of Wygtoft
and Swyneshev^d. That the Town of Swinesheved ought to repair Swineshed Ee,
from the North side of Swinesheved, unto Byker Ee.

That the Towns of Biker, Donington, Quadring, and Gosberkirk ought to repair
Biker Ee, from the beginning of Biker to the Sea, and to make it xxiiij foot in
breadth, and six foot in depth; viz. the Town of Biker, from the beginning of
Biker to Bonstake; and from thence the Town of Donington, to Quadriug: and from
thence Quadring and the Commoners thereof to Gosb^rkirke; and Gosberkirke to
the Sea: And that it ought to run all the year.

They also then presented, that the Gutter of Quadring, called Angot, was
broken; and that it was necessary that it should be removed nearer to the Sea
by an hundred p^rches; as also that the Ditches wherein the Salt water came,
should be stopped; and that the sides thereof, on each part; should be raised
^our foot in height; which repairs to be always done by those whose lands were
drayned thereby.

And moreover, that the Got, called Sangote, in Gosberkirke, was ruinous; and
that it ought to be repaired by the Tenants of seven Carucates of land in
Surflete, and of five Carucates in Gosberkirke, according to equal proportions.
And that the Newgote of Surflete ought to be repaired and made two foot in
depth, by the said Town of Surflete unto Totisbrige.

And that the Town of Gosberkirke ought to maintain the Gutter, called the
Thurgote, because that at that time, the said Town and Surflete were almost
drowned by an arm of the Sea; which grew by reason of the said Gutter, and
Salten Ee. In which Inquisition it appears how the said Gutter might be
removed to the best advantage, for the safeguard of those places; and through
whose lands it ought to run, and of the value thereof. And that it ought to be
repaired by the Town of Gosberkirke, betwixt Alvelode and Surflete. As also how
Cross got ought to be repaired and removed.

And the said Jurors then presented, that the Sea-banks and others, belonging
to Surflete, Gosberkirke, and Quadring, were too weak and low; and that they
knew not who ought to repair them. Whereupon the Shireeve had command to summon
those Towns to appear: Who accordingly making their appearance, said; that they
could not deny but that they ought of right to repair them: and therefore they
were amerc'd and distrained thereto. And the Town of Sotterton, with all the
rest, were likewise amerc'd, because they came in by great distress.

In the same 35 year of King Edward 3. Roger la War, Will. de Thorpe, Robert
de Thorpe, and others, were assigned. Pat. 35 E. 3. p. 2. m. 25. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks and Ditches throughout this whole Province of
Holand. In 37 E. 3. Will. de Huntingfeld, Roger de Cobeldyk, Matthew de Leeke,
and others, had Pat. 37 E. 3. p. 1. m. 46. in dorso.
the like assignation for those in the VVapentake of Skirbok: So also had the
said William, with Godefrey Fuljaumbe, and others, for those in the VVapentake
of Kirketon. And in Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 1. m. 42. in dorso.
39 E. 3. Godefrey Fuljaumbe, Simon Symeon, Roger de Meres, and others, for
those from Waynflete to Tydgote.

Upon a pleading Plac. coram Rege term. Mich. 39 E. 3. Rot. 25. Linc.
in the same year, the Town of Pinchebek was acquitted, by the verdict of a
Jury, from the repair of the Marsh-bank, called Ee dyke, extending from
Pinchebec, by Escote, to Donneshirne: but the same Jury then found, that the
said Town of Pinchebek ought to repair that Bank, from Donneshirne to
Goderamscote: And that the Abbot of Brunne and Town of Brunne ought to repair
it from Goderamscote to Ectcote; and that the said part thereof was then
ruinous.

In 41 E. 3. was that memorable verdict Plac. coram Rege term. Pasch. 41 E. 3
Rot. 28. Linc.
, touching the Custom of the Country, that the Lords of Mannours, adjoining to
the Sea, should enjoy the land, which is raised by silt and sand, which the
Tides do cast up. Which verdict was in the behalf of the Abbot of
Peterborough, in respect of the Lordship of Gosberkirke (whereof I have already
taken notice)

In 43 E. 3. John Duke of Lancaster, Godefrey Fuljaumbe, Thomas de Mapelton,
Parson of the Church of Frampton, and others, had Commission Pat. 43 E. 3. p.
2. m. 18. in dors^.
to view and repair the Banks, Ditches, etc. throughout this whole Province of
Holand; and to proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.
The like Commission Pat. 45 E. 3. p. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
(and to proceed accordingly) had Raphe Lord Basset of Drayton, Roger de
Kirketon, Richard de Waterton, Rich. Poutrell, and others, for all those
betwixt Kelfeld and Bykersdyke. So also in Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
48 E. 3. had Sir William de Huntingfeld, Sir John de Rocheford, with Sir John
Crecy Knights, and others, for all those throughout the whole Province.

Upon a pleading Plac. coram Rege te^m. Mich. 49 E. 3. Rot. 8. Linc.
in 49 E. 3. the Towns of Hokyngton and Gerwick could not gainsay, but that
they ought to repair and cleanse the one half of Gerwike he, on the North side,
unto the Cowstalls of the Abbot of Swinesheved, called Herewik; therefore
command was given to the Shireeve to distrain them. At the same time it was
likewise found, Ibid. Rot. 43. Linc.
that the Towns of Wiberton, Frampton, and Kirkton, and the West of Boston
ought to repair and maintain the Ed^kes from the Schust to Deynboth. As also,
that Ib. Rot. 46.
the Towns of Swynesheved, and Wyktofte ought to scour the Sewer called
Swineshed he from Candelby hill to Biker he. And Ib. Rot. 46.
that the Town of Tofte ought not to repair the Sewer, called Hill dyke; but
that John Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl of Lincoln ought to cleanse it; in
consideration whereof they receive of every man that keeps fire in his house,
within the VVapentake of Skirbek, ii d. upon the Feast day of S. Martin.

And it was then also found Ib. Rot. 48. Linc.
, that the Towns of Boston and Sbirbek ought to cleanse a certain Sewer, from
Hill dyke to Wythom stream; in consideration whereof they had common in the
marsh of Bolingbroke. And that Ib. Rot. 24. L^^c.
the Town of Flete could not deny, but they ought to repair the Road-way in
Flete, called Spittle lake; and also the bank, called South he, in Flete,
which was then too low.

The next year following, upon the like pleading Plac. coram Rege term. Hill.
50. E. 3. Rot. 21. Li^c.
, the Inhabitants of Surflete acknowledged, that they ought to repair a bridge
in Surflete, near the house of Thomas Dod; and cleanse the River of Burn every
fourth year, from Newesende in Pinchebec marsh, which ought to be repaired by
the Town of Pynchebec, unto Surflet; and from Surflet to the Sea, according to
a Decree made by the Justices of Sewers for those parts.

And the same year it was found Plac. coram Rege Term. Mich. 50 E. 3. Rot. 9.
Linc.
by the Jurors (upon a pleading also) that the Inhabitants of the eight
Hundreds of Holand, ought to cleanse and repair the Ditch called the Old Ee,
betwixt the Marsh of Holand and the Marsh of Hekington, on the West side of
Babberboth, and Hoggeboth of West crofte. And moreover, that they ought to
repair and cleanse the Ditch, from Babberboth in Hekington, unto the Distrithe
in Swynesheved marsh, on each side. And from the Ditch, which is supposed by
the presentment to be from Hoggesbothe of Westcrofte, to the water of Wythome,
they said, that the Inhabitants of those eight Hundreds ought not to repair and
cleanse the same; because there was no such Ditch there, as the same pres^ntment
mentioned,

In 51 E. 3. John King of Castile and Leon, etc. Roger de Kirketon, Thomas de
Hungerford, and others, were constituted Pat. 51 E. 3. p. 1. m. 41. in dorso.
Commissiones for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers,
throughout this whole Province of Holand.

After this I have not seen any more Commissions of this kind, for this
Province, till 6 H. 5. that Thomas Lord de la War, Sir Robert Hagbeche
Knight, Nich. Dixon Clerk, John Belle of Boston, with some others, were
appointed Pat. 6 H. 5. p. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
to view them, and take order for their repair: with direction to proceed
therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

The like Commission Pat. 2. H. 6. p. 1. m. 32. in dorso.
in 2 H. 6. had the said Thomas Lord de la Ware, Robert Lord Wylughby, Sir
Raphe Cromwell, and Sir Robert Roos Knights, William Copuldyk, John Henege, and
others, with the same directions;
as also power to take so many diggers and other laborers, upon competent
wages^ to assist therein, as they should think r^quisite, in regard of the
great necessity for expedition in the said work. So also in 6 H. 6. had Pat. 6.
H. 6. p. 1. m. 32. in dorso.
the Bishop of Lincoln, Sir Thomas Roos, Sir Robert Wylughby, Sir Raphe
Cromwell, Sir Reginald West, Sir Raphe Rochford, and Sir Robert Roos Knights,
Nich. Dixon Clerk, and others; with authority to make Statutes and Ordinances,
proper for the safeguard of the Seacoasts, and Marshes, according to the Laws
and Customs of Romeney marsh: And to determine all things therein according to
the Custom of the said Romeney marsh: As also to take such and so many
Laborers, upon great competent wages, in respect of the necessity of
expedition in the work, as they should think fit to employ therein.

In 10 H. 6. John Hals, Sir Henry Rocheford Knight Walt. Tailboys Esquire,
Richard Pynchebek, Richard Benyngton, and others, were constituted Pat. 10 H.
6. p. 1. m. 11. in do^s^.
Commissioners to view all the banks and Sewers of Crouland, Spalding, Weston,
and Multon, and take order for their repair; with the like power to make Laws
and Ordinances as abovesaid. And in 30 H. 6. Richard de Benyngton, Thomas Kyme,
George Hetone, and others, had the like Pat. 30 H 6. p. 1. m. 22. in d^^so.
Commission for those banks and Sewers, within the precints of the Lordship of
Framptone, viz. from Forsdyke unto the Rode near Boston.

In 34 H. 6. there was a Session Ex bund. de B^ev. and Reco^ci^, W^llias etc.
^angenbus ^. 22.
of Sewers held at Spaldyng, upon the Wednesday before Palme-Sunday, before
Richard Benyngton and his fellow Justices; where the Jurors presented, that the
Prior of Spaldyng ought and had used to repair and maintain a certain common
Sewer, called the Priors Ee in Sutton, within this province; from a certain
place called Tydde graynes; in Tydde S. Mary's, to Outbroken in Sutton
aforesaid, and so going into Priors fall; together with certain bridges upon
the same Sewer; viz. one overthwart the Priors Lathes; another called Cross
gate brigge, and another called Randolf brigge, which were then in decay, to
the great damage of the said Town of Sutton, and the whole Country: And that
the said Sewer ought and had used to be repaired, with the bridges
before-specified, by the pedecessors of the then Prior, and by the same Prior,
by reason of his lands in Sutton aforesaid. Whereupon the Shireeve having
command to summon the said Prior to an^wer this chardge; he appeared by Thomas
Spenser his Attorney, and denied that he ought to perform those repairs;
alleging, that the said Prior and his Predecessors had been seized, time out of
mind, of the Manor of Gannok in Sutton aforesaid, as in right of their
Monastery of Spaldyng, whereof the said Sewer, so supposed to be a common
Sewer, was parcel. And farther said, that the same Sewer had been made from
the time aforesaid, by the Predecessors of the then Prior, in their own proper
soil, and within the precinct of that Manor, for drayning and avoiding away
of the waters within the same, for their own and their Tenants advantage; and
that no man's Land else ought to be drayned thereby. And farther affirmed, that
it was no common Sewer; as also that the said Prior and his Predecessors,
neither ought nor had used to repair the before-specified Bridges, as in the
said presentment was set forth.

Whereupon a Jury being summoned, and sworn, they said upon their Oaths; that
the said Sewer was a private Sewer, made by the Predecessors of the then Abbot,
for the drayning of the waters out of the said Manor of Gannock, for their
own and their Tenants sole benefit; and that it was never any common Sewer.

In 1 E. 4. Richard de Welby, Richard Pynchebec, John Pynchebek, Leonard
Thorneburgh, and Richard Fendyk were constituted Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 1. m. 11. in
dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, from
Skegnes and Dodyngtone-Pygot, to Tydde got; and to proceed therein according
to the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and of Romeney marsh.

Howbeit, from this time, until the xiijth year of the late Queen Elizabeth's
reign, I have not seen any thing else considerable, in reference to the Banks
and Sewers of this province: A. 1571.
but then ( viz. on the xxith of September) Sir Henry Clinton Knight, Anthony
Thorold, Robert Carre, Leonard Irby, John Bushey Esquires, and others, at that
time Commissioners sitting at Boston, and by Inquisition taken before them upon
Oath, finding, that the Sewer called called Merlode, could not without an
excessive chardge, convey away the water falling thereinto; nor have any fit
place at the out-fall thereof, whereon to erect a sufficient Got; decreed, E^
Collect. prae^ob. Mount^^^ Comi^is^ce Lindsey.
that it should be scoured and made xvi foot wide, and six foot deep, from the
in-fall out of the Fen, unto a certain place called Elwood Elmes, by the
Townships of Quadring and Donington, next adjoining, before Martinmasse in An.
1572. And that from Elwood Elmes, it should be turned, and made of the like
breadth and depth, at all times thenceforth, by the Inhabitants of of the said
Town of Quadring, to Gosbertown Ee (through diverse grounds in the said Decree
mentioned) And at the falling thereof into the said Ee, that there should be a
substantial stone bridge made and erected, for the public Road way there, at
the chardges of Quadryng and Donyngton aforesaid: and likewise a D^m (at their
like chardges) at Party bridge.

And moreover, that the said Inhabitants of Quadring and Donington should for
ever hereafter enjoy for the Commodity of their said watercourse of Merlode,
the same drain called Gosberkirk Ee, under the Sea dyke, from the in-fall of
Merlode thereinto; and from the said Dam to be made toward the Sea, unto the
Got, which thenceforth should be appointed to be made for them and their said
Drayn of Merlode, by all the limits thereof, after also to be expressed, unto
the out-fall of that their Drayn into the Sea, at their private Drayn.

In consideration whereof, they decreed, that the said Townships of Quadring
and Donington, should make a another sufficient Drayn in Gosberkirke Ee
aforesaid, to stop and turn the Watercourse of Rysegate, out of and from the
old course thereof, toward the Sea-dyke aforesaid, at a place in Gosberkirk,
near unto Challan bridge; where they decreed, that a bridge should be made and
set up, at the chardge of the said Townships of Quadring and Donington: And
that then the said Townships should scour a new Drayn from thence, of the like
breadth and depth, by the limits after to be specified, which shall be called
the New Ee of Sur^let and Gosberkirk: the accomplishing of these directions
being most beneficial for the receipt and speedy conveyance of the waters both
of Kesteven and Holand, from the said old course in Rysegate Ee, by the same
New Ee, in form before recited.

And by a Decree Ibid.
of Sewers, made at Helpringham, 22 June, xvi Eliz. it appearing, that the New
got, set in the Sea-dyke of Surflet, at the chardge of the Inhabitants of
Donyngton and Quadring (by virtue of the Decree made at Boston, 21 Sept. 13
Eliz. abovementioned) did of a sudden after three weeks settling thereof, sink
into a Quick-sand: It was ordered, that the same should be made again more
substantially, and set upon a better and firmer Foundation.

In which year also Richard Bertye, Esquire, Rob. Wingfeld the elder, Edmund
Hall, William Fitz William Esquire, and others, being Commissioners, and
sitting at Burn the fifth of July, ordained Ibid.
;

That the Sewer called Repingale South dyke, should be dyked from Berhom-pooles
to Irelode, and thence to the Beche, in breadth xij foot at the least, and depth
six, by the Township of Pinchebeck, before Michaelmasse following, upon pain of
every rode not done 3 s. 4 d.

Likewise that Irelode drain should be sufficiently dyked and banked, by the
Townships of Dowsbye and Repingale, for their limits; and from thence to the
Beche by such Townships, as by the Laws made at Sempringham, mense Sept. 8
Eliz. was appointed; upon the like penalty.

Moreover, that upon the Sewer called Newdike, two new bridges should be
erected at Rusgate Ee mouth, by the inhabitants of Gosberkirke and Surflete, in
their limits: one in Quadring up-fen, against the common way coming from
Westrop; and one other within the limits of Byker, in Hekendale-Wathe, over to
Hekendale Hills, of such height as Boats might well pass under; and to be done
by the Inhabitants of Quadring and Byker, before All-hallow tide then next
ensuing, upon pain of an C s. for every bridge not finished.

As also that one bridge over the said Sewer at Kyrton Fen, another at Frampton
Fen, and another at Lichfeld end, should be reformed by the Townships and
persons, who of right ought to do the same; and to be of xij in breadth, and of
height sufficient for boats to pass under, upon pain of 3 l. -- 6s. -- 8. for
every bridge unfinished at Michaelmasse following.

And that the Waredyke beginning at Colehousestile, and so extending along the
River of Burn Ee, to Goodrams coote, should be continued from the said Coote
to Done hurne, and to be distant from the River C. foo^, and in breadth xij
foot, and depth iiij. at the cost of the Inhabitants of Pinchbeck^; upon pain
of xx d. for every rode unfinished at Michaelmasse then next following.

Also that the Sewer called Newedyke in Dykesen, should be perfected from
Eedyke bridge, unto Holand Fendyke, according to the Law at Sempringham, as
aforesaid, upon pain also of iijs. iiij d. for every rode unfinished at
Michaelmasse then next following.

Likewise that the Sewer extending directly against the East to Northgraft,
should be dyked and banked sufficiently, by the Townships of Hakenby, Dunsby,
and Pinchebeck, and the manure to be cast on the North: and that from the
beginning of Pinchbeck limits to the Graft: And that the Sewer of Northgraft,
from the first fall of the waters of the Fen into the said Sewer, and thence to
the Sea, ought to be xij foot broad, and six foot deep; and to be done by the
Inhabitants of Pinchbeck, before Michaelmasse then next ensuing, upon the
penalty above-specified.

And that the Sewer called the Beche, from Wrightbold Clowe to the Sea, should
be dyked, roded, and scoured, by the Townships of Pynchbeck, Gosberkirk, and
Surflet, as had been accustomed, before Michaelmasse then next ensuing, upon
like pain.

Likewise, that the Sewer called Marisbeek, should be scoured by the
Landholders there, according to their several parts, to be done before the said
day etc.

And that the Sewer from Colehouse style to Friar bar Hurne, thence to
Burne-barre, and thence to Eedyke bridge, should be dyked etc. by the
Land-holders within the Manor of Burn, of the breadth of 8 foot, and depth 4.
from Colehouse style to Friar bar: and thence to Eedyke bridge, to be 12 foot
broad, and 4 foot deep; before the said day, etc.

Also, that the banks from Colehouse style to Goodrams coote, and thence to
Done hurne, should be made of xij foot thickness, and three foot height, where
most need required, by the Land-holders of Pinchbeck and Burn, according to
their limits, before the said day, etc.

And lastly, that the Sewer called Hawewell should be scoured to Dykebarre, by
the Fermours of the Hawes, and Tho. Gotherd; Thence to Repingale South-dyke, by
the Inhabitants of Dyke, Morton, Hakenby, and Dunsby: Thence to Berhomepoles,
by the Inhabitants of Repingale, Ringstone, and Kirkby-Underwood, before
Michaelmasse then next following.

After this, viz. in 43 and 44 Eliz. there arose a great controversy Out of
Sergeant Callice his Reading upon the Statute of Sewers.
about the erecting of two new Gotes at Skirbek and Langare, for drayning the
waters out of South Holand and the Fenns, into Boston Haven: which work, Sir
Edward Dimock Knight did, by himself and his friends, further what he could:
but it was opposed by the Country of Kesteven; and the very exception taken
thereto, was; that the Commissioners of Sewers, could not by the power of their
Commission,
make a Law for the erecting of those new Gotes, wh^re never any stood before.
Whereupon the decision of this point coming at length before the then two chief
Justices, viz. Popham and Anderson, they delivered their opinions Ibid.
, that the said new Gotes, if they were found to be good and profitable for the
safety and advantage of the Country, they might be erected by the power of the
Statute of xxiij of Henry the eighth.

Of Spalding and Pinchbeck Fens, see farther in my last Chapter under the title
of Kesteven and Holand.

CAP. XLVI.
FRom Lincolnshire, keeping on my course Eastwards, I come next into Norfolk;
on the West side of which Country, very great advantages have been made by
banking and drayning; whereof the most ancient are in that part of it, called
Marshland, next adjoining to Holand, last spoken of.

That this was originally gained from the Sea, by the Romans, I have in the
Chapter of this discourse endeavored to make manifest: which admitted, we may
well conclude, that our Ancestors the Saxons, considering the extraordinary
fertility of the soil, had a fair invitation to seat themselves therein: for
that they did so, is evident enough from that authentic Survey Domesday Lib.
in Scac.
, taken by the Norman Conqueror; which shows, that the Towns now in being
there, were all extant in the days of King Edward the Confessor. Nor is it
improbable, but that they were so, likewise, for diverse preceding ages;
forasmuch as it appears, that the Church of Ely was possessed Monast. Anglic. p.
94. c. 1.
of Walpole long before; a place of no small note, by reason it gave birth to
S. Goderic the Hermit, of whom M. Paris. makes ample In An. 1170.
mention.

T^i^ Country, on the East is bounded by the stream of Ouse; on the West, with
Wisbeche River; on the North with the Sea-bank; and on the South with the new
Po-dike (as the Map shows) and contains no less than t^irty thousand
Acres; whereof part is a ^amous plain, called the Smeeth; which being common to
all the Towns therein, maintains at least thirty thousand sheep; and yet is
not of a larger ext^nt, in the widest part of it, than two English miles. Of
this plain I may not om^^ a tradition, which the common people thereab^uts
have; viz. that in old time, the Inhabitants of the neighboring Villages had a
fierce contest with one Hickifric (the then owner of it) touching the bounds
thereof; which grew so hot, that at length it came to blows; and that
Hickifric, being a person of extraordinary stature and courage, took an
Axeltree from a Cart, instead of a Sword; and the whe^l for his Buckler: and,
being so armed, most ^toutly repelled those bold invaders: for farther
testimony of which notable exploit, they to this day show a large Gravestone,
near the East end of the Chancel, in Tilney Churchyard, whereupon the form of
a Cross is so cut, as that the upper part thereof, by reason of the flourishes
(wherewith the Carver has adorned it) shows to be somewhat circular, which
they will therefore need have ^o be the wheel, and the s^aft the Ax^^r^e.

It is observed, that within the compass of this Province, there is neither
Mole, nor Rat: and that such has been the care of the Inhabitants, for
pervention of mischief, which might happen by any breach of the public
Sea-bank; that they have environed every Town with a particular bank, called
the Indike, or Ward-dik^^ which, upon any such inundation, does secure it from
danger. As for the several Sewers and Bridges, which it has, I shall reserve
them to be spoke of, in the l^st place; purposing now to go on, in taking
notice of such improvements as have been made within the old Precinct thereof;
as also how it has been preserved from the violence of the tides on the one
part, and fresh waters on the other; with the farther enlargement of it is
particular bounds.

By an ancient Pleading Plac. coram Rege Term. Much. 15 E. 1. Rot........
, it appears; that before the year MCLxxxi. (27 H. 2.) there was neither any
habitation, nor ground that yielded profit, within that part of Wigenhale, from
Busterdesdole, unto the South side of the same Town, except the Monastery of
Crabhous, with some lands belonging thereto; all being then waste, and in the
nature of a Fen: But afterward the Inhabitants of that place, and of diverse
other, came; and, with drayning and banking, won as much thereof, by their
industry, as they could. And that they might the more securely enjoy the same,
were conten^ to be Tenants for it, unto such great men of whom they held their
other lands: and upon this occasion, by a common consent amongst them The old
Podike raised.
was the old Podike first raised, about the year MCCxxiij. (7 H. 3.)

Nor was a great part of this Country any other than a Marsh about that time:
for by that Precept Claus. 2. H. 3. m. 14.
to the Shireeve of Norfolk, for giving unto Hubert de Burgo, then Justice of
England, the like possession thereof, as he had in King John's time (when he
went into Poictou for the servi^e of that King) it was so called; and bounded
with the Towns of Wigenhale, Well, Hagebeche, Tilney, and Tirington (which I
take to be little less than half Marshland:) all which was soon after restored
Ib. in dorso m. 10.
to the Church of Ely, as having a better interest to it, than this great man.

But notwithstanding the said Bank, called Podike, so made as has been said;
it seems, that the Marshland men had no clear title to the whole soil whereon
it was erected; Will. Bardolfe, at that time Lord oi the Manors of Stow,
Wimbotesham, and Dounham (Lordships lying on the other side of the Ouse)
chalenging some right therein: for in 35 H. 3. they came to an agreement with
him, by a Fine Ex. cod. MS. penes Guib. Godard Arm.
levied before the Justices itinerant at Norwich, in the xv of S. Martin; the
principal parties to the said Fine; being the then Bishop of Ely, the Prior of
Jews, the Abbots of Ramsey, Dereham, and S. Edmundsbu^y; Thomas de
Ingaldesthorp, and Will. de Shouldham: By which Fine, the said Will. Bardolf
quitted all his title, in the whole Marsh, called West fen (through which the
same bank extended) unto the said Bishop, Prior, Abbots, etc. and their
successors for ever: And they to him and his heirs, the before-specified old
bank ( viz. Podike) and an Cxx acres of marsh, with the appurtenances, lying in
the said West fen, within the same bank, Northwards; containing xij furlongs in
breadth.

About three years after, the Sea-banks of this Province wanting repair, the
Shireeve of Norfolk was required Claus. 32 ^. 3. in dorso m. 15.
to distrain all those persons, in the Let of Clenchwarton, and West Len, who
were Tenants of such lands, as ought to repair those Banks, in such sort as
they had wont to be repaired, for repelling the inundations of the Sea and
fresh waters; which Tenants to have afterward allowance for the same from
their Landlords.

What was then done therein I find not; but within four years ensuing, it
appears Clau^. ^^. H. 3. i^ dorso m ^5
, that the Inhabitants of this Country had exceeding great loss by the breach
both of the Sea-banks, and those which should have kept off the fresh waters;
insomuch as the King, being advertised thereof, commanded Clau^. ^^. H. 3. i^
dorso m ^5
the Shireeve of Norfolk, that he should forthwith distrain all the
Land-holders, who might have benefit thereby, to repair and maintain those
Banks and Ditches, according to the proportion of their said lands, lying
within the bounds of them. And the next year following, upon more damage
happening, by a new inundation of the Sea, through the breach of those Banks
toward Wisbeche, within the liberties of the Bishop of Ely; having required
Claus. 4^ H. 3 in ^^^so m. 12.
the said Bishop to distrain all his Tenants, within this Province of
Mershland, and elsewhere within his said liberties, who had defense and
safeguard thereby, according to the quantity of their lands, lying within the
said Banks, to repair and maintain them, as they ought and had used to do; he
sent his Precept Claus. 4^ H. 3 in ^^^so m. 12.
to the Shiree^e of Cambridgshire; thereby chardging him, that after the said
Bishop had so distrained his said Tenants, as abovesaid, he the said Shireeve
should not d^liver any Cattle so taken by way of distress, without the Kings
special command.

In 16 E. 1. Will. de Carleton and Will. de Middilton, were constituted Pa^. 16
E. 1. m. 9.
Commissioners to enquire of certain breaches in the Banks of Robert de Scales
in the Hawe and Ilsington, in this Province; and to distrain all those who
ought to repair them.

The like Commission Pat. 17 E. 1. m. 12.
had they the next year ensuing, for the view and repair of the Banks in Tilney
and Ilsington, then broken by the raging of the Sea.

So also in 18 E. 1. had Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 33. ^n dorso.
the said Will. de Carleton, and Will. de Pageham, for the banks called
Pokediche, Siwellediche, Fendiche, and Gildangordiche, then broken by floods,
in diverse places.

In 21 E. 1. the Inhabitants of this Country made a grievous complaint Pat. 21
E. 1. m. 11.
to the King, importing, that whereas the bank called Pokediche, was anciently
made, and had till that time been maintained by them, for the safeguard and
preservation of those parts, against floods of water; certain Malefactors,
having a purpose to do them mischief, had made a hole in the said bank, and did
by force and arms hinder those that would have stopped it; by reason whereof,
as well the tides from the Sea, as the fresh wat^rs, overflowed the Pastures
lying within the precincts thereof: the said King therefore, being very
sensible of this great injury, assigned Pat. 21 E. 1. m. 11.
Peter de Campania, Thomas de Hacford and Adam de Shropham, to enquire by the
Oaths of honest and lawful men of this County, who they were that did make
this breach; and to hear and determine of that trespass. And the said King
being informed, that in case the fresh waters, coming by Utwell, could have
their course to the Sea, in such sort as that they might not mix with the
waters running in Mershland;
this Country of Mershland, by that severing of them, would be much amended; he
commanded the said Commissioners, that they should forthwith go to the Town of
Utwelle, and there take order, that the said fresh waters so descending that
way, should have their due and ancient course to the Sea, as formerly, so that
this Country of Marshland, might have it is Drayn to the Sea by the same
out-fall.

The next year following, the King directing his Commission Ex R^gist. de
Ramsey penes Henr. Cromwe^l arm. f. 117. a.
to Simon de Elysworth, and Thomas de Hageford, to enquire touching the defects
in repair of the Bank called Pokediche, as also of other Banks and Sewers in
this County, the Jurats for the Hundred of Frethbrigge, by virtue of the said
Commission, did upon their Oaths present; that through the default of the Town
of Wigenhale, in making and repairing of their Ditches above the Podyke, great
losses had happened in those days to these parts of Mershland, so that the lands
of diverse men were drowned by the inundations both from the Sea and fresh
waters. And they also said, that the said Pokedyke could not be sufficiently
repaired before the Feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist, for the safeguard
thereof, and of the Country; in regard that certain men of Wigenhale had diverse
lands lying adjacent to the same B^nk, and some not; so that no earth could be
dug there withont the good will of those whose lands adjoined thereto.
Whereupon the said Commissioners decreed,
that by the oversight of John de Wykenhale, John de Reynham, Adam de Blowere,
and Alexander de Walpole (who were deputed thereto, upon their Oaths) earth
should be taken off those men's lands which lay so there, for the repair of the
said Bank; giving a valuable consideration for the same, according to the
judgment of those persons so sworn; and that the repair thereof should be
accomplished before the said Feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist, upon
penalty of an C. Marks.

At that time did the Jurors, also, for the Hundred of Clakelose, present upon
their Oaths; that there was a certain Band, betwixt the Town of Utwell, and the
Priory of Molycourt; which bank the Land-holders betwixt it and Pokedike, ought
to repair and raise higher, for the advantage of the bank of Pokedike, and
defense of the Country; viz. Thomas de Ingaldesthorpe, John fits Gilbert, and
others: wherefore the Shireeve had command to distrain them, by all their
lands, betwixt Utwell and Molycourt, till the said Bank was repaired as it
ought to be.

Afterward, upon Wednesday after the invention of the holy Cross, in the 23th
year of the same King Edw. 1. the said Justices made another Inquisition, by
Robert de Hakebeche, and others: who said upon their Oaths, that of necessity
the water of Upwell ought to be stopped, at the house of Raphe Smyth of that
town; and that the ancient course thereof ought to be scoured, and enlarged,
from the Sluses of Elm, to that stop in Upwell, to the breadth of xl foot, and
deeper by six foot than it was at that time.

And they also said, that it was necessary, that the said water of Upwell
should have it is course by the Little lade, and a place called Wadyngstowe,
until such time as the before-specified Sewer could be cleansed, repaired, and
so enlarged. And they said, that Tyd S. Giles, Neutone, Leveringtone,
Wisebeche, Elm, and Upwell, of the County of Cambridg, should at their
peculiar costs repair the one half of that Sewer; and that Robert de
Scadeworthe, Steward of Ely, did und^rtake for that moytie: And the Town of
Wygenhale, on the part of Marshland, Tilneye, Tyringtone, Walpole, Waltone,
Utwell, Waisokne, Enemethe, Clengwartone, with the Commoners in Marshland
Common to repair, at their costs, the other moytie; so that all those
Land-holders above the said stop at Upwell, toward Meremaund, should be
totally quit of any contribution thereto. And the said Steward of Ely, on the
behalf of the said Cou^ty of Cambridge, was to superintend John de Fictone and
Adam de Blowere, Assessors and Collectors for the Town of Wygenhale; Philip de
Fenne, and Stephan fitz Walter, Assessors and Collectors for the Town of
T^lneye, and the Hamlets; William de Sybille, and John de Dulingham, Assessors
and Collectors for the Towns of Tyringtone and Walpole; and Raph fitz John,
together with the said John de Dulyngham, Assessors and Collectors for the
Towns of Walsokne, Waltone, and Enemethe (all sworn and thereunto appointed)
that they should begin the said stop, and clensing of that Chanel, upon the
morrow after Ascension day, so that the same water should, by such scouring and
enlarging of the said ancient Chanel, run before the gule of August, then next
ensuing, under the penalty of an C l. And in case that passage, called
Lytlelode and Wadyngstowe should not be sufficient for the carrying away of
those waters, it was determined, that they should be enlarged, as they were
before time, by the view of the Shireeve of Norfolk, both as often, and in what
places need might require. And the Shireeve of Norfolk had command; that, as
often as he should be required to assist the persons above-specified, so
deputed to assesse and collect those moneys, he should be aiding to them, not
favoring either rich or poor therein. And it was also decreed, that Lytlelode
and UUadyngstowe should be opened until the before-specified Sewer were
cleansed, viz. the gule of August.

And the Jurers of both the said Hundreds farther said; that the chardge of
scouring the s^id Sewer might be d^frayed for six score and two pounds; whereof
the Steward of Ely, did undertake to levy the moyti^, upon the Towns in
Cambridg^^ice. And to this contribution, Ti^^. y^, with the Hamlets belonging
thereto, was taxed at xil. Tiringtone at xi l. UUaipole at xil. UUa^tone and
En^m^the, at xi l. UUalsokne at xil. UUyg^n^^l^ at C s. and Utw^il, in the
County of Norfolk, at xxs. And if those mon^ys would not suffice to perform the
same, that then the Towns of both Counties to contribute more, as need should
require.

And the said Shireeve had likewise command to distrain Thomas de
Ingaldesthorpe, Thomas de S. Omer, John fitz Gilbert, John Blakeman, Walter de
Palmere, Simon fitz Agnes, the Prior of Molycourt, and Alan le Mutere
(Land-holders in Utw^ll and Molycourt) to repair the Ba^k b^twixt UU^lle and
Molycourt, for the advantage of the said Bank of Pokedike, so that every Acre
should be assessed alike in the said contribution; and that the said Bank
should be perfected before the Feast of S. Pete^ ad vincula (commonly called
Lammas) upon penalty of xx l.

And the said Shireeve of Norfolk had moreover command, that he should distrain
the before-specified Town of Utwelle to the repair of the Bank, called Sandy
diche, before the said feast of S. Peter ad Vincula, upon penalty of xx l. And
likewise to distrain all the tenants of the Lands of Pachefeld, and Kirkefeld,
in the Towns of Utwelle and Upwelle, to repair the Banks and Ditches in those
fields; so that every Acre should be assessed alike; and the said repair
accomplished before the Feast of S. John Baptist, upon penalty of xx l. And
mor^over to distrain all those, who ought to repair the Bank at Pokedyke, so
that it might be finished before the Feast of S. John Baptist, upon pain of xx
l.

And because it was presented by John de Wygenhale, John de Reynham, etc. then
deputed by the said Justices to take earth for the repair of the said bank of
Pokedike, from the ground lying nearest thereto; and that the Abbot of Dereham
had within the same bank CCC. acres of land; they were commanded to take earth
off the said Abbots land,
lying an Acre distant from the Bank, provided that the said Abbot had
competent satisfaction for the same, according to the judgment of the said
Jurats: because there was no other earth, within that Bank to be found, so
proper for that service.

Howbeit, no sooner was the before-specified Chanel at Littlelode so made, as
by the Decree of the said Comissioners had been directed; but that some
mischievous people, broke and threw down the banks thereof; the King therefore,
upon complaint to him thereof made, did grant a new Commmission P^^ 2^ E. 1. m.
18. i^ do^so.
unto the said Simon de Ellesworth, and Thomas de Hakeford, to view the same,
and to enquire out the Malefactors.

An^ for the better discovery of them, did, the year following, issue out
another Commission Pa^. 24 E. 1. m 11. and m. 13. in do^so.
unto Will. de Bereford, Will. de Carletone, and Simon de Ellesworth: by which
there is mention made; that Peter de Campania, Thomas de Hacford, and Adam de
Shorpham, having been appointed
to view where and in what manner the water of Utwelle before spoken of, might
have it is passage to the Sea, by Channels and Gutters, without mixing with the
waters of the adjacent Towns, for the more security of the Inhabitants of that
Country; did cause it to be stopped in three places, and reduced to it is right
and ancient Chanel.

The like Commission, Ex praef. cod. MS. penes H. Cromwell. arm.
about three years after, was directed to William de Carletone and Will.
Haward. Whereupon they met at UUelle upon Wednesday after the Octaves of
Easter, at which time and place the Shireeve of Norfolk brought a Jury; who
being then and there sworn, said upon their Oaths, that Robert Russel, Bailiff
to the Abbot of Ramseye, John Mayner, Walter Hulleman, and others, did by force
and arms break down that Dam, so made at Smalelode, as has been observed: and
that Richard Curteys broke the other at UUadyngstowe: for which respect the
said Shireeve was commanded Ibid.
to take the said Robert, John, Walter, and the rest of those Malefactors, and
imprison them safely, till h^ should receive farther order.

In 1 E. 2. at a Session Ex cod. MS. penes G. Goddard, a^m.
of Sewers held at Cowstowe (within the Liberties of Tilney) before Richard de
Halstede and others, upon the Monday next after the Feast of the Apostles Peter
and Paul; it being found by the Jurors, that the Sea-bank from the stone Cross
unto Cowstowe, aforesaid, was then in good repair; viz. in breadth xij foot, and
as high as was necessary; the Prior of Meremonde, and Sir Henry de Walpole
Knight, Attorneys to the Prior of Ixworth, did take exceptions against that
verdict, because it was presented to be a Sea-bank; alleging, that from
Lakebrigge to Cowstowe, there was not any Sea-bank or Marsh-wall: but that
there was a certain Causey for driving of Cattle belonging to the Towns of
Upwell and Utwell, into and out of their Common within the Fen; which Causey
was no safeguard to any man's land; and that it was then sufficient for that
purpose, with some repair of a sew defects therein.

Whereupon the said Prior and Henry required judgment from the
before-specified Commissioners therein; and that the persons who had benefit by
such driving of their Cattle too and fro, should contribute to the making and
repair thereof, according as they had Commodity thereby, as it was the Custom
of the Country, and as the said Kings Commission did direct: which Judgment
and Decree, was published accordingly; and the said Jurors amerc'd for their
erroneous presentment.

After this, viz. upon Saturday next after the Translation of S. Thomas the
Martyr, in the first year of the said Kings reign, at a Session of Sewers held
at Wisebeche, came the said Prior of Mermonde, and Sir Henry de Walpole, before
R. de Seytone and his fellow Justices, in the behalf of the said Prior of
Ixworth; and took exceptions against the verdict of the Jurors made at Well,
in the fourth year of the said Kings reign; in regard they then presented, that
the said Prior had two brecks upon the brink of his Frontier, which he ought to
amend and repair; and that they said and decreed; that, from the said
Stone-crosse unto Cowstowe, each man ought to be chardged to the making of his
brinks so adjoining to his Frontiers. Which Prior then said; that from
Lakebrigge to Cowstow, there was neither Sea-bank, nor Marsh-wall, or any other
defense than only a Causey whereupon the Commoners of the Country did drive
their Cattle; and that every man ought to be assessed for the repair thereof,
according to the benefit which he had by it; and this he desired might be
enquired of by the Jurors: Who, being accordingly impanelled and sworn, did on
the behalf of the said Commoners of Well justify the said Decree; and
thereupon they put themselves upon trial of another Jury. Which Jury being
sworn, said, that the said Bank from Lakebrigge to Cowstowe, was not then a
Bank for the safeguard of any man's land, as aforesaid: howbeit, in ancient
time, before the fresh waters had their passage toward Wigenhale, it was a
Bank of defense;
^ut since that, it neither was, nor could be, except a new Ordinance were
made; in regard of the excess of water, and height of the ground.

And they farther said, that the before-specified Prior, in those days, was not
alone liable to the making and repair of the same Bank, from his Priory unto
Cowstowe (as the s^id Jurors had presented) because he did not alone receive
benefit thereby. And they said, that the Bank within those bounds, was the
safeguard and defense of the Fishing there, and for the Pasturage of the
Commoners; because that by the said Bank the same Priors fishing and other
borderers, was both kept from the Seawater; and that the Fish could not get
away into the Fen. And as to the Pasturage; they said, that the same Bank did
serve for diverse Commoners and people of the Counties of Huntendon, Cambridge,
and Norfolk, to drive their Cattle to and fro from the Commons of the Fen.

And they did finally ordain; that the said Prior, and every person having
fishing within the bounds from Lakebrigge, toward Cowstowe, should according
to the quantity thereof, and the Commodity he had thereby, make the said Causey
and Bank: And that the said Prior and every Commoner of the whole Hundred of
Wisebeche, and all others, who had drift for their Cattle that way, should
contribute to the repair and maintenance thereof, according to the benefit
which accrued to them thereby, as abovesaid. And moreover, that the said Prior
should recover damages, for that erroneous presentment, which were taxed at xx
s.

In 7 E. 2. Walter Bishop of Cov. and Lich. and Henry de Stantone were assigned
Pat. 7. E. 2. ^. 2. m. 14. in dorso.
to view the Banks and Sewers in these parts of Marshland, and to take order
for their repair. The like assignation Pat. 12. ^. 2. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
in 12 E. 2. had John Haward and John Hotoft, for those at Tirington. So also,
the next ensuing year, had Thomas de Ingoldesthorpe, John de Fitton, John de
Hotoft, and Will. Bataile, for all the banks throughout this Province of
Marshland.

But in this last specified Commission, the said Thomas de Ingoldesthorpe and
his associates, did Plac. coram Rege te^m. Much. 15 E. 2. Ro^. 2^. No^ff.
nothing in effect; so that great complaint Plac. coram Rege te^m. Much. 15 E.
2. Ro^. 2^. No^ff.
was made to the King by the Inhabitants in these parts: he therefore issued
out a new Commission to them, bearing date the 24th of August, in the 14th year
of his reign, commanding them, that without delay they should proceed therein.
Whereupon a Jury was summoned to attend them at Tyrington, upon Friday, being
the Feast day of the Decollation of S. John Baptist. Who appearing accordingly,
did upon their Oaths present, that the preservation of the Town of Wigenhale,
on one side the great River of the same Town i viz. upon the Southwest part,
was one and the same; and that all the Land-holders, on that side thereof, were
equally preserved: and that the safeguard thereof likewise on the other side,
to the North-east, was also all one.

And that the Causey called Old fen diche, was made and repaired by the
Parishioners and Tenants of S. Mary, S. Peter's, and S. Germans of Wigenhale;
and not by the Parishioners of S. Mary Magdalens.

And it was likewise found, that as well the said Causey of Old fen diche, as
all other Causeys and Banks of the whole Town of Wigenhale, of what kind
soever; as the Lands and Tenements of all and singular the Tenants of the said
Town, were preserved by the said banks from inundation and drowning by the Salt
waters: and that the repair of those Banks tended to the Commodity of the said
Tenants of all that Town; forasmuch as whilst the said Banks and Ditches were
repaired, the making and maintaining of those Causeys was no chardge at all.
And moreover it appeared, that by the view of the said Thomas and his
associates, and by that Inquisition, that those Banks which were good, at the
time of the Agistment made by the before-specified Will. de Carleton, were then
bad; and that many places, which were at that time better than ordinary, were
then, by reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, much worse. Whereupon the
said Thomas and his associates thought fit to make a new Agistment for the
common safeguard of the said Town of Wigenhale; and therefore ordered, that the
Land-holders there, should make good their Banks and Ditches on that side of
the said River.

After this, in another Session Ibid.
of the said Thomas de Ingaldesthorpe, and William Bataile, held at Tirington,
upon Monday next after the Feast of S. Valentine, in the seventeeth year of the
said King Edward 2. the Jurors of Wigenhale did ordain and say; that it was
necessary for the safeguard of the Inhabitants and Land-holders of that Town;
as often as any distresses should be made upon any persons for the proportion
assessed upon them, according to what they held; or upon the Collectors or
Receivers of the moneys so assessed; that, after the impounding of them by the
space of three days,
or delivery by Replevin, they should be prized by honest and lawful men of
the said Town, in the presence of the Guardians of the Banks, and by the said
Guardians exposed to sale; and the money received upon such sale, ^o be
employed upon the affairs of the Commonalty: And that the surplusage of such
money, over and above the just proportion thus assessed, to be restored to the
party so distrained: Saving to the Guardians of those Banks, and their Bedels,
Bylaw, Byscot, Triscot, and Wopenys, according to the Custom of those parts.

But as the expense, in such a constant support of these Banks, Ditches,
Bridges, Sluses, and Sewers, within this Province, was great; considering the
frequent assaults which the Sea, in tempestuous seasons, did make upon the one
side thereof; and the fresh waters of so spacious a Fen, agitated by boisterous
winds and storms (especially in the time of extraordinary floods) on the other:
so, for those respects, was the regard not small. For, Claus. 18 E 2. m. 12.
whereas the whole Hundred of Frethebrigge, in this Shire, considering the
chardges whereunto it lay subject, in supporting works of this kind, by reason
of the like perils, had time out of mind, in all public payments whatsoever,
relating to the whole County, enjoyed the exemption from any more than a xij
part thereof; the Towns of this Province, viz. Walsokne, Westwalton, Walpole,
Tiringtone, Tilney, Wigenhale, and South Lenne, were rated but at a third part
of that xij. as is evident from the said Kings Precept, Claus. 18 E 2. m. 12.
bearing date 16 March, in the xviij year of his reign, directed to Constantine
de Mortimer, William Bernak, Roger de Kerdestone, and Geffrey de Wyche, then
Commissioners for the levying and arraying a thousand and forty
Foot-Souldiers, within this County, for his service. By which Precept it
appears; that the certain chardge whereunto this Province stood then exposed,
was no less than a thousand and fif^y pounds per annum (a vast sum in those
days:) and that within the compass of xl years before, through the raging of
the Sea, no less than seven hundred Acres of land in this Country, were
utterly lost.

In 2 E. 3. Thomas de Reppes, Richard de Depham, and Thomas Shilling, were
constituted Pat. 2. E. 3. p. 2. m. 30. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, lying
betwixt Wygenhale, Tirington and Lenne Episcopi. Whereupon the Shireeve had
command Plac. coram Rege term. Mich. 30 E. 3. Rot. 105.
to summon a Jury to attend them at Islington upon Monday being the Feast day
of the Decollation of S. John Baptist: Who appearing, accordingly, presented
Plac. coram Rege term. Mich. 30 E. 3. Rot. 105.
upon their Oaths, that all the Lands and Tenements, Common of Pasture, and
Fishings, Gutters, Sewers, Bridges, etc. lying on the Seacoast, betwixt
Wigenhale, Tirington, and Lenne Episcopi, were within the Towns of Tylney and
Islington (which is a Hamlet of Tilney) and did common together; and betwixt
which, there was no metes or bounds, the Parishes being limited by Fees: so
that they said; that the defense of the whole Town of Ti^ney and Islington,
as well on the South side of Fendiche, as on the North toward the Sea, was all
one: And that all the Land-holders of that whole Town were equally secured and
defended, by all the Sea banks, and banks of the River and Fen, invironing the
said Town of Tilney and Islington. And likewise, that of necessity there ought
to be a new Agistment made, and an assignation of banks in the parts aforesaid.

And moreover, that it would be necessary for the preservation of those parts;
that there should be kays, an^ six shores made, betwixt Palmerys old (...)
gong, and the Lands of Sir John de I^^aldesthorpe, at the charge of all the
Landholders in those parts: And that every Inhabitant in those parts, should do
Men works according to the number of Acres which they held. And that from year
to year, (according to an^ient custom) there should be c^osen three Guardians
for the safeguard of those parts: And that all the Gutters and Sewers should be
maintained in common, at the charge of all the Landholders there, excepting
Islington brigge, and the house of Robert de Middilton, which is done at the
charges of John de Engaldesthorpe, and the heirs of Sir Robert de Scales: and
excepting Black diche brigge at Tilney Stow, toward the Fen, which is done at
the charges of the Inhabitants of Walsokne and Emneth.

But the men of Ilsington, who held Lands in the fields called Westfeld, Harp,
and Sibille, were much unsatisfied with what was done by the before specified
Commissioners; and thereupon informed Ibid.
the King, that though they ought not to repair a certain bank, called Less
diche of Tilney, or any part of the same, nor ever had wont to do; and that
they neither had Lands, common of Pasture, or fishing near the same bank, nor
any safeguard or defense thereby; but that, for their Lands and Tenem^n^, they
th^n did, and of ancient time had repaired a certain bank called Blake diche,
by which they had benefit and preservation: Nevertheless, at the pr^s^cution of
the Inhabitants of Tilney, w^o ought, and had always used to repair and
maintain, totally, the banks c^^led H^ddich; under color of an Inquisitio^,
touching certain things which were amiss in those parts, taken before them, the
said Commissioners, they did adjudge a certain part of that bank to be repaired
and maintained by the sai^ men of Ilsingtone; whereupon they were distrained so
to do. The said King t^erefore being desirous that all parties should have
right done to them therein, required the before specified Commissioners, to
transmit the whole pro^ess of their doings therein unto him, in the xv. of St.
John Bapt. then next following. At which day, both the men of Islington and
Tilney came: but the hearing thereof was then respited till the Octaves of St.
Michael; and at that time did Thomas at Lache, one of the Inhabitants of
Tilney, appear accordingly; but they of Ilsington appeared not: therefore the
men of Tilney had execution of what had been decreed by the before mentioned
Commissioners.

At the same time there was complaint Ibid.
made to the King, on the behalf of the Abbot of St. Edmundsbury, that whereas
he the said Abbot held certain Lands in Tilney and Ilsyngton, which had
anciently belonged to that Monastery; and notwithstanding that every Landholder
there, and in the parts adjacent, ought to defend their own proper grounds, at
their own peculiar charge, against the force of the Sea; and make and repair
certain banks for their better preservation, by the appointment of the Justices
of Sewers, and likewise by custom: nevertheless certain men of those parts,
having an aim to alter that their custom, and to compel the said Abbot and
c^rtain others; who, to their great charge did make and maintain the banks
against their own Lands, to contribute likewise, in common to the repair of all
the other banks; had procured certain Justices of Sewers to view those banks;
which they did accordingly^ not giving notice to those complaynants: the said
King therefore, by his Writ directed to Henry le Scrope, and his fellow
Justices of the Kings Bench, required them to take the business into
consideration; and in case they should find, that the before specified
information was true, then to discharge the said Abbot, and the other persons
concerned therein.

In 5 E. 3. John de Cantebrig, Will. Lovell, Walt. de Glemesford, and John de
Waltham were assigned Pat. 5. E. 3. p. 1. m. 39. in dorso.
to view the banks and ditches in these parts of Mersh land, and to take order
for their repair. The like appointment Pat. 7. E. 3. p. 2. m. 25. in dorso.
in 7 E. 3. had Simon de Drayton, Will. Lovell, Will. de Dunton, and Peter Fitz
waryn.

In 9 E. 3. at a Session Ex cod. MS. penes G. Goddard, a^m.
of Sewers held at the Church of Wigenhale St. Mary, upon the Monday next after
the Clause of Easter, before John Howard the elder, and other Justices; the
Jurors presented; that the safeguard of the whole Town of Tilney and Islington,
was one and the same; and that all the Lands and Tenements, and the holders of
them; as also of common of Pasture and fi^hing there, were equally secured and
defended by the Banks, Ditches, and Sew^rs belonging thereto, from the
inundation of the Sea, and flowing of the fresh waters. And they said; that in
the days of K. Edward the first, there was an equal assignation made, to the
Inhaitants and Tenants of these Towns, according to each man's proportion, of
the banks, ditches, and causeys belonging thereto, by Will. de Carleton and his
associats, then Justices of Sewers: at which time the charges were easy; but
then, through the raging of the Sea, and floods of fresh waters, very heavy and
grievous to bear: As also that the said charge was, then, so unequally
assessed, that some persons were burdened more by an hundred fold, considering
their proportions of Land, than others; whereby they were so impoverished, that
they were not then able to contribute any farther to these repairs and that by
their decay, much damage had already accrued there; and more was likely to
happen, if speedy remedy were not had. Wherefore they said, that, of necessity,
there ought to be a new Agistment made, of the said banks and ditches, and an
assignation of a fit proportion to each man, for the maintaining whereof they
might be continually compelled.

And they said moreover; that the ground whereupon the Ditches and Banks stood,
betwixt Edyensgole, and the East corner of the Tenement of John de
Engaldesthorpe, in the Freth, within the said Towns of Tilney and Ilsington,
was daily torn up by the boisterous Sea tides, and floods of fresh waters;
insomuch as the said banks could not be preserved, in any sort, by that
Agistment, to defend the said Town from drowning: therefore they said, that for
safeguard of that Town, there must, of necessity be made certain Kays, and four
or six Schrops, betwixt Edyensgole, and the said corner, at the charge of all
the Landholders throughout the whole Town.

And they ordained; that, whereas by reason of the like danger in another
place, between Knight's gole, and the gutter called Cattesback dole, the Sea
banks would not be sufficient to defend the Town from drowning; there should be
made, forthwith, certain Kays and Schrops, at the charge of the whole Town: and
and that no bank should be thrown down toward the River, betwixt those Goles,
in any place but where they then were, until by assessment they could be
maintained at less charges. And that the whole bank and chanel of the river,
betwixt the said gutters be made; and, if need required, raised two foot
higher; so that it should contain xiii. foot in breadth at the top, and at the
bottom a thickness proportionable thereto.

And they also said, that the banks upon the river side, betwixt Skalys gole
and Cattesbak, were grown so narrow toward the bottom, by reason of the often
sinking down of the Earth, that the Cart way, which is of xxiiii. foot in
breadth toward the said banks and ditches, for the whole length thereof, was by
those banks and ditches totally interrupted and stopped: whereupon they ordained,
as before that time it had been, that xxiiii. foot of ground should be added
thereto, from the Land next adjoining.

And they farther said, it was necessary, that all the Sewers and Gutters,
great and small, as also the common Bridges in Tilney and Islington, with the
gutters of Sibley, and at the Mill, sometime belonging to William de Fen, upon
the Fen ditch in Tilney, should be continually repaired, at the charges of the
whole Town, as often as need should require; with the help of the Town of
Tirington; and for scouring the Sewers of Wesenhamdale in Tilney, to the gutter
called Scales gole; and to make and maintain the same gutter continually: which
said assistance did merely belong to the Inhabitants and Landholders of Tilney,
for the drayning and avoiding of the waters from all the Tenements of the Town
of Tirington, betwixt New Fen ditch; viz. from the house of Laurence Chapel
Northwards, to the great Sea bank; within which space, more than five thousand
acres were contained; excepting the great gutter called Knight's gole, which
was to be made and maintained, as well at the costs of Tirington, Walpole,
Walsok^n, and Emneth; and that part of Wigenhale which has commodity th^r^by,
as the Towns of Tilney and Ilsington; and exc^pting the Bridge at Robert de
Midleton's house, which was to be always made and maintained by John de
Engaldesthorpe, and Robert de Scales, in consideration of the fishing th^re,
anciently granted to them and their ancestors, and accordingly enjoyed, in
common with the Towns of Tilney and Ilsington. And excepting likewise the
Bridge called Black ditch bridge unto the Fen at Tilney stowe, which the
Inhabitants and Land-holders of Walsoken and Emnethe were obliged to make and
continually maintain, for the waters descending thereby to the Sea, as they had
used to do, for the cause aforesaid, time out of mind. And likewise excepting
the s^veral Bridges of all the Tenants and persons conversant upon that Sewer,
which was betwixt the house of Rob. de Midleton and Gullysgole in Islington:
and exce^ting all the particular Briges of such persons as were conversant upon
the S^^^rs betwixt the Fedditch, and Cuntesforth brigge, in Tilney; because
they ^elonged specially to those persons.

And they said that the Sewer from Custowe in Tirington, to Tilney Fen brigge,
ought to be xii foot in breadth throughout; and the Bridge there of the same
wideness at the bottom. And that the Sewer from thence to Islington bridge,
ought to contain xvi foot in breadth, throughout; and the same bridge xii foot
at the ground. And the Sewer from thence, unto the gutter called Knight's gole,
xviii foot in breadth for the water course; and every Bridge beyond that Sewer,
upon that current, xvi foot in breadth. And that all the said Sewers, with the
Gutter, called Knig^t's gole, and the common bank adjoining to the said G^tter,
ought to be repaired and cleansed, from thenceforth, as well by the remote
Tow^s, which have benefit thereby, as by the sa^d Towns of Tylney and
Isl^ngton, a^ anciently had been accustomed. And that the common Sewer^ betwixt
Old fen diche, and Osgood hirne should be eight ^oot in breadth at the least:
and that upon the cleansing and scouring thereof in every place, half the ^arth
so cast out, to be carried to raise the common Drove higher. And all the
Bridges over the said Sewer, six foot in breadth, at the least: which Sewer to
be scoured at the charge of all those that resided near thereto.

And they likewise said, that the Sewer from the west side of the croft,
belonging to the message of Will. de Westbrigg, ought to be always scoured
and maintained, amongst the rest of the common Sewers, unto the North part of
the Abbot of Dereham's Land, by the Hadeland there lying, and t^ere turning
near the same La^d, to the Sewer next unto the Drove. And that the Trenches
betwixt the tenement of John the Son of Peter Drugh, and John Sabine, an^
elsewhere in the H^^eland, called Sonner^^ye, which is unduly made a common path,
should be forthwi^h stopped up, and so kept thenceforth, to the end that the
same path might be hindered.

And they moreover ordained, all the Sewers belonging to the said Town of
Tilney and Islington, to be opened in every place, and so k^pt for ever.

And they farth^r decreed, that for the inviolable performance of all the
beforespecified Ordinances, reasona^le Taxes should be moderat^ly assessed by
the Guardians for the safeguard of those places; and chiefly by xij. others
authorized and associated to them; and then collected by Geffrey at Falyate,
etc. And that the said Guardians, with the assistance of those twelve, should
diligently enquire of the transgressors of those Ordinances; and compel them
to make due satisfaction for the same, by distress and s^le of their goods, and
grievous amercements, as often as there should be occasion.

And the said Jurors did also decree, that the same penalties and punishments
against such as should violate those ordinances, or negligently in any sort
withdraw themselves in the observance of them, should firmly and inviolably be
imposed from thenceforth, forever, as were then, and had time out of mind been
used in Wigenhale, and other Towns in these parts of Marshland, for the
safeguard of the Country; viz. that as often as any one, of what estate or
condition soever, should not repair his proportion of the banks, ditches, and
causeys before-specified, for the preservation of the said Towns of Tilney and
Islington; as also the said common Sewers belonging to him, according to the
Ordinances aforesaid; that a fit day should be assigned him by the
before-specified Guardians, before which no peril might probably happen: and in
case he did not perform the same within that time, that xii d. (which is called
a Bilawe) should be levied upon him, f^r every perch unrepaired:
And then a^^^^er day to be given him, to accomp^^^^ ^he same, before which no
dang^r might in likelihood happen; and in case he did not make performance
thereof before that time, that then he should p^y for every perch two
shillings, which is called Biscot. And then, that a third day should be allowed
him to effect the same, before which no peril might probably happen; within
which time in case he failed, to pay for every acre three shillings, which is
called Triscot: And thenceforth that the said delinquents in those neglects, to
be always distrained, and the distresses to be prized openly, and sold by xij
honest and lawful men of the said Towns of Tilney and Ilsington; and the
moneys arising by such sale o^ those distresses, employed in the performance of
the said repairs; and the remainder, in case there should happen to be any, to
be forthwith restored: Saving always to the said Guardians, the forfeitures of
the Bilaws, Biscots, and Triscots, for the causes aforesaid.

In the Winter season of this year, so great were the tempests, Claus. 9. E. 3.
m. 18.
that the Towns of Walsoken, Westwalton and Enemuthe received extraordinary
loss by inundations from the Sea, insomuch as they became Petitioners to the
King for some alleviation of the tax, of a Fifteen, then granted to him in
Parliament by the Commons of this Realm: whereunto the said King did graciously
con^escend, and thereupon directed his Pr^c^pt Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 18.
to the Treasurer and Barons of his Exchecquer, as also to the Assessors and
Collectors of the same, to abate unto them eight pounds thereof, the whole sum
being Lx ^. the next y^ar ^ollowing, Geffrey de Colevill, Roger de Hakebeche,
Geffrey Bryseyard, and Adam de Fincham, were constituted ^
Commissioners for the view and repair of the banks and Sewers ne^r Walpole, in
this Province. In the winter of which year, the Sea was so outrageous, that it
brake the banks in sun^^y places, drowned many cattle, and spoyl^d a great
quantity of corn: so that the Inhabitants of Tuney, Walpo^^, W^lsokne, West
walton, (...), petitioning ^.
the King ^or r^medy ^^^rein, he assigned ^.
Constantine d^ Mo^ti^^er, John de Hiderse^e and John de la ^^kele, to make
enquiry the^eof, and consider of some speedy way of redr^ss.

Whereupon a Jury was impanelled and sworn; who presented Tilney.
upon Oath, that the Town of Tilney had a c^rtain bank toward the S^a, on the
East part of the said Town, extending it self from the Town of Clenchwarton
toward Wigenhale, and containing in length two miles; the charge in r^pair and
m^intenance of one mile and an hal^ thereof, amounted to Lviii l. x s. viz. for
^very perch xviii d. and the other half mile vi l. x s. viz. for ^very p^rch vi
d.

And they said, that upon Monday next after the Feast of St. Hillary,
pr^c^ding, the same bank was so broken, by the raging of the Sea, in no less
than five places, that the Town of Tilney was overflowed with the Sea water,
and the Lands, Me^dows, and Pastures belonging ther^to, continually drowned for
the space of seven days, by which means their wintercorn, then sowed upon the
ground, was destroyed, as also much of the corn and hay in their Barns; with C.
Murrons, and Lx. Ewes, to the damage of CCC l. unto the said Town.

And they said, that before they could make good that bank, called the Indike
(containing four furlongs and an half in length) for the safety of the said
Town, five Messuages, and xl. acres of ground, which were the Lands of Thomas
de Ingaldesthorpe, and others, with diverse goods then therein being, were
utterly lost, to the damage of a C l. And they said, that the Inhabitants of
that Town expended in the repairing the said four furlongs and an half of the
same Indike, xl l. and that to make the same good, as it anciently had been,
would require Lx l. more.

And they said moreover, that within the compass of Lx. years then past, one
Parish Church, with the Parsonage, was by the breaking in of the Sea, ruined:
and within xxx years, a Manor house of Robert de Scales, and of his Tenants,
and others, xx messuages, ^ with an hundred Acres of Land, utterly lost for
ever.

And they farther said, that the same town of T^lney had another Bank on the
North side t^ereof, for its defense toward the Sea; viz. in length from
Tyrington one mile toward Cl^nchwarton; the repair whereof stood them in xl s.
by the year. And that they had another Bank toward the Fen, called Pokediche,
containing in length one mile, for defense thereof against the fresh waters;
the repair whereof stood them in xl s. per anum. And that the whole yearly
chardge which the said town of Tilney did undergo, in the repair of the said
Banks, Gutters, great and small, Bridges, Kays, and Schores; with several
Sewers, for the preservation thereof, came to Cxl l.

And they likewise said, that this town of Tilney by that grievous tempest so
happening upon the Monday before-specified, lost one Gutter, called Scales goule,
to their damage of xxx l. And that the charge in new making of xij new Gutters,
great and small, five Bridges to be new made, or repaired, and diverse Sewers,
would amount unto xxx l. which of necessity must be done the Summer following.

And they said, that these dangers did every year much increase upon them, in
regard that the Fifteen taxed upon them for the two preceding years, amounted
to Lx l. and the raising, arming, and arraying of Hobelars and Mariners xx l.
there being DCCxlvij. acres of land, lying within them, which belonged to the
Abbeys of S. Edmundsbury and Dereham, and other Religious Houses, which were
assessed with the Spiritualities, and therefore contributed nothing therein.

And they said Ibid. n. 112.
, that the town of Walpole had a certain Bank, on the North part thereof, for
its defense toward the Sea; which Bank extended from the town of Tirington, to
the Gutter of Waltone, Walpo^e
called No^^che gole, containing in length three miles; whereof two miles would
require CC l. per annum chardge, and the residue xl s.

And they also said, that upon the before-specified Monday, next after the
Feast of S. Hillarie, the same Bank was so torn by the raging of the Sea, that
the Inhabitants of the said ^own bestowed xl l in the repair th^reof.

And they said mor^over, that in the eighth year of the same Kings reign, upon
the Eve of S. Andrew, a certain S^a-bank, at Ristofte, broke by the violence of
the waves, whereby two hundred acres of land were utterly lost for ever: And
that within thirty years th^n last past, they likewise lost for ever, one
Parish Church, xx messuages, and CCC. acres of land. And likewise, that the
Inhabitants of this Town were at the yearly chardge of Lx s. in repair of the
Gutters great and small, with diverse Bridges belonging thereto. And that the
said Town had also another Bank toward the Fen, called Pokediche, for defense
thereof from the fresh waters; which Bank contained one mile in length, and
stood them in xl s. per annum repair.

And they said, Walsokne
that the town of Walsokne had a certain Bank for it is defense toward the Sea,
extending from Warfanglestowe to Emeneth menys, and cotaining in length three
miles; whereof the repair for one mile, amounted to xxvi l. per annum, viz. for
every perch vi d. And that the same Bank, was so broken by the rage of the Sea,
upon the before-specified Monday, that the Inhabitan^s of the said Town were at
xxl. costs in repair thereof: And that in the eighth year of the Reign of the
said King, upon the like occasion, they spent xxxl. And that the yearly chardge
in repair of the Gutters great and small, and Bridges, for safeguard of the T
said own, amounted to C s.

And they likewise said, that the same Town had a certain Bank called
Pokediche, toward the Fen, for defense thereof from the fresh waters; which
Bank, containing one mile in length, had xl s. per annum bestowed thereon in
repairs.

And they said, that the before-specified Inhabitants, in repairing of one
Gutter at Colevile's Mill, in the twelfth year of King Edward the second's
reign; and another at Coldhirne, in the eighteenth year, for drayning the
waters from their lands to the Sea, expended xl l.

And that the stream of the water, called Wallenhee, which had wont to run
toward the Sea, under the Sea-bank of Walsokne, where it had made so great a
depth and hollownesse,
that the Lands in that Town had a sufficient evacuation of their waters, to
the Sea, thereby; being, at the suit of the Inhabitants of the Counties of
Northampton, Cambridge, Huntendon, The new course of UUellen Eee.
and Lincoln made to the King, and judgment of his Court, diverted toward
Wigenhale, by Well dam; the sands were grown to that height in those Channels,
wherein it had formerly passed, that the wa^ers of the said Town of Walsokne
could not drayn, any longer, that way; by reason whereof no less than CCC.
Acres of ground sowed with Winter Corn, were in the seventh year of the reign
of the said King ( Edward 3.) overflowed and drowned, to the damage of fifty
pounds; viz. every Acre xl d. And in the eighth, ninth, and tenth year^, for
want of the like Drayning, their loss was xlv l. viz. every year for each Acre
xij d.

UUest UUalton.
And they said, that the Town of West Walton, with the Hamlet of Enemeth, had a
Bank for defense of the Sea; beginning at Nobeche got^, and extending it self
in length to a certain boundary, called UUarthangl^stoke, two miles and an
half; whereof one mile co^t them xl l. And that they had another Bank of
defense against the Sea, extending it self from a certain place, called
M^r^iche, to Boxted hirne, containing in length three miles; the repair whereof
did cost yearly, in the whole, vi l.

And they said, that the same Bank in UUest Walton, was so broke in the VVinter
preceding (upon the said Monday next after the Feast of S. Hillarie) that the
Inhabitants of that Town and Hamlet, were at Lx l. charge for repair thereof,
and for safeguard of the same; over and above the cost which they yearly had
used to be at therein: And that in the said eighth year of the before-specified
King, on the same Eve of S. Andrew the Apostle, they lost by the raging of the
Sea, fourscore Acres of land; by reason whereof, they were constrained to make
a new Sea-bank, of four ^urlongs in length, which cost fourscore pounds, viz.
every particle x s. And that in the first year of the said King, they lost
seven messuages, and sevenscore Acres of land and an half, by the violence
likewise of the Sea. And in the tenth year of K. Edw. the second, they also
lost, by the like means, xiij messuages, and eightscore Acres and an half of
Land; and in the second year of the same King Edward 2. xij messuages and
sixscore Acres of Land.

And that they had a certain Bank called Pokediche, for defense against the
fresh waters, containing in length one mile, which stood them in xl s. per
annum chardge. And they said, that the same Town and Hamlet did maintain three
Gutters for drayning away of the fresh water; one toward the Sea, and two
toward the Fen; which were new repaired in the ninth year of the then King, to
the cost and expense of xl l. and that the yearly chardge in repair of them,
came to xx s. And that in Gutters, Pipes, Sewers, and Bridges, they spent
yearly no less than Lx s.

And they said moreover, that the four Towns beforementioned, with the Hamlet,
had a certain Gutter, called Knight's gole, which then wanted repair; as also a
certain Sewer to the same Gutter, extending it self five miles in length, the
chardge in repair whereof, amounted to Lx l.

And they said, that UUigenhale, UUigenhale.
Tirington, and South Lenne were neighboring Towns: and that UUigenhale had a
certain Bank, containing in length seven miles; on one side the great River,
called UUigenhale he.
And on the other side of that River, a Bank of three miles in length.

And that they had a certain Bank for defending of the fresh waters; as also
Bridges, Pipes, and Sewers, Causies and floudgates which occasioned them much
expense every year.

And they said, that on the morrow after the Epiphany, in the third year of the
then King, a certain Bank on the West part of the said River, by means of the
raging of the Sea, broke; so that the Tides entered and overflowed a thousand
Acres of Land, sowed with Corn, to the great damage of the same Town. And that
on the West part of the said River, by reason of the like tempests, happening
upon the Eve of S. Hillarie next before, the before-specified Bank was broken
and torn, so that the tides entered, bore down a House, and overflowed CC. acres
of land sowed with Corn. And that, on the Eve of S. Andrew, in the eighth year
of the same King, the said Bank, was by the like mishap broken again, for the
length of three furlongs, in a certain place called Burtys bithe, insomuch as
the tides flowing in thereat, overwhelmed a thousand Acres of Land sowed with
Corn: And that on the morrow after the Feast of S. Hillarie then last past,
there was by the like means, a breach made on the East part of the same River,
whereby eightscore Acres of Land sowed with Corn were overflowed.

Tirington.
And they said, that the men of Tirington had a certain Sea-bank, containing
three miles in length; and another Bank for defense of the fresh waters; as
also Gutters, Bridges, Sewers, and Causies, which occasioned them great
expenses every year. And that the Gutter, called Orehowe, was broken on the Eve
of S. Hijlarie then last past; and likewise another Gutter, called Newethrowe,
by the violence also of the Sea; both which did then want repair. And that a
certain Gutter, called Giggesthorne, was also so broken, that it stood in need
of repair.

And they lastly said, that the Town of South Lenne, with the Hamlets, had a
Sea-bank, and Sewers, with Bridges and Floud-gates, which were also very
chargable to them.

The said King therefore much compassionating the great losses which the
Inhabitants beforementioned did sustain, by reason of those lamentable
breaches in their Banks and inundation of the Sea, as aforesaid; constituted
Pa^. 11. E. 3. p. 3. m. 2. in dorso.
John Howard senior, Gilbert de H^thil, Geffrey de Brusierd, John de Swa^ham,
and Adam de Walfokne his Commissioners to view the same; and to make new
Agistments for the same Sea-banks, for the safeguard of the Country, as often
as need should require.

And the next year following, there being Claus. 12 E. 3. p. 1 m. 40.
a Tenth and Fifteenth to be Assessed and Collected, which had been granted to
the King in his Parliament held at Notingham, about two years before, upon the
humble Petition of the Inhabitants of Tilneye, Walpol^, Walso^ne, and West
UUaiton, and the Hamlet of Enemethe; as also of the Towns of UUigenhale and
Tirington, exhibited to the said King; by which they represented their
extraordinary losses by the before-specified inundations; desiring, that the
Assessment might not extent to any other of their Goods and Catalls, than what
they had remaining after those their disasters; the King tenderly commiserating
their condition, required Constantine de Mortimer and John de Hedersete, who
were then appointed Collectors thereof in this County, that they should not
assesse it in the Towns beforementioned, otherwise than according to the
direction which they had specially received from himself, under his Seal to
that purpose; whereby Tilney was taxed at x l. UUalpole at xvi l. viij s.
Walsokne at xij l. UUes^waltone, with the hamlet, at xvi l. ij s. UUigenhale at
xi j l. iiij s. and Tiryngton at xvi l. ix s. vi d. And thereupon he commanded
Ibid.
the Treasurer and Barons of his Exchequer, that they should, for the
considerations afor^said, accept thereof; and upon payment of those sums,
dischardge them of the same.

In 16 E. 3. Will. Corbet, John de Houtone, and Edmund Noen were constituted
Pa^. 16. E. 3. p. 2. m. 24. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers
throughout all this Country of Marshland. And in 20 E. 3. Sir Robert de
Causton, and Sir William de Dunton Knights, Edmund de Gunevyle Parson of the
Church of Tyringtone, John de Brymmesley, Adam de Walsokne, and Thomas de
Welverton had the like Commission Pat. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 18. in dorso.
for those Banks in Tyringtone; with direction to make new Agistments for the
better safeguard of them, as often as need should require. So also the same
year, with the like direction and power for making new Agistments, had Ibid. p.
3. m. 20. in dorso.
John de Hedersete, Robert de Hake^eche, Roger de Dersingham, Hugh de Walton,
and Adam de Walsokne, for all the Sea-banks throughout this whole Province.

In the same year, the Inhabitants of Wigenhale, Walpole, Walsokne, Tylney,
Tirington, West Walton, and the Hamlet of Enemethe, complaining Pa^. 21. E. 3.
p. 2. m. 9. in dorso.
to the King; that though the Assessors of the Fifteenth, granted to the King
in Parliament, in the xith year of his reign, of all their goods movable, for
the term of three years, did tax them the said Inhabitants at less sums for
the said Fifteen than they had used to be rated at before their losses by the
Seas inundation (as has been observed) And that though the same persons had
often undergone the like, since that time; nevertheless the late Assessors of
another Fifteenth then granted to the King, had exacted from them the ancient
sum, wherewith their said Towns were chardged before they suffered such losses;
and that the Collectors of Wool, did impose the like rates upon them; and
not only so, but that the Shireeve had endeavored by distresses to levy the
arrears of that old Fifteen, whereof, by the said Kings special direction, they
were to have abatement; he therefore appointed Pa^. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 9. in
dorso.
William de Thorpe, John de Walton, and Roger Petygard to make enquiry thereof,
and to certify the truth in the pr^misses.

By virtue of which Commission, the said William, John, and Roger sat Esc. 21.
E. 3. n......
at Tylney, upon Monday next after the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed
Virgin, in the year abovesaid; before whom the Jurors presented; that in and
after the xith year of the then King, there were destroyed and drowned by the
raging of the Sea, ten messuages and C. acres of Land in UUigenhale, Wigenhale.
belonging to diverse persons; and that several other Lands were there daily
overflowed, and in danger likewise of being lost. And that the Lands and
Tenements of the Inhabitants of the said Town, did lie on both sides that arm
of the Sea, which ran through the midst of the said Town. And they said, that
the men of that Town, by reason of the beforementioned arm, did yearly repair
and maintain two Banks; the one containing six miles in length, and the other
three, the chardge whereof amounted to Cxx l. per annum, and more; as by
estimation they were given to understand. And they likewise said, that the
beforespecified Inhabitants, did yearly repair and maintain one Bank called
Pokediche, containing two miles in length, for their defense against the fresh
waters, the charge whereof came to Cs. per annum, and more.

And they said, Walpole.
that in that same xith year and afterward, there were by the said inundation,
Cxl. Acres of Land in Walpole, drowned, and for ever lost. And that the
Inhabitants of that Town, did yearly repair and maintain a Sea-bank, containing
three miles in length, which extends it self Northwest, from the Town of
Tyrington, unto a certain Floud-gate of Waltone, called Nobeche got; for the
repair and ma^n^enance whereof, the Inhabitants of the same Town did yearly
expend Cxij l. And that h^y did repair and maintain a certain Ditch, called
Pokediche, containing a mile in length, for their defense from the fresh
waters; the charge whereof came to more than x l. per annum: besides other new
works about those Banks, which yearly rose to xl l.

And they said, Walsokne
that in the same xith year, and afterward, two Gutters, which had been then
lately made at Walsokne, for avoidance of the fresh waters of that Town,
toward the Sea, were wholly filled up by the raising of silt, and utterly
destroyed; by reason whereof CC. Acres of Land, belonging to several men there,
were every year overflowed, in Winter time, to the damage of ten pounds to the
Inhabitants. And they said, that the before-specified Inhabitants of that Town
did repair and maintain, for every acre of land within the same, four foot of
the Sea-bank, for defense of their lands against the Ocean. And likewise, for
every acre of land in the same Town, one foot of the Bank of Pokedike, for
keeping off the fresh waters; the charges of both which was more than xxx l.
per annum. And that they did likewise yearly repair and maintain one Sewer,
containing five miles in length; viz. from the Town of Walsokne to UUigenhale,
which stood them in more than ten pounds per annum.

And they said, Tilney^
that in the same xith year, and afterward, seven messuages, and ten acres of
land, belonging to diverse men in the Town of Tilney, were by the like
outragiousnesse of the Sea, drowned and for ever lost; and that diverse lands of
the Inhabitants there, were daily overflowed. And they farther said, that the
said Inhabitants of that Town, did yearly repair certain Sea-banks, toward the
River,
called Wigenhale Ee, viz. from Catysbac-gole to King's gole, which contain
xxiiij furlongs in length; whereof xviij do extend from a certain place called
the Hope, to Edeyenesgole, and were often subverted by the Sea-tides, so that
the men of that Town did thereby lose a great part of their land yearly. And
they said, that the before-specified Inhabitants were at the yearly charge of
three pounds, for repair of six furlongs of the said Ditch, and for every
furlong, besides, ten Marks.

And they said moreover, that there was a certain Gutter, called Scales gole,
but lately made, for safeguard of the lands of those Inhabitants; which was
then destroyed by the Sea-tides; by reason whereof, a great part of the said
Town was drowned and made yearly much worse, to the annual damage of xx l. so
that, for the better defense of their Lands, and Bank, they were constrained to
make two Scores, the charge whereof came to C. Marks, which Scores were also,
by the raging of the Sea, over^hrown and spoiled, to the loss of that Town C
l. And they likewise said, that the before-specified Inhabitants did every year
expend xx l. in the repair of two Banks, viz. Pokediche and Blakediche, for
def^nce of their lands against the fresh waters: and that they were at the
yearly charge of xx l. more, for other common works; and likewise x l. for
maintenance of their Gutters and Sewers.

Tirington.
And they said, that in the same xith year and afterward, a thousand Acres of
land, belonging to the Town of Tirington, were yearly overflowed by inundation
of the fresh waters, in regard that the Sluse called Scales gole, being
destroyed and spoiled by the Sea-Tides, as abovesaid, did occasion the breach
and ruin of another Sluse, called Oxhowe, by which the said fresh waters
passed to Scales gole; the damage whereof was Lx l. yearly to the said Town.
And they also said, that CC. Acres of Marsh, belonging to the same Town, viz.
in Rushemershe and Newemershe, were overflowed by the said tides, to the damage
of the said Inha^itants, more t^a^ six Marks yearly. And that the said ^own,
for repairing of the Sea-b^nk, containing two miles and an half in l^ngth, and
of the Bank of Pokedich^, containing one mile in length, was at the yearly
chardge of xxxix. and upwards.

And they said, W^st-W^^ton
that in the before-s^^cified year, and afterward, sixscore a^res of land
belonging to the inhabi^^nt^ of UUest Walton, were overflowed by the Sea-tides,
to the yearly dam^ge of xl ^. by reason that the Sea-banks were, with such
fearful tempests, so broken as aforesaid; and that the charge in repair of
them came to more than Lx. per annum. And that they did yearly repair, for
every acre of land lying in the said Town, six foot and two inches of the said
Seabanks: and likewise for every acre, one foot of the said Bank called
Pokediche, the charge whereof amounted unto xl ^. yearly, and more. And that
they also spent x l. per annum, in repairing of Gutters and Sewers, for
draining of their land. And they said, that fifty three messuages, and three
hundred acres of land in that Town, were drowned and utterly lost for ever, by
the inundation of the Sea.

And they lastly said; Enemeth.
that in the year aforesaid, and afterward, ten messuages, and an hundred
acres of land, belonging to several persons, within the Hamlet of Enemeth, were
utterly destroyed and drowned by the same inundation of the Sea. And that the
Inhabitants of that Hamlet were at the yearly charge of xxx l. and more, in
repairing of the Bank called Pokediche, for the safeguard of their Land.

Upon the return of which Inquisition wherein those their great losses, and
constant yearly charges were so evidently set forth, the said Inhabitants of
Wygenhale, and the other Towns beforementioned, did again Petition Claus. 22 E
3. p. 1. m. 5.
the said King; representing their hard usage from the Assessors of certain
Fifteens and Tenths, then lately granted to him, in Parliament, by the Commons
of this Realm; viz. that whereas, in the eighth year of his reign, the Town of
Wigenhale was taxed at xxxvij l. Walpole at xxxv. l. x. s. Tilney at xxx. l.
West Walton at xxiii. l. Walsokne at xxvi. l. viii. s. Tirington at xl. l. ix.
s. and Enemethe at xiii. l. for the Fifteen then granted: and, that
notwithstanding so much of their Lands had been drowned and utterly consumed;
as also, that by reason of the frequent inundations, since happening, they had
little hope of the recovery thereof; yet did not the said Assessors for the
Fifteens and Tenth, granted in the eleventh year, and two more Fifteens and
Tenths granted in the eighteenth and twentieth years of the said Kings reign,
cease to tax them as heavily, as they had been levied in the eighth year
abovementioned: Lest therefore, in regard of their disabilities to bear so
great a burden, they should be compelled to leave the Country; the said King,
taking the premises into mature consideration, and advising therein with his
Council, directed his Precept Claus. 22 E 3. p. 1. m. 5.
to the Treasurer and Barons of his Exchequer, requiring them to accept of two
parts of the several sums so imposed, and to abate the third unto those
particular Towns before-named.

The next year following, the King being advertised, Pat. 23 E. 3 p. 1. m. 30.
in dorso.
that the Bank called Pokedyke, which by the assent of the whole Commonalty in
those parts, had of ancient time been raised and made, for the defense and
safeguard of the Town of Wygenhale, and the parts abovesaid, against the
sudden inundations and violence, as well of the Sea, as of the sresh waters,
usually annoying them; was at that time so torn and broken, that diverse
inestimable losses, for default of its repair, had happened; and that more were
like to be in process of time, unless some speedy remedy were had; assigned
Pat. 23 E. 3 p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
John Howard, Robert de Causton, John de Berney, Will. de Wychingham, and Roger
de Dersingham, to take a view thereof; and to enquire by the Oaths, as well of
Knights as others, by whose default the said breaches were so made; and who
they were that did commonly drive their Cattle upon the same Bank: and by heavy
distresses and amercements, to constrain all such persons, as well those who
were guilty of the said breaches, as those who had any benefit by the same
bank, together with others who were obliged to the repair thereof, in case
there were any such, to take speedy course for the amendment of the same,
according to the proportion of what each man held.

In 26 E. 3. Sir Robert de Causton Knight, Raphe de Rocheford, Hugh de Walton,
and Raphe de Bygeney were constituted Pat. 26. E. 3. p. 3. m. 22. in dorso.
Commissioners, for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers in
Walpole and Walton. Several other Commissions were, in the succeeding years,
issued out to the like purpose; viz. in 27 E. 3. to Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 1. m. 29.
in dorso.
the same Sir Robert, Raphe, Hugh and Hugh, together with Thomas de Baa and
Will. Durant, for all those upon the Seacoast, in this Province. In 28 E. 3.
to Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. in dorso.
Will. de Dunton, Rob. de Hakebeche, John de Tylney, John de Wilton, Will.
Durant and Hugh de Walton, for the same Sea-banks. In 30 E. 3. to Pat. 30. E.
3. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
John Bardolf of Wirmegeye, Ric. de Wylughby, John de Berneye, Adam de
Shiryngham, and Roger de Dersyngham, for those in Suth Clenchewarton and
Wigenhale. In 32 E. 3. to Pat. 32. E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
Sir Saier de Rocheford, Sir Rob. de Causton, and Sir John de Tilneye Knights,
and others, for those in the parts of Mershland, betwixt the waters of
UUellestreme, UUysebeche, Well, and Wygenhale. In 36 E. 3. to Pat. 36. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
Rob. de Thorpe, Richard de Walkefare, Robert de Causton, and others, for those
betwixt South Clenchwarton, near Lenne, and Wigenhale. So likewise, in the same
year, to Ibid.
the said Rob. de Causton, Hugh Lovet, Gilbert Bernard, and others, for those
betwixt Tyrington and West Walton.

About this time did the Inhabitants of UUigenhale, Ilsyngtone, Tilney,
Clenchwarton, Watlyngtone, Roungtone, Holme, Secchithe, and West UUinche (all
in this Province of Mershland) exhibit a doleful Petition Ex ver. membr. in
Armario Cartarum de Lenne in Com. Nor^^.
to the King; showing, that whereas the said Country of Mershland had been much
overflowed and surrounded by great and violent floods of Salt water, to the
extraordinary damage of the said King and the whole Realm: and whereas the
River (going to Lenne) had used to run betwixt certain banks, distant a sunder
twelve Perches, at which time all people had sufficient passage with their
Boats to and fro, the fresh waters free course to the Sea; the Banks on one
side of the said River, were at that time so low by reason of the
before-specified floods, that the said River was then a full mile in breadth.
And moreover, that some of the Inhabitants of Lenne, had promoted a Bill in the
Parliament then sitting; wherein it was alleged, that the course of the said
River ought not to be made narrower, under pretense that if it should, not only
the Port of the said Town of Lenne would be destroyed, but the Counties of
Cambridge, Huntendon, Northampton, Bedford, Buckingham, Leycester, UUarwick,
Derby, and Suffolk, would sustain much damage thereby: and that the said Bill
was maliciously made, and without reason, as it might be justly proved, in case
the said King would condescend, that the Justices put in Authority for the
preservation of the said Country, would do their duty therein, and proceed
according to the Law and Custom of the Country; considering the sudden
mischief and destruction, which might happen by one hours neglect; the whole
Country being in danger of irrecoverable drowning: desiring that the said
Justices might not be superseded, but that they might proceed to reduce the
same River into it is ancient bounds, and in such sort as it was before the
boisterous floods had carried away the before-specified Banks, and the Country
so surrounded.

In 37 E. 3. Sir Saier de Rocheford, Sir Robert de Causton, Sir Hugh Lovet, and
Sir Raphe Rocheford Knights, Thomas at Lathe, and others, were appointed Pat.
37. ^. 3. p. 1. m. 46. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, betwixt the Rivers of
Wellestreme, Wysebeche, Well, and Wigenhale, in this Province of Mershland:
with direction to proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm. The like Commission Ib. m. 26. in do^so.
had Rob. de Ufford Earl of Suffolk, Robert de Thorpe, and John Knyvet, for
those Banks etc. betwixt Lenne and Wygenhale. So also in 51 E. 3. had Pat. 51.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 41. in dorso.
Robert Howard, John Colevyle, Raphe de Rocheford, and others, for all the
Banks etc. throughout this whole Province.

And in Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 1. m. 25. in dorso.
1 R. 2. Roger Scales, Robert Howard, John Colevill, Raphe de Rocheford,
Reginald Hakebeche, William de Petworth Clerk, Hugh de Gandeby Clerk, John de
Rochefort, John Mareschall, and William Newehous.

It seems that there was nothing done upon that Petition exhibited to King
Edward the third, by the Inhabitants of Wygenhale, and the other Towns therein
mentioned, for reducing the River into its ancient bounds: for I find, that in
2 R. 2. they presented another Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 2. m. 10. in dorso.
to the then King, importing the same in effect as the other did: adding, that
the said water, by reason of its extraordinary breadth, after the Banks on the
one side thereof were worn away, had so great a power upon the Bank on the
other side, that all the Towns in those parts were frequently overflowed; and
the chardge in maintaining of the said Bank grown so great, that they were not
able longer to support it; so that their Country was in much danger to be
totally destroyed, in case some fit remedy were not speedily used. The said
King therefore by the advice and assent of his Prelates and Nobles, then
assembled in Parliament, constituted Ibid.
William de Ufford Earl of Suffolk, Robert de Wilughby, William de Wychingham,
and John de Hawe, his Justices, to take view of those Banks, and to enquire
what remedy might be had therein, whether by reducing the said stream into a
narrower compass, or otherwise; and if by making the course thereof narrower,
thenin what place to make new Banks for that purpose, and in what manner: and
likewise to enquire through whose default those losses had thus happened; and who
did hold any Lands, Tenements, Common of Pasture, or Fishing in those parts, or
that had safeguard and benefit, or loss, or might any ways have, either by the
said stream, as well those that inhabited at a distance, as those that lived
near unto it; and to distrain them for the repair thereof, according to the
proportion of their Lands, to be new measured by Acres, if need were; or by
Carucates, or quantity of Common of Pasture and Fishing.

By virtue of which Commission the Shireeve was required to impanell Ex praef.
cod. MS. penes O.S. John arm. f. 44. b.
a Jury to enquire etc. Which he did accordingly, and attended the said
Justices at Wigenhale, on Saturday next after the Feast of the Apostles Peter
and Paul; where being sworn, they presented Ex praef. cod. MS. penes O.S. John
arm. f. 44. b.
as follows; viz. that the Banks on each side the before-specified River,
running up from the main Sea into the Country, through the midst of the Towns
of Clenchwarton, Tilney, Islington, Wigenhall, Watlington, and Roungeton-Holme,
and farther, even to Pokediche, were, through the extraordinary raging of the
Sea, so miserably broken and torn, that the greater part of the Lands and
Tenements in South Lenne, Hardwick, UUestwinche, Secchithe magna, and Secchithe
parva was overflowed and destroyed: And that there was no other remedy for the
safeguard of those Towns, and the parts adjacent, against the forementioned
dangers, but only the reducing of the said River within narrower bounds, and
other means following.

And they said, that such a restraint thereof might well and conveniently be
done for the safeguard beforementioned, in a certain place, called Larkes
hirne, in South Lynne, in this manner; viz. that whereas the same River did in
that place then contain in it self xl perches in breadth (every perch being
reckoned at xvi foot) it ought of necessity, to be restrained in that place, on
both sides, for the safety of those Towns, xxxiiij perches, every perch being
of the length abovesaid; so that the breadth of the Chanel of the same River
should be reduced to six perches. And thence, on the East side of the same
River, that a new Bank should be made, directly, to a certain other River,
called Secchithe, and so to the House of the Friars Carmelites of South Lenne:
which River of Secchithe was then five perches wide (as they presented) but
ought to be reduced to the breadth of one perch; accounting the said perch at
xvi foot long, as aforesaid.

And they said, that if such restraint of that River beforementioned, and a
new Bank were not made, all the Banks on each side the said stream, betwixt the
Town of Lynne and Pokediche, would be totally ruined; and consequently the said
Country wholly destroyed: And that all such straightning of the said Rivers,
ought to be made by the Land-holders in Clenchwarton, Tylney, Islington, and
Wigenhale: and that for the same defense, to be performed in form aforesaid,
they ought every one of them to give their assistance, according to what each
man held: provided always that no Tenant or Commoner upon a certain place
called Tylney Smethe, Privilege to the Tenants of Tilney^ Smethe, and Marshland
fenn.
and on another place called Marshland fenne, should, by reason of any
Commodity had, in either of those places, contribute any thing thereto.

And they likewise said, that all the owners of land, from Larkyshyrne, to the
common way, which leads from the Bridge at Wigenhale S. Germans, unto the
Bridge at Secchithe magna; and from Hardwick house directly Southwards, to the
said Bridge at Secchithe, in length; and from Gre^nediche, which joyneth upon
Hardwick dam, Northwards, and Gerys dam Southwards; and from UUest
Wynchegreene, which joyneth upon Gerys dam, Northwards, in a place where
formerly had been a stone Bridge; and thence directly to the Manor of
Coldham; and from thence, and the Crofts of Secchithe magna, and beyond to
Secchithe bridge; and thence Westwards; and in breadth to a certain way, which
leads from Sech gate unto Jones dole fence; and thence to Lynne dyke,
Northwards, unto the How dyke, and so directly to Larkyshirne aforesaid, in the
said Town of South Lynne, Hardwick, Westwinche, and Secchithe magna, ought to
contribute to the making of that defense, every man according to the proportion
of his Land.

And they farther said, that all persons which had Lands and Tenements in a
certain place called Clenchwarton-Marshland, within the Town of South Lynne
aforesaid, and all the Land-holders in Secchithe magna, South Lynne, Secchithe
parva, and Watlington, in diverse places, from Secchithe gate, Southwards, to
the Crofts of Secchithe parva, and from Secchithe draine, Westwards, to East
wroe dyke, at Watlingtone, and the Old Ee of Wigenhale; as also all the
Land-holders in Watlingtone, in a certain place called the Cornfen, which
extends it self from the Wroedike, Westwards, to the River of Wigenhale, and
from Po^dyke, Southwards, to Gerys dam, and thence, Southwards, in the Newlande
to Deylode Drove; and from Wigenhale^bedding, to the River of Wigenhale,
Westwards; and likewise all the Land-holders in the Towns of Roungeton holme,
in a certain place called Holme Bight, which reaches from Deyslode drove to
Green yates, Southwards; ought to contribute to the straightning of the said
Rivers and Banks, to be made in the before-specified places, as aforesaid;
because they lay within the defense and safeguard, and had or might have
benefit or loss by the said Rivers and Banks: And that all their Tenants
likewise ought to make, repair, and maintain the said new Banks, for the
restraining of those Rivers within the beforementioned limits, when and as
often as need should require.

And they said, that this restriction of the said Rivers, by the making of
those new Banks in the places before-specified, would be a secure, lasting and
perpetual defense to all the Banks, and all the lands, lying within the Towns
and places aforesaid. It was therefore ordained by the said Justices, that the
said work should be done accordingly.

In 11 R. 2. Sir Edmund de Thorpe, and Sir Philip de Tilney Knights, together
with John Marshall, were appointed Pat. 11 R. 2. p. 1. m. 33. in dorso.
to view and repair the Banks etc. betwixt Cattesbak, and the Fen end, within
the Town of Tilney. The like Commission Pat. 7. H. 4. p. 2. m. 25. i^ dorso.
in 7 H. 4. had Sir Thomas de Skeleton, Sir John de Rocheford, Sir Pain Tiptoft,
and Sir Raphe de Shelton Knights, Richard Norton, Will. Ludington, and William
Snetesham, for all those Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, as well upon the Seacoast
as otherwise, belonging to the Towns of Tiryngtone, Walpole, Walton, Walsokne,
Enemethe, Well, Wigenhale, Tylneye, and Clenchwarton, anciently ordained for
the safeguard of those Towns: and to proceed therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm. So also in 10 H. 4. had Pat. 10. H. 4. p 1. m. 13. in
dorso.
the same Sir Thomas de Skeleton, with Sir Edmund de Thorpe, Sir John Colvyle,
Sir Raphe Shelton, and Sir John Rocheford Knights, Richard Norton, William
Rees, William Ludyngton, Laurence Trusebut, and Richard Gegge, for all those
Sea-banks lying within the Town of Tyringtone, for the safeguard thereof; and
to proceed therein, as abovesaid.

In the same year, the Abbot of Ramsey was impleaded Pla^ coram Rege term.
Pasch. 10 H. 4. Rot. 9. Norff. Et Rot. 62.
for damages, which were sustained by his neglect in repairing his proportion
of Pokedike, for his lands in Walsokne.

And in 8 H 5. John Cokain, Sir Thomas de Skeleton, Sir John Colvill, Sir John
de Rocheford, and Sir Henry de Rocheford Knights, Robert Tirwhit, Richard
Norton, William Ludyngtone, John Benard, Thomas Derham, Nich, Morys, William
Fulbarne^ and Robert Bird, were assigned Pat. 8. H. 5. p. 1. m. 31. ^n do^so.
to view the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, in Tyrington, Walpole, Waltone,
Walsokne, Enemethe, Well, Wygenale, Tilneye, and Clenchwarton, then broken and
in decay; and to take order for their repair; with direction to do all things
therein according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

What they did therein, I have not seen; but soon after, viz. in 1 H. 6. the
King receiving information Ex cod. MS. ^^nes G^i^. Godda^^ ^^ m.
, that the Banks, Sewers etc. lying betwixt the waters of Well, and the stream
which runs from thence to Salters lode, and Wigenhale, in this Province of
Marshland, were so torn and consumed, partly with the violence of the tides,
and partly by the great floods of fresh waters passing that way, as that very
much damage had happened to the whole Country thereabouts; constituted Ex cod.
MS. ^^nes G^i^. Godda^^ ^^ m.
Thomas Duke of E^eter, Sir Thomas Erpingham, and Sir Henry Rocheforth Knights,
William Paston, John Schuldham, Simeon Fyncham, John Mannyng, and Thomas
Dereham, Commissioners to view the same; and to make such Agistments, both for
raising of new Banks, where need should be, and repairing the breaches and
decays beforementioned, in such sort as they should deem most expedient for
the safeguard and benefit of the Country. Which Commission bears date at
Swyneshed the xij day of April, in the year abovesaid.

By virtue whereof, the Shireeve of Norfolk had command to impanell Jurors,
and to bring them to Downham hithe, upon Thursday next before the Feast of
Pentecost, then next ensuing: Who then and there attending the before-specified
Commissioners, upon their Oaths presented; that the Bank called Pokediche,
anciently made for safeguard of the Towns in this Province of Marshland, and
all the Lands and Tenements within the same, was then so broken and ruinous,
that a great proportion of ground was thereby overflowed with the fresh waters,
to the extraordinary damage of all such persons as were Landholders, or that
did enjoy Common of Pasture or Fishing there. And they said, that the
before-specified Bank, could not be made firm and sufficient by any repair
thereof, the weakness of the ground, whereon it stood, considered: and
therefore they ordained and decreed; that for the better preservation of all
the Towns in Marshland aforesaid; and of all the Lands within the compass
thereof; The making of the new Pokedike.
that there should be another Wall or Bank made new, on the North side of
Salterys lode brink, by all the Land-holders throughout Marshland; and all the
Inhabitants and Residents within the Towns thereof, and of the Town of
Wigenhale.

And that the said Bank so to be made new, should be made and raised upon the
North side of the great River, which passes from UUelle to Salterys lode, and
UUigenhale; viz. from the shore of that River by the space of xxiiij foot: as
also to begin in that place called Salterys lode, and to extend it self from
thence, to the Priory of Mullycourt, Westwards; And that the height thereof
from Salterys lode to North delfe, shall be five foot from the level earth,
and the thickness at the bottom xviij foot; and from Northdelf to the said
Priory, six foot in height from the ground, with xviij foot in breadth at the
bottom, and xij at the top, of good measure, so that it might sufficiently keep
out the water of the Fen. And that all the menure for the making of the said
Bank, should be taken on the South side thereof near the water, but not within
the space of xij foot of the skirt of the same Bank, excepting in time of
necessity, when no earth might be had any where else, by reason of the
inundation of the fresh waters: by which means, not only the River it self
might be enlarged in breadth twelve foot more, where need should require, for
the better carrying away of the fresh waters; but the Kidells being in the same
stream might be sufficiently widened.

And the said Jurors did also decree and ordain, that it might be lawful for
every man, in making his proportion of the said Bank, to dig earth on the North
side of the same, in Winter time, when by reason of the floods of fresh water
coming down, it could not be taken on the South side; so that such digging on
the said North side were xl foot distant from the same, upon penalty of being
amerc'd.

And they likewise decreed; that every Land-holder having Lands within any of
the said Towns of Marshland, and Town of Wigenhale; as also within the precinct
aforesaid, should have his portion of the same Bank assigned to him, according
to the quantity of his Land, according to a new Agistment to be thereof made.
And that all the Land-holders in Stow Bardolf, betwixt the Hord hedding and
Tilney Bank; and within the Bank of Stow lode brinke, and the Ferry pit of
Wigenhale, should be agisted upon the said Bank, each man according to what he
held.

And they did moreover ordain; that all persons, as well Horsemen as Footmen,
which should happen to come to the repair and maintenance of the said Bank, at
any time of the year, upon necessity; should have free and safe coming to and
fro, with their Carts and other things, not only in order to the said repair,
but for the supervising thereof; and to stay there with their said Horses, and
return the nearest way for them, without the danger of any amerciament,
distress, or other punishment for so doing: saving always to the Lords of the
Fees, Waifs, Estreys, and punishment for bloud-spilling, and amerciaments for
Hue and Cry there levied.

And they likewise ordained, that every person, having lands within the
precinct of the said Bank, so to be new made; and that might have safeguard and
benefit by the making and repair thereof, or loss by its not making, should be
obliged to the making and repair of the same, according to his proportion,
betwixt the said Priory and Salterys lode, according to the Law and Custom of
the whole Country of Marshland. And, that every of the said Towns of Marshland,
and Town of Wigenhale, being within the before-specified precincts, should be
obliged, according to his proportion, to the making and repair of the said
Bank, upon penalty of xx l. to be paid to the King, as often as any defect
could be found in his not performance thereof. And they also ordained, that
every Guardian of the same Bank, should have power by the said Law, to take
distresses, for the performance of the premises, when need might require,
without the contradiction of any man whatsoever. And, that every such Guardian,
doing his Office, in respect of his tenure, within the precinct aforesaid; or
that ought to do it; should perform it duly and diligently, for the better
making of the said Bank, so that no defect might be found therein, under the
same penalty, as was anciently established by the Law and Custom of Marshland,
for the making and repair of the before-specified old Bank, called the Poke
diche. And, that if any person agisted for the making and repair thereof,
according to the proportion of his tenure, should be found refractory, and
disobedient to the said Guardian, for the time being; in what he should direct;
that then he to be distrained, punished, and compelled by the said Guardians,
for the well and sufficient performance of the same, according to the Law and
Custom of Marshland.

And they moreover ordained; that neither the Lord, nor any Commoner should
depasture his Cattle upon the said Bank, so to be new made, excepting sheep:
nor that they should drive any Cattle upon the same, for the future avoiding of
those inestimable losses which had happened in times past, by so doing; upon
forfeiture of a penny for every beast so driven, or there depasturing, by the
appointment, knowledge, or neglect of those that ought to look to them; to be
paid to the Guardian of the said Bank, as often as any such delinquency should
happen. And that the Cattle found depasturing, or driven, aforesaid, upon the
said Bank (sheep as aforesaid excepted) to be taken and impounded, and in the
pound detained, until the owner of them should pay the before-specified
penalty: which forfeiture to be employed for the repair of that part thereof,
as should be so hurt by such Cattle.

Also they did ordain, that John Bekeswell, and his heirs and assigns, Tenants
of the message of North delfe, should sufficiently repair and maintain that
Bank opposite to his message on the South part, both in thickness and height,
as often as need should require, for ever, at his and their own proper costs
and chardges, so that through default thereof; no damage might come to any one
within the precinct of the same, under the penalty anciently established for
reparation of the Banks, Gutters, and Sewers in these parts of Marshland,
according to the Laws and Customs thereof.

And that the Prior of Mullycourt and his successors, under the same penalty,
should make new, as also repair and maintain well and sufficiently, as well in
thickness as height, one Bank throughout his Priory, opposite thereto, upon
the South side.

And they likewise then ordained, that the Inhabitants of the whole Town of
Outwell, their heirs and assigns, should new make, repair and maintain one Bank
well and sufficiently for ever, both in thickness and height, toward the
before-specified great River, and on the North side thereof, from the said
Priory of Mullicourt, throughout all the Town of Outwell aforesaid, unto the
Mansion house of Thomas Beaupre, where need should require, upon the penalty
abovementioned. And that the said Inhabitants of Outwell, their heirs and
assigns, should, in default of such new making or repair of the same, forfeit C
s. to be paid to the King, as often as there should be cause by that their
neglect.

And they said moreover; that there was a certain field, called Plawfielde,
lying in the Town of Upw^ll; and certain other fields, called Kyrkfield and
Budbeche, in the Town of Upwell and Outwell; as also another field, called
Sandyfield, in the Town of Outwell aforesaid, which were every year overflowed
by the fresh waters, to the great damage and impoverishing of all persons
having lands in the same, as of all other, having lands within the said Bank,
called Pokediche, then to be new made: and therefore they did ordain, as well
for the better safeguard of all the lands, lying within those fields, as of all
others lying within the Precinct of the said Bank, called Pokediche, to be then
newly made; that there should be made one new Pipe, under the Bank, called
Kirkfield diche; and under the great River there, and the said new Bank, on the
West side of the said Priory of Mullycourt. And likewise one new Sewer, from
the said new Pipe, through Mullycourt drove to Rightforth lode; thence into
North hook, and thence into the great River, which runs from Salterys lode
to Bishop's Lynne: And that all persons, having Lands and Tenements in the said
fields, called Plawfield and Kirkefield, should always repair, cleanse, and
scour the said Pipe and Sewer, so to be new made, unto Kightforth lode, at
their own proper costs and charges, when and as often as need should require.
And that all persons and their heirs having lands in the said fields, called
Budbeche and Sandy field, should have one Sewer there, for avoiding the fresh
waters thence, into Blewe diche; and from Bl^we diche unto Rightforth lode. And
that the same persons, so having lands in those fields, called Budbeche and
Sandyfield, should repair and cleanse the said Sewer unto Blewediche, for the
future, at their own costs and chardges, whenever need should require.

And that the same persons, their heirs and assigns, having lands in the said
fields called Budbeche and Sandy field; as also all the said Inhabitants of
those Towns of Upwell and Outwell, having common of Pasture within the precinct
of the same Bank, called Pokediche, to be so new made, as aforesaid; should
repair and maintain the said Sewer from Blewe diche to Rightforth lode, for the
future, at their own proper costs and charges, as often as need should require.
And that all persons having Lands in the said fields, called Plawfield,
Kirkfield, Budbeche, and Sandyfield; as also all the Inhabitants of Upwell and
Outwell, having Common of Pasture and Fishing within the Precinct of the said
Bank called Pokediche, so to be new made, as aforesaid, should repair the said
Sewer, called Rightforth lode, unto North hook, at their own proper costs and
chardges, for the time to come, whenever need should require.

And they likewise ordained, that the Abbot of UUest Dereham, and his
successors, should new make, repair, and maintain, well and sufficiently, for
the time to come, one Causey of six foot in breadth, Eastwards, throughout all
that part of his land, lying betwixt the old Pokediche on the North part; and a
certain piece of land belonging to the Abbot of Ramsey, and another pertaining
to Thomas Duke of Exeter, on the South part; and abutting on the
before-specified great River toward the East. And that the said Abbot and his
successors should be justified and ordered, for the not making and repair of
the same Causey, according to the Law and Custom anciently used in the Town of
UUigenhale. And that the said Abbot of Ramsey, and his successors, should also
new make, repair and maintain one other Causey, of six foot likewise in breadth,
through another piece of his land, lying on the East part, toward the said
great River.

And they farther ordained, that every person, having lands, Common of Pasture
or Fishing, within the land of the said Abbot and Common lode, should likewise
new make, repair, and maintain one Causey, well and sufficiently, viz. each man
against his own land, toward the said great River: And for the performance
thereof, that they should be compelled by the Steward of Thomas Duke of Exeter,
for his Manor of Stow Bardolf, his heirs and assigns, in the Court of
Stow-Bardolf. And that all the Tenants and Inhabitants in the Towns of Downham
hithe, Wimbotesham, and Stow Bardolf, should new make, as also repair and
maintain, well and sufficiently, for the time to come, a certain Causey,
beginning in a place called Common lode, and extending it self from thence to
Salterys lode.

All which Ordinances and Agistments, so made in form aforesaid, the Towns in
Marshland beforementioned; as also Well, Wigenhale, Dounham hithe,
Winbotesham, and Stow Bardolf, did for the time to come, agree for themselves,
their heirs and assigns, to observe and hold firmly. It was therefore decreed
by the before-specified Justices, that the Inhabitants of the said Towns, which
had Lands, Common of Pasture, or Fishing, within those fields, and safeguard of
the said Bank called Pokediche, to be new made in such sort as aforesaid;
should, for the future, be obliged to repair and maintain the same, according
to the form and effect of the Inquisition, Ordinances and Agistments before
declared; and to be distrained for the time to come, for the performance
thereof, as often and when need should require.

In witness whereof, the said Henry Rocheforth and Thomas Dereham did affix
their Seals thereunto.

Which Inquisition and Ordinances were exemplified by the said King Henry the
sixth, under his great Seal, upon the xijth day of May, in the third year of
his reign.

And, in respect that the ground, from Salterys lode to North delfe
before-specified, whereon the said Bank was to be raised, was then the proper
soil of the said Thomas Duke of Exeter, as part of his Manor of Stow Bardolf,
the said Duke, in confirmation thereof, did, by his Deed E^ prae^. c^d. M^ p^.
and G. ^oddard Arm.
(wherein he likewise styled himself Comes Dorcestriae and Harcuriae, and
Admirallus Angliae) bearing date the Monday next aft^r the Feast of S. Peter ad
vincula, in the said first year of the reign of the same King King Henry the
sixth, grant and confirm, for himself and his heirs, to John Bishop of Ely, Sir
John Colvile, and Sir Henry Rocheford Knights, Richard Peverell, Thomas
Karvile, Thomas Dru, Robert Karvile, and Edmund Massingham Esquires, and all
the Inhabitants of Wigenhale, Tylney, Islington, Cleuchwardon, Terington,
Walton, Enmethe, Walpole, and Walsoken, in the parts of Mershland, their heirs
and assigns, the said Bank called Pokediche, so to be new made and raised for
safeguard against the said fresh waters, on the North part of the River, which
runs from Well to Salterys lode and Wigenhale; beginning at Salterys lode
aforesaid, within his the said Duke's Lordship, which extends it self in
length from thence unto Northdelfe beforementioned; viz. ground containing
xxiiij foot on the South side of the same Bank, for the making, repairing, and
maintaining thereof: as also sufficient ground on the North side thereof, xl
foot distant from the same, for the repair likewise and maintenance thereof:
provided that they should not dig any earth on the said North side thereof, for
the purposes abovesaid, as long as the said Bank could be fitly repaired with
the earth on the South side.

And he did moreover grant and confirm to the said John Bishop of Cly, and the
rest of the persons above-specified, their heirs and assigns, that they not any
of them should be molested in their passage to and fro, in the making and
repair of the said Bank, wheresoever there might be cause for the same: Saving
nevertheless to him the said Duke and his heirs, Wayfe, Stray, and other
amerciaments for Hue and Cry, as also for blood shed, within his said Lordship,
at all times of the year.

After this; viz. in the same third year of the said King Henry the sixth,
William Babyngton, Sir John Colvyll, and Sir Henry Rocheforth Knights, Will.
Paston, Tho. Derham and John Mannyng, were Pat ^. H. (...) 1. m. 16 i^ dorso.
constituted Commissioners to view the Banks, Sewers, Ditches, Bridges, and
Causeys, betwixt UUalpole and Tilney; and to determine all things therein,
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm: as also to take so many Diggers
and Laborers, upon competent wages, as they should think necessary for that
service; in regard of the great expedition, which through the decay of those
works, was then required.

Several other Commissions were afterward issued out, in this Kings reign, to
the like purpose; scil. in 8 H. 6. to Pat. 8 ^ 6^ ^. 2. n. ^0. i^ dorso.
Sir Henry Rochefort, and Sir Robert Clyftone Knights, William Pastone, William
Goodrede, Thomas Derham, Simon Fyncham and Thomas Shuldham, for all those
Banks, Sewers etc. in the Towns of Upp^welle, Outwelle and Enemethe, betwixt
the River, which goth from Wellynhee, to the Priory of Mullycourt: and the
River which passes from Enemethe unto the said Priory; and to proceed therein
as abovesaid.

In 22 H. 6. to Pat. 22. H. 6. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
Sir Thomas Scales Knight. William Yelverton, Hugh Prior of Wirmegay, Thomas
Trusbut, John Fyncham, Thomas Salesbury, William Willy and Raphe Geytone, for
those throughout the whole Province of Marshland, and the parts adjacent, from
Marham to Wigenhale: and to do all things therein according to the Laws and
Customs of Romeney Marsh. The like Commission Pat. 30. H. 6. ^. 1. m. 22. in
do^so.
had the said Sir Thomas Scales, William Yelvertone, Thomas Trusbut, William
Eweyn and Thomas Salisbury in 30 H. 6.

So also had Ibid. m. 14. in dorso.
John Earl of Oxford, John Viscount Beaumont, John Heydone, John Fyncham and
John Bekyswell, for all those betwixt the waters of W^lle, and the water which
leads from Well to Salterys lode, and Wygenhale.

In 21 H. 7, the said Bank, called the new Pokedike was totally measured Ex
cod. MS. pene, Gu^^. Goddard Arm.
, and then found to contain in length, from the house of John Pie at Salters
lode, unto the house of John Bekeswell at Northdelf, xviij furlongs and xxvij
perches; the repair thereof belonging as follows; viz.

To the Tenants of the Lord Bardolf, xxij perches. To the Town of Wigenhale,
three furlongs, xviij foot and four inches. To the Towns of Tilney, Islington,
and Clenchwardon, three furlongs, xviij foot and four inches. To Tirington
three furlongs, xviij foot and four inches. To Walpole three furlongs, xviij
foot and four inches. To UUalton and Emneth three furlongs, xviij foot and four
inches. To Walsoken three furlongs, xviij foot and four inches. To John
Bekyswell, opposite to his house at North delf, xv perches. And from Northdelf
to Mullycourt, it contained in length xiiij furlongs, and seven perches;
whereof the repair belonged as follows; viz. To Walsoken two furlongs, xv
perches, five foot and four inches. To UUalton and Emneth two furlongs, xv
perches, five foot and four inches. To Terington two furlongs, xv perches, five
foot and four inches. To Tilney, with Islington and Clenchwarton two furlongs,
xv foot and four inches. To Wigenhale two furlongs, xv perches, five foot and
four inches.
Memorandum, that upon the seventh day of July, 21 H. 7. every Acre of ground
in Marshland was assessed at four inches, for the maintenance of the said Bank.

But notwithstanding this care taken for repair thereof, such was the
wickedness of some people, that they diverse times made breaches in sundry
parts of it; insomuch as complaint being made in Parliament, Ao 22 H. 8. this
ensuing Act Rot. Parl. 22 H. 8. c^ p. 9.
was thereupon made.

WHereas before this time, diverse evil disposed persons, of their perverse
and evil dispositions, maliciously, at diverse and sundry times, have cut, cast
down, and broken up, diverse parts of the Dike, called new Powdich, in
Marshland, in the County of Norff. and the Broken dyke, otherwise called
Oldfield dyke, by Marshland, in the Isle of Ely, in the County of Cambridge: By
reason whereof, as well by the great abundance of the Salt water, as also by
the course of the Fresh water, entering and coming into, and by the said part of
the said Ditches, so broken and cast down, the grounds and Pastures within the
County of Marshland, in the County aforesaid, have been diverse and many times
drowned and surrounded with the water aforesaid, so that no profit thereof
might be taken by the owners and occupyers of the said ground: And the
Inhabitants within the said Marshland, and the Level of the same, many and
sundry times have been, not only put to importunate chardges and expenses, to
their extreme damage and costs, but also to their great undoings, having lost
much of their Cattle and Beasts, then being and depasturing upon and within
Marshland aforesaid, to their great damage and loss, and to the great decay of
the Common welthe of the Country adjoining to the same. And also by reason of
the same waters, much people have been drowned in their beds, within their
houses, and have lost the most port of their goods being within the same.

For reformation whereof, it is ordained, enacted, and established, by the King
our Sovereign Lord, by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in the present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same;
that every such perverse and malicious cutting down, and breaking up of any
part or parts of the said Dikes, or of any other Banks being parcel of the
Rind or uttermost part of the said Country of Mershland, at every time and
times hereafter, from henceforth, by any person or persons committed and
done, otherwise than in working upon the said Banks and Dikes, for the
repairing, fortifying and amending of the same, to be taken, reputed and
adjudged Felony: Felony to cut Podike,
and that the offenders and doers of the same, and every of them, be adjudged
and reputed Felons. And that the Justices of Peace of the said Counties of
Norfolk and Cambridge, in the said Isle, at every of their Sessions, within the
said Isle and Counties to be kept; by the authority aforesaid, have full power
to cause enquiry to be made after every such offense, so at any time in form
aforesaid hereafter to be committed and done; and to award the like process
against every of the said offenders, with like judgment and execution of the
same, if they or any of them, be thereof found guilty by verdict or otherwise,
as the said Justices have used and accustomed to do upon other Felonies, being
Felony at the common Law.

Which Statute was in 5 Edw. 6. by an Act R^t. Parl. 5 E. 6. n.
of Parliament, then largely made, for the repeal of diverse Treasons and
Felonies, clearly repealed and made void. But in 2 and 3 Ph. and M. it was
again Rot. Parl. 2 and 3 ^h. and M. cap. 19.
revived.

In which year there were these ensuing Ordinances E^ prae^. cod. MS. p^nes O.
S. John cap. Justic. de Banco an. 1657.
made, upon the eighth day of April, by the chief Inhabitants of this whole
Country of Marshland, and Town of Wigenhale, touching the Old Powdike and
Broken dike.

1 That the said old Pow diche be sufficiently made, from the place called West
head unto Well Town, so far as it has been of late accustomed; viz, in height
six foot, above Bardolf Fenne, and in breadth at the foundation xxx foot; and in
breadth on the highest part thereof, xv foot. 2. That no man take or dyke any
menure, within viij foot of the South part of the same Pow diche: And on the
North part of the same, no menure to be taken, within C. foot from the foot of
the same Pow diche. 3. That the same Powdiche be made by every particular
Township, whole and Common, by Acre silver, and not otherwise: and the same to
be done by every Township, by Whitsunday then next coming, or Midsomer at the
farthest, in pain of every Township xl l. to be levied to the use of the said
King and Queens Majesty. And that every particular Town do sufficiently Clay
their particular charge, on the forepart thereof, in thickness with Clay one
foot and an half, and on the top thereof one foot. 4. And for the better
preservation of the same Powdiche, they did in like manner ordain, that there
should be re-edified upon the said Powdiche, three Houses; that is to say, one
at North hook gate, another between Walpole and Tirington gate, upon the Bank
and Powdiche; and the third at Well gate; the charges to be levied upon the
whole Townships of Marshland, and Town of Wigenhall, by Acre silver. 5. That if
any man were then indicted, or thereafter should be indicted, vexed, or molested
for any cause, touching the defense, maintenance, or preservation of the same
Country, and Town of UUigenhale; then they and every of them to be defended and
saved harmless by the said Country and Town of UUigenhale, all so far as the
Law will serve and permit. 6. That the Broken dyke be sufficiently made,
maintained, and repaired, from time to time, as it has been in times past,
that year and other years, thenceforth by the said Country of Marshland. 7.
That a view be made at Emneth, by the chief Inhabitants of the Country, where
there might be newly made and re-edified, within the Level and Rind thereof,
a new Dyke for the defense of the water, if Broken dyke be broke: which view to
be at Sandy rood, upon the Friday following, by eight of the Clock.
And on the tenth day of the same month of April, it was farther concluded, by
the consent of the said chief Inhabitants, and Town of Wigenhale; that the said
Dyke, called Broken dyke, should be made, maintained, and kept, from time to
time, by, and at the costs, charges and expenses of the whole Country of
Marshland, as afore-time had been accustomed.

And that a new Dyke be made from Myll dam, unto Peter Sanderson's house; and
so by the high way directly about, unto a certain place, called Suffield gate,
in such height, thickness and breadth, as Thomas Guybon, John Reppes, William
Hunston, and Thomas Karvill Esquire, Richard Baker, alias Ladde, Richard
Nichols, Henry Hunston, and Thomas Hewar Gentleman, or the more part of them,
with the advice of the workmen, should think meet and convenient.

After this, 8 Eliz.
viz. in 8 Eliz. there were other Ordinances Ex praef. cod: MS. f. 113. b.
made touching the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers in these parts; the substance
whereof are as follows; viz.

1 That Rightforth lode from Westhead or North hook Westward, being but 8 foot
wide, ought to made xij foot in breadth, by Edmund Beaupre Esquire: And so every
person etc. to make his or their part of the same wideness, from the said Edm.
Beaupre VVestwards; and so to Stowbridge. 2 That the brinks of the great River,
from Stowbridge unto Common load, be made in the upper part 8 foot in breadth,
between the Houses, Hedges, and VValls of the West part of Ouse. 3 That Common
lode (lying on the South side of Stowbridge houses) be made of the wideness of
xij foot, and 4 foot deep; with such a Sluse as Rightforth lode has at
S^owbridge; to be done etc. at the charge of the Inhabitants of Dounham,
Wimbotesham, and Stow-Bardolf, for that it is their Drayn etc. 4 That upon the
stopping of Newlode (lying between Common lode and Downhambridg) the said lode
called Common lode, or Downham lode, was made. 5 That the gole betwixt Dounham
bridge and Salters lode, to be made xij foot wide, and 4 foot deep; and to
extend into the Fen, from the said Sluice, a mile and more; and scoured by the
Inhabitants of Dounham. 6 That the brinks on the West side of Ouse, from
Common lode to Dounham brigg, be made xij foot broad in the bottom, and 8 foot
on the top; and one foot higher than the highest water mark; to be done by the
Inhabitants of Stow-Bardolf, UUymbotesham, and Downham. 7 That Edm. Beaupre
Esquire, and other the Land-holders in great Powdichfield, and Whart medows,
have a Sluse at UUelle Clouses, at the North head of Whartmedow, and so to
drayn through the midst of Marshland fenne. 8 That the brinks of Ouse, from
Dounham bridge to Salters lode, be made xij foot broad in the bottom, and 8
foot at the top; as also one foot higher than the highest water mark. 9 That
the new Powdiche, from Salters lode to North delph, be made xviij foot broad in
the bottom, xij foot at the top, and ^ive foot in height from the plain ground.
And from North delph to Mullicourt^ of the same breadth at the top and bottom;
and six foot in height from the plain ground. All which to be done and kept by
the Inhabitants of Marshland, the Town of Wigenhall, the Land-holders of the
hundred Acres within Stow Bardolf, called the Lords hedding; and the
Land-holders of the decayed Tenement, sometimes Bexwell's, at North delph. 10.
And that from the East corner of Mullycourt, unto Mullycourt drove, it be made
of the like breadth at the bottom and top, by the Dean of Ely; and six foot in
height as abovesaid. Which said Powdiche, from Mullycourt droves end, tends
VVestwards unto the Bridge at the East end of Outwell Church; and thence
Northwest unto Boxstedstile, which is the farthest bound of Outwell toward
Emneth; and is the division betwixt the half Hundred of Clakclose, and the
Hundred of Freebridge: The which Bank or Causey ought to be made and kept by
the Inhabitants of the Town of Outwell, for their lands lying in Mullycourt
field, Sondy field, and Powdich field. 11. That the River of Well, called
Well Ee, coming from the Bridge at the East end of Outwell Church, and running
Eastward, till it come opposite to Saltham lake, thence South East unto North
delf, thence Eastward to Salters lode, to be made xxvij foot wide in the
bottom, and xl foot at the top, from the said Bridge at Outwell Church to
Mullycourt droves end, by the Inhabitants of Outwell; and from thence, of the
same wideness, by the Dean of Ely, to Saltham lake; and from thence to Salters
lode, of the like breadth, by the Inhabitants of Marshland and Town of
UUigenhall. 12 That at the end of this River of Well Ee, near Salters lode, be
made two Jettyes of wood, or stone; each opposite to other, and distant xviij
foot, to hinder the tides from flowing up Westwards, toward Well; and that
the fresh water may have the quicker fall into the Ouse; and this to be done by
the Inhabitants of Marshland, and Town of Wiggenhall. 13 That the common Sewer,
called Thief lake, lying in Denver fenne, be made within xl Rood of Salters
lode, between Shiplode and Salters lode; and x foot wide unto the Land lake;
with a sufficient gole, by Thomas Gawswell Gent. owner of the Manor of East
Hall in Denver. 14 That the Common Sewer in Denverfenn, called Streme lake, be
made of the wideness of x foot, to bring the water out of the Fenn, by the
space of six furlongs; to be made and kept by the Inhabitants of Denver, with a
sufficient gole etc.
That the other common Sewer, called Denver hithe, lying in Denver fenn,
between Stream lake and Shiplode, be made one furlong in length or more, and x
foot wide, with a sufficient gole; by Nicholas Have Esquire, owner of the
Manor of West Hall in Denver.

That the brinks of Ouse, between Salters lode and Shiplode, be made viij foot
broad in the bottom, and six at the top; and one foot higher than the highest
water mark.

That some provision be made for the straightning of Lynne Haven; which, being
wider than it was wont to be, causes the tide to rise higher by a foot, at
Salters lode, than it was wont to do within these xx years.

1 The next year following, I find Ex cod. MS. pene^ Gui^. Goddard A^m. An.
1567. 9. Eiz.
a Certificate and Presentment made the xxxth of June, by Richard Nicholls,
Thomas Hewar, and others, Jurats for this Country of Marshland; the tenor
whereof is as follows.

1 That all the Lands and Tenements etc. within the Hundred of Frebridge, on
the West side of the great River, leading from Salters lode to Lynne; and all
other Lands etc. in the Hundred and half of Clacklosse, on the West side of the
said great River, and on the North side of a certain Bank called the New Pow
dich, situate in the Hundred and half of Clackclose, on the West side of the
said great River, made and erected in the time of the reign of King Henry the
vith, are defended and saved from submersion and drowning with fresh water, by
the said Diche or Bank called the New Pow dich: Which Bank has been kept and
defended by the lands in the Hundred of Frebridge, by a certain field called
Hawsted, and by an hundred Acres in Stow-Bardolfe, and the Frontier against
North delf house, on the North side of the said old Powdich only: yet thereby
are defended all the Lands, Tenements and Commons on the South side of the said
old Pow dich, and Emneth marsh dich, and ought to be charged for their portion
and profit by the said Bank, taking between the Priory of Mullycourt and
Salters lode aforesaid; as appears by certain orders made before the
Commissioners of Sewers, in the first year of the late King Henry the sixth:
yet the said Lands, Tenements and Commons last abovesaid, are not there
chardged nor defend any part thereof, contrary to equity and Justice. 2 And
that the Inhabitants of the said Hundred of Frebridge, nor any of them, nor any
other ought to be distrained or troubled by the Lords of the Fee, nor their
Ministers, when they or any of them shall come thither for the making their
portions of the said Bank, nor for the oversight of the making thereof; nor for
the depasturing of their Horses there; nor for their carriage; but that they
may return in the meetest and most convenient ways for them, and have free
ingresse and egresse to the same Dyke or Bank, without any amerciament or other
punishment; Saved to the Lords, Wayf, Stray, punishment for blood draught, and
for Hue and Cry. 3 And that every person is chardgable to keep their portions
upon the said Bank, from time to time, by and after the Custom of Marshland,
by old Custom used; that is to say, by Bylawe, Byscot, Triscot, and Wopeny.

And that every Town of the said Hundred of Frebridge, is chardgable to keep
and repair their portions upon the said Bank, upon pain of xx l. to be paid to
the Queens Majesty, her heirs and successors, Kings and Queens of this Realm.

4 And that the menure for the repair of the said Bank, ought to be taken on
the South side of the same Bank, and xij foot from the foot of the said Dike or
Bank; and not upon the North side, but when for the Inundation of the water it
cannot be taken on the South side of the said Bank, called the New Pow dich. 5
Item they say and find, that there is a certain Ward dich, or Fence Bank,
called the Old Pow dich, which does begin at a place, called the Wech, or West
head, next unto Rightforth lode brinke; and extends Westwards nine hundred
and twenty two Rode, unto a certain place, called the Thwart lane, or the New
Pow dich of Marshland: which Bank is in good repair, from the West end thereof,
unto a certain place in Walpole charge, where against, Edmund Beaupre Esquire,
has fixed and set certain bars into a pasture of his there, by reason the
said Edmund does keep and maintain a certain Crest or Fen-bank on the North
brink of Rightforth lode; which defends the water on the South side thereof,
from the Pow diche aforesaid. But at a certain Gate upon the said Old Pow
diche, in Emneth charge, in the reach aforesaid, is a certain Pipe laid by the
said Edmund Beaupre, for the drayning of certain Lands on the South side of the
said Old Pow dich, which is to the surrounding of the Fen and Smethe of
Marshland; and of right ought not that way to drayn, but by Rightforth lode:
And that the said Pipe ought to be taken up, and the said place stopped and made
higher, that no water drayn that ways. 6 And the residue of the said Old Pow
dich, in the charge of Walpole, Terington, Clenchwarton, and part of Tylney, in
part is defective, for lack of height and breadth; and that most chiefly by the
ruin and decay of a certain Crest or Fen-bank, which ought to be kept on the
North side brink of Rightforth lode, by Nicholas Hare Esquire, and others. And
that the residue of the said Bank of the Old Pow dich is in good repair, even
unto Rightforth lode brinke: By the ruin and decay of which Bank, the gross
Common, called the Smethe, and the Fen of Marshland; and certain Fens and low
grounds in UUigenhall and Stow-Bardolf, on the North side of the said Pow dich,
may be surrounded and damnified. 7 And that the said Thwart lane, or the New
Pow dich of Marshland, extending from the Old Pow dich aforesaid, unto a
certain place of Emneth marsh dich, called Abbot's hirne, as we think in our
consciences, ought to be kept and maintained by the chardges of the said
Country of Marshland, as often, and when need shall require; the South end
whereof is in defect for lack of height; yet not very needful to be exalted
and made, because the Hundred is sufficiently defended by a certain Bank of the
Old Pow dich; which extends from the South end of the Thwart lane aforesaid,
unto the River or Sewer of Well; and from thence, on the West side of the said
River, unto the beginning of Emneth Sea-dyke, at Boxsted style: which Bank of
the Old Pow dich, we find necessary to be new agisted, that every person may
have equal chardge accordingly as they now use. 8 Item they say and find, that
all the Lands and Tenements etc. in the said Hundred, on the West side of the
said great River, and a certain field called Hawsted, are defended and saved
from surrounding, by a certain Bank called Broken dich, or Old fen dich,
situate in the Town of Elm, in the County of Cambridge; extending from a
certain place at Emneth, called Mill dam, unto another place called Hichcock's
dam: which Bank, for the better security of Marshland, would be exalted from
the corner, next the Mansion house of Robert Blewick, in Emneth, unto Hichcocks
dam, one foot at the least; and more, where necessity should be; so that the
same shall be a just Level, and in breadth in the top, twelve foot; and by the
common chardges of all the Lands and Tenements within the Salvation aforesaid.
9 Item, that two Pipes are laid throughout the said Bank, for the drayning of
certain lands on the South side of the said Bank, which are to the surrounding
of Marshland, and the Commons of the same; and ought to be fordone and broken
up, for that they are to the great prejudice of Marshland. 10 Item, they say
and find, that where in the first year of Henry the sixth, a Decree was made,
before the Commissioners of Sewers then, as well for the Salvation of certain
Fields, called Plawfield, Budbeche field, Kirkfield, and Sandyfield, in Upwell
and Outwell; as also for the perfect saving and sewing of the Lands and
Tenements, within the salvation of the New Powdich; then to be erected, and on
the South side of the Old Pow diche aforesaid; that there should be two Gotes
made, under the River in Well, for the drayning of the said fields: which
Gotes, through the insufficiency of the Sewer, called Rightforth lode,
extending to the great River, have often overflown and surrounded, and almost
every winter do overflow diverse Lands, Tenements, and Commons, in UUelle and
Stow-Bardolf, and much damnifie the Old Powdich, to the great and inestimable
hurt of the Lands, Tenements and Commons, within the Salvation aforesaid.
Wherefore it was decreed by certain Commissioners; that if the Lands and
Tenements, that way drayning, do not sufficiently keep the said Sewer, that the
water be kept within the Bay; so that the Lands within the Salvation of the
said New Powdich, may drayn into, and by the said Sewer; that then it shall b^
lawful to the Inhabitants of Marshland to stop up their said Gotes. 11 Which
Decree, for that it is profitable for the said Hundred, and for all other the
premises within the Salvation of the said N^w Powdich; we find, that it is
reasonable, that it be ratified by the authority of this Commission of Sewers.
And further, that it shall not be lawful for any man to open the said Gotes,
or Got, before the water be fallen within the Bay; so that all the premises,
within the said Salvation of the said New Powdich, may drayn and be sewed,
which lie on the South side of the Old Powdich, upon pain to lose and forfeit
for every such offense x l. to be levied by any of the Dike-Reeves of
Marshland; or by so many of them as the said Country shall assign, of the goods
of every person or persons which shall open the same, or their procurers, or
any of them, toward and for the stopping of the said Gotes, to the scouring of
the said Sewer; and to be bestowed upon the said Old Pow dich in equal
proportions. 12 Item they say, that neither the Lord, nor no Commoner, shall
feed any Beasts upon the said New Pow dich, besides Sheep; nor make any drift
with Beasts upon the said Bank, for inestimable hurt that may there be done,
upon pain of a penny for every load so driven, or under the custody, will, or
default of any keeper of any; to be paid to the Dike-Reeves of the same Bank,
as often as such offense is: And that the Beasts there found feeding or drive^,
in manner aforesaid except such as are excepted) by the said Dyke-Reeves, shall
be distrained, impounded, and in pound to be kept, while the owners of them
shall pay the money forfeited, which shall be employed upon the amendment of the
said Bank, so hurt by the drift of the said Beasts, as appears by the Decree
made then. 13 Item they say and find, that all the Lands etc. on the South side
of the said Old Pow dich, and all other Lands in Well, on the West side of the
River, leading from Mill dam to Well Church, are saved from surrounding, and
do take great benefit by the New Pow diche aforesaid; and therefore ought to be
charged between the Priory of Mullycourt and Salters lode, for their portion
and profit thereby taking; but are not; whereby the Queens Majesty's
possessions, and other possessions of the Country of Marshland, are very much
surcharged. 14 Item they say, that the Inhabitants of Marshland, or any other
that shall come to the said New Pow dich, for the menuring, making, or
repairing of the same; or oversight thereof, with their Carriages, Horses, or
other things for the defense thereof; ought not to be distrained, or otherwise
troubled by the Lords of the Fee, o^ their Ministers; but that they may return
in the ways meetest for them without amerciament or punishment and that way of
punishment is reserved to the Lords of the Fee; but Wayf, Stray, punishment for
bloud-draught, and for Hue and Cry, and for taking of menure on the North side
of the said Bank, within forty foot of the foot of the same Bank. 15 And they
say and find, that the said Dyke or Bank, is in defect for lack of height or
breadth, between the Priory of Mullycourt and North delf house, in diverse places
of necessity defended; viz. in the supposed charges of Emneth xi foot; of
Terington xxiij Rods; of Walsoken viij Rods and a half; of West-walton x Rods;
of Walpole xli Rods; of Tylney xij Rods; of Wigenhall iij Rods; and xv Rods
against the decayed message of North delf; which ought to be kept by the said
messuage-land to it belonging, in wideness and height equal to the said New
Pow dich. And from Northdelf to Salters lode in the like supposed charges; of
Enmeth iij Rode; Walsoken xxii; Walton xxxvi; Walpole Lxx; Teringtone Lxij;
West-Lynne vi; Clenchwarton xvi; Tylney xli; Wigenhall Lx; be^ides a certain
other part likewise supposed to be the charge of certain other lands of a C.
Acres in Stowe, on the North side of the Old Pow diche, which is wholly in
defect. 16 All which Bank, from Salters lode, to the decayed message of North
delf, ought to be five foot above the Fen; and in breadth in the bottom, xviij
foot; and in breadth in the top, xij foot. And from the said Northdelf house to
Mully court, the said Bank ought to be in height vi foot; and in breadth in the
bottom xviij foot; and in the top xij foot. 17 And that the menure for the
repair and making of the same Bank, ought to be taken on the South side, xij
foot from the foot of the same Bank, saving in the time of great need; and not
on the North side of the same Bank; but in the winter time, and when for the
inundation of the water, it cannot be taken on the South side; and then C. foot
from the foot of the same Bank. But because there is no punishment contained in
the said Decrees for such offenders, as take their menure within xij foot of
the said Bank, on the South side thereof, whereby the foot of the said Bank, in
diverse places, is very sore diminished; and the Lands and Tenements within the
Salvation aforesaid, much the more in peril; wherefore we find it reasonable,
that it be now decreed, that every person that shall take any menure on the
South side of the said Bank, within twelve foot of the said Bank, except in
time of great necessity, shall lose and forfeit for every Rod so taken and
decayed as aforesaid, x s. the moytie to the finder of the same, the other
moytie to the Queens Majesty.
But notwithstanding all this care and cost, so outrageous were the storms and
tempests, which did beat upon these Sea-banks, that on Monday and Tuesday, the
second and third of October, in the year 1570. (12 Eliz.) they made Ibid.
several breaches in them, whereby all Marshland, together with the Town of
Wigenhale, was overflowed with Salt water; so that from old Lynne unto Magdalen
bridge, there were not left ten Rods of the said Bank firm and whole, to the
extraordinary damage of all the Country.

How these breaches were made up, I have not seen, nor any thing else
considerable, touching these parts, until 39 Eliz. that there was complaint
Ibid.
made at a Se^sion of Sewers then held at Beaupre Hall; Ibid.
that in regard of the neglect of keeping the water in Rightforth lode, within
the Crests of the same, the grounds on the North part of the said lode, were,
in time of great inundations overflown; which occasioned the Tenants thereof,
for avoiding of the water, to cut the old Pow dike, and to issue the said water
into Marshland Fen, to the great surrounding of the same, and extraordinary
loss to the Inhabitants and Commoners there: It was therefore ordained and
decreed by the said Commissioners; that if any person or persons whatsoever,
should thenceforth attempt to cut the said Bank, in any part thereof, to the
intent aforesaid; or should lay any Pipe or Sluse, for the waters to fall
through the same, other than such as were already laid, should lose and forfeit
to the said Queen, her heirs and successors xx l. to be levied of the Goods and
Chatels of every such person, upon every such default.

After this, diverse years, there hapued Ex cod. MS. penes praef. O. S. John f.
200. a.
a mighty tide, upon the first day of April 1607. (5 Iac.) which broke Catts
bank, and drowned Clenchwarton: On the xvth of which month, there was another
Survey Ex cod. MS. penes praef. G. Goddard Arm.
made of the before-specified New Pow dike, together with an Agistment thereof,
by one Mr. Richard Atkins of Outwell; which was performed very exactly, by the
Rod of xvi foot and an half, of strict measure, according to the number of
perches charged upon every Town; and began at the stone, erected upon the said
Bank near Mullicourt corner, by Saltham lake: the number of perches, from
Mullicourt to Northdelf Close, being there found to be CCCCxlix. according to
the large Hundred; which perfectly agreed with the Books and Rolls of the
Country: From whence the repair of the said Bank, on the South part, and
opposite to the said Northdelfe Close, was assigned to the heirs of Sir Francis
Gawdey Knight, for the whole length thereof, as anciently it had been.

And from that place it went on, more toward the East, from the East corner of
the before-specified Close, near the Ditch, unto a stone fixed nigh Salters
lode; which is the chardge belonging to Stow-Bardolf, for those Lands called
the Hundred Acres: but this part was measured by the Rod of xvij foot; and so
accorded perfectly with the just number of perches anciently assigned to each
Town of Marshland. All which being done, there were special Merestones set up
by the said Richard Atkins, which had peculiar names graved upon them, by the
consent of the Inhabitants, and did distinguish the several proportions of the
said Bank, charged upon each Town. And thence, for the Hundred acres of Stow
aforesaid, unto the Ditch, which compasses the Tenement at Salters lode, were
xxiij perches and ten foot, according to the said Rod.

At which time it was agreed betwixt the Dyke-Reeves, who were then in office,
that the proportion of the said Bank charged upon UUest Lynne, should be
transposed and agisted, as well above as below, with Tilney and UUigenhale,
where the said Bank was more secure; in regard that the Inhabitants of the said
Town of Lynne had been found so negligent in repairing and maintaining their
parts thereof. And it was then also finally concluded, betwixt the principal
Guardians of the said Bank, that this new survey and assignation of parts,
should continue in force for ever; and all formerly made, in regard they were
so confused, to be utterly void.

The next year following, on the xvith of August ( viz. 6 Iac. An. 1608) it was
by a Law of Sewers decreed Ex praef. cod MS. penes O. S. John f. 218. a.
that a new Drayn or Lode should be made and maintained from the end of
Chancelours lode, unto Tylney Smethe, on the South side of the Bank, to the
Fen-ward of the aforesaid ancient Sewer; which Drayn to be xij foot in breadth,
and four or five foot in depth. Likewise that a Sluse or Gole should be made at
the North end of Chancelour's lode, to convey the waters of the Fen into the
common Sewer.

And it was then also decreed, that the Land-holders on the South side of
Wisebeche, should from that time forward ^ew and pass the water out of those
their Lands lying on the said South side of Wisebeche (between the River of
Wisebeche on the North, and Ingham field, Halfpeny field, and Spitt^e field on
the South, and Gold bank on the West, containing by estimation eleven hundred
Acres of ground) every year from the xxv of March, until the first of
November, by a Pipe of xviij inches square, under the little River of
Wis^beche, at a place called New common, into Enemeth field; and so into
Walsoken drayn; and so to the Smethe lode: and, that, in consideration thereof,
the said Land-holders should pay to the Inhabitants of Marshland C l.

And on the xxvi of the same month, it was farther decreed Ibid.
, that all the rind Banks within this Country of Marshland, toward the Sea,
should be of the height and scantling hereafter expressed; viz. in Terington,
Walpole, West Walton, and Emneth, in height eight foot, above the ordinary
Marshtides; and in breadth on the top ten foot. And, that the residue of the
rind Banks in Islington, Tilney, West Lynne, North-Lynne, and Clenchwarton, to
be of such height and breadth, as the Dyke-Reeves should think fit.

As also, that Register Books of Parchment be made by the Dyke-reeves, in every
Town, containing the number of Acres of their Lands; with the quantity of their
Banks, Walls, VVood-shores, and other defenses, which every of the said Towns
are charged to make, either to the Sea, or otherwise. And that whereas the
Towns of Terington, Tilney, and Clenchwarton, had In-dikes for their defense
against the Salt water, in case any sudden breach of the Sea-bank should
happen; it was decreed, that the said In-dikes should be carefully maintained
and repaired by those Dyke-Reeves, out of the Common Acre-shot, ass^ssed within
every of the said Towns.

After this, at another I^id.
Session of Sewers, held on the xvijth day of April, in the year of our Lord
1610, (8 Iac.) it being considered, that this Country of Marshland was subject
to surrounding, as well by downfalls of Rain, as by the overflowing of the Sea
and fresh waters; and was therefore kept drayned by Sewers, descending to
Knight's-Gole (the common out-fall to the great River of Ouse:) And that the
said Gole, by the flowing and ebbing of the Sea, was then so silted up with
sand, at diverse times, especially in Summer, that it obstructed the waters in
the said Sewers, to the utter surrounding of all the Fens and low grounds in
the said Country; And moreover, that the said Gole, in former times had been
kept and perfected, as also the fleet from the same, unto the before-specified
River, by a certain ancient pair of Clows, placed up higher in the Sewer
thereby; one appointed for the taking in of the tides, and so holding up the
water, betwe^n a pair of Clows, until the River of Ouse were run low; and then
forcibly let go, for the scouring of Sand out of the said Gole and Fleet: And
that the setting open of the said Gole, and putting down and pulling up the
said Clows, would be both dangerous and troublesome, by reason of the
greatness and weight of the said Clows, made to that purpose: It was ordained
and decreed, that there should, in consideration thereof, be yearly paid out of
every hundred Acres of Land, being several, within the said Rind of Marshland,
which were drayned by the said Gole, and had usually paid thereunto, the sum of
ij d. ob. by the owners or occupyers of the said Lands; and so after that rate.
And of every hundred Acres of Land, lying on the South side of Wisebeche and
Elm, Oldfield, and Outwell, which then were or should be drayned by the said
Gole, by the owners or occupyers thereof, v d. and so after that Rate.

And whereas the Land-holders of Oldfield, in Clme, and certain Lands in
Outwell, on the East side of UUelle river, from Emneth unto Beaupre Hall, and
so to Stoning style, and thence to the old Pow dyke, had at diverse times
drayned their said Lands in Oldfi^ld, into Marshland, through the out-rinde
Bank of Marshland, called Broken dyke, and so through Emneth into Marshland
Fenn: as also their Lands in Outwell, to the great hurt of the said Country, by
suffering those waters to run into the said Fen, without any perfect Sewer, to
carry them down in any Gole to the Sea; and likewise without paying any Tax,
Acreshot, or other contribution toward any Drayn, Sewer, or Gole, in Marshland
for the same: It was then also ordered, that the said Lands should not,
thenceforth, be drayned into Marshland Fenn, but by and under such conditions
here expressed; viz. that the Land-holders of Oldfield and Outwell, should,
before the xxiiijth of August then next ensuing, give unto the Land-holders of
Marshland C l. viz. the Land-holders of Oldfield Lxxv l. and they of Outwell
xxv l. toward the making of a certain lode, between Marshland Fenn, and
Smethe, called Shore lode, in wideness xij foot, and in depth four or five
foot; and toward the making of three sufficient Stone-bridges for Carts to
pass over the said Lode.

But it was neither the strength nor height of those their Banks, so repaired
as aforesaid, which could secure them from that dreadful inundation of the
Sea, happening on the first of November, in An. 1613. (11 Iac.) the memorial
whereof I shall here deliver from an Inscription upon the East wall of the
South Isle, in Wisebeche Church.

To the immortal praise of God almighty, that saves his people in all
adversities, be it kept in perpetual memory, that on the Feast day of All
Saints, being the first of November, in the year of our Lord 1613. late in the
night, the Sea broke in, through the violence of a North-east wind, meeting
with a Spring tide, and overflowed all Marshland, with this Town of Wisebeche,
both on the North side and the South; and almost the whole Hundred round about;
to the great danger of men's lives, and the loss of some; besides the exceeding
great loss, which these Counties sustained, through the breach of Banks, and
spoil of Corn, Cattle and Howsing, which could not be estimated.

Which losses, with other things of note, relating to the said Banks, and the
particular Towns then surrounded, as they were presented upon Oath, by the
Jurors for the hundred of Frethebridge, before the Kings Commissioners sitting
at Lynne, upon the ixth day of December, in the year before-specified, I have
here, likewise, thought fit to transcribe.

The Presentment Ex praef. ^od. MS. penes O. S. John cap. Justic. de Banco.
of the Jury, for the Hundred of Frebridge in Marshland, made at Kings Lynne 9
December. 11 Jac. An. 1613.
1 Inprimis, we present and say etc. that there is belonging to the Town of
Terington, Ex part Terington.
a Sea-dyke, containing xiC Rode, in length, or thereabouts; which was in good
repair before the first and second day of November last; whereof CCCCxx Rode
were ruinated by the rage of the Sea, that then happened; and also one Bridge,
called St. John's bridge, was then broken up.

2 That there were at that time lost, by the rage of the Sea etc. 1876 sheep,
amounting to the sum of Lviij l. and more. In great Beasts, lost 120, valued at
322 l.

In Corn sowed in the Fields, 480 acres, valued at xxx s. the Acre; amounting
to 720 l.

Hay lost in the fields and barns, to the value of CC l.

Corn in the barns lost, to the value of DCC l.

Grass in the Fields lost, to the value of D l.

Dwelling houses utterly ruinated and wasted xiij.

And Cxlii. dwelling houses there impaired, to the value of a M l.

Bedding and other Household Stuff lost, to the value of xl l.

In this distress the people of the Town fled to the Church for refuge; some
to Hay-stacks; some to the baulks in the Houses, till they were near famishe^;
poor women leaving their Children swimming in their beds, till good people
adventuring their lives, went up to the breast in the waters to fetch them out
at the windows: whereof Mr. Brown the Minister, did fetch diverse to the Church
upon his back: And had it not pleased God to move the hearts of the Mayor and
Aldermen of Kings Lynne, with compassion; who sent Beer and Victual thither, by
Boat; many had perished: which Boats came the direct way over the soil, from
Lynne to Terington.

3 That the Creek, which now runs under Terington bank, and underneath them,
has within four or five years last past, run half a mile off; and that about
xx years since it did run about a mile off.

4 We think, that the approach of the said Creek, is the greatest cause of the
decay and overthrow of the said Banks: and that at this present, the said Creek
runs where Banks have lately stood, being xxiiij foot deep or more, at a low
water. And that by the said outrage, there are four other great Creeks, worn in
the whole ground, to the Town-ward, where there was Corn reaped the last
Harvest; whereof two of the said Creeks are fourscore foot broad a piece, and
near xxx foot deep; and are worn to the Town-ward, within ten rod of the
Indyke, by the reflowing and ebbing of the waters, from out of the Town to the
Sea-ward; and that these Creeks were so worn within the space of xlviij hours.

5 We say, that the Township of Terington stands chardged with xiC. Rod of
Bank, at xvi foot to the Rod; which, within 50 years last past, cost making
MMxx l. And that ninescore Rod, part thereof, have by the space of xx years
last past, been made with earth, straw, and wood, at iiij l. the Rod per annum;
which is for every year 720 l.

There has been more, fourscore and two Rod (part of the said Bank) made very
strongly with lime and stone; which cost, the first making, betwixt xvi and xx
l. the Rod, amounting to MMM l.

There was more, six Rods of stone wall made, which cost CC l. The yearly
repair of the said stone walls having cost by the space of xij or xiiij years
last past CC l.

The repair of viiC Liiij Rode, the residue of the said xiC rods, cost seven
years since CCCLxxiij l. and now, upon this rage, will cost more.

There are also two Inbanks lost by the said outrage, which were made within
ten years last past, and cost CCCC l.

Also one other Indike made the last year, which cost making DXCviii l. and is
now ruinated by this last rage, to the value of Cxx l.

There were also exposed to the Sea, this last year, without the said Indike,
Cxxxvi. Acres; for which by the Law of Sewers an allowance of fifty shillings
the Acre is and must be paid; amounting to the sum of CCCxx l.

6 We say, that the Salt Marshes of Terington are exceedingly worn away: For
the Kings Majesty had one Marsh, in the occupation of Awdley Lad, alias Baker,
or his assigns, called the Gonge Marsh; which, by report, has contained about
CCC. Acres; and within xxx years last past, contained Lx. Acres, which is now
all worn to the Sea. And his Majesty has lost more within these xxx years, C
Acres of Marsh, being part of other Marshes, which the said Mr. Lad holds by
Lease of his Majesty. Which Marshes are (as we suppose) chiefly wasted or
decayed, for want of keeping and maintaining of diverse Damms, which are named
and set down hereafter in the answer to the xiith Article.

7 We say, that the waters of Wisebeche and Elm, have anciently fallen to the
four Gotes as they now do, and from thence they have fallen to the Sea, within
the memory of man, more than a mile off from Terington Banks: And it is very
probable, that in ancient time they have fallen to the Sea much farther off.

But, in our opinions, upon our view taken, they might be carried, at this
time, a nearer way to the Sea; viz. from the four Gotes aforesaid, over Tyd
marsh, and Sutton marshes, unto a Creek there, called Kings Creek; and there
to fall into the deep, called Lutton Leame, and so to the Sea; which is a
shorter course for the River by vi miles, and has a much better outfall.

8 We say, that all the Towns within the Isle, which have been heretofore
chardged with the maintenance of Wisebech River: and such other Towns in
Northamptonshire and Huntingdonshire, bordering on the said Isle, between
Peterborough and Somersham, who have heretofore contributed to the maintenance
of Clows cross drayne, or Wysebech River, shall, in our opinions be benefitted
thereby: And the Towns of Walpole and Terington proportionably: but for the
portions of money to be particularly rated upon every several Town, we leave it
to farther consideration.

9 We say, that we hold it convenient, there be a new Indike taken at
Terington, for the present and better preservation of the said Town: but
whether the said Indike will defend the Town any long time, except the waters
be diverted, and the Marshes imbanked, we know not.

10 Nihil.

11 Nihil.

12 We say, that these Marshes following are very much decayed, for want of
making and maintaining of Damms; viz, between one Marsh in the tenure of Awdley
Lad; and one other Marsh called the New marsh, being also the Kings Majesty's,
being in the tenure of Sir Robert Wind, or his assigns, there is a Creek
called Hurdle fleet, which it x rod broad, and xx foot deep, within the level
soil; being on the East side of the Ewe marsh and the Myss^e; which Creek
continually flows and refloweth, dangerously, over the Marshes: But in the
memory of man it has not been Dammed; neither can we present who ought to do
the same.

There is also another Fleet, called Ground fleet, upon the West side of Ewe
marsh, and the Marsh of Mr. Iudde, which contains in breadth 5 rods, and in
depth xvi foot, within the level soil; which Fleet was never dammed within the
memory of man.

There is also another Fleet on the West side of Mr. Iudd's Marsh, and the
Marsh of Edmund Riches, that is in breadth four rode, and in depth x foot; which
likewise within the memory of man was never dammed: which said Fleets, in our
opinions, are great occasions of wearing away the Marshes there.

There is also a passage, way, or Chase on the West side of Ewe marsh, which
is called UUaterlese diche; and on the East side of Mrs. Rachell and Anne
Deane, and the Marsh of Nicholas Iudde: Which Chase is not maintained with
Damms, as within the memory of man it has been, to the damage of the Marshes;
but who ought to do it, we are ignorant.

13 Nihil.

14 Nihil.

15 We say, that in our opinions, it were very convenient, that the Marshes of
Terington, Tylney, and Clenchwarton were imbanked, and made Inmarsh, for the
better preservation of the said Towns.

Ex part Walpole.
1 We say, that there is in Walpole a Sea-bank, containing in length three
miles; extending from S. Ellens Chapel, next Terington, unto Nobech got, in
UUalton, which Bank, before the first and second days of November last, was in
so sufficient repair, as ever it was within the ^emory of man: And now, by the
rage of the Sea then happening, there were made xx breaches in the said Bank at
the least: And the residue so rent and torn, as the making up and repairing of
them, has and will cost a thousand pounds.

2 We say, that in the said Town, by reason of the said outrage, there is lost
in Corn sown DC. Acres, to the damage of 900 l.

Item, in Messuages and Cottages eight; some carried away clean, and the rest
uninhabitable, to the damage of 100 l.

Lost in Horses, great Beasts, and Sheep, to the value of 400 l. Lost in Corn,
Barns and Stacks, to the value of 200 l. Lost in Hay, in stacks to the value of
200 l. In Grass in the fields 3000 Acres, to the value of 100 l. In VValls,
and Fences, 50 l.
Ex part Walton.
1 We say, that there is a Sea-dyke, which defends the said Town, extending
from Nobeche got, unto a place called Newgate stowe, containing in length two
miles and a half: which Banks we say, before the first and second day of
November last, were in very good repair: And by the outrage of the Sea, then
happening, there were made four breaches; and the rest of the said Banks were
so ruinated and torn, as the making up and repair thereof, will cost CC l. But
we say, that the waters, which came in at the breaches in UUalsoken, did drown
us more, than the waters, which ran over our Banks.

2 We say, that there was lost by the said outrage, viz.

Corn sown, CC Acres, to the damage of CC l. Hay in Barns and Stack, to the
value of C l. Grass in the fields, to the value of Cxx l. Cattle of all sorts,
to the value of xx l. Corn in Barns and Stacks, to the value of Lxxx l. And in
Houses, Bridges, VValls, Gates Household stuff, and Firing, to the value of Cxxx
l.
11 We say, that there be two ancient Highways, over the Sea-bank, there,
into the Town, being the usual passage for VVool-Carts and droves of Cattle, in
great abundance coming over the River at UUalton dam: which, Carters, be the
Bank never so sufficiently made, will cut down the same for their more easy
passage: And the droves of Cattle do continually wear them down, to the great
damage and yearly charge of the Town: In relief whereof we pray, to have some
reasonable Toll granted to the said Township, to be taken of the said Carts and
Droves.

1 We say, that the Sea-dyke belonging to the said Town, Ex part Walsokne.
containing three miles in length, beginning at Newgate slow, next UUalton, and
extending to the Sea-dike of Emneth: which before the first and second days of
November last, were very sufficient and good, and able to defend any flood,
that did arise more than viii foot above the soil of the Marshes adjoining,
other than in such Highways, as are specified in the answer to the xith
Article, following. In which said Bank, by the rage of the Sea then happening,
there were made seven great breaches; and the residue of the said Bank so torn,
as that the making up and repair thereof will cost CCCLx l.

2 We say that there was lost by the said outrage, viz.

In Corn sown in the fields, and in barns, to the value of 500 l. In Grass
and Hay, to the value of 3000 l. Cattle of all sorts, to the value of 100 l. In
VValls, Bridges, VVood and Firing, to the value of 060 l.
11 We say, that there be three ancient Highways, over the Sea-dyke, into the
said Town (leading to the Market of UUysebeche) which are too low by six foot,
for such an outrage as then happened.

And that there be eight other Cart ways, made over the said Sea-dike, by
private men into their grounds, which also must be heightened.

Ex part Emneth.
1 We say, that there is a Sea-dyke, which defends the said Town, extending
from UUalsokne Sea-dyke, unto Boxsted style; which in diverse places was not
sufficient against such an outrage as happened on the first and second days of
November last past, and will cost the making and repairing xl l.

And we say, that CCCC. Acres or thereabouts in the same Town, were drowned
with the waters, which came in at the breaches in UUalsoken, and did fall over
a Dyke, called Long dyke, into the said Town of Emneth.

2 We say, that there was lost in the same Town, in Corn, Grass, and Hay, to
the value of L l.

And that the making and repairing of certain Banks defensive, against the
waters there now lying, has and will cost Lx l.

An Abstract of the losses in general as they were presented by the Jurors of
several Hundreds, at the Sessions of Sewers held at Lynne, 9 December. An. 1613.
Within the Ring of Marshland.
Terington 10416 l. Walpole 03000 West Walton 00850. Walsoken 01328. Emeneth
00150. UUigenhall and South Lynne 06000. Tylney and Islington 04380.
Clenchwarton 06000. West Lynne and North Lynne 04000. The total 35834 l.
Without the Ring of Marshland.
Gaywood 205 l. South Wootton 313. North Wootton 810. Watlington 500. Totnell,
cum Wormgays 060. Holm, cum Thorpland 040. Stow-Bardolf 100. The total 2028 l.
The total of both 37862 l.
After which Presentment so made, as has been showed, the said Commissioners
did in Ianua. An 1613. (11 Iac.)
following, direct their Letters Ib. f. 233. ^.
to the Lords of the Council; signifying, that they had taken a view of the
breaches made by the fury of the Sea in the Banks of Marshland, the chiefest
whereof were those of Tirington; which being a Frontier Town was very
ingeniously fortified, not only with Banks of extraordinary height and
thickness; but with two mighty Brick Walls, armed and defended with piles of
Woodshoves, and other devises, of as much hope, as the wit of man, according to
the ability of the people, could invent: and that within these xvi years, the
said Town had expended 20000 l. upon the same. And moreover, that the two
Indikes, which had been reared behind the said walls, for securing the Town, in
case these outer walls should fail, were by this terrible breach, swept all
away.

And therefore, though the said Indikes were already repaired again, and
sufficient to restrain the ordinary tides; yet the safety of the Country was
not to be committed to them. In consideration whereof they further certified,
that they thought it fit a new Bank should be raised, of an extraordinary
skantling, nearer to the Town by six hundred Acres, in a place of better
advantage; and to be in breadth at the bottom fourscore foot, and in length
about two miles, with thickness and height proportionable: But forasmuch as
the chardge would be insupportable for the Inhabitants of the said Town, and
that no Law of Sewers could compel them thereto; and forasmuch as the King was
Lord of the same Town, which is likewise the Key and safety of other Towns of
his Majesty's adjoining, they humbly prayed, the furtherance of the said Lords
to the King, to take care and consideration of them therein. Dated at Kings
Lynne 20 Ian. 1613.

And to add to these losses, such were the Snows that fell in January and
February ensuing, which occasioned mighty floods from the Upland Countries,
upon their going away, that a great part of this Country was Ex inscript. super
parietem, in Eccles^a de Wise^eche.
overflowed with the Fresh waters; viz. from their Bank called the Edge,
between their Towns and the Smethe, unto the new Po dike, through diverse
breaches between Salters lode, and Dounham bridge.

Moreover, about four years after ( viz. 15 Aug. 1618 (16 Iac.) the Inhabitants
of this Country, 15 A^g. 16 Iac^
and parts adjoining, exhibited a Petition Ex praef. cod. MS. pene^ pr^edict.
O. S. (...) f. 245. b.
to the Commissioners of Sewers; showing, that Lynne Haven, was, through
outragiousnesse of the tides, made much wider than formerly, and did put the
Country to an excessive charge, in the restraining of its wearing more broad
and deep: and therefore desired, that they would take view thereof, and cause
it to be straightned according to the presidents of former times, limiting such
fresh waters as did help to the increase thereof, unto their proper outfalls.
The like Ib. f. 246. a.
Petition did they prefer to the Lords of the Privy Council the 13th of
November following. Whereupon there was this ensuing order Ib. f. 249. b.
made by that honorable board; viz

That a special Commission should be directed unto certain Gentlemen,
indifferently chosen out of all those parts, together with the Mayor and some
Aldermen of Lynne, to consider of the conveniencie or inconveniencie of the
work; as also to what scantling it should be made narrower, and the chardge
thereof; and so to proceed therein: But to respite the executing of the said
Commission, till according to the Law made in August before, for opening the
Rivers of UUeland and Nene, that work were done. But if there were delay in
opening of those Rivers, and complaint made unto the said Lords thereof, some
course should be taken for their coercion and for preserving of Marshland in
the mean time; and also of the parts adjacent, from eminent danger.

After this, viz. upon the tenth of December 10 Dec. 17 Iac.
An. 1619. (17 Iac.) the Commissioners of Sewers sitting at Peterborough; and
having in consideration the setting up of a Sluse, at a certain place called
the Horshoo, such was then the siding of the said Commissioners, that the Jury
became divided in opinion; so that nothing being done therein, they signified
Ib. f. 254. ^.
as much to the Lords of the Council.

VVhereupon the Inhabitants of Marshland exhibited a Petition Ibid. b.
to that honorable board; imploring their care for the safety of that Country;
and intimatating, that the erection of that intended Sluse, would be an
apparent overthrow thereof.

Which Petition occasioned the said Lords to write unto the beforementioned
Commissioners; by which Letters Ib. f. 255. a.
they desired them to consider of the outfalls to the Sea, before they drew
down the waters from the high Countries, that might oppress Marshland and the
low parts adjoining, in the Counties of Lincoln and Norfolk; and wishing them,
that in case they should differ in opinion, how these things might be best
effected, to make choice of two Commissioners, out of each of their Counties,
who might be instructed to give them true information of their differences; and
that then they would endeavor to give such farther direction, as might best
advance the public good, with the least prejudice to the private.

Whereupon they met at Wisebeche, and appointed Mr. Henry Kervill and Mr.
Robert Balam, with some others, to take view of the danger of this Country, on
Tirington side, by the fretting of the Chanel, as it then ran, and to certify.
Who accordingly did view the same, and certified; that the Chanel of fresh
waters, as it then ran, did very much hurt to Tirington and the whole Country
of Marshland; and that by conveying more waters that way, the whole Country
would be endangered: and therefore, for the beter safety thereof, they
expressed, that they were of opinion, that a new Cut, made from the four Gotes,
over Tyd and Sutton Marsh, unto King's Creek, would be the best issue for
those waters; the River Nene, being brought from P^terborough to Guyhyrne,
between sufficient Banks, for the better grinding of the out-fall; and that the
River should be cut straight from the Horshoo to the four Gotes.

And in a Session of Sewers, holden at King's Lynne 23o Iunii 6to Caroli.
recital being made; that whereas the Land-holders of Elm Oldfield, in the Isle
of Ely, at the like Session held at King's Linne 17 Apr. 8o Iacobi, obtained a
Law, for the downfall of water in the said Oldfield Lands, through the outrinde
Banks of Marshland, under certain conditions and limitations expressed in the
said Law, and under the pain of xl l. by them to be forfieted to the Kings
Majesty, his heirs and successors, in case they should take in any waters, out
of any other fields in Elm or Well; and the abuse in execution of that Law
had been very hurtful and dangerous to the Country of Marshland, and Town of
UUigenhall, in their several Pastures and Fen-grounds, by reason of the
abundance of fresh waters coming out of the said Field, at a Sluse made in
Oldfield Bank, called Brokendike, more than the own waters of the said Oldfield
did afford; for that there was no provision in the said Law, for stopping them
up, if they should take in, or suffer any foreign or other waters to come into
the said Oldfield: For under color and pretense of the said Oldfield waters,
they took into the said Oldfield and Says field, other waters; and also other
waters at the Sluse called Mildam, and put into their Oldfield fresh waters out
of the River, for the filling of their Dikes; and so when any great rain fell,
did put those warers into Marshland: and also, by means of not sufficient
keeping and maintaining the River Banks against Oldfield at Lunges droves end,
that the River waters did run into the field there, very extremely in wet
winters, and most especially the winter preceding.

And that whereas at a Session of Sewers, holden at Beawford Hall, by Friday
bridge, 27o Martii, 9o Iacobi, by a Law of Sewers then and there made, the
Land-holders and others of Waterseye in Elm, had a Drayn made from Friday
bridge in the Dyke of the North side of Needham dike, being the Fence-dyke of
Oldfield and Says field, and so to Well, and from thence into the old Pow
dike of Marshland, and so through the old Pow dike at Chamber's house in Stow;
and so to the River of Ouse, with certain Sluses made upon the said Drayn, to
stop and restrain the waters when they did arise and exceed the superficies of
the grounds: By reason whereof, when the Slus^ at Friday bridge did run, and
the Sluice at Well River was stopped, the waters in the Drayn rose over the Dam,
called the Stintings and Oldfield, and so ran into Marshland. For remedy
whereof, and that the Land-holders of Oldfield were at the making of the said
Law tied to no conditions of restraint or stopping; which they then conceived
fitting, by reason the said UUaltersey drayne (which was not before thought of
ran within their field, and did overflow the Banks, and fill their Dikes with
water, which came into Marshland, contrary to their Law; and by reason that
they in Summer time took in waters to fill their Dikes, which they might spare
to take, if they would dike them, and make watering places for their Cattle, as
Marshland did; it was therefore ordered, that the said Land-holders of Oldfield
should pass and run their said waters therein, under such conditions, and with
such cautions, as by the Law of Sewers, the Land-holders on the West side of
Elm, and So^th side of Wysebeche did, and not otherwise, under and upon such
pains and penalties, as in that Law is contained.

The number of Acres in the several Towns of Marshland. Ex cod MS. penes
Ricar^um At^yn^ de Outwell in com. Nor^^. Genesis

Acres. Rodes. UUest lynne. CCxlviij. xij. Clenchwarton. xvC lx. i. Tylney. vM
viiiC xi. iij. Wigenhale. iiiM viiiC xi. iij. Terington. iiiiM iiiC xxvi. iij.
Walpole. iiiiM viiC xxvij. Walton. iiM iiiiC xlv. ii UUa^soken. iiM viiC vxx i.
Emnet^ and Hawsted. iiM ixC vi. Sum total in the Franchises and Geldable. xxvii
M viiC xxxix Acres. Sumin the Liberties, viz. Terington, Walpole, Walsoken,
Walton, and Emneth. xvM iiiiC xxvij Acres, i Rode. Add Tylney, and
Clenchwarton thereto. xxiiM viiC xxxix Acres.

An Agistment of the new Powdiche, from Saltham lake, by Mullycourt, to
Northdelfe, according to the Books and Rolls of the Country, containing iiiiC
Lxiii. Rode, and ii Foot, divided thus.
Emneth, and Hawsted. xli rode, iii foot, ii inches. Walsoken. Liii rode, iii
foot, ii inches. Walton. xlvi rode, xi foot. Wa^pole. XC rode, iiii foot, vi
inches. Terington. Lxxxii rode, x foot, x inches. Clenchwarton. xxix rode, ix
foot, iii inches. Tyln^y. vxx xii rode, x foot, ix inches. West Lynne. v rode,
i foot. Wigenhall. iiixx xii rode, xiii foot.
From Northdelfe to the hundred Acres charge, are vxx xli rode, vi foot, iiij
inches, divided thus.
Emneth, with Hawsted. xlix rode, viii foot, i inch. Walsoken. iiixx iii rode,
xvi foot, vi inches. Walton. Lvi rode, i inch. Walpole. vxx viii rode, vii
foot, ix inches. Ter^ngton. iiiixx xix rode, iiii foot, ix inches.
Clenc^warton. xxxv rode, ix foot, xi inches. Ty^ne^. vxx xv rode, vi foot, i
inch. West Lynne. v rode, viii foot, xi inches. Wigenhall. iiiixx vii rode,
viii foot, iii inches.
The old Powdich, containing........ Agi^ted thus.
Rodes. Foot. Inches. Emn^th and Haw^^ed. Lxvi. viii iii. Wa^^^kne. iiiixx
xviii. xii viii. Wa^ton. iiii^^ vi. viii. v. Walpole. vi^x viii. ix. o.
Terington. vii^x xiii. v. x. Cl^nchwarton Lv. o iii. Tylne^. xxx ix. ii. o.
Wigenhale. Cxv. ii. ix.

Note, that the true sum of this, is viiC ix Rode, xlix foot, and iii inches.
Of which xlix if there be allowed xvi foot ii^ inches to a Rode (as is set down
under Mr. Beaupre's hand) then is the sum viiiC xii Rode, and ix. perches.

The little Powdich, containing CCCxliii. has agisted thereon xxiiiM viiC
iiiixx vii Acres, and iii Rode; every hundred Acres comes to a Rode, xi. foot
two inches, a half, and a Barleycorn; which is the third part of an Inch.
Agisted thus.
Rods. Foot. Inches Tylney. iiiixx xvi. xii o Clenchwarton. xxv. xiii. vii.
Terington. Lxxiii. vi. vii. Walpole. Lxxx. iiii. o. Walton. xli. iiii. o.
Walsoken. xlvii. viii. vi. Emneth and Hawsted. xxxvi. viii. ix.

The Ward dich, from Well gate, to Sandyrood, belonging to the Fraunchises, with
Tylney and Clenchwarton, containing viiixx xviii rode, xv foot. Agisted thus.
Rods. Foot. Inches Tylney. xliiii. iii. o Clenchwarton. xi. x. o. Terington.
xxxii. vi. vi. Walpole. xxxv. vi. vi. Walton. xviii. iiii. vi. Walsoken. x^.
xiiii. o. Emneth, with Hawsted. xvi. ii. vii.

Brokendike Agistment.
From Kyrkham lane, to the turning against Mr. Blewick's, contains.......
Rode; and is agisted iiiixx Rode, from the middle of Mildam, toward the house
of the said John Blewick: To the which there is said Tilney, Terington,
Walpole, Walton, Walsoken, and Emneth, containing xxiiM CC xxxix Acres. So
every Acre has almost two inches. Every thousand and iii^x. xii Rode, v foot,
v inches, and two Barlycorns. iiM Cxxiiii Rode, x foot, xi inches and i corn.

iiiiM CC has xlix Rode, v foot, x inches ii Barley-corns. Every hundred and
vi. Acres, has a Rode, iii foot, ix inches. Every Lxiii Acres has ix foot, x
inches and a half.

Rods. Foot. Inches Tylney. Lxviii. ii. o Terrington. xlix. xi. x. Walpole. Lv.
vii. vii. Walton. xxviii. x. viii. Walsoken. xxxii. x. viii. Emneth and
Hawsted. xxv. iiii. iii.

From Emneth bridge, between the Town and the Smethe, be xiiiiC xv Rodes, which
be thus divided.
Rods. Foot Inch. Emneth, with Hawsted. Cxxx. viii. o. Walsoken. CLxviii. xi.
o. Walton. Cxlvii. xi. iii. Walpole. CCLxxx.vi ii. iii. Terington. CCLxi. xiii.
vi. Wigenhall. CCxxxviii. o. vii. Tylney. CCCLvi. xv. vi. Clenchwarton. iiiixx
xiiii. o viii West Lynne. xv. ii. vi.

Drayns and Bridges lying within the precincts of the several Towns of
Marshland.
Emneth.
A Drayn there, belonging to certain Fields, called Suffield and Haulsted;
extending from the common Sea dike, called Emneth Sea dyke, on the West part of
the same Field; and from thence to a place called the Styldes; at which place
the said Drayns do meet, and from thence into the Fen. Which Drayns ought to be
in breadth ix foot, and in depth v foot.

Another Drayn, belonging to Churchfield and Northfield; extending from a place
called Seadike-dole, to a place called Knape more; and from thence Eastwards,
toward Whicks brigg, and so to Myd feder, into the Smethe lode, which is the
common Drayn of all Marshland.

Another Drayn, belonging to Newfield; extending from Hallow crofts on the
West, and so to Ports bush, on the East; thence to Hawkyns brigge, and so to
Hungate dyke, to a place called Nomans land corner; and so into Smeth lode.

Bridges.
Over the first of these Drayns are three Bridges; the one at a place called
Lonhole; the other at the end of the Drayn; and the third between Ladies drove,
and the great Drove of Emneth.

Another Bridge situate at the North style of Emneth.

Another, called Knapmore bridge, set over Churchfield Drayn.

Another, called Whicks bridge.

Another, called Little Edge bridge.

Another, called Hawkyns bridge, lying over Newfield drayn.

Walsoken.
A Drayn there, called the Mai^t Drayn, extending from Holmes bridge, on the
North part of the Town, to the common Sewer called Smethe lode.

Another Drayn, on the South side of the Town; beginning at Small lane in Lark
land, and extending to a Bridge called Bronden bridge; and so to Knapemore
lane bridge; and thence to the Smethe lode.

Bridges.
Holmes Bridge.

Borret bridge, situate over the main Drayn.

Mayes Bridge, upon the same Drayn.

Another Bridge at Small Droves end.

Walton.
THe old Drayn, extending from Clynkhyrne on the North part, and abutting upon
Newland lane, on the South end.

Another Drayn, extending from Crosse-green, by Halehyrne, to a place called le
Yates Wall, at the foot of Walton Sea dike; and thence to Gybson's bridge.

Another Drayn, beginning at Gibson's bridge, and thence to the Smethe lode.

Bridges.
Gybson's bridge. Old fen dich bridge.
Terington.
THe common Drayn, extending from Fawkesfield to Oxhow board, and from thence
into the Smethe lode.

Another Drayn extending through the same Town unto the Smethe lode.

Bridges.
One Bridge, over the common Drayn, at St. John's lane end.

Another at the Old fen dich.

A third (ruinous) adjoining to the common Sewer, called the Smethe lode.

Tylney, with the Hamlets.
THe More dich drayn, beginning at Tungreen bridge, and so going to Wyndbrigge.

Read's Drayn, beginning at Rysgate, and extending to the Common Sewer.

The Fen dich drayn, beginning at the West end of Tylney drove, and extending
to Pollets gool.

Another Drayn, beginning at the West end of Meeres gre^n, and so extending to
Creydike; from thence to Fryth dich gole, and so into the main River.

Another Drayn coming out of Spellow field, and so over Meyres green, to Meyres
green Drayn.

Another, called Black dich, lying from Terington to Islington Fen end.

Bridges.
Five Bridges upon Moredich drayn; whereof two are in Sale yate, a third called
Tungreen bridge; another called Moredich bridge, and the fifth at the end of the
said Drayn.

Another Bridge at Rysegate.

Another adjoining to the Common Sewer.

Another Bridge, called Fen dich bridge.

Another Bridge, called Pollets gool bridge.

Another called Poyse gole bridge.

Another called Meyres green bridge.

Another at Dodale fedham.

Another called Meyres dich bridge.

A Causey, called Islington droves end, lying between the Bridges of Islington
and Wigenhall.

Wigenhall.
A Drayn that begins at Crow gool, and extends to New land gate; thence to
Barnwell Cloyt; thence to Cowstow pipe, and so to Raynham gool.

Another, called St. Peter's dich, leading from Islington bridge to West fen
lode.

Another, called the High fen dich, leading from Cowstow to Pykers hyrne;
thence to Hell bottom, and so into the main River.

Another called the Heddings, beginning at Pykers hyrn, and thence extending to
Hell bottom.

Another, called the Border, extending from Wygenhall mere to Pykers hyrne.

Another, lying from Wigenhall mere to Scales corner, and so forth to Newfield
heddyng, between the Spade gonge and Islington drove.

Another, called Simons lode, extending from a place called the Senston, alias
the Hook, and thence to Symonslode gool.

Another, called Cross lode, extending from the Hook, to the main River.

Another, called John's lode, extending from the said Hook, unto Iohn's-lode
gool.

Another, called Bustard's lode, which extends from the said Hook, unto
Buctard lode gool.

Another, called Griggs lode, extending from a place called the Low way, to
the Gool head, at the main River.

Another Drayn, coming from West fen dich to Griggs gool.

Another called Martin drayn.

Another called New dich; beginning at the West part of the Common, belonging
to Stow Bardolf, Wynbotesham, and Downham, and extending to the main River.

Another Drayn, lying in Stow-Bardolf, from a place called West head, into the
main River.

A Dike belonging to Dounham, which extends from Dounham bridge, unto the
chardge of the C. Acres of Stow Bardolf, lying at the new Powdich.

Bridges and Causeys.
Gillingore brigge.

A Causey, called called Wigenhall mere, extending from the old Pow dike to
Black dich.

A certain Causey, called Low side.

A Common Causey, called Stow brinke, extending from a place called Scapwere,
unto the Common gate.

Memorandum, that the Ward dich, called the Little Pow dich, ought to be
repaired by the Townships of Tylney, with it is Hamlets, Terington, Walpole,
Walton, UUalsoken, and Emneth.

A note of the Chardges, which do yearly belong to Marshland, being but eight
Towns.
INprimis, in the High ways for Travelers, there are xxv Bridges, valued in
their reparations, yearly at -- C l.

Item, there is in the other ways of the Country Lxxx Bridges, and five
Gooles, (without which the Country is neither habitable nor passable) valued
yearly for reparations at -- DC l.

Item, there are two other Gooles, very great ones, with Drayns into the River
of Ouse; one called Knight's goole; the other the New goole, valued yearly for
reparations at -- CC l.

Item, the Sea-Banks of the Country, valued yearly for reparations, at -- M Ml.

Item the Pow dikes; the one called the New Pow dike, and the other the Old Pow
dike, which be defensive Banks against the fresh waters; valued yearly for
reparations at -- C l.

The total 3000 l.

CHAP. XLV.
HAving no more to say of Marshland, I shall next take notice of the remainder
of this Country, lying Eastwards from the River Ouse; and then of those parts
of Suffolk, wherein any improvement has been made by Banking and Drayning.

In 55 H. 3. complaint Pat. 55 H. 3. m. 12. in dorso.
being made, that about seven hundred acres of Marish and other Lands,
belonging to William Bardolf, and the Prior of Wyrmyngey, lying in Wyrmyngey
and Tokenhull, were then overflowed more than formerly; partly by inundations
from the Sea, and River of Secchehithe; and partly by the making of Pools and
otherwise; so that the said Prior had received very much damage thereby. And
that there was a certain Causey lying in the proper soil of the said William,
overthwart the said Mannours (which Causey was the Kings Highway to Lenne)
through the midst whereof a certain stream of water passed behind a Mill; And
that the said William, and his Ancestors, having permitted the people of the
Country, for their common benefit to raise the same Causey in the Winter
season; the said stream of water, which had wont to have it is course through
the midst of it, as aforesaid, was thereby so stopped, that it overflowed all the
lowgrounds therabouts: the King therefore, being desirous that there should be
some remedy had therein, granted a Commission Pat. 55 H. 3. m. 12. in dorso.
to John de Cokefeld, to enquire the truth thereof; and how and in what manner
those Marish grounds might be drayned, with the least damage to the Country.

In 5 E. 1. upon the like complaint Pat. 5 E. 1. m. 12.
, that the course of the River at Wirmegay, had been so obstructed by the
frequent inundations of the Sea, that two thousand Acres of Land, Meadow, and
Pasture, lying in the Marshes of Midleton and Wirmegeye, were drowned; the King
assigned Pat. 5 E. 1. m. 12.
Raphe de Wyrham and Will. de Midleton, to enquire thereof; and how they might
be so drained as aforesaid. And in 22 E. 1. Peter de Campania, and Adam de
Shropham were constituted Pat. 22 E. 1. m. 28. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers of
Middelton, Rungetone, and Sechithe, then ruinous and in decay, by reason of the
Tides and floods of fresh water.

Other general Commissions, of the like nature, were afterward issued out;
both in this King's time, and K. Edward the second's, viz. in 35 E. 1. to Pat.
35 E. 1. m. 9. E^ m. 42. in dorso.
William de Carleton, Will. Houward, Giles de Mounpinson, and John le Bretun.

In 1. E. 2. to Pa. 1. E^. p. 2. m. 23. in dorso.
the same Will. Howard, John le Bretun, and Thomas de Ingoldethorp. In 2 E. 2.
to Pat. 2. E. 1. p. 1. m. 22. in c^dul^
Henry de Staunton, John le Bretoun, Richard de Walsingham, and Thomas de
Ingoldesthorpe.

In 6 E. 2. to Par. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 2. in dorso.
John de Thorpe, Richard de Walsyngham, and Thomas de Snyterton, for the view
of all the Banks, Ditches, Sewers etc. in the Hundreds of Frethebrigge and
Clackelose.

In 10 E. 2 to Pat. 10 E. 1. p. 2. m. 10. in dorso.
John de Milford, Robert, de Maddingle, William de Corton, and Simon de
B....... for those in the same Hundreds.

In 15 E. 2. upon a Session Plac. coram Rege term. Much. 15 E. 2. Rot. 22.
No^ff.
of Sewers held at Tirington, by Sir Thomas de Ingaldesthorpe, John Fytton,
John de Hotoft, and Will. Bataile, the Jurors presented upon Oath, that the
Causey of Watlington, called East wrodiche, extending from Burfenne to
Polberdiche; and another Causey in the same Town, called Polberdiche, reaching
from East wrodiche to the Eebrynke of Wigenhale, ought to be raised in every
low place, so as it might be made equal with the highest; and to be six foot in
breadth, throughout, at the top. And likewise, that the Eebrinke, at the River
of Wigenhale, ought to be raised in every place, from Pulberdiche to Gerys dam,
so as it might be full two foot higher than the highest Water-mark, which was
in the thirteenth year of the said King Edward the second's reign: and to be
ten foot broad at the top. And that the Causey of Watlington, called Gerys dam,
be raised to the same Level as it then was in the highest place; and to be xvi
foot in breadth at the top.

And they said, that the Sewer in the Cornfen of Watlington, lying betwixt the
Lands of William Chaplein, and John Saunfoly, on the North part; extending it
self from the Meadow gate to the Broad beche, ought to be scoured; and a Bridge
of three foot in breadth, and as much in height, made over the same, in the way
of Broad beche; so that the water might run under the same, without the South
side of the Beche, into the Hending, Westward, until it should come to Will.
fitz Thomas; and there divert the water through the midst of the narrow Beche
to Skindeslediche; and then to run in that Ditch unto the Kings High way; and
there a Gutter to be made 3 foot broad, and 3 foot high, through the midst of
the Kings high way, and so to run in the Ditch, betwixt the land of Roger
Hestings and Maud Skindwell, till it come to the Eebrynke; in which place there
ought to be a Gutter made, three foot in breadth, and as much in height, through
the midst of the said Eebrynke; through which the water might pass to
UUigenhale. And that the said Sewer be cleansed throughout, so that it might
contain eight foot in breadth.

And they said, that the Gutter called Iuresgole and Goseygole, with the Gutter
running through the midst of the Kings High way, opposite to the other, ought
to be enlarged, each of them to the breadth of one foot, and as much in height.
And that the Sewer, extending it self from the Kings High way to the
before-specified Gutters, called Iuresgole and Goseygole, ought to be scoured
and enlarged, to the breadth of six foot. And, for the repair and enlarging of
those Causeys and Sewers, that land should be purchased in some places^ every
acre, so employed, to be estimated at 5 Marks.

And they said, that all the beforementioned Causeys, together with the
Eebrynke and Sewers aforesaid; with the Bridges and Gutters, ought to be made,
repaired, enlarged, and cleansed, as often as need required, at the chardge of
those which held Lands or Tenements in the said Cornfen of Walington, betwixt
the same Causeys or elsewhere, each man to be assessed according to the
proportion of what he held; and according to the benefit and safeguard which he
had thereby. And that there were in the field of Cornfen, betwixt those
Causeys, four hundred and fourscore Acres, and one rode of land.

And they said moreover, that the Sewer in the Cornfen of Watlington, extending
from Eastwrodiche unto Meadow gate, betwixt the arable lands, meadows, and
Sewers on the West part of Meadow gate, from Watlington Hall meadow,
Southwards, unto the Dam: and the Sewer from the Lake at the Thwarlbek, toward
the South, betwixt the Flegester and the Common; and Westwards toward the
Meadow gate, on the East side of the Meadow gate, Northwards to the Meadow
gates end. And the Sewer on the East part of the Beche, from Polberesdich,
Southwards, to the Gutter passing through the midst of Thurlanegate, betwixt
the Beche and the Hedlondole. And the Sewer from the Calkecotecroft,
Southwards, betwixt the Reyndole and Thurlongpythils and Forkescroft, to the
Cheker. And the Sewer from the Thurlongpightels, Southwards, betwixt
Thurlongate, and the Lake to the Dam. And the Sewer from the Gutter, passing
through the midst of Thurlongate, Westwards, to Wigenhale crofts, betwixt the
Dam and Dich furlong. And the Sewer from the Dam to Wigenhale crofts, and the
Dich furlong, and the Beche, Northwards, to Skindelesdiche. And the Sewer on
the East part of the Kings High way, from the Dam, Northwards, unto Polberdich,
ought to be cleansed as often as need should require (so that the water coming
into those Sewers, might pass without any impediment) at the chardges of those
persons which have lands abutting upon them. And that every Sewer should be six
foot in breadth.

And they said, that the Causey in Newland and Watlington, on the South part of
Gerys Dam, ought to be raised from the land of Robert at Dam, Eastward^, unto
the meadow of Peter fitz John. And that the Causey from Gerys dam to Geylode
drove, lying at the East had lands in the Newland, ought to be raised in every
low place as much as where it was then highest; and to be six foot in breadth at
the top. And that the said Causeys ought to be made at the chardges of those,
which have lands in Newlond quilot, according to each man's proportion, and the
Commodity and defense which they have by them. And they said, that the Gutter
in Newlond, through the midst of Ee brynke, betwixt the lands of Will. Lucas,
and of Maude the Daughter of John Geylode. And the other Gutter, lying betwixt
the land of Will. de Clenchwarton, and the land of Thomas the Son of Rich. at
Green, ought to be enlarged, as aforesaid. And another Gutter, lying betwixt
the land of Thomas Bennyng ought to be enlarged: As also another Gutter, lying
betwixt the Message of Will. Seaman, and the Message of Clarice the Widow of
Henry. And likewise another Gutter, lying betwixt the land of John Leff, and
Peter Heward: And another, lying betwixt the land of Will. fitz Thomas, called
Wadys, and the land belonging to the heirs of Thomas Bond: And another, lying
betwixt the land, between the Briggecroft and the Message late Peter
Mountfords.

Also, that the E^brynke at the River of Wygenhale, from Geyrys dam to Geylode
drove, ought to be rai^ed two foot above the high Water-Mark, as it was in the
xiiijth year of the reign of K. Edw. the second: and to be ten foot in breadth
at the top. And the said Ee brynke to be made and maintained at the charge of
the landholders in Newlond and Watlington. And that all the Ee brynks in
Watlyngton be made and repaired, before the days assigned by the Dichgreves,
upon penalty of Bylaw, which is for every perch xii d. And that all the Banks
in the said Town, for defense against the fresh waters, be likewise made
according to the days assigned by the Dichgreves, upon the like penalty of
Bylaw, which is for every perch vi d.

And they said, that all the Sewers and Gutters in the Cornfen and Newland,
ought to be made before the days so likewise assigned by the Dichgreves,
according to the Ordinance made before the Justices, upon penalty of the Bylaw,
viz. for default of every perch iij d.

Also, that the Custom of Marshland is, that they who ought to make or repair
their Banks, shall be warned to do the same by a certain day; and that if they
fail therein, then that the Bylaw shall be levied upon them.

And they moreover ordained^ that all such as had Stowes lying in their Sewers
any year, or after the Feast of All Saints, should pay to the Dichgreves for
every such transgression vi d. And, that all the Tenants and Commoners in
Watlington should meet twice in the year, and hold the Customs of Marshland.
And that there should be chosen from year to year certain Bailiffs, which are
called Dichegreves, who may have power, on the Kings behalf, to distrain the
offenders, both within and without their houses, by all their Goods and Catals
found in the said Town. And that whenever those Dichgreves should find any
Hoggs rooting upon the Ee bryuk, it should be lawful for them to impound them,
and to keep them so impounded till they shall receive three pence for every
Hog. And that when any man is reasonably required to repair and maintain his
said Banks, Ditches etc. and shall neglect so to do, so that his Goods and
Catals are thereupon taken by the said Dichgreves, or their Deputies; the said
Dichgreves shall receive for their pains in so distraining them, id. for each
distress.

By another Inquisition n taken about that time, before Sir Robert de Scales,
Sir John de Fytton and others, it appears; that the Jurors presented upon Oath,
that the Inhabitants of Watlington and Runcton holme suffered great losses in
the Common of Pasture belonging to those Towns, for want of Gutters and Sewers
there. And they said, that the Sewer, which extends it self from Monyescroft
in South old Ee, Westwards, to the Hirne croft; and from the East end of Hirne
croft into the Ditch, which is betwixt the Field, called the Sight; and from
Geylode drove directly to the Eebrynke of Wigenhale, ought to be amended and
made deeper, so that the water running therein might pass without any
impediment: and to be in breadth eight foot, for the whole length thereof. And
that a Gutter should be made through the midst of Heibrynke, in breadth three
foot, and as much in height; through the midst whereof, the water may run in
Wigenhale Ee.

And they said, that the same Gutter and Sewer at Geylode drove, ought to be
made, maintained, repaired, and cleansed, as often as need should require, at
the charges of those which had Common of Pasture, or that had Common betwixt
Gerys dam and Flemyngs hithe, each man according to the proportion of what he
held; and as they had benefit and preservation by the said Sewer. And that the
said Commoners should every year meet at the Old Ee, on the morrow after
Trinity Sunday; and keep the Customs of Marshland. And for the performance of
the premises, there were chosen four Guardians by the said Jurors.

In 7 E. 3. John Claver, Robert de Well, Thomas de Birston, and Simon Costyn
were constituted Pat. 7. E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, Sewers etc. in
the Towns of Midleton, Sechithe, Rungetone, Westwynche, Watlyngtone, Wirmegey,
Shuldham and Pentney, in this part of Norfolk.

Upon a Presentment in 37 E. 3. there was a Precept Plac. ^oram R^g^ term.
Much. 37 E. 3. Rot. 21. No^ff.
directed to the Shireeve and John Berney, to enquire how the River of Small Ee,
came to be obstructed; and who ought to scour it; as also what Towns had damage
thereby.

By a pleading Pl^c. coram Rege term. Mich. 41 E. 3. Rot. 18. N^r^.
in 41 E. 3, Sir Hamond de Felton Knight, then Lord of the Manor of Dansey,
could not deny, but that he ought to cleanse the several waters running from
Gaywood to the Sea, called Danseye he, which was then obstructed: and that he
ought likewise to make and repair a Bridge there, then ruinous: the Shireeve
thereof had command to distrain him and his Tenants, both to cleanse the said
Chanel, and repair that Bridge.

In 44 E. 3. the Mayor, Aldermen, and Constables of Lenne were commanded Pat.
44 E. 3. p. 1. m. 34.
to view the Ditches compassing that Town; which, by reason of its situation
upon an arm of the Sea, were through the ebbing and flowing of the Tides,
filled up with mud and other filth, to the great damage of that Town: and to
take course for the speedy remedy thereof.

In 4 H. 4. John Hevenyngham, John White, Raphe Ramsey, Will. Snetesham, John
Clear, and Robert Marcham had Commission Pat. 4 H 4. p. 2. m. 31. in dorso.
to view the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers etc. betwixt the Town of great
Iernemuth and the City of Norwich, on the one part; and the said Towns of great
Iernemuth, and Bekles, on the other; which were then in decay: with special
direction to perform all things therein according to the Law and Custom of
this Realm, and those parts of this County.

By an Indenture E^ au^^ g^. in Eccl. S. Ge^mani de Wigenhale.
tripartite, made in the Church of S. German, at Wigenhale, on the Feast day of
S. Mark the Evangelist, in 11 H. 4. it appears; that the Abbot of Dereham,
Prior of Shuldham, Prior of Pentney; Robert Kervill and John Elwin, Tenants of
the Lands, lying on the East side of the River of UUigenhale aforesaid; and the
xij Jurors then in the Sembec, there; did, for themselves and their successors,
with the consent and assent of all the Land-holders on the said East part of
UUigenhale, and of the Hamlet of Sadylbow^ grant unto the Prior and Covent of
UUestacre, and to the Prioresse and Covent of Blackvergh, and their successors;
as also to Will. Campneys and Margerie his wife, their heirs and assigns; that
they the said Prior, Prioresse, William and Margery, of their own proper costs,
might make a certain VVater-course, or Sewer, sufficient for all the Lands and
Tenements of the said Prior and Prioresse, and their successors; and of the
said William and Margerie, and their heirs and assigns, lying in the Earls
march; viz. betwixt the Earls dich on the North part, and Bond's dam on the
South side of Grenedich; so that by the same Sewer, the before-specified lands
might drayn, from time to time, whenever the said Prior, and Prioresse,
William and Margery, their heirs and assigns should think fit. And that they
should have, enjoy, and maintain the said Sewer so made, for ever, from a
certain place called the Erlesmarsh; and so through the midst of Sadilbow
pitts, to the breadth of eight foot; and thence to a certain Gutter, called
Feresgote. With power to make a sufficient Bridge over the same for Carts, at
the South East Corner of Geffrey Siward: and another also for Carts, near the
gate of the heirs of John Drew, and a third likewise for Carts; together with a
Clow, having two bars with Keys, at the West end of Brod will Ea; whereof one
Key to be kept by the Dyk Reeves, for the time being, to remain on the said
East part of Wigenhale; and the other by the said Prior and Prioress and their
Successors, and the said Will. and Margaret and their heirs and assigns, for
ever; to the intent, that if an excess of water should fortune to come on the
side of Erlesfeld, then the said Dike Reeves might shut the same Clow, until
the said Sewer might, in reasonable time, convey it away; so that the Lands in
Wigenhale and Sadilbo might not be overflowed therewith. And in like manner, if
such an excess of water should come from Wigenhale and Sadilbo; that then the
said Prior and Prioress, and their successors; and the said Will. and Margerie,
and their heirs and assigns, for prevention of the inundation of their Lands,
might shut the same Clow, until the said water should be carried away. And
that otherwise than for the evacuation of such excess of water, coming from
Erlesmarsh, or from that part of Wigenhale and Sadilbow, neither of the said
parties to shut the same Clow.

And the said Prior and Prioress for themselves and their successors; and the
said Will. and Margerie, for them and their Heirs, did Covenant to keep
sufficiently and maintain, the said Sewer, Bridges, and Clow, at their own
proper costs and chardges. And the said Land-holders in Wigenhale and Sadilbow
Covenanted likewise to permit them the said Prior and Prioress, and their
successors; and the said Will. and Margerie, and their Heirs, to have a
sufficient Sewer for the draining of their Lands in Erlesmarsh aforesaid. In
consideration whereof, they the said Prior and Prioress, for themselves and
their successors; and the said William and Margery, for themselves their Heirs
and Assigns, did grant to the said Landholders of Wygenhale and Sadilbow, an
yearly rent of viii s. to be received yearly out of the Lands beforespecified.

After this about two years, (scil. on Thursday next after the Invention of the
Holy Cross) there was a Perambulation Ex v^t. Rot. perg^m. pe^e^ Henr. K^rv^ll
de Wigenhale, Ar^^.
made on the East part of the River of Wigenhale, by xij. Jurors; who said upon
their Oaths and ordained, that for safeguard of the said Town, the Newland dich
ought to be eight foot in breadth at the ^op. And that all the Sea-banks
opposite to the message Walls, and elsewhere, from the said Newland dich to
Rouse beche, ought to be xij. foot broad at the top. And that the Rouse beche,
Briggebeche, Yernemouth dole, Dukesbeche, Gromesdiche, and Cannesbeche, ought
to be xij. foot in breadth at the top.

And they said, that all the Sea-banks, opposite to the message Wall of
Sechegole, unto Pulbergole, ought to be six foot in breadth at the top, and
within the Wall four foot, but elsewhere xij. foot. And that all the said
Sea-banks ought to be raised above the highest tides, two foot, and perfected
before the Feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist, upon penalty of the Bylaw;
viz. for every perch not repaired vi d. And that they be well turfed before the
Feast of All Saints, upon penalty of Biscot: and at the utmost that they be
sufficiently repaired before the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, upon
penalty of Triscot.

And they likewise ordained, for the better safeguard of the said Town, that
all the said Sea-banks should be strengthened with Stakes and Piles, or with
Timber; viz. of schoring, where need required, before the Feast of All Saints,
upon penalty of vi s. viii d. for every perch not repaired. And that all the
Sewers should be cleansed and scoured, where need was, before the Feast of the
Nativity of S. John Baptist, upon penalty of Bylaw; viz. for every perch not
repaired ij d. without damage to the Land sowed. And that where the Sewers lay
upon the sowed Land, that they should be cleansed before the Feast of S. Michael
the Arch Angel, upon the like penalty: And that all the warp should be thrown
into the Common ways, to fill up haggs and lakes, where need was, upon a great
penalty, where it should ly near the Common rode.

And they furth^r ordained, that all Dunghills, lying in Common, to the nuisance
of any, should be amerc'd, viz. for each Dunghill ii ^. there was therefore
warning given for their removal, before the Feast of S. Michael the
Archangel, upon penalty of iiii ^. for every Dunghill.

And they said, that there was a certain Lake, in the Kings High way, betwixt
the Message of John Hastings Chaplain, and the Plot lately belonging unto Edm.
Blower; command was therefore given to fill the said Lake with earth, on each
side, before the Feast of S. John Baptist, upon penalty of vi s. viii ^. As
also that all Trenches, Lakes, and Haggs in the fai^ public ways, within the
before-specified limits, should be filled up with earth, lying near thereto,
before the said Feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist, upon penalty of vi ^.

And they likewise ordained, that all those old Cu^tomes, of Bylaws, and other,
touching the safeguard of that Town, anciently used and approved by the Kings
Justices, should be firmly kept: And to quicken the observance of them, that
the said Bylaws, Biscot, and Trisco^, should be levied according to ancient
Custom, by the oversight and advice of the Jurors of the Purale. And that the
principal Guardians, called Dike-Reeves, as often as they should think fit,
should make inquisition of the trespasses touching the common obstruction in
the Sewers and Stows, and the like; and amerce those whom they find faulty,
according to the measure of the offense. Which Dike Reeves to have the one
half, and the Commonalty the residue, for those common nusances, to be employed
in menwarke and grundegole. And the persons taking the said distresses to have
i d. called Wopeny, for every one so taken: as also twelve pence in every xx s,
of Tallages and Amerciaments by them Collected. And that the chief Guardians of
the Town, should, for the future, from year to year, upon the Feast of S. Mark
the Evangelist, give up their account at a public meeting, of all Tallages,
Bylaws, Biscot, and Triscot, in what sort soever levied; and be answerable for
the same unto the Commonalty, according to ancient usage: and the same day to
deliver up their verdict unto them.

And, that the said chief Guardians, their Deputies, or Attorneys, shall swear
to execute their Office, for the common benefit and safeguard, not favoring
any. And that the Distrainers should likewise swear to observe the direction of
the said Guardians, and be obedient the^eto.

And they also said, and presented, that in times past, much peril had happened
to the said Town of Wigenhale, through the negligence of the Dike Reeves,
appointed for the safeguard thereof; in regard they had not sufficient Lands
and Tenement within that liberty, nor knowledge of the Laws and Customs of
Marshland. Whereupon, for the avoiding of future peril, it was ordained, by the
consent of the whole Commonalty, that, thenceforth, no Guardian, which should
be chosen for the safeguard thereof, should make any Deputy or Attorney to
exe^ute his Office, except he were a fit m^n, free, and sufficient to answer to
the Commonalty, in case any hurt might come to the Sea-banks through his
neglect and default. And they likewise ordained, that no man should thenceforth
take upon him to measure any Se^-banks, without the oversight and assent of the
Town Officers, sworn thereto, upon the penalty of xx s.

And they moreover presented, that whenever the Commonalty should be summoned
to meet for the safeguard of the Town; that they which should then be present,
whether more or less in number, might, together with the chief Guardians, or
those which should then be there, have power to make Ordinances for the
safeguard before-specified; and that the same Ordinances should be effectual
and firm. And that if any of the xij Jurats should make default, by not
meeting, or to perambulate the Sea-banks, for the safeguard of the Town, that
each of them should be amerc'd at xii d. so often as he did so neglect. And in
case the said principal Guardians, their Deputies or Attorneys, did make
default, each of them to be amerc'd at iii s. iiii d. as often as he did so
transgress. And if the said distrainers should not come with their Rolls of
the Sea-banks, and with the perch to measure them; that they should be amerc'd
at xx d. for every time of such their neglect.

And they said, that when any Grun^egole should happen in the Banks of the Sea,
or Marshes, and not through his default to whom the same belonged; that it
should be repaired by the Commonalty of the Town; and the party whose
Grundegole it was, to be distrained until he made satisfaction. And that in
case any man should be refractory, or a Foreiner, so that no distress could be
made upon him for such default in his Bank, and that the said Bank were in
danger; that then the chief Guardians to summon the Men-worke, and make good
the Bank for certain sum of money; and when time should serve, a distress to
be taken and detained until three pence were paid for every penny so expended.
And that whosoever should have warning to repair the said Grundegole and came
not, he should forfeit xij d. And whosoever should not come upon summons to
special Men-worke, to pay xii ^. and nevertheless to perform the same on the
morrow.

And they likewise ordained, for the better safeguard of the said Town, that
Sessings should be made in the said Banks, opposite to the Messuages and Walls,
twice or thrice every year, in case of necessity, for preservation of the Bank;
and that the persons agisted should be distrained, from day to day, for the due
performance thereof. And they said, that they had, time out of mind enjoyed a
Cart way for Carriages, in a certain place, called the Bicches, on the backside
of the said Sea-bank, for repairing the same Banks at all times of the year,
when need required.

And they also ordained, that every Ditch being within less than xii foot of
the backside of the Sea-bank, should be filled up by those unto whom the same
Bank lying opposite to it, belonged; and that the same should be speedily
accomplished, upon penalty of ii d. for every foot. And they farther ordained;
that, for the better safeguard of the said Town, no man should thenceforth make
any Ditch or Pit, upon the backside of the Sea-bank, within xii foot, upon
penalty of iii s. iiii d. for every perch. And that if any Hoggs should be
found feeding or rooting upon the said Sea-banks, they to be amerc'd for every
foot i d. and for each mandible i d. And for Sheep or Cattle treading or
depasturing thereon, from Rousebeehe to Pulberys gole, to forfeit i d. for
every foot, as often as occasion should be.

And they also ordained, that all the lands, lying in the field of Sadylbowe,
abutting upon Seche water leswe, betwixt Thief gate, and Farlow diche, should
raise the Stows, equal with the land on each side; and with Hurdles laid upon
them six foot in breadth, to prevent the water, coming from the Sewer of
Sechewater leswe, from overflowing; upon penalty for every Stow vi d.

And, that the Causey extending from Newdiche through Lenne gate and B.....
milhirne, on the West part to Puelldole, was in decay; and from Puell dole by
Thief gate, and the lands of the Prior of Schouldam....... to.... Diche; and
from a place called the...... he, by Powdiche on the Northside, unto the great
River of Wigenhale, by reason of the excess of water coming out of the Field
of Seche and Watlington.

In 14 H. 4. John Ingaldesthorpe, John Harsyk, Simon Baret, John Mannyng, and
Thomas Styward were constituted Pat. 14 H. 4. p. unica m. 28. in do^so.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Sewers etc. in the
Hundreds of Frebrigge and Claklose, betwixt the Mill at Marham and Secchithe
Bridge: with direction to proceed therein according to the Law and Custom of
this Realm, The like Commission Pat. 16 H. 6. m. 5. in dorso.
in 16 H. 6. had William Earl of Suffolk, Sir Raphe Cromwell, and Sir William
Bardolf Knights, Will. Godered, Nich. Dyxon Clerk, Sir John Colvyle, and Sir
Thomas Tudenham Knights, Andrew Sperlyng, John Heydone, and Gilb. Haltofte, for
all those throughout this whole County: with power to make Laws and Ordinances
therein, according to the Law and Custom of this Realm and of Romeney marsh;
and to determine all things therein according to those Laws: as also to impressed
so many Diggers and Laborers, upon competent wages, as they should think
necessary to employ in those Works, in regard of the expedition which the same
required.

But farther, touching this North east part of Norfolk, than what has been
said, I have not observed^ until the xviith year of Queen Eliz. reign, that
Sir Nicholas le Strange, and Sir Robert Bell Kts. with other Commissioners of
Sewers for the Hundred of Clak clos, made Ex cod. MS^ pe^e O. S. John f. 153. b.
these following Ordinances, upon the fourth of Aug. in a Session of Sewers
held at Kings Lynne, viz.

That all the Banks against the great River, extending to Narborough bars, to
Canons fen, shall be repaired, and made in breadth at the bottom, xvi foot; at
the top 4 foot; and in height 4 foot; and the Chanel of the River 24 foot in
wideness: The like all along, down to Pentney Mill.

That Pentney Mills be pulled down, whereby the drowning of the common ground
of Marham and Shouldham may be prevented; which by reason of the keeping up the
water, for those Mills, are overflown.

That the back Dike from Narborough bars, to Cardike, be kept in breadth 8
foot, and in depth 5.

That all the Banks of the River from Blackborough bridge to Prioursturne, be
made in height and breadth as aforesaid. So likewise then to Cotehill, and
thence to Sechee bridge.

That the Drayn called Wronglode, extending from Wode dyke to Tile kill, be in
breadth 8 foot, and in depth 4.

So also the Sewer called Wode dike, lying in Marham; and likewise Carre dike.

That the common Sewer called Bush fen, extending from the said Car dike to the
great River, be made xx foot in breadth, and five foot in depth.

That a Dam be made on the West side of Bush fen Ea, in Dunstall dike, so that
the waters coming from Car dike may run into Bush fen Ea.

That a Drain in Marham, extending from Cross yard to Padocks hill, be made in
breadth five foot, and depth three.

That the old River in Marham, be made 12 foot broad, and four foot deep, from
the place where Marham Mill stood, to Bears head: Thence to Marplot dike, of
the same breadth and depth; Thence to Dunstall dike; and thence to String dike
in like sort.

That Dunstall dike shall Drayn through the Mill Causey, by a sluice there to be
made of two foot square, into a Dike lying on the North side of a Hopyard,
called Hopyard dike: Which Dike, extending from the said Causey to Stringdike,
to be 8 foot wide also, and 5 foot deep.

That the Drayn in Marham, extending from Swans nest to Bradwell lode, be made
eight foot wide, and four foot deep.

That Bradwell lode, extending from the Abbey yards end unto the old Ea, and so
to the Cross willow, be made of the like breadth and depth.

That the Drayn from Dowhouse-Close, to Crowdw^ll gappe, be kept in breadth x
foot, and in depth 4. So likewise Friday lode, extending into the said Old Ea.

That the Common Drayn called the Old Ea, extending from Haddon Mill to Black
dyke, be made and kept 8 foot in breadth, and 4 in depth. So likewise from
Haleroft bars to Wirmgey bridge.

That the said Common Drayn, or Old Ea, from Wirmgay bridge to the Abbey style,
to be kept in breadth xii foot, and depth 5. And from the said Abbey style to
Cotehill, and so to the great River, xvi foot in breadth; and in depth as
aforesaid.

That the River of Wisse, extending from Whittington to Stokebridge, be
cleansed, and made in breadth xl foot.

That Stokebridge containing three Arches of the wideness of 40 foot, be
repaired by the Country near adjoining.

That the said River of Wisse, from Stokebridge to Sandell were; thence to
Haveringay were, Bishops were, Izelham were, Cote were, New were, Forwere,
Helgay bridge, Hide were, Shellewere, and West lode, be cleansed and made in
breadth xl foot as aforesaid; and thence to the great Ouse in breadth 30 foot.

And that two Jetties or Peers of stone, xviii foot distant each from other, be
set upon the said River, within 200 foot of the said River of Ouse.

That the Landlake (which takes its beginning out of the River of Wisse, at
Weere dike, a mile distant from Stoke bridge) whose natural fall to the Sea is
through Snore fen, through Helgay Causey, in a Pipe of Timber or Stone; and
thence etc. to Gunnels lode, be there divided into two branches; the one
directly Westward, to the River of Ouse^ and the other Northwards, through
Denver South fenn; in each whereof (near the said River Ouse) to be placed a
substantial Gole.

That the Banks on the South side of Wisse, from common Fengate, in Helgay, be
made 8 foot in breadth, and 4 foot in height.

That the Banks on the East side of Ouse, from West lodes end to South lode, be
made and kept 8 foot broad, and 4 foot high; and from thence to Modney cote,
ten foot broad in the bottom, 5 at the top, and 5 foot in height.

That the Drayn in Helgay fenn, called the Wisse, be kept in breadth 12 foot,
and depth 4. unto Miles end corner; and from thence to the River of Ouse 10
foot broad, and 5 foot deep. And at the end thereof a Gole 2 foot square, and
16 foot long.

That a sufficient Drayn be made at the Causey between Helgay and Modney.

That the Drayn between Fordhammore and Portmore, in Helgay, be made in breadth
12 foot, and depth 5. And a Gool at the end thereof of the like dimension as
aforesaid.

That the Drayn betwixt Thack fen and Helgay-more be 10 foot in breadth, and 4
in depth, with the like Gole as aforesaid.

That Turff fen lake in Helgay be kept 12 foot broad, and 6 foot deep, with a
Gole where it enters into Ouse.

That the Common Dayn called Creek^ lode; extending from Creek mere in Little
port, to the 4 Lodes; and thence to Pulwear lake, be kept in breadth 20 foot,
and depth 6 foot; and so likewise to a place called the Willow; and th^nce to
the River of Ouse, 16 foot in breadth, and 6 ^oot deep, with a Gool at the end
thereof, of 4 foot in breadth, and 5 in depth.

That Rebech River, in Helgay, extending from Redmercote, unto the great River
of Ouse in Sotherey, be made in breadth 40 foot, until it come within three
furlongs of Ouse, and then 30; to be done by the Townships of Feltwell,
Hockold, Wilton, Brandon-ferry, Santon and Dounham; and all others having any
grounds drayning through and by the said River.

That the Common Drayn in Sotherey, called Stake lode, be in breadth 12 foot,
and depth 4. till it come to Cross water; and thence to the River of Ouse 14
foot in breadth.

That Sotherey Causey be made 18 foot wide at the bottom, 14 foot at the top,
and 3 foot in height.

That the Banks of Ouse North of Sotherey Ferry to Modney dike, be 8 foot in
breadth at the bottom, 5 foot at the top, and 3 foot in height.

That the Land drain in Sotherey, extending from Sotherey bar to the Hall
yard, be kept in breadth 8 foot, and in depth 3. and so till it come to Stake
lode.

That Pollver drain in Wirmgay, beginning at Campions hills, and extending to
Sechey Causey, and thence to Kings bridge, be 10 foot in breadth, and 4 in depth.

That the Drayn in Watlington and Totnell, extending from The^fes bridge unto
Hobs dike, be kept in br^dth 6 foot, and depth 3. And Hobs dike, 9 foot wide,
and 4 foot deep.

That East wroe dich Bank, in Watlington, otherwise called Savers bank, which
defends the fresh waters of Polver drain and Seche River from overflowing
etc. to be heightened in every low place.

That Polver drain, from Kings bridge to the Gole head, be made in breadth 16
foot, and in depth 8.

That Geris dam^ in Watlington, be kept in breadth 12 foot, and in depth 6. and
the menure cast out of it to be laid upon the Causey on the North part thereof,
for the raising of the same Causey.

That the Were Bank lately made by the Inhabitants of Walington, extending from
the great River at Bells drove to Moynes crossed, leaving in the midst of the Old
Ea a Wast to be made of iime and stone 3 foot square, and a sufficient Drayn
from the same to Geris dam, be sufficiently maintained.

That the Townships of Runcton holme and Watlington do make a Drain from the
Pipe lying between Bells drove and Flemings hive, to the great Lake, of 8 foot
wide, and 4 foot deep.

That those which ought to amend the Drains,
neglecting for 14 days, the Dike Reeve to perform the work, taking for for
every penny laid out 3 d.

Tha^ the Causey, called Fleming hive, lying in Runcton holme, be made in
breadth 16 foot, and in height 5 on the North side.

That Thorpe land gole, be maintained 9 foot in breadth, and in depth 4.

That Stow goole (alias Hirne gole) be made in breadth 8 foot, and in depth 4.

That the Sea-banks from Stow bridge, to the division between Stow and Dounham,
be in breadth on the top 8 foot, and in height one foot higher than the highest
Water-mark.

That the Drayn in Wimbotesham, extending from Midl^tons house to the
Parsonage, be 3 foot broad, and 2 foot deep; thence to Inghams Corner, 5 foot
broad, and 3 foot deep; and thence to Wimbotesham gole, in breadth 8 foot, and
depth 5.

That the Drayn in Downham, on the East side the River of Ouse, extending from
Bydewells to the great River, be made from Bydwell to Goodcrosse, in breadth 3
foot, and depth 2. From thence to the Goole dich, in breadth 8 foot, and depth
4, and from thence to the great River, in breadth 10 foot, and depth 5.

That the Drayn in Dounham by Yerning ditchs, extending to Tullymore in Denver,
be made in breadth 8 foot, and depth 5, and the Gool belonging thereto to be
repaired.

That the Banks on the East side of Ouse, from Dounham goole to Denver hithe,
be 6 foot broad at the top, and one foot higher than the highest Water-mark.

That all the Banks of the said River, from Denver hithe to West lode; and
thence to Gunnels lode, be on the top 5 foot broad, and one foot higher than
the highest Water-mark.

So likewise on the North side of West lode, alias Wyssey River, extending from
Gunnels lode to Shippen lode.

And from Shippen lode to Helgay bridge, to be 12 foot at the bottom, 6 foot at
the top, and in height equal with Helgay Causey.

And in the seventh year of King James, the Sea having made a very great breach
betwixt the Towns of great Yarnmouth and Happisborow, in this County of
Norfolk, and overflowed and drowned much hard grounds, besides the greatest
part of the Marshes and low grounds within diverse Towns and Parishes, not only
of this County, but also of Suffolk; there was a special Act Cap. 20.
of Parliament then made, for the issuing out of Commissions, under the great
Seal of England, for the Survey and view thereof; and using such other means
for the speedy recovering of them, as by the said Act are particularly directed.

CHAP. XLVI.
IN 6 H. 3. complaint Pat. 6. H. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
being made to the King, that the Sea-tides had overflowed a great part of
Dunwich, and the Lands adjacent; as also, that they did daily encroach more and
more thereon, so that farther damage was like to happen, in case something were
not done therein; he issued out his Letters Pat. 6. H. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
Patents unto all the Earls, Barons, Knights, and Freeholders of this County,
affectionately desiring them, that they would apply a proper and speedy remedy
thereto. And in 3 E. 1. the King directed his Precept Claus. 3. E. 1. m. 18.
to the Constable of Orford Castle, that for the better defense of Orford
marsh,
he should cause new Banks to be made where none were before; and to repair the
old ones in all places where they were defective.

In 18 E. 1. there was so great and sudden an inundation Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 19.
in dorso.
of the Sea, at Gernemuthe, and the parts thereabouts, that it broke into the
Houses, and carried out much of their goods, and Chests with money and Jewels;
as also Sheep and other Cattle out of the pastures; many whereof were taken up
by those who were not the proper owners of them: Whereupon the King having
information, he constituted Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
Will. de Gyselham, and Will. de Redham Commissioners to enquire in whose hands
they then were; and to cause restitution thereof to be made.

In 3 E. 2. Hervie de Staunton, John le Breton, Ric. de Walsyngham, and Thomas
de Ingaldesthorpe were assigned Pat. 3 E. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
to view the Sea-banks, Ditches, and Sewers in this County, and to take order
for their repair, where need required. The like assignation Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 1.
m. 20. in dorso
in 9 E. 2. had Robert de Reydone and Roger Sturmy, for all those upon the
Coast betwixt Ippeswiche and Donewich.

And in 31 H. 6. the Abbots of Leyston and Sybeton, Thomas Brewes, John
Harleston, Will. Ienney, Reginald Rous, John Strange, and Richard Yakesley were
appointed Pat. 31 H. 6. p. 1. m. 22. in dorso.
to make the like view from Amynesmere haven unto Rakewarebrigge, and from
Stonhill to Keyesbrigge; and from Rakewarebrigge to Yoxford brigge: and to make
Statutes and Ordinances according to the Laws and Customs of Romeney marsh
etc. as also to take up so many Diggers and other Laborers, upon competent
wages, as should be necessary to be employed in that work, in respect of the
great necessity in accelarating thereof, for the avoidance of further mischief.
So also in 36 H. 6. were Pat. 36 H. 6. p. 2. m. 4. in dorso.
Sir Robert Corbet Knight, Thomas Brewes, John Harlestone, Henry Gray, Reginald
Rous, and Henry Turnour.

CHAP. XLVII.
REturning now Westwards I come to Cambridgshire, wherein the largest
proportion of this spacious Fenny tract lies: and in regard that the
obstruction See Cap. for the reasons thereof.
of the old natural outfall at Wisebeche, not only of that great River Ouse,
wholly; with Grant, and likewise a branch of Nene, then united to it; but of
diverse Lodes and Lakes besides, has been both the Original and chief cause,
that the main Level became thus totally overflowed; and consequently, the
occasion of such excessive pains and continual chardge, as well for the
preservation of it from utter drowning, as recovery of what was so under water;
I shall next take notice of the manifold endeavors and vast expenses in that
kind, which have been used in order thereto: as also of such dreadful
inundations from the Sea, by reason of sundry violent tempests; or of the same
fresh waters, which for diverse ages have happened in these parts.

In the year MCCxxxvi. (21. H. 3.) on the morrow after Martinmass day, and for
the space of eight days more, so boisterous were the winds, that the Sea,
being raised much higher than its usual bounds, broke in at Wisebeche, and
other places of this Country, ita quod naviculae, pecora, necnon and hominum
maxima periit multitudo, says Annal. M. Westminster. de An. 1236.
Math. Westminster. So that of little Vessels, Cattle, and people, very many were
destroyed.

And about seventeen years after, there happened such another woeful accident:
whereupon the King directed his Precept Claus. 38. H. 3. m. 12.
to the Shireeve of this County, requiring him to distrain all those who had
Lands within the precinct of the old Banks in these parts of Wisebeche, to
repair the said Banks as they ought to do, according to the quantity of their
holdings. Which losses, though they were very great, might the better have been
supported, had not the before-specified obstruction of the fresh waters annoyed
them in a more than ordinary measure; which so much increased, that in 13 E. 1.
the Tenants to the Bishop of Ely in Well, Elm, Wisebeche, Leverington, Neuton
and Tyd complained Pat. 13 E. 1. m. 24. in dorso.
thereof to the King; in particular showing, that their Lands in those Towns,
by the great flux of waters running toward the Sea
of Wellestrem, and through the defect in repair of the Sewers, Bank of
Rughmere, and other Banks, anciently raised, and to be made anew from Town to
Town, were drowned: and not only so; but that diverse of the Inhabitants in
those Towns, being averse as well to their own as others benefit, did refuse to
submit themselves to the Law and Custom of the Fen, for remedy thereof: the
said King therefore constituted Pat. 13 E. 1. m. 24. in dorso.
Hugh de Balsham, then Bishop of Ely, and Hugh Peche, his Commissioners to make
enquiry etc. and to cause the said Bank of Rughmere to be repaired at the
chardge of those persons, whose Lands were preserved from the peril of
inundation, thereby; or if need were to raise another in a
more fitting place: provided, that by such repair and making of Banks from
Town to Town, no disherison, or damage did befall Geffrey de Sandiacre and
Clementia his Wife, and their Tenants in Neuton and Tyd, or any other person
whatsoever.

After this, within a few years, the Sea-banks in these parts being again
broken Pat. 19. E. 1. m. 23. ^^ dorso.
by the violence of the Tides, the same Geffrey de Sandiacre, and James de
Beaumeys were appointed Pat. 19. E. 1. m. 23. ^^ dorso.
to view them, and to take order for their repair.

But these irruptions of the Sea, as they were casual ( viz. when the North or
North East winds accompanied extraordinary Spring-tides) so were they not
frequent, nor did those floods so long continue upon the Land, as to destroy it
by drowning; the stagnation of the fresh waters producing much more damage;
which for want of evacuation, for the reasons above-specified, were a continual
annoyance to the whole Co^ntry thereabouts; insomuch as the Inhabitants of
Marshland, discerning the danger to that Province, by the increase of those
waters, did in 21 E. 1. procure a Commission Ex Regist. de Ramsey, penes H^ W.
Cromw^ll arm. f. 115. a.
from the King, bearing date the xixth of June, directed to Peter de Campania,
Thomas de Hakford, and Adam de Schropham, to enquire farther touching the same,
and to apply the most proper remedy thereto. Who thereupon sitting Ibid.
at Utwell upon Monday after the Feast of S. Peter ad vincula next ensuing; and
taking into consideration Ibid.
what ought to be done, for restoring those waters of Utwell (for so that great
River of Ouse, which had formerly passed that way was then called) to their due
and ancient course,
did, with the assent of the Country, ordain, that there should be three Dams
made; one at Utwell bridge, another at Lytlelode b^idge, in Upwell; and the
third at Fen-dyke-lake in Upwell also. And because the Inhabitants of
Marshland, at whose instance the said Commission was procured, perceived that
this Ordinance for the making of these three stops would be for their benefit;
they, without any authority from the said Justices, given to them, or from the
Shireeve, or any Bailiff of the Hundred, did, of their own accord, and contrary
to the tenor of the before-specified Commission, make a stop of the said water
at Little lode aforesaid, and so continued it, until by the force of the water,
with the help of some persons who passed that way with their Boats, a part
thereof was opened. And finding it so opened, procured another Commission to
Simon de Ellesworth and Thomas de Hagford, to Ib. f. 116. a.
enquire thereof. Who by by virtue of that Commission, sitting at Upwell, upon
Wednesday next after the Invention of the Holy Cross, in the xxiiith year of
the said Kings reign; and making enquiry accordingly, were answered; that they
had not any power by their said Commission so to do; by reason they had no
appointment for the stopping thereof: Whereupon the said Thomas de H^gford, who
was likewise associated with the before-specified Peter de Campania, in the
first Commission, being asked, whether himself and his fellow Justices at that
time, did then consent, or give command for the damming of the said water of
Little lode, answered, that in the Commission, so directed to Peter de Campania
and himself, there was nothing contained, but only touching the waters
descending by Utwell, without any mention at all of stopping the water of Little
lode in Upwell, and consequently no command to obstruct the same; whereupon
they the said Simon and Thomas forbore to do any thing farther therein.

But afterward, the same day^ the said Commissioners, by virtue of another
Precept for the view of Pokediche, in Marshland (whereof I have in the Chapter
of this my discourse, already taken notice) did receive this following verdict
from the Jurors then impanelled and sworn; viz. that there was a necessity,
that the water at Upwell should be stopped at the house of one Raphe Smith of
that Town; and that the old course thereof should be cleansed, and enlarged from
the Sluse at Elm, unto that stop at Upwell, xl foot in breadth; and made in
depth full six foot more than it was at that present. And that there was the
like necessity, that the said water of Up well should have its course by the
Little lode to a place called Wadyngstowe, till such time as the said Sewer were
so cleansed, enlarged, and repaired, as has been said: And, that if the said
Chanel called Lytlelode and Wadingstow, would not be sufficient to carry those
waters, that it should be enlarged by the oversight of the Shireeve of Norfolk,
as need required. And it was then also ordained, that the Lyttlelode and
Wadyngstowe should be kept open, until the before-specified Sewers were
cleansed; viz. till the Gule of August: in pursuance of which Ordinance, that
part of Little lode, then remaining stopped, after the said breach by the power of
the waters and Boats so passing that way, as has been said, was opened.

After this; viz. in 27 E. 1. the said King, directing his Precept Ib. f. 119.
a.
to Will. de Carletone and Will. Howard to enquire concerning the breach of the
said stop at Little lode, by reason whereof the water could not have its passage
to the Sea accordingly as it had anciently used^ they sat at Well, upon
Wednesday after the Octaves of Easter, and received this following information
by the verdict of the Jurors then impanelled and sworn; viz. that Robert Russel
Bailiff to the Abbot of Ramseye, John Mayner, Walter Halleman, and others, had
forcibly broke down that Dam at Small lode (or Little lode) and that one Richard
Curteys had done the like at Wadyugstowe: Whereupon the Shireeve had command to
take them all, and imprison them, until he should receive farther directions
therein.

In 8 E. 2. the King being informed, Pat. 8. E. 2. p. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
that the water whereby diverse persons of Cambridge, Huntendon, and Northampton
shires, passed with Ships and Victual, from the parts of Lenne to Well, to the
great benefit of all the Country, and especially of the Town of Holme, situate
thereupon, was obstructed by certain men dwelling thereabouts: he therefore
assigned Pat. 8. E. 2. p. 1. m. 16. in dorso.
John de Butetort, Robert de Maddingle, and Walter de Mollesworth to enquire
thereof.

The next ensuing year Geffrey de Colvile, Robert de Maddyngle, Laurence de
Burewelle, and John le Corouner, were appointed Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m. 24. in
dorso.
to view the Banks and Sewers upon the Seacoast, lying in Tyd, Neuton,
Leveryngton, and Wysebeche; as also in some Towns of Marshland, and the parts
adjacent, within the Hundred of Wisebeche, which were then in decay; and to
take order for their repair.

The like Commission Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso.
had the said Geffrey, Robert, and John, together with Nich. de Houtone, in 9
E. 2.

And in 17 E. 2. the King receiving farther information Pat. 17. E. 2. p. 1. m.
6. in dorso.
concerning the obstruction of the water of Welstreme, at the Town of Well
beforementioned, whereby Merchants and others were hindered from passing with
their Ships, Boats, and other Vessels from the Town of Lenne, unto Yakesle,
Holme, and other places lying in the Counties of Huntendon and Norfolk, in such
sort as they had formerly used to do (and as the Commission Pat. 17. E. 2. p.
1. m. 6. in dorso.
in 8 E. 2. above-specified imports) constituted John de Mutford, Walter de
Friskeney, and Will. de Gosefeld, Commissioners to enquire thereof.

What they did herein, I have not seen; but in 3 E. 3. (which was not long
after) there was a Presentment Ex cod. MS. Memorandorum ^b. de Bu^g. Petri,
penes Ra^. Wi^^fiel^ Eq. aur. f. 73. a.
exhibited to the Justices Itinerant, sitting at Northampton, by the Jurors for
several Hundreds in that County, importing; that whe^eas the course of the
River Nene had anciently been, directly from Peterborough, Videsis eti^m Plac.
coram Rege te^m. Tri^. 5. E. 3. Rot. 12.
unto the Len^e, in Norfolk; by which Corn, VVoo and other Commodities were
carried to that Haven; and from thence, Victual and other necessaries; that
about xxviii years then past, Walter de Langetone, Bishop of Coventre and
Lichfield, and Treasurer to King Edward the first, (Grandfather to the then
King) did, for the drayning of his Manor of Coldham, situate in a Fenny Soil,
by his power and greatness, cause a Dam to be made at Utwell in the said
County of Norfolk, with earth and sand, so that no navigable Vessels could
afterward pass to and from Lenne, as they had wont to do; to the great damage
of the said King and his people, as well of that County, as of Norfolk,
Cambridge, Huntendon, and Lincoln shires: and that the same stop of those
waters from descending to Lenne, did cause the Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and
Marshes of Borough fen and Thorney fen, with diverse others adjoining, to be
overflowed and drowned; to the damage of the men of that County CCC l. per
annum, and upwards. And that Edmund Peverell, son and heir to Robert Peverell,
Brother and heir of the said Bishop, then holding the said Manor, did
maintain and continue the before-specified Dam, but by what Authority they knew
not: the Shireeve of Norfolk had command therefore to summon the said Edmund
to answer thereto.

Who appearing, in person, and being required to say what he could for the
keeping up of the said Dam; alleged, that the before-specified Bishop, dying
seized of the said Manor, Robert Peverell entered into it as his Brother and
heir: and that after the said Roberts death, he the said Edmund entering as his
son and heir, found that water so damm'd, as has been observed; without that,
that the said Dam was so made, as aforesaid, by the same Bishop, or that he the
said Edmund had continued and supported the same to the common damage etc. as
had been presented: and thereupon did put himself upon the Country; and so
likewise did Richard Adelburgh, who prosecuted for the King. And therefore,
because it seemed expedient to the Court, as well for the King, as for his
people, that there should be a verdict from the Country on that behalf, as well
by Jurors of those Counties, wherein the damage was assigned, as by Jurors of
Norfolk, in which County the said Dam was alleged to be made; command was given
to the Shireeves of Cambridge, Duntendon, Lincoln and Northampton shires,
likewise, that each of them should bring xij. honest and lawful men, whereby
the truth might be the better known, to appear before the King three weeks
after Michaelmass.

At which time came Adam de Fyncham the King's Attorney: but the said Edmund,
though solemnly called, appeared not; whereupon a verdict was taken against him
by default.

Nor did the Shireeves of any of the beforementioned Counties make return of
their said Precepts: therefore new writs were issued out unto them, to the same
purpose as abovesaid, returnable upon the xvth of S. Hillarie then next
following. At which time came the said Adam, and the Shireeves of Norfolk and
Northampton; who alleged, that the Writs were so long in coming to their hands,
that they could be nothing therein: howbeit the Shireeve of Cambridge and
Huntendonshire returned the names of Jurors; but the Shireeve of Lincolnshire
sent no answer.

Whereupon the King issued out a Precept to Geffrey le Scrope and his fellow
Justices of the Pleas before himself to be holden, whereby he signified to
them, that the Inhabitants of Marshland, in Norfolk, had complained; and the
men of Suffolk and Cambridgshire, who had Lands near unto those parts, had
exhibited a Petition to him the said King and his Council; showing, that
whereas some parts of Marshland, together with a great proportion of those
Counties, was lost and destroyed by the inundation of the Salt waters; as also
of the fresh, by reason that the said waters and Sewers had not their right
course: And that King Edward the first, passing that way, and taking notice
thereof; did, by the advice of his Council, assign William Howard and some
other to make enquiry touching the premises; who by Inquisitions taken before
them,
found that those parts could not be any other way preserved, than by stopping
of a certain water called Well dam: And whereas for that respect, they did
ordain the before-specified obstruction thereof to be made: and that afterward
it was presented before him the said Geffrey and his fellow Justices itinerant,
in the County of Northampton, by the procurement of some persons, for their own
particular advantage; that the same obstruction was made to their damage;
Whereupon they caused Edmund Peverell to be impleaded for it; and proceeded so
far therein, as that the said Edmund submitted to an Inquisition thereof: which
Inquisition being to be taken before the said King; the parties
before-specified besought him; that, whereas that obstruction had been made by
the appointment of those Justices, he would please to supersede the taking
thereof, until the complainants could show forth their right as they ought to
do. The said King therefore being willing to do right in the premises,
required the Treasurer and Chamberlains of his Exchequer, that they should
under the Exchequer Seal, send unto him the Inquisitions so taken before the
said Will. Howard and his associates, as aforesaid; together with the whole
process thereupon, upon the xvth of the holy Trinity then next ensuing; all
which were at that time in the Treasury of the said Exchequer, under their
Custody. And commanded the Shireeves of Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgshire, to
make Proclamation within their liberties; that every person concerned in the
premises, should then and there appear, to answer what might be proposed to
them, if they thought fit; and to folicite for further Justice therein: And
lastly forbad the said Geffrey and his fellow Justices to receive the said
Inquisition.

By virtue of which Precept, the Jurors for the Counties of Cambridge and
Huntendon were respited until from the xvth of the holy Trinity following;
because none of them appeared: and therefore the Shireeve was to attach them.
And because the Shireeves of Norfolk and Northampton returned, that their Writs
came so late unto them, that they could do nothing therein; and the Shireeve of
Lincolnshire made no return at all, therefore other Writs were sent unto them,
requiring each of them to bring xxiiij. honest and lawful men etc. at that
time prefixed: and in the interim the said King dispatched his Writ of
Certiorare to the Treasurer and Chamberlains of his Exchequer; commanding them,
that they should forthwith send unto him under the Exchequer Seal, the said
Inquisitions, so taken before the before-specified Will. Howard and his
associats, as aforesaid. Which Writ of Certiorare bears date the xviiith day
of February in 5 E. 3.

But the said Treasurer and Chamberlains of the Exchequer, made return; that,
having sought amongst their Rolls, they could not find any such Inquisition,
Ordinance, or Decree touching the obstruction of that water.

Whereupon the King signified as much to the said Geffrey le Scrope and his
associats; and not long after issued out a writ to the Shireeve of Norfolk;
whereby, having advertised him of all proceedings in that business, he
commanded him to make public Proclamation, within his Liberties, where he
should think fit, that all such persons who were concerned therein should
attend the said King, at a day and place assigned, to make their proposals
touching that business, if they thought i^ meet; as also to solicit for
further Justice there. And to make return of his doings therein a Month after
Easter ensuing. Which Writ bears date upon the 18th of February in the year
beforementioned.

By virtue whereof the said Shireeve of Norfolk ( viz. Thomas de Hindringham)
thus answered; that he made return of the same Writ to John Bosse of
Kenynghale, Bailiff of the Bishop of Elye's liberty: who said, that he did make
Proclamation accordingly, and found no man gainsaying ot finding fault with
that Dam; but that the said passage was as commodious as it had wont to be. And
that he did give notice to all the Noblemen of those parts, that they should
appear at the same day, specified in the writ, before the said King, to render
their reasons, if they thought good. And the said Shireeve did also give
advertisement thereof to Will. de Whetacre Steward of the Liberties for the
Town of Lenne, who had return and Execution of writs. Which William answered,
that he did cause Proclamation to be made thereof in the full Market of that
Town, upon Tuesday in Easter week, in the same year; with advertisement, that
all those whom the said obstruction might concern; should attend the said King,
likewise, at the time before expressed, to manifest their reasons in that
business.

The like Writs did the said King send to the Shireeves of Suffolk and
Cambridgshire. Which Shireeve of Cambridgshire ( scil. Will. le Moigne) made
return; that he did cause the like Proclamation to be made as abovesaid; viz.
that all those whom the said obstruction did concern, should attend the said
King upon the xvth of the holy Trinity, to set forth their right etc. And
because, that the King received information before the said xvth of the holy
Trinity, that the before-specified Edmund Peverell dyed; and that Elizabeth his
Wife did jointly hold the said Manor with him the said Edmund; he issued out
another Writ to the said Shireeve of Cambridgshire; whereby (after recital of
the whole business) he required him to summon the said Elizabeth, to appear
upon the said xvth of the holy Trinity, when Inquisition was to be taken
thereof, to propose what she could touching her right then in question. Which
Writ bears date the xijth of May, in the year abovesaid.

And upon the same xv. of the holy Trinity, the said Shireeve making return of
his Writ, there came Adam de Fincham, the King's Attorney, and likewise the
Jurors for the said Counties of Norfolk, Cambridge, Huntendon, Lincoln, and
Northampton: But neither did the said Elizabeth, nor any of the Marshland Land
men, nor of the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge, having Lands
thereabouts, make any appearance at all.

Whereupon the said King sent another Writ to the before specified Geffrey le
Scrope and his associats, requiring them without farther delay, to proceed to
the taking of the said Inquisition, upon the same xv. of the holy Trinity.
Which Writ bears date the xii of May, in the year abovesaid.

At which time the Jurors for the County of Norfolk, impanelled and sworn, did
say upon their Oaths; that Walter de Langton^ sometime Bishop of Coventre and
Lichfield, did, for the Drayning of his Manor of Coldham, about one and
thirty years then past, cause a stop to be made at Outwell, of the
beforementioned water; by reason whereof, those men who had occasion to go
with Ships and other Vessels, laden with Goods and Merchandise, from Holme,
Yaxley, and other parts thereabouts, unto the Port of Bishops Lenne in Norfolk;
as also such as had a mind to return directly from thence to Peterborough and
the parts aforesaid, could not pass with their Ships and Vessels, as anciently
before that stop was so made they had used to do; but were forced to go a long
way about; viz. by Old Wellen he, and Little port (which in going to and fro
is fifty miles and more) whereby Corn, Timber, Wool, Reed, Turf, Stone, and
other Commodities were the dearer; and so likewise were Fish, Herings, and
other Victuals, by reason of that circuit, to the damage of the Inhabitants of
Norfolk CC l. every year.

And being asked in whose soil the said stop was so made at first, they
answered in the Kings soil; and said, that the Common Road and passage for
ships and Boats had wont to be there, before the said stop was so made; and the
water likewise common for fishing to all the Neighborhood. And they also said,
that the borderers on each part thereof were either Tenants to the Abbot of
Ramsey, the Earl Warren, or of John de Bardolf, and other Lords. And being
farther asked, whether the said Edmund or Elizabeth did in their times do any
thing for the maintenance and keeping up of that Dam; they said, that after the
before-specified Bishop had first made it, it did not need any repair or
amendment; and that the said Robert Peverell, Edmund, or Elizabeth, did not in
their times meddle at all therewith.

And the Jurors for the County of Lincoln impanelled and sworn, said upon
their Oaths; that the Chanel called South Edyke, beginning at Crouland, and
extending it self to Tyd, in that County, through which the fresh waters
descending from the Fens and Up-Countries, used to pass unto the Sea, by
raising the crest thereof no more than two foot; was then scarce sufficient to
carry away those waters, by reason of the beforementioned obstruction, though
the Bank was in height no less than xv. foot on each side: And that before this
obstruction was so made, whenever there was any occasion for the repair of
the said Bank, or raising it higher, the agistment of every Acre of Land in
those parts, at an halfpenny, was sufficient for the same; but that then,
through the overflowing of those waters, every Acre was agisted at iiii d. and
that by reason of the said obstruction, no less than xl. thousand Acres of Moor
and Marish ground in Holand fen, were overflowed and drowned.

And they farther said, that the Abbey of Crouland was founded by the
Progenitors of the King's of England; and that two thousand Acres of Land,
Meadow, Moor and Fen, belonging thereto, were by means of this obstruction
overflowed and drowned; so that the possessions of that Monastery would not
suffice to maintain the House, except the number of Monks were lessened: and
that, by means thereof, the King, in the times of Vacancie of the said Abbey,
did lose the benefit which might accrue to him thereby. And they said moreover,
that by reason of this obstruction, the Lands, Meadows, Moors, Marshes, and
Pastures, of Deping fen, Burgh fen, and Spalding fen, which contained seven
thousand Acres; as also the Moor and Marshes to the Moors of Kestevene, were
so overflowed and drowned, that the Lords and Commoners of all the Towns,
adjacent on every part, had, by reason of that obstruction, lost the profits
belonging to them.

And they farther said, that the Common passage for Ships and Boats from
Crouland to the Haven of Lenne, with Corn and other Commodities, had wont to be
by the said Town of Outwell, where the before-specified obstruction was; and
that then they were constrained, by reason of that stop, to go about, by Old
Wellenhee and Little port, which is fifty miles farther than the other way; to
the damage of the King and his liege people of those parts, a thousand Marks
yearly.

And the Jurors for Cambridgshire impanelled and sworn, did say upon their
Oaths, that the River of Ouse, descending from Huntendon, being the bounds
betwixt Cambridge and Huntendon shires; and the River of Nene,
descending from Peterborough, and other parts above, did meet at Benwick in
Cambridgshire; and had used to run directly from thence, to the said Port of
Lenne, by the before-specified Town of Outwell, until xxxi. years then last
past, that the said Bishop made that stop as aforesaid; by reason whereof, the
Lands, Meadows, Fens, Turbaries, and a great proportion of arable, belonging to
all the Towns, betwixt Fen Drayton, and Benwick beforementioned, unto the said
Town of Utwell, in Cambridgshire, and which were adjacent thereto; and for the
length and breadth of about xxx. miles, were commonly overflowed and drowned
every year; so that neither the owners of the said Lands etc. nor the
Commoners, had any yearly profit by them; to the damage of the said King and
the Inhabitants of those parts, and such as would pass that way, CCl. and
upwards every year.

And they said moreover, that for the reasons abovesaid, there was not that
passage for Vessels with Corn and Merchandise toward the beforementioned
Port, as had used to be, neither in going nor returning, except by Old Wellen
he and Little port, which is xxxvi. miles about.

And the said Jurors being asked how much the said Manor of Coldham was then
more worth annually, than it had been before that stop was so made; they
answered xll. by the year.

And the Jurors for Huntendonshire, empanelled and sworn, for the same purpose,
said upon their Oaths; that whereas men would pass from the Towns of Iakele,
Holme, Glatton, and Ramsey, by the River of Nene, directly toward the Haven of
Lenne aforesaid, with navigable Vessels laden with Corn and other vendible
commodities, by the said Town of Outwell; they were then hindered by the said
Dam, that they were constrained to go about more than fifty miles.

And they farther said, that all the Meadows, Lands, Pastures, Fens, and
Turbaries, from the Town of S. Neots in Huntendonshire, lying adjacent or near
to the River Ouse, in length xxx. miles, and in breadth x. miles, more or less,
unto the Town of Benwike, where the Rivers of Ouse and Nene have their
confluence: and likewise the Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and Fens of all the
Towns, betwixt Aylington in that County, unto a place called Mus^cote in the
Fen, which is xvi. miles, in flood times were overflowed and drowned, by reason
that they could not pass away as they had used to do; so that the Lords of
those Fens and their Tenants, as also the Commoners in them, did totally lose
the benefit which belonged to them thereby; to the damage of the said King and
Inhabitants of those parts, six hundred Marks by the year.

And they said moreover, that the said King was Lord of the Manor of Glatton,
whereunto the Hamlet of Holme belonged; to which Market, men from the parts of
Lenne and elsewhere in Norfolk and Suffolk could not pass with their Victuals
and Merchandise by Ships and Boats, nor return, by reason of the said
obstruction; insomuch as that Manor of the Kings, whereunto the said Market
belonged, was less worth by ten pounds per annum, than formerly.

And the Jurors for the County of Northampton, empanelled likewise and sworn,
said upon their Oaths, that the River of Neene had wont to pass directly from
Peterborough to the Port of Bishop's Lenne, whereby the men of that County
usually carried Merchandise, Corn, and all manner of Victual with Ships and
Boats, by Outwell in Norfolk, until within xxxi. years then past, that the
said Walter Langtone, late Bishop of Cov. and Lich. obstructed the course of
the before-specified water; insomuch as all persons, who had a desire to go
from Peterborough unto that Haven, were constrained to go by Old Wellenhee and
Litil port, which in going and coming is a farther Journey by fifty miles.

And they also said, that, by reason thereof, the Marshes of Burgh fen, North
fen, Talnholt fen, as also the Lands, Meadows and Pastures adjacent to those
Fens, were overflowed and drowned, when any flood of waters happened, in regard
that the said waters could not pass as they formerly had done; so that the
Lords of those Fens, with their Tenants, as also the Commoners in them, did
lose the profit unto them belonging; to the damage of the said King and the
Inhabitants of those parts, fifty Marks per annum.

Upon all which Verdicts, the said Adam de Fincham, then the King's Attorney,
was appointed to wait for judgment therein. And on the morrow after the Feast
of S. John Bapt. next after the said xv. of the holy Trinity, the King sent his
special Precept to the said Geffrey and his fellow Justices; whereby, reciting
what had passed, he commanded them to proceed to judgment therein, according to
the Verdicts aforesaid: which Precept bears date the third day of July, in
the year abovementioned. Whereupon they gave this following Sentence; viz.
that whereas by the Jurors for the County of Norfolk, it was found, that the
before-specified Dam was made at Outwell, by the sad Walter de Langeton; and
that Robert Peverell, his Brother and Heir; as also Edmund, Son and Heir to the
said Robert, did at some times repair the same: and that this obstruction was
to the damage of the King, and the said Inhabitants of Norfolk CCl. per annum.

And whereas it was likewise found by the Jurors for the Counties of Cambridge,
Huntendon, Lincoln, and Northampton, that the lands of Thorney fen, Ramsey
fen, and other, were so drowned aforesaid; they decreed that the said Dam, so
raised to the hurt of the said King, and nuisance of all the persons
before-mentioned^ and whatsoever else was of nuisance in this behalf, should be
taken away: Whereupon the Shireeve of Norfolk had command to pull it down. And
in like sort, the Shireeves for the Counties of Cambridge, Huntendon, Lincoln,
and Northampton, were required to make the like Proclamation within their
respective Liberties; viz. that all persons concerned therein, should be at
Outwell aforesaid, to aid the said Shir^eve of Norfolk, in pulling down of the
said Dam.

After this, about five years, ( scil. in 10 E. 3.) John de Shardlowe, Simon de
Drayton, John de Colvill and John Claver were appointed Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 1. m.
40. in dorso.
to enquire touching the decay in the Sea-banks and Sewers in these parts about
Wisebeche, Tyd S. Giles, Elm, Leveryngton, and Neuton, with the parts
adjacent; and to take speedy order for their repair.

And in 12 E. 3. the King being informed, that the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers
about Wysebeche, Elm, and Well, were broken and out of repair, issued a
Commission Ex vet. cod. MS ad Abb. de S. Elm^nd^ quond^m spect n^e, ^uper vero
penes Io^. Willug^iry Eq. aur. f. 417.
unto Mr. John de Hildesley Chancellor of his Exchequer^ Richard de Bayeux,
John de Wilton, John de Stoken, and Will. Neuport, to enquire thereof; and
through whose default they became so ruinous; and who were Land-holders
thereabouts, or had safeguard by the said Banks; and to distrain them for their
repair, according to the proportion of their Lands.

By virtue of which Commission the persons abovementioned did intend to stop
the River of Nene, running to a certain Fishing, called Livermere, lying in the
Town of Well, and belonging to the Abbot of S. Edmundsbury; but were hindered
from so doing.

After this, the next year following, the said King, receiving advertisement,
from the Inhabitants of the before-specified Towns of Elm, Ib. ^. 418. and 419.
Well, and Wisebeche, on the South side of Wisebeche; that though it had been
found by an Inquisition, taken before the above mentioned Commissioners, that
the ordinary and chief safeguard for the said Towns of Elm, Well, and
Wisebeche, on the South part of the River of Wisebeche, would be by a Causey to
be made at Gongested lake, unto the Crike; and thence unto March dyke; and
that the Crike should be wholly stopped up; and that the said Towns could not be
preserved, unless that were done: and moreover that though the said
Inhabitants had often requested those Commissioners; that, forasmuch as the
said Causey, and stop, being made, would much redound to the common benefit of
the same Towns, they would cause them to be done; and that at that time nothing
was, nevertheless, performed therein: he required them, that in case it were
so, they would forthwith call such persons before them, as they should think
fit to make use of therein, and to proceed in effecting the same, according to
the tenor of his Commission.

Whereupon a Jury being summoned to attend them upon the Saturday next after
Mochaelmass day, and there sworn, did say upon their Oaths; that the common and
principal safeguard, for the whole Town of Elm, Well, and Wisebeche, on the
South side of Wisebeche, would be by making of a Causey from Gongested lake to
the Crike; and from the Crike to March diche; and that the said Crike should
be utterly stopped up: as also, that the said^ Causey ought to be xvi foot in
breadth, and four foot in height; and all these things to be done at the charge
of the Land-holders of Elm, Well, and Wisebeche, on the South side as
aforesaid, from Mermaunde unto the house of John de Vernon: and they ordained,
that for the performance thereof, every acre of Land in Elm, Well, and
Wisebeche, within the Precincts before-specified, should be agisted at ii d.
and more if need required.

But afterward, at a Session of Sewers held at Wisebeche by the same Justices,
came the freeholders of Tyd, Neuton, Leverington, and Wisebeche, on the North
part of the River of Wise; and alleged, that the obstruction of that Crike
ought not to be permitted; because if it should be made, the water running
through that Chanel, called the Crike, would so rise, increase and stand upon
the Fen-bank of Wisebeche, and Leverington, as that the Tenants of those Towns,
viz. Wisebeche and Leverington, could not be able to maintain them; but their
said Banks would be broken, and their Lands totally drowned and lost; whereby
more damage by half would happen to those Towns, than benefit to the Towns of
Elm, Well, and Wisebeche, on the South side.

Whereunto the said Tenants of Elm and Well answered, that the water of
Crike, had then so swift a course by Well, unto the River of Wigenhale, that
though the said Crike were stopped, as was contained in the before-specified
Ordinance, the water running by the same Crike would never turn toward
Wisebeche, nor do any hurt. And they farther said, that the Crike, where the
water then ran, was the proper and several soil of the Bishop of Ely, which
Bishop might lawfully, at his pleasure stop the same. Whereupon came the Abbot
of S. Edmundsberry by his Attorney, and claimed a certain fishing in the said
water of Crike, of the gift of Canutus sometime King of England; and brought a
Precept from the King, directed to the said Commissioners, reciting a
confirmation made to the said Abbey by the before-specified King Canutus and
other his Progenitors ( inter alia) of certain Lands and fishing, which
Ulfkytell had in Well: And that though the said fishing was then ( viz. when
this Inquis. was taken) called Livermere, and in the Town of Well, which was
before called Wylla, and in the County of Cambridge: and that a certain water
called Nene, had time out of mind ran to the said Lake, and did then so do; and
that the said Abbot and his Predecessors, had ever had the said Lake or
fishing, with the course of that River of Nene running thereinto, and peaceably
enjoyed the same; the said Commissioners, by Virtue of the King's Letters
Parents, for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers in that
County; and by color of an Inquisition taken before them, without any notice
given to the before-specified Abbot, intended the obstruction of the said
watercourse, wherein, in case they should proceed, the said Abbot would
totally lose the benefit of his said fishing, to the damage of the King
himself; because that the profit thereof, with the benefit of the other Lands
belonging to that Abbey, being of the said Kings Patronage, ought to belong unto
the Crown in the time of every Vacancy: he therefore required them, that they
should not make any attempt therein to his prejudice, without consulting with
him.

Whereupon the Wednesday next before the Feast of the blessed Virgin being
assigned, the said Commissioners sat again; at which time the said Inhabitants
of Elm, Well, and Wisebeche, brought the Kings Writ, by virtue whereof, the
Bailiffs of Tyd, Neuton, Leverington, Wisebeche, Elm, and Well were required
to summon xij. of the most substantial men in every of the said Towns, to
appear at the Castle of Wisebeche before the said Justices upon Wednesday next
after the Feast of S. Luke the Evangelist, there to perform what should be
enjoined them, on the said King's behalf touching the obstruction of that
Crike. And the said King did likewise issue out another Precept Ib. f. 420.
unto the before-specified Justices, that after their said Session, they should
upon the Octaves of S. Hillary, under their Seals, transmit the Record of their
proceeding therein unto him; to the end, that upon perusal thereof, he might
consider what farther to do therein, according to the Law and Custom of this
Realm.

The next ensuing year ( sc. 14 E. 3.) John de Hedersete, John de la Rokele,
and Hugh de Walton were assigned Pat. 14. E 3. p. 1. m. 1^ in dorso.
to view the Banks and Sewers on both sides the water of Well Ee, within the
Town of Waterwell, on the borders of Norfolk and Cambridgshire; and to take
order for their repair.

And the same year, at a Session of Sewers, held at Wisebeche, upon Monday next
after the Feast of S. John Baptist, for safeguard of the Towns of Elm and
Well, it was ordained, Ex praef. Co^. MS. penes O. S. John Arm. f. 43. a.
that there was a necessity of mending and raising the Bank, called the New
diche, lying betwixt the Rivers of Elm and Well, full two foot more than it
was at that time in the highest place: and so, beginning by the Level of Friday
brigge, to Charity Crouch; thence to Gongsted lake, according to the same
Level, height and thickness; thence to the Cowestowe; thence to the Garden of
the Prior of Meremaund; and thence to Lakebrigge; every man to make his
frontier of the same height, thickness, and Level. And they also decreed, that
from Gonsted lake unto Charity Crouch, no man should come near the said Bank,
called the New diche, for to mow or dig, for the breadth of ten perches toward
Coremere, and Hendmere, except for the mending of the said Bank; and that to be
done by common assent.

And they likewise ordained, that a Clow of five foot in breadth, and in depth
two foot, should be made at the Lakebrigge, to carry away the waters betwixt
the Newdiche and Bishops diche, at the charges of those who had Lands and
Commons within those places. And that one Clow should also be made at
Frydaybridge, and another at the Stone-Crosse in Outwell, for avoiding the
waters of Needham, each of them of the same breadth and depth as abovesaid; and
to be done at the costs of all those who had lands within the Bishopsdiche, and
Needham diche; and within the River of Elm, and the Greendiche and Thorndiche.

And they moreover ordained, that the old Sewer of Deleford, unto the
Stone-Crosse, should be cleansed and dug as it ought to be, at the charges of
Needham; and that every Ditch drawing water to the said Sewer, should be opened
at all times of the year, wherein water could run. And that Piisdrove should be
raised in each low place; and that from the same little Drove one Crest should
be made into the large Drove, unto the Grenediche, having a Causey for Common
Drift of Cattle at all times of the year, and this to be done at the charge of
Upwell and Outwell; and that all Slades and low places in the same Drove and
ways, be amended at the charge of the Towns, each for themselves.

And they likewise ordained, for Drayning of the Lands at Bodebeche, that there
should be three Pipes placed; the first of one foot square every way; and this
to be fixed in the Bank, sometime belonging to Gilbert at Delf, near the
Milne hill; the second in the Bank of Christian de Beaupre, opposite to the
School, being two foot in breadth, and one foot in depth; and the third in the
ancient Sewer, to be a foot square on every side: All which Pipes to be made at
the charge of the Landholders in Bodebeche.

And they also ordained, that the frontier of the Abbot of Dereham, in
Bodebeche should be stopped; and that for the future no mau should dig Turfs, nor
Slakkes in the common Droves of Elm and Well, for dieving of flax or hemp in
the common Ditch and Sewer, to the nuisance of the Commonalty; except by the
oversight and appointment of the Guardians, which were to be deputed for the
present. And that the Bank called the New diche, extending from Charity Crouch
to the Prior of Meremound's Garden, should be anew repaired equally, and
afterward agisted. And also, that the breaches in Bishopesdiche and Needham
diche should be repaired: and moreover, that all the Frontiers of the
Uausedrove unto Frydaybrigge, and thence to Eustace le Vernoun's Drove, should
be stopped up.

And they also ordained, that one stop should be made in Oldfield, near to the
Se diche, in the Ditch of Raphe at Field; and to be in thickness eight foot,
at the charges of the said Raphe. And that the Floud-gates of Elm, as also the
old Bridge, together with the great Bridge near to the Church of Elm, should
be newly repaired and amended at the charges of the whole Town. And that for
the repair of the said New diche, every Acre of land, from thence to Needham
diche, should pay a penny: and every Acre from Needhamdiche unto.......and
Uernons field, and the Infield and Brodbechefield an half penny; and either more
or less as need should be.

About this time (I suppose it to be, though it have no date, that) there was a
Survey Ib. f. 14.2.
made of the Marshes about Wisebeche, as follows; whereby it was found, that
the Marsh called the Hey fen, belonging to the said Manor of Wisebeche, and
to the Towns of Leverington, Neuton, Tyd, Elm, and Well, within the liberty
of Ely, did begin at the Shofe, an continued from thence to the Horshooe, by
the old River; thence to the Ditch of Robert de Marshe; thence to Wride, by the
Bank belonging to the Abbot of Thorney, unto the two furlongs beyond the Knor:
thence to Orchard sled; thence to Stod path; thence to Wipe, by Deed he, unto
Mimers; thence to West fen cote, by the said River; thence to Wisemouth; and
thence by Swerdesdelf to Great Cross; and from Great Cross by Hiden he, to
Quedale; and so to Mercheford by the Crike and the Heyron^, unto Eching he;
and so all along beyond Heyront to Thermercote; and from Tharmares to
Stanimeres; and thence all along, farther, unto Pealyswere; and so by Hold
Wellen he to Milnested, and thence to Shrewid hist, where the said Towns ought
to Common together with their Cattle, Horn under Horn: Saving always to the
Bishop, his Royalty and Fishing within the said bounds.

In 21 E. 3. Sir John de Colvile Knight, John de L'isle, John de Dayvile, Hugh
de Walton, Adam de Walsokne, and Will. de Neuport were constituted Pat. 21 E.
3. p. 1. m. 36. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches and Sewers in the
Towns of Dodington and Elm. The like Commission Pat. 24 E. 3. p. 2. m. 27. in
dorso.
in 24 E. 3. had the said Sir John de Colvile, John de L'isle, John de Pelham,
Hugh de Walton, Adam de VValsokne, and Will. de Neuport. So also in 26 E. 3.
had Pat 26 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. in dorso
John de Colevill, John de Pelham, Will. Muchet, James de Grauncecete, and
Hugh de Walton.

In Pat. 32 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
32 E. 3. Sir Robert del Ilde Knight. Sir John de Colvill, Sir John de Wilton, and
Sir John de Vernoun Kts. Thomas de Ba, Hugh de Walton, Thumas de Welsh, and
Nich. de Massingham, for those Banks upon the Sea coast, within the Hundred of
Wysebeche and Town of Marcheford, in this County. And in Pat. 37 E 3 p. 1. m.
46. in dorso.
37 E. 3. Laurence de Flete, John de Wilton, Hugh Lovet, John Hoode, Will.
Hyptofyt, and Nich. de Massyngham, for all those in the Towns of Wisebeche and
Leverington, with the Hamlets of Neuton, Elm, Well, and Marchford.

By virtue of which Commission, the said Laurence and his associates sat
at........ on Thursday Ex praef. cod. MS. pen^s O. S. John, f. 47. a.
next after the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady; and upon Inquisition
made touching the premises, they ordained Ex praef. cod. MS. pen^s O. S. John,
f. 47. a.
; that the Pipe lying under the River of Elm; at the house of John Massingham,
should be repaired; and that a Clow should be made, to the end, that no water
might pass from that Pipe unto Ieccons got, but in a measure, and under the
Chanel; upon penalty of stopping the said Pipe in Elm, at that house.

And they also ordained, that a Causey should be made in the Small drove, in
breadth eight foot, and in height three, at the charge of all the Landholders in
the Newland, on the South part of the River of Wisebeche: and likewise that
another Causey of the like breadth and height, should be made from the Small
drove unto the Land of Gilbert Hillary, where need required, at the charge of
the Landholders in Beckdale field.

And that all the Inhabitants of Elm should, at their charges scour and repair
the Pipe lying under the Sewer of Elm, at Hill^^^ dich, to the land of Will.
Porter.

And they likewise ordained; that a Clow should be made in Elm, at the end of
Hillary dich, in breadth two foot, and in depth as much, at the charge of the
Landholders drayning by that Clow: And that when the River is low, that no
water do run through the said Clow, but in the Chanel; so that all the Lands of
Wisebeche, lying there, have no damage by the said water. And if any one of
Elm, or any other person whatsoever shall transgress this present Ordinance,
that then it may be lawful for any Inhabitant of Wisebeche to stop the water,
so running through that Clow.

And they farther ordained, that the said Bank called Hillaries diche, should
be amended and raised higher by three foot, and made eight foot in breadth from
the said Clow to the River of UUysebeche, at the charge of all those that had
benefit by the same Clow. And that all the Heddings of the Middle dole be stopped
with Clotes: As also that a sufficient Bridge be made in Hillary diche, betwixt
the Lands of Henry Fayer and Will. Look. And that all the Crests and Clotes be
sufficiently made, betwixt the said Lands, from Hillaryes dich to Brig diche.

And they moreover ordained, that a Causey should be made, from the old River
of Elm to the River of UUisebeche, in the Bridge drove^ in height three foo^,
and in breadth eight, at the charge of the Inhabitants of Elm. and Brig field.
And that a sufficient Bridge be made in the Bridge drove, at the end of John
Mudfish his lands, at the charge of the Inhabitants of Elm. And likewise a
Causey, from the said Bridge, unto the Pipe, lying over the River at Mesdrove;
which Causey to be three foot in height, and eight foot in breadth; and to be
done at the charge of the Land-holders of Elm drayning thereby. And that the
Inhabitants of Elm should at their own charges cleanse and repair a certain
Pipe in UUsibeche, lying over Meesdrove, under the Sewer of Elm, running by
Boulstre brigg.

And they likewise ordained, that a Clow should be made at Boulsterbrigg, in
height two foot, and in depth as much, at the charge of all the Landholders
there; but not suffered to run, otherwise than when that Clow, which was to be
made at the end of Hillary diche, did run; upon penalty of stopping up the
Sewer of Elm at Boulsterbrigg. And that a Causey, lying in Reynold's drove, be
made, from Flemyng's drove to the River, three foot in height, and eight foot
in breadth, at the charge of all the Landholders in Longland. And that the drayn
of the Vicaridge Lands in Wisebeche, called the Werch, or the Wears, should be
raised three foot in height, and eight foot in breadth, at the croft of John
Simonde, at the charge of all the Landholders in Elm, that drayned thereby.

And they moreover ordained, that Meesdrove, Bolney hirst drayne, and
Cromediche should be raised and amended in all places needful, by a Causey of
three foot in height and eight foot in breadth, at the charge of the Sewer at
Elm and the Lands of Bolnehirst: And that all the Pipes, Bridges, Causeys,
Croftes, Clotes, and Clowes, which ought to be made by the men of Elm, be
repaired and amended, and sufficiently made before the Feast of S. Peter ad
vincula, upon penalty of stopping all the Sewers of Elm, lying in Wisebeche.
And that two Pipes be put in East field and Sandy land under the two Sewers in
Elm; so that the water of those Fields may run at Rotispipe, upon penalty of
stopping all the said Sewers.

And they likewise ordained, that the Sewer on the Southside of the River of
Wisebeche, beginning from the Goule hirne, may have its ancient course from
that Pipe, unto the Pipe lying in Hillary diche, under the Sewer of Elm: and
that the said Pipes be maintained by the Landholders in the new close of Elm:
and that the said Sewer have its ancient course from that Pipe unto Newbridgg
drove; and there, either a Bridge, or a sufficient Pipe to be made, opposite to
the land of Robert Cake: and that the said Sewer may have its course from that
Bridge or Pipe unto the Pipe in Meesdrove, lying under the Sewer of Elm: And
that the same Pipe be made and repaired (in regard it was then broken) by the
men of Elm, if the said Sewer will run any more. And, that the said Sewer have
its ancient current from that Pipe unto Ieconnesgate, on the Southside of the
Nether gate: and that a Bridge be made near unto the message of the heirs of
John Pateshull, over that Sewer; and that the said Sewer be cleansed and dug
whensoe^er and wheresoever need required; and that the Droves be raised higher,
with the Earth, which is dug out of the said Sewer.

And lastly they ordained, that every Acre lying on the South of Wisebeche; and
every Acre on the Northside of Elm, should pay a penny; and more, if need
require, for the repair from Iecons gate of that Sewer, and to amend the Pipes
and Bridges of the same Sewer; and where need required to make them new: And
moreover, that Ieconnesgate be amended, and new made when need should be: as
also, that every Field should make the Bridges and Pipes belonging thereto; and
cleanse and scour their own Sewers.

In 41 E. 3. Sir John de Colvill, Sir Raphe de Rocheford, Hugh Lovet and others
were constituted Pat. 41. E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, lying
upon the Seacoast and otherwise, betwixt Tyd brigg and the Town of Chaterys.
The like Commission Pat. 42. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. in dorso.
in 42 E. 3. had Sir Robert del Isle, Sir Hugh Lovet, and Sir John Vernoun
Knights with others, for all those in Wisebeche, Elm, Well, March, and
Marford, in this County.

In 47 E. 3. John Cavendish, and other his associats, Justices of Sewers, by
Virtue of the said King's Commission, Pat. 47. ^. 3. p. 1. m. 8. in dorso.
sat at Elm, before whom it was presented Ex praef. Cod. MS. (...) O. S.
(...) f. 38. a.
by the Jurors; that a certain Bank, anciently made for safeguard of all those
Lands betwixt the River of Wisebeche and the River of Well, beginning at the
foot-path opposite to the Gate of Wisebeche Castle, and so extending it self to
Goneldich; thence to Bensted hirne; thence to Tilney hirne; thence to Mareys
gate; and thence to Charity Cross; and from thence to Uernouns Corner, and so
to the River of Well, was then almost broken and in decay; by reason whereof
diverse Lands and Tenements, within the precinct thereof, were overflowed by the
fresh waters, to the great damage of all the Landholders there. And they said;
that the said Bank did then contain no more than four foot in height: And
therefore, for the better safeguard of the Town of Wisebeche, Elm and Well,
they ordained, that the said Bank should be raise^ three foot higher; so that
the whole height thereof from the Level ground might be seven foot, and the
thickness thereof at the bottom xxxij. foot, and at the top xij. foot; so that
the water of the Fen might not any way enter through the same Bank. And that
every one, having Lands, Tenements, Common of fishing, or pasture, who might
have safeguard, defense or benefit by the making or repair of the said Bank, or
loss for the not doing thereof, were obliged, according to the proportion of
their holding, to make the same, consonant to the Law and Custom of the
Country; so that the Lands on the South side the River of Elm should be
agisted upon the Bank, called the Byshopesoyke: and that all other Lands and
Tenements, betwixt the River of Wisebeche, and the River of Elm, be agisted
upon the Sea-bank, and the Fen-bank of Wisebeche and Elm, on the North side of
the River of Elm.

And they ordained, that it should be lawful to any man, making his part of
the said Bank to the Fen, to dig and carry away Earth for the repair thereof,
for the space of ten perches without the said Bank, without the contradiction
of any man, as anciently they had used to do: provided, that they should not
dig within the length of two perches thereof, upon penalty of xxs. And they
farther ordained, that neither the Lord, nor any Commoner should depasture any
of his Cattle upon the same Bank, except Sheep, nor make any drists with Cattle
over it, for the avoiding of future damage thereto, upon penalty of a penny for
every Beast so driven, or depasturing thereon by the knowledge or default of
the owner; to be paid to the Lord and Commoner to whom the repair thereof
belonged, so often as he should offend therein. And that such Cattle as should
be found there depasturing, or driven in manner aforesaid, upon the same Bank
(Sheep only excepted) to be impounded by the Bailiff of Waltersey, or Dike
Reeves of Elm, Wisebech^, or Well, at Waltersey; or in the Common pound of
Elm, Wisebeche, or Well, now made, or to be made by the Lord and Commoners;
and therein to be detained, until they should satisfy and pay the penalty
aforesaid, to be employed in repair of that man's Bank which had received
damage by those Cattle.

And they ordained, that eight bars should be made, and set upon the said Bank
to hinder the passing of Cattle upon it, asweel of Strangers as Commoners: the
first at Waltersey, by the Bishop of Ely; the second at the Corner of Bensted
hirne; the third at Hunterstones, by the Bishop and his Tenants of
Hunterstones; the fourth at the end of Waldersey drove, by the Prior of Ely;
the fifth near the gate of Tilney House, by the said Prior of Ely; the sixth at
Coldham hithe, by the Lord of Coldham; the seventh at Charity Cross, by the
Fields of Elm; and the eighth at the end of Grenediche, next to Well: and
that the said bars should be repaired and maintained, when need required, upon
pain of xxs. to be paid by him to the Lord and Commoners, who ought to repair
them, as often as any damage should happen to the Commoners ther^by. Provided
nevertheless, that every one, at the making of his Bank, might have free
ingress and egress thereto, and to amend the same as need requires; and that
the penalty aforesaid should be employed to the repair thereof, as aforesaid:
And that every Dike Reeve of Elm, and Wisebeche, on the South side of the
River of Wisebeche; and likewise every Dike Reeve of Well, on the North side
of the River of Well, might have power, by that Ordinance, to take distresses,
for the charges in making and repair of the Banks aforsaid, as often as need
should require, as well on the part of Wisebeche and Well, as on the part of
Elm, by turns; and severally, without the contradiction of any one.

And they ordained, that Draymere diche should be repaired and raised higher
where need required, so that the Commoners might have chase and rechase, with
their Cattle, unto their Commons: and that every man, having Lands or Tenements
adjoining, or abutting upon the said Bank, called Draymeresdiche, should dig
and cleanse the Frontier of his Land, eight foot in breadth; and cast the earth
so dug out upon the same Bank. And they likewise ordained, that the Bank
called the Blackdiche should be amended and repaired, at the charge of all the
Landholders, anciently agisted thereto: and that the Sewers of UUaltersey,
Coldham, and Redmorefield, with their appurtenanc^s, should be cleansed; and the
Crests of them raised higher; and maintained where need required, unto the
Pipes lying under the River of UUisebeche. And, that all the Hades of the Lands
abutting on those Sewers, and upon all other Sewers, within that Precinct,
should be stopped xij foot in breadth, so that the water of Lech, running
through those Sewers, should not enter into the fields, to the damage of the
Lands lying therein.

And they moreover ordained, that one Clow should be made at Hillaryes drove,
between UUisebeche and Elm, at the cost of the Landholders anciently agisted
thereto, who had wont to make and repair the same. And that one other Clow
should be made upon the River of UUisebeche, near to the message of Thomas
Howes, Barkere; so that the water coming out of the fields of Elm, by the
passage called Uykorisgote, might Drain there, in default of a Got called
Dogarde: and that a Bank be made from that Clow, unto the house of William
Maste, Bocher, on the South side of that Sewer; and another Bank from the said
Clow, unto the house of Thomas How, Barkere, on the other side of the said
Sewer, for hindering the Sand brought up by the Tides, from choking up of the
said Sewer.

And they likewise ordained, that there should be a Causey made near unto
Maryes^arre, whereof the one end to begin at Maryesbarre, and so overthwart
beyond the River of Elm, unto Loveday diche; which Causey to be eight foot in
height, xij foot in breadth at the top, and thirty two foot at the bottom; and a
Clow made there, at the charges of those who were to have benefit thereby, for
the bringing in fresh water into the River of Elm, when need should be.

And they likewise ordained, that every person having Lands or Tenements,
Common, Fishing, or Pasture, in the Towns of Elm, UUisebeche, and Well,
within the Precinct aforesaid, should have his portion upon the Fen-bank
beforementioned, to the quantity of his holding, according to an agistment
thereof to be made anew. And likewise each man, having Lands or Tenements,
within the Precinct aforesaid, to have his portion upon the Sea-bank, beginning
at the house of Thomas Mounpesson, and extending it self to the Floudgates of
Elm, and so to UUelle; each man for the quantity of his tenure, according to a
new agistment to be thereof made. And they said moreover, that the Bank before
ordained, was then broken for want of repair, and that diverse Lands and
Tenements, within the said Precinct, were drowned by the Fresh waters, to the
great damage of all the Landholders there. And they also said, that the same
Bank ought to be repaired, as well in height as in thickness, so that it might
contain in thickness xxxii foot at the bottom, and at the top xii. at the
least; and in height from the Level ground seven foot: And that the men of
UUisebeche, Elm, and UUelle were obliged to the repair and making of the said
Bank, each man according to the proportion of his holding; and that the said
Bank could not be preserved nor kept, except those men, who had Lands and
Tenements within the said Precinct were new agisted upon the Bank before
ordained.

And they also presented and ordained, that one Bank should be made new, and
begin at Uernounes Corner, upon Bishopsedike; and so to extend, directly, to
the Bank of UUelle, upon the soil, lately belonging to Hamon de Vernoun in
part; and in part upon the common soil; and to be of the height and thickness
abovesaid; as also to be done at the charge of all the Landholders, for their
lands lying betwixt the River of Elm, and the River of Well. And being asked
of the number of Acres, as well on the South part of the River of UUisebeche,
unto the River of Elm, as on the South part of the same River of Elm unto the
River of Well; they answered, that there were on the South side of the River
of Wisebeche unto the River of Elm, five thousand and two hundred Acres; and
on the South side of the River of Elm, to the River of Well, two thousand and
ninety Acres.

Whereupon command was given to the Steward of the said liberty, that he should
summon all the Land-holders, as well of Elm and Well, and of the Town of
Wisebeche, on the South side of that River; as all others who had Lands or
Tenements, or any Pasturage, or Fishing, in Fee, or for term of years, to
appear before the said Justices, at Ely, upon Thursday next after the Feast of
the Epiphany, then and there to show what they had to say for themselves, why
all the before-specified Ordinances, in each point, ought not to be inviolably
kept for the future.

At which day came John Pain, who then prosecuted for the King, and the
Steward of Ely; and required, that Thomas Bishop of Ely, who had within the
said precinct ( viz. in the Town of Wisebeche, Elm, and Well) diverse Lands
and Tenements; and that John Simson of Wisebeche, Thomas Mounpesson, and
others, who had also Lands and Tenements within the said Precinct, in the Towns
aforesaid, should be attached to be at Ely, before the said Justices at that
time, to show as aforesaid. And thereupon the said Bishop of Ely, Will. Street
Lord of the Manor of Coldham, Sir John Colvill Knight, the Prior of Ely, the
Abbot of Crouland, the Abbot of Wendling, John Vernoun, Will. Newhouse, Nich.
Makesake, Sir Nich. Golofre, Knight, and John de Crofte of Well, who had Lands
and Tenements within the said precinct, within those Towns, were summoned to
appear at that said day, to show cause as abovesaid. All which persons came
accordingly; and it being demanded of them, and every of them, wherefore the
before-specified Ordinances, as well relating to the Town of Wisebeche, as those
of Elm and Well, ought not in every point to be observed, according to the
tenor and effect of them; they severally answered, that as to the repair of the
Bank, which begins over against the Gate of Wisebeche Castle, and goes to
Goneldiche; thence to Bansted hirne; thence to Tylneyhirne; thence to Coldham
hithe, thence to Mareysdam; thence to Charity Cross, and thence to Vernouns
Corner; and as to the making of the new Dich there, from that place, all along
to the Bank of Well, and so to the River of Well: and likewise as to the
eight bars upon the same Bank, they did assent to them all.

And as to Drayndike and Blakedike Floudgates, and Crests, within the same
precinct, they did also concur. And as to the Agistment to be new made,
according to the proportion that every one held, and the performance of all
other things, they could neither for themselves, nor the Towns aforesaid,
gainsay them: And therefore they did well agree and desire, that all the same
Ordinances so established as aforesaid, should for the future be performed in
every Article, to the full, according to the force and effect of them; and for
the accomplishment thereof, they did severally oblige themselves without any
contradiction. And John Pain, who then prosecuted for the King, required; that
John Simmeson, with the rest before-named, should be compelled on the said
Kings behalf, for the performance of all the said Ordinances: And because the
Court was not then determined to give judgment therein, it was adjourned until
the Wednesday in Easter week.

Upon which day the said John, with all the rest, came; but then there was
another adjournment, viz. unto the Saturday next after the Exaltation of the
Holy Cross, in the xlixth year of the said Kings reign. At which time the
parties above specified came again, but then it was also adjourned until the
Wednesday in Easter week, in the 50 year of the said Kings reign. And at that
time they put it off till the Monday after the Feast of S. Michael then next
following. Upon which day all the parties before-specified appearing; and in
regard that the said John Simmeson, and the rest, could not say, but that the
Ordinances before-specified were necessary and good, they obliged themselves to
the future performance of them: It was therefore decreed and ordained, that the
same should, for the time to come, be put in execution; and accordingly there
was a Precept issued out to the beforementioned Stewart, to distrain the said
John Simmeson, for the new-making of the said Agistment, according to the form
of the before-specified Presentment; and to bring the same, so m^^e, under the
Seals of the framers thereof, before the said Justices at Ely, upon Wednesday
next before the Feast of S. Nicholas the Bishop, then next ensuing; at which
time all the persons beforementioned had warning to be there.

Who appearing accordingly, the before-specified Steward required of the said
Justices, that the said Ordinances and Agistment might be ratified and
confirmed. Whereupon they ordained and decreed, for the better safeguard of the
said Towns and place, that the Inbabitants of Wisebeche should be agisted upon
that Bank, and begin to make the same, from the division betwixt Elm and
Wisebeche; viz. from the Stone Cross near the House of Lepers, unto the Town
of Wisebeche; and thence to the River of Wisebeche, directly to Griggesh^rne;
and to maintain and repair the same for the future, as often as need should
require, as well in thickness as in height, according to the above specified
Ordinance, at their own costs and charges.

And that the Bishop of Ely, for his Manor of Walterse, and for all his Lands
in Wisebeche and Elm (with in the said precinct) excepting xxxv Acres of his
land, lying at the Cylere in Wisebeche; and all others, who had Lands,
Tenements, Common of Pasture, or Fishing in the said Town of Elm, within that
Precinct, to be agisted for the making of the same Bank, from Griggeshirne
aforesaid, unto Banstedhirne; thence to Tilney hirne; thence to Coldham hithe;
thence to Mareys dam; thence to Charity Cross; thence to Vernoun's Corner; and
so upon the Bank to be new made there, until over against Welhirne drove,
where the Bank of Elm is divided from the Bank of Well. And that all the
Inhabitants of Well, who had lands within the said precinct, should be agisted
for the making of the said Bank from that place opposite to Welhirne-drove unto
Welleclote; and thence to Lakebrigg, and thence to the River at Upwell bridge;
and thence to Outwell bridge; and thence returning back to Loundesgote, at Elm.

And that the men of Elm, who had Lands within the before-specified precinct,
should be agisted to make the Sea-bank from the said place, called Loundesgote,
unto the Floudgates of Elm; and thence to the Stone Cross near the house of
Lepers (which is the division betwixt Elm and Wisebeche) All which Ordinances,
Decrees, and Agistments, as well the parties above-specified, as the Towns
beforementioned, did consent and agree, to hold firm and steadfast for ever.

In 48 E. 3. Sir Roger de Kirketon, Sir Raphe Rocheford, Sir John Colvile Kts.
and others, were assigned Pat. 48. E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. in dorso.
to view the Sea Banks and Sewers, in the Towns of Leverington and Neuton, and
to take order for their repair.

After this; viz. in 1 R. 2. there were certain Presentiments Ex praef. col. MS.
penes O. S. John. f. 41. b.
made at Ely, in a Session of Sewers held there, on Wednesday next after the
Feast of S. Nicholas, concerning the Banks, Ditches, and Sewers in Ely,
Dounham, Littleport, Hadenham, Sutton, Chateriz, Dudington, March, Marchford,
Wittlesey, Elm, Well, Wisebeche, Leverington, Neuton, and Tyd S. Giles; and
elsewhere within the Isle of Ely: the tenor whereof are as follows; viz. that
for the better preservation and safeguard of the three hundred acres of land in
the Town of Elm, on the North side thereof, lying in the fields called
Townfield, Halpenifield, and Inhamfield, there should be made one Bank, upon
the soil of the said Town of Elm, in the Parish of Elm, for stopping of the
salt water; and the same to be done at the charges of all the Landholders in
those fields: Which Bank so to be made, to begin at the Sea-bank at the
Stone-Crosse, being the division betwixt the Lands of Elm and Wisebeche; and
so to go Westwards directly to Cromediche, upon the land of John Ristoft; and
thence directly to Illerisdiche in Hanc drove, upon the land of Reginald
Toftie; and thence by a straight line unto Illiresdiche, upon the land of John
de Waltersey; thence to the Bank of Bekedale, and there to be joined with that
Bank: which Bank to be xxiiii foot in breadth at the bottom; and in height four
foot from the Level ground. And that there should be three Sluses, or more, if
need were, in the Sewers of Elm, under the said Bank, for the letting out of
the fresh water; and likewise sufficient bars to hinder the driving of Cattle
to and fro upon the said Bank. And they likewise said, that there would need an
acre of John Ristoft's land, valued at Lvi s. viii d. and of Reginald Tofties
an acre, valued at xlvi s. viii d. and of John Walterse's one acre, valued at
xx s. and no more, because it was low ground; but if there were need of more,
then more to be taken when and where need required, making allowance for the
same according to that rate.

And they also presented, that there was a Bank made anciently by the
Inhabitants of Wisebeche, beginning at Sareshirne, and extending it self to
Turnelake mouth; thence to the Pipes of Walterse, and so to Elm Fendich, by
Grasner; which Bank was at that time broken for want of repair. And they
ordained; that for the more and better safeguard of all the lands in Elm,
lying on the South side of the said Bank, that it should begin at Goneldiche;
and so crossing the Sewer of Walterse, unto Sareshirne, and Blackdiche, and
there a Pipe to be made under the same Bank; and so to extend directly to
Turnelake mouth, and thence to the Pipes of Walterse, as anciently it had wont
to do; and so to the Fen ditch of Elm, straight by the Manor of Walterse:
Which Bank to be in part repaired, and in part made new, so that it might be
xxiiii foot in breadth at the ground, and 4 foot in height from the Level earth;
and to be repaired as often as need required, at the charge of all the
Landholders betwixt the same Bank and the Bank called Drayner diche.

In 4 R. 2. there was a Session of Sewers held at Elm, Ib. f. 42. a.
before John Holt and others, then Commissioners, upon the Thursday next before
the Feast of S. Gregory; touching the safeguard of the said Towns of Elm and
Well: at which time, these ensuing Decrees and Ordinances were made; viz. that
the portion of the Bank called Bishop's dike, which extends it self from the
corner of the Bank, called Uernoun's corner, directly beyond the several land,
late Hamon Vernoun's^ in the Fen, unto the corner of the Bank of Will. at
Lake and John at Delfe of Well, should be new made in the Summer next
following, as it had been decreed, formerly, by John Cavendish and his fellow
Justices. And that the Bank of Well should be newly agisted, like that of
Elm, as it was also ordained; so that all the lands on the side of Well were
to be agisted upon the Bank of UUelle, called Bishopsdiche, according to their
proportion, in the like sort as all the lands of Elm were agisted upon that
Bank in Elm, called Bishosdich. And they ordained, that the men of Elm should
make their moytie thereof, and the men of Well their moytie, and maintain and
repair the same, when need should require, for the future.

And they did likewise ordain, for the better safeguard of the said bank of
Elm and Well; that every man having his portion thereupon, should plant
VVillows opposite thereto, toward the Fen, for to break off the force of the
waves in Flood times; as also for keeping of werk; and that, upon occasion,
there should be Stakes in readiness, to be made of the said VVillows, for
reparation thereof. And they ordained, that if the said VVillows so planted,
should happen to be destroyed by Cattle, or otherwise, that they should be
doubly replanted again by the owners of the said Cattle, or by those which
should be guilty of the spoil, the very next season ensuing, upon lawful
request; upon penalty of xl d. to be paid to every man suffering hurt in that
kind and that the Dike-Reeves of Elm, or Well, should levy those penalties,
upon request made by them who should be so injured, and collect the same being
so forfeited.

And they also ordained; that the Banks called Needham diche, and Redmore diche
should be repaired and raised higher, so that each of them might be 18 foot in
thickness, at the bottom; and 7 foot in height; and that the said Banks should
be joined together, by the making of a Dam, over the River of Elm, at Friday
bridge, of the same thickness and height. And that the North end of Redmore
diche should be annexed to the Bank of Begedale field, likewise, by a Dam; to
be made in the most proper place over Coldham Sewer, Lilly field, and Walterse,
with Bridges to the said Sewers. And that the Grenediche of Well should be
repaired and raised higher, in like kind, from Sewalesclote unto the Stone
Cross at Well; and a Clow of four foot in breadth, and three foot in height be
made there, at the charges of all the Landholders in Nedeham field, as well on
the part of Well as of Elm. And that every man should raise his frontier,
toward the River of Well, from the Stone Cross toward Welleshole. And that
the frontier............ be raised higher by one foot; and all other to the
same height: as also, that soil should be taken in the River, for raising of
the said Frontiers, so that the River of Nedeham might descend into the River
of Well, upon penalty of xx s. And that the said piece be levied by the
Dike-Reeves of Elm and Well, and employed toward the repair of the said
Sewer and frontiers; which Sewer begins at Friday bridge, and extends unto
the Stone Cross of Well aforesaid.

And lastly, that no one should permit their Swine to go upon the said Bank,
except they were ringed, upon penalty of a penny for each Hog, as often as they
should be found so unringed, to be levied by the Dike-Reeves for the use of the
whole Town; and that the party trespassed upon, be likewise recompensed to the
value of the damage.

In 15 R. 2. the Inhabitants of the said Town of Elm complained ^
to the King, ^
that whereas their Banks, Ditches, and Sewers, both on the Sea coast, and
toward the fen, were, by reason of diverse tempests and great floods much
broken, that their lands had been, for the most part surrounded; and did
continue in such sort overflowed, so that they could in no wise drayn them, in
regard that they had not any Gutter or Sewer without the Precincts of them, as
the Inhabitants of other Towns had; forasmuch as the soil where the Inhabitants
and Tenants of the said Town used to have their ancient Sewers, was so much
heightened by the silt of the Sea, that those Sewers were uterly lost, and the
water, by that means so obstructed as that it could not pass away as it had
wont to do, which did so impoverish the said Townsmen, that many of them were
constrained to seek new habitations, and the rest likely to do so, except some
speedy remedy were applied thereto: the said King therefore appointed Sir
Thomas de Bardolf, Sir Tho. de Morley, Sir Hugh de Louche, Sir John Colvill,
Sir Philip de Tilney, Sir John Inglesthorpe, Sir Reginald Hakebeche, and Sir
Edm. Noon Kts. Will. Thirning, Tho. Pynchebek, John Markham, Will. Gascoign,
John Richeford, John Styvecle. Tho. de Wells, and John Mareschall to view the
same; and to take such order therein as they should deem meet, proceeding
according to the Law and Custom of this Realm.

The like appointment Ib. m. 5. in dorso.
had they for the Sewers in Wisebeche, Elm, and Well, so choked up with silt
as abovesaid.

After this, viz. in 16 H. 6. at a Session Ex praef. cod. MS. penes O. S. John
f. 61. a.
of Sewers held at Wisebeche, by John Colvile, Gilb. Haultofte and others, upon
Saturday next before the Feast of S. James the Apostle, the Jurors presented,
that the Tenants of the xl acres of land in Bachecroft, in Wisebeche, time out
of mind, ought and had used to maintain a certain Bank in Wisebeche, called
UUisebeche fen dike; viz. for every acre 5 foot, and had not done so. And that
the Prior of Spinney and his Predecessors, had for the like time, for xl acres
of land, which they had in UUisebeche, repaired a part of the said Bank,
according to the same proportion. So likewise that Nich. Howard had done for
xii acres of land, which he had there.

Likewise that the Abbot of Thorney and his Predecessors, in regard of their
lands in Thorney, had for the like time cleansed, and ought to cleanse and scour
a certain Sewer, from Muscote in Thorney, unto Thorney bar, in the same Town;
and thence to Knarre; and thence to Wryde, both in the same Town; and thence to
Setting lake in UUisebeche; and thence to Mariskote in Thorney; and thence to
South Ee dike in Wisebeche (which is the division betwixt Cambridgshire and
Lincolnshire) and that it was not cleansed.

Also, that the whole Hundred of Wisebeche, had used time out of mind, and
ought to cleanse the before-specified Sewer, from South Ee dike, in the said
place, unto Trokenholt in Leverington. And that the Abbot of Thorney, for his
lands in Trokenholt crofts, in Leverington, had used, in like sort, and ought
to scour the Sewer of Trokenholt aforesaid, unto Clows cross, in Leverington,
near to the Bank of Sutton on the North part; and then that the whole Hundred
of Wisebeche ought to cleanse the same from Clows cross to Guyhyrne, but had
not done it.

Moreover, that the Tenants of the lands called Pavys, in March, had used and
ought to cleanse a certain Sewer, from Wardyscote in Dodington, unto Wisemouth
in Wisebeche, so that the water might have it is passage to the great River of
Wisebeche; and that it was not cleansed.

Also, that Will. Vernoun, for his Manor of Coldham, and his partners, for
the whole time aforesaid, ought and had used to repair a certain Bridge in Elm,
in the Drove, called Crome dike; and another Bridge in Elm, which then were
broken. And that the said Will. for his Manor of Coldham, together with his
partners, ought and had wont, for the whole time aforesaid, to maintain a
Bridge in Wisebeche, below the Parsonage, which was then broken: as also one
Clow at Bolsterbrigge in Elm, with two Keys, whereof the one to be in the
Custody of the Guardian of the Fen, on the South part of the River of
Wisebeche; and the other in the custody of the Lord of Coldham; but that then
there was no Clow at all there. And likewise that he the said William, in
respect of his said Manor of Coldham, and his partners, for the whole time
aforesaid, ought and had used to make a Crest in Meesdrove, in Wysebeche,
higher than it was at that time by three foot, and in breadth eight foot; for
the which he ought to have the aid of a certain Field, called Bolnehyrst field:
as also a Bridge in Elm, in a ceriain Drove, called Cromedike.

And they likewise presented, that the said Town of Elm had not cleansed a
certain Sewer, called the River, which leads from Elm to Wisebeche, and
ought to be ten foot in breadth, and of a fitting depth; so that the fresh water
might run in the Chanel unto Wisebeche, and thence to the Sea. Also, that
Marysdam, in Elm, ought to be cut, so as the fresh water might pass away by
the old River of Elm, to the Sea, according to ancient Custom.

Also, that the Bishop of Ely, and Will. Venour, for his said Manor of
Coldham, and his partners, did use and ought, for the whole time aforesaid, to
repair one Bridge, lying at the Falgote in Leverington, but had not then
repaired it. And that there ought to be one Dam at Bolstrebrigg, in Elm, made
by the said William, for his said Manor of Coldham, as long as a Clow should
be made there.

Likewise, that the Bishop of Ely, the Abbot of Croyland, William Venour, in
respect of his Manor of Coldham, William Branch, and all other persons having
several Fishing, used and ought to cleanse the River of Elm, called Elm Ee,
from the Floudgates unto Marysdam, in Elm, and thence to Hedmere in....... and
thence to Lethermere in........ and thence to Creke hirne in.... and thence to
March Eee, because they claimed Fishing in all those places. And that John
Mannyng of Wisebeche, did cut one Crest of Coldham Bank, to the general
nuisance. And that the Landholders of Nymenesdole in Wisebeche had used and
ought to repair one Crest in Wisebeche, beginning at the Tenement of Alice
Cave, and leading to the house of John Algood, in the same Town.

And that three Pipes newly made in a certain field, called Smalmedows, in
Wisebeche; the first by the Bishop and his Participants; the second by the Lord
of Coldham and his; and the third by the Tenants on the South side of
Wisebeche, being made too large by xij foot, should be amended. And that the
Tenants of Heighmathes, in Wisebeche, ought and had used to rep^ir one Crest in
Nett^ldykelane in Wisebeche, four foot in height, and as much in breadth.

Moreover, that Will. Prior of Ely, Sir Thomas Tudenham Knight, and his
Tenants, ought and had used to repair one Crest, beginning at the Fen dike in
Wisebeche, and leading to Bellymyll brigge, in the same Town; thence to
Corner's Message; on the South side of the Sewer, in height three foot, and in
breadth four: and that all the landholders in the fields called Sayrefield,
Nymandole, Flakemore field, and Heymathes, ought to repair the said Crest,
every man according to his proportion. And that the Parson of the Church of
Wisebeche ought and had used to repair a Sewer in Wisebeche, beginning at the
house of Reginald Rogers in Wisebeche, and leading into the same Town. And,
that the Town of Wisebeche ought and had used to make a Clow in the Sewer of
Wisebeche, at a certain Bridge in Neuton, near Fytton gole, for stopping of the
water when need required.

And they likewise presented, that John Everard Esquire, had straightned the
common River of Wi^ebeche, with Nets and other Engines therein placed, to the
general nuisance etc. As also, that Will. Cause Esquire, and John Green had done
the like. And that the Abbot of Dereham had one Kedel in the Common Sewer of
Wisebeche, called Plant's were, to the common nuisance etc. as also another
Kedel in the same Sewer.

Likewise, that the Town of Wis^beche ought and had used to repair a Bridge in
Neuton, called Mutcroft bridge, which was then ruinous. And that the Bishop of
Ely, and his Participants ought and had used to repair a certain Bank, called
Blak-dike in......... unto the Pipe, called Watersey Pipe; which was then in
decay. And that the same Bishop ought to make one Crest in Hillary drove,
beginning at Bullok's lane end, and leading to Bridge drove, through the midst
of the lands of Geffrey Sutton: as also one Crest from the Stow of Geffrey
Sutton, unto the Pipe in Meesdrove, in height two foot, and in breadth ten: and
one Clow at the Pipe of Meesdrove, on the South side of the River, with two
doors thereupon, each of three foot in breadth; with two Keys, whereof one to be
kept by the Bailiff of Waltersey, and the other by the Guardian of the Marsh,
on the South side of the said River.

And that the Town of Leverington ought and had used to make and repair one
Crest in Leverington aforesaid, beginning at Neuton Gore dyke, and leading to
Bondysgate in Leveryngton, and thence to Rechmond in the said Town, four foot
high, and eight foot broad. And, that the Tenants of the lands in Harpsfield in
Leverington, ought and had used to raise a Crest in a certain place called Two
lanes, beginning at Shoffendike in Leverington, and leading to Blak lane, in
the same Town; in height four foot, and breadth eight. And that the landholders
in Southingham, in Leverington, ought and had used to raise one Bank, called
Overdiche in Leverington aforesaid; beginning at Bellymil brigg, and leading to
Parsons drove end, in the same Town; And thence to Meysbrigge to be repaired by
the landholders of Northinham, thence to Blakenfield by the landholders of
Fenhalfi^ld, thence to Bondysgate by the landholders of Blakelanefield, and
that it ought to be two foot higher than it was at that time in the highest
place, and in breadth xii foot.

Also, that the Landholders of Fenhalfeild in Leverington, ought and had used
to make one Highway, called Polly lane, beginning at Sho^endike in
Leverington, and leading to Marslane brigge, in the said Town, four foot in
height, and eight foot in breadth. And that the said Town of Leverington ought
to maintain one Sewer, beginning at the Corner of the ancient Sewer in
Leverington, near to Reginald Corners house, thwarting the Drove, called Fytton
drove, unto the House of John Stokyll, and so to the Sea: and the said Sewer
ought to be xij. foot in breadth only, and that it was then more than xx. foot
in breadth.

Likewise, that the Bishop of Ely and Will. Vennour, for his Manor of
Coldham, and his Participants for his Tenements in Elm, ought and had used to
repair one Bridge at Falgote in Leverington, which was then in decay.

And, that the Town of Tyd S. Giles ought and had used to cleanse all the Sewers
within the said Town, beginning at the Sea-bank, and extending to the Fen-bank,
where need should require: As also, that the said Town of Tyd ought and had
used to maintain two Ward Diches in the same Town, called the Threding and Sea
dike; beginning at Averys trees in Tyd aforesaid, and leading to Newfen Dike,
in the same Town, in height six foot, and breadth xij. And likewise, that the
said Town ought and had used to repair and maintain one Bank, called Martin's
fen dike, in Tyd aforesaid, beginning at Averyes trees, and leading to
Wesingham brigge; in height six foot, and in breadth xij.

And that the Town of Neuton ought to cleanse all the Sewers, within the same,
beginning at the Sea-bank of Neuton aforesaid, and extending to the Marsh Bank,
where need should require.

And that the Landholders of the thousand Acres in Wisebeche, on the South side
of the River, and of the three hundred Acres in Elm, ought and had used to
repair one Pipe at Kikking drove lane, in the same Town, in height three foot,
and in breadth eight.

At the same Session the said Jurors likewise presented, Ex bund. de Brev. and
Recordis, Wallia^ etc. tangentibus. ^. 18.
that the Sea-bank, beginning at Tydde got in Tydde S. Giles, near the County
of Lincoln, and extending it self unto Bevys Cross in Wisebeche aforesaid,
ought to be fifty foot in height ( viz. from the first sloping thereof unto the
Crest) and in breadth at the top six foot: and that all the Landholders in the
said Town of Wisebeche, as also in Leverington, Tydde S. Giles, and Neutone,
every one according to his proportion, did use, time out of mind, to repair,
maintain, and make the said Bank; and so as well by the said Custom, as by the
judgment and assignation of certain Justices of Sewers, in the time of the
King's Progenitors, were obliged to do, according to the quantity of their
Land. Whereupon, forasmuch as it seeming meet to the said Commissioners, both
by the Verdict of the Jurors aforesaid, and by their own view thereof, all
parties concerned therein, then appearing, and the Statutes of Romeney marsh,
in the like cases published, being seen and understood; they decreed and
ordained, for the safeguard of all those Towns, that every Landholder in them,
should according to the proportion of his tenure, repair, maintain, and new
make the same, as often as any defect might happen to be therein, according to
the proportion of his tenure.

And they presented, that the Landholders in the old Market of Wisebeche
aforesaid, did use time out of mind, to repair, maintain, and new make a
certain Sea-bank, from Beuvise Cross unto the great Bridge of Wysebeche, on the
West part of the River of Wise aforesaid^ viz. every man against his own Land;
and that the same Bank ought to be in height ten foot, and in breadth at the top
xij. Whereupon the said Justices, for the considerations aforesaid, did decree
the same accordingly; and that no one should cast dung or any thing else into
the said River; nor make stamps; nor lay Sege-rekes, nor Dunghills, from
Geyhirne to the Sea, upon the brink thereof, whereby the current of the water
might be straightned or stopped; upon penalty of xx s. to be paid to the Bishop
by him or them, in whom the defect in repairing, maintaining, or new-making of
the said Ditch, or any other the Ordinances or Statutes aforesaid, should for
the future be found; as often as the same should be.

And they also said, that the Landholders of the Town hende of Wisebeche on the
North side of the River Use, had used and ought, time out of mind, to repair,
maintain, and new make a certain Bank, called the Gebrynck, from the great
Bridge in Wisebeche unto Soz^l dyke. And that the Landholders in the Fen hende
of Wisebeche did use, for all the time aforesaid, to repair, maintain, and
newmake a certain Bank, called the New dyke, from Sozel dyke to Gye hirne; and
another Bank, called the Fen dyke, reaching from Gey hirne aforesaid, unto
Piggesdrove Cross: and that the Landholders in the Fen hende of Wisebeche were
not able to repair the said Banks of New dyke; viz. from Sozeldike to Gey
hirne; and the Fen dyke from Gey hyrne to Piggesdrove Cross. Whereupon the
said Commissioners decreed; that as well the Landholders from the Townhende, on
the North part the River of Weyse, as the Landholders of the Fenhende of
Wisebeche, should thenceforth repair, maintain, and new make the said Bank;
viz. the Sea-bank called the Ebrynke on the North side of the said River; viz.
from the great Bridge of Wysebeche to Sozelsdyke: and the New dike from
Sozelsdike to Geyhirne; and the Fen-dike, from Geyhirne aforesaid, to Pigges
drove, each man according to the proportion of his tenure, as often as need
should require.

Leverington.
And they moreover presented; that the Landholders in Leveringtone did use time
out of mind, to repair, maintain, and new-make, a certain Fen-bank in
Leveringtone, from Pigges drove Cross unto the Clouse which is the division
betwixt Leverington and Sutton, each man according to the quantity of his land,
according to an ancient Agistment^ Whereupon the said Commissioners did decree
the same accordingly.

And they likewise presented; that the Landholders in Leveringtone, did use and
ought, time out of mind, to repair, maintain, and new make a certain Bank
called Shoffendyke, extending it self from the said Clouse, to Goredyke in
Neuton; each man according to the proportion of his holding. Whereupon it was
accordingly decreed.

And they also presented, Neutone.
that the Landholders in Neutone used, time out of mind, and ought to repair,
maintain, and new make a certain Bank, called the Shoffendyke, beginning at the
Gore-dyke of Neutone, and extending it self to Tyd-Threddyng, each man
according to the proportion of his tenure, as often as need should require.
Whereupon it was decreed accordingly.

And they presented, Tyd S. Giles^
that all the Landholders in Tyd S. Giles did use, time out of mind, to repair,
mai^tain, and new make a certain Bank, called Shoffendyke, extending it self
from Tyd-Threddyng unto the Egryndes in Tyd S. Giles; each man according to the
proportion of his Land. Whereupon it was decreed accordingly.

And they likewise presented, that there had been time out of mind, and also
ought to be two Clows in Leverington, one at Rotespipe, a^ the charge of all
the Landholders from Newbrigge drove in Wisebeche, un^o the Sea dyke; and the
other at Meysland, at the costs and charges of all the Landholders from Sozel
dyke, in Wisebeche, unto Newbrigge drove in the same Town.

And they presented, that the Prior of Ely, and Sir Thomas Tudenham Knight. ought
and had wont to repair, time out of mind, one Crest in Tholymesse drove, in
Wisebeche; beginning at the Fendyke; and extending it self to Tolymers, in the
same Town, four foot in height, and eight foot in breadth. And that the
Landholders of Geyhirne field, of Wisebeche, time out of mind, had used, and
ought to repair, a certain Crest, extending it self from Blakedyke unto
Mariotts brigge, in the same Town, in height four foot, and in breadth eight.
And that the said Landholders of Geyhirnefield, did use also, time out of mind,
to repair the Crest from Maryottisbrigge to Tolymers drove, near to the common
Sewer on the West side, four foot in height, and eight foot in breadth.

And they said moreover; that the Landholders of Geyhirne Cross, in Wisebeche
unto Sozel dyke, ought to make and repair one Crest upon Blake dyke, from
Geyhirne cross to Sozel dyke aforesaid, in height four foot, and in breadth
eight. And, that the Landholders in Geyhirnfield, as also of the lands of Will.
Cause, in Tolymersfield, in Wisebeche, ought to make and repair one Crest from
Mariottesdrove, in Wisebeche, unto Doddesbrigge, in the same Town, near to the
common Sewer on the North part, in height four foot, and in breadth eight. And
that all the Landholders in Rechey field, ought to make and repair one Crest
from the said Clow, unto Belymylle brygge, near to the common Sewer, on the
East part, in height four foot, and in breadth eight. And that Thomas Hyptoft
and his Tenants, ought to make and, repair one Crest in Rat Row, on the East
side of the way called Tolymersdrove, unto Rat Row brigge, in height four
foot, and breadth eight. And that the Tenants of Hugh Sozell's lands in Will
Lake, and of the lands of Mundeforth field, ought to make and repair a Crest in
Gamyl drove, from Doddesbrygge to Blakedyke, in height four foot, and breadth
eight.

And they likewise presented, that all the Landholders of the xxx acres in the
Town hende in Wisebeche, ought to make a repair a certain Bank, called
Belymylle dike, from Belymylle brigge unto the land late belonging to Will.
Beteyns, in height four foot, and breadth eight. And that the Landholders in
Sayersfield, in Wisebeche, ought to make and repair one Crest in Waldysgate,
from Belymylle brigge, to Robyns brigge, in the same Town, in height four foot,
and in breadth eight. And that the Landholders in Briggefield, in Wisebeche, on
the North side of the River, abutting upon Bridgedrove Eastwards, ought to make
and repair one Crest in Briggedrove, in Wisebeche, in height four foot, and in
breadth eight. And, that all the landholders in Wisebeche ought to make and
repair a Clow in the Sewer of Wisebeche, at a certain Bridge in Neutone, near
to Fytton Gole, for to stop the water there, when need should require.

And they also presented; that whereas there were three Pipes, newly made, in a
certain field, called Small medows, in Wisebeche; one by the Bishop of Ely and
his Participants; the second by the Lord by Coldham, and his; and the third by
the Landholders on the South side of the River of Wisebeche, they were made too
big in breadth, and contrary to the Presentment of the Jurors; it was therefore
decreed, that they should be amended: the said Commissioners therefore did
ordain and decree, that the Bishop of Ely and his successors, Sir Thomas
Todenham Knight, Thomas Hyptoft, Will. Cause and his heirs, the Lord of Coldham
and his Participants, and all others beforementioned; and all the Landholders
within the said Town of Wisebeche, as aforesaid, should for the future be
charged to make, repair, and maintain all and singular the Banks etc. specified
in the said Presentment, according to the proportion of what they held, as
often as need should require.

And, for the better safeguard of the said Town of Wisebeche, they moreover did
ordain, that the Bank, called Wisebeche fen dike, should be barred in certain
places needful, to prevent Cattle from passing thereon; and that hassocks
should be gotten in the Fen, and laid at the foot of the said Bank, in several
places where need required. And that all the Landholders of Oldfield in
Wisebeche, abutting, upon the Sewer of Coldham, ought to stop the ends of their
Ditches, beginning at Tylyry lane, unto Coldham pipe.

And the said Commissioners also decreed, and ordained, that all Kedylls,
Stamps, Dams, and other Engines in the River of Wisebeche, whereby the water
was in any sort straightned or stopped, should be removed and taken away: and
that no man, thenceforth, should make any stamps, dams, Kedills, or other
Engines in the said River, from Geyhirne to the Sea; upon penalty of Cs. to be
paid to the Bishop of Ely for the time being. And that there should be a
Guardian appointed for the safeguard of the Country, to oversee, open and shut
the four Gotes of Wisebeche, Leverington, Neuton, and Tyd S. Giles, yearly, at
the charge of each man, according to the proportion of his lands.

And they moreover decreed, that all the Sewers belonging to every hamlet of
Wisebeche, from the Fen-banks to the Sea-bank, should be well scoured and
cleansed, at certain times in the year, by those who anciently used to scour
them, so that the water might have its course to the Sea without any
impediment: and that all the Bridges, Clows, Pipes, and Gutters, within every
of those Towns, be repaired and cleansed, well and sufficiently in all places
needful, by those unto whom they belonged, as aforesaid; so that no loss might
accrue to any person whatsoever for default of such repair. And that all Banks,
called Wardyches, betwixt every Town of the said Hundred, should be raised
higher, repaired, and maintained well and sufficiently, by those unto whom they
appertain, as aforesaid; viz. in breadth xvi. foot, and of a fitting height to
stop the water of each Town, from other; so that no damage might accrue to any
of them, for want thereof, upon penalty o^ xls. to be paid to the Bishop of
Ely, for the time being. And likewise, that all the Crests, as well betwixt
every Field, as bordering on all the Sewers of each Town, within the said
Hundred, should be raised higher, repaired, and maintained well and
sufficiently, in height, breadth, and thickness by those also to whom they
belonged, upon the like penalty of xl s. to be paid to the Bishop of Ely, for
the time being: And that no man, thenceforth, should presume to cut or cause to
be cut any Wardiche, or Crest, within any of the Towns of the said Hundred,
under the like penalty of xls. to be paid to the said Bishop of Ely, as often
as there should be an offense of that kind committed. And that the river of
Wisebeche should be scoured and enlarged, in all places defective, from Gye
hirne to the Sea, as often as need required, by all the Landholders within the
said Hundred of Wisebeche, each man according to the proportion of his holding.

And the said Jurors also presented, that the Bank, called Grenedyke of Well,
which begins at the Stone Cross in Well, and extends to Sewalesclote in
Well, should be raised and repaired higher than it was at that time, by two
foot, and in breadth xij. by the Landholders in Budbeche, each man according to
his proportion. And that the Abbot of Bury ought to repair one Bank in Well,
leading from Sewalesclote in Well, to Lakebrigge, and make it higher, than it
was at that time, by two foot, and in breadth at the top eight foot. And that
the Landholders in Sayerf^ld in Well, ought to repair a certain Bank in Well,
called Thornedyche, from Lowndes^rove to the Stone Cross in that Town, and to
make it higher by two foot than it was at that time; and in breadth eight foot.
And that a certain drove in Well, called M^^sdrove, leading from Grenedyke
unto Pyldrove, be made higher by three foot, than at that time it was, and in
breadth xij. foot, by the Landholders in Budbeche, within the said Drove.

And the said Jurors also presented, that there then was, and had anciently
been a certain Crest in Uppewelle, called Pysdrove, leading from Grenedike in
Uppewelle unto the great River of Well aforesaid; which Crest ought and had
anciently been made and repaired by the Landholders in the said Town of
Uppewelle. And they said, that it was necessary for the safeguard of the parts
adjacent, that the said Crest should be made perfect, and higher than it was at
that time in the lowest places, by three foot; and to be eight foot in breadth
at the top. And that all persons having Land^, or Tenements in the Field,
called Rudbeche in Outwelle, and Uppewelle, ought to repair a certain Gutter,
near unto the message of Simon King, in Outwelle aforesaid, whereby the water
of Rudbeche might run into the great River of Outwelle. And they also said,
that for the safeguard of the Lands within the said Field of Rudbeche, that the
same Gutter ought to be new made with Stone, by those persons who had Lands or
Tenements in the said Field of Rudbeche. Whereupon the beforespecified
Commissioners did decree and ordain; that the said Bank, called Grenedyke, as
also that leading from Sewalesclote to Lakebrigge; and the Bank called
Thornedyche, with the Droves called Meysdrove and Pyisdrove, should be raised
and repaired in manner and form above-specified, by the said parties, each man
according to the proportion of his tenure, as often as need should require: and
likewise that the said Gutter lying near the message of Simon King, should be
new made of stone by the parties abovesaid.

And they moreover presented, that the Bank called Elmfendiche, beginning at
Kekysmylle, and leading to Benstedehyrne; hence to Tiln^y hirn^; and thence to
Mareysdam in Elm, ought to be raised three foot higher, and to be s^x foot in
breadth at the top, according to an ancient agistment. And that the Bank, called
Redmoredyke in Elm, beginning at Coldham C^ouse, and leading to Friday brigge
in the same Town, ought to be well and sufficiently repaired by all the
Landholders in Redmoresfield and Walysch^feld, by new agistments to be thereof
made; and to be made higher by four foot than it was at that time, and eight
foot in breadth at the top: As also, that the Bank, which begins at
Fryday-brigge aforesaid, on the Westside of the River, and reaches to
Maryesdam, ought to be made three foot in height more than it was, and to
contain eight foot in breadth at the top.

And they also presented, that the Bank called the Gebrynke, in Elm, on the
East side of the River there, beginning at S. Gil^s Drove, and extending to
Friday brigge, and from thence to Mareysdam, ought to be repaired, and raised
higher than it was at that present, by three foot; and to be twelve foot in
breadth at the top; and this to be done by the Landholders in Oldfield and
Needham, according to an ancient agistment. And that the Bank called Nedham
dyche, in Elm, beginning at Thornedyche in Well, and extending to Coldham
Kyrfe, in Elm, ought to be repaired, and raised higher, in all the low places
thereof^ so that it might be equal to the Bank of John Blewyk, which is upon
the same Dyche.

And they likewise presented, that all persons having Lands abutting upon a
certain Sewer in Elm, which leads from the hades of the Lands in Nedham,
from Friday brigge to Knytesdyke, in the same Town, and thence to S.
Christophers Chapel in Outewelle; and thence to the Clow at the Stone Cross in
Outewelle, ought and had used to repair and scour the said Sewer, at the hades
of their Lands, so that the water of Nedeham might have its course to
Wellescholle: And that all men having Lands betwixt Friday brigge in Elm, and
Grenedyke in Well; and betwixt Bishopisdyke and Nedehamdyke in Elm, ought to
make and repair one Clow, as sufficiently as it could be done, to stop the
water of Outewelle in the Winter season. Upon consideration of all which, the
said Commissioners did ordain and decree; that the Bishop of Ely and his
successors, and Will. Vernoun, and all the Landholders in Elm aforesaid,
should be chardged, to make, repair, raise, and maintain all and singular the
Banks and Sewers beforementioned, in such sort as they are specified in the
said Presentiments, each man according to the proportion of what he holds,
whenever need should require.

And moreover, whereas the water of Old field in Elm, on the East side of the
River of Elm, ought to have its course and issue by a Pipe lying under the
River of Elm, called Massyngham's pipe, and thence to run into the River of
Wysebeche at Bevyse: but by reason that the River of Wysebeche, had for many
years past, been so filled up with filt and sand, brought in by the Sea-tides,
that it could have no passage there;
the said Commissioners ordained, for the better safeguard of the said Town,
that the said water of Oldfelde, should for the future pass away by the said
Pipe, called Massyngham's pipe, lying under the River of Elm, betwixt the
message of John Blythe, on the one patt, and the message of John Ratelesdene
on the other; and thence directly by an ancient Sewer, betwixt the Land of John
Tofty, on the one side, and the Land of John Westbroke on the other, unto the
Drove, called Toundrove; and thence by the said Drove on the one side, and the
hades of the Lands belonging to John Westbroke, John Edryche, and Bedylacre,
unto the Lands of Will. Eryswell on the other part; and thence by the said
Drove on the one part, and the Land of John Conysbury, and Will. Bryswell on
the other part, unto the Sewer called Coldham Sewer at Crumdykbrigge; and
thence into the said Coldham Sewer, unto the pipe lying under the River of
Wisebeche, called Coldham pipe; and thence betwixt the said Coldham Sewer, unto
the Floudgate in Leverington, called Dieugard; and thence to the Sea.

And that the water of Redmorefeld and Walyshfeld should not, for the f^ture,
run, or have its cours^ by the ^^d Sewer of Coldham; but by a P^pe called
Redmore pipe, lying at the Towns end of Elm; thence betwixt the Bank, called
Hillary dike, on the one sid^, and the hades of John Walpole's Lands, unto the
Land of Will. Beston on the other; and thence thwarting the said Bank, called
Hillary dike, into the Sewer called Waltersee Sewer, and so along that Sewer
unto the Floudgate in Leverington, called Dieugard, and thence to the Sea. And
that all persons having Lands in the said Field of Oldfeilde, and all others
receiving benefit by the drayning away of the said water, should thenceforth be
perpetually chardged, with the sufficient making, repairing, and maintaining of
the said Pipe, called Massynghams pipe, and the said Sewer, leading thence unto
Coldham Sewer, at Cromedyke brigge, as aforesaid, according to the quantity of
their Lands: And likewise, that they should contribute with Will. Venour, Lord
of the Manor of Coldham, to the making, repairing, and maintaining of the
said Sewer, called Coldham Sewer, from Cromedike brigge aforesaid, unto the
Sea; as also of the Crest thereof; and likewise to the said Pipe, called
Coldham pipe, according to the proportion of their Lands, in such sort as the
said Will. Venour and his Participants had before done, according to an
Ordinance for that purpose anciently made. And that the Crests of Coldham Sewer
should be sufficient for the water of Oldfield to run into the said Sewer of
Coldham, within the same, and to overflow the Lands adjoining thereto.

And they also presented, that every person having any Ditch, abutting upon the
said Sewer of Coldham, ought thenceforth to stop up the same, with a Dam, and a
Clote, set thereon; which Dam to be xij. foot in breadth, and in height equal
unto the hades adjacent; so that no prejudice might come to the Lands lying
near the same Sewer, as it had been anciently ordained. And that all persons
having Lands in Redmorefeld and Walyschfeld, should thenceforth be
contributory, together with the Bishop of Ely, unto the said Sewer of Walterse,
from that place in Hillary dyke, where the waters of Redmor^feld and
Walyschfeld do fall into the said Sewer of Walters^e; and to make, repair, and
maintain the Crest of the said Sewer of Waltersee, together with the said Pipe,
called the Lordyspipe, according to the quantity of their Lands.

And they moreover presented, that the Landholders in Leverington, ought and
had used to make and repair one Bank in Leverington, called the Wardyke, and to
raise it higher by three foot, than it was in the best place. And, that the
said Town of Leverington had used time out of mind to repair eight Bridges in
Neutone, lying in certain places specified in the Kings Records, in such sort
as they had anciently done. And they said, that those eight Bridges in Neutone
did lie, as follows, viz. the first Southwards at the Clow, which was then to
be repaired; the second ^oward the frontier of Andrew Cok; two others at
Leverington pipe in Neutone; one at Lordislane; one at Childesgrave; one at
Grenedyke; and one at Startesgate. And the said Jurors being asked, if ever any
of them saw any of those eight Bridges in any other place, than they were at
that time; and they answered No.

And they likewise presented, that the Town of Leverington, had, time out mind,
used and ought to repair and raise one Crest in Leverington, beginning at
Neuton Gordyke, and leading to Bondesgote in Leverington, and thence to
Rechemound in the same Town, in height four foot, and in breadth eight. And that
the Landholders of Harpfelde, in Leveringtone, ought and did use to repair and
raise a certain Crest in another place, called Towlanes; beginning at
Shoffendike, in Leveryngton, and leading to Blaklane, in the same Town, in
height four foot, and breadth eight. And that the Landholders in Southhinham in
Leverington, ought and had used to make, repair, and raise one Bank called
Overdyche, in Leverington aforesaid, beginning at Belymylle brigge, and leading
to Parsondroveshunte, in the same Town; thence to Meysbrigge, by the
Landholders of Northhinham; thence to Blakelanefeld, by the Landholders of
Fenhalf^ld; thence to Bondysgote, by the Landholders in Blakelanefeld; and to
make it two foot higher than it was at that time in the best place; and in
breadth xij foot.

And they presented, that the Landholders in Fenhalfeld, in Leverington, did
use time out of mind, and ought to make, repair, and raise a certain way,
called Polylane, beginning at Shoffendyke, in Leverington, and leading to
Meyesbrigge in the same Town, in height four foot, and in breadth eight. In
consideration of which Verdict etc. the said Commissioners did ordain and
decree that the same should be performed accordingly; viz. every man according
to the proportion of his holding, as often as need should require.

And the said Jurors also presented, that there ought to be made one Sewer in
Fenlondfeld, in Neutone, in breadth six foot, and in depth three; betwixt the
land of Martin Thompson and the land of John Mendham, at the charges of the
landholders who had benefit thereby. And that another Sewer should be made in
the same field, in breadth six foot, and in depth three, betwixt the land of
John Rogerson, and the land of Alice Pope, at the charges of all those persons
who had also benefit thereby. And that there should be another Sewer made in
Longefelde, in Neutone, of the like breadth and depth, near to the lands of John
Derby, called Barowsdyke, and betwixt the land of Simon Thomsone, from Mil-lane
to Medow-lane, at the charges of all those who had Commodity thereby. And that
another Sewer ought to be made in the middle of the said field, called
Longfield, from the land of Sir John Colvyle Knight, near to the land of John
Godeknape, unto the said next Sewer, in breadth six foot, and depth three, at
the charges of all persons having profit thereby. And that all the hades of the
lands of Fytton croft^s, should be dug, from Doddyke to Medowlane, in breadth
eight foot, and depth four, at the costs likewise of those who had benefit
thereby. And that all the hades likewise of the lands of Fytton croftes, should
be dug in breadth eight foot, and depth four, from Lowynsfendike unto Doddys,
at the charges of those persons who should have benefit thereby.

And they presented moreover, that there should be another Sewer made by the
hades of the lands, in the middle of Oldfield, from Fdtton croft^s to the land
of Sir John Colevile Knight, called Wortheynyscroft; in breadth six foot, and
depth three, at the costs of all such persons who should have Commodity
thereby. As also another Sewer at Wortheynyscroft, on the South side, unto Dod
dyke, six foot in breadth, and four in depth, at the costs likewise of such as
should have profit thereby.

And they also presented, that the Town of Neutone, time out of mind, ought and
had wont to repair and make a certain Bank, called Lowynsfendike, beginning at
Fytton, and leading to Tyd Siddyke, two foot higher than it was at that time in
the best place; and xij foot in breadth. And that John Symondeson of Neutone,
for the whole time aforesaid, ought and had wont to make and maintain a certain
Dam at the East end of the land in Newfield, to restrain the water of the said
Newfield, from descending into the next field, called Rolsefield. And that the
said Town of Neutone ought and had wont to make and repair a certain Bank in
Neutone, called the Gordyke; beginning at Blokkyslane, and leading to
Shoffendyche, in height six foot, and in breadth twelve. Whereupon the said
Commissioners did decree accordingly.

And the said Jurors likewise presented, that all the Landholders in Newfield
in Tyd S. Giles, ought and had used to make and repair one Crest, in a certain
field called Beeslane field, in the same Town, beginning at Tyd Syddike, and
extending to Brounesbrigge, in height four foot, and in breadth eight. And that
the Landholders in Southfelde, in the same Town, ought and had used to make and
repair another Crest, from Tyd Syd dyke to Brounesbrigge, in height four foo^,
and breadth eight. And that all the Landholders in Southfelde in the same Town;
beginning at the land of John Household, abutting upon a certain mansion called
Beesplace, unto Tyd Syd dyke, ought, and time out of mind had used to make one
Crest upon Syd dyke, beginning at Beeslane end, and leading to Averey's crose,
in the same Town, four foot in height, and eight foot in breadth. And that the
Landholders in Southfelde aforesaid, of the lands abutting upon Brod gate,
ought and did use to repair and make one Crest near to the common Sewer, on the
South side, in height four foot, and in breadth eight. And, that all the
Landholders in Bradeste, of the lands abutting upon Hascroft lane, toward the
West, ought and had used, for the whole time aforesaid, to make and repair a
certain Sewer; beginning at the Sewer, next unto the land, called
Stokwellesland, unto Brossebrygge, in breadth eight foot, and depth four.

And they likewise presented, that all the Landholders of the lands in
Halcrofte, for the whole time aforesaid, ought and had wont to make and repair
sufficiently, the common Sewers in Halcrofte unto Welmany flete, thwarting the
High way, called Crossegate; and so by the land lately belonging to Thomas
Retherwyk, and John Mayner, unto the land lately belonging to John Be (but
then to John Hunstone) and so betwixt the land of the said John Hunstone, and
Isabell Retherwyk, unto Sondy lane; and there to make one Bridge of one foot in
breadth, and as much in depth; and so betwixt the land of John Lambard, and the
land late of Geffrey Cosyn, unto Sedyk lane, and the land of a certain field,
called Blohevede, unto the Floudgates. And that all the Landholders in
Edykfelde, from Blakeslane to Mosselane, abutting upon Edyke, ought and did use
to make and repair a certain Sewer at the North point of the lands of
Edykfelde, aforesaid, in breadth eight foot, and depth four.

And they also presented, that all the Landholders in Edykfelde, ought and had
used to make one Sewer, at the North end of the lands of Edykfelde aforesaid,
abutting upon Edyke, from Blakkeslane to Barrowsgrene, in breadth eight foot,
and depth four; so that the fresh water might have its course to Blakkeslane,
unto the great Sewer, and so the Sea. And, that all the Landholders in
Hornefeld, ought and had used to make and repair one Crest in Brodgate, in Tyd
S. Giles, on the South part of the Sewer, called Marteynesfendyk, unto the
Corner where Will. Hubert then dwelt, in height four ^oot, and breadth ten. And
that all the Landholders in Cokley field, ought and had used to make and repair
one Crest in Botteleslane, from Bottelesbrigge, to the Ee dyke; in height four
foot, and breadth twelve. And that all the Landholders in Fendykfelde and North
lane feld, ought and did use to make and repair one Crest in Blake lane, in Tyd
aforesaid, from Bottelesbrigge unto Tubbesbrigge, and from the land of John
Ingleche unto Ee dyke, in height four foot, and breadth eight. And that all the
Landholders of the lands in Carrowfelde, abutting upon Ee gat^, from Gotebrigge
to Northlane, ought and had wont to make and raise one Crest in Eegate, in Tyd
aforesaid, where need should be, in height four foot, and in breadth twelve.
And, that all the Landholders in Tyd aforesaid, did use and ought to raise and
make one Bank, called Byshopesdyke, from Tubbesbrigge unto the Ee dyke, in
height four foot, and in breadth twelve.

And they moreover presented, that the Town of Tyd S. Giles, ought and had
used, time out of mind, to make and repair, sufficiently, one Clow, or one Dam,
in the Common Sewer of Tyd, next to the Land of Simon Canch^ne, and Hascroft
lane, on the Westpart; and another Clow or one Dam, in the common Sewer at
Brownesbrigge; and another Clow or one Dam, in the Common Sewer at
W^singhambrigge; and another at Boteleslane brigge, and another at
Tubbesbrigge; so also one in each of the Common Sewers at Mannyngesbrigge,
Beeslane brigge, and Stonebrigge, in Kirklane. And that the said Town of Tyd
ought also and did use to make, repair, and mantain sufficiently, two Banks
called Wardyches in Tyd aforesaid; viz. the Syd dyke, and Three dike, beginning
at Avereys trees, in Tyd aforesaid, and extending to the New fen dyke, in the
same Town, higher by six foot than they were at that time in the best place;
and in breadth twelve. And that the said Town of Tyd ought to raise^ maintain,
and repair, sufficiently, one Bank, called Marteynesfendike, in Tyd aforesaid;
beginning at Avereys trees, and leading to Wesynham brigge, in the same Town,
six foot higher than it was at that present in the best place, and in breadth
xij. foot. Whereupon the before-specified Commissioners decreed, that the said
Sewers and Banks should be made and raised accordingly.

And they likewise, for the better safeguard of the said Town of Tyd, did
decree and ordain; that a new Sewer should be made from Brownysbrigge unto
Kirklane, on the North side of Newgate; in breadth ten foot, and in depth as
much as needed; so that the Rivers of El^tesfeld, Fendykefeld, Cokeleyfeld;
Hornefeld, and Rylondfeld might have their course to the House, sometime
belonging to Will. Noche, but then to Will. Hobart, on the North part of
Brodgate; and so thwarting the Broadgate unto Brownesbrigge aforesaid, on the
South side of Brodgate; and so unto the said new Sewer; and then crossing
Kirklane, where a fitting Bridge of breadth and depth convenient, was to be
made: and so by the hades of the Lands of Somerleswe, abutting on Kirklane,
toward the West, unto Thorgereslane; and so by Thorgereslane, on the North
side, unto Hastcroft dyke, near to Thes^ill brigge; and from Thestely brigge
unto the end of Thorgares^ane, unto Hascrost mylle hylle, thwarting Hascroft
dyke; and so to the ancient Sewer, called Brossebrigge; and so to the Sea:
which Sewer was to be made by all the Landholders of the Town of Tyd aforesaid.
And, that the two Sewers, on each side Brodgate and Kirkgate, from the House of
Will. Hobert and Brownesbrigge, should be stopped up, when need required. And
that one Sewer should be repaired and dug on the South part of Southgrafte
feld, near to the Syddyke; viz. from Childesgrave unto the Gorys, and so to
The^tely brigge, eight foot in breadth, and as deep as needed, by all the
Landholders in Southgrafte feld aforesaid. And that all the hade Lands of
Southgrafte feld aforesaid, toward Thorgares^ane, should be stopped by the
Landholders there, upon penalty of xx s. for every of them, to be paid to the
Bishop of Ely, for the time being, so that the water of Southgrafte feld
aforesaid might have its course to the Sea, without any impediment. And that
every man having Lands or Tenements in Tyd aforesaid, might take Earth to
repair and make the Shoffen dyke, from the Common next to the River, which is
in Tyd aforesaid, and Tyd S. Mary's, which is the division betwixt
Cambridgshire and Lincolnshire. And that the said Shoffendyke should be barred
in three places, to prevent Carts from coming thereon: and that a certain way
in Tyd aforesaid, called Bee^lane, should likewise be barred, for the same
respect, from the Feast of S. Michael the Arch angel, unto the Feast of S.
Peter ad vincula, by the Landholders in Newfelde.

And they lastly presented, that Thomas Flower of Okham, in the County of
Roteland, ought to repair and maintain upon the Bank called Wisebeche Fendyche,
a certain proportion, containing six hundred foot, in respect of xxiiij acres
of land in Wisebeche: and that upon Monday the Feast of S. Wolstan the Bishop
and Confessor, in the seventeenth year of the said King Henry the sixth his
reign, the same portion of that Bank was broken and decayed; and that the Dike
Reeves aforesaid did warn the said Thomas to amend the same; which he refusing
to do, the fresh waters made the said breach greater; whereby the portions of
the same Bank, belonging to Geffrey Lambard and others, adjoining thereto, were
also broke and ruined, to the danger of destroying the whole Country; MMMMCCCC.
acres in Wisebeche, MMMMDC. acres in Leverington, MCCCC. acres in Neutone, and
MM. acres in Tyd, being thereby, at that time, overflowed and drowned.

Not long after this, viz. upon Saturday next before the Feast of the Nativity
of the blessed Virgin, in 17 H. 6. there was a Session Ex. pr^e^. cod. MS.
penes O.S. John f. 69. a.
of Sewers held at Wisebeche, by Sir John Colevile Knight, Gilbert Haltoft, and
others; at which time the Jurors presented upon their Oaths, that there was a
certain Sewer, called South Ee, but anciently Old Ee; whereby the water of Nene
and Weland ought to pass from Noman's land, in Croyland, unto Dowesdale, in
the same Town; and thence by South Ee dyke unto the East end of the field of
Throkenold, in Leverington, near the Cross in Leverington; and thence into the
Sewer, called Fendiche, in Leverington and Wisebeche, unto the River of
Wisebeche at Guyhirne: Which Sewer of South Ee aforesaid, is the division
betwixt Lincolnshire and Cambridgshire. And that the moytie of the said Sewer
ought to be scoured by the Abbot of Crouland, and the Towns of Quaplode,
Hotheche, Fleet, Gedney, Sutton, and Tyd S. Mary's in Lincolnshire; viz. by
the said Abbot to Dowesdale aforesaid; and thence by each village aforesaid,
for their proportions of land in each Town. And the other moytie by the Abbot
of Thorney, and Bishop of Ely with his Tenants of Wisebeche Hundred; viz. by
the said Abbot for his Fens in Thorney and Leverington, bordering upon the same
Sewer; and by the said Bishop and his Tenants, for their Fen called Wisebeche
fen, in Cambridgshire, abutting upon the said Sewer.

And the said Sewer, called Fendiche, ought to be cleansed by the Towns of
Wisebeche, Leverinton, Neuton, and Tyd S. Giles. And that the said moytie of
that Sewer, which ought to be scoured by the said Towns of Quaplode, Holbeche,
Fleet, Gedney, Sutton, and Tyd S. Mary's, was not cleansed; but stopped up and
filled with Reeds, Haffs, and other Vegetables; so that the said water could
not have its right course unto the said Sewer, called Fendiche; and thence to
the River of Wisebeche, and so to the Sea, as it used to have; whereby the
whole Fen, called Wisebeche fen, belonging to the Bishop of Ely, was drowned;
so that the said Bishop and his Tenants of Wisebeche Hundred, could not receive
any benefit in the same.

And they likewise presented, that one part of the water of Nene descended from
the Bridge at Peterborough unto Thorney bar aforesaid; thence to Noman's
land, in Croyland: Which River the Abbots of Peterborough and Thorney ought to
cleanse, from the said Bridge at Peterborough, unto Thorney bart aforesaid, and
thence to Noman's land aforesaid; viz. the Abbot of Peterborough the one half,
and the Abbot of Thorney the other. And they said, that the other part of Nene,
which passes from Peterborough bridge aforesaid, unto Wodeshed in Wytlesey;
thence to Wittleseybrigge; thence, by Wittlesey, to Wardiscote in Wittlesey,
and thence into the great River of Wisebeche, ought to be scoured, from the
said Wodeshed to Wardysgote aforesaid by the Town of UUittlesey, and the
Landholders, late Pavy's, in March; and that it was not then cleansed. And they
said, that the Town of UUittlesey ought to cleanse one Sewer, beginning at Goose
UUillow drove, in UUitlesey, unto the North part of Adernale, in the same Town;
and thence to Brodreche in UUisebeche, called Upstanlake; and that it was not
cleansed: And that the Bishop of Ely ought to cleanse the said Upstavinlake, unto
the great River of UUisebeche, which was not then done.

In 9 E. 4. W. Bishop of Ely, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Earl of UUarwick
and Salisbury, John Earl of Northumberland, John Earl of Oxford, Humfrey
Bourchier Lord Cromwell, John Catesby, Will. Ienny, Thomas Gray, Roger
Tounsende, Henry Spilman, Thomas Daniel, and others, were constituted Pat. 9 E.
4. p. 1. m. 14. in dorso
Commissioners for to view the Banks, Ditches, Sewers etc. of Marshland,
Upwelle, and Outwelle, and of other Towns and Fens, by the water which goes
from Erith brigge directly to Benwyke; thence to Paddok mere; thence to Farset
brigge; thence to Standground, and so to Muscote; and from Muscote to Thorney
mill and Godelakcrosse, by Noman's land; and thence to Dowysdale, and so to
Clowecrosse; thence to Wylowedyke; thence to Edgreynes; thence to Tydegote; and
thence to the Sea: And to make Statutes and Ordinances for the repair of them,
according to the Laws and constitutions of this Realm, and the Statutes of
Romeney marsh: As also to impressed such and so many Diggers and other Laborers
to be employed in those Works, as they should deem necessary for the expedition
thereof. The like Commission w had they for the view and repair of those in the
Marshes betwixt the water, running from Erith brigge aforesaid, by Ely, to
Salterslode and Wigenall, to Bishops Lenne; and the water passing from the same
Bridge at Erith, by Benwick, Gretecrosse, and Wyssebeche to the Sea.

About this time I suppose it to be (for it is without date) that the
Landholders of Pokediche field, in Well, exhibited a Petition Ex praef. cod.
MS. (...) O.S. John, f. 23. b.
to the Lords and Commoners of Marshland; showing, that the said Field was
agisted, for its number of acres, in as high a measure, toward the repair of
the Bank called Pokediche, for the safeguard of that Country, as any part
thereof, which lay within the precinct of that Bank; and that the water of
Pokediche did so overflow the same field, that they could not dig earth, upon
occasion, for repair of the before-specified Bank: and therefore desired that
they might drayn the same by a Sewer, through the said Bank into Marshland, in
such a place where it would be of least damage thereto. Whereupon they were
allowed to have a certain Clow near Thwart medows, for that purpose.

In 20 H. 8. at a Session of Sewers held at Stuntney, in the Isle of Ely, by
Sir Thomas Knight, Tho. Dereham, John Fincham, and others, there was a
Presentment Ib. s. 90. ^.
then made by the Jurors, of all the Sewers, at that time in being, within this
part of the Country; instancing to whom the repair of each belonged; the tenor
whereof I shall here insert.

The Bishop of Ely ought to scour Crekelode, extending from the great stream,
toward Sotherey, unto the Willough, by the space of two furlongs. And from the
said Willough to Pulverlake, the Cellerar of Bury has an half part, against
all others, for the space of a mile and more. From the said Willough also, to
Pulverlake, the Prior of Modney has a share: So likewise the Prior of Norwich
for the Church of Fordham; and the Parson of Helgay for the Church of Helgay.
And the Landholders late Massingham's, and Bekeswell's ought to cleanse the
same, against the Cellerar of Bury, from the said Willough to Pulverlake. Which
Cellerar of Bury has also an half part in the middle of this lode, against all
others, for two miles.

The Abbot of Ramsey ought to scour the Sewer, called Balkwere abutting upon
Gnat lode, for one quarter of a mile. And the Prior of Norwich, the Rector of
Helgay, with the Tenants of the lands late Massingham's and Bekeswell's, ought
to repair the same unto the four Lodes end.

In Crekelode also, Thomas Boteler of Helgay ought to scour a place called
Hogs middle, for the length of one furlong. And the Duke of Gloucester one
part in Gretwere (a part of the said Crekelode) for the length of a mile,
against all others: And another part there, for half a mile, the Prior of
Castelacre, Abbot of Wendling, and the Tenants of those lands, late Bekeswell's.

Sheting middil, in Crekelode, ought to be cleansed by the said Cellerar of
Bury, for the space of one mile and more. Chutting in Crekelode, by the Duke of
Glouc. for half a furlong and more. Strem middil by the Cellerar of Bury, for
one mile.

In Ung medil the Prior of Modney holds one part, by the space of two
furlongs, against the Prior of Chetford.

John Ashfield and the Abbor of Ramsey, for the lands late Nich. Gunnes. The
same John Ashfield holds one part in Lodwere, in Creklode aforesaid, for two
furlongs.

In Bullinger the Prior of Modney holds half a part, for two furlongs and
more, against the Abbot of Ramsey. The said Prior of Modney, and the Tenants of
the Lands, late Massingham's, ought to cleanse all Gredy middil, for one mile.

The Prior of Chetford ought to scour Iellis middil, for the space of one mile.

The Town of Lyttilport, the Widow of Nich. Orme, and the Earl of Worcester,
ought to cleanse Newdike unto Welney court, for one mile.

Criklode, in March, begins at the Great Ee, betwixt March and Well, and
goes on directly to Elm, containing by estimation six miles, and ought to be
scoured by the Bishop of Ely and Abbot of Bury equally.

Gnat lode begins at Hawkyns bytte, and continues to four lodes end,
containing by estimation three miles, and ought to be scoured by the Towns of
Elm and Littilport.

Small lode, betwixt Well and Outwelle, ought to be cleansed by the Abbot of
Dereham, from the great River in Well to Ingram's hirne, by the space of three
quarters of a mile. Another part in the said Small lode, from Ingram's hirne to
Seman's gole, containing one mile, the Abbot of Ramsey and John Aylesham, ought
jointly to cleanse.

Maidlode begins at Welneywater, and continues to Sheppe lode, and thence
to Sheppeslodes end; which ought to be cleansed by Richard Cranford, and Clarice
late Wife of John Cranforth, by the space of one furlong; and by the Town of
Upwell, for the Lands of Mr. Will. Dunthorne by the space of one mile; and for
another mile, and more, by the Town of Well.

Shiplode ought to be cleansed by John Sambroke for half a mile; by Thomas
Beaupre for as much; by John Fincham also for half a mile; by the Abbot of
Ramsey for the like proportion; by the Prior of Walsyngham for three miles; and
by the Prior of Lynne for three furlongs, unto the end thereof.

Wide lode ought to be cleansed by the Town of Well for half a mile; by the
Prior of Thetford, and the Heirs of Bekeswell, for xxv. furlongs; and by the
Prior of Jews for one mile.

Old Small lode begins from Wide lode; and ought, for the space of half a
mile, to be repaired by the Bishop of Ely: and by the Abbot of Dereham and John
Aylesham by the space of half a furlong.

Webwinch lake ought to be cleansed by the Abbot of Ramsey, for the space of two
miles.

The Town of Well ought to scour from the Sholle of Outwell, for the space of
half a mile: thence the Prior of Lynne, unto Mullicourt, for one furlong; and
thence the Prior of Jews for one mile and more.

The Bishop of Ely and John Ailesham ought to scour the watercourse from North
delf unto Salter's lode, for the space of half a mile, and the Bishop of Ely
alone, for two miles and more.

The Lord Scrope ought to cleanse the Channel, from Darsey lode to Manytownsend,
for the space of one mile.

Cock's lode begins at Hunney Corner, and continued to Manyfeld's end, and
ought to be cleansed by the Abbot of Ramsey; and from Mannyfeld's end to Harry
Mace's Cote, by the Lord Scrope unto Maney lode.

The River of Nene has its rise above Northampton, and comes to Peterborough
bridge, and thence to a certain place called Noman's land, and there enters
into South Ee, which is distant from Peterborough xiiij. miles by estimation.
Which River ought to be scoured and cleansed by the Abbots of Peterborough and
Thorney, but was not. And from Noman's land to Dowesdale, by the Abbots of
Crouland and Thorney, for the space of four miles. And from thence to Clows
Cross, on the South side, by the Abbot of Thorney; and on the North, by the
Abbot of Crouland, with the Towns of Holbeche, Fleet, and Sutton, for six miles.

The River of Wailand begins above the Town of Stamford, and runs unto
the Triangular bridge at Crouland; and thence one part thereof passes unto
Spalding Ee, and the other to Nomans land: some say, that it did anciently r^n
into a certain Fen, belonging to the Abbot of Crouland, called the Pricmote,
alias Possons, in Lincolnshire, and so to the Sea: but now that current being
stopped it runs by the South Ee unto Clows Cross and so to Guy hirne.

Furthermore, betwixt Shepelode and Salterslode, there is a Sewer called Thief
lake, which ought to be repaired by Thomas Gawsell, unto the great River at
Salterslode; it lying on the West side of Salters lode, about half a mile
distant.

Also there is another Common Sewer, called Stremelake, lying betwixt Shiplode
aforesaid and Salters lode, which ought to be cleansed.

The Fen betwixt Crekelode, Well, and Salterslode ought to be repaired by the
Town of Denver, for the space of six furlongs, and more.

There is also a Common Sewer, called anciently Denver hithe, now stopped by the
Lord Berkley, and the Town of Denver; which contains one furlong, and more.

After this, viz. in 2 Edw. 6. at a Session Ibid. ^. 106. b.
of Sewers held at Upwell, upon the Monday next after the Feast of the Nativity
of S. John Baptist, by Geffrey Colvile, Edmund Reaupre, Thomas Dereham, Rich^rd
Everard, and John Willoughby Esquires, James Hawes and John Schuldham
Gentlemen, the Jurors presented, upon their Oaths; that by the great abundance
of fresh waters, yearly descending from the Counties 2. E. 6.
of Norff. Suff. Cambr. Bedf. Hunt. North. Rutl. and Linc. by and through two
great Rivers; viz. Ouse, extending from Cambridge unto Ely; thence to Lytilport
Chair; thence to Sotherey; thence to Helgay; thence to Fordham; thence to
Denver; thence to a place in Dounham called Salters lode; thence to
Wymbotesham; thence to Stow-Bardolf; and thence unto the North Seas at King's
Lynne, in the said County of Norff. And the other great River, called the great
Ee, extending from Peterburgh, in the said County of Northampton, unto Ramsey;
thence to a certain Sewer or decayed River in March, in the said County of
Cambridge, called great Cross; thence to a certain decayed River or Sewer
called Creke lode, in March aforesaid; thence into another decayed River or
Sewer, called the New Leame, in March aforesaid; thence unto a certain place in
Upwell aforesaid, called Shewysnest point; and there the said River, dividing
it self into two Branches, whereof the one returns South Eastward, and is
called the South branch, unto a certain old decayed Sewer in Welney (a Hamlet
of Upwell aforesaid) called Maid lode; thence unto another old decayed Sewer,
between Welney aforesaid and Lytilport, in the I Will of Ely, called New dike, and
Creek lode, in Sotherey aforesaid; thence unto Lytilport Chair aforesaid, and
so to the aforesaid great River of Ouse, and so to the North Seas at K. Lynne.

And the other Branch, descending North East ward, called the North branch,
from the said place, called Shrewysnest point, unto a certain place in Outwell
aforesaid, called Outwell Sholle; thence Southward unto a certain place in
Dounham aforesaid, called Northdelf; thence Eastwards unto Salters lode, into
the said River of Ouse, there is yearly drowned within the Towns of Upwell and
Outwell aforesaid, eight thousand acres of Marish and Pasture grounds, over and
besides the great damage unto four several Infields of the same Parishes,
called Plawfield, Kirkfield, Budbech, and Sandyfield, to the number of 1600
acres; and to the Houses of the Inhabitants of the same Parishes, to the number
of 300 Households, were not the same fields and houses defended by great Banks,
Dikes, and Crests made for their safeguard, to the great impoverishing of the
said Inhabitants; specially by the said waters descending by the said great Ee,
The ancient course of the wat^r^ by Wisbeche.
from Peterborough unto Ramsey, thence to March, so to Upwell and Outwell, and
thence to the North Seas at K. Lynne: forasmuch as the most part of the water
of the said great Ee, sometimes was conveyed unto the North Seas at Wisebeche,
by the said decayed Rivers in March aforesaid, called Great Cross, Crekelode,
and the New Leame, whereof the farthest River called great Cross, passes not
in distance from the said great Ee, in March aforesaid, to the said Town of
Wisebeche, ten miles: And the said lode called Crek lode, in March aforesaid,
is not in distance in length from the said great Ee unto the said Town of
Wisbeche, but six miles and a half: And the said New Leame but 5 miles and a
half from the said great Ee unto Wisebeche.

And now the water being forced to take, in manner, his full and whole course,
contrary wise from his natural and most ready fall at Wisebeche aforesaid, in
form aforesaid, is constrained unto the said Chapel in Upwell aforesaid, called
Shrewysnest point, by reason of the decay of the said sewers, where it divides
into two branches, as before is mentioned.

And the one branch going South Eastward, in form aforesaid, extends in
distance and length, from the said great Cross unto Shrewysnest point, and so
by the said South branch unto the said North Seas at K. Lynne aforesaid Liiij.
miles: And the same River, descending from the said great Cross unto
Shrewysnest point aforesaid; and from thence by the North branch unto Outwell
Sholle, and so to the said North Seas, is in distance xxxiij miles.

And from the said Sewer called Creeklode, in March aforesaid, unto the said
North Seas at K. Lynne, aforesaid, by the said South branch, is xlviij. miles,
and by the said North branch xxviij. miles.

And from the said Sewer, called the Leame, in March aforesaid, unto the North
Seas at K. Lynne aforesaid, by the said South branch, is xlvii. miles, and by
the North branch aforesaid xxvii. miles.

The decay of which said several Sewers, with the Rivers, Lodes and Drayns from
them, extending unto the said Town of Wisebeche, they say be the chief and
special occasions of the drowning, as well of the said Marish and Pasture in
Upwell and Outwell, as of the whole Country of Marshland and Wigenall
adjoining; and in continuance of time, as they think in their consciences, will
utterly drown the said Parishes, and the said Country of Marshland, unless the
same decayed Sewers be scoured, according to the ancient Ordinances; so as a
great part of the said fresh waters of the same great Ee, in March aforesaid,
may be conveyed unto the said North Seas, by the Town of Wisebeche, in manner
and form aforetime used.

And they said, that there is another great occasion of the drowning of the
said Marish grounds, by reason of the decay of the said old Sewer in Upwell
aforesaid, called Maid lode; and a part thereof called Ship lode; the which
Lode begins at Welney water, otherwise called the South branch, coming from
Shrewysnest point aforesaid, and extends from thence unto a certain fen of
the said Edmund Beaupre, called Week fen; and from thence into a certain place
in Helgay, called Shiplode Helgay house, and there into the said great River of
Ouse: The which Sewer they say has been most specially decayed, by reason that
there has not been kept a good Sluice of stonework or timber, with sufficient
falling and hanging doors to the same, to stop out the Floudsilty waters: And
also by reason that the same Sewer falls not lower toward the said North
Seas; viz. at and against a certain place in Denver, called Denver hithe; at
the which place they think it most meet for to set and build the said Sluice.

And they said, that for the preservation of the said Sluice, there ought to be
a substantial Clouse of stone work and Timber, with two sufficient drawdores to
the same, to be set within half a furlong of the said Sluice, to stop the fresh
waters as well in the time of repairing the same Sluice, as to keep and preserve
a sufficient portion of waters within the said Drayn, in the time of extreme
drought.

Furthermore they said, that forasmuch as there has not been a substantial
Bridge over the said Sewer, called Maid lode, of the length of xx foot, next
unto Welney water, so as the same water, at the entry thereof, might have full
passage; has been in like manner a great decay of the said Sewer.

And they said, that the heirs of Richard Cranford ought to scour the said Maid
lode, next from the said Welney water, called the South branch, by the space of
one furlong, at the wideness of xx foot, and of sufficient depth. And next
unto that, the Inhabitants of Upwell and Welney ought to dike the same, by the
space of one mile, for certain lands, which they hold in common, called
Dunthorn's fens, otherwise called our Lady fenns, and one other mile for their
Common called Blakmereshall: And then the Landholders, belonging to the Prior
of Fakenham, to scour the said Lode called Shiplode, by the space of half a
mile: And then the said Edmund Beaupre, for lands belonging to Beaupre Hall, in
Outwell aforesaid, half a mile. And for his Manor of Upwell, late ^^longing
to the dissolved house of Ramsey, half a mile: And then Richard Fyncham Gent.
for certain Fen grounds and Marish half a mile: And the Landholders, late
belonging to the Monastery of Walsingham, three quarters of a mile: Then the
Dean of Norwich, for lands belonging to the late Celle of Monks in K. Lynne
three furlongs; and from thence to the said place against Denver hithe (where
the said Sluice shall be set) the Townships of Denver, Helgay, and Fordham shall
dyke etc. the rest of said lode, for four furlongs; in consideration, that they
be not charged in any part of the said Sewer, called Maid lode and Shiplode;
and yet the same Townships shall drayn by the same Sewer, by estimation, a
thousand acres of Common Fens and more.

And forasmuch as great Commodity shall grow, as well to the Inhabitants of
Denver, Helgay and Fordham, as to the Inhabitants of the whole Country of
Mershland, and Wygenhall, by reason that the same Sewer as well shall drayn the
Fenns of Denver, Helgay and Fordham, as also shall receive the great abundance
of fresh waters, the which before this time have descended against a certain
Bank in Outwell and Dounham aforesaid, called the New Powdich, being the only
defense and safeguard of the same Country of Marshland and Wigenhall, the which
for lack of this provision, at this present by them agreed, have been diverse
times of late years drowned, that, in consideration thereof, as well the
Inhabitants of Marshland and Wigenhall, as of the said 4. Infields in Upwell
and Outwell, called Plawfield, Kirkfield, Budbeche field, and Landy field,
shall bear and sustain the Costs in and about the sufficient making of the said
Sluice and Clowes.

And that after the same Sluice and Clowes be well and sufficiently made, that
then the same shall be repaired at the Costs of the said Inhabitants and
Landholders of Denver, Fordham, and Helgay aforesaid, except when the yearly
chardges in amending the same, shall come to above the sum of xxvi s. viij d.

Also they said, that there is another great destruction, as well to the said
Fenns, as to a great part of the low grounds within the I Will of Ely, by reason
of the decay of the said drayn, called in part New dike, in Littilport
aforesaid, and in part thereof called Crikelode, in Sothery aforesaid, betwixt
Sothery poole and Modney, and there enters into the said great River of Ouse.

And they said, that the Bishop of Ely ought to scour the said Creeklode, from
the said great River of Ouse, unto a certain place called the Willow, by the
space of two furlongs; and then the Landholders of the Lands of late belonging
to the Cellerer of Bury, ought to dyke from the said Willough, unto Pulver
lake. The Dean of Norwich for his Church of Fordham; the Parson of Helgay for
his Church of Helgay; the Landholders late Massingham's, and the Landholders
late Bexwell's, ought to dyke the said Sewer against the late Landholders of
the Cellerer of Bury, from the said Willow unto Pulverlake.

And they said, that the Landholders of the late Cellerer of Bury ought to dike
the one half of the said Sewer, in a certain place called the Middyl, in
Creeklode, against all men, by the space of two miles.

The said Landholders of the Lands belonging to Ramsey, ought to dyke a certain
place called Balkwere, abutting upon Gnatlode, by the space of a quarter of a
mile. The Dean of Norwich, the Parson of Helgay, the Landholders of
Massingham's, and the Landholders, late Bexwell's, ought to dyke the said Sewer
unto four lodes end.

The Heirs of Tho. Butler of Helgay, ought to dyke a certain place in the said
Sewer, called Hogs myddle, by the space of one furlong. The King, for Lands
sometimes the Duke of Gloucester's, ought to dike at a certain place called the
great Were, against all men, by the space of a mile.

The Landholders of the late Monasteries of Castleacre and Wendlyng, and the
Landholders, late Bexwell's, ought to dyke the other part of the said Sewers,
against the King, for the space of a mile. Then the Landholders late belonging
to the said Celerer of Bury, ought to make a Shetting middyl in the said Sewer,
by the space of a mile, and more.

The King for Lands sometime the Duke of Gloucester's, ought to dyke a certain
place, called Chattyngs in the said Sewer, by the space of half a furlong and
more. And the Landholders late belonging to the said Celerer of Bury, ought to
dyke a certain place in the said Sewer, called Stream middyl, by the space of a
mile; and then the Landholders of the late Priory of Modney ought to dyke the
one half of Unge medyl, in the said Sewer, by the space of two furlongs,
against the Landholders of the late Monastery of Thetford.

The Heirs of John Ashfeild, the Landholders of the late Monastery of Ramsey
(sometime Nicholas Gunne's) ought to dyke the said Sewer against the said
Landholders of the late Priory of Modney. And the Landholders late John
Ashfeild's ought to dyke at a certain place in the said Sewer, called Lod were,
by the space of two furlongs.

The Landholders of the late Monastery of Thetford, and the Landholders late
John Champayne, ought to make the other part, by the space of two furlongs.

The Landholders of the late Priory of Modney ought to make the one half of a
certain place in the said Sewer called Bullings, against the Landholders of the
late Monastery of Ramsey, by the space of two furlongs and more. And the
Landholders of the said late Priory of Modney, and Massingham's, ought to dyke
the said Sewer, called Credy-middyl, by the space of one furlong. The
Landholders of the late Monastery of Thetford ought to dyke in the said Sewer,
called Iolles-middyl, by the space of a mile.

The Township of Litilport; the Landholders sometime called Nicholas Orme, and
the Earl of Worcester, ought to dyke the said Sewer called New dyke, unto the
said South branch called Welney water, by the space of a mile.

And that the persons chargable with the making, scouring, etc. of these
Sewers, shall have the Fishings, so far as they are so charged.

Also they said, that there is another occasion of the drowning of the said
Marish and Pasture grounds, and of the whole Country of Marshland; which is the
decay of a certain River, parcel of the North branch, extending from
Shrewysnest point unto Outwellsholl: the which decay begins at a certain
place in Outwell aforesaid, called Saltham lake, and extends to a place in
Downham, called North delf, and so to Salters lode: The which River ought to be
in breadth, in the narrowest place of the Chanel, xxiiij foot, and of convenient
depth. And of the breadth and depth aforesaid, by the Inhabitants of Marshland
and Wygenall, from the said place called Salthamlake, unto Salter's lode.

And they said, that there is a certain Bank, before remembered, called the New
Powdich, set in Outwell and Downham aforesaid, on the East and North part of
the same River; as well for the safeguard of certain low grounds in Downham,
Outwell, Wimbotesham and Stow Bardolf aforesaid; as also of the whole Country
of Marshland and Wygenall, for and against the abundance of fresh waters,
descending to and against the same bank: the which Bank begins at the South
end of the Parish of Outwell aforesaid, and extends South Eastward unto
Mullycourt drove; thence to Saltham lake; thence to North delf in Dounham; and
thence to Salters lode; and adjoyneth in part thereof to the East side of the
said River, and in part to the North side thereof. Which Bank, by all the
limits thereof, ought to be in breadth, in the foundation xviii foot at the
least, and in the top xii foot: And in height from the plain ground unto the
top thereof, from the said Saltham lake unto Northdelph, six foot of lawful
measure; and from North delf unto Salters lode, in height five foot, of like
measure.

And they said, that the Landholders of those lands in Outwell aforesaid, in
certain fields, in the same Town called Mutlycourt field, Sandy field,
Out-Sandy field (alias Blewick field) and Powdich field, ought to maintain the
said Bank, from the Towns end of Outwell unto Mullycourt drove, at their costs.
And the Dean of Ely, for the said late Priory of Mullycourt, from Mullycourt
drove unto Saltham lake. And the Inhabitants of Marshland, and Wygenhall, from
the said Saltham lake unto North delph; and from thence unto Salters lode etc.

And they said, that the decay of the said Bank has grown most especially, by
reason that the Earth taken for the repairing thereof, has been dyked and cast
from the foot of the said Bank; whereas by the ancient Ordinances it has been
appointed to be taken on the South part and West part of the said River,
adjoining to the said Bank, in time of Summer; and in the Winter, upon great
necessity, the Country of Marshland and Wygenhall to take their manure in the
common Fenns of Outwell and Dounham, on the East part and North part of the
said Bank, in distance xl foot from the same.

And they said, that there is another Bank, extending from Salters lode
aforesaid, unto Dounham brigge; and thence unto Stow Bardolf houses; and so, by
the same Houses, to Staple were, in Stow Bardolf aforesaid, made for the
defense of the several and common grounds and Marshes of Dounham,
Wimbottesham, and Stow Bardolf, for and against the Flood and Spring waters
coming out and from the North Seas at King's Lynne aforesaid: the which Bank,
viz. from Salters lode to Dounham Bridge, ought to be in breadth in the
foundation xviii foot, and on the top xii foot; and in sufficient height for
the defense of the flood.

And that the Inhabitants of Dounham ought to repair the said Bank from Salters
lode to Dounham brigge, unto Stow brink houses, to which place it ought to be
vi foot in breadth at the top; and from thence unto Staple were 8 foot in
breadth, and of sufficient height.

And that the Inhabitants of Dounham, Wymbottesham, and Stow Bardolf, ought to
maintain the same in manner and form aforesaid.

Also they said, that for the avoidance of the fresh waters, falling within
certain several grounds and common Fens of Denver aforesaid, on the East part
and South part of the said great River of Ouse, there ought to be made, at the
costs and charges of the Inhabitants of Denver aforesaid; and set at the said
Hithe, one good and sub^^antial Sluice of Stone and Timber, with a falling door,
for the avoidance of the said Fresh waters, into the said great River.

And that there is an old Bank, extending from Upwell Towns end, by and through
the Common of Upwell, called Neatmore, unto a place called Moule rech, next
unto the Common drove of Upwell, extending from Upwell Towns end to Welney
aforesaid; the which Bank was made in the beginning, as it should seem, for the
preservation of certain common and several Fens, called Neatmore, Low fen,
Waxbeche, and Walsyngham fenns; the which Fens amounting to the number of 2000
acres, by estimation, or more, be yearly drowned by the decay of the said Bank.
And that the said Bank ought to be in height from the plain ground, one foot
and a half; and in breadth in the Foundation 8 foot, and in the top four foot in
breadth: and that the charges of making and keeping the same, ought to be born
by the Inhabitants of Upwell aforesaid.

And that there is another old Sewer, called Small-lode, between Upwell and
Outwell aforesaid; which begins at the great River in Upwell, called
Northbranch, at a certain place called Welhirn yard; and extending to Ingram's
hirne; and from thence to Seman's goole, in the same Town: Which Sewer ought to
be scoured by the Kings Majesty for certain lands in Upwell aforesaid, sometime
belonging to the Monastery of West Derham, by the space of three quarters of a
mile. And then the said Edm. Beaupre, for his Manor of Upwell^ and Will.
Norman for lands sometime John Aylesham's, ought jointly to keep and scour the
said Small lode, from Ingram's hirne unto Seman's gole, by the space of a mile.

And further they said; that where there be 4 several fields, in the Par^shes
of Upwell and Outwell, viz. Plawfield, Churchfield, Budbeche field, and Sondy
field; the which fields be defended by great Banks, kept by the Landholders of
the said fields, to their great costs; they said, that by reason of the
abundance of waters falling within the said fields, it cannot be conveyed out
of them unto the Sea, by any of the Sewers beforementioned: for the avoidance
therefore of the same fresh waters, there ought to be made, at the cost and
charges of the same fields, two Sewers, the one to begin at a certain place in
the same field, called Wadingstowe; and from thence directly in a Dyke, by a
certain Bank called Plawfield dike; and so by a certain dike called Ba^dike;
and then in a dyke between the Common Droves of the one part, and the Lands of
Robert Dannet Gent. on the other; and so forth in a dike between a ground
called the xxx Acres of the one part, and the lands of the said Robert Dannet
and Anth. Cotton on the other part; and so directly into a Pipe or Sluice of
Stone, under the little River called the Small lode in Upwell aforesaid.

And the other Sewer to begin at Hilling drove in Plawfield aforesaid, and to
pass in two Dikes, in both sides of the same Drove; and so into the Common
River called Hermite's Ee; and from thence into a Dike between the Lands of
Will. Walsyngham Gent. on both parts, under the Common Drove called Sprouter's
drove; and so in a dike between the said Drove on the one part, and the lands
of William Norman on the other; and from thence into the said Dike or Drayn at
Bardrove; and so into the said Sluice under the said River, called the Small
lode: and from the said Pipe or sluice unto the Dike belonging to the King, in
right of the late dissolved Monastery of West Dereham, into the said field
called Kirkfield; and so in a Dike in the the same field, between the Kings
lands on the one part, and the lands of Richard Fyncham Gent. on the other;
unto a certain ground of the said Richard's called Goddard's, and there to be
made a Dam between the lands of the King and the Lands of the said R. Fyncham.

And from thence the same Drayn to extend in a Dike overthware the Lands of the
said Richard, into a Dike of the same Richard on the one part, and the Lands of
the Heirs of Peter Bateman on the other part; and there to be made a Dam between
the said Lands; and from thence overthwart in a Dike, by the midst of certain
ground of the King's, called Anbell land, into a Common Drove called Dowes
drove of the one part, and the said Anbell land on the other part; and there to
be made a new Dam between the said Lands and the said Drove.

And from thence to extend in a Dyke between the said Dowes drove, and the
lands of the King, called Derebought land, and the Lands late Walter Godard's,
and one piece of Land called Howardyn, of the other part, directly into
Kirkfield Ditch; and then overthwart in one Pipe, or Got of stone, under Dowes
drove aforesaid, and so from thence in a Dike, by a certain pasture ground of
Ric. Foulesham, called the xx. Acres on the other part, and Kirkfield dike on
the other; and so in the said Dike into the Lands of Anthony Croftes, and there
to be made a Dam, between the said Lands on the one part, and the said Lands
called the xx. Acres on the other part: And from thence in a Dyke of the said
Croftes, directly by the said Kirkfield dyke, unto the Common Drove called Each
drove; and there to be made a Dam, between the same Drove and the Lands of the
said Crofte's, and there to enter into a Got or Pipe of stone, under the said
Drove.

And then in a Dike between the Lands of the said Croftes, on the one part, and
Kirkfield Dike on the other part; and there to be made a Dam on the other side
of the said Drove, between the same Drove, and the said Lands of Croftes; and
so from thence in the said Dike of Croftes unto the Meadow of William Norman
(sometime John Curtis) and there to be made a Dam, between the Lands of the said
Croftes and the said Will. Norman, and from thence in a Dike between the said
pasture of the said Will. on the one part, and the said Kirkfield Dike on the
other part, unto Kirfield Dike Corner^ and there to enter into a great Pipe of
Stone and Timber, under the said great River, extending from Outwell Shall unto
North Delph: And in like manner under the said Bank, called the New Pow diche;
and from thence in a Sewer, for the waters of both the said Fields, called
Plawfield and Kirkfield, by and through the Common of Outwell aforesaid, called
Mullycourt Drove; and so forth in the same Sewer or Drayn, unto a certain
place, called the Sumptes, against the Meadow of the said Edmond Beaupre,
called Galcroft; and from thence unto a certain Bridge called Angle brigge, in
the Common of Outwell aforesaid.

And from thence unto a certain Sallow ground of the said Edm. Beaupre, called
Hodg hirne; and there to enter into Rightforth lode; which Lode begins at
the South Corner of Hodges hirne aforesaid, and extends from thence, between
the Common Drove of Outwell on the one part, and the Marish and Fenn of the
Earl of Arundell, called Bardolf fenn, on the other, unto the North Corner of
Hodges hirne: And thence, right forth, between the Marshes and Fenns of the
said Earl on both sides, unto a certain place in Stow Bardolf aforesaid, called
North hook; and thence directly in a Drayn to Stow bridge, in Stow Bardolph
aforesaid; and there, through a Sluice of Stone and Timber into the great River
of Ouse.

Also they said, that for the safety of the field, called Budbech field in
Upwell and Outwell, there ought to be made a Drayn, by the Landholders of the
same Field, from a certain place in Upwell, called Dod's style, by diverse
heddings unto Pyes drove, in Upwell aforesaid; and there to enter into a Pipe
or Got of stone, under the same Drove; and from thence directly in a Dike,
between the Drove called Mayers drove of the one part, and the Lands of the said
Rob. Dannet, the Lands of the King as in the right of the said Monastery of
West Dereham, the Lands of the Dean of Ely, and the Lands of John Fyncham Gent.
the Lands of the Heirs of Anth. Croftes, the Lands of the Heirs of Edm.
Chatterys, the Lands of John Coney, the Lands of Reynold Hilbrond, the Lands
belonging to the Parsonage of Outwell, and the Lands of the Heirs of Croftes,
and the Lands of the said Ric. Fyncham on the other part; and so in a Dike unto
the Lands of the said John Fyncham; and then in a Dike between the Lands of the
said John on the one part, and diverse men on the other part, unto the Yard stead
of the said John, sometime Thomas Hollows of Outwell aforesaid; and there to be
made a Dam, between the said Lands and the Lands of John Coney.

And from thence in a Dike between the Lands of the said John Fyncham, unto the
front of the said John, in Owtwell aforesaid; and there to enter into a Pipe or
Sluice of stone and Timber, under the same front; and also in the same Sluice,
under a certain River in Outwell aforesaid, called the Little lode, the which
River divides the said Counties of Norff. and Cambridgshire; Division of the
Counties of Nor^f. and Camb.
and so forth in the same Pipe into the said Field called Sandyfield: and
thence in a Drayn between the Lands of the said Edm. Beaupre, called Reynolds,
of the one part, and the Lands of the said John Fincham on the other, unto a
certain pasture ground of the said Edm. Beaupre, called the Upward; and so in a
Dike between the Lands of the said Edmund, on both sides, unto a certain
pasture of the said Edm. called the xx. Acres; and there to enter into a Pipe
or got of Stone, laid between the Lands of the said Edm. on both parts; and
from thence into a Drayn or Sewer, by or through the grounds of the said
Edmund, unto a certain gysted Dike of the said Edmund, called Blewick dike; and
there to enter into a Pipe or Sluice of Stone, under the same Dike; and then
into a Drayn or Sewer, as well for the waters of the said Sondyfield, as for the
waters of the said Field called Budbech field; and from thence in the same
Sewer, for both the said Fields (called Budbeche and Sondy field) by and
through the Common of Outwell, called Blewick fen, unto the said place called
Hodges Hirne; and there, meeting with the said Drayn, for the said Fields,
called Plawfield and Kirk field, to pass forth with the same, by and through
the said Sewer, called Rightforth lode, by and through Bardolf fen, unto North
hook aforesaid; and from thence unto the Pipe or Sluice at Stow bridge
aforesaid; and by and through the same into the great River of Ouse.

And they said, that the said Drayn for Plawfield aforesaid, ought to be in
breadth from the said place where it begins, unto the said Sluice lying under
Small lode, 8. foot: and from the said Sluice by all the said Drayn unto Hodges
hirne, 8. foot, and from thence unto Rightforth lode, at a place called Hodges
hirne, 8. foot wide.

And the said Sewer for Budbech field to be in breadth, from the said place,
where it begins, unto the Pipe under the little lode in Outwell aforesaid 7
foot: And from thence unto the said Sluice, lying under the said Blewick dyke, 7
foot: And from thence unto Rightforth lode, to be in breadth in the narrowest
place of the same, xij. foot: and so to Stow bridge; and that they be made of
depth according to the wideness.

All which Sewers and Drayns to be kept and maintained at the charges of all
and every person chargable to the making of them.

After this, viz. in 13 Eliz. at another Session Ib. f. 118. a.
of Sewers, it was presented by the Jurors; scil.

1. That the Sea-bank, beginning at Tyd got, in Tyd S. Giles, adjoining upon
the County of Linc. and so leading to a place called the Horshooe, being in
great decay, be made in height xx. foot above the Saltmarsh, and in breadth six
foot, by the Inhabitants of Tyd, Newton, and Leverington. 13 Eliz.


And from the Horsho^e unto Crabmarsh gate, of the same breadth and height, by
all the Lands in Estfield. And thence to the Sluice of Wisbeche. Which Bank from
Crabmersh gate, was decayed in Bishop Goodrick's time; and part thereof carried
(by the ^onsent of the said Bishop) for the pavement of the Market place in
Wisbeche, and part by Mr. William Blomfield for making of a Windmill there.

2 That the Bank called Whymeydike, beginning at the Sea bank end, at the
Horshooe in Leverington, ought to be made unto Coxe corner in Wisbeche, above
the brink of the water xx foot, and in breadth 8 foot.

And from Coxe Corner the old Market of Wisbeche, the Ee bank to Newdike end
(alias Lentshurne) beyond Bevys Hall on the North side, and West side of the
said Riv^r, to be made in height xii foot, and breadth xvi foot, by all the
Landholders on the North of Wysbeche. And that Newdike, from Lyntyshirne, unto
the farther Cross at Guyhirne, be made in height xvi foot, and in breadth xii
foot, by the said Landholders on the North of Wysbeche.

3 That the High Fendike, beginning at Guyhirne cross, and so leading to Pigs
drove, and Clows cross to be made xi foot in height, and xii in breadth, by all
the Landholders of the North side of Wysbeche and Leverington, taking menure
for the same at liberty; and paying for every Rode of menure in length and
breadth xvi foot, and in depth 8 foot, xvi d. to the owner of the land.

4. That Shofendyke, otherwise called Harhold, beginning at Clows cross, and
extending to Goredyke, in Newton, be made in height 8 foot, by all the
Landholders in Leverington: And from Gore dike to Tyd thredding, in height and
breadth as aforesaid, by all the Landholders in Newton: And from thence to
Eegraynes, in Tyd S. Giles, in like sort, by the Landholders in Tyd S. Giles.

5. That the Conies be destroyed, which do hurt to the Sea-bank, beginning at
Tyd got and extending to Wysbeche Sluice.

6 That a Crest be made from Fytton bridge against the gole in Leverington, by
the Landholders on the North of Wisbeche, to keep the water within the Bay.

6 That the Landholders in July field make a Crest in Orech (alias Mouth drove)
from the great River unto Black dyke, in height six foot, and breadth 8.

7. And that the Dean of Ely and Lord Berkley make a Crest in Tholomer's drove,
beginning at the Fendyke, and reaching to Tholomers, in height and breadth
aforesaid.

8. That the Landholders in Guyhirnfield do make a Crest from Blakdike to
Marytts brigge, of the like breadth and height: And from Maryts brigge to George
Ramsey's house Corner, on the East part of the Sewer, to be made by the
Landholders of Guyhirne field. From Marytts bridge to Tholomers, of the West
side, by William Butcher, for his lands in Calves field, so far as his lands do
extend, and the residue by the Inhabitants of Tholomer's drove. From Guyhirn
Cross to Blakdyke end, by the Landholders in Guyhirn field. From Blakdike end
to Mouth drove by the Landholders of Iuley field: And from Mouth drove to Sondy
dike (alias Sorr^ll dike) by the Landholders in Rummers field; all of the like
breadth and height.

9 That the Landholders of Munthforth field make a Crest from George Ramsey's
corner to Dods brigge: Thence to Riche's stow, to be made by the Landholders of
Guyhirnfield, William Butcher for Calves field and Munforth field. From Riches
stow to Belymyll brigg, on the West side of the Sewer, the Landholders of
Richey field: in height 4 foot, and breadth 8.

10 That Tho. Gardner, the heirs of Henry Repps Esquire, the heirs of Laurence
Cade and Agnes Talbot, with their Coparceners, do make a Crest in Ratrow, from
Tholomers drove unto Ratrow brigg, in height 4 foot, and breadth 8.

11 That the Lodebrinke in Murrow, from Priors brigg to Mill lane end, be made
by the Tenants of the Dean of Ely: Thence to Household brigg by the said Mr.
Repps and Tho. Gardner, and their Coparceners. Thence to Belly myll brigg by
the Landholders in Richey field, in height six foot, and in breadth 8.

12 That the Landholders in Willake and Munforth field make a Crest in Galls
drove from Dods brigg, unto Black dyke, in height 4. foot, and in breadth eight.

13. That the Heirs of Talbot do make a Crest in Mampasse, from Dodsbrigg, on
the South side the Common Sewer, unto the East end of his Pasture, of the like
height and breadth.

14 That Mil lane, from Tholomers drove, and reaching to Mill lane end to the
Pipe in the Drove, be made in height four foot, and in breadth eight foot, by
the Dean of Ely and Lord Berkley.

15 That the lands between Sorrel dyke and Bellymill dike, from Belly mill unto
Newdike, otherwise called Sandy dike, do make Sorrel dyke and Belly mill dike,
in height 6 foot, and breadth 8 foot.

16 That the Landholders in Sayrfield, make a Crest in Wallys gate, from
Bellymill brigg unto Cheyneybrigg (otherwise called Robbins brigg) in height
six foot, and in breadth 8 foot.

17. That the Crest beginning at Sorrel dyke, and extending to the Church style
at S. Maryes, ought to be made by the Lands, lying between Newdrove and the
said Crest, in height 6. foot, and breadth 8.

18. That the Landholders in Nymans dole make a Crest in a drove, called Kilne
house dike, from Pigs drove to Cheyney brigg, in height 6. foot, and breadth 8.

19. The Bevys dike, from Pig's drove to Bevys cross, be made by the
Landholders of Inhamfield and Newfield, in height and breadth as aforesaid.

20. That Newdrove be made, by the Landholders of Newfield, from Sorrels dike
unto Bevys dike, 4. foot high, and 8. foot broad.

21. That the Landholders in Hirnfield make a Crest in Fleming's drove, from
Bevys drove to Bowman's drove, in like sort.

22. That the Landholders in Longland make a Crest, in Bowman's drove, from
Bowman's Cross, to Fleming's droves end, in height 6. foot, and in breadth 8.

23. That the Landholders in Briggefield, on the North of the River, make a
Crest in Newfield drove unto Long drove end, in like sort.

24. That the Landholders of Fenland make a Crest in Mill lane, from the great
River unto Barton lane, in like height.

25. That the Landholders in Harvey field make a Crest in Faulle lane, from the
great River unto Mill lane, in like height and breadth.

26. That the Landholders in Whitemathes, from Barton cross, alias Barton lane,
unto Wisbeche lode, running to Callows bridge, ought to make a Drove called
Giggs drove, in height 4. foot, and breadth 8.

27. That the Landholders of Nyman's dole make a Crest from Barton Cross unto
Barret's Brigge, in height and breadth as aforesaid.

28. That the Landholders in Flatmore make a Crest in Netledyke lake, from
Leonards pipe unto Barton lane, of the like height and breadth.

21. That the Landholders of Gybesholme, and all the Lands between Barton lane
and Pycks, make a Crest in Barton lane, from the great River unto Gydges dike,
in height 4 foot, and breadth xij.

22 That the Landholders in Sondylond make a Crest in Pickards lane, and Mill
lane; from Mill lane end, unto the Dike between Leverington and Wisbeche, in
height six foot and breadth xvij.

23. That vii acres, called Gallow land, make a Crest from Spittle Cross uuto
Whynney dike, in height 6 foot, and in breadth xii.

24. That the Lowfie^ds on the North side of the River of Wisbeche, from the
Fendike to Bellymil dike, shall scour the Lode, from Belly mill to the nine
hundred Briggs, as need requires; and thence to Evildike brigg, (the nine
hundredth to be Contributers) And from Evysdike to the 4 gotes, all the lands on
the North side the River, every man according to what he holds.

25 That a Close Shut be made at Leonards pipe, by the Landholders of the next
fields: Another at Evysdike brigge, by the Landholders of the nine Hundreds, to
keep the water from running into the Low fields.

26 That all Weres and Stampes from Guyhirne to Clows-crosse, or elsewhere
within any part of the Fenn, be xxiiij foot in the Were and the door, and wider
if need be, so that no water be stopped or straightned.

27 And from Clows Cross unto the Northwest corner of Troknold, in the river
called Old Ee (alias South Ee) the one half of the said river to be cleansed by
the Landholders of Troknold, and the other by those of Tyd S. Mary's and
Sutton; and from Troknold field unto Marysh cote, the one half to be cleansed by
the Bishop of Ely and his Tenants, and the other by the Landholders of Sutton
and Gedney, it being the division betwixt Cambridgshire and Lincolnshire.
Division betwixt Cambridgshire, and Lincol^shire.


28. That Guyhirne gole be stopped.

29 That the Sewer, called the New leame, from Knar lake to Stanground, being
so grown up that no water can pass in dry years, to the utter decay of
Wisbeche river, be diked 30 foot wide, and 6 foot deep.

30. That the Landholders of Wisbeche do make a Shut at Fytton brdg, within the
Town of Newton, to stop the water when need shall be.

31. That all the lands in Wisbeche on the North side the River, ought to
cleanse the high lode of Wisbeche from the 4 gotes to Eydikes brigge in
Leverington, in breadth xii foot, and depth four; and repair seven Bridges in
the Town of Newton.

32. That the great River of Wisbeche being greatly decayed,
raised and filted up, by reason of the flowing and ebbing of the salt water;
for preservation therefore of the whole Hundred, that a Sluse be made in the
said River at the Horshoo in Leverington, at the charge of all the Hundred of
Wisbeche, or any other place, that shall take profit by it; and to be made in
breadth Lx foot, and depth x foot from Guyhirne to the Sea.

33. Also, that there be two new rivers cast of each side of the said great
river of Wisbeche; the one to begin at Guy hirne Cross, and to extend to
Kentoun's Corner; the other at Tower house, and to extend unto Kekys mill;
which rivers to be xv foot wide apeice, and six foot deep; and this to be done
by the whole Hundred of Wisbeche.

34. And that for the better preservation of the high Fen dike and the
Country, the Townships of Newton and Tyd S. Giles, shall, as often as by any
outrageous tempests and waters it shall be in danger, rise and come to give
their attendance, with the Townships of Wisbeche and Leverington, to watch for
the preservation of the same.

35 That a Dam be made in the Lode at Hobs house, to the end that by the
stopping thereof in dry years, the wa^er may the better descend into the great
river.

Leverington.
36. That a Crest be made from Fytton bridge against the gole in Leverington,
by the Landholders on the North of UUysbeche, that the water may run within the
Bay.

37. And that the heirs of Richard Everard Esquire, shall maintain a dam in the
xl acres (lying between the lands late Geffrey Norman's, and the heirs of the
said Mr. Everard) to keep out the gool water from drowning of Parkfield and
UUratfield.

38. That the Landholders of Harpfield and Sherefield in Leverington, make a
Crest in a place called two Lanes; beginning at Shofendyke, and leading to
Blacklane, in height 6 foot, and in breadth 8.

39 That the Landholders in Southingham, in Leverington, make a dike called
Overdyke, beginning at Bellmylne Briggs, and leading to Parson drove end, and
thence to Meysbrigge by the Landholders of Northinham. And from thence to
Blacklanffield, otherwise called Lady outgote, by the Landholders of
Fenhalfield; and thence unto Bond's got by the Landholders of Blacklanefield,
in height 6 foot, and breadth xii.

40. That the Landholders of Rymersfild in Leverington, make a Crest in Pokle,
beginning at Southgate, and so leading unto Birds drove, in height six foot,
and breadth eight foot.

41. That the Landholders of Newfield in Leverington make and repair a Crest in
Alinne drove, beginning at Bird's drove, and so leading to Newfield pipe, in
height six foot^ and breadth 8.

42. That the Landholders of Pokefield make a Crest in Mill lane, beginning at
South gate, and so leading to the Pipe at Birds drove, in height six foot, and
in breadth 8 foot.

43. That the Landholders of Richmund field make a Crest in Cattle dike,
beginning at Newer's dike, and so leading unto Richmund pipe, in height six
foot, and in breadth xij foot.

44. That the Landholders in Richmund field and Newfield make a Crest in
Turnmeredike, beginning at Bond's got, and so leading to Richmund pipe, in
height 6 foot, and in breadth xii foot.

45. That the Landholders of Longmeadow and Catfield, make a Crest in
Oldfendike lane, beginning at Leonard's pipe, and so leading on to Cakerow hill
gate, in height 4 foot, and in breadth 8.

46. That a gool in Northinham, and a gool in Southinham, shall be agisted and
made, and the agistment thereof maintained by all the Landholders in
Leverington; the menure to be taken off the lands annexed, paying to the Owners
iiij d. for every Rod.

47. That the Landholders from the High Fendike to Newlane, in Northinham,
shall make Newlane in breadth xii foot in the bottom, and in height four.

48. No stops to be made in those Sewers of Southinham and Northinham; but that
the narrowest place be six foot wide; that Boats may pass.

49. That the Landholders on the North of Wis^eche River, who drayn through
Leonard's pipe, make sufficient a Crest, beginning at Leonard's pipe, and so
leading by Popelane to Ives dike bridge, in height four foot above the water,
and in breadth 6 foot. And every one to keep their Heddings and their Cloves on
the West side of Popelane, according as heretofore.

50. That the Landholders of Out Newlands, in Leverington, make a sufficient
Dam; in breadth 8 foot, and height 6. at their lands ends at the North east side
at the Windmill in Leverington, to keep out the water from running in Wisbeche
lode.

51. That the Landholders of Southinham and Canonfield, make a Crest from Dike
corner unto Over dike, in height six foot, and breadth eight.

52. That all the lands in Leverington ought to scour the high Lode from the
Fendike unto the 4 gotes in breadth 12 foot, and in depth 4. And all Stamps and
Weres therein; to be pulled up: nevertheless the Inhabitants to have a Common
set in the said Lode, at a place called Richmond green, from side to side,
according to ancient old Custom.

Newton.
53. That a Sewer be made in Longfield, in Newton, in breadth 8 foot, and depth
4, between the lands of Ieffrey Colvile Esquire, and Simon Trove, and the lands
of the said Mr. Colvile and Thomas Reynold, from Mill lane unto Meadow lane.

54. That another Sewer be made in the midst of Longfield aforesaid, from the
lands of Ieffrey Colvile Esquire, abutting upon the lands of Robert Roydan,
unto the aforesaid, Sewer, to be in breadth 8 foot, and in depth four.

55. That all Fish taken at the 4 gotes, be converted to the use of the said
gotes.

56. That the Heddings of Fytton Seacrofts be diked from Dods dyke unto Meadow
lane, in breadth 8 foot, and in depth 4.

57. That the Heddings of the lands in Fytton croft be diked in breadth 8 foot,
and in depth 4. from Lowing's Fendike unto Dods dike.

58. That a Sewer be made by the Heddings of the lands in the midst of the
old......... viz. from Fitt^^ Cross unto the lands of Ieffrey Colvile Esquire,
called Worthens Croft, in breadth 8 foot, and in depth 4.

59. That a Sewer be made on the South side of Worthens Croft, unto Dods dike,
in breadth 8 foot, and depth 4.

60. That the Township of Newton, time out of mind, ought to repair a Dike
called Lowings, otherwise called Blackdike, beginning at Fitton, and so leading
unto Tyd Seadyke, in height 8 foot, and breadth xii.

61. That the Landholders of John Clarke and Rolls field ought to make a Dam,
at the East end of John Clarke's land in Newfield, to keep the water of
Newfield, from running into Rolls field.

62. That the whole Township of Newton ought to repair a Dike called Goredike,
from Block's lane, leading to Shoffendike, in height 8 foot, and in breadth xii.

63. That all the lands in Newton, shall cleanse one Lode, called Newton lode,
beginning at Fendike bridge, and leading to Pickerd's style to the four Gotes,
in breadth xii foot, and in depth 4 foot.

64. That the Landholders of Rolls field, shall keep their Clotes; and the
Landholders of Newfield, and all other fields that drayn that way, shall make
their Heddings in Rolls field, from the lands of John Clarke aforesaid, unto
Dod dike; and there to make a Pipe of four foot square.

65. That a Sewer be made in Newton from viii acres of...... Drews, at Fytton
gole, at the West end of meadow field; and so all along by Meadow lane unto West
field, and so by Sim. Troves 8 acres; and from thence by the Heddings of Mr.
Colvile's xx Acres, and so over the Lane through a pipe to the Common Sewer of
Newton, to be diked 8 foot in breadth, and depth 4, every man against his own
land.

66. That the Sewer in Fenlondfield, beginning at Starts gate, and so going
into a Pipe lying over Franks lane; and so to the mote of Geffrey Colvile
Esquire; and thence to another Pipe lying over the High way in the same Town of
Newton, near to the Common Sewer, be diked by all the Landholders that shall
take profit thereby.

67. That all the lands in Newton do make a Dike coming from Shofendike;
beginning at Goredike, and so leading to Tyd thredding, in height 8 foot, and
breadth 6.

68. That all Weres and Stamps, being in the high lode of Newton, from
Shofendike into the 4 gotes, be pulled up.

69. That the Township of Leverington do make 8 Bridges in Newton, and one
Close shut: which Bridges do lie toward the South; the first at Stanfield's
door; the second at the beginning of Black dike; two at Leverington pipe, with
2 stone walls; one at Lords lane; another at Child's grave, otherwise called
Tailors sheers; one at Green dike; and one at Start's dike.

70. That the Landholders of Leverington ought to make the Heddings in Newton,
beginning at the burnt place in Fytton, and so leading unto Fen-dike Bridges;
and thence by Galls field unto Start's bridge, in height... foot, and in breadth
8; taking menure, and paying to the Owner for every Rod, of length 18 foot,
breadth 4 foot, and depth four foot, four pence.

Tydde S. Giles.
71. That all the Landholders in Tyd S. Giles ought to make a certain agisted
Dike, called Shoffendike, from Tyd thredding unto Ee graynes, in Tyd, in height
six foot, and breadth 8.

72. That a Bank called Ee dike; and all Ee Banks from the said Eegraynes unto
Tyd got, shall be made of the same height and breadth, by all the said
Inhabitants, saving against Hockfield, and other two places, called the Ee dike
or Bishops dike: The which Ee dike to be made by the Bishop of Ely, and the
others by the Lord of the said Hockfield.

73. That a petty Drayn be made in Newfield, beginning at Brown's bridge, at
Newgate, leading by Broad gate, and Barngate, to the Bridge at Churchgate, in
breadth 8 foot, and depth 4. by the Landholders on the North side of Newgate,
bordering on the same Drayn.

74. That a petty Drayn in Somerlesue be scoured, beginning at the said Bridge
at Church gate; and by Church gate going to Littilbrigg, in breadth...:.. foot,
and depth 4. by all the Landholders in Somerlesue, and a Shut or Dam made at
the said Littlebrigge, as often as need requires.

75. That all the Dikes lying against the North side of the Town drove, and
under Old dyke and Fen lane, beginning at Skepgate brigg, and so by the Droves
to Shofendyke, be scoured by all their Heddings, every one against his front, 8
foot wide, and four foot deep.

76. That a Crest be made in Towndrove, beginning at Gaunt's brigge, and so
leading unto Cowstowe, thence unto Fen lane, and thence unto Ee dike, in height
6 foot, and in breadth 8 foot, by all the Landholders in Rylondfield, Carrow
field, and Northlane field: And from Fenlanes end unto Shofendyke one Crest to
be made in height and breadth as aforesaid, by all the Landholders in Elletfield.

77. That a Pipe be made in the same Bank a little from Gaunt's brigge out of
the Lode, for the drayning of the Fen; and not to run but at such time as it
shall not surround any other lands.

78. That all the Wardikes in Tyd aforesaid, shall be barred at all times in
the year, when need shall require, by the advice of the Headborows and
Dike-Reeves of the same Town; that is to say as well Town drove, Fenlane, South
dike, Tyd thredding, Blackdyke, and Beyslane, as all the other agisted Banks
and Dikes.

79. That the Landholders in Tyd do make a Crest in Beyslane, beginning at Tyd
Sea dike, and so leading unto Brown's brigge, in height 4 foot, and in breadth 8.

80. That the Landholders in Southfield, beginning at the lands late John
Household, and abutting upon a certain land, called Beyse place, and leading
unto Tyd Sea dike, ought to make one Crest upon the Sea dike; beginning at
Beislane end, and leading to Averie's trees, or Black dike, in height 6 foot,
and breadth 8.

81. That all the Lands in Brodhest, abutting upon Haftcroft lane, do repair a
petty Drayn, beginning at the Common Sewer....... and leading by the said lane,
unto Brassey lode, in breadth 8 foot, and depth 4.

82. That the Common Drove in Halcroft, beginning at Hall pasture, and so
leading between the lands of Sir William Cordall Knight, and so by the said
Lane, unto Welman's street; and so into the old Sewer; and so, by the Sea gate
green unto Skepp's board; and so by the Sea bank unto the Common Sewer, be
cleansed by all the lands lying upon the same, 8 foot broad, and 4 foot deep.

83. And that at the said Shepes bourd be made a Bridge, with a Close shut, or
else a Dam, and the said place to be stopped at all times at the discretion of
all the Head-borows and Dikereeves of the said Town.

84. That the Landholders in Ee dike field, from Black lane unto Moss lane
abutting upon Ee dike, make one petty Drayn, as often as need shall require, at
the North head of the same land, in breadth 8 foot, and in depth 4 foot, so that
the water of the said field may have his course to the Common Sewer.

85. And that the Landholders of the same field, from Blacklane unto Barrow's
green, at the North head of the same field, ought to make one petty Drayn, in
breadth 8 foot, and in depth 4, that the water may pass into the Common Sewer.

86. That one Sewer be made at the East side of Cross gate, beginning at
Thack..... a little from Chaucheon's bridge, and so leading through a Pipe at
Black lane unto Black.... and so to Garreds lane end; and so through Seagate
green unto Helgay's got, 8 foot wide, and 4 foot^ deep, by all the
Landholders thereto adjoining.

87. That all the Landholders in Hurnefield, make one Crest..... in Broadgate,
at the North side of the Common Sewer there^ from Sheppers gate bridge, unto
Hubberds Corner, in height 4 foot, and breadth 8.

88. That all the lands in Cockley field ought to make one Crest in Bottel's
lane, from Bottel lane brigg unto Ee dike, in height 4 foot, and in breadth 8.

89. That all the Landholders in Fendyke field, make one Crest in Blacklane, to
begin at Tubbesbrigge unto Bottlebrigge. And in like sort the Landholders in
Cockley field to make one Crest in Ey gate, from Bottel brigg unto Ee dyke, in
height four foot, and breadth.....

90. And in like manner the Landholders of Carrow field to make one Crest there.

100. That the whole Township of Tyd do make one Shut or Dam in Brasselode Dam,
in the Sewer; and one other Dam at Dike Landam: And another..... head Acres
under the Sea dyke, with Shuts to stop out the salt water. And also a Shut at
Hornelanes end; another at Foster's dam; Another at Thursley bridge; Another at
Tubbes brigge; another at...... Bridge in Kyrklane: All which to be stopped, by
the Assent of the Headborows and Dikereeves; when need shall require.

101. That the Landholders of Tyd ought to keep two Wardikes; viz. Tyd Eedike
and Thredding; beginning at Averey's trees, and so leading to New fendike,
alias Shoyfendike; in height 4 foot, and breadth 6.

102. And another Wardyke, called Black dyke, and Skeppers gate, to be made by
all the lands, between the East side of the said Dike and the Sea-bank; and by
all the Commoners of the said Town: Which Dike begins at Averey's trees, and
so leads to Tyd bridge, to be made in height 8 foot, and breadth 12.

The Presentiments of Elm and Coldham are wanting. Upwell and Outwell.
103. That Henry Cowper shall make his Bank in Upwell aforesaid, from Lakebrigg
unto Dods style, otherwise called Sewell's clout, as the Abbot of Bury has
done before his time, which Bank to be in height 6 foot, and breadth 8. And that
there shall be two good lawful Gates, between the said Lakebrigge and Dods
style, for passage of people.

104. That all persons having lands in Budbech field in Upwell, ought to make
their part of Green dike from Dod's style, and so to the Stony Cross, at
Sumpter's door, every man his part, 8 foot broad on the top.

105. That the Sewer called the Chair in Upwell more, beginning at the great
River of Well, and descending unto Coxecote tree; thence to Darsey lode, and
so to Welney River, be scoured in breadth xvi foot, and depth 6 foot, by the
Bishop of Ely for his part, Edm. Beaupre Esquire for his part, and all others
that have been charged heretofore.

106. That Friday lake and Magglake, in Outwell and Upwell, be cleansed by the
Inhabitants of both the said Towns, in breadth....... foot, and depth 4 foot.

107. That Bishop's dike, which begins at Sewell's clout in Upwell, and
thence extending to Langbeche, (which lies in Elm) ought to be made good by
all the Lands of Upwell.

108. That a pair of Bars be kept at Sewell's clote.

109. That every Were and Door in the great River, be xxiiii foot wide, or
more, and all other Rivers and Dra^ns in the Hundred of Wisbeche, xviii foot in
breadth or more.

110. That Budbech Sewer, beginning at Broad Common, and coming to Pyes drove,
and thence going to a Pipe at the house of Simeon Fyncham, being decayed and
grown up, be cleansed in breadth x foot, and depth 3 foot, by all the Landholders
of the said field.

111. That the Sewer called Newdike, lying in Burial field, in Outwell;
beginning at the East end of a Wood sometime Hilbrond's, and descending unto
the Chapel-bridg, and thence to a Pipe at the Stone cross, at the door of Ric.
Sumpter, be cleansed; and that there be a Sluice set at the Bridge at the house
of John Chambers; and then that the Bank at Mildam being cut, the water may
pass to the River called the Salt Ee.

112. That in the watering place in Elm marsh, be made a Pipe of stone, with a
Sluice that may stop the water, when it is high in the River of Elm, so that it
descend not backward.

113. That a pair of Bars be set up at Dod's style (alias Seywell's Clout.

114. That a Dike called Brokendike, lying in Elm...... upon the East side of
the Salt Ee, be made in height...... foot, and breadth xii foot, by the whole
Country of Marshland.

115. All Weres and Stampes within the Hundred of Wisbeche to be pulled up.

116. That if any person be negligent in making or repairing their Banks, or in
scouring their Drayns, within the said Hundred of Wisbeche, according to such
Orders as they are bound to do; that it shall be lawful for the Dikereeves of
every Town, to cause them to be made; and being so made, to distrain any lands
of every such person so neglecting. And if he be not stramable, then to
distrain upon any other his lands lying within the said Hundred of Wisbeche, or
elsewhere within the Realm of England,
and to sell the distress, paying to the Owner the overplus, when the charges
and expenses are deducted, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

117. That new Agistment Books be made by the Headborows with the Dike-reeves
of every Township.

118. That all pains forfeited, the moytie of them to redound to the Bishop of
Ely and his Successors; and the residue to be bestowed upon the Banks, Bars,
Crests, etc.

119. That the Bank, beginning at the Horshooe, and so leading directly to the
Town of Wisbeche (which is the defense for the East field) be repaired by
Thomas Orrell Esquire, from the said Horshoo to Leverington Wardyke, and to be
made higher by three foot.

120. And that Guyhirne gole be banked with a Bank of xvi foot, and in height x
foot, by all the lands lying in Wisbeche, between Sorcel dike and the high
Fendike.

On the 12th of July, 13 Eliz.
in the same 13th year of Queen Eliz. reign, it was thus ordered Ex. cod. MS
penes G. Go^dard Arm.
by Robert Bell, Ieffrey Coleville, William Hunston, Robert Balam, William
Brian, Richard Nicholas, Thomas Hewar, and Henry Hunston Esquires, Justices of
Sewers for the Country of Marshland, in the County of Norffolf, and for the
Borders and Confines of the same; viz.

Forasmuch as Bishops dyke, within the Isle of Ely, is greatly decayed by the
abundance of fresh waters, which happened this last Winter (the like whereof was
never seen within the remembrance of man) to the great decaying and impairing
of Broken dyke, being one of the defenc^-Dikes for salvation of the whole
Country of Marshlande, to the great peril of the drowning the said Country of
Marshland, and to the utter undoing of all the Landholders of the East side of
Elm, between the said Bishop's dike and Broken dike, if the said Bishop's dike
be not sufficiently repaired and amended in time the experience whereof was too
manifest this last winter, to the great loss of a number of the Queen's
Majesty's Subjects, the misery whereof is unspeakable; it is therefore
condescended and agreed by the said Justices;

That the Landholders of Elm, within the Isle of Ely aforesaid, between
Nedeham dyke and Broken-dyke; as well, for that the Countty of Marshland may the
better repair and maintain the said Broken dike, this last Winter decayed by
the means of the overflowing of the said Bishop's dike; as also to be without
charge of making and defending of the said Broken dike, the said Broken dyke
being maintained; which cannot be, if the land there remain surrounded still,
and so thereby no profit to be reaped by the Owners of the same land; shall
have license to issue out the water of Oldfield, between Needham dike, and
Broken dyke, at the Got or Pipe already laid on Broken dike, not far distant
from Blewick's house; and to issue into Marshland, by the direction of Mr.
Balam, Mr. Hewar, and Mr. Henry Hunston, through Emneth and Walsoken, in the
highest parts of Marshland.

Provided, that when it shall be thought by any two of the Justices aforesaid,
or by any four of the chiefest Landholders of the Country of Marshland, then
resiant within the said Country; that the same water running underneath Broken
dike, is hurtful to the Country of Marshland, or to any part thereof; or that
it shall be perceived by any two of the said Justices, or by any four of the
chiefest Landholders of the Country of Mershland aforesaid; that the Charge
bearers of Bishop's dike be negligent in the well defending the said Bishops
dyke; or that the Landholders of Oldfield do not sufficiently from time to
time, maintain and keep Needham dike; or lay any Gotes or Pipes in any place of
the said Needham dike, to issue any water from any part of the South side of
the said Needham dike; or that any water is received into Oldfield, by any way
or device, to the intent to utter the same at the Got in Broken-dyke, other
than the downfall of the Air falling into the aforesaid Oldfield: that then,
and at all times afterward, it shall be lawful for any of the Inhabitants of
the Country of Marshland, so to cease the running of the water through the
same; any thing mentioned in this Order or Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Or if the owners of the lands, which do lie between Needham dike and Broken
dike, or any of them, do refuse to bear and pay all and every such charges to
Knight's goole, or to any Sewer leading thereunto, as the other lands in
Marshland do, according to the number of Acres; and the same to be paid to the
Dikereeves in Emneth.

Or if the Owners and Landholders of Oldfield, do not from time to time, well
and sufficiently repair and maintain, as well the said Got or Pipe, lying
underneath or through Broken dike; as also as much of the Bank or Dike, called
Broken dike (alias Oldfield dike) as the same Got or Pipe is in length or
breadth: Or, if the same Got have not two strong doors, viz. at each end one,
always in readiness to be shut or stopped when occasion shall serve, at or
before the day of S. Michael the Arch Angel next ensuing the date hereof; and
from time to time thenceforth to continue and keep the same in good
reparations; or else to cease, as is aforesaid.

At a Session Ex co^. MS. pen^s pr^f. O. ^. John cap. Ju^^ic. de Banco f. 137.
a.
of Sewers held at Wisbeche 22 Apr^ xvi Eliz.

Ordered, that the Causey called Norwol dam shall be raised with gravel three
foot higher than it is, at the costs of the Hundred of Wisbeche; saving a way
to be left of xii foot in breadth, 16 Eliz.
with a Bridge over the same as heretofore has been accustomed; which Bridge to
be made at the costs of the Bishop of Ely.

Also, that Longe's drove in Elm, shall be made sufficient to keep out Says
field water, by the Landholders of Oldfield.

In An 1576 xviii Eliz. was the first Ib. ^. 164. a.
Improvement of Needham and Burial fields (lying within the Precincts of
Upwelle) by an Agreement of the Landholders there, on the xxiiiith day of June,
18 Eliz.
in the same year; at which time they settled an Acre-shot of six pence the
Acre, for defraying the charge thereof.

And about two years after this, at a Session of Sewers held at Erith brigge,
viz. 4o Augusti xx Eliz. it was ordered Ib. f. 137. b.
by the Justices; that there should be a Bank made from Marysse dike unto
Bishop's dike (alias Lovedays dike) over the River of Elm, to be in height
eight foot, 20 Eliz.
in breadth xii on the upper part, and in the bottom xxxii foot: as also a
Clouse at Marisdam; but so as Boats might pass through the same. And likewise,
that the Bank beginning at Ke^ismill, and extending to Guy hirne; and so by
Coldham to Friday bridge in Elm, should be repaired, so that the height thereof
might be six foot, the breadth in the bottom xxiiii foot, and at the top 8 foot.

At a Session of Sewers held at Wisebeche upon the 12th of July in xxiii Eliz.
it was thus ordered Ib. ^. 138. b.
; that whereas the Common, called Ladwers, lying in Elm, is drowned for want
of a Crest, that there be a Crest or Bank made, 23 Eliz.
beginning at Tylneyhirne, and so leading to the New Leame; thence by the River
of Nene to the Horshooe; thence to Marmond land; thence to the West end of
Langbeche, adjoining unto Bishops dike; which Bank to be xii foot in the
bottom, in breadth 4 foot at the top, and in height 5 foot. And that the Sluse
upon Marys dam shall be taken up; and when the said Bank is made, then to be
set at New Leames end. As also a convenient Tenement built meet for a man to
dwell in, for the keeping of the same. And it was likewise then ordered Ib. f.
139. a.
; that the Towns of Upwell and Outwell, should from thenceforth be discharged
from any diking in Wisbeche river, unless by the goodness of the Drayn their
lands do take benefit thereby.

And in the same year, in another Session of Sewers held at Wis-, beche 14 and
15 Sept. before John Peyton Geo. Carleton, Humfrey Michell, Thomas Hewar
Esquires, and others, there was this following Decree Ib. f. 139. b.


Whereas the great River of Wisbeche is, by this our Law, ordered to be dug
for the better grinding of the Chanel low to the Sea; ^3 Eliz.
we find, that Elm River, called also Elm Ee, ought to be in like sort
dug. But whereas that part of the said River, extending from the Floudgates
in Elm to Wisbeche Sluse, has been doubted in former Sessions for Sewers, who
of right ought to dig the same: and that thereupon, in a Session held 18o
Martii 23 Eliz. we find that service laid upon the whole Hundred of Wisbeche:
we now, upon Record showed forth before us, bearing date the 6 Dec.... R. 2.
that Wisbeche from Stone Cross (otherwise called Spittel Cross) to the Sluse,
should make and maintain the Sea-bank. And also in a Session for Sewers held
the Thursday before S. Mathew's day, 25 H. 8. that from the Floudgates in Elm
to Spittle Cross, the Township of Elm should dig, and scour the same; and
from Spittel cross to Wisbeche Sluice, the Township of Wisbeche to dig the
same: we ordain;

That the said River called Elm Ee shall be scoured; viz, from Wisbeche Sluice
to Spittel Cross (being the division between Elm and Wisbeche) by the
Township of Wisbeche; and from Spittel Cross unto the Floudgates of Elm, by
the Township of Elm; and from the said Floudgates unto the Townbrigge of Elm,
by the Bishop or his Fermour of Braunc^mere; and from the said Townbridge of
Elm to Frydaybrigge, by the Queens Majesty for her lands late belonging to the
dissolved Monastery of Crouland: And from Friday brigg to Marys dam, by the
Lord of Coldham: And from Marysdam to the cutting over the Old Ee, by the said
Lord of Coldham. Thence unto Branchmere by the Township of Elm; in
consideration that the said Township shall hereafter be discharged of all such
like digging in and upon any the Commons of the said Hundred, Lodward excepted,
and the Bishop of Ely for his length in Branchmere.

From thence to Levermere by the Township of Elm. Then for the length of
Levermere by the Landholders thereof: Then to the River Nene by the Township of
Elm.

And that from Marysdam, under Bishop's dike, unto Lakebrigge; and so into
Well River, shall be diked from Lakebridge unto Swan pen two parts thereof by
the......... and the third by Richard Fyncham Gent. And from Swan pen to
Langbeche by the Township of Upwell; and for the length of Langbeche the Bishop
of Ely. From thence to Gale dole the Township of Elm, Upwell and Outwell: And
for the length of Gale-dole by those that have the profit thereof, to Marys dam.

Which digging, viz. from Wisbeche Sluice to Spittel Cross, to be 4 foot deeper
than now it is, and to hold xx foot in breadth: and the rest by that example.
Saving that the River under Bishop's dike, between Marys dam and Well streme,
shall not exceed xvi foot in breadth.

And we also ordain, that there be made a new Crest to begin at Tilney hirne,
leading to the New Leame; thence to the Horshooe; thence to Marmound land;
thence to the West end of Langbeche, adjoining upon Bishop's dike, to be made a
Bank of xii foot thick in the bottom, 3 foot at the top, and five foot broad,
at the charge of all the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Wisbeche.

And at a Session I^. f. 139 a.
of Sewers held at Wisbeche 26 May 29 Eliz. it was presented by the Jurors, 29
Eliz.
that Norwold Causey, being in decay, ought to be raised 5 foot higher than it
was at that time, and in breadth 8 foot on the top, at the charge of the
Landholders of the whole Hundred of Wisbeche; and a Bridge of xii foot in
breadth at the higher end of the same Causey, at the charge of the Bishop of
Ely. Likewise, that the Watercourse on the South end of Wisbeche, should have
it is course under the great River of Wisbeche, through the xiC Bridge, and so by
the high Lode unto the 4 Gotes: And that the waters in Fen end in Wisbeche,
which have their course by the High lode, from Leonards pipe unto Evysdike
bridge, by a cut through the Bank at Leonards pipe, shall have their course in
Pope lane lode, unto Evsydike bridge, and so to the four Gotes.

At another Session Ib. ^. 164. ^.
of Sewers, held also at Wisbeche 10 Oct. 31 Eliz. 31. E^iz.
by Sir John Peyton Knight, Nich. Hare, John Colvile, John Reppes, George
Carleton, Thomas Hewar, Charles Balam, Richard Buckworth, and Alex. Balam
Esquires, Commissioners of Sewers, then constituted, it was thus decreed; That
whereas the Fen, called Needham and Burial Fen (lying in Elm and Well) had
anciently been drayned into the little Lode in Well, called the Sholle, at the
Stone Cross; and so by Well River, descended into Ouse at Salters lode: but
then, having no descent into the said ^ittle lode, by reason that the height of
the water therein was 2 foot above the Level of the same Fen: And whereas the
Landholders in the same Fen, having, to their great charge, procured a new
Drayn, passing under the Bank called Greendike (where they have erected a Sluse
for that purpose) and from thence by a Sewer upon the East side of Meares
drove, by another Sluse, by them likewise erected at Stow-sted, to stop Nedham
water for running into Budbech field, where the said Sewer takes its course
into the Drayn of the same Budbech field, and so continues therein, by and
through a Pipe lying under the said Little Lode of Well; and thence passes to
Hodg hirne corner, where they (by the consent of Sir Robert Bell Knight, late
Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer) caused a new Sewer to be made through a
several ground of the said Sir Robert, called the Fences, and Bardolph fen, by
the space of 2 miles, or more, in length; and from thence, by the consent of
Nich. Hare Esquire (Lord of Stow-Bardolf) did carry the one half of the said
Sewer called Common lode, between diverse severalls, lying in Stow Bardolf
aforesaid on the North, and the Common Fen belonging unto Stow Bardolf,
Wimbotesham, and Dounham on the South; and so through another Sluse (lately
also erected by the beforementioned Landholders) into the River of Ouse: And
whereas the said Sewers and Sluices, were found to be most beneficial for the
drayning of the Fen abovementioned, the said Commissioners ordered that they
should continue for ever, and be maintained from time to time, by a Common
Acre-shot upon all the lands in Nedham and Burial aforesaid.

Which new Sewer for Nedham, does from Hodghirne, beforementioned, to Ward
brigge, in Stow, contain Lxxii Rode and a half: And from thence to the Sluse by
Ouse Cxiiii Rods and a half.

And they then also decreed; that for taking away of the Sock of Bishop's dike,
and better drayning of this Fen, a Drayn should be made under Bishops dike,
within the said Fen, xxx foot, at the least, from the said Bishop's dike, in
breadth x foot, and depth..... the menour whereof to be cast toward Bishops
dike: The which Drayn to begin at Fenbridge, and to go to the Bars that part
the Fen, in the possession of Alex. Baalam Gent. etc. thence to a pair of Bars
standing on Bishops dike, next to the West corner of Malles fen; then to the
Drain called Langbech, thence to Dods style, and thence, under Greendike to the
Sluse lately erected at S. Christopher's Chapel.

And that there should be another Sewer made from Hall's fen to the said Sluice
at St. Christopher's Chapel.

And likewise that an ancient Sewer (belonging to the said Fen) called Knights
dike; beginning near Benford's Hall (now Mr. Alex. Balaam's house) and so
passing under Needham dike on the North, so unto Elm drove, and thence to the
Drove in Burial field, near S. Christopher's Chapel, should be kept and
maintained, in breadth xii foot, and in depth five. And moreover, that the
agisted Dike, called Ea brinke, beginning at Needham dike, and extending from
Maryes dam unto Dod's style, should be from time to time repaired.

And that for default in payment of the Acre-shot, the Dikereeves to levy for
every iiii d. by them expended, vi d. and for every iiii d. unpaid to levy vi d.

Likewise, that an Indike be made on the North side of the Sewer, extending
from Hodghirn^ through Bardolph fen; and a new Sluse near the River Ouse, at
the East end of Common lode; and an Acre-shot of xii d. the Acre, imposed upon
all the lands in Nedham and Burial, for supporting the charge thereof.

And, that, for default in payment of the Acre-shot, distresses should be taken
and sold, (restoring the Surplusage) in any Market within ten miles.

And at a Session of Sewers Ib. f. 168. b.
holden at Lynne Regis, ult. Sept. 33o Eliz. before Sir John Peyton Knight,
Nich. Hare, H^mfr. Guibon, Edm. Bell, Rob. Forest, Tho. Oxburgh, Alex. Balam,
John Willoughby; and Miles Forest Esquires, it was farther ordered, that
whereas the Acreshots imposed upon Richard Fyncham Gent. toward the drayning
of Nedham fen, amounting to xxxvi l. viii s. were not paid, no^ any distress
to be found upon the grounds charged therewith; and that Rich. Fyncham and Rob.
Fyncham, interessed in the reversion of the said lands, did refuse to pay the
same; that John Fyncham of Upwell Gent. having paid the said sum to the
Dikereeves, should have the said lands for a certain term of years.

Upon the 19 of Sept. 39 Eliz. at a Session of Sewers, held by Edmund Bell,
John Reppes, Tho. Hewar, Tho. Oxburge, Rich. Ogle, Anthony Irby, Alexan. Balam,
William Guibon, and John Hunt Esquires, there were certain Laws and Ordinances
Ex bunde^lo in Cap^lla Rotulorum n. 27.
made, concerning the course of Welney stream, and Well stream, with other
Sewers, the substance whereof are as follows; viz.

Whereas it is evident, that not only the Rivers of Grant, ^^atmore Law.
Nene, Ouse, and Weland; but the land-waters from the Counties of Hunt.
Northampton, Cambr. and Nor^f. and some part of Suff. which border upon the
Isle of Ely, 39 Eliz
do stay in the Fenny grounds of the said Isle etc. forasmuch as neither the
several Rivers, nor the other streams that are fed with the same, as March
stream, the New Leame, the West-water, and diverse Lodes within those limits, be
sufficiently cleansed, not imbanked for the ready conveyance of them to the Sea;
by means whereof the Out-ring Banks of Deping, Croyland, and South Ea in Com.
Linc. and the Fen dike, Waltersey Bank, Bishop's dike, Elm Ee brinke, Coldham,
and Redmore Bank, in the said Isle of Ely, and the out-ring of Marshland; as
also the New Pow^ike in Com. Norff. are in years of water, much chargable to
the owners and Inhabitants of those Countries, and those Fenny grounds lie
unprofitable. The said Commissioners, deliberately considering the redress, do
conceive, that by renewing of the former depth and wideness of those Rivers,
Lodes, and streams; as also of the decayed Banks; and by farther imbanking in
places convenient, the said Marish grounds will be perfected or much amended:
and therefore did ordain, that Welney stream, and Well stream, from Litelport
Chair to Well ea, and so toward Elm (as the same have been accustomed to
have their fall) And March stream unto Shrewysnest, where it falls into UUell
stream: As also, that the water of South Ea, anciently called the Old Ea, from
Clow's Cross unto Guy hirne, before the x of December, which shall be in the
year 1598. shall be cleansed and scoured by such as were to do the same.

And that the Lode, called Small lode, from the great River in Upwell to
Ingram's hyrn be scoured by Sir John Peyton Knight, Dame Dorothy his wife, or
Edm. Bell Esquire, for their lands in Upwell and Outwell, parcel of the
Possessions of the late Abbey of Dereham; and thence to Seman's goole: and
thence to Northdelph, by those whose lands lie adjacent thereto. So also
Darcey-lode, and Coxlode. Likewise that Maid lode and Ship lode, and the moytie
of London lode (which ends at Northdelph) should be perfected, the Banks to
be made in the bottom xvi foot, and four in the top, and five foot in height.
And the said Maidlode to be five foot deep, and xxx foot wide, by the space of
the first 2 miles thereof: And for the next two miles, in wideness 25 foot; and
for the residue of the same and Shiplode xx foot; with a Sluice at its fall into
the River of Ouse, in wideness xii foot of water; and in depth below the
low-watermark of the said River, as it happens to be about Bartholmew tide; all
to be done by those that have interest of Common in Neatmore.

And the other moytie of London lode, beginning at Upwell Causey, to be done by
the Inhabitants of Upwell, for the residue of their Common called Neatmore,
lying without the limits. Likewise, that a Tax of x s. the Acre, be imposed,
for erecting of Sluices, heightning of Banks, and making of Drayns; and in
default of payment thereof, the one half of their lands who shall neglect, to
be sold.

Moreover, that for drayning of Denver fen, a Sewer of xviii or xx foot in
breadth be cut through the same, to the great River of Ouse, and a Sluice at its
entrance thereinto.

And, that the Bank called the Causey, extending from the Cross at Upwell
Town's end, unto London lode head; and the Bank called the Indike, leading from
thence by the North side of London lode, to Well streme, at Northdelph, with
sufficient Indikes to the said Bank and Causey, should before the first of Ian.
next following, be made and maintained of the like wideness, height, and
breadth, as those that should be Purchasors or Lessees did or should make theirs
between London lode and Maid lode, on the West head thereof. And lastly, that
the Dikereeves should levy ii d. for i d. upon all that did make default in
paying of their proportions (according to the Custom of Mershland) And if the
Dik^reeves should be remiss, then the Commissioners to levy the said ii d. for
i d. and i d. upon the said Dikereeves, besides.

Which Acre-shot being not paid by the said Sir John Payton and his Lady, and
Edmund Bell Esquire, as it was decreed by the before-specified Commissioners;
there was a Session of Sewers held at Sechie, in Com. Norff. upon the eighth
day of May, the next ensuing year, 40 Eliz.
by Francis Gaudy Esquire, one of the Queens Justices of the Pleas, before her
self to be holden; and in that Session a demise, Ib. n. 26.
for thirty nine years, made unto Will. Ingelbert, and others, of diverse lands,
belonging to the said Sir John, Dame Dorothy his wife, and Edm. Bell; to the
end that the said Will. and his fellow Lessees, should out of the profit of
those their lands, make performance of what had been so decreed, by those
Commissioners.

And at another Session Ib. n. 25.
of Sewers, held at Dounham, in Com. Norff. upon the xx of Sept. in the same
year, by the said Francis Gawdye, Edmund Bell, Clement Spelman, Edmund
Moundeford, John Reppes, Thomas Hewar, Thomas Oxburgh Esquires, and others;
recital being made, of the Laws and Ordinances, for drayning the Fens and
Marshes before-specified; the said Commissioners decreed; that Will. Engelbert,
John Watts, and others, and their heirs and assigns, being undertakers for the
said drayning; and to keep and maintain the same, being perfected; should have
the full moytie of the said Fens so drayned, which lie and adjoyn to the said
Lode, called Maid lode; and likewise the moytie of all the several grounds,
wherein no Common is or ought to be enjoyed, within the said limits between
London lode and Maid lode, and other the Precincts aforesaid, except of the
several grounds of Sir John Payton Knight. Dame Dorothy his wife, and Edm. Bell
Esquire, or any of them, within those limits.

After this, at another Session Ib. n. 19.
of Sewers holden at Sechie aforesaid, upon Wednesday in Easter week, being the
xi of April, in the xli year of the said Queen, by the said Francis Gaudy,
Clement Spelman, and others; recital being made of those Ordinances established
in the former Session, before noted, held the 29 of Sept. 39 Eliz. for drayning
the Marsh-grounds in Upwell before-specified, by a lode called London lode
(provided for the drayning of Neatmore, and certain grounds adjoining) on the
North part, and the drayns called Maid lode and Ship lode, on the South:
whereby the Banks were appointed to be xvi foot broad at the bottom, in height
five foot, and in breadth at the top four foot: as also the Dikes five foot
deep, and in wideness at the top xxx foot, for the first two miles^ and for
the next two miles xxv foot; and for the residue of the same and Shiplode xx
foot, with a Level bottom unto the Sluse for the same, at the River of Ouse,
which Sluse to be xii foot wide, the one moytie to be done at the charge of all
those as had interest of Common in the same; and the other moytie to be done by
the Inhabitants of Upwell, for the residue of their Common, called Neatmore,
lying without the limits aforesaid imbanked. And, that as well every Acre of
several ground, as that wherein any had interest of Common, lying within the
Precincts abovementioned, was assessed at ten shillings the Acre, toward the
erecting of the said Sluse, heightning of the said Banks, and making of the
Drayns or Lodes, called Maid lode or Ship lode, and the said moytie of the said
Drayn, called London lode: and that the lands of such as were so taxed, and in
default, to be sold; the said Commissioners, by virtue of the before-specified
Ordinance, did decree, diverse lands to be accordingly sold, for such their
default in payment of what the owners of them had been so assessed and taxed.

41 Eliz.
Extracted out of a Certificate Ibid. n. 20.
of certain Commissioners assemled at Upwell, 24o Sept. 41 Eliz.
1. That the Bank sometime called the Crest, but now Turk-banke, lately
re-edified for the defense of the waters out of the Fen ^in Upwell, lying
betwixt Maid lode and London lode, will be of great advantage to many of her
Majesty's subjects; for besides the improvement of the whole grounds imbanked,
which are esteemed 4000 Acres at the least, from i d. the Acre, to 3 s. 4 d. or
more, there arises an improvement of a great number of Acres in Denver; and
likewise the defense of the Banks of Plawfield and Churchfield, in Well, which
were heretofore much oppressed with water: as also of the new Podike, against
the fresh waters.

2. That this Bank^ called Turks bank, was erected about two years since: but
there was long before, and yet is, an ancient Bank or Causey, near the said new
Bank, called Turks bank, and on the West side thereof, toward the Isle of
Ely: which Bank was originally made for defense of the waters coming out of the
said Isle, from overflowing the grounds now imbanked, and other adjoining
grounds; and for a way and passage for footmen between Well and Welneye.

3. That there has been of ancient time another old Bank or Crest, called the
Common drove, on the West part of the said old Bank, toward the said Isle,
adjoining unto the River of Wellenhe, being the division between the said Isle
of Ely and Norff. Which said Bank was made for keeping those waters of the said
Isle in their ancient and right course.

4. That it appears by certain Court Rolls and Records, that diverse persons
have been amerced and fined in the time of K. Edw. 1. and since, for cutting of
the said Bank, whereby the said River of Welneye was turned out of his right
course; and whereby the grounds on Norff. side, confining upon the said River
of Wellnye (part whereof is now inned) were surrounded.

5. That after the Drayns called Maid lode and Ship lode are perfected (as by a
Law of Sewers is provided) the Inhabitants of the said Isle, and other the
Countries confining, shall receive much more benefit, and be better drayned,
than before the inning of the said grounds and erection of the said Turks
bank, they have been.

41 E^iz
The Presentment Ibid. n. 23.
of the Jury for the Isle of Ely, made 25o Sept. 41o Eliz.
1. That the Bank called Turks bank, containing in compass about xv miles,
will be a great hinderance to the fall of many waters, flowing toward the Sea
through the Isle of Ely, it being planted between the two most natural Drayns
on that side the Isle, at the meeting of many waters, flowing out of Neene,
Ouse, and other streams, falling by Dodington and March etc. and so turns
them unto the other side of the said Isle, toward Litleport, and the Countries
thereabouts; where, falling into the Ouse, they stop the waters naturally
flowing into those quarters from that ordinary Drayn etc. Whereupon complaint
being made unto Mr. Justice Gaudy and other Commissioners of Sewers, sitting at
Sechie in Com. Norff. xi of April last past, it was by them ordered; 1. That
the said Turks bank should be presently cut. 2. That Small lode, London lode,
and Maid lode be sufficiently scoured by the Inhabitants of Well and the
Londoners. 3. That Maid lode be made xxx foot wide; at the mouth xxv, and xx
foot at the Slu^e, with Sluses to carry it; and five foot in depth; and so to
be maintained by the Londoners, as need shall require.


Whereupon on May day following, the said Bank was cut in many places, by
reason whereof the water ran so forcibly through the said Cuts, that for the
space of x or xii days after it sucked in diverse Boats and Vessels passing that
way.

And it was farther presented, that a little without the upper end of this
Bank, there has been a Crest, for people to travel on, from Welney, to Well,
in the Summer time when the waters are down: for which cause the said
Church-path being about fifty years past made of more strength and height, than
in former times, by one Mr. Beaupre; the same was, not long after, cut down in
many places, by the express command of Bishop Goodrick, then Lord Chancellor
of England, and Bishop of Ely.

In 44 Eliz. there was an Agreement, bearing date the xx of March, made by
Indenture, between Sir John Peyton K^. Dame Dorothy his wife, and Edmund Bell
Esquire, then owners of the Manor of Upwell, John Richardson and diverse
others who were at that time the major part of the Commoners and Inhabitants of
Upwell aforesaid; and John Watts Citizen and Alderman of London, Sir William
Cokain of London Skinner, and others, for the drayning of diverse Fenny VVasts
and Commo^s, containing about three thousand acres, lying in Upwell, between a
certain Drayn called London lode toward the North, Maiden lode and Ship lode
toward the South, and toward the West adjoining to and upon the Causey-bank
extending from London lode to Welney; and toward the East upon Denver Common;
for drayning and maintaining whereof they were to have conveyed unto them,
their heirs and assigns, one full moytie of the said wastes: Whereupon with the
expense of great sums of money they did accomplish the work, and accordingly
had the said moytie thereof set out for them; which they enjoyed for diverse
years, till about the latter end of King James his Reign, that the Fen-waters
broke their Banks and drowned all again: the Country people then turning the
Adventurers out of their possessions; which they kept, till Francis late Earl
of Bedford be^ame the principal undertaker for draining of the whole great
Level, and did perform the work. But afterward his said drayning meeting with
some disasters, the whole Level became totally surrounded again, and so
continued until William Earl of Bedford and his Participants, did in the year
1649. undertake to drayn it anew; which in four years time he perfected (as I
have elsewhere more fully showed) VVhereupon Sir John Watts Knight, and some
others, who claimed under the first undertakers beforementioned, were restored
to the possession thereof.

At a Session Ex praef. cod. MS. penes O. S. John cap. Ju^tic. de Ban^o. f.
169. a.
of Sewers, held at King's Lynne 1. October. 7 Iacobi, before Sir Raphe Hare, Sir
Thomas Hewar, and Sir Henry Spelman Knights, John Reppes, Thomas Oxburgh, 7.
Iacobi.
Thomas Athow, Rob. Gawsell, and Richard Bachcroft Esquires and others, it was
ordained, that the Decree made for the drayning of Needham fen, and Burial
field, the tenth of October 31 Eliz. should be confirmed in all points; and an
Acreshot of xd. the Acre imposed for the speedy redress of all defaults, in the
said Drayns, Banks etc.

Certain Observances made upon the Marshes, below the 4 Cambridgshire Gotes, of
the outfall of Wisbeche River, and certain Creeks there, with their Sands and
Deeps; by Richard Atkins of Utwell Gent. in June 1605. 3 Ia^.

WIsbeche Chanel falls, from the 4 Gotes Eastward, down by Walpole Marshes,
on the East and South, to Crosse-Keys Corner (alias Gates-end Corner) and from
thence passes toward Tirington Bank; leaving to the Southward, an high Skore
of Clay (the only preservative of the Town:) And when it has run East, as low
as against the Beacon, then does it turn flat North under the Sand called
Tirington breast, lying on the East of the Chanel^ and so continues Northwards,
by the said Breast, by the space of 5 miles; and there falls into Blow deep.

It is to be observed, that upon every flow, there comes from the North out
of Blow-deepe, a Tide, which runs along Tirington breast on the East side,
and a Sand called the Thief, on the West: And out of the West, from a Chanel
called the Maids Eye, comes another tide; and both these do meet within a
mile of Tirington banks; and so meeting, do make great Seas there: And many
times, when the wind is at West or North, the Seas rise there higher than they
do ten miles off at Sea. These two Tides, thus united, with violen^e run right
upon Tirington banks; and but that God of his mercy, has there placed a Skore
of Clay, containing not above a furlong in breadth, the Bank could not, in man's
reason, stand the next 3 Tides.

This Skore of Clay, by the fretting of the Sea, daily wastes; and the people
of the place, not understanding what a defense it is to their Banks,
continually bear away the same to the repair of those Banks, never foreseeing
their destruction, if that Skore of Clay were once gone, and the Sea at the
ordinary depth of his Chanel, suffered to come to the foot of the Bank.

Where Mayds Eye meets with Tirington deep; at the very entrance thereof, at
a dead low water, it exceeds not 5 or 6 foot deep at this day; and it has
been observed, that in a great drought, the whole mouth thereof of has been
stopped with sands; but upon the next great fresh that happened, all those sands
have been removed, and the Chanel grown to the old course again. Here is a
special observance to be made, Qui habet intellectum attendat.

Decursus namque aquae dulcis, viam praebet marinae: Oceanus interim, ex duobus
his canalibus aestuans, fossata marina alatrand^, alluendo, inundando, and
lacerando saepissime gravissimeque ita excercet; ut, deficientibus aggeribus
(de quibus male sustentatis multum doleo) de finali perditione and dissolutione
partium adjacentium, verisimiliter (quod absit) formidatur; nisi and Hinc
nascitur periculum and onus; illico acquirendum est remedium and salus: Homines
vero patriae cum plerique inertes sint and hebeti ingenio, in se invicem nuper
pro fossatorum sustentandorum oneribus obruentes de remedio ex sublata causa,
ne somniare quidem possunt; sed nec ingeniosos inertiamque suam desidiosam
exosos, inter se vivere vix sustin^re possunt.

The head of the 4 Lincolnshire The (...) how preserved from silting.
Gotes is preserved (especially in Summer) by two great Finns brought of the
Marshes just to the mouth of them, which in every Springtide affoard store of
water to grind down the Chanel; whereof that on the North side is the more
principal; for the conducting whereof to the place of best advantage, the Leame
is embanked on that side ^y some certain space; that the tide on the Marsh
cannot fall into it but by that Finne at the very head; and there, by his
plentiful descent scoureth, to good purpose, that which otherwise in Summer
would be silted up: such penury there is of fresh waters in the Country at that
time.

19. I^c. An. 1621.
In 19 Iac. there was a Decree Ex bund^llo Decr^torum in Officio de Pettibag.
made at Outwell, by the Commissioners of Sewers then fitting there, for
levying the forfaitures and penalties imposed by the Jurors for the Hundred and
half of Clakclose, upon the Landholders of Churchfield and Plawfield, ^or not
making sufficient Sluses; viz. one at the South end of the Pipe under Well
River; the other in Plawfield Drayn, in the xxx. Acres of John Fyncham Esquire.

2^. S^p. 8. c. r. An. 1^3^.
And in 8 Caroli, there having been an Agreement made with Henry Dereham of
London Esquire for the drayning of certain Fens, and surrounded grounds, lying
in the Parishes of Tyd S. Mary's in the County of Lincoln, Tyd S. Giles and
Newton in this County of Cambridge, made by the proprietaries and owners of the
said Fens, containing by estimation three thousand Acres: by which Agreement
the said Henry was to make his Draynes unto the outfall, near Eatts mere, into
the Sea, so that the said grounds should be kept dry, at least one foot under
the soil; and for his charges therein, that a Tax of xls. the Acre should be
imposed; and in default of payment thereof, that the said Henry should have two
fifth parts of the said grounds upon an equal division thereof into five parts,
to be established to him and his heirs for ever; and a moity of the said two
fifth parts, to be set out to the said Henry and his heirs, for the maintaining
of the said works, after they should be perfected: the said Agreement was fully
ratified by a Decree made at Wisebeche upon the 20th. of September, the same
year, in a Session of Sewers then and there held.

CHAP. XLIX.
HOlding on my course more Westwards, The Isle of Ely.
I come to that part of this County, which is called the Isle of Ely; the
bounds whereof I shall next take notice; and then of what else is most
memorable touching the Fens, which do belong thereto.

The circuit of this Isle, says the Register Pe^e^ Henr. C^omw^ll ^rm. f. 67.
b.
of Ramsey, begins at Erith brigge, and from thence extends to Sutton grove;
so to Mepehale; thence to Wichhome brigg; thence to Ely Dounhom; thence to
Litisport; thence to the Town of Ely; thence to Haveringmere; thence to Stratam
lode; thence to Anglongwesche, on the South side of the Isle; thence to
Aldirhethe brigge, and so to Erith brigge.

The entrances into it are these; the first at Litisport; the second at
Stuntmere brigge; the third at Alderhethe brigge; and the fourth at Erith
brigge.

Moreover it is to be noted, Ibid.
that the Commons in the Fens of this Isle, Commons in the Fens of this Isle,
how anciently bounded.
are divided from those of Chateriz, at Snarissode: whence the Commons of
Chateriz go on to Mepehale he; and so to Andelong bihee. Howbeit the Commons
of Chateriz fen, to mow, cut and dig, begins at Dryebyresfen, and so goes
on, betwixt Arnyatesmere, and thence to Blakwell; and from Blakwell to By Ee;
and from thence compassing Hunn Eye, unto Langereche; thence to the River of
Dodyngton; then to Bil^ynge; thence to Algaris-fen, and so over the fen, to
Achinwerdore. But the pasture belonging to Chateriz goes first to Dounham;
thence to UUycheham; thence to Sutton, and so to Dodyngtone and March; within
which Precincts the Monks of Ramsey had enter Commom with Chateriz.

Belonging likewise to Chateriz are these Meadows; scil. Crow lode, beginning
near Suth fen muthe, and extending to Hol lode; which Meadow is compassed with
waters on every side. And on the other side the water, from Park hale to
Fenton, is UUelagh; beside one piece which the Abbess has.

The demesne Fen of Crow lode, belonging to the Abbot of Ramsey's Manor in
Chateriz, begins at Wolvey were, which stands in the great River, near to
the place where Fenton lode descends thereinto, hard by Horshithe; and so
goes on, in length, by the said great River, Southwards, unto Croslode^ which
Cros^lode is by some called Parkhale lode, but by others, the Draught: and
farther extends it self, thwarting the Fen, to the West, by the Southside of
the said Fen, called Crow lode, unto Wolvey lode (which by some is called
Fenton lode) and thence to Wolvey welagh, which stands near the said River,
on the North part of Wolvey lode, and opposite to Wolvey were aforesaid: within
which precinct the Abbess of Chateriz holds one part of a Meadow, which Hugh
Folyot, sometime Abbot of Ramesey gave unto her.

It is also to be noted, that the Soke of Somersham ought to Common, as well in
grazing as mowing, in that Fen, which extends from Erith brigge unto Parkhale
lode; by the River; and thence to Fenton welugh, to graze and mow; and for
Housebote and firebote: and from Fenton welughe, they ought to Common in
grazing^ unto Weremere; and from Weremere likewise to Thornbrigge. And it is
likewise to be noted, that within those Precincts Sir Will. le Moigne has one
Field, which is gained land, and a grove of Alders with two meres at Roweye.

The bounds Ib. f. 78. b.
of Higgen Eye fen, recovered by Simon Abbot of Ramsey, were these; viz. from
Calverwodeyate, and so directly to Munke lade; thence to Hokeslade, descending
toward Glatton; and so by Hokeslade unto Byrchmere poolys; thence to Walton
elde lode, directly to Byrch holt; and thence to the dry land of Higgen Eye, at
the corner of Byrch holt: and there, by the dry land to North welne; and thence
unto Calverwodeyate: which Fen contains a thousand Acres.

Within the precincts of the waters, belonging unto this Isle of Ely, there is
a little Island, called Eh^eneie, Ex hi^t. E^^en. Insulae in bibl. Cott^n. sub
ef^igie Titi A. 1. f. 50. a.
wherein the Monks of Ely had a Cell; which, by reason of those obstructions,
that hindered the fresh waters in their passage through this great Level, from
evacuating themselves, as I have before observed, became, by the swelling of
those waters, almost drowned: upon a great complaint, Ibid.
therefore, made by the said Monks unto Alberic Picot, he gave Ibid.
them four Acres and an half of ground in the Isle of Denney, which lay without
the reach of the Fen; to the end, that they might translate their House
thither, and make Orchards and Gardens there for their use.

The next thing of note, in reference to this Isle (wherewith I have met) is
the repair of the Causey leading thereto, in 5 H 3. the King then giving Claus.
5 H. 3. p. 1. m. ^5.
unto Peter de Valentiniis (a Monk of Ely) four Oaks to be taken out of his
Forest of Wauberge (in Huntendonshire) for that purpose; the Record terming it
Calcetum de Ely; which makes me think, that it was the Causey leading from
Soham to Ely, considering the antiquity Vide Cap^ xli.
thereof: for whether there were any other at that time, I make a question;
because many years after this, the Barons, who took up Arms against K. Henry
the third, made this Isle their last refuge (as in the xli. Chapt. is observed)
which could not have afforded such security to them, had there been many
accesses to it by land.

But what deserves more observation, is the commodious and flourishing
condition of some of the Fens pertaining anciently to this Isle; which
occasioned no small dispute betwixt the borderers thereon, touching the extent
of their several bounds: for in K. Henry the first's days, I find; Ex Regist.
de Thorney, penes M^d^^y Comi^^m Westmerl part. 3. Cap. x^.
that after a long contest between the Church of Ely ( Nigell being than
Bishop) and Abbey of Thorney, about the limits of Wysebeche fen, and Thorney
fen; as also of Thorney fen and Wytlesey fen; there were chosen diverse prudent
men, as well of the Clergy as Laity, by the consent of all parts, who thus
subscribed and settled the same, viz. from Tidbrithwic, above the old stream, by
Scepelac unto Toft, and thence by Schepelak unto Cnor; thence to Ringmere;
thence (betwixt Thorney and Wytlesey) from Cnor to Midfentre; and from
Midfentre unto the stream called Must.

Notwithstanding which conclusion, some of the succeeding Abbots were not
satisfied (as as it should seem) for it appears, Ibid. Cap. Cxxxvii.
that in 19 H. 3. upon claim made, by Robert the then Abbot, unto a thousand
Acres of Wysebeche fen, Hugh........ at that time Bishop of Ely, by a Fine
levied at Huntendon, on the Octaves of S. John Baptist, before Robert de
Lexinton and his fellow Justices Itinerant, did grant and confirm unto the
beforementioned Abbot and the Church of Thorney, a full mile within that Fen;
viz. betwixt the Abbot of Thorney's wood and Wysebeche toward the East, North,
and South (according to the perch of xx. foot:) and where the said wood
determines, the Abbot to have the said mile, by a line directly extended unto
the division of the Counties of Lincoln and Cambridge; and unto other
boundaries, which divide their own Fen, betwixt Wytlesey and Thorney; to enjoy
to himself and his successors for ever.

About this time, also, the extent of a large Fen, called Heye fen, belonging
to the Manor of Wysebeche, and to the Towns of Leverington, Neuton, Tid,
Elm, and Well, within the liberties of Ely, was thus set Ibid.
forth; viz. from the Shof to the Horshoo, by the old stream; and from the
Horse shoo to the Bank of Robert of the Marshe; and from thence to Wride, by
the Abbot of Thorney's Bank, unto two furlongs beyond Knor; and so to
Orchardstede; thence to Stodpathe; thence to Wype: from Wype, by the Ded he,
to Nymeres, and so to Westfencote, by the same stream; and thence to
Wysemouthe: thence to Suerdesdelfe to Great cross; thence by Iden he to
Quedale; so to Merchforde: thence by the Kirk, and the Heyeront unto
Echinghee: and so lineally, by Heyront to Tharmerecote: thence to Stanymeres;
thence directly to Freileswere; and so, by Oldwellen he to Millestede, and
from Millestede to Shrewediche, where all the said Towns ought to eat in Common
Horn under Horn, with their Cattle.

Touching the Fen, called Kingsdelfe, belonging to the Abbey of Ramsey, it
likewise appears, Ibid. part. 8. Cap. vii.
that the bounds thereof began at Hindelake, and thence extended to Gangstede;
thence to Southea; thence to South South Ea; so to Pokelode; thence to the head
of Gresemere; hence to Pakkelode; and so by the Marshes and stream ^alled
Cnoutesdelfe and Middelmor, to Hindeslake. But the whole territory of Ramsey,
with the Hundred of Hirstington, were much more large; viz. Ibid. Cap. ix.
from the Stone near the House of John Freman (Son to Thomas of great Ranele)
unto Walton barwe; thence to Hokessede; and so to Toroldescote; thence to
Halteshers, and so to Hindeslake: Thence by the stream called Cnoutesdelfe,
dividing Middilmore and Kyngesdelf, unto Steylinghale: thence to Schelwpol, and
so to Cromestal: thence to Wetinges, and so to Etinges: thence to
Athelstonesdelf, so to Depelake: thence to Hokewerebiht: thence to Wolfeye
lode, so to Colputteslode, through the midst of Huniberdale; thence through the
midst of Wystowe, unto the stone before-specified.

But the Abbot of Ramsey had it not totally to himself (as it seems:) for,
after much dispute betwixt Robert Abbot of Thorney, and Hugh Abbot of Ramsey
(about the beginning of H. 3. Reign) touching the Common of pasture in this
Fen, unto which the Monks of Thorney then laid claim [the Abbot of Ramsey
withstanding the same, and alleging, that it was an unjust challenge, forasmuch
as he the said Abbot of Ramesey, had no Common in the said Abbot of Thorney's
fen of Iakele, nor that he the said Abbot of Thorney, did any service to the
Abbey of Ramsey in consideration whereof he ought to have such Common] they came
to this Agreement, by a Fine Ibid. ^ap. xii.
levied in the Kings Court at Westminster, mense Pasch. 8 H. 3. viz. that the
whole part of the said Fen, from Kingesdelfe, through new Hynd^lake, unto the
new Falt upon Witlesmare, being the part toward Ramsey, should remain to the
said Abbot of Ramesey and his successors, peaceably for ever, without any
claim, that the said Abbot of Thorney or his successors should make therein:
And that the other part thereof, from the said Kingsdelf, through new
Hyndelak^, unto the new Falt upon Witlesmare, being the part toward Ia^ele and
Farresheved, the said Abbot of Thorney and his successors should enjoy, for
ever, without any claim of Common therein by the said Abbot of Ramsey or his
successors. And it was agreed, that the Ditch to be made for distinguishing and
severing these Commons, should be xvi. foot in breadth; whereof the one half,
all along, to be taken out of the Abbot of Thorney's part, and the other out of
the Abbot of Ramsey's side: and to be made directly, by a straight line from
Kingesdelfe, beforementioned, unto the said new Falt upon Witlesmare: And
lastly, that it being the boundary betwixt both their Fens, it should be common
to each of them and their successors to fish therein, and carry any thing
through it for their ease and Commodity.

Which Ditch was set Ib. Cap. 10.
forth by twelve Knights, upon the King's special Precept to that purpose;
and, by consent of all parties, made and perfected accordingly.

But after this, there grew farther dispute betwixt the Bishop of Ely, and
Abbot of Ramsey, concerning the limits of their Fen-land; which were not
settled, till about the year MCCLvi. (40 H. 3.) Howbeit, then did W. de.......
Bishop of Ely, and Hugh Abbot of Ramsey come to a full conclusion therein; the
relation thereof, forasmuch as it so amply manifests how dismal a tract all
those parts had long before been, and unto what an height of improvement they
were at that time grown; I shall here, from an eminent Historian Annal. Math.
Paris. P. 929. n. 30.
of that time, exhibit.

A. MCCLvi. (40. H. 3.) facta est pax inter Episcopum Eliensem W, and Hugonem
Abbatem Ramesiae, super lite mot^, de terminis in Marisco statuendis: De quo
marisco hoc mirum nostris accidit temporibus; ut, ubi quondam, annis
antiquissimis, quorum non extat memoria, loca invia ac inaccessibilia, ubi
nullus hominum vel pecudum gressus fuit, vel habitatio; sed carecta, luta
profunda, and arundineta palustria, solis avibus (nedum dicam Daemonibus
inhabitata, prout legitur in vita beati Guthlaci; qui ibidem, utpote in loco
horroris and vastae solitudinis coepit habitare) nunc in prata delectabilia, ac
etiam terram arabilem convertuntur: and quae ibidem pars segetem vel foena non
produci^, gladiolum, cespites, and alia ignis pabula, cohabitantibus utilia,
germinando abundanter subministrat: unde lis and gravis contentio de terminis
locorum talium and terrarum, inter eos, qui ab initio mariscum inhabitabant
exorta, lites and praelia suscitabat etc.

In the year MCCLvi. (40. H. 3.) William Bishop of Ely, and Hugh Abbot of
Ramsey came to an Agreement upon a controversy betwixt them, touching the
bounds of their Fens; whereof in these our times a wonder happened: for whereas,
as anciently, time out of mind, they were neither accessible for man or beast,
aff^rding only deep mud, with sedge and Reeds; and possessed by birds (yea much
more by Devils, as appears in the life of S. Guthlac, who finding it a place
of horror and great solitude began to inhabit there) is now changed into
delightful meadows and arable ground: and what thereof does not produce Corn
or Hay, does abundantly bring forth sedge, turf, and other fuel very useful
to the borderers: which occasioned much dispute and contention betwixt them
that were the most ancient Inhabitants in those parts, nay quarrels and
fighting, touching the bounds of such fruitful lands. For so it happened, that
on the Feast day of S. Peter ad vincula, two of the Canons of the Priory of the
holy Trinity in London, disputing thereof, grew to such high words, as
contracted an implacable hatred betwixt them; so that studying a revenge, the
one took an opportunity to murder the other.

In what manner and by whom these Fens were then so drayned, I find not; but it
could not be without the clearing of those ancient out-falls of the several
Rivers, which both before and since did overflow the whole Level: leaving,
therefore, the discovery thereof, to a farther scrutiny; I shall briefly point
at such Commissions, as I have found, tending to the improvement of them, by
Banks and Sewers, after that time; which, being not many, are all involved with
those of other places in this County, as by these instances will appear; viz.

In 51. E. 3. to Pat. 51 E. 3. p. 1. m. 41. in dorso.
John Cavendish, Will. de Thorpe, John Colevill, and others, for those in Ely,
Dounham, Litelport, Hadenham, Sutton, Chateryz, Dudington, March, Marchford,
Wytleseye, Elm, Well, Wysbeche, Leverington, Neuton, and Tyd S. Giles, and
elsewhere within the Isle of Ely. In 1 R. 2. to Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 1. m. 25. in
dorso.
John Cavendishe, Will. de Thorpe, John Colvill, Martin Everard, John Holt,
Will. de Petteworth, Thomas Pynchebek, and Thomas de Well. In 3 R. 2. Pat. 3
R. 2. p. 1. m. 35. in dorso.
to Sir Roger de Skales, Sir Philip le Despenser Knights, John de Cavendish,
Rob. Bealknap, and others, for all the Banks, Sewers etc. in the
before-specified places; by which Commission they were appointed to make
agistments for the safeguard of those parts, by the number of Acres or Perches,
to be new surveyed as often as need should require; and to constitute trusty
and diligent Dike-Reeves for the same purpose.

The like Commission Pat. 6 R. 2. p. 1. m. 9. in dorso.
in 6 R. 2. had the same Sir Roger, with Sir Rob. Bealknap Knight, Sir Philip
Spenser, Sir Will. Skipwith, and others. So also in 15 R. 2. had Pat. 15 R. 2.
p. 1. m. 37. in dorso.
Will. Thirnyng, Thomas Pynchebek, Sir John Colvylle, Sir Reginald Hakebeche,
Sir John de Wilton, and Sir Will. de Flete Knights, John de Markham, Will.
Gascoigne, and Thomas de Well: with directions to proceed therein according to
the Law and Customs of this Realm.

And in 8 H. 5. Thomas de Skeltone, John Colevile John de Rochefort, Laurence
Everard, Rob. Tirwhit, John Bernard, Nich. Morys, Will. Foulbourne, and Robert
Brydde had Pat. 8 H. 5. p. 1. m. 32. in dorso.
the like; as also to view the several Causeys, betwixt Ely and Saham, Ely and
Litleport, and Hadenham and Wynelingham, then broken and decayed; and to take
order for their repair; doing all things therein according to the Law and
Custom of this Realm.

CHAP. L.
WEst and by North Ely, lies Thorney, an Island also containing about three
hundred Acres of ground, and compassed with spacious Fens: wherein, as in Ely,
Crouland, and several other places (for the respects instanced in the....
C^ap^.) Adelwold Bishop of Winchester, in the year of Christ DCCCCLxxii. (K.
Edgar then Reigning) founded E^ Regist. de ^horney, penes. Comitem Westmerl. f.
11.
a goodly Monastery for Benedictine Monks.

What these Fens were, for depth and breadth, during the space of diverse ages,
before the late general drayning, it is no hard matter to guess; the Moore,
totally contracted by a long stagnation of the fresh waters, sufficiently
demonstrating the same; which is found, for the most part, ten foot deep
throughout all this side of the Country: but more anciently it was otherwise,
as Will. of Malmesbury, an authentic Historian (living about five hundred
years since) affirms: Who, having first spoken of the Isle of Ely, and then
coming to this of Thorney, says Lib. 4. de gesti^ Pentif. f, 167. b.
thus; Thorneia, ulterior scripto, and contractior spacio; sed Prior laudum
titulo, Paradysi simulachrum, quod amoenitate jam Coelos ipsos imaginetur; in
ipsis paludibus, arborum ferax, quae enodi proceritate luctantur ad sydera,
aequorea planities herbarum viridantibus comis oculos advocat etc. id est
Thorney, though last mentioned, and less in Circuit, has the Priority in fame;
represented a very Paradise; for that in pleasure and delight it resembles
Heaven it self; the very Marshes abounding with Trees, whose length without
Knots do emulate the Stars. The plain there is as Level as the Sea, which with
the flourishing of the grass allureth the Eye, and so smooth that there is
nothing to hinder him that runs through it. Neither is there any wast place in
it: for in some parts thereof there are Appletrees, in other Vines, which
either spread upon the ground, or are raised up with poles. A mutual strife
there is betwixt Nature and Art, so that what the one produces not, the other
supplies. What shall I say of the Beautiful Buildings, which it is so wonderful
to see the ground amidst those Fens to bear?

From which testimony, no less can be inferred; but that, then, this skirt of
the Level was not at all drowned: and therefore, that the out-falls to the Sea,
were at that time clear and open; which argues a greater care in the people
inhabiting this flat Country, in those days, than has been for several ages
since. Not were the parts toward Peterborough then less free from that
annoyance, as may seem from what I have received from credible testimony, viz.
that upon the cutting of certain Moats by Francis Underwood Esquire, at
Wittlesey, where he has made a pleasant and commodious plantation, within
less than xx years last past, there was found, at seven foot deep (through
absolute Moor) firm ground, and swathes of mowed grass, lying perfect and not
consumed: which clearly manifests; that, through some excess of rain,
falling in the Summer time, there happened such a flood of the fresh waters, as
then meeting with an obstruction at the out-fall, in regard of the silt there
contracted by a long season of dry weather, it did so hinder their usual
current to the Sea, that, being forced back, they not only overflowed the whole
Level, but have ever since, till the late undertaking (whereof I shall speak
anon) kept it, for the most part under water.

But I dare not adventure to say, that this was the only cause thereof; there
being something else, which (no doubt) might be concomitant; viz. the usual
flowing of the tides, much higher upon the coasts toward Lenne, than formerly:
for, that they long since did so, is easily demonstrable; there having been, of
late years found, at the setting down of a new Sluse, a little beneath Magdalen
fall (which is about half a mile from Magdalen bridge) on Marshland side, about
xvi foot deep in the earth, a large flat stone, of about eight foot in length,
and a Cart wheel near unto it, which were taken up by certain workmen, employed
be one Mr. Emerson, in that business. And at Wigenhall S. Mary's (which is not
far thence) at a place called Wathden, there are still to be seen some
remainers of a Church, as also bones that appear at a low ebb upon the River
side, about 8 foot below the present superficies of the earth. The like is also
observable at UUigenhall S. Germans, the floor of the Church there, being at
least seven foot lower than the high watermark of the Ouse, which River running
by the Churchyard side, is kept off by a strong and large Bank from drowning
the Country. Nor is it any thing else, but the same rising of the usual tides,
to a greater height than formerly, which has so widened the Chanel of this
great stream at Lenne, that the Inhabitants have been constrained to remove one
of their Churches to a farther distance from it, as is yet to be seen in that
part thereof, now called old Lenne; where the bones of the dead, which were
buried in that Churchyard, are now daily washed at every high tide, by reason
that part of the same Churchyard is consumed away with the violence of that
current.

As for the Trees, which he so magnifieth for their length without knots, I
believe they were Firr, no other timber affording such straightness and
height; of which kind there have been many dug up, of late years, in those
parts. But when it was, that this obstruction (whereof I have thus taken
notice) happened, I could never yet discover; nor the exact time, that the course
of the Sea did thus alter: I shall therefore, for want of better light therein,
descend to the beginning of K. Edw. the first's time, and observe from our
public Ex Ror. Hundred^, in Com. C^^tabr. in arc^ (...).
Records, the extent of the Fens, belonging to diverse Towns in this County,
wherein the Inhabitants had Common; which were, as follows; viz. of Soham ten
miles, and two in breadth; viz. from Ayornemere to Alwoldingewere: Iselham, six
miles in length, and in breadth one, viz. from Mildehale fen, to the Fens of
Soham and Ely. Of Wykes two miles in length, and one in breadth, viz. from
Alwoldingwere to Strem-lake; besides a Fen in another place, of one mile in
length, and in breadth half a mile, scil. from Huppewere to the Town of Wykes.
Of Fordham a Marsh called West fen, containing six furlongs in length, and as
much in breadth, extending from Nesdam to Hopperislane: with another Marsh,
called Nort-fen, in length two furlongs, and breadth one, viz. from the house of
Walter fitz Robert to the Message of Maud de Somere. Of Sneilwelle four
furlongs in length, and two in breadth, viz. from the Fen of Chippeham to Holme
melne; besides the Marsh of West fen, containing half a mile in length, and one
furlong in breadth, viz. from Preeruspend to Calvenebreg. Of Landwaye half a
mile in length, viz. from Brounisdam to Illingworthe.

Of Borewelle six miles in length, and three in breadth, viz. from Rech lode, to
Nesdam: besides part of Est fen, containing four furlongs in length, and two in
breadth, viz. from Nesmelne unto Borewelle field. Of Chippeham six furlongs in
length, and three and an half in breadth, viz. from the said Town of Chippeham
to Sneilwelle fen.

Of Swafham Priors, in length from the Town it self, unto the River of Grante,
containing three miles; and in breadth from the Lode of Reche, to the Lode of
Swafham Bolebek, containing a mile and half: The bounds of the Heath there
extending from the Crest of the great Bank, unto Tweynhowes, in length one
mile; and in another part of that Town field, to Smathowe, being as far.

Of Bodekesham, in the Fen of Stowbrigge, unto Swafham Bolebek Lode, two miles
in length, and as much in breadth. Of Wilburham parva, from the Town it self to
the upland of Stow....... and in another place to the River, which extends it
self from Halke milne, to the Mill at Fosse. And of Wilburham magna, from
Lidene unto Wateholme.

Thus much for the extent of the Fens belonging to the before-specified
Townships.

In 1^ E. 1. the Causey betwixt Saham and Stuntney, with the little Bridges
belonging thereto, was in great decay; the King therefore assigned Pa^. 12 E.
^. m. 18. in dorso.
Thomas de Weyland and Richard de Holebrok, to enquire, by the Oaths of honest
men of the Country, who ought to repair the same.

After this there were some Commissions for the view and repair of the Banks,
Ditches, Sewers, within this County in general; and some wherein certain of the
adjacent Counties were joined, viz. in 31 E. 1 to Pat. 31 E. 1. ^. 43. in do^so.
James Beauvoys, Robert Hereward, William de Estdene, and Hugh Vicar of the
Church of Elm, for those in this County alone.

In 2 E. 2. to Pat. 2 E. 2. m. 11. in ^o^so.
Ranulph de Friskeneye, Geffrey de Colevill, William de Spanneby, and Roger de
Cubeldyk, for those throughout the whole County of Lincoln and this Shire.

In 4 E. 2. to Pat. 4. E. 2. m. 18. in dorso.
William de Ormesby, William de Estdene^ and Henry de Walpole, for those in
this County only.

In 10 E. 2. to Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
Geffrey de Coleville, and Roger de Seiton, for the same.

In 12 E. 2. to Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 2. m. 21. in d^rso.
Robert de Maddyngle, John de Fitton, William de Rungeton, John de Hotoft,
Laurence de Holbeche, and John de Cantebrigg, for those in this County; as also
in Norfolk, Lincoln, and Northampton shires, and the Confines thereof; with
power to constitute trusty Dykereeves for the safeguard of the said Banks,
Ditches, and Sewers throughout all those parts.

In 15 E. 2. to Pat. 15 E. 2. p. 1. m. 14. in dorso.
Michael de Meldon, and Roger de Beler, for the same Counties.

And in 18 E. 2. to Pat. 18. E. 2. p. ^. m. 10. in dorso.
William la Zouche, John de Cantebrig, Simon de Brim, and John de Hinton, for
those in this County alone.

Upon a Pleading in 40 E. 3. it was found Plac. coram Rege apud ^^slm. term.
Hill. 40 E. 3. Rot. 26. Cautab.
by the Jurors, that the Prior of Ely did obstruct the course of the water at
Wilburgham magna, in a certain place called Watholm dam, so that it could not
have it is current as it usually had; insomuch as the Commons belonging to the
Town of Fulbourne were overflowed, to the damage of the whole Country. And in
12 H. 4. the Town of Harlton being questioned Plac. coram Rege t^rm. Mic^. 12.
H. 4. Rot. 18. Ca^^ab.
for diverting the current of the water, betwixt Harlton and Haselingfeld, to
the damage of the whole Country, could not deny the charge; and therefore was
amerc'd; Raphe Bateman being then Lord of that Manor.

In 14 H. 6. William Godrede, Thomas Fulthorpe, Sir John Colvyle, Sir Henry
Rocheforth, and Sir Robert Hakebeche Kts. William Yelverton, Thomas Dereham,
John Iakys, Thomas Reynold, and John Tylney were constituted Pat. 14 H. 6 ^. 1.
m. 18. in dorso.
Commissioners for the view and repair of the Banks, Sewers, and Ditches,
throughout this whole County, only; and to make Statutes and Ordinances for the
same, according to the Laws and Customs of Runmey marsh.

The Description of Witlesey mere.
On the West side of this County, and at the outmost skirt thereof, lies
Wittlesey mere, the greatest Lake in all these parts; and consequently the more
worthy of note: I shall therefore cloze up what I have farther to say of this
Shire, with that particular description of it, which I find in the Register
penes Will. P^^^pont a^m, ^. 77. a.
of Peterborough.

In Septentrionali part stagni etc. On the North side of this Lake, there is a
water called Merelade, issuing out of the River of Neene, where the Northern
bounds thereof are. This, with the Fens thereto belonging, has at the end
thereof a certain Fishing called Edd^rmuthe. Upon the East part thereof are two
other Meres, called Wellepole and Trendelmere; betwixt which is a narrow
stream, containing two furlongs in length, called Trendelmere beche, having in
it two Fishings. And there is likewise another narrow water there, of one mile
long, which is called Falet, having in it one Fishing.

In that part thereof betwixt Wytlesmere and Kynkesdelf, where the Eastern
boundary thereof is, the breadth of the Mere contains three miles, having in
it a narrow stream, called Derescuf; and a Wood named Rageholt. On the South
part thereof also, there is another slender stream, of three furlongs in
length, called Selfremerebeche, having in it two Fishings; at the end whereof
is a Lake, named Selfremere; having on the South side thereof a narrow water,
of half a mile long, called Ubbemere lade; at the head whereof is likewise
another Fishing, And about the middle thereof, there is a place in the Fen,
called Alwynesbarwe; and there is the Southern boundary thereof. Moreover, on
the West side of this Lake, there is also a narrow stream, containing two
furlongs in length, named Trendemere beche, which has one Fishing in it; at
the end whereof, is the Mere, called West Trendemere. On that side there are
also these waters, viz. Drelgmere, Wellepole, Withibuscemere, Langemere,
Kinninges, and Musklemere.

There is likewise, on that side, another narrow water, of one mile in length,
extending to Oppebeche, and has in it one Fishing: at the end of which water,
is the Western limits of the Fens, and all the waters pertaining to Witlesmere.

About two miles distant from the North East side of the before-specified Mere,
there is a memorable Chanel cut through the body of the Fen, extending it self
from near Ramsey, to Peterborough, and is called King's delph. The common
tradition is, that King Canutus, or his Queen, being in some peril, in their
passage from Ramsey to Peterborough, by reason of the boysterousnesse of the
Waves upon Witlesey mere, caused this Ditch to be first made: and therewith do
some Annals Math. Westminster.
of our Historians agree; who say thus; Anno Domini Mxxxiiii. Cnuto, Rex
potentissimus, viam in marisco, inter Ramsey and Burgum, quod King's delph
dicitur, ut periculum magnorum stagnorum vitaretur, eruderavit. But how to
reconcile this testimony to what I meet with above threescore years before, I
well know not: which is, that King Edgar confirming to the Monks of
Peterborough, beforementioned, the fourth part of UUitlesmere; with all the
waters, Fishings, and Fens thereto belonging, bounds Ex Regist. de Peterborough
pene^ De^. and Cap. ejusdem Ecclesiae.
it to these limits, viz. quorum Septentrionalis est ubi primum intrat Mere
lode de ampne Nen, orientaliter ad King's delph; Australiter ad Adewinesbarue
etc id est, whereof the North side is, where Mere lode first enters thereinto
from the River Nen, Eastward to King's delph; and Southward to Aldewynesbarue,
etc.

But the largest and most notable, is that fair Chanel made from Stanground
steafe, below Peterborough, to Guyhirne near UUisebeche, of xl foot in breadth,
by Godwin. de praesul. 329. Et Cambd. Brit. 405.
John Moreton Bishop of Ely, in King Henry the seventh's days, and still called
Moreton's Leame, or the New Leame; a work certainly of singular consequence,
not only for the quicker evacuation of the overflowings of Nene, but for
convenience of Carriage from Peterborough to UUisebeche; which will remain a
lasting memorial to that worthy Bishop.

CHAP. LI.
SOuth-west from Cambridgshire, lies the County of Huntendon, into which a
skirt likewise of this great Level extends: at the entrance whereof I meet
first with Ramsey, compassed with Fens on all parts, excepting toward the
South-west, and containing about...... Acres: wherein (for the like respect, as
in Ely, Crouland, and Thorney, by others) Ailwin, a near Kinsman to King Edgar
(and who is styled by our Historians, totius Angliae Aldermannus, id est, Chief
Justice of England) did found Ex Regist. de Ramsey, in Se^ce. penes Remem.
R^g^s. f. 218. ^.
an eminent Monastery for Monks of S. Benedict's Rule, almost an hundred years
before the Norman Conquest.

Touching the situation of this Isle (for so it was anciently called) let us
hear what the Register of that Abbey says; Quum igitur in orientali angulo
territorii Huntedonensis etc. Forasmuch, therefore, as this place, situate in
the Eastern corner of Huntendoushire, where the Chanel of the River Ouse
restrains the bounds of the Fens, is, for its bigness, the fairest of the
fenny Islands; and which many have endeavored to extol, so that it needs
not our commendation; nevertheless we will not wholly leave it untoucht. On the
West side (for on all other there is no access to it, by reason of the Fens) it
is severed from the firm land, with certain deep and boggy Quagmires, in breadth
about two Bow shot: insomuch, as in times past, the access unto it was by
navigable Vessels, brought thither through a slow stream, with gentle winds:
but now, by much labor and no small cost, there is, with Wood, Stones, and
Gravel, a firm Causey made, so that people may come to it on foot. In length
this Island does extend, almost, unto two miles; but in breadth not so much,
being environed with Alders, Reeds, green Canes, and Bulrushes, which do
beautify it exceedingly; and before it became inhabited, was full of all sorts
of trees (especially wild Ashes) the length and bigness whereof, may be seen by
the beams and rafters on the roof of the Church. But now, through tract of
time, the Woods, for the most part gone, the fertility of the turf is such, as
that the land, converted to tillage, bears Corn plentifully: nor is it less
profitable otherwise, being full of fair Gardens, fat Pastures, shady Groves,
and rich Meadows; which, in the Spring time, make a most beautiful show.
Moreover, on the borders of it, there are several Meeres full of Eeles, as also
spacious Fens and Pooles, abounding with diverse sorts of Fish and Waterfoul;
whereof one, called Ramsey mere, from the name of the Isle, much excels the
other adjacent waters in bea^ty and profit; which, lying on the most large and
woody side of it, and pleasantly beating upon that sandy shore thereof, called
Mereham, makes a delightful object to the beholders: in the deep and great
gulfs of which Mere, there are frequently taken, by several sorts of Netts; as
also with baited Hooks, and other sishing Instruments, Pikes of an
extraordinary bigness, called Hakedes by the County people: And though both
Fishers and Fowlers cease neither day nor night to haunt it; yet is there
always of Fish and Foul no little store.

What proportion to the Fens, belonging to diverse particular Towns in this
County, anciently, were of, I shall^ in the next place, from the testimony of
Record, make manifest; by which they, who are well acquainted with those parts,
may discern how much improvement has been since made therein, through the
industry of the Borderers; or whether all or any of them were by neglect
expatiated to a more large extent.

Upon that memorable Survey, Dom^sday Book. Hunt.
made shortly after the Norman Conquest, it appears, that the Fens belonging
to Colne, were then reputed to be one mile in length, and half a mile in
breadth; and those in Wardboys just as much. But in 3 Edw. 1. there is a far
more exact account Ex Rot. de Inquis. per Hundreda, in arce Land.
of them; it being then found by Inquisition, as follows; viz. that the Fens
pertaining to Stangrund and Faresheved, called Faresheved ferri, contained,
then, in length, from Faresheved brigge, at the one end, unto the other, where
Ramsey fen, and Fairesheved fen, did part, two miles: and in breadth, from the
Bank called King's delph, unto Wythlesmare, one mile. In which Fen there was at
that time a certain Meadow, called Kingesdelph-mede, containing Cx. Acres; and
another, called Myleby, of x. Acres; the same Meadows then belonging to the
Inhabitants of Stangrund and Faresheved. Moreover, there was then a certain
division betwixt the Towns of Stanground and Flectone, beginning at Brod he,
near to the Mayden-cros, and extending it self by the ancient lode to
Lauehythe; and from thence directly to Blancheferye; and thence to
Stakengeshirste is a certain Common Pasture which belonged to the Towns of
Stangrund and Flectone.

Likewise, that in the Hundred of Normancros, there was a certain Fen, called
Kyngesdelf; beginning at the end of Brod he, scil. at the end of Kyngesdelf;
and extending it self, circularly, to Wittleseye Town's end, for two miles: and
from Wytlesheye, by the hold Old Ee, to Pokeslode, for the space also of two
miles; and from thence, by Hold Old Eee to West fen, for three miles; thence to
Wysemuthe, for two miles; thence to Beynwic, for three miles; thence to Syrmare
for two miles; thence to Kyngges delfe end, Southwards, for one mile; and
thence to the utmost point of Brod Ee, where Kynge's delfe ends, for five
miles: which whole Circuit contains xx. miles, and belong^th to the Abbeys of
Ramsey and Thorney, and Priory of Ely; for which the Abbot of Ramsey has the
Charter of S. Edward, from Gangestede, Eastwards, to Hyndelake in the West; and
so at Wendelmere and Cayeresholt, with the confirmation of several Kings since
that time.

The Fen of Glactone extends it self from Denton lade, to Hubbemere, containing
in length a mile: but it begins at the Town of Holme, and continues to
Saldermere, which is, in length three miles.

The Fen belonging to the Town of Conyngton, begins at Conyngton mere, and
reaches to the Redipole, and thence to Scelremore, containing in length from
Conington mere to Selremere, two miles. From Selremere it goes to Berchemere;
and thence, by Hokeslade, for three furlongs, unto Monks lade; and so by the
said lode, to the new lode at Sautre, for a mile and an half and two furlongs,
which is betwixt Sautre fen and Conyngton: and so it holds on, by the new lode,
unto the Bank of the Nesse: and from the third Hassoke, unto the said Bank, it
contains in length one mile directly; and from the said Bank it goes on
crookedly unto the North side of Conyngton mere, being in length from that Bank
unto the said Northern side, one mile and an half: within which Circuit
Conington fen is included. But the Abbot of Saltrey ought of right to make two
Bridges in the said Fen, beyond Monks lade; over which the men of Conynton are
to drive their Cattle to Pasture beyond that lade.

The Fen of Dentone contains in length one mile, and extends it self to
Witlesmare one way, and another way to Dentone field; being four Acres in
breadth: But Glattone and Holme have by force appropriated to themselves, a half
furlong and more of the said Fen, in breadth, excepting one Bank, and in length
one mile: and did there dig turves by force and carried them away: nor could
the men of Denton dig turves with them; but they had pasturage there for their
Cattle. Moreover the Earl of Cornwall did appropriate to himself the Flete,
and ditch't it in, which place contained three Acres; and had been Common to
Dentone, Glattone, and Holme.

The Fen of Waltone, beginning at Michelholme hale, extends it self thence,
for two furlongs, unto Stakelode; and thence, for one furlong, to the bar of
Bollokes fen; and thence, for three furlongs to Croslode; and thence for two
miles to Hokeslode; thence for three furlongs to Brichmere; thence for four
furlongs to Hubbemere lode; and thence for one furlong to Hubbemere cote;
thence, for two miles unto Ranelesnok; and thence, for half a mile, unto
Michelholm hale.

To the Town and Abbey of Sautre belongs a certain fen; which begins at the
one end at Saneshyl, and the head of Monks bank; and extends it self in length
near to Monks meadow, crookedly, for one mile; and so goes on by the stable;
and thence directly to the bar of Bollokes fen^ and thence directly to the head
of New lade for half a mile; and from thence to Esterne dyke for one mile; and
from Esterne dyke at the head of the Bank of Staneshille, for four furlongs:
and thus the Fen of Sautre is perfectly bounded: And beyond Monkeslade, b^ the
whole fen of Waltone, and Conytone, to Wytlesmere bank, and Hubbemere bank,
they are to Common with their Cattle.

The Common of Pasture in the Fen belonging to the two Towns of Wardeboys and
Caldecote, is in length two miles, and in breadth two and a half.

This County of Huntendon being then a Forest, the Regardors did, in 34 E. 1.
by virtue of the King's Precept, make this following Presentment Ex Regist. de
^amsey, pene^ H^nr. Cromwell arm. f. 59 b.
at the new Temple in London; viz. that the Tenants of the Abbot of Ramsey in
the Town of Ramsey; the Tenants of the Abbot of Thorney in Wytlesheye, and the
Tenants of the Prior of Ely in Wytlysheye, had wasted all the Fen of
Kyngesdelfe, of the Alders, Hassocks, and Rushes, estimated at a thousand
Acres, so that the King's Deer could not have harbor there as they had before
that perambulation.

Likewise, that the Towns of Stangrund and Farsheved had wasted the fen of
Farsheved of the Alders and Rushes, estimated at an hundred Acres.

Also, that Ib. f. 60.2^
the Abbot of Thorney had made a Purpresture in the said King's Forest, within
Farsheved fen, and enclosed the same with a double Ditch on the side toward
Farsheved; which contained in length two miles by estimation, and two furlongs
in breadth. And likewise that the said Abbot had raised a new Bank, without the
Town of Iakele, containing one mile in length, against the assize of the Forest.

And that Ib. f. 60. b.
John le Wode of Iakele came with the men of Wytlysheye, into the Fen of
Kynggesdelfe, and set fire therein, which burnt in length and breadth about four
miles, by estimation; which caused great loss to the King in his Hearts, Hinds,
and Goats. And likewise, that the men of Benewyk had destroyed a certain place
in Kyngesdelf, of the Alders and Rushes, called Hertyngges, containing a mile
in length and breadth.

And they likewise then presented, that the Banleu of Ramsey began at
Humberdale, and so went on to Wystowe low, by the middle of the Town of
Wystowe; and so to Ranelestone; and thence to Ranelesnoge; thence to
Obmere-bote; thence to Scaldemere; thence to Ayxschebeche; thence to the New
lode, which leads betwixt Middilmore and Kynggesdelfe; thence to Beaurepeyre;
thence to Tyrmerekote; thence to Pollyngsecote; thence to Caldemowchache;
thence to Goldepyttelade; and thence to Homberdale.

The division Ib. f. 61. 2.
betwixt this Forest and the Bishop of Ely his free Chase of Somersham, Vide
etiam bund. de Brev. and Recordis temp. H. 4. scil. anno 3. in arce L^nd. band.
1. n. 1.
began at the great River; scil. at the three Willowes; and thence extended to
Fentone lode; thence to the new Bank; thence to Fentone Cross; thence to the
Mill at Wardeboys; thence to Pydelemare; thence to Pydele dam; thence to Iny
mede; thence to Kollangeleye; thence to the Hanger of Bluntesham, and thence to
the great River.

CHAP. LII.
THis, being the last of those six Counties into which the great Level (as has
been observed) extends, contains no more than a narrow skirt of those fens;
at the utmost point whereof, that sometime great and famous Abbey of
Medeshamstede, since called Peterborough, was (for the like advantages, already
taken notice of in Thorney, and some others) first founded Ex Regist. de
Peterborough penes Dec. and Cap. ejusdem Eccl. a. 1640.
by Peada King of the Mercians, about the year of Christ DCL. and soon after
amply endowed by King Wolpherus, his Brother, and Successor in the government.

As to its situation, and the more exact description of the fens belonging
thereto, I shall exhibit what Robert de Swasham, sometime a Monk of that House,
says, In bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Othonis A. 16. f. 22. b.
Burch vero in regione Gyrviorum est fundatus etc. Burch is founded in the
Country of the Gyrvii; for there begins the Fen, on the East side thereof,
which reaches Lx. miles, or more, in length: Which Fen is of no small benefit
to the bordering people; for there they have wood and other fuel for the
fire, and Hay for fodder; as also Reed for thatching of their Houses; with many
other necessaries. There are likewise diverse Rivers, Waters, and great Meeres
for fishing, the Country abounding in such things: in the best part whereof
Burch is seated; having on the one side of it the Fen and River; and on the
other upland ground, with Woods, Meadows, and many Pastures; which do render it
most beautiful on every part; having a meet access to it by land, except
toward the East; on which side, without Boats there is no coming to it. On
the South side of it runs the River Nene etc.

And these are the limits of the possessions, Pooles, Fenns, Lakes, Fishings,
Lands etc. which King Wolphere gave thereto, that the Monks therein placed
might freely serve God^ viz. from Medeshamstede to Norburch; and thence to a
place called Folies; thence directly through the main Fen to Esendic; and from
Esendic to the place which they call Fethermute: thence directy to Cuggedic,
ten miles distant;
thence to Raggewi^c, five miles, to the principal stream, which goes to Elm
and Wisebeche: and thence, for the space of three miles, up the said principal
stream, to Trochenholt; thence directly, through the vast Fen, to Derevorde, in
length xx. miles: thence to Grecescros; thence, by a fair current, called
Beadan Ea, six miles, to Paccelode; and so, through the midst of many Lakes and
spacious Fens in Huntendonshire; together with the Pooles and Lakes, called
Scelfremere, and Witlesmere, and several others to them belonging; as also with
the Lands and Houses, which do ly on the South side of Scelfremere, and all
within the Fen, to Medeshamstede; and thence to Welmesford, and so to Clive and
Estune; and from Estune to Stanforde; and thence, as the River runs, to
Norburch before-specified.

But touching the improvements made here by Banking and Drayning, I find little
in particular, till of late time (whereof I shall speak anon) this being the
utmost Corner (toward the high land) which the fresh waters (for want of a
clear and perfect evacuation) overflowed; the Banks and Sewers, conducing to
the exsiccation thereof, having been cut from the River Nene, through
Cambridgshire, toward their most ancient and natural out-fall at Wisebeche.

CHAP. LIII. Observations upon the Commissions and Statutes of Sewers.
Having now done with those particular endeavors of Banking and Drayning,
within the precinct of the Great Level, in order to the bettering that
surrounded part of the Country; I come lastly to speak of that eminent and
signal undertaking; viz. the general winning thereof by Banks and Sewers; a
work, certainly, of no less honor to the first Adventurers therein, than
beneficial to the present and future Age. But, before I begin therewith, it
will be proper (I conceive) by way of preparation thereto, to make some short
observation upon the ancient Commissions and most notable Statutes of Sewers.

And first touching the Commissions (the antiquity and extent whereof do
sufficiently appear in the precedent discourse) I shall briefly note; First,
that the King, ratione dignitatis suae Regiae, ad providendum salvationi Regni
sui circumquaque fuit astrictus etc. (for those are the words therein) was by
the prerogative of his Crown obliged to see and foresee to the safety of his
Realm. See Serg. Callice his Reading upon the Stat. of 23 H. 8.
Secondly, that by virtue of them, the Commissioners might enforce the
neglecters of their duty, by distress of their goods, and likewise fine and
imprison the dissobeyers of their Orders, as appears by those words viz. ad
distringendum, and per amerciamenta and alio modo, prout, etc. All which was by
the Authority of the Common law, id est the ancient usage of this Kingdom; as
the learned Sergeant Callice well infers from the words dignitatis suae Regiae,
all Prerogatives being without limitation of time.

Now for the Statutes. The first of these was in 6 H. 6. and this adds to the
power of the said Commissioners; for it gives them Authority to make Officers;
to take Accounts of their Expenditors; to set Laborers on work; and to rate
the wages of such Laborers.

Then that of 8 H. 6. Cap. 3. which supplying the defect of the former, grants
power to the said Commissioners to ordain and execute the Statutes, Ordinances,
and other things to be made according to the effect and purport of the said
Commissions.

Next that of 18 H. 6. Cap. 10. which continues the power of that Statute of 6
H. 6. for ten years longer, the time first limited therein being then expired.

Then that of 23 H. 6. Cap. 9. prolonging that of 18 H. 6. to xv. years more.

Next that Videsis Exempl. ejusdem. Par. 14 E. 4. p. 1. m. 7.
of 12 E. 4. Cap. 6. which not only adds the like number xv. years more
thereto; but enlarges it to the Marches of Caleis, Guynes, and Hammes (on the
borders of France and Flanders.)

Then that of 4 H. 7. Cap. 1. prolonging that of 12 E. 4. to xxv. years more.

Likewise that of 6 H. 8. Cap. 10. ratifying the former Acts, and giving power
to the Lord Chancellor of England, for the time being, to grant out Commissions
of Sewers into all parts of this Realm.

Next that of 23 H. 8. Cap. 5. in the Preamble whereof there are these words;
viz. the King nothing erthely so highly weighing as advancing of the Common
profit, wealth and Commodity of this Realm. Whence (says the before-specified
learned Sergeant) it appears; that the making of this Law was of all other
thought to be most necessary, and of greatest consequence, the King preferring
the same before any earthly thing: and the King's care therein became his Royal
person very worthily; because by this Statute safety was brought to the Realm,
and wealth and profit to the people thereof.

In that Preamble it is likewise observable. First, that Marshes and low grounds
had formerly been, by politic wisdom, won and made profitable for the good of
the Commonwealth. Secondly, that if more speedy and further remedy were not
had and provided, though diverse provisions had been formerly made; yet none of
them were sufficient remedy for reformation thereof. And thirdly, that power is
given thereby to six Commissioners of Sewers, whereof three to be of the
Quorum, to take any man's timber etc. to be used therein, and to set the price
thereof; as also to sell any man's Lands, nay the King's also, or part thereof,
in fee, or for what other term they pleased.

All which being confirmed by the King's Royal assent had thereunto, are not to
be repealed but by Act or Parliament; and makes them therefore an absolute
Court, to hear and determine all things concerning Sewers.

After this, about two years ( viz. 25 H. 8. Cap. 10) there was another
Statute, which extends this last Commission to the Town and Marches of
Caleis, and imposes a penalty of five Marks upon every Commissioner who shall
refuse to be sworn according to the Act of 23 H. 8.

Then that of 3 and 4 E. 6. Cap. 8. which, taking notice how beneficial the
Statute of 23 H. 8. had been to this Realm, ordained; that it should continue,
with these additions thereto, for ever; viz. that all Skots, Lo^s and sums of
money, thenceforth to be rated and taxed upon any of the King's Lands, his
Heirs or Successors, for any thing concerning the Articles of the said
Commission of Sewers, should be gathered and levied by distress, or otherwise,
in like manner and form, as should and might be done in the Lands of any other
persons: And that no Commission of Sewers should thenceforth have continuance
for above five years after the date thereof.

Next that of 13 Eliz. Cap. 9. which authoriseth the Commissions of Sewers,
thenceforth, to stand in force for the term of ten years next after their
dates, unless they were repealed by reason of any Commission, or by supersedeas.

And lastly that of 3 Iac. Cap. 14. which comprehends the Walls, Ditches,
Banks, Gutters, Sewers, Gates, Causeys, Bridges, Streams, and Watercourse
having their passage into the River of Thames, and within two miles of the City
of London, as subject to the Commissions and Statutes of Sewers, and to the
penalties of the same.

To these, for removing of some scruples, touching the power of the
Commissioners of Sewers, for erecting of new Sluses, and for making new Cuts
and Drayns where none were before, I shall add the opinion of those two Chief
Justices, viz. Popham and Anderson (men famous in their times for their
learning) in both these Cases; and which is observed by the before-specified
Serg. Callice in his said Reading upon the Stat. of 23 H. 8. As also of Sir
Henry Hobart Knight Attorney general to King James.

In 43 and 44 Eliz. a great controversy did arise in the County of Lincoln,
about the erecting of two new Gotes, at Skirbeck and Langare, for drayning the
waters of South Holland and the Fenns, into Boston Haven; which work Sir Edward
Dimock Knight, did by himself and his friends further what he could; but it was
opposed by the Country of Kef^even; and they very exception taken thereto was,
that the Commissioners of Sewers could not by the power of their Commission,
make a Law for the erecting of these new Gotes where never any stood before:
Whereupon the decision of this point coming, at length, before the then two
Justices, viz. Popham and Anderson, they delivered their opinions; that the
said new Gotes, if they were found to be good and profitable for the safety and
advantage of the Country, they might be erected by the power of this Statute.

The like controversy arose in 12 o Iacobi, in the Counties of Cambridge,
Huntingdon and Northampton, about the making of new Cuts and Drayns in the Isle
of Ely, by the power of the Commissioners of Sewers; which being much opposed,
the business came, in the end, to be heard before the King and the Council:
Whereupon the said King, by the advice of his Council, upon mature
deliberation, comparing the undue proceeding of those who had disturbed his
Commissioners of Sewers in those Counties, with the ancient Laws of this Realm;
as also with the constant practice of ancient and later times, and the opinions
of the Lord chief Justice Popham, delivered in writing very exactly and fully
upon the said Questions, touching the power and authority of the said
Commissioners^ it being objected, 1. that the Commissioners had no power to
raise new Banks, Drayns or Sluses where there had been none before. 2. that
they might not lay the Tax upon Hundreds, Towns, or the Inhabitants thereof in
general; but upon the first Presentment or Judgment to charge every man in
particular according to the quantity of his land. 3. that they had not power to
commit to prison persons refractory to their Orders: and lastly, that actions
of trespass, false imprisonment, and other process at the Common Law, have
been brought against some of their Officers, for executing their Decrees and
Warrants: their Lordships finding in their Wisdoms, that it could neither
stand with Law, nor common Reason, that in cases of such great consequence, the
Law can be so void of providence, as to restrain the Commissioners of Sewers
for making of new works to withstand the fury of the waters, as well as to
repair the old, where necessity does require it for the safety of the Country,
or to lay a charge upon the Towns or Hundreds in general that are interessed in
the benefit or loss, without attending a particular Survey and admeasurement of
Acres, when the service is to have speedy and sudden Execution; or that a
Commission, that is of so high a Nature, and of so great use to the Common
wealth and evident necessity; and of so ancient jurisdiction, both before the
Statute and since, should want means of coercion for obedience to their Orders
and Decrees^ whereas upon the performance of them, the preservation of many
thousands of his Majesti^s Subjects lives, goods, and lands did depend: and it
plainly appearing, that there would be a direct frustrating and overthrow of
the authority of the said Commission, if the Commissioners, their Officers and
Ministers should be subject to every suit at the pleasure of the Delinquent, in
his Majesty's Courts of the Common Law, and so to weary and discourage all men
from doing their duties in that behalf: for the reasons aforesaid, and the
supreme reason above all, viz. the salvation of the King and people; did order,
that the persons formerly committed by that Board, for the^r contempt
concerning that cause, should stand committed, until they did release or
sufficiently discharge such actions, suits and demands as they did bring at the
Common Law against the said Commissioners of Sewers, or any their Officers etc.

The opinion of Sir Henry Hobart Knight, Ex cod. MS. penes praef. O. S. John f.
191. b.
Attorney general to King James, touching the making of new Drayns; the Case of
the new Drayns made in the Isle of Ely, and the Taxation set for the same,
being thus.
1 THat the grounds now sought, by these new Sewers to be won and drained, are
such as naturally and anciently were dry grounds, and not continually
overflown; so as they were truly land and not water, and are still to this day
dry half the year, and sometimes in good years longer.

2. Nextly, that there have been always, notorious and common Drayns,
maintained at public charge for the conveying away of the waters in times of
downfall or other overflows.

3. Thirdly, that the said ancient Drayns cannot now possibly (were they never
so well maintained) drayn the Country, because their conveyance (whilst they
were in use) was into the Sea running out at Wisbeche, from whence the Sea is
now departed: so that there is no way now to carry these waters to the Sea, but
by Lynne Haven, to which therefore these works are made to carry them.

The case (I say) standing thus in all these parts, I am of opinion; that the
Law of Sewers, lately made for these new works, is warranted by the Commission
of Sewers; and that a Tax may be set, as well for the making and maintaining of
it according to the meaning of the Statutes and Commission, as it might have
been for the old, if they had remained still in use. And therefore I am of mind
plainly, that though it may se^m still within the power of the Commission, by
the Letter of it, to maintain the old Sewers; yet the Commissioners cannot now
enforce the m^intenance of them, when they are no longer, indeed, Sewers, nor
benefit nor damage can arise by them: for Sewers are made and maintained for
the land, and not the land for the Sewers.

On the contrary, when they fail, reason teaches and necessity enforces, some
other remedy be found in supply of it: And the words of the Commission have it
plainly, that gives power in one Clause to make necessary and behooffull Laws,
for the safeguard and preservation of the lands lying to the premises; which
premises, being restrained as much as may be to the Sewers, yet the lands
lying to them, must be understood the land^ about them, or for which they were
wont to serve: So that the safeguard and preservation of the lands, is the
principal end of the Commission; which being not to be preserved by the old
Sewers, are by this Clause to be preserved at large^ that is, as best may be,
and by the Judgment of the Commissioners shall be found necessary and
behoofull; which words and meaning are satisfied in this case.

Henry Hubbert.

Nor do we want examples of greater antiquity for such new Cuts and Drayns, the
names of diverse, which to this day continue, manifesting the same; as 1.
New-ditch, alias Lents hirne, in Wisebeche. 2. Newdike in Burial field in
Well. 3. Newdike in Witlesey, a very fair Sewer; Newdraine (there also) xx
foot wide. 4. Newdrayne, from Croyland to Spalding. 5. Newdike, alias Sandy
dyke, there also. 6. Newdike in Neatmore, in Upwell. 7. New-leame there, fifty
foot wide. 8. and New-leame in Chateriz and March.

Nay, it is very evident, that even the great Rivers themselves have, for the
like respects, been diverted from their ancient and natural Channels: For, 1.
The River of Ouse Ouse.
(its outfall by Wisbeche decaying) was not only cut straight; but by a new
River made from Littleport Chair to Rebbech, was let fall into Ouse parva (or
Brandon water) and thence by Salters lode to Lynne Haven; its former course
from Littleport being by Wellenhee to Well, and so to the North Seas at
Wisbeche. 2. The West-water (a part of Ouse magna) having its course from Erith
bridge to Chateriz ferry, and thence to Benwick, and so to March, was, for the
crookedness of the way, conveyed by a new passage, called the Leame (through
Chateriz, Dodington, and March) and thence by Elm Leame to Wisbeche (a course
of xvi miles) and so continues all this way. 3. Moreton, Nene.
the worthy Bishop of Ely, in the time of K. H. 7. to avoid the many and
crooked passages in the River of Nene, between Peterburgh and the Sea (by the
way drowning many thousands of Acres) out of the whole ground, made a new
River, now called Morton's Leame (or the New Leame) xl foot wide, and 4 foot or
more deep ( viz. from Stanground steafe to Guyhirne) being a course of xii
miles long at the least; and continuing the same through Wisbeche^ for the more
speedy delivery of the waters; attempted to cut through the Sea-dike to
Wisbeche at Bevys-Crosse; and again at Eastfields end nigh the Horshooe in
Leverington (which Banks were in less than xxx years before, ordained by
Commission to be maintained, id est, from the first slope of the Bank, fifty
foot high) and so made a new outfall from Wisbeche to the 4 Gotes, and thence
to the Sea. 4. A branch of Nene usually passing from Peterburgh to Crowland,
and so to Spalding (that outfall decaying) was turned back by Dowesdale, with
the South Ee to Wisbeche, and so to the Sea. 5. A great part of Ouse and Nene
united, descending from Benwick, by great-Crosse, to Wisbeche; but Wisbeche
outfall decaying, they both fall by March to Well, and so into Ouse at Salters
lode. 6. The waters of Well were by a shorter cut, conveyed under Broken-dyke,
by Hichcock's dam, to Elm Floudgates, the old way lying through Enmeth, by the
Wroe. 7. The River of Elm, running by diverse Crooks from Elm to Wisbech^, was
cut straight, and the water passed by a shorter course, as by the old Chanel on
both sides the new River, may yet be seen. 8. The River in Wisbeche a little
above the great Bridge, within the memory of man, running crooked, was cut
straight, and so to this day continues. 9. The River of Clows-crosse, being
crooked at either end, was in the upper end conveyed by Willow-dike, straight
to Graynes Hill; and in the lower end rectified by a New Cut, the old Chanel
being forsaken. Weland.
10. Ingulphus in his History of Crouland makes mention, how Richard de Rullos
Chamberlain to King William the Conqueror, having married the Daughter of Hugh
de Evermue (Lord of Burn and Deping) for the inlargment of his Town of Deping
diverted the River of Weland -- Et in pratis quae erant nuper profundi lacus
and paludes immeabiles, excluso fluvio invenit campos uberimos, and terram
desiderabilem; and de puteis and uliginibus maledictis fecit hortum voluptatis
-- And in the Meadows, which before were deep Lakes and drowned Fenns, by
excluding the River, he found them fruitful fields, and as good ground as
could be wished: nay, of the very Pits and Bogs, he thereby made a Garden of
pleasure. Moreover, the same River of Weland, having anciently its course by
Spalding, through the decay of the outfall th^re, a great part thereof sometime
fell through great Possons, and so out by Quaplode; but that outfall also
decaying (as most out^alls over the Washes have, and still will do) that way
was stopped up, and the River driven to seek a course in a very faint manner by
South Ee toward Wisbeche; where again through the defect of Wisbeche outfall,
when it meets with the Nene at the New Leames end at Guyhirne, they both turn
back under Waltersey bank to Hobbes, and so to March stream, and there meeting
with the great Branch of Nene, come to Well, and so to Salters lode.

Which River also (as says Leland) by a shorter way, called the new Drayne,
was put from Croyland to Spalding, as now it goes.

12. Grant.
The River of Grant, by a fair Chanel passing from Beche to Charefen, in
Cottenham, and so into Ouse, was diverted; and by a straight^r course turned
down by another Branch of the same River to Harrimere, where it loses the
Name. 13. Lastly, New Eegate in Gosberchurch, found through the Marshes another
outfall; but because it was not so convenient as the first, the Jurats as the
Record says, Ex cod. MS. penes O. S. John. f. 193. b.
-- Requisiti si cursus aquae, quam nunc tenet, sit sufficiens ad eductionem
and deliberationem aquae; dicunt, qoud ^ic: sed dicunt qoud antiquus cursus
plus competeret, and utilior esset quam cursus quam nunc tenet, eo qoud
minoribus sumptibus reparari poterit direct currendo, quam long per cireuitum
and in obliquo, and citius aqua per ibi deliberari, -- Being asked if the
Chanel wherein that water then ran, were sufficient for the carrying it away;
they said that it was: but they farther said, that the ancient current thereof
would be more fit and beneficial than it, in regard it might be repaired at
less charge, by running straight, than to go about by a long circuit, and the
water much sooner evacuated.


And for these two Reasons the Jurats have often proposed to Commissioners of
Sewers, shorter ways to pass waters; as from Leonards Pipe to the four Gotes,
for the water on Wisbeche North side: and a new Drayn xx foot wide, by a
shorter way, from New dike in Witlesey, lineally to the great River on the
North of Wings lake; and many more etc. And in a word, most of the new Courses
proposed for the general draining were of that kind.



CHAP. LIVE. For the general Drayning of the great Level.
IT has been a long received opinion, as well by the borderers upon the Fens,
as others; that the total drowning of this great Level (whereof we have in our
times been Eye witnesses) has, for the most part, been occasioned by the
neglect of putting the Laws of Sewers in due execution in these latter times:
and that before the dissolution of the Monasteries by King H. 8. the passages
for the water were kept with clensing, and the Banks with better repair,
chiefly through the care and cost of those Religious Houses.

It cannot (I confess) be denied, but that the opening and ^couring of those
many petty Draynes and Sewers, which anciently had been made by sundry persons,
for the better drayning of their own particular lands, might much conduce to
the sooner taking away of these vast spreadings of water in the Summer season;
but wholly to clear them, was impossible, without the perfect opening and
clensing of their natural out-falls, which the daily flowing of the Tides had
choakt up with so great a thickness of Silt (as in the xxxviith. Chapter of
this discourse I have fully showed.) In order whereunto the first considerable
attempt, whereof I have seen any notable memorial, was in 20 Eliz. the Queen
then granting her Commission to Sir Thomas Cecill, Penes R^mem. Regis in Sca^c.
Sir William Fitzwilliams, Sir Edward Montagu, and Sir Henry Cromwell Knights,
Robert Sapcotts, Rob^ Winfeld, William Hunstone, Edmund Hall, Robert Bevell,
Vincent Skinner and John Mountsteving Esquires, and to any four or more of
them, to proceed according to these following Articles, entitled,

Articles to be enquired on by the Commissioners for the Drayning of the Fenns,
through and by the Drayn, called Clowse Cross, and so to the Sea.
1. TO cause a perfect Level to be made of the same Drayn, throughout all
places convenient, from the Clowe-crosse to the Sea.

2. Item, to enquire by the Judgment of Workmen, or otherwise, how a perch of
the same may be wrought, and so consequently what the charge of the whole will
amount unto.

3. Item, how that charge may be most easily born, and by whom, and how the
same may be rated by the Acre or otherwise, having a respect to charge the
owner of the grounds in severalty with more, and the Commoners with less,
ratably according to their portions.

4. Item, to enquire and certify the quantity of the grounds that are several,
and the grounds that ly in Common.

5. Item, the names of the Towns, that the Commissioners shall think meet to be
charged in contribution, in respect of the benefit they shall receive by the
said Drayn; and likewise the names of the owners in severalty chargeable for
the same.

6. Item, what detriment, loss, or hind^an^^ may or is like to come to our
Sovereigne Lady the Queen's Majesty or to any other person or persons by
opening of the said Drayn.

7. Item, a Book made of the contribution, to appoint, for the well and perfect
doing of the work, certain Collectors to levy the money, and certain other
persons to see to the expending of the same; all which to yield Account to the
said Commissioners.

Hereupon the before-specified Commissioners sat at Peterborough upon the
ixth. of June in the same year, and there empanelled certain Jurors ( viz. six
for each County) of the Counties of Northampton, Lincoln, Huntendon, and
Cambridge; who presented as follows; viz.

1. To the first Article, that there was a sufficient descent or fall between
Clowse-crosse and the Sea, for the Drayning of the Fenns; and that the most
convenient place for conducting of the Drayn was from the Windmill Corner, upon
the West side of the Bank, called Willow dike, unto a place there called
Gannok; and from thence to cut through the Lands of the Queens Majesty, and the
lands of Henry Adam Esquire, in the Fenn of Tid S. Mary in the County of
Lincoln, unto the Ea between both Shires, viz. Lincoln and Cambridge, at
Graynes hill; and so following the course of the old Drayn, dividing both the
Shires, unto the Got called Shire Got. 2. To the second Article; that by
estimation every perch from Clowes cross to Gannok, being in number 968. every
perch having xx. foot in length, xxiiii. in breadth, and six foot in depth,
would cost, for the making thereof, xvs. And every perch, after the quantity
aforesaid, from Gannok to Grains hill 61 perches, would cost xs. the charges
of the perches aforesaid amounting 75^ l. -- 06s. -- 08d. And from Graynes hill
to Shire got, being in number 1732 perches, would cost, for every perch
scowring 03 s. -- 04 d. that sum amounting to 288 l. -- 13 s. -- 04 d.

The sum total 1045 l.

Item, for building of the Clowes, and for every other extraordinary charges
thereto belonging, they judgit would cost an hundred pounds.

The total of the whole 1145 l.

3. To the third Article, they presented; that the charges of the Drayn from
Clowes cross to Grains hill, should be born by the equal charges of
Cambridgshire, to be lev^ed of all those Towns and grounds nigh adjoining, and
having Common or several in any Fenns or low grounds, within any of the said
Countries before-named, reaping or taking any profit or Commodity by Drayning
of the Fenns by the Drayn through Clowes cross, and so to the Sea. 4. and 5.
To the fourth and fifth Articles, they presented a Bill or Book of several
Countries and Towns thereunto annexed, of all that they knew; and for farther
knowledge they referred it to the good discretions of the Lords, Masters,
owners and dwellers within any of the Towns and grounds near adjoining to the
said Fens, and reaping or taking any Commodity or profit any manner of ways by
the said Drayn, called Clowes cross Drayn, or Shire Drayn. 6. To the sixth
Article, they presented; that to their knowledge there was neither detriment,
loss, or hindrance like to happen to the Queens Majesty or any person or
persons, by opening the said Drayn, the Clowes and Banks being sufficiently
made, ordered, and kept, except two Acres of the Queens Majesty's and Henry
Adam Esquire; but great Commodity and profit to all the Inhabitants and
Dwellers near to any of the said grounds or Fenns above South Ea Bank. 7. And
to the seventh Article, they presented; that they left it to the good
discretion of the Commissioners to appoint at their pleasures.
Next follows the names of all the Towns and Lands contributory and
chargeable toward this work: as also of the Treasurers and Surveyors for each
County: but what was accomplished therein I am yet to learn: Sure I am, that it
would have fallen far short of performing what was aimed at; there being
nothing more evident, than that without a general Drayning, all these
particular attempts, how chargeable soever, would be of little moment, witness
that fair Chanel, made by John Morton Bishop of Ely in King H. 7. time (called
Morton's Leame, or the New Leame) extending from below Peterborough to Guy
hyrne; and this of Clows cross; as also Popham's Ea, the Londoners lode, and
many others: which cost, had it been at once bestowed upon the main work, might
have gone far, toward the accomplishment of a general exsiccation of this
whole Fenny tract.

And this was, at length, experimentally found to be so, by such as were men of
skill and judgment: to the end therefore, that so noble and profitable an
undertaking, as this of a general Drayning would, might be promoted; and that
the inter^st of them who were Lords ( id est of the soil) of those great Waste
grounds, or any severals as were subject to such inundation, might not hinder
so laudable a work, tending to the disburthening from those great and constant
charges in Banks and Sewers, which were found to be of little avail to that
public end, and prevent the extraordinary benefit, which (as was clearly seen)
would accrue thereby to the Realm; that excellent Statute of xliij. Eliz. was
made, entitled An Act for the recovering of many Hundred thousand Acres of
Marshes and other grounds, subject commonly to surrounding, within the Isle of
Ely, and the Counties of Cambridge, Huntendon, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Sussex, Essex, Kent, and the County Palatine of Duresme, the preamble
whereof runs thus; Whereas it is apparent to such as have travailed in the
execution of Commissions of Sewers in the Isles and Counties aforesaid; that the
Wastes, Commons, Marshes, and Fenny grounds there, subject to surrounding, may
be recovered by skillfull and able undertakers, whereby great and inestimable
benefit would arise to her Majesty, her heirs and successors, disburthening her
Highness of many chargable Banks and works of Sewers within those surrounded
gronnds, as the increase of many able subjects by habitations being there
erected, and in like sort profitable to many her Highnesses subjects, both
bodies politic and corporate, who have estates of inheritance and other
interest within the same: And for that the Drayning and making dry and
profitable of those surrounded grounds is chiefly hindered, for that the greater
part of them are Wastes and Commons, subject yearly to surrounding, wherein
diverse have Common by Prescription, by reason of their resiance and
inhabitancy: which kind of Commons nor their interest therein, can by the
Common Law be extinguished or granted to bind others which should inhabit there
afterward: And in that also it appears, that the Commoners in respect of
their poverty are unable to pay the great charges to such as should undertake
the recovery of the same: It was therefore enacted, that the owners of all
surrounded Wastes and Commons, as also the most of the Commoners, for their
particular Commons, might contract or bargain for part of such Commons, Wastes,
and Severals, with such person or persons who would undertake the Drayning (the
Country themselves being not able to do it, as the said Act acknowledges) and
that the same their contract, and conveyances thereupon made, should be good
and available in Law, against the Lords of the soil etc. and all other the
Commoners therein; but not against the said Queen her heirs or successors,
except such conveyances should be certified into the Chancery, in case the said
Wastes were of the possessions of the Crown, and except the royal assent were
obtained thereunto.

Howbeit, upon this Act (happening so near the latter end of that Queens reign)
little was done: but King James, shortly after coming to the Crown, being a
grave and prudent Prince, as also of a most noble and public Spirit, and
withal highly sensible of the general advantage, which thereby would redound
to whole Kingdom; by his Letters Ex ^od. MS. pene^ O^. S. John. A^m. f. 163. b.
directed to the Commissioners of Sewers, for the Isle of Ely, and Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntendon, Northampton, and Lincoln, bearing date
at Westminster the xith. of July, 11 I^lij. 2 Iac.
in the second year of his reign, encouraged their proceedings therein;
expressing his readiness to allow a part of his own Lands, to be so recovered,
toward the charge of the work, in like proportion, that other of his subjects
should do; and signified to them, that he had appointed one Henry Totnall, and
John Hunt, respectively, to take view of the said Fenns; and to treat and
contract with as many Lords and Commoners, as they might, touching the
premises; desiring, likewise, the said Commissioners to be aiding to the said
Henry Totnall, and I. Hunt therein.

The limits Ib. 198. b.
of the Commission for the general Drayning, 3. J^c. An. 1605.
attempted A^ 1605.
The grounds lying between and within any the limits within the Isle of Ely and
Country of Marshland; and within all the grounds every way between the said
Isle and the River of Ouse; and between the Country of Marshland and the same
River of Ouse, and the Upland grounds of Norff. Suff. Cambr. and Huntingdon;
and between all the grounds between the Isle of Ely and the Upland grounds of
Huntingdon and Northampton shires: and within all the grounds as well of the
Washes in Lincolnshire, as those between the same washes, the Isle of Ely,
South ea bank, great Porsant bank and the River of Welland; and within all the
grounds between the said River of Welland, great Porsant bank, South Ea bank,
and the Upland grounds in the Counties of North. and Linc.; and within all the
grounds between the River of Welland and the River of Glen, or in the borders
and confines of the same.

The particular Ibid.
limits.
From the Corner of Edw. Skypwith's bank, next to Creek lode, by the River of
Ouse; and so by that Bank to Maid lode, alias Shiplode; and by a Bank on the
North side of the said Lode to Calsey-dike, and so through a part of Upwell to
Lakebridg; and from thence by Bishop's dike to Friday brigge; and so Elm leame
to Maryes dam, and to Tiln^y hyrne; and from thence to Hob's house, alias
Bensted hyrne, to Guy hyrne; and from thence to Clowes Cross, and so by South
Ea bank, and through Crouland, to the further end thereof, toward White house;
and from thence by a new Bank or Banks, (as intended to be made) to the Upland
near Peykirke in Com. Northt. From thence by the utmost ring of the Fenns or
low ground to the Upland, subject to surrounding in the said Counties of
Northt. and Hunt. to Erith; and from thence by Over fen Bank to Over hive; and
from thence by the utmost ring of the Fens or low grounds toward the Upland
subject to surrounding in the said County of Cambridge, to a Causey leading
from Water beche to Clay hive Ferrey; and from thence to the utmost ring of the
Fenns or low grounds toward the Upland, subject to surrounding in the said
County of Cambridge, unto Upwere; and thence by the utmost ring of the Fens or
low grounds toward the Upland, subject to surrounding in the said Counties of
Cambridge, Suff. and Norff. to Stoke Causey; and by it and the utmost ring of
the Fenns and low grounds toward the lands subject to surrounding, in the said
County of Norff. to another Bank of the said Edm. Skipwith's by Stoke River,
and by the said Bank of Helgay Causey; and from thence by the utmost ring of
the Fenns or low grounds toward the Upland of Helgay and Sotherey, subject to
surrounding, unto Sotherey Calsey; and by it to the River of Ouse at Sotherey
ferrey; and from thence by the said River of Ouse to the said Corner of the
said Mr Edw. Skipwith's Bank.

In order therefore to this great work, direction was given to one Mr. Richard
Atkins of Outwelle (a person whose observations in these fenny grounds were
very notable) to make search with an Augar of xi. foot long, on the skirts of
the New Leame, from Guy hirne to Stanground stafe, to find the soil there of at
eight foot deep: whereupon he began so to do on the second of April, 2. Apr.
An^^ 1605.
and found the first place on the North side 2, 3, 4, and 5. all Moor. 6. At
mile and half Tree, Moor: 7 8. All Moor.

9. In the Leame, Moor: 10. On the North side Moor: In Knarlake Moor at eleven
foot deep. 12. On the South side against Knarlake all Moor.

13. In the Leame, Moor. 14. On the North side all Moor to 8. foot.

15. In the Leame Moor 9. foot deep.

16. By Lords dikes end, black Moor mixed with earth.

17. In the Leame the like. 18. On the North side the like.

19. On the South side Lipny holt, against the Hill, mixed Earth.

20. Westward a furlong, black Moor mixed. 21. The like. 22.

23. Against Easttree, mixed Moor.

24. Nigh Cotes, Moor on both sides.

25. Against Cotes, all Moor: Above Cotes on the North, Moor, by Basually hill.

26. At Stonhil doles, Moor. 27. Against Calves Croft South, Bassa gravel
North, Moor.

28. Between the Leame and the Lake against the Mills, Moor.

29. Between Great Hill and Stone hill gravel, Moor, mixed.

30. Between Stone hill gravel and Eastlong Lotts, all Clay aloft, and gravel
at 2. foot. 8. inches.

31. More Westwards in the River, Gravel and silt at 4 foot.

32. On the North side; At North Ee gravel the like.

33. At North Long-lotts all Clay aloft.

34.

35. By Bradley fen, Clay and mixed Earth aloft, about 3 foot.

36. By Bradley fen to the Leames end, such like above, but rank Moor all the
way under.

The Searches made from Erith bridge to Plawlis were.
At Erith bridge, within Lx pole of the Bridge, at the first Ham, there, at 2
foot, and 2 foot and a half, Clay: But after, under the same, at 8 and 9 and 10
foot and upwards, is all red Moor; and so from thence all the way over Sutton
fen, By Ee fen, Many fen, and Westmore to Wellney turf ground, all red Moor.
And likewise to Cotehirne nigh Franks dike end; So till within Lx Rods; where,
at ^ive foot it is mixed silt, and at the water side Clay. The like for 60 to 80
Rods over Welln Ee green, and after right over to Maid lode, at the head of Mr.
Skipwiths ground all vile Moor by the whole Tract.

After this, viz. upon the 22 of April next following, the Lords of the Kings
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, by their Letters Ib. f. 194. a.
to the before-specified Commissioners, 22 Apr. 3. J^^. A. 1605.
desired them to endeavor to satisfy all such persons, as having no respect
to the general good, which was like to come to this Drayning, should oppose it,
or use means to others so to do; or otherwise to enjoin them to attend the said
Council. And whereas some of the Commissioners, intending the advantage to some
particular parts of the Country, doubting the success of the general work, had
made an Order touching that of Clows Cross only; the said Lords by this Letter
did command them not to proceed therein, till it should be discerned what
success the general undertaking would have.

Upon receipt of which Letters, the said Commissioners, meeting at Huntendon,
the xixth. of May ensuing, made this return Ibid. b.
to that honorable Board; viz. that after long debate, and all objections
heard; they concluded (with one consent) that this work of Drayning was
fesible, and without any peril to any Haven or County: and not only so, but
that they did reckon it the most noble work for the said Lords to further, and
most beneficial to the Countries interessed, to have good by, that ever was
taken in hand of that kind in those days; referring more particular relations
concerning it to the beforementioned Mr. Hunt and Mr. Totnall^ the Bearers of
those Letters. The Commissioners names subscribed thereto being there; viz.

Oliver Cromwell. Robert Bevyll. John Cutts. John Cotton. Robert Wingfield.
Robert Cotton. Simeon Steward. Richard Coxe. Henry Spelman. Anthony Forest.
Thomas Lambert. Robert Cromwell. Anthony Ireby. Thomas Ogle. Christopher
Hudson. William Styrmyn. John Fyncham. William Marshall.
Whereupon there was a particular view Ib. f. 200. b.
of the whole Level, begun on the xxith. of June next following, by Sir Robert
Bevill, Sir Robert Wingfield, Sir John Gamlyn, 21 ^uni^.
Sir Richard Coxe, and Sir Anthony Forest Knights, Christopher Hodson, and
Matthew Robinson Esquires; and thus certified, as follows.

First we repaired to the out-fall, to the Sea, at the meeting of the two
Rivers of Weland and Glen; where we found the said out-fall reasonable good.

Thence to Cowhyrne and Pikebridg, and so to Spalding bridge; in all which
passage we found the River very defective in breadth and depth; and from Cowhyrn
to Spalding bridge a great Bank lying on either side the River.

From Spalding bridge to Willow row end, by Cubbet and Peakell, to White house,
the River all along being defective as abovesaid; having a great elbow, by
Cubbet and Peakell, which much hinders its course to the out-fall.

From White house to Crowland, and by the Cross in the Ea to Waldram Hall, the
like defects of breadth and depth appearing, as aforesaid.

Iunij. 22.
From Peterborough bridge to the Old Ea and Catts-water, which ancient Sewer is
so grown up with earth and weeds, as that it serves neither for passage with
Boats, nor Drayning, and so has been of long time; which ought and had wont to
be for the ordinary passage to and from Spalding and other places in Holland,
to Peterburrow.

Thence to Stanground steafe, where we found the River sufficient for breadth
and depth. Thence to Guy hirne, in all which passage we found wonderful
defects in breadth and depth.

From thence to Wisbeche, and so to the Sea; in all which passage we found the
like defects.

Iunij 24.
From thence by Elm River to Frydaybridge, and so by Bishops dike to
Lakebridge; thence to Shrewes-nest by Well River, where we took Boat,
perceiving at Shrewes-nest that the Riv^r of Nene, which comes from the Mares,
has but six miles to Salters lode to pass by Well; but by reason of the
quarring of the said Chanel, a great part thereof runs from Shrewes-nest to
Salters lode by Welleney, Litleport Chair, and Sotherey ferrey etc. which is 28
miles; and that the River through Well cannot be conveniently amended: This
River is now called Popham's Ea.
To remedy which, Mr. Hunt desired, that a new River of 80 foot wide and 8 foot
deep be made from March River, at the Ham, cross Marmound etc. through
Netemore, to fall into Well River, near London lode.

Between Shrewesnest and Forweare, we found a place called the Ham, not above
two foot deep.

About 4 miles from Shrewes nest, is Elm leame, which is a Sewer going from
March River to Friday bridge, through Elm River to Wisbeche; which Sewer is
landed up. Thence we came to March leame (about a mile and half short of March
bridge) which is much decayed, to the great hindrance of navigation from St.
Ives to Wisbeche, and for the Drayning of all the grounds betwixt Chateriz
ferrey, and March River. And at March bridge, on either side, we found diverse
Gravels, which do stop the course of the River.

Thence to Great-Crosse (3 miles above March bridge) and so through Ramsey,
Ugge, and Witlesey meres. Thence to Farset bridge, about xvij. foot broad.
Thence etc. to Peterborow.

From Peterborow to Yaxley lode. I^nij 25.
Thence to Ramsey lode, along the skirt of the Upland. Thence to Erith brigg,
where Mr. Hunt disireth a new River, from the first corner of the West water
(beneath the said Bridge) to begin in Midlemore Fen, near to the Severals, and
so to go, line right, unto Wellenhey-River, nigh Sprall were, and thence, line
right, to the fall into Ouse at the end of Maid lode, or at some apt place
between that and Salters lode: which River or Rivers to contain in breadth 120
foot and in depth 8 foot: And for preservation of the Navigation to and from
St. Ives to Cambridge, and Linne, as also to Wisbeche, he thinks it necessary
that diverse other Sluses be made; viz. one in the Ouse near the Hermitage; one
in the West water near to the new River, to stop the water from running to
Benwick, and for Navigation; drayning of Huntingdon fen grounds, between it and
the Upland grounds, and other necessary uses; and so many Sluses at the ends,
as the said River shall be divided into parts, which he thinks to make into 3
Rivers of xl. foot a piece.

Iunij 26.
Thence we came to Over, Aldrich-Causey, Haddenham, Grunty fen, and so to Ely.
In Ely town we observed, that the water was but 14 Inches deep, and upon the
Hards 18 Inches, and in some places 2 foot.

Thence we passed by water to Sotherey, and Prick-willow, where Mildenhall
River falls into Ouse: And between Ely and Littleport Chair, we observed;
that the said River of Ouse was so crooked, that the making a new River from
Erith bridge, through Sutton, Beryall and Westmore fens, to Wellenhey River, and
thence through certain Fenns of Norfolk, into the Ouse, about Maid lode, would
be most necessary, and that without so doing the Fenns could never be drayned.

Thence we went to Rebbech, where Brandon River (alias Ouse parva) falls into
Ouse, near Priest houses.

Thence to Sotherey and Modney. Thence to Helgay bridge. Thence to Fordham.
Thence to Salters lode, where Nene falls into Ouse; which is a very great
descent, viz. ten foot from the soil of the Fenns, to the low water mark,
(besides the natural descent of the Fen-grounds, from the Uplands of
Huntingdon-shire thither.) Thence to Wisbeche.

I^nij 27.
Thence to Tower house, and so to Hobbs house; where we observed that Plantwater
(which comes out of Nene at great Cross to the said Hobbs house) with Staven
Ea (which were wont to run to Tower house, and so to Wisbeche) do now run from
Hobbs house, by Hunster stones, through Hobbs dike, into March River.

Thence we went to March and Dodington: and between Dodington and Chateriz
there is a small lode Besselinges lode, which runs through a low Marish Fenn.

Thence to Chateriz Towns end; where there is a Sewer called Chateriz leame,
growing from the West-water at Chateriz Ferry unto Dodington weeles.

Thence to Mephall, and there saw Mephall lode, which runs from Sutton lode.
Thence, by water, to Cambridge.

In which passage we took notice, that Harrymere gravel was a great means of
the overflowing of Grant. As also of Burwell lode, Swaffham lode, and Botesham
lode, all which do fall into Grant.

Upon this view Mr. Hunt (who was the Artist for the Drayning) represented Ib.
f. 204, a.
to the said Commissioners what Cuts, Banks, Sluses, Clows etc. would be in his
judgment farther necessary in order to the perfecting this work; all which they
signified under their hands to the Lords of the Council, together with their
opinions how much it would tend to the honor and enriching of the Kingdom; but
declined, in regard of shortness of time, to give any estimate of the charge
thereof, or upon what conditions it would be meet to take it in hand.

And upon the xxiiiith. day of the same Month, 24 Iunij 3 Iac. Anno 1605.
the King himself, by his Letters Ib. f. 194. b.
bearing date at Grenewich, taking notice of theirs to the Lords of his
Council (as aforesaid) incited them, to fall in hand speedily with the work;
and the rather, because that was a dry Summer, and so the more proper for it:
intimating also, that for the better expediting thereof, he had employed his
Chief Justice ( Popham) to take pains therein.

Whereupon such good speed was made, that upon the xiiith. of the next Month,
this following certificate was delivered in to the said Commissioners, then
sitting at Wisebeche.

Ib. 197. a.
The true content or number of Acres in the Fenns described in the general Plot,
lying without the Fen-dikes, as it was delivered by William Hayward Gent.
Surveyor, upon his Oath at Wisbeche 13 July 1605.
Acres. BUrrough-soke great Fen, with some severals by Catts-water 13 ^^ly 3.
^ac. an. 1605.
8015 Borough little Fen. 900 Croyland Fenns, in three pieces 2000 Certain
several Fens and wet Meadows, lying in Ely, between Borrough- Little fen,
Borrough great Fen, and Catts water 763 Thorney grounds, containing in all
15850, whereof in hard land 400 Acres; in Fenn 15450 UUisbeche Hundred high
Fen, with Sutton Fen and Throkenholt severals 8365 Ladwers, Ixwell-moore, the
Rivers etc. and other severals between Coldham bank, Bishop's dike, the division
of March, UUelney-River, and Darcey-lode 0740 UUittlesey and Stanground Common
Fenns, with diverse severals and half severals between the old Ea and Thorney
bounds, the division of UUisbeche high Fenns and Dodington fenns; and from that
division by the High stream and Ramsey-mere to Knuts delph, and by that Delph
up to Horsey brigg (in which bound Ramsey has a part of a Fen, next to Ramsey
mere) containing 2800 Acres 24435 Other Fens between the said Delph, the high
stream, Ubmere, UUittlesey mere, and so by Conquest lode to Pocket-holme, and
the high Land 7390 Certain Fens in Huntingdonshire, between the high land
skirts, and Ramsey-Hards, and Mere; and the said high stream and Conquest lode
13455 Other Fenns of Huntindonshire, lying between Ramsey Mere, the high stream
to Benwick, the West-water to Erith brigge, and the skirts of the high land,
between the said Bridge and Ramsey Hards 13340 The Fenns of Dodington cum
membris, Common and several 32000 Honey Fens, in all 370. viz. Hard land 90. Fen
280 Chateryz Fens, together with certain Fens of Sutton and Byall fen, with
some severals lying between the bounds of Dodington and Honey, the West-water,
Sutton lode, and Oxwillow lode 20700 Sutton Fens on the South of Sutton lode,
between the West-water, Haddenham fens, and the Hardes of Haddenham, Sutton,
and Mephall 2910 Haddenham fens, between the former Fens, the River of Ouse,
Wilberton fens, and Haddenham hards 3870 Willingham fens, on the South of the
Ouse, on the West of Aldrey-Causey, besides Hempsall on the East thereof 2920
Wilberton Fens, with part of other Fens between the Ouse and Hard land, to Ely
bridge 2790 Grunty-fen, encompasseth with the high lands 1694 A Fen more North,
between Sutton lode, by Coveney and the hard land of diverse Towns compassing it
3780 Downham Wodfen, and other Fens between the Fens of Little port, the Ouse,
and Ely hard-lands, to the Town 2440 The Fens of Littleport on both sides of
the Ouse, Common and several 12660 Westmore, South of Darcey-lode, and West of
Welney River, together with diverse severals 15360 Certain Fen grounds, Common
and several, between Welney River, and the Causey dike in Upwell 1105 Certain
Fens, Common and several, between Welney River, Maid lode, the Ouse and
Litleport grounds 8600 Part of Wisbeche high Fen, lying in Waltersey, with
diverse severals 4320 Marshland-fen, and many other grounds between Maid lode
and Spalding River, the Fen banks, and Sea banks, which will be made dry by the
general drayning 4220 The Fens between Helgay brigg and Stoke brigg, by the
River on the South-east; the high lands of Stoke, Wretton, Wereham, D^reham and
Wroxham on the North; and the grounds of Edmund Skipwith Gent. on the West 2900
The Fens between the high grounds of Hocwold, Wilton, Feltwell, Methwold and
Northwold high lands, on the East; Soke River on the North; the imbanked
grounds of Helgay, Modney, Sot^erey, and in part the River of Ouse on the West,
and Brandon River, from Priest houses to Brandon brigg 23290 The Fens between
Brandon River, on the North the River of Ouse, in part; and Whelpmore and Burt
fen on the West; Mildenhall high land and River on the South; and the high
lands from Mildenhall to Brandon 22120 Between Mildenhall River, on the North
east Ouse, from Prickwillow to Ely brigg on the North West Stuntney and Soham
Causey, the high ground of Stuntney, Noruey, Soham, Isleham and Worlington on
the South, and East, contain 11780 Between the said Causey and the high lands
of Stuntney, on the North Ouse and Grant, from Ely brigg by Up-were on the
West, Wickynhie grounds on the South, and of Soham East 4297 The Fens and low
grounds between Grant from Upwere to Clay hithe and Horningsey high grounds, on
the West the way from Quoy to Eambridge, and Quoy and Bottesham high grounds on
the South^ the two Swafhams, Reach, Burwell, Lanward and Fordham, on the East;
and of Soham and Wickin North 11950 The Fens between the high grounds of
Teversham and Hinton West; of Fulburne South; of great and little Wilbram East;
of Bottesham and Quoy, North 1240 Between Grant from Harrymere to Ditton, on
the East of Ouse; from Harrymere to Aldrich bridge on the North; Hempsall, Yram
and the high grounds of Rampton, West; and the high grounds of Cottenham and
Denney Abbey South 9480 Hempsall and Ireham, East of Aldrich Causey 823 The low
grounds from St. Ives to Erith bridge on the South; the Fens of Willingham and
Over on the East; the high grounds of Swasey, Drayton, and Stanton on the
South, and the high grounds of St. Ives West 3529 The low grounds below St.
Ives, on the North side of Ouse, between the said River on the South and East,
and the high land of Bluntesham, Hallywell and St. Ives on the North and West
1871
The total sum 307242 Acres.

Whereupon the said Commissioners sitting 13 (...). 3. ^ac. an. 1605.
at Wisebeche aforesaid, upon the day and year aforesaid (the Lord
Chief Justice Popham being then and there present) made certain Laws I^. f.
204. ^.
and Ordinances, the extract whereof is, as follows.

Ordered, first, that Sir John Popham Knight Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir
Thomas Fleming Knight Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir William Rumney Knight
Alderman of London, and John Eldred Citizen and Cloth-worker of London, their
heirs and assigns, shall within the space of 7 years, next coming, at their own
proper costs and charges, drayn all the Fens and surrounded grounds, between
the old course of the River of Ouse as it now runs from Erith bridge to
Salters lode, and Deping; and within the land Eas hereafter mentioned: And
convey the said River of Ouse, or the greatest part thereof, from some place at
or near Erith bridge aforesaid, unto such place between Salters lode and Maiden
lode, as the said Undertakers etc. shall think meet.

Which conveyance to be made between the bottom of the two uttermost Banks 30
pole at the least, and the Rivers to be 30 foot wide and 8 foot deep: And the
same utmost Banks, to be each of them 30 foot wide at the bottom, and 7 foot
in height at the least; and if that height will not do, to carry away the water
etc. then to raise them higher.

That the like passage be made at the entrance of the Fens near Peterborough,
for the conveyance of the River Nene from thence to Wisbeche.

And so likewise for the River of Weland, from its entrance into the Fens at
Waldram Hall, until it meet with Glen.

That Land-Eas from Erith to Stanground, and thence to Waldram hall be made, to
defend the grounds within them, and between the said new passage of Ouse and
Weland from the Land floods falling from the Upland-Countreys: which Land eas
to be from the utmost part of the Fence dike 6 pole at least.

That a drayn be made from Salters lode unto the Ham in March River, to carry
away the water which shall fall into the same Land eas etc.

That a new Bank be made from Erith bridge to Ely, to defend the grounds between
that and the same new passages from the overflowing of Ouse: As also other
necessary Sluses and Drayns, within the precincts beforementioned, with
Bridges etc. for passage etc.

That the Undertakers shall have such sums of money as the Commissioners at
their Session shall think fit, from those persons who shall take benefit by
this drayning, and not contribute part of their Lands toward the charge
thereof.

That the Undertakers shall allow for the drayn at Clows Cross in ease of this
charge to the Country.

That a Navigable Sluse be made at Salters lode. And that Well-Creeke shall be
enlarged and diked to London lode; and thence through Neatmore to Wadingstowe;
and thence over the River of Wellenhee, as directly as may be, unto or above
the Ham in March River. And a Sluse, with a bridge to be made at Wadingstow, to
keep so much of the River Neene, as shall be needful, in its old course
through both the Towns of Well.

In recompense of which performance, the said Undertakers to have one hundred
and thirty thousand Acres, of statute measure, of Fen grounds (at fivescore to
the hundred) to be taken out of the worst sort of every particular Fen
proportionably, by the Commissioners, before the Feast of the Annunciation of
our Lady next coming, the whole number of surrounded Acres being 307242.

And that the Undertakers, their heirs etc. shall enjoy all the said waters,
Fishings and Banks, of and within the Rivers, with the Indikes, and Land-Eas;
and liberty to take sufficient menure for the repairing of the said Banks etc.
which Rivers, Banks, Indikes etc. to be accounted parcel of the said 130000
Acres so assigned to them.

And that the said Undertakers shall make good all drowned parcells out of
their own proportions, or in value, in case the drayning be not made perfect to
the Land-owners.

Of which quick dispatch his Majesty being advertised, he wrote to them, again,
from Theobalds, upon the xxiiith. of the same Month of July: by which Letters
Ib. f. 195. a.
he commended their endeavors in the work, 23 Iulij. 3. Iac.
and progress made therein: and, taking notice of some opposition, which had
been made by certain people thereto, not knowing out of what spirit it
proceeded, desired them to take special care to suppress the spreading of all
false rumors, that might give distaste to the Country, touching their
proceedings therein, and with those who were then employed by his Majesty in
that service, as also to examine the grounds of all such rumors, and to punish
the Offenders; giving advertisement to his Majesty and the Council of any
mutinous speeches, which might be raised concerning this business, so generally
intended for the public good.

Shortly after this, viz. upon Monday, Aug. 5th. Mr. Hunt, Ric. Atkyns and
others, laid Ib. 199. b. A^g. 5th.
out the ground where the River, through Neatmore should go, by a straight line
to Mumbes dikes end: An. 1605.
but misliking the way, on Tuesday they veiwed New ditch; and in the Northeast
end thereof, Popham lode begun.
by the Pow dich, laid out the Ditch, to be led, line-right, from thence to the
Cross at Upwell Towns end.

And upon Aug. 7th.
Wednesday, about 8 of the Clock, the work began, in the presence of Mr. Hunt
(who cast the first spit the wrong way) Mr. Helon, Mr. Totnall, Mr. Hamon, Mr.
John Fyncham, Mr. Richard Atkyns, and others. And was prosecuted so well, as
that upon Ib. f. 199. b. 11 Dec.
the xxith. of December following (being the Feast day of S. Thomas the
Apostle) the Bank at the Cross at Upwell towns end was opened, and the River
suffered to run; as also a Bridge presently laid over. 15 M^rtij.
But on the xvth. of March next ensuing, there happened so great a storm, that it
brake the Banks of this new River, and drowned Neatmore, with the severals
adjoining: So that on the xxi. 21 Martij.
of the same Month of March, they were constrained to stop the River at Upwell
Towns end, again.

Not long after this, there was a Petition Ib. s. 195. b.
exhibited to the King, by the Inhabitants of diverse fen-towns without the I Will
of Ely, in the Counties of Suff. and Cambridg; humbly desiring, that whereas a
most laudable work of drayning the Fens etc. was then recommended to the high
Court of Parliament, and that diverse Towns lying on the skirts of those Fens
would have no benefit thereby, in regard their lands were very seldom
surrounded; they therefore might be excluded out of the intended Act of
Parliament, whereby a proportion of the said Fen grounds was to be allowed to
the undertakers in the drayning, for the supporting of their charge therein.

Whereupon the Lords of the Council, by their Letters Ib. f. 196. a.
dated at White Hall upon the xxxi. of August, in the fourth year of the said
K. James his Reign, Ult. A^g. 4 Iac. Anno 1606.
reciting what had been signified formerly by them as to the fecibleness of the
before-specified Drayning, and that the Lord Chief Justice ( Popham) was
present at the Session of Sewers held at Cambridge, and gave notice to the
Country that his Majesty's pleasure was so far to further the same, as to men
of understanding might appear to be to the general good of his people; as also
that there was a Law then made for the said Drayning: And moreover, that at
another Session held at Wysbeche, order was taken for the drawing of a Law to
be presented to the Parliament for confirmation thereof: But that some persons,
not well understanding the state of the cause, complained to his Majesty of
great losses and hindrances which they were like to sustain in case the said
Act should proceed; and therefore desired the said Commissioners to examine the
true Causes of those Complaints; and to represent to them the true state of the
Fens, with the difference between the last years profit and that present year.

In answer whereunto the said Commissioners made this return Ib. f. 196. b^
to the said Lords of the Council; viz. that they did meet at Cambridge on the
22. of October 1606. for the Examination of the Petition formerly mentioned;
and that they found few reasons to fortify it, but such as were or might be
provided for in the intended Bill; all persons with whom they had treated
having acknowledged, that the want of drayning was an inestimable hurt to those
Fenny Countries: And that whereas an objection had been made of much prejudice
that might redound to the poor by such drayning, they had information by
persons of good credit, that in several places of recovered grounds, within the
Isle of Ely etc. such as before that time had lived upon Alms, having no help
but by fishing and fowling, and such poor means out of the Common Fens, while
they lay drowned, were since come to good and supportable Estates.

The Chief Contents Ib. f. 207. a.
of the Bill handled in Parliament, Anno 4. Regis Jacobi, touching this general
Drayning.
The limitation of time allowed to Sir John Popam Knight (Lord Chief Justice)
and the rest of the Adventurers, for accomplishing the work, was to be ten
years after the end of that Session of Parliament.

The particular Cutts and Drayns etc. to be made by the Undertakers, were as
follows.
1. A New River, with a Bank and In-dike, from the Upland, near Peykirke,
between Weland and Burrow Bank, unto or near Heddike Corner; and thence to
Crouland water head, and there to place a Sluse; and so to great Porsand Bank,
with a Dam over the River to the said Bank, to keep in Weland from overflowing.

2. To amend the Leame from Peterborough to Guyhirne; and to cut a new River
and Bank on either side of the said Leame, with Indikes for preserving of the
Banks; the North Bank to begin from Burrow little Fen Bank; where six of the
Commissioners shall think fit.

3. To enlarge the River from Guy hirne to Wisebeche, and so to the four Gotes.

4. To make a sufficient passage for the River of Ouse, from Erith to Salters
lode, either by enlarging its Chanel, or embanking etc. And to make two new
Rivers to begin about Erith brigg, and so to go by Sprall's were, to Maid lode;
and so through Denver fen into Ouse, about Denver hithe, with sufficient Banks
and Indikes etc. and Sluses at the upper end of the new Rivers and West water,
in such sort as the Navigation in old Ouse and Grant may not be impaired.

5. To imbank in all needful places, Grant, Mildenhall, Brandon and Stoke
Rivers; viz. Grant from a Corner below Clayhithe ferrey, Mildenhall, and
Brandon Rivers, from their entrance into the Fens, or from some other more
convenient places. And Stoke River, from Stoke Causey; unto the places where
they fall into Ouse; and to enlarge them where need is, with Banks and Indikes
etc. as six of the Commissioners should think fit.

6. And to make new Rivers, Banks, Indikes etc. where need is etc. yielding to
the owners of the Lands, such recompense, as any six of the said Commissioners
should think meet. As also Bridges, passages, Sluses, and Land Eas.

7. That they may take in water to maintain fishing, so as the same be kept
within Banks, and be not hurtful to the adjoining Fens.

8. To make Ferryes and Ferrey houses where need is.

9. That for this performance the Undertakers etc. to have in severalty 112000.
Acres, Statute measure, by the small hundred, by assignation of the
Commissioners.

10. That where there is sufficient waste to answer the Undertakers, and leave
sufficient for the Commoners, the Land owners not to be impeached in their
severals.

11. That the Commissioners do respect both quantity and quality in their
opportioning.

12. That such opportioning be made before Michaellmass A. 1007. if they may.

13. That of Waltersey the Undertakers to have 2. full parts of 3. to be set
out, as aforesaid.

14. That the Undertakers shall have the soil, waters, and fishing of all the
new Rivers, so to be made, with the Banks, Indikes etc.

15. That they shall begin to take their profits, as they finish their
draynings.

16. That if any of the grounds shall be again overflowen, recompense to be
made to the parties damnified, out of the 112000. Acres, to be assessed by any
six Justices of the Peace (whereof 2. of the Quorum) where such surrounding
shall happen.

17. That all grounds adjoining to these Fens, which are bettered by the
Drayning, shall contribute toward the charge of the Undertakers, as any six or
more of the Commissioners shall think meet.

18. That all Manors, Wastes, and Common shall have metes and boundaries set
to them by the said Commissioners, where the bounds are known; and so likewise
where they are not known, to do the like; which boundaryes shall stand good for
ever. And that if the Commissioners cannot agree; the difference to be
certifyed to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time being; who with
the assistance of certain Judges of both Benches, to determine it. And that
within 3. years after such determination, the Owners and Commoners to make
division Dikes, in breadth and depth as shall be thought fit by their Lords and
the Homage.

19. That the Commons shall be stinted by the Lords and greatest part of the
Freeholders, and Copyholders Commoners, with the allowance and consent of the
Judge of the Isle, or one of the Justices of Assize of the County.

20. That the Cottagers upon the Lords waste, not having right of Common,
because they have been suffered to take benefit of the wastes, shall be provided
for by the Lords and Homage in every Manor, in the said wastes, as the Lords
and Homage shall think fit.

21. That of the 112000. Acres belonging to the Undertakers, no more then 4d.
an Acre to be paid for the Tithe thereof for ever, yearly.

21. That after the said Drayning, there shall be a Corporation, or body
politic of xxx. known discreet and sufficient persons, by the name of the
Governors of the Fens within the Isle of Ely etc. to purchase etc. Lands, to
sue and to be sued by that name; the first of these to be Martin ^ishop of Ely,
Sir Anthony Mildmay, Sir John Peyton, Governor of Gern^ey; Si^ Oliver Crumwell,
Sir Robert Bevyll, Sir Edw. Coke Attorney General, Sir John Cutts, Sir John
Heigham, Sir Rob. Wingfield, ^ir Rob. Cotton, Sir Edw. Apsley, Sir Henry
Warner, Sir Miles Sandys, Sir Simeon Steward, Sir Thomas Lambert, Sir William
Rumney Knights; Humfrey Tindall Dean of Ely, Anthony Irby, Tho. War, Thomas
Rawly^s, and Henry Totnall Esquires; John Eldred, Roger O^field of London
Merchants, John Fyncham, and John Hunt Gentlemen: And when these die new to be
chosen, by the most voices, out of such Lords or Undertakers as shall have
1000. Acres at the least of lands assigned to them.

21. And that the Governors for ever shall have assured to them 112000 Acres,
statute measure, which they may keep for ever, and the profits to be employed
for the perpetual maintenance of the drayning, and satisfaction for drowning,
as before, so far as it will suffice; and when it will not suffice, the
Governors then to lay a Tax of all the rest, to do it withal.

22. And that the said Governors may make Laws for the maintenance of the
drayning and levying such Taxes, in cases aforesaid, and put them in execution,
being ratified by the Lord Chancelour, Lord Keeper, or the Lord Tresurer and
the two Chief Justice^ or any three of them, whereof the Lord Keeper, or
Tresurer to be one. And the Governors to let the lands to them appointed, to
the best value, so as they exceed not the term of seven years.

An. 4o. Iacobi Regis Cap. 13. Observations Ib. 167. b,
out of the Act for Drayning of certain Fens etc. within the I Will of Ely,
containing about 6000. Acres, and compassed with a Bank called the Ring of
Waldersey and Coldham.
THat Francis Tindall Esquire, Henry Far, and John Cooper Gent^ having
undertaken to endeavor the drayning etc. shall have power, for the space of 7
years ensuing the end of that present Session of Parliament, 4 ^ Iac^
to effect the same; the lands so intended to be drayned, lying within the Bank
beginning at Kekys mill, and thence extending by Tower house and Hobbes house
to Tylney hirne; so by Maryes dam and Elm leame to Friday bridge; and thence
by Redmore dike, Begdale, and Goldike to Kekys mill again. And that for the
doing thereof they may have power to make new, or repair, as need is, all
Drains, Lodes, Banks etc. and Sluices, as they shall think fit, not being in
Marshland, with^in the old Pow dike, giving such satisfaction to the owners, as
by any six Commissioners of Sewers (whereof three inhabiting within the said
Isle, and thr^e within the County of Norff.) shall be set down.

Which Undertakers etc. having accomplished the said Drayning, to have two
parts, in three, of the lands so drayned, to them and their heirs, to be set
out by six of the said Commissioners at the least, wh^r^of four inhabiting
within the said Isle: which two parts to be holden of the chief Lord of the Fee
etc. in free and common So^age, and to be exempt from payment of any Tithes for
7 years, after the time limited for the said drayning.

But if the said grounds so undertaken etc. shall in de^ault of the said
Undertakers, be overflowed and so continue by the space of two months betwixt
the Feast of S. Mich. the Archangel and the Annunciation of our Lady; or the
space of one month betwixt the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady and S.
Michael, the owner by the view etc. of any six of the said Commissioners, to
re-enter and to enjoy the same.

Things most observable, extracted by me W. D. out of the Verdict Ib. f. 116.
^. 26 Iulii 6 Iac. An. 1608.
of the Iurats, for the Hundred of Clakclose and Freebridge in Marshland, at a
Session of Sewers held at Ely 26 Iulii An. 1608. 6 Iacobi.
1 THat the River of Well from Salters lode to North delf, and so upward, was
then in great decay in depth and breadth, for want of clensing etc.

2. So likewise the Sewer called Small lode, in Upwell, being stopped etc.

3. That the Sewer called London lode, lying in Upwell, ordained for the
Drayning of the Fen called N^atmore, was a^^o in some decay.

4. That the Sewer called Maid lode (beginning at Welney water) extending to
Shiplode and so to the River of Ouse, was imposed upon the Undertakers to scour
etc.

5. That the Sewer called New dich in Littleport, taking its head from Welney
water, and extending to Crekelode, in Sothrey and Helgay, was then in decay etc.

6. That the Sluse at Crekelode end, next to the River of Ouse, being utterly
decayed, to be new made, with a door six foot broad, and 8 foot deep.

7.
That there was a new Sewer in Upwell then lately begun, by the late Lord chief
Justice Popham; P^pham Ea.
which taking its head out of the River of March, near a place in Upwell called
Newdich end; and extending in self through the Common of Upwell etc. to
Wadyngstow, and so through Neatmore, falls into Well River at North delph,
is esteemed to be a perfect Drayn for the most part of the Isle of Ely,
especially the whole Hundred of Wisbeche, and the Towns of Upwell, March,
Dodington, Wimlington, Benwick, Chateriz, Whitlesey, Litleport, and other
adjoining places, even to the high Lands.

8. That the Common Sewer in Sothery, called Stake lode, was then in great
decay.

9. That the River of Wysse, from Helgay brigge to the River of Ouse, was then
defective in breadth and depth; and to be amended.

The next year following, upon the 7th day of June, in a Session Ib. f. 210. b.
7 Iunii 7 Iac.^ An. 1609.
of Sewers held at Ely, these following Laws were made, viz.
1. That the defects in Popham lode shall be amended. 2. That for the safeguard
of the grounds in Well, by which the said Lode must pass, there be on either
side of the same a sufficient Crest made, extending from the Causey of Upwe^l
to Well river at North delph, and the said Crest, or Bank, to be six foot from
the plain ground, and in breadth at the top six foot, and in thickness at the
bottom xviii foot: And that the said River be scoured and cast two foot more in
depth than it then was. With Indikes of x foot in breadth, and four in depth,
and two convenient Pipes or Sluses at its fall at North delph into Well River.
3. That a Bridge of stone be made at the head of the said River by the Causey
aforesaid, over the said Lode, of x foot broad, with Sluses in the three Arches
thereof. 4. That four pair of Bars be set up to keep Cattle from coming on the
said Banks. 5. And that Well River from Mullycourt to Salters lode be made
above 50 foot wide.
1 Aug. 7 Iac.
By virtue of which Law, the River called Popham lode was again taken Ib. f.
200. a.
in hand upon the first of August ensuing; and cast two foot deeper.

An. 1609. 23 ^ug. 7 ^a^.
Soon after this, viz. on the xxiii of the same month, in a Session of Sewers Ex
bund^llo De^^^torum in Officio nun^upa^o the Pettib^g.
held at Ely, the Commissioners, taking into their consideration, that whereas
part of the main River, dividing the County of Huntendon from the Isle of Ely,
called the West water, had used to fall by and through Sutton lode; and thence
by sundry Lodes, to Cannol lode, and so into Welney water, near Littleport; all
which Lodes, by sundry annoyances and negligences, were become almost
altogether unprofitable to the Country etc. to the great damage of all the
Towns lying on the South side of the said Isle, and sundry Towns in the
Counties of Cambridge and Huntendon; they ordered and decreed, that all the
said Lodes should be cleansed And also, that one ancient Bank on the East side
of the West water, extending from Erith to Sutton lode end, and so to Mydelmore
stamp, should be raised four foot from the Level of the ground thereabouts,
and made ten foot in breadth at the bottom, and 3 foot at the top, by the owners
etc. ^f the said grounds.

And one other Bank, lying by the said Westwater upon Mydilmore; and another at
the South thereof in South Medland, extending it self from New ditch etc. to be
made of the height and breadth aforesaid, by the Inhabitants of Sutton abovesaid.

And that another Bank, lying partly by the said Westwater, extending from the
^outh end of Abbots Holload house bank to Holload gate, at the miles end, and
so by the Westwater in North Medland, unto Sutton lodes end aforesaid; t^ence
to Mydilmore stamp; thence by Shakpole lode, so to Manny Mandolegate, to
Hunlode gate, to be repaired, as aforesaid, by the Inhabitants of Sutton, and
Mepall abovementioned.

About that time twelvemonth, there was another Session of Sewers held at
Wysebeche, viz. sexto Iulii, 8 Iacobi, where James Hawe Gentleman, 6 Iulii 8
Iac. Anno 1610.
Edmund Gawsell Gent. and others, presented Ex praefato cod. MS. p^n^s O. John
Arm.
as follows;
Inprimis, we find not by any Record etc. that the River of Well, from North
delf pingle, unto Salters lode, has at any time within the memory of man, been
ditched: But we find that it has been twice enlarged by the Inhabitants of
Marshland, and the Town of Wiggenhall, and the Landholders of North delf
pingle, viz. in the sixth year of K. Henry the 1. and at the erecting of New
Powdich etc.

And we likewise find, that in 18 Eliz. there was 24 foot of ground, lying on
the South side of the River next Salters lode, granted to the Inahbitants of
Marshland and the Town of Wiggenhall; whereof xii foot was dug next to the
river, for the erecting of a Bank to amend the Pow dich in time of necessity:
In full satisfaction whereof the said Inhabitants of Marshland and Wiggenhall,
with the Landholders aforesaid, did grant to widen the River, there, xii foot:
Which Grant was then decreed by a Law of Sewers, for perpetuity etc.

We likewise say, that Popham Ee, does, and is likely to bring much more water
to the River of Well, from North delf to Salters lode, than has usually
passed that way, within the memory of man.

Upon which Verdict ensued then and at that place these Orders made by Sir John
Peyton, Sir Miles Sands, and other his Majesty's Commissioners, viz.
That the ixth of August, next following, a view should be taken by the said
Commissioners, of the River between North delf and Salters lode; and upon the
same view, a Law made, for the widening, diking, and making it of such
wideness and depth, as the said Commissioners should think fit; to be done at
the charges of the Country of Marshland, the Town of Wigenhall, and the
Landholders of the hundred and odd Acres in Stowe; and the Landholders of North
delf pingle: And that the said Landholders etc. shall be thereupon, free from
any charge toward Popham Ee.

Upon this view, it was likewise agreed; that the River from North delf to
Matthew Bales, and xl pole lower^ should be made xxx foot wide; which was done
accordingly.
The next year following, at a Session of Sewers, held Ib. f. 226. a. 20 M^ui.
9 Iac. an. 1611.
at Stow brynke, in com. Noff. upon the xx of May, it was thus ordered by the
Commissioners, that the Undertakers and their heirs should have power to drayn
all the grounds mentioned in the Act of 4 Iac. (formerly mentioned) through the
Pipe called Coldham got, which lies under the Bank of Elm leame; and so
through a piece of ground, lying between the said Leame, and a Bank leading
from Friday bridge to Bishops dike; and so till it come over against a Dike
between the lands in Oldfield and Needham: Thence betwixt the lands in Oldfield
and Says field on the one side, and Needham bank and Thornedike on the other
side; and so to Old lode, called Chapel lode; Thence through Greendike; Thence
to the Bridge near B^aupre Hall: Thence to Stonhamslile, and so to Boys fen
gate: Thence unto Bedingfield Bars, and so to Hook gate: and thence to Staple
were at the Bank of Ouse.

This was called Coldham and Waltersey Law. In pursuance Ib. f. 299. b. 2 Aug.
9 Iac.
whereof the Dikers set upon the work, upon the Wednesday then next following.

And upon the second of August, the Ma^ons began Ibid.
the Pipe under UUelle River, which was finished upon the Tuesday after
Michaelmass day.

After which, within a few days ( viz, on Friday ensuing) the Masons began
Ibid.
the Sluse at Stow for Coldham.

And upon Saturday, being the xxith of September, the Commissioners took Ibid.
view, ^1 Sept. 9 Iac.
for Mr. Bell, in Stowe and UUelle, for the low grounds between Popham lode,
and the new Powdike.

All things therefore speeding on so well, upon Thursday following (it being
the xxvi of September 26 S p^.
) in a Session Ib. f. 299. ^.
held at King's Linne, in the County of Norfolk, there was another Law of
Sewers made, called Low fen, and UUalsingham fen Law, the tenor whereof is as
follows, viz.

Whereas there are about 1300 Acres of low grounds, lying together in the
several Parishes of Upwell and Outwell in the County aforesaid, between Popham
River on the South, and the Bank called Bardyke and Churchfield dike on the
North, and Outwell Crest toward the East, which are preserved from overflowing
by the said Crest, and by the Bank on the North side of Popham river aforesaid;
which low grounds may be drayned etc. And that the repairing of the said Crest,
and of the North Bank of Popham River will be a defense to the new
Powdich, and a great preservation to the Country of Marshland.

And whereas the drayn from Plawfield, in Upwell, to Hodghyrne; and there
falling into Rightforth lode, and thence, by a Sluse near Stow bridge into the
River of Ouse, is very defective etc. which being repaired would be sufficient
to drayn all those low grounds: We do ordain and decree etc. that it shall be
lawful ^or the Landholders and Commoners of and in the said low grounds etc.
to drayn them through the said Sewer.

And we do farther ordain, that the said Sewer from the said Sluse to a place
called West head shall be diked etc. ten foot broad in the bottom, at the
least; and in depth proportionable etc. And from thence to UUelle river x foot
broad, and 5 foot deep, and the greater part of the menure to be cast on the
South side of the said Lode, from UUest head to the East end of Hodg hirne, for
the making of a sufficient Crest to hold the waters within the brink thereof.

And that there shall be placed in the North end of Churchfield dike, in
Outwell, a Sluse of Brick with a tunnel of two foot broad, and three foot high,
with a door to be pulled up and shut etc. And from the said Sluse a Drayn or
Sewer to be made under Churchfield dike on the East part thereof, to the North
end of Champney-Corner: And from thence to continue the same Drayn, in an
ancient Dike, between Outwell Common on the North etc. to North delph.

8 O^t. 9 I^c. Anno 1611.
Upon Ib. f. 200. a.
Tuesday (being the 8th of October following) in the night tide, the Dam made
by Mr. Hunt for Coldham, a little below Stow bridge, broke up; and on
Wednesday, being inwardly taken with a little light Moor, broke again: So
likewise on Thursday, being taken with earth between Planks set end-wise, it
brake again; and continued running till Sunday Oct. 13. At which place there
assembled that day, Sir Raphe Hare and six other Commissioners; who laying the
command of the work and order of it upon Mr. Richard Hunt; he, with the
assistance of the Country, took it in hand, and made it firm before the return
of the next Tide.

But as we see by how little was done in this and most of the precedent years,
that the general Drayning went but slowly on, notwithstanding the King himself,
as also the Lords of the Council, and those Gentlemen who were constituted
Commissioners for that purpose, had so earnestly endeavored the speeding
thereof; so was there now such a stop, for the space of five years at the
least, that there nothing appears of consequence to have been farther
prosecuted therein, by reason of the opposition which diverse p^rverse spirited
people made thereto, by bringing of turbulent suits in Law, as well against the
said Commissioners, as those whom they employed therein, and making of
libellous Songs to disparage the work; of which kind I have here thought fit to
insert one, called the Powtes Complaint.

COme Brethren of the water, and let us all assemble,
To treat upon this matter, which makes us quake and tremble;
For we shall rue it if it be true that Fenns be undertaken,
And where we feed in Fen and Reed thei'le feed both Beef and Bacon.
Thei'l sow both Beans and Oats, where never man yet thought it,
Where men did row in Boats ere Undertakers bought it:
But Ceres thou behold us, let wild Oats be their venture,
Oh let the Frogs and miry Boggs destroy where they do enter.
Behold the great design, which they do now determine,
Will make our bodies pine a prey to Crows and Vermin:
For they do mean all Fenns to drain and waters overmaster,
All will be dry, and we must dye 'cause Essex-Calves want pasture.
Away with Boats and Rodder, Farewell both Boots and Skatches,
No need of the one nor the other, men now make better matches;
Stiltmakers all and Tanners shall complain of this disaster;
For they will make each muddy Lake for Essex Calves a pasture.
The fethered Fowls have wings, to fly to other Nations;
But we have no such things to help our transportations;
We must give place (oh grievous case) to horned Beasts and Cattle,
Except that we can all agree to drive them out by Battle.
Wherefore let us entreat our ancient water Nurses,
To show their power so great as t'help to drain their purses;
And send us good old Captain Flood to lead us out to Battle,
Then two-peny Jack, with Skakes on's back will drive out all the Cattle
This noble Captain yet was never known to fail us,
But did the Conquest get of all that did assail us;
His furious rage none could assuage, but to the Worlds great wonder,
He bears down banks and breaks their ranks and Whirly-giggs asunder.
God Eolus we do thee pray, that thou will not be wanting,
Thou never said us nay, now listen to our canting:
Do thou deride their hope and pride, that purpose our confusion;
And send a blast, that they in haste may work no good conclusion.
Great Neptune (God of Seas) this work must needs provoke thee;
They mean thee to disease, and with Fen-water Choke thee:
But with thy Mace do thou deface and quite confound this matter,
And send thy Sands to make dry lands when they shall want fresh water.
And eke we pray thee Moon, that thou will be propitious
To see that naught be done to prosper the malicious;
Though Summers heat has wrought a feat, whereby themselves they flatter,
Yet be so good as send a flood lest Essex Calves want water.
Upon great complaint therefore of these their doings, made to the Lords of the
Council, I find this Order Ib. f. 237. a. 8 Nov. 14 I^c. An. 1616.
made by them, bearing date at White Hall upon the 8th. of November, in the
xiiijth. year of the said King's Reign; viz.

That whereas sundry vexatious suits had been brought against his Majesty's
Commissioners of Sewers and their Officers by diverse obstinate persons, for
executing the Orders etc. of the said Commission, to the great hazard of the
inundation of many large Levells in the Counties of Northt. Hunt. Cambr. and
Linc. That the said Lords, well weighing these undue proceedings, and the
ancient Laws of this Realm, evidenced from diverse notable Records in the very
point questioned; as also the continued practice of ancient and latter times;
and likewise the opinion in writing of the Lord Chief Justice Popham, upon the
Questions touching the Authority and power of the said Commission; viz. first
whether the said Commissioners have Authority to cause new Banks, Drayns^ or
Sluices to be made, wh^re none have been before.

Secondly, whether they may lay a Tax upon any Hundred, Town or the Inhabitants
thereof in general, and not impose it upon every particular man, according to
the ^uantity of his land or Common. Thirdly, whether they may commit to prison
such as disobey their Orders etc. and Fourthly, whether that Actions of false
Imprisonment, Trespass, and other Process at the Common law, have been brought
against the Commissioners or their Officers for executing their Decrees, Orders
etc.

Their Lordships finding in their wisdoms, that it can neither stand with Law
nor Common sense, that in a case of so great consequence the Law can be void of
providence, to restrain the Commissioners in making new works, as well to stop
the fury of the waters, as to repair the old, where necessity requires it for
the safety of the Country; or to raise a charge upon the Towns or Hundreds in
general, which are interessed in the benefit or loss, with attending a
particular admesurement of Acres, where the service is to be speedy etc.

Or that a Commission of so high consequence to the Commonwealth, and of so
ancient Jurisdiction, both before the Statute and since, should want means of
coercion for obedience to their Orders etc. whereas upon the performance of
them, the preservation of thousands of his Majesty's Subjects, their lands,
goods, and lives does depend: and plainly perceiving, that it will be a direct
frustrating and overthrow to the Authority of the said Commission, if the
Commissioners etc. shall be subject to every suit at the pleasure of the
Delinquent etc.

Their Lordships ordered, that the persons formerly committed by that Board for
their contempts concerning this cause, should stand committed, until they
release or discharge such their Actions etc. Saving nevertheless any complaint
or suit for any oppression or grievance before the Court of Sewers, or before
the said Council board, if they receive not Justice at the said Commissioners
hands: And that Letters be written to the Commissioners to proceed in their
several Commissions etc.

And in pursuance of this general work, the said Lords of his Majesty's Council
sitting at White Hall the ixth. of May, Anno 1617.
then next following, orderd; Ib. f 250. b. 9. Ma^^ 15^^
1. That a Sluse must necessarily be made at the out-fall of Wisbeche River
into the Sea, at the charge as well of the high-Countries as the low, to be
rated by the Commissioners of Sewers. 2. That the River of Wisbeche, and all
the branches of Nene and Westwater^ be cleansed and made in breadth and depth as
much as by ancient Record it shall appear they have been; or where that cannot
appear, at the discretion of the Commissioners. 3. That Weland be also scoured
etc. from the out-fall to Waldram Hall, at the particular charge of the owners,
and their Tenants: As also the River of South Ea, from Crouland to Guy hirne,
by those that of right ought to do it; and that till that be done, Clows cross
drayn shall run. 4. And that things to be farther done therein be referred to a
new Commission of Sewers, to be procured at the indifferent charge of the
Countries therein mentioned.


10 S^pt. 15 I^c.
After this; viz. upon the xth. of September, the ^ame year, in a Session of
Sewers held at Wisebeche, before Francis Lord Russell, and other his Majesty's
Commissioners, it was ( inter alia) ordered; Ib. f. 42. 1


That London lode should be damned up at Welle-Causey; and that Popham Ea be
made a perfect Sewer, with Banks on both sides, according to a former law, for
height breadth and strength, and so continued for ever. And that so much charge,
as the charge of the Banks on both sides of London lode, and of the lode it
self, whereof they are dischardged, by this Order shall be employed upon the
making and maintaining of the Banks and Sewers of Popham Ea, the same to be
rated by the Commissioners of Sewers.

And that the said Commissioners shall also consider what charge is to be
imposed on those, who by the old law were chargable toward Small lode, and to
allow the same upon Popham Ea, etc.

Whereupon Sir Henry Hobart Knight, 11 Nov. 15 Iac.
then Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, being then advised with, and
likewise assisted by diverse of the Commissioners of Sewers, delivered his
opinion Ib. f. 258. a.
touching this Drain called Small lode, as follows; viz.

1. That it is an old forsaken Sewer, not known within the memory of man to
have been in use, and so grown up, that the very tract thereof is not in many
places discernable; and that it is also uncertain whether the proper out-fall
thereof should be toward the Ouse (as an exemplyed Law of 39. Eliz. appoints
it) or to Wisbeche River, as some Presentiments, much more ancient, do declare
it. 2. That the scouring thereof has anciently belonged to the owners of lands
adjoining (now pertaining to Sinolphus Bell Esquire and others) but for the
reasons aforesaid not put in charge till the said Law of 39. Eliz. ordaining it
to be opened, and to have its fall by the new Powdich into Ouse. 3. That by a
Law made ix. Iac. grounded upon a view and open debate in Sessions, it was
ordained to be damned up, as unnecessary. 4. That Popham Ea (though a new Sewer)
is of such use, in respect of its largeness, and situation, that it alone
suffices (as many think) both to discharge the waters descending thither from
the high Countries, and those also of the grounds drayned by London lode, that
there is no use of this Small lode. 5. That therefore those lands adjoining
(which belong to the said Sinolphus Bell and others) be discharged from its
repair etc.
Reasons confirming this opinion.
So long as the outfall of Wisbeche had its perfect being, the whole River of
Ouse had there its perfect outfall, from whence the Town seems to have taken
the denomination; viz. Ouse or Wisebeche. Thither then came the first Branch of
Ouse, from Erith, by the course now called the West water to Benwick; where
meeting with a part of Nene (which then was very small, the greatest passage
being, in those days, by Crouland, South Ea, Wride stream, and other Courses
about Thorney) fell together by Great Cross or Plant-water, to the North Seas
at Wisbeche. The other part at Ouse, being the second Branch, fell down from
Eryth to Harrymere, and there meeting with the River Grant from Cambridge,
passed so united to Ely; thence to Litleport Chair, and so by Welney and Well
to the said North Seas at Wisbeche, where it met with the former Branch from
Benwick.

Then, as it seems, there was no River between Litleport Chair and Rebbech,
which is a place by Priests houses, where Ouse parva or Brandon water, falls
in: But diverse Lodes, Lakes and Dikes; at S. Edmunds lode, Gnat lode, and Docky
lode, which took their natural fall into a great Mere by Well, called the
Wide; and from the Wide, by diverse tracts, as Webwinch lake, Aldy lode, old
Small lode, Cheselbeche, Waxbeche lode, Small lode; and so into the River at
Upwell; and thence, with the same Branch from Litleport to the North Seas at
Wisbeche.

But Wisbeche outfall decaying; and the passage of Nene by Crouland, likewise
fa^ling, through the decay of of Spalding River, and other hinderanc^s; the
Westwater, or first branch of Ouse, with Nene united, waxed weak in the
passage, and so fell down by March to Well; and not finding passage by Well
at Shrewes nest point, the most part thereof turned back again to Litleport, by
the old forsaken second Branch of Ouse, and holds that course to this day.

This second Branch of Ouse, with Grant united, lying hereby debarred of
passage by Wisbeche, means was made to let it fall from Litleport-Chair to
Rebbech, by a lode, which at the first seemed to be called Hemmings Ea, and so
in Ouse parva's Chanel, passed to Salters lode, and thence to Lynne; whose
Chanel, not long before that time, was not above six pole wide, being then by
due presentment said at that time to be both infficient for the Haven and
Vessels thither resorting by the inlet of the Salt water; and large enough to
pass away the fresh, as by the proceedings of a fair Commission thereof, in
An. 1378. may appear. (2 R. 2.)


Then began the waters from above Well, and all thereabouts, to seek their
passage by that Tract to Lynne ( UUisbeche Chanel, and so as low as the Cross
Keys, which was over the face of the Marshes betwixt Well and Wisbeche, and so
downwards toward Tirington, utterly thereby decaying, as to this day may yet
be seen) But the people of Marshland finding themselves overcharged by these
waters, upon complaint made to King Edward the first, obtained a Commission An.
21 Edw. 1. to have the waters of Well (which anciently had their outfall by
Wisbeche) to be brought and carried in debitum and antiquum cursum etc. Then
were there three stopsmade; viz. the first at Fendike about Upwell Towns end
(near where Popham lode Sluse now stands) 2d at Small lode bridge, and 3 at
Outwell bridge; and order taken for opening of the Rivet from Well to Elm
floudgates, upon the Confines of both Counties, at the costs of the people of
the Isle, and of Marshland, indifferently.

To show that the River of Ouse had its outfall at Wisbeche, besides what is
before expressed.
1. The Sea-banks from Well to Wisbeche.

2. Wisbeche Castle founded super flumen illud famosum, quod Well streme
appelatur. [ Regist. de Petroburg.]

3. -- Situm est praedictum Castrum quod a pluribus paludibus and rivulis and
fontibus principium habet, and per longos meatus in mare magnum juxta Wilbeche
derivare liquide comprobatur. [ Regist. de Thorney par^e 3a. p. 34.]

4. The people of K. John perished in the waters of Well.

That there was sometime no River between Litleport Chair and Rebbech.
1. a Record vouched by Mr. Hexham Surveyor to Philip Earl of Arundell, the
tract of the River being of a clean contrary nature; viz. more straight than
any of the Ouse in all the Fens from Ely to Wisbeche.

2. The imposing of the name of Heming's lode in the Description of Rack fen in
the words of the Record; viz. a le Chair per Heming's lode usque Gnat's lode
end.

That the waters of the Isle should not, nor of old did fall down from Well
upon Marshland Eastward; nor into Well Fens in Norff.
1. See the Commission de anno 21 E. 1.

2. See the Leet Rolls de anno 29 E. 1. pro Wadingstow fracto, in hiis verbis;
Reginaldus de Burgo fregit obstupationem de Wadingstow, factam per Breve domini
Regis, and reversit aquam extra rectum cursum suum ad magnum dampnum and
nocumentum totius patriae; ideo in misericordia iii s.

See there some others amerced for the like; and in the next Leet, how their
Pledges were amerced, and the Offenders commanded to be attached.

3. See in the Rolls of Upwell Leet 12 E. 2. in fine, diverse amerced for
breaking or hurting the Banks of the Fenn, called the Fendike, between Well
and Wellenhe; and many Presentiments to prove that there were Banks from Upwell
to Wellenhe; and that they should not be broke nor cut, nor the water turned
into the Fens near Marshland.

4. See the stopping of the waters of Well from falling upon Marshland, upon
the Complaint of Marshland men made to the King, by whose Commission they were
stopped at Outwell brigge, at Small lode brigg, and at Fendike lake in Upwell,
and at a place near the Sluse at Upwell Towns end, on Popham lode head
sometimes called UUadingstow.

5. And upon the breach of the Dam at Small lode bridge (by means of a Complaint
of Marshland-men) see a Commission sent down in 25 E. 1. to enquire of the
Malefactors, and to punish them expressly, for breaking Small lode dam, and a
Writ of Attendance directed to the Sheriff to that purpose.

6. And that Small lode dam, was according to this Commission made and
fortified again, appears plainly by diverse Presentiments and punishments set
forth in the Leet Rolls of Upwell aft^r those days; only one of 12 E. 2. shall
suffice, viz. -- Et dicunt, quod Walterus Jollyff consuetus est trahere
batellam suam ultra estupationem factam per Breve Domini Regis apud le Little
lode, per quod dicta obstupatio deterioratur; ideo in misericordia ii s. See
there, 4 or 5 more amerced for the like: And that there were Banks from Upwell
to Welleney aboard the great river kept, that the water should not fall into
the Fens on Norfolk side, may be proved by very many Presentiments, almost in
every Kings time since Edward 1. to K. James; viz. in 1, 2, 22, 23, 24, 25, E.
1. 2 E. 2.12, 15, 16, 18 E. 2.3, 4 E. 3. etc: 2 R. 2. etc.

I will only add one more old Record to prove that the waters of the Isle
should not fall into the Fenns on Norff. side, An. 24 E. 1.

-- Iuratores dicunt, quod Adam Noach cidit communem dravam per medium, juxta
hold Wellen he, per quod cursus magnae ripariae, and hold UUellen he
transversus est ex recto cursu versus mariscum, ad grave nocumentum totius
Communitatis; ideo dictus Adam in misericordia xii d. And in the Leet following
his Pledge was amerced and pained to have it amended; and he himself distrained
to answer to it.

So that, where it is here said (and in many other places also) that the stream
of the great River of Wellenhee was turned out of his right course by cutting
the Fendikes or Droves; in this Presentment and some others it is said, that
the water was turned into the Fen; so as to go out of the right course into the
Fen, proves plainly that there was no Watercourse through the Fen for the
water to pass by.

And in An. 1 Mariae it was thus presented -- Et quod nulla persona abscindet
Calcetum in aliqua part ejusdem, sive aliquorum aliorum Calcetorum etc. sub
poena forisfacturae pro quolibet tempore sic factum vi s, viii d.

And in the Convocation for Cowstowe.... the Jury say thus; -- Dicunt etiam,
quod antiquo tempore, antequam aquae Marisci descendebant versus Wigenhale,
Sed postquam aquae marisci desendebant versus Wigenhale nunquam fuit dictum
fossatum aliqua salvatio etc.

Whereby it appears, that anciently the waters of Upwell did not fall down
toward Wigenhall, and so by Lynne.

That there was a Mere in Well, called the Wide.
Robert de Swaffham in his Hist. Penes Dec. and Ca^. Eccl. ca^h. Pet^rb.
of the Foundation of Peterborough under the title De gestis ^ncliti militis
Herewardi, says; that Hereward fleeing William the Conqueror, cum navibus
suis, quas habebat been armis munitas etc. in quoddam mare Wide vocatum, juxta
Well secessit, magnum and spaciosum lateribus aquarum, and liberos exitus
habens. The name and tract of which Mere yet remains in the Fens of Upwell,
Wide lode being ordained to be cleansed by the same Law that Small lode was.

That the waters had their course from Gnat lode toward Well.
The tract to this day shows it: for the Presentment by which Small lode is
so much urged, says; that Gnat lode incipit apud Hawkyns bright, and durat
usque Fowr lodes end. The Cross end of Gnat lode was Docky lode, which fell
into Widelode: and in the same Presentment it is said, The extent of Widelode
that Wide lode was in length a mile and a half, and xv. furlongs;
and that old Small lode incipit a Wide lode, and continued toward Well to a
place, of late called Crosse-water against Nurses viii acres end, by the space
of half a mile and half a furlong; and there fell into Cheselbeche lode, alias
Small lode, and from Seman's goole came into the River a little below Upwell
Church.

Other Branches there were, all tending their course toward UUelle, and so to
the North Seas, at UUisbeche; as UUebwinche lake, UUell mere, Audley lode,
UUabeche lode, Chesebeche lode, Twane lode, Saltham lake etc. as may seem by
the tracts of many of them in the Fens of UUelle.

So much be spoken touching the old course of the River of Ouse, and of the
other Lodes and Meers; which, by reason that the outfall at Wisebeche has
been, for a long time, much choked up with silt, are not now well known to the
vulgar; and therefore I have thought it not impertinent to leave this memorial
of them to posterity.

I now return to the general Drayning.

Upon the xxiiij of February, 24 Feb. 15 Iac. An. 1617.
in the said 15 year of King James, there was a Session of Sewers held at
Huntendon, and these following Decrees then Ex bundello Decretorum in Officio
vocato the Pettibag.
made, viz.

1. First, that the great River of Wisebeche, from the Sea to Wisbeche bridge;
thence to the mouth, and so to Gyhyrne Cross, be cleansed to the ancient
breadth and old bottom; viz. from the Sea to the Mouth, by the Hundred of
Wisebeche; thence to Guyhyrne Cross by the Bishop of Ely, before the xxth. of
June then next ensuing, upon pain of 3s. 4d. for every perch not perfected, by
that time. 2. That Morton's leame be accordingly scoured etc. from Guy hyrne
Cross to Midfentre by the Hundred of Wisebeche, for their Common in the High
Fenn; thence to Musdyke by the Inhabitants of Wittlesey; thence to Stanground
staff, by the heirs or assigns of Sir Anth. Mildemay, before the xxth. of July
next, upon the like penalty. 3. That the Old Ea, from Clay lake, unto Middle
honce hard, at Bull dyke end, near Peterborough, be in like sort cleansed etc.
by the Dean and Chapter of Peterborough: Thence to Thorney Cross by the Lord of
the Cokenary of Wittlesey, or the fermour thereof. 4. That the Sewer, called
Catts water, from Thorney Cross, to Fynset Cross, be cleansed etc. by the Lord
Russell, or his Tenants for the Lordship of Thorney, on the East side; and on
the West side by the Bishop of Peterborough. And to Tooth willow, thence to
Henny dyke, and Perkyns coat, by the said Lord Russell, before the xxth. of
Aug. next. 5. That Thorney water, from Blackstile to Thorney got, and thence
to Powteshed, and so to Wryde ware, by the said Lord Russell his Tenants etc.
From Wryde ware down Wryde lake unto High fen dyke, by the Commoners in
Wisbeche high fen, before the said xxth. of August. 6. That the River called
High fen dyke and South Ea (being also a branch of ^ene) be scoured etc. from
Guyhyrne cross unto Clow's cross, in breadth xl. foot, and depth six foot, by
the Towns of Wisbech, Leverington, Newton, and Tyd S. Giles: And from Clows
cross to Halgates by the Landholders of Sutton, cum membris, and Tyd S.
Mary's, their Tenants etc. on the North part; and the Lord of Throkenholt on
the South, before the said xxth. of August. 7. And from Hallegates to Goldyke
by the Inhabitants and Landholders of Gedney and Sutton cum membris, so far as
their limits extend, on the North part: and by the Inhabitants etc. of Sutton
etc. wholly on the South part. And from Goldyke to Dowsedale, on the North side
by the Inhabitants etc. of Whaplode, Holbeche, Flete and Gedney, every Township
so far as their particular lymits extend: And on the South side, by the Lord
and Owners of Thorney etc. And from Dousedale to Nomans land on the North side,
at the Prince his charge, for his lands in Crouland; and on the South, by the
Lord of Thorney. 8. And that the River of Weland, from the Sea to Crouland, and
thence to Stamford bridge, be sufficiently cleansed etc. before the 20th. of
June aforesaid.

And that the out-ring banks, from Dousdale to Crouland (in length 4. miles) be
amended, at the charge of the Prince; or his Tenants of Crouland. And the Bank
from Crouland to Clout house (3. miles in length) be amended, at the charge of
the said Prince: That Lx. Rods thereof be repaired by Rob. Chapman Clark; and
several other small proportions of it by other mean persons.

9. And whereas the two Rivers of Ouse and Grant do pour down so much water,
that the Chanel below Harrymere, where they unite, cannot contain the same; but
has been supplied by the Sewer called the Old Ea; and by another Sewer, called
Padnall lake: which Sewers being crooked and narrow, were almost grown up; and
that the Commissioners for supplying the said defects, had make two Laws of
Sewers; the one dated 9. Iunij 1609. the other the 8th. of Aug. in the said
year; and thereby appointed two larger Sewers, near the said places, and much
streighter than the ^ormer: and beginning the same, did perfect 800. perches
thereof; but then being disturbed by contentious people, could not go on: They
therefore ordained, that the said works should be again proceeded in, till they
were perfected. 10. And they farther ordained; that the said River of Ouse,
from Harry mere, upwards to Odercote, should be cleansed, by those that of right
ought to do the same, before the 14th. of July ensuing, to the ancient breadth
and old bottom. 11. And that the great and main arm of Ouse, called the
Westwater, descending by Erith brigg, on the West part of the Isle of Ely,
should be cleansed etc. to Benwick, in such manner as aforesaid. As also a
Branch thereof called Sutton lode, from the said West water, to the outfall
thereof into Welney water. So likewise Ouse di^he (another Branch of the said
West water) falling out of the same between Hollwood and Oldstaffe, and so unto
Sutton weads. And that Chatterys new Leam falling out of the said West water
should be scoured beneath Chatterys ferry, to Key's Corner; so to Chatterys
Town; thence to Dodyngton park; thence to Wymblyngton hoke and March stream;
thence by Elm leame, unto Elm Town; and so to Wisbeche great River. 12. Also
that Ea brinke in Elm, from Friday bridge unto the Town Dam, be made as high
and fe^sible as other Banks adjoining, by the Landholders of Redmore. And that
Maid lode, and Shiplode, extending from Welney water unto the main River of
Ouse; And likewise London lode, lying on the other side of the Londoners
grounds, and falling from the said water of Welney unto Well Creek etc. be
scoured etc. 13. So also Darsey Ea, extending from Welney River, toward Stony
ditch, belonging to the Manor of Dodington; and the said Sewer extending
thence to Maney Ea, so to Coxe lode, and Dalling's ditch, and thence to
Dodington leame. 14. And that all other Common Drayns, Lodes, etc. within the
tract of the said River of Ouse be opened, cleansed etc. 15. And it was farther
decreed, that the Bank of South lake end, presented to be cut by the
Inhabitants of Crouland, to let the water of Weland run into Borough great fen,
to the prejudice of the Commoners, and hindrance of the outfall at Spalding, by
diverting the water out of it is ancient course, should be well and sufficiently
repaired and made by the Commoners in the said Fen, before the twentifift of
March then next following.
After this ( viz. about the beginning of March following) there was a Petition
Ib. f. 251. a.
exhibited to the Lords of the Council, by diverse of the Commissioners of
Sewers, for these Counties, whereof part do lie within the Precincts of this
great Level.

Showing what pains they had taken for two years past in order to the general
Drayning; and made several Laws: But that Letters were come down from their
Lordships, bearing date 20 Ian. for respiting the execution of those Laws, so
far as related to the County of Cambr. or Isle of Ely, except such as concerned
the outfalls of Nene and Weland, until farther directions from their
Lordships: So that, by reason of this stop, those parts, especially in the
County of Cambr. Hunt. and South parts of the Isle of Ely, were like to be
utterly lost. And that this great discouragement to the said Commissioners,
occasioned their Petition, that they might be left to their former liberty.

Whereupon the said Lords, sitting in Council at White Hall, on the ix of March
ensuing, ordered Ib. 252. a.
, that their said Letter of 20 Ian. should be returned back to that Board; 9
Martij. 15 Iac.
and that all Laws and Orders made by the said Commissioners should be in
force: As also that such of the Commissioners as do find themselves grieved,
should give notice thereof to the Session of Sewers, and agree upon a day, when
both parties might attend the Council Table to be equally and fully heard,
forasmuch as by the procurement of some few of them, the said Letters had been
sent, which tended so far to the distracting of their proceedings.

Which Letters of the said Lords occasioned this Answer Ibid. b.
from the said greatest part of the said Commissioners, 17 Martij.
viz. that those xi Commissioners, who had formerly distracted their
procc^edings, by procuring the Councils Order for respiting the execution of
the Laws of Sewers that had been made etc. had again granted out Warrants,
which tended to a farther distraction of their proceedings: and therefore they
humbly desired, that the duplicate of the Commission then lately procured for
Cambridgshire, might be called in.

Not long after this there was a Letter Ib. f. 253. a. 19 Martij 16 Iac.
sent from the said Lords to the before-specified Commissioners, importing;
that by the result of that Board, an Order was made for a Sluse to be erected
at the outfall of Wisbech river; and after that so done, the River to be
ditched: And that since that time, without the consent of any of the
Commissioners within the Hundred of Wisbeche, a Law was made for the ditching
of the said River, and that at the particular charge of the same Hundred, from
Wisbeche bridge unto the Sea; but no Law for the Sluse. And moreover, that the
said River, when it was last ditched was enlarged from xl foot to Lx foot wide,
at the charge of the high lands and low Countries; and that this Law has now
imposed upon the said Hundred of Wisbeche the ditching thereof to its ancient
breadth, making no mention of the said added xx foot.

All which considered, the said Lords did think fit to vary from some points of
those Laws; and farther ordered, that there should be a Sluse made at the
Horshooe beneath Wisbeche, at the general-charge of all that drayn that way.
And that from the Horshoo to the four Gotes, and as far further as the
Commissioners should think fit, the work to be done at the general charge, and
not by the Hundred of Wisbeche only; in regard it is a new work and very
beneficial to many Countries: As also that the River from the Horshoo to
Guyhirne Cross, be made Lx foot wide, as it was the last time it was ditched;
and at the general charge: and all Laws crossing these Orders to be made void;
and that the Order for making the outfalls perfect, be generally observed.

VVhereupon, at a general Session of Sewers held at Wisbeche 30 Maii then next
following, in submission to the Order of the said Lords, it was decreed, That a
strong and sufficient Sluse of Stone and Brick should be set up at the Horshoo
beneath Wisbeche, I^. 253. ^. 39 M^^i. 16 Iac.
at the general charge of all such who were to drayn by the same.

And that, forasmuch as by reason of an unexpected downfall of rain and
overflow of waters, diverse of the works of Sewers decreed at Huntingdon 24 Feb.
1617. had been so hindered, as that they could not so soon be undertaken, much
less perfected within the time limited by the said Law; it was decreed, that
all parts thereof should be repealed, except what concerned Sutton lode (which
might be perfected) And that those works ensuing, mentioned in the said Law,
should proceed and be perfected, viz. the River of Ouse, Sutton-lode, London
lode, and Maid lode; and that the Decree made at Stilton 30 Martii then last
past should stand in force.

And upon the xix of June then next also ensuing, in farther prosecution of
this great and necessary work, the said Commissioners exhibited a Petition Ib.
f. 242. ^. 19 Iun^i 1618 (16 Iac.)
, to the Lords of the Privy Council.

Showing, That whereas sundry Sessions had been held by them since his
Majesty's Commission for Drayning etc. was on foot; and nothing effected
through the variety in opinions of the said Commissioners; but instead thereof
much charges lost, and that many parts did thereby suffer and undergo great
danger. And therefore desiring, that for the safety of those Countries so
endangered, and prevention of farther delays, their Lordships would please to
direct, that at the Sessions to be held at Peterborough, on the last day of
that instant June, one of the Clerks of the Council might be there present with
them, to take a view of the Outfalls, if need should require; who, as a person
indifferent, might inform their Lordships of the fecibleness of the work, and
of the fittest means to effect it, without or with the least loss to any part:
And that a certain and constant course might be by their Lordships directed,
whereunto they all expressed themselves willing to submit.

Upon which Petition it was then ordered by the said Lords, that Sir Clement
Edmunds Knight should meet the said Commissioners at Huntingdon, for
accomplishment of their desires in the view of the Out-falls etc.

12 Aug. 1618. (16 Iac.)
And upon the xijth. of August next ensuing, at a general Session of Sewers held
at Huntingdon aforesaid, there were appointed three Commissioners of every
County, to accompany the said Sir Clement Edmunds in that service: Who
accordingly performed it, Ib. f. 246. ^. b.
and gave in this following Certificate to that honorable Board, viz.

Sept. 20. 1618. 16 (...).
1. That the River of Ouse, in time of floods, had in former times certain
Slakers, or bi-Sewers, to receive part of the water wherewith it was
overchardged; whereof the West water at Erith brigge was one, which now for
want of clensing falls into the Ouse (whereas it should pass from it.) 2.
That the said River was from Huntingdon to the high Bridge at Ely, much choked
with Weeds, and stopped with weres, and in diverse places made shallow by
Gravels and Fordes (which they call Hards.) 3. That the Haven of Lynne was
through the violence of the Tides, and the great fall of Fresh-waters, grown
much wider than it had been, to the endangering to Marshland. 4. That the River
of Nene is also much stopped and choked up, so that it passes not out totally
at Wisbeche, which is its proper out-fall; and that below Wisbeche it was
found, near the out-fall, six foot or more higher in the bottom than it had
been heretofore; so that whereas the Inland waters at Guyhirne, which had
formerly 5 foot fall, were not only stopped; but the River fell back upon them:
Whereupon a Law of Sewers was made by the Commissioners for the amendment
th^reof. 5. That a Sluse made upon that River formerly, to the great charge of
the Country, stood not 7. days, but was blown up by the Tides: Nevertheless,
that it was agreed, that after the River was again cleansed to a sufficient
depth, there should be a new Sluse there erected, if need required: But as to
the performance of this work for matter of charge, there was a great difference
between the Town of Wisbech and the Inhabitants of the Upland Countries,
forasmuch as the said Town insisted upon a considerable help from them toward
the charge thereof; alleging what benefit they would receive thereby. 6. That
the said water of Nene, not having a free passage by Wisbeche, but dividing it
self into diverse parts, did great hurt by overflowing the Country about Thorney
and Crouland; and that in 38. Eliz. there was a Drain agreed on for the passing
away part thereof at Clows cross; which Sewer lying x. or xij. foot lower than
the Level above, was conceived to be the best drain to regain the surrounded
grounds on the North of Wisbeche. 7. That forasmuch as the Inhabitants of
Marshland complained much of their danger, by the running of Wisbeche River
from the 4. Gotes, by the skirt of Marshland; and that if the out-fall
beforementioned should be opened, whereby a greater proportion of water would
pass that way, it would be much worse for them: It was therefore agreed, that
if the said River, together with the Drayn of Clows cross were carried from
the said 4. Gotes, by a new Cut to be made through the Saltmarshes to an
out-fall called King's Creek, besides the benefit which would arise by drayning
of their Fens, it would secure Marshland from danger, and no way prejudice
Holland. 8. That the River of Weland also, was from Crouland to Spalding, very
defective for want of clensing; and from Spalding to its meeting with Glen
(near to the Sea) almost silted up; insomuch as the Inhabitants of Spalding
complained, that by reason of the shallows thereof (which were less than half a
foot deep 2. miles below the Town) they had not wholesome water for their
necessary uses. 9. Considering therefore these defects etc. before expressed,
he proposed to the said Lords, that some car^ might be taken to open those
out-falls.
And though there were many Gentlemen of good worth in those parts, who wanted
neither zeal nor judgment to do service therein; yet it was conceived, that the
work might be best effected by such as had no interest at all in the Country;
but stood indifferent between all parties, and thereby levy the charge without
partiality.

Whereupon ensued certain Orders, Ib. 245. a. 20 Aug. 1618. (16 Iac.)
occasioned by that view of the said Sir Clement Edmunds and those
Commissioners; viz.
1. That the Sewers between Overcote and the Mere be opened and scoured before
the last of May then next ensuing, sub poena 3s. 4d. per vigam. 2. That the
West water, with all the branches be opened and scoured by those who ought of
right to do the same, by Michaelmass come Twelvemonth, then also next
following, sub eadem poena. 3. That the Hill in Humbert's water be abated
before the first of November, sub poena 5. libr. 4. That Padnall lake, from
Ouse to the Clay way, be scoured xx. foot wide and 4. foot deep, by the first
of April then next ensuing, sub poena 5s. per virgam. 5. That Stretham and
Thetford do their Draines by the first of May, sub eadem poena. 6. That Popham
Ea, though it be respited, is reputed an excellent drayn; Sir Raph Hare and
other of the Commissioners being appointed to view its defects. 7. That the
work in Wisbeche River be perfected before the 20. of August next. 8. That a
new Clow be set up at the charge of all that drayn thereby. 9. That South ea be
cleansed after Wisbech River; and Weland diked.
And upon Report made to the said Lords of the Council, by the before-specified
Sir Clement Edmunds, it was ordered (...). f. 246 b. 29 N^v. 16 Iac. Anno 1618.
by their Lordships, that the Earl of Arundell, the Bishop of Winchester, the
Lord Carew, Mr. Treasurer and Mr. Comptroller of his Majesty's Household, Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Mr. of the Rolls, and Sir Edw. Coke, or any
4. of them, should take consideration of the state of the business etc. and
prepare some opinion to be delivered to the Board, of what present course might
be fit to be taken therein.

In pursuance of which Order the said Earl of Arundell made a journey into
these parts; where having treaty with Sir William Ayloff Knight and Baronet,
Anthony Thomas Esquire, and others; they the said Sir William, Anthony, and the
rest, as Undertakers in this great Adventure, did, in consideration of the
pains and costs which they were like to bestow therein, make these ^ollowing
Proposalls; Ibid. f. 256. a. b.
viz.

1. To have all the Kings lands, drowned with fresh or salt water, which should
be so recovered, at the free Rent of iiijd. the Acre, over and above all Rents
or revenues then in being or coming to his Majesty. 2. To have all the Prince
his lands upon the like conditions. 3. To have of all Subjects lands, so
drowned all the year, two thirds, to them the said Undertakers and their heirs,
to hold in severalty for ever. 4. And of all such lands of Subjects, which lay
drowned half the year, to have the one half to them the said Undertakers and
their heirs.
Of which Proposalls the King liking well, he did by his Letters, Ib. 256 b. 4
S^pt. 17 Iac. Anno 1619.
to the said Commissioners of Sewers, bearing date the 4. of September, in the
xvij. year of his Reign, signify unto them, that the said Sir William, and
Anthony, with others, had undertaken to drain all the Fens in the Counties of
Cambr. and Isle of Ely, Norff. Suff. Linc. Northt. and Hunt. with the good
liking of his said Majesty and his acceptance of their Propositions; And
recommended them and their design to the said Commissioners, to the end they
might be ayding to them in expediting such Contracts as they should make; and
to further them therein with their Authority in all lawful things etc.

And on the morrow following, the Lords of the Council, by their Letters Ib. f.
257. a. 5 Sep^. 1619.
to the said Commissioners of Sewers, signified to them; that the said
Undertakers did purpose to begin their work at the Sea, by opening the outfalls
of Nene and Weland; and to make the same navigable to Spalding and Wisbeche,
which would take away all fear of turning the water upon any neighbor Country,
and draw the same into their true and natural Channels; and that whatever
Commission or assistance they should desire to further this work, order should
be taken for the same; desiring them to observe the Kings directions therein.

Whereupon, within three days after, the said Commissioners met Ib. b. Et f.
238. 8 S^pt. 17 Iac. An. 1619.
at Peterborough, and in a Session of Sewers then and there held, forthwith
ordered

That in obedience to the Instructions by them received from the Kings Majesty
and the Lords of his Council, the Undertakers before-specified, should have the
free consent and approbation of that Court to proceed with their enterprise, so
soon as they should think meet; and likewise their furtherance in such
Contracts as they should make with the Lords, Owners, and Commoners interessed
in the said Fens.

And moreover; that further time, and longer days should be given to them for
perfecting their works in the Rivers of Ouse, Nene, and Weland, and all the
Branches of them; viz. until the first day of August then next ensuing, and no
advantage taken of the Penalties in the Laws formerly made for effecting the
business before that time.

And in a Session of Sewers held at Ely the 20 and 23 of the same Month of
September, Ib. f. 259. a. 23 Sept. 1619.
having received these following Propositions from the Undertakers, viz.

1. That their intent was so to drayn the said Fens and grounds, as that by
their said works, no person should receive any hurt. 2. That they would from
time to time maintain, and scour the same, so drayned. 3. That they would not
receive any recompense, but where through their industry an increase of benefit
should be raised to the Owner thereof; and that after their works should be
perfected. 4. That if question should arise, whether any benefit were received
in any particular by their industry, it should be decided by a sufficient and
able Jury, to be named by the Commissioners of the County, and such Jurors so
nominated, and no others, to be retured by the Sheriff. 5. So likewise in the
Isle of Ely, by a Jury of that Isle. 6. And that they would give such
recompense to those, that should receive hurt or damage by any of their said
works, as the Commissioners, or the greater part of them, should think fit. 7.
That at their own charge, they would make provision, that water should be
conveyed to stay at those Towns (where water had before come and stayed) for
Navigation and transportation, and the Townships afterward to maintain it. 8.
And that they would better, and not hurt, or impair the Navigation in the
Rivers of Grant and Ouse.
And did therefore order and decree, that the said Undertakers should have
their free consent, and the approbation of that Court, to proceed etc. and that
they would assist them etc. in their Contracts etc. It being not the purpose of
the said Undertakers to alter or change the state of any Commons, but only to
have such competent part thereof, to be set out in severalty to them and their
heirs, as should content them for their work of Drayning the same; and the
residue of every Common to remain in the same condition, to all intents and
purposes, as then it did.

And at a Session Ib. f. 260. a. 1^ S^pt. 1619.
of Sewers held at S. Ives on the morrow following, they decreed, that the
tenor of the Order made at Peterborough 8 Sept. and that present Order, should
be published at every Town, Village etc. which the premises should concern in
all the said several Counties etc. before the vith. of Oct. next then coming;
to the end, that all Owners, Commoners etc. Interessed in any surrounded
grounds within the places aforesaid, might apply themselves to the said
Undertakers etc. for concluding their contracts etc.

On the 4th. of October ensuing, the said Undertakers sent their Letters Ibid.
b. 4. Oct. 1619.
to the Commissioners for Norfolk, sitting at a Session at Ilsington, excusing
their not waiting on them sooner; and, enclosing the Copies of those Letters of
the King and the Lords of the Council to them, desired; that the same might be
communicated to their Neighbors, together with their Proposalls; to the end
that they might be the better prepared for contracting with them: As also that
they might have a meeting with the said Commissioners of Norff. at Cambridge,
on Wednesday the xiijth. of October then next ensuing; and in the mean time
that they would cause these Letters of the King and Council to be published in
their Churches etc.

And upon the xv. of October following, in a Session Ib. f. 261. a. 15 Oct. 17
Ia.
of Sewers at Huntingdon, the said Commissioners, reciting their proceedings at
several Sessions of Sewers, held before that time, in pursuance of the Kings
direction; and for the better expediting of the work, decreed; that for and
toward the opening of the ancient out-falls of Nene and Welland, and all other
necessary works for drayning of the said grounds etc. every Acre of the said
drowned grounds in those Counties of Northt. Hunt. Linc. and Norff. should be
taxed at xxs. the Acre, to be paid by the owners thereof before the 7. of Dec.
then next coming, unto Thomas Bishop of Peterborough, Sir Francis Fane, Sir
Rob. Bevill etc. (and others by this Decree named) to remain in their hands, to
be ratably paid over to the said Undertakers, their heirs and assigns, after
their work of Drayning should be done whole, or in part. And that for want of
payment thereof at the days and times appointed, the said Commissioners should
in a full Session of Sewers to be held the 21. day of Dec. following, at
Peterborough, allow and set forth such portion of the said surrounded grounds,
for which the sums aforesaid were not paid, unto the same Undertakers their
heirs and assigns, in recompense of the said drayning, as should seem just
etc. unto them; which should be enjoyed etc. accordingly.

And that after the said work of drayning should be perfected, and adjudged
sufficiently done, by the said Commissioners, at a general Session for that
purpose; a competent proportion of land to be reassured by the said Undertakers
and their heirs or assigns, for the perpetual maintaining of the said works.

And lastly, that Copies of this Order should be published by the Sheriffs in
the several Counties etc. where the said draining was.

But notwithstanding all this, the work did not go on so effectually as the
King desired, which occasioned a Letter Ib. f 263. a. 5 D^c. 1619.
from the Lords of the Council to the said Commissioners of Sewers, (bearing
date the 5. of December ensuing) whereby, taking notice of the many attendances
upon them by the Undertakers in several Sessions of Sewers, and yet that little
progre^s had been made therein; they desired them again to affoard their
effectual assistance for removing of such difficulties, as might hinder an
undertaking of so great an hope, nothing now resting but the putting of their
own Orders in Execution for advancement of the same.

Whereupon, the Commissioners si^ting at Spalding ^ession of Sewers at Spaldin^
16 Dec. 17 Iac.
upon the xvith. day of the same Month of December, reciting the Decree made at
Huntendon in the Session of Sewers held there upon the xv. and xvi. of October
preceding, and taking notice, that no money of the said Tax of xxs. the Acre
had been paid, as was then ordered; did judge Ex bund^llo D^^^^torum in Officio
nuncupato the P^^tibag.
and decree, that from and after the said worthy work of Drayning the said Fens
and surrounded grounds, in general beforementioned, or those particulars
hereafter mentioned, or any of them respectively, in that County of Lincoln,
should by Gods help be well and truly accomplished by the said Undertakers,
their heirs or assigns, at their own proper chardges and expenses; and so
adjudged and approved by six or more Commissioners of Sewers, commorant and
residing within the part of Holland, for those works that should be done in
those parts of Holland; and six or more Commissioners of Sewers, commorant and
residing within the parts of Kesteven, for those which should be done in the
said parts of Kesteven; then and from thenceforth they the said Sir William
Ayloffe and Sir Anthony Thomas, being the Undertakers beforementioned, their
heirs and assigns, should have, hold and enjoy the parts and portions of the
Fens and grounds, usually and hurtfully surrounded, and by them undertaken to
be drayned respectively, as follows; viz. whereas the Earl of Exeter then had
a third part of the Fens called Deping, Spalding, and Pinchbeck South Fenns,
and of Goggisland belonging to Crowland by contract heretofore made with
Captain Thomas Lovell, for the Drayning of the said Fens: which notwithstanding
being not performed the same Fens then remained drowned; that therefore the
said several Fens, called Spalding and Pinchbeck South fen, and Deping fen, and
Goggisland, together with that part of the said Fens and grounds in the
occupation and tenure of the said Earl, or his Tenants, should be all entirely
and wholly survayed and measured by two several Surveyors, whereof one to be
named by the said Sir William Ayloff and Sir Anthony Thomas, the said
Undertakers, their heirs or as^igns, and the other by some six Commissioners of
Sewers of Holland and Kesteven; and the whole content and number of Acres to be
exactly taken and cast up, and thereof the said Sir William and Sir Anthony,
their heirs or assigns, to have so much of the said Fens, then lying open and
in Common, as together with the said several grounds in the tenure and
occupation of the said Earl, should amount unto and extend to a moity or half
part of the whole content of all together, to be proportionably taken out of
the said several Fens; viz. one part out of Spalding and Pinchbeck South fen,
another part out of Deping fen, and a third part out of Goggisland, according
to the number of Acres, then in them lying in Common, to be set out by the said
six or more Commissioners of Sewers in either of the said parts of Holland and
Kesteven within their said several parts respectively. And of the whole content
of the Marish and drowned grounds called Bellesmore, lying in Spalding and
Wesson in the said County, being the grounds of Sir Francis Jones Knight, two
third parts: And of the whole content of the Marish grounds called Turpitts,
lying in Weston aforesaid, being the grounds of William Coulson of the same
Yeoman, two third parts: And of the whole content of the Marish ground, called
the East fen, lying in Moulton, being the grounds of Sir John Payton Knight and
others, one fourth part: And of Whaplode and Holbeche Common, Marish or Fen
grounds, one half part: And of Sutton Fen, lying on the South side of South Ea,
two third parts.

And it was farther ordered and decreed; that till the said Fens and grounds
should be adjudged drayned, and approved to be drayned as aforesaid, the two
Rivers of Glene and Weland, and the Banks environing the said South Fen should
be kept and maintained for the safety of the Country at the charges and costs
of the said Earl of Exeter or his assigns, according to the contract made with
the said Thomas Lovell.

That this Decree also had little effect, I am much inclined to believe: For
upon the last of February following, the said Lords of the Council, wrote ^^id.
p. (...) Febr. 16^^.
again to those Commissioners; requiring them to attend the King in person at
his Council Board in the third week of Lent ensuing, there to clear such doubts
as his Malesty should desire to be satisfied in from them.

Whereupon, the business being heard at large, there ensued this following
Order, (...) 264. h.
upon the ixth of April, the King himself being present and likewise the
Commissioners, viz.

That the Undertakers should on Tuesday following, exhibit in writing what it
was that they promised to effect, and to specify what they would demand as a
recompense for their labors, etc.

1^ (...) 16^^. 18 ^ac.
Which accordingly was done; the Propositions of the Undertakers delivered in
unto the Commissioners being as follows; viz.

1. That they did intent really to perfom the work of drayning of the Fens,
without any tax upon the Country; excepting the deep Meers and Pools etc. which
were under the Level. 2. That when the work should be done, they would assure
competent Land for ever, to stand liable for ever to maintain and repair the
same. 3. To effect this Drayning within 3 years after a perfect Contract made
with his Majesty for such lands as should be a competent recompense for their
costs and pains; and the same Land set out by Metes and bounds in severalty,
and sufficiently assured to them their Heirs and Assigns for ever etc. 4. That
in order to this work, they would open the out-falls of Nene and UUeland, and
make those Rivers navigable as high as Wisbeche and Spalding. 5. And lastly,
not to forget to preserve the Navigation between Cambridg and Lynne.
In recompense whereof they demanded Ib. f. 165.2.
these proportions in the several Fens hereafter expressed; viz.
1. Of Bu^rough great Fen one third part. 2. Borough little Fen, Eye-Fen, and
Flag Fen. a sixth part. 3. Crowland Fen (3 pieces) a fourth part. 4. Thorney
fenns a half part. 5. Wisbeche high Fen, Sutton, and Throcknall a third part.
6. Fens on both sides of March River, between Darcey lode on the South, and
Needham fen, North 2 third parts. 7. Wittlesey fens 1 half part. 8. Stanground
1 fifth part. 9. Ramsey fens 1 half part. 10. Huntingdon Fenns, on the West of
Ramsey, by the River of Nene on the North, up to Yaxley, and the skirts on the
South and West one half part. 11. Huntingdon Fens, from Eryth bridge up to
Ramsey, by the West-water, and the River of Nene East and North one third part.
12. Donington Fens in Common one half part. 13. Donington Fens in several one
sixth part. 14. Fens between the West-water, West Sutton lode in the Isle of
Ely and Coveney drain South, Oxwillow lode East, Coxlode and Chateriz lode
North, together with Chateriz Fens on the other side to Donington one third
part. 15. Hunney fen one tenth part. 16. Sutton and Hadenham fens one eighth
part. 17. Grunty fen. one third part. 18. A Fen by Sutton lode and Coveney,
between Dounham Hards one fourth part. 19. Downham Wode fen, and other Fens of
Ely, between Litleport grounds and the Ouse, Elie-uplands and Scarlet tree lode
one half part. 20. Litleport Fens, on both sides the Ouse one third part. 21.
Other Fens between Darcy lode North, and Welney river East one third part. 22.
Fens in Upwell and Outwell one half part. 23. Fens between Welney-river and
Welney Causey. one half part. 24. The Hale and Mr. Hawe's fen one half part.
25. Fens on the North of Stoke River, to the great River between Helgay and
Stoke one fourth part. 26. Fens between Stoke River North, and Brandon River
South one fourth part. 27. Fens between Brandon River North, and Mildnall River
South, and Litleport Fens West one third part. 28. Fens between Mildnall River,
and the great River, up to Harrymere, and the Uplands of Isseham, Fordham, and
Soham one fourth part. 29. Soham Fens, by Wicking hards on the South one sixth
part. 30. Fens between Wicking hards on the South, Homyng fen, Quye and the
River of Grant, West one fourth part. 31. Fens on the South of Quoy, compassing
of Fulberne field one fourth part. 32. Fens between the River of Grant East,
and the Hards of Milterne, UUaterbeche, and Denny Abbey, West; and so extending
West, between the River of Ouse on the North and the hard land South, up to S.
Ives bridge; and a part on the other side of Ouse, between Erith and S. Ives.
one eighth part of the better. one fourth part of the worse. 33. Fens or
drowned Lands on the North side of Wisbeche 2 third parts.
The Answer Ib f. 265 b 11 Ma^j. 1620. 18 Iac.
of the Commissioners to these Propositions.
That they had no power to take away any man's land without his voluntary
assent: And that the authority which they had by their Commission (to which
they were strictly bound) was only to rate the charge of every particular man
toward any such general work, according to the profit which every such person
should receive by the same: And forasmuch as 'twas impossible to be discerned,
before the work were finished, who should have profit thereby, or how much,
they could not legally procure any such assurance before hand. But if the
Undertakers would be constant to their Propositions which themselves had before
that time at diverse Sesions of Sewers published; viz. that they required no
other recompense for their intended work, than a moity only of the clear
profit, which by their sole industry and charge they should bring unto each
particular owner of these surrounded grounds, more than formerly was received;
they should be ready (as at the first) to give the said Undertakers all lawful
furtherance and assistance: Provided, that before they begun their work, they
gave security, that they would not impair the Navigation, in the Rivers of Ouse
and Grant.

Upon which terms if the Undertakers did refuse to proceed, the said
Commissioners offered to do the work themselves, according to the ancient
course and legal power of their Commission.

VVhereupon ensued this Ib. f. 266. a.
Order of the Lords of the Council, by reference from the King made upon this
Answer of the Commissioners, bearing date at White Hall 12 Iulii An. 1620. (18
Iac.)

1. That, according to an offer then made on the part of the Country, good
security should be given to the Undertakers for a moity of the clear profits,
which by the drayning should be improved upon every man's ground, above the
rate that then the same was valued at; and that the security should be partly
from the Owners, and partly in case of Common, by aid of the Commissioners;
with this Condition, that the lands and parts of each County should be rated by
the Commissioners of the said County.

2. Concerning Prejudice of Navigation in the Rivers of Ouse and Grant, it was
ordered that the Undertakers being agreed with for their security in form
aforesaid; they should show unto the Country the means they intended in the
drayning of these Levells: And therefore if the Country should find it either
prejudicial to Mershland or otherwise, and present their Reasons to the Board,
their Lordships concurring therewith, all farther proceedings to be stayed.

3. That consideration should be had, that particulars receive no damage by
this drayning; but that the Owners have satisfaction out of those that were to
receive Commodity.

4. That no land should contribute to this charge, which was then at 8s. an
Acre or upwards, except it lay in small quantities, and intermixed with other
lands, so that the work could not go forward without it, and then to have a
moity of profit, ut supra.

5. That their Lordships should not intermeddle with any part of the work,
which was already settled and agreed on.

6. That the Undertakers, according to their promise, should begin the work
within one Month after this Agreement should be concluded.

All which being thus settled and agreed upon the last day of May then past,
with the consent of both parties (for ought appeared to their Lordships.)
Forasmuch nevertheless as the Undertakers, had not then entered upon the work,
nor made any proceeding therein (the time of the year requiring expedition) it
was, according to his Majesty's pleasure and command, ordered by that Board;
that the said Undertakers should either go on, according to the Articles so
agreed on at that Board, or otherwise desist from that undertaking, and hold
the Country no longer in suspense; but to leave them to such further courses as
should be expedient: To which purpose it was likewise ordered, that Copies of
those Articles and Orders should be delivered both to the Undertakers, and such
Gentlemen as attended that service there for the Country.

And afterward, viz. upon the 25th. of the same Month of July, the King by his
Letters Ib. f. 267. a. 25 Iulii. 18 Iac.
directed to the said Commissioners (published at Cambridge 18 Aug.) commending
the Undertakers readiness, and acceptance of such mean conditions in so
hazardous an enterprise; required that they might have square dealing in the
valuation of the Lands, as they had been truly let, and security for the
partage of what should be allotted to them, so that there might not be any just
exception thereto; and likewise that the said Commissioners should give them
their best assistance, that they might go on with cheerfullness in the work;
the Lords of the Council also, by their Letters Ibid. 20 Iulii. 18 Iac.
to the said Commissioners, inciting their assistance to the said Undertakers;
and for their settling of the business with them according to that Agreement.

In pursuance whereof, in a Session Ib. f. 267. b. 17 Aug. 1620. (18 Iac.)
of Sewers held at Cambridge, upon the 17th. of August following, it was
ordered; that Sir Miles Sandys Knight and Baronet, Sir Edw. Peyton Knight and
Baronet, and several of the Commissioners of Sewers within the County of
Cambridg and Isle of Ely, should view and value, according to the annual worth
of the same (being subject to the Taxes, surrounding, and other inconveniences,
which the same had born for x. years then past) all the Fen grounds within the
County of Cambridge and Isle of Ely, beginning at Fen-Drayton on Tuesday the
22th. of that instant August. And that four able and sufficient men of every
Parish should attend the said Commissioners there, for the better informing
them in the true value of those grounds.

And the next year following in a Session of Sewers, held also at Cambridge
aforesaid, it was decreed; that the Adventurers, in recompense of their charge
of Drayning this whole Level, 19 Iac.
should have out of the surrounded grounds so to be drayned one hundred and
twenty thousand Acres, to be set out by metes and bounds: and the King himself
(who has been heard to say; that for the honor of his Kingdom, he would not
any longer suffer these Countries to be abandoned to the will of the waters,
nor to let them lie waste and unprofitable) was then pleased to declare himself
the principal Undertaker.


But whether it was the great disturbance he had about that time, and after
till the end of his reign, for regaining the Palatinate, then violently invaded
by a powerful Army, and his Daughter with her Husband and Children exposed to
the wide World for a subsistence, which was the impediment; or what else I
shall not take upon me to say: Certain it is, that no farther progress was made
therein; nor any thing else conducing thereto, till the fifth year of our late
Sovereign King Charles the first, of blessed memory, when in a Session of
Sewers held at Huntendon, upon the 6th. of January, 6 Ian. 5 Car. Anno 1629.
it was decreed; that a Tax of six shillings an Acre should be laid upon all
the said Marish, fenny, waste and surrounded grounds, in order to this general
Drayning: Notwithstanding which Decree, there was no part of the said Tax paid,
nor any prosecution of that work.

1 S^pt. 6 C^r.
Howbeit, in another Session of Sewers, held at King's Lynne, upon the first of
September the year ensuing (the Commissioners then present being xlvii. in
number) there was a contract made with Sir Cornelius Vermuden Knight (a person
well experienced in works of this kind) for the Drayning of this Level; and he,
for his recompense therein to have ninety five thousand Acres of the said
surrounded lands: But the Country being not satisfied to deal with Sir
Cornelius, in regard he was an Alien, they intimated their dislike to the
Commissioners; and withal, became humble Suitors to Francis then Earl of
Bedford (who was owner of near twenty thousand Acres about Thorney and
Wittlesey, of this fenny Level) to undertake the work; at whose request, as
also of the Commissioners, he condescended thereto.

Whereupon, for the better ratifying of this Agreement, there was another
Session of Sewers held at King's Lynne before-specified, 13 Ian. 6 Car.
upon the xiijth. of January following; and by xli. Commissioners then and
there present, a solemn Decree made, reciting these particulars, viz.

That the work of Drayning was first propounded 19 Iac. at Cambridg, at a
general Session there, where the then King James declared by his Letters, that
he himself would undertake it: And for satisfaction of his expense, the
quantity of 120000. Acres was decreed to his Majesty, his heirs and successors
for ever.

But the work being neglected by him, his late Majesty King Charles the first
had often recommended the care to the Commissioners of Sewers, and in pursuance
of this gracious intimation, the Commissioners at a Session holden at
Huntingdon 20 Ian. 5 Caroli, did lay a tax of vis. the Acre upon all and every
Marsh, and fen grounds; which tax, nor any part thereof was ever paid.

And moreover that whereas at a Session holden at Kings Lynne 1 Sept. then last
past ( id est 6. Caroli) the Commissioners being xlvij. present, did contract
with Sir Cornelius Vermuden, that he should undertake the work at his own
charge; and in recompense thereof to have 90000. Acres parcel, equally and
indifferently to be laid out: and that the said Corn. Vermuden had presented
the Commissioners with a Map and design of the work, which was approved of; but
required 95000. Acres, which the Commissioners and Country were unwilling to
grant, or that any contract should be made with an Alien or stranger; they
therefore petitioned, that the Earl of Bedford, then present, would undertake
the work; which the said Earl yielded unto; under the Agreements and Articles
here under expressed; viz.

1. That he should presently begin the same, and finish it so, as to make the
grounds fit for Meadow, Pasture, or ^arable within the compass of six years,
from 1 Oct. following, unless the Commissioners should approve the cause of
deferring it any longer.

2. That sudden overflowings, in places remote from the Out-falls, should not
be adjudged a not Drayning; nor Meers, Lakes, Pooles and Forelands, left by Art
and Approbation for Receptacles; Nor any part of the ground out of which he was
to have his proportion.

3. That there should be 95000. Acres set out by six Commissioners (respect
being had to Commoners accommodations) before Michaelmass then next following.

4. That the Earl and his associates might be incorporated for ever, to make
Laws, Ordinances, and Orders; and to have power over the lands assigned (but no
other) toward the maintaining of the works.

5. That the whole 95000. Acres should be liable to the first finishing of the
work; and 40000. toward the maintaining: and the 40000. to be subject, in case
of neglect, to the Commissioners of Sewers.

6. That when 30000. Acres should be finished, the Earl to have his proportion
out of it.

7. That the private Indikes, for partition, be made by advice of the Earl, and
by direction of the Commissioners.

8. That the Commissioners shall set out convenient Highways and passages by
land throughout the Level.

9. Provided that the Port and Haven of Kings Lynne be preserved; and the
Navigation, Passage, and Highways, in, upon, or about all the Navigable
Rivers; namely Ouse, Grant, Neene, Welland and Glene to be preserved; and no
prejudice, annoyance, hurt or hindrance to be done to them. And if any such
prejudice, annoyance, hurt or hindrance upon complaint thereof and of the
Commissioners, whereof the Vice Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge....... shall be 3. if they will be present; to return, abate,.......
and amove all such prejudice, annoyance etc. so that the ancient Navigation,
passages, and Highways may be preserved.

10. For the safety of Holland and Hundred of Wisbeche, Clows Cross Drayn to
be kept within soil or Banks; and in case of any prejudice, then six
Commissioners to reform the excesses, and the Earl to make recompense.

11. That the new Rivers, Cutts, and Dreyns, the Banks, Forelands and inside of
the Banks, not exceeding 50. or 60. foot, to be the Earls; paying such
recompense as the Commissioners should think fit, the old ones to remain as
they were.

12. No passages upon the Banks but for the towing of Boats.

13. That the Earl might take Earth, dig Drayns, and Cutts, upon the lands next
adjoining, making recompense.

14. That the Commissioners should assist the Earl to suppress ryots,
insolences, and disturbances.

15. Such as should receive benefit by the work, and yet no parties to it, if
their land be taken within the allotment, of the 95000. Acres, to pay to the
Earl as the Commissioners shall assess, upon pain to forfeit double.

16. That the Earl might hold the 95000. Acres in free socage at xl. per annum
fee ferm; and if any other Rents be issuing, that pay be charged upon other
lands.

17. That the King should release any benefit, which by the Law of Sewers made
19. Iac. or by any other law might accrue to him; and approve of this Law; and
that it may be confirmed by Decree in Chancery, and Council of State, and by
Act of the next Parliament.

18. That 12000 of the 95000 acres be assured to the King for his Royal assent,
and laid out upon the lands belonging to the Manor of Whittlesey, and the
Marshes there adjoining.

19. And, that for allotments out of small parcels, less than 30 Acres, there
the Earl to divide and accept what 6 Commissioners should assess.

These things being thus settled, the said Earl taking in diverse Adventurers, as
Participants with him therein, they cast the whole, so allowed for their
recompense, into twenty parts or lots, each lot consisting of four thousand
Acres; whereof himself was to have three shares or lots; Oliver Earl of
Bullingbroke, one; Edward Lord Gorges, one; Sir Robert Heath Knight, one; Sir
Miles Sandys Knight and Baronet, two; Sir William Russel Knight and Baronet,
two; Sir Robert Bevyll Knight, one; Sir Thomas Terringham Knight, two; Sir
Philibert Vernat, one; William Sams Doctor of Law, one; Anthony Hamond Esquire,
two; Samuel Spalding Gent. one; Andrew Burwell Gent. one; and Sir Robert Lovet
Knight; one. And thereupon he the said Earl, and those his Participants, did,
by Indenture (of fourteen parts) covenant with each other; that if any one of
them, or their assignees, after notice, should fail in the payment of such
moneys, as from time to time should be imposed on them, in pursuance of that
agreement, for carrying on the said work; that then it should be lawful to and
for the rest of the said parties, or their assigns, to supply the same, or to
admit some other person or persons, to have the share of such defalture, paying
the sum imposed on the said share: and, that all such parties, as aforesaid, by
himself or his assigns so failing, should be wholly excluded, and for ever
debarred from demanding, or receiving all or any such sum or sums of money, as
any such person or persons had formerly disbursed for and toward the said
undertaking.

Which agreement so made, the said Earl and his Participants, or such unto
whom several proportions of those lots or shares, were by them assigned, began
the work; and in order to the carrying off the superfluous water, wherewith the
Level was so much annoyed, caused these several Channels to be made; viz.

1. Bedford River, extending from Erith to Salters lode, Lxx foot wide, and xxi
miles in length (this being intended for taking off the high floods from the
River of Ouse, having at each end thereof a Sluse of great strength.) 2. Sam's
Cut, from Feltwell to Ouse, being about six miles in length, and twenty foot in
breadth. 3. A Cut to drain the River of Mildenhall in Burntfen, near Litleport,
two miles long, and forty foot wide. 4. Bevill's Leame, being a Cut from
Witlesey mere to Guyhirne, about ten miles in length, and xl foot in breadth. 5.
Morton's Leame (beforementioned) new made. 6. Peakirk Drayn, ten miles in
length, and 17 foot in breadth. 7. New South Ea, from Crowland to Clows cross.
8. Hill's Cut, near Peterborough, about two miles in length, and 50 foot in
breadth. 9. Shire Drayne, from Clows cross to Tyd, and so unto the Sea.
Moreover, besides these Cuts and Drayns, he caused two Sluses to be made, at
Tyd, upon Shire Drayne, to keep out the Tides; as also a Clow at Clows Cross,
for the fresh water.

And likewise a great Sasse on Well Creek, with a Stone Sluse at Salters lode
upon Bedford River, to keep out the Tides, and Sluses at Erith, for the fresh:
But above all, that great Stone Sluse below Wisbeche, at the Horshoo, to hold
the Tides out of Morton's Leame, which cost about eight thousand pounds.

And to the end they might the better accomplish this so great an
undertataking; as also maintain and preserve the works, after they should be
completed; the said Francis Earl of Bedford, and his Participants, did in the
x year of the said Kings reign, obtain Lettees Patents of Incorporation,
bearing date 13 Martii: 13 M^rtii. 10 Caroli.
whereby the said King, making some recital of the before-specified Laws of
Sewers, made at King's Lynne 13 Ian. 6 Car. with his royal assent thereunto;
did incorporate him the said Earl, and certain other persons; viz. Oliver Earl
of Bullingbroke; Henry Lord Maltrevers; Edward Lord Gorges; Sir Francis Crane
Knight, Chancellor of the most noble Order of the Garter; Sir Miles Sandis
Knight and Baronet; Sir Thomes Teringham Knight; Sir Robert Lovell Knight; Sir
Filbert Vernat Knight; Sir Miles Sandis Knight; William Sams Doctor of Law;
Oliver S. John Esquire; Anthony Hamond Esquire; and Samuel Spalding Gentleman,
into a Body politic, to be Guardians and Conservers of the Fen lands, in the
Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk, Suffolk,
and Isle of Ely; by the name of a Governor, Deputy Governor, two Bailiffs,
and Commonalty of the Society aforesaid: and that they and others, to be
elected into that Fellowship, to have a perpetual succession by those Names and
Titles, with power to purchase lands, plead and be impleaded, and to have a
common Seal.

And moreover, that out of this their Society be yearly chosen, upon the xxix
of September, one who shall bear the name of Governor; another to be Deputy
Governor, and two others to be Bailiffs of the same Society, to continue for
one complete year: each of the said Commonalty having of Inheritance five
hundred Acres, at the least, in the said Fen lands.

That upon Death or Removal, the Survivors to elect others in their rooms; And
that six shall have power to make Laws, for the public benefit of the Society,
whereof the Governor or Deputy Governor to be one.

Also, that the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Bailiffs, shall make Oath for
the due execution of their Offices: so likewise their Servants and Ministers.

By this Charter of Incorporation, the said Governor, Bailiffs, and Commonalty
of this Society, and their Successors, are likewise constituted Guardians of
all the Waters, Rivers and Fens within the Precincts aforesaid; with power to
seize and take all Nets and other Engines made and used therein for destroying
of Fish contrary to the Laws and Customs of this Realm. And they be thereby
empowered to enquire by Oath, of all Trespasses and Offenses, committed contrary
to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; and to punish the Offenders by Fines
and Amerciaments: which Fines and Amerciaments to be levied by their Officers,
and to be to the use and benefit of the Society, without any Estreits thereof
made into the Exchequer.

Likewise to build Churches or Chapels, and make Churchyards, in such fitting
places of the said Fens as they shall judge meet; and to cause them to be
consecrated by the Bishop. And to take reasonable Tolls of all Carriages and
Commodities, at such Bridges as they shall erect and maintain: So also for
laded Boats, passing under the same Bridges.

And lastly, to Register all conveyances of these their lands, within three
months after the making thereof, in certain Books to be kept for that purpose,
by the said Governor and Bailiffs.

All which being accomplished, about three years after, in a Session of Sewers
held at Peterborough xii Oct. 13 Car. the whole Level was adjudged drayned; 12
Oct. 13 C^r. Anno 1657.
and the ninety five thousand Acres were set out by six or more of the said
Commissioners, by metes and bounds, unto the said Francis late Earl of Bedford,
his Heirs and Assigns; the charge Discourse touching the Drayning of the Fens,
by Sir Corn. Vermuden p. 2.
of these works to the said Earl and his Participants, having been no less
than an Hundred thousand pounds.

But notwithstanding this great expense, it was at length evidently discerned
Ibid.
, that though the lands were very much improved by those works, yet were they
subject to Inundation, especially in the Winter season; and therefore in a
Session of Sewers held at Huntendon 12 Aprilis; 12 Apr. 14 C^r. Anno 1638.
the year ensuing, the said Earl of Bedford's undertaking was adjudged
defective.

And on the xxiii of May following, 23 M^^i.
in another Session held at Wisbeche, the particular defects therein, being
considered by the Commissioners, there was a new Tax of xv s. the Acre, imposed
by them; but upon D^ping f^n xxx s. the Acre; Waldersey and Coldham xx s. the
Acre; Needham fen vis. viijd: the Acre. For the Marshes within the precincts of
Walton, Wallokne, and Walpole in the County of Norfolk, Tyd S. Mary's, Sutton
in Holand, Lutton, Gedney, Fle^te, Holbeche, Ouaplode, Moulton and Weston in
the County of Lincoln, Wisbeche, Leverington, Newton, and Tyd S. Giles in the
County of Cambridge, xls. the Acre. Marshland ^en xxs. the Acre; and other the
Fens and low grounds in Marshland x s. the Acre. The Common and several
Fen-grounds lying within the North side o^ Wisebeche, between South Ea bank,
Wisebeche River, the old Sea-bank, and the Shire drayn; viz. the Common
Fen-grounds lying in Neuton and Tyd within the said North side of Wisebeche xx
s. the Acre: and the several Fen-grounds in Neuton and Tyd aforesaid x s. the
Acre: and the rest of the Common Fen-grounds lying within the North side of
Wisebeche vi s. viij d. the Acre.

The Common and several Fen-grounds in Holand (in the County of Lincoln) viz.
the Common at xx s. the Acre, and the several at x s.

And it was then decreed, that the said Tax should be paid in, to the
Treasurers appointed to receive the same, before the xviijth. of July then next
ensuing that present Session; to the end that it might be speedily employed in
the work; that so the said Fens might by sufficient Drayning, be made as well
Winter-grounds as Summer-grounds, in all the parts thereof, saving convenient
Forelands and Receptacles for Winter floods.

Hereupon, his late Majesty King Charles the first of blessed memory, taking
this great business into his Princely consideration; and foreseeing that these
lands, being Discourse by Sir C. Vermuden, ut supra, p. 2 and 3.
a continent of about four hundred thousand Acres, in case they were made
Winter-grounds would be an extraordinary benefit to the Commonwealth ( viz. of
six hundred thousand pounds per annum, value) as also a great and certain
revenue to all parties interessed: And likewise, because the Owners (who were
very many) could not agree to do so great a work (one being willing, and
another not; one able to contribute, another not) was therefore pleased to
undertake the making of those lands, Winter-ground, at his own charge, whereby
the said four hundred thousand Acres might be profitable, firm, and good. And
for the better performance thereof, did command diverse Gentlemen, expert in
such adventures, to give their advice how these lands might be recovered in
such manner, as that they might be made Winter-grounds; to the end the said
work might be completed.

Amongst which the before-specified Sir Cornelius Vermuden was one: who, after
view taken thereof, returned their opinions; all concluding it fesible, but
differing much in the way to accomplish the same.

To give instance of the various conceits of such whom his said Majesty
employed to inform him therein, it will be needless: howbeit of those, that
Discourse concerning the Drayning of the great Fens, Impr. Land. 1642.
exhibited by the said Sir Cornelius Vermuden (a person of greater experience
in Drayning than most others were) was not the least considerable: and
therefore it being published in Print, I shall refer my Reader thereto.

But such speed there was made in the farther prosecution of this great and
noble adventure, that at a general Session of Sewers, held at Huntendon on the
xviijth. 18 Iulii 14 Car. Anno 1638.
day of July then next ensuing, the said King himself was declared the
Undertaker; and to have not only those ninety five thousand Acres, which had
been formerly set out for the said Earl; but also fifty seven thousand Acres
more, from the Country; his design being (as by the Decree then made at
Huntendon, appears) to make the said Fens as well Winter-grounds as
Summer-grounds, as has before been expressed, viz. out of Deping, Pinchbeck,
Spalding South fen, and Croyland fen (alias Gogsland fen) twelve thousand
Acres: And out of the rest of the lands out of which the ninety five thousand
Acres had been formerly assigned to and for the said Earl of Bedford and his
participants; First the number of twelve thousand Acres, parcel of the said
ninety five thousand (which twelve thousand were then in the possession of his
said Majesty, his Fermours or under-tenants:) And the quantity of one hundred
and forty thousand Acres more; whereof eighty three thousand (residue of the
said ninety five thousand) to be taken in part, and fifty seven thousand, in
full of the said hundred and forty thousand Acres, to be indifferently taken
and set out of the residue of the said Fens, where or out of which the said
ninety five thousand Acres were so decreed or assigned to the said Earl of
Bedford; viz. out of such of the said Fens as do lie on the North-West side of
the said new River called Bedford River, 29 thousand Acres, in part of the said
57 thousand Acres: And out of those on the South-East side of the said new
River, 28 thousand Acres, in full for the said 57 thousand Acres: And for the
drayning of the said Common and several low grounds lying in Holand, Com. Linc.
within the River Weland, Porson bank, the South Ea bank, the Shire drayne,
and the several high Marshes and grounds of the Towns or Parishes of Tyd S.
Mary's, Sutton, Lutton, Gedney, Flete, Holbeche, Quaplode, Moulton, Weston and
Spalding, 19 thousand eight hundred 33 Acres. And for drayning the Common and
several Fen-grounds, lying between the South Ea bank, Wisbeche River, the old
Sea-bank, and the Shire drayne, in Wisbeche, Leverington, Newton, S. Giles, Tyd
S. Mary's and Porson drove, the quantity of 4000. Acres.

And for Drayning the Common Fen-grounds of the Towns of Marshland, called
Marshland fen, containing by estimation 4000 Acres, the quantity of two third
parts (divided into three) And for drayning the Marsh lands lying open to the
Sea, in or near Walton, Walsoken, and Walpole, in com. Norff. between the old
Sea bank of Marshland, and the old course of Wisbeche River, containing by
estimation 3000 Acres, and of the Marsh lands and Marsh grounds, lying in or
near Wisbeche, Leverington, Neuton and Tid S. Giles, in com. Cantab. and the
course of Wisbeche River and the Shire Drayne there, together with one piece
thereof lately imbanked next the said Shire Drayne, containing by estimation
1000 Acres; and of the Marshes etc. lying in or near Tid S. Mary's, Sutton in
Holand, Lutton, Gedney, Flete, Holbeche, Quaplode, Moulton and Weston in com
Linc. between the Marsh-grounds there formerly imbanked, and the Sea, extending
along the Sea coast there (containing by estimation 5000 Acres) the quantity of
two full third parts.

And for Drayning of Stretham mere and the Meer-grounds thereof, containing by
estimation 300 Acres; the one half thereof, or of so much thereof as shall be
drayned.

And for the drayning of the rest of the Meers, Meer-grounds, Lakes and Pools,
the quantity of 3 fourth parts of them (or so much of them as shall be drayned)
divided equally into four parts.

And that though the said Earl of Bedford had not performed his undertaking, he
should, in recompense of his great charge, in those Rivers, Cuts, and Drayns by
him and his Participants made, have 40 thousand Acres to be assigned him, out
of the beforementioned 83 thousand Acres, residue of the said proportion of 95
thousand Acres assigned to the said Earl, as aforesaid.

About three days following (for it was upon the xxith. 21 Iulii 14 C^r. Anno
1638.
of the same Month of July) the said Commissioners still fitting at Huntendon,
dispatched away Letters Ex Collect. praenob. M^n^^gu Comitis de Lindsey.
of that date, to the Lords of the Council, concerning their transactions then
in hand, the tenor whereof were as follows; Touching the Great Level, we
have received many and several complaints, from diverse Townships therein; that
their lands are taken from them, and they have received no benefit by the
Drayning: upon hearring whereof, and of the proofs by them made, and
declaration of diverse Commissioners in Court, we find many of them true; and
according to his Majesty's Instructions to some of us, his Commissioners, we
have made an Order to permit them to take the profits of their lands, and
Common of pasture, until the Drayning be adjudged, so as they shall not pull
down, or deface any Mounds, Fences, or Drayning, without due proof made, and a
special Order of the Court in that behalf; wherein the Country have received
and expressed a great deal of contentment and satisfaction. We have also two
several days heard Mr. Holborne and Mr. St. John, being of Council with the
Earl of Bedford and his participants in the great Level; and they have taken
diverse exceptions, and argued at large against the Laws of Tax, and proceedings
upon this Commission: and their main Objections tended to destroy, not only
these Taxes, Decrees, and proceedings of this kind. And the same reasons, if
admitted, would plainly overthrow all the Presentiments, Taxes, Decrees, and
Proceedings, for the Earl of Bedford and his participants. We are now taking
into consideration the force and weight of what has been alleged, and shall
therein give a just and speedy resolution; and with all care and diligence
proceed to the further execution of this Commission, and settling of this great
work.




I have not seen any direct Answer made by the said Lords, unto this Letter:
but on the xxiijth. of the same Month, there was a Letter dated at Theobalds
(the Court being then there) from William Lord Bishop of London, and sent to
the said Commissioners, in answer to a Letter of theirs, to him, dated the
xxith. the tenor whereof (for so much as relates to this great Level) I have
here likewise inserted.

-- And because his Majesty intends to see this great work of the Level
prosecuted according to his first Princely design (being for the Countries
good, and his own service) in such manner as may have just regard to the
perfecting the same, with most public and general advantage to the whole Fens;
he is farther pleased to declare himself the sole Adventurer, as well of Deping
fen, as the great Level: and hereafter in ordering the same, will have a just
respect unto such persons of Honor, and others, as have had any former
interest or engagement therein. And likewise well approving the rest of your
proceedings, requires you to go on with the care you have begun: not doubting,
but to such things, as have been said by the Council at Bar, touching
Commissions of Sewers, you will consider the weight of their Arguments, and
give them a fitting answer thereunto.


At the Session of Sewers held at Huntentendon 23 Julii 14 Caroli.
Deeping fen 27000 Acres. The charge 27500 l 13750 Acres.

The proportion 12000 Acres, whereof 9000 out of the Undertakers; 3000 out of
the Kings, Owners and Commoners: with purpose to come for more, if it will not
perfect.

The Meeres and Meer-grounds 4500 Acres. The proportion of 4200 Acres is 34ths.
3150 Acres.

Stretham Mere 3000 Acres. 300 Acres, a moytie thereof 150 Acres.

Porsand and South Holland 36000 Acres; the charge 11200 l. 20000 of the worst
at 12 d. the Acre; 10000 of the middle sort, at 4 s. the Acre, 6000 of the best
at 8 s. the Acre. 2 thirds of the worst 13334 Acre 1. 3 d. A moytie of the
middle sort 5000 Acres 1 fourth of the best being 1500 Acres.

In toto 19833. Acres.

North of Wisberhe 15000 Acres; whereof 8000 Acres surrounded: a moytie to be
decreed, 4000 Acres.

Marshland Common fen 4000 Acres. To the undertakers two thirds, viz. 2666
Acres.

The Marshes 9000 Acres. To be imbanked 7000 Acres. The charge 17500 l. The
recompense two thirds, viz 4666. Acres, and an half.

The Great Level 306000 Acres; whereof 12000 Acres to the King.

The charge 132900 l. The proportion 100000 Acres. Whereof of the Earl of
Bedford's already set forth 43000 Acres. Out of the Country 57000 Acres. And
then left to the said Earl 40000 Acres.

None to be taken till the work be done, and Judgment upon a Winters
experience, and that probationary etc.

The whole to be bound for the works, both the Kings and the Earls; excepting
the Kings 12000 Acres.

And moreover to enrich these Countries by several new Plantations, and diverse
ample privileges: Amongst which his Royal intentions, that of the building of
an eminent Town in the midst of the Level, at a little Village called Manea,
and to have called it Charlemont, was one; the design whereof he drew himself;
intending to have made a navigable stream from thence to the River of Ouse.

And to manifest his earnest and real purposes, for the speedy performance of
what was likely to redound so much to the Benefit of his People, and Honor of
the Realm, he caused 1. A Bank on the South side of Morton's Leame, extending
from Peterborough to Wisbeche, to be made; and a navigable Sasse, at
Stanground; and began the like Bank on the North side of that Leam. 2. He
caused a new River to be cut, betwixt the Stone Sluse at the Horshoo, and the
Sea below Wisbeche, of Lx foot in breadth, and about two miles and an half in
length, with Banks on both sides thereof. 3. And lastly he placed a Sluice in
the Marshes below Tyd, upon the outfall of the Shire Drayn; which afterward
was swallowed up by the Quick sands.


But here I come to a period of that noble design of this excellent Prince, he
being not in a condition to prosecute it any farther; those fatal Clouds, which
began to appear in Scotland the year before, by the unhappy combination of that
people in a League and Covenant, thickning apace that present year ( scil. An.
1638) so that he was necessitated to raise an Army, and to march thither in
person, for the prevention of the approaching storm: which when with no small
charge and trouble, he believed he had done, and disbanded his Army, upon
assurance of their future more steadfast obedience; they soon after invaded this
Kingdom with a powerful Host, which occasioned his Sacred Majesty to call a
Parliament here, hoping both of advice and assistance from his English
Subjects, for the getting out and quieting of those turbulent Spirits: But
instead thereof, what a foundation the predominant party in the Parliament,
confederated with their Brethren the Scots (for by that title they were then
pl^ased to call them) had laid for the ruin of the King, the extirpation of
his posterity, and enslaving of the whole Nation, I shall not need here to
tell, the woeful days, which we have seen, being still so fresh in the minds
of all good people.

The Kings work, therefore, being thus obstructed, and the Country thereupon
entering upon the said nine^y five t^ousand Acres, the said late Earl of
B^dford, and his Participants, did in the year 1641 make their application to
the then Parliament, and had their Case committed: but the flames of war so
soon after breaking out, not only hindered them from any farther prosecution of
their purpose, but occasioned the works made both by him the said Earl, and his
late Majesty, to decay and become useless.

Whereupon William Earl of Bedford, son and heir to Francis then deceased,
being willing to prosecute the work, wherein his Father had been so great an
Adventurer, making his address in the behalf of himself and some other his
Participants, to that Convention sitting at We^tminster,... May. An. 1649.
in the year 1649. and then called by the name of a Parliament; was thereby
declared to be the Undertaker for the same; and that he should have ninety five
thousand Acres, for perfecting thereof, as they were set out in October 13
Caroli, or thenceforth should be set out by virtue of that Act.

The said Earl and his Participants therefore fell in hand with the work; for
the better understanding whereof, it will be proper to take notice, that this
main body of the Fens, so undertaken by them, is divided into three distinct
Levells, viz. the North Level, the Middle Level, and the South Level, every
of which has its particular Banks and outfalls.

1. That which I call the North Level, lying betwixt the River of Weland and
Moretons Leame, they defended from Weland by a Bank, beginning at Peakirk,
running to Crouland, and so to Brotherhouse, where it unites with Holland Bank,
which Bank (as all the rest of the great Banks are generally) is seventy foot
broad at the bottom, and eight foot in height. Peterborough water ( viz. the
River Nene) being also kept off by the like Bank, extending from Peterborough
to Guyhirne.

But the Drayns are only those that were before, which were by this Earl and
his Participants new scoured and opened: And the outfall is also the same; viz.
by Shire Drayne; and the Sluse at Tyd; for the Sluses set in the Marshes are
all lost, which cost near 25000 l.

Moreover they caused Wisbeche River to be opened for the length of two miles
at least, which was a very great work.

2. The Middle Level also they defended from Peterborough water, by a large
Bank made from Peterborough to Wisebeche; this being raised upon the foundation
of that which the King begun; excepting a little turn in Waldersey Bank.

From the River Ouse they likewise defended it by a great Bank, extending from
Erith to Salters lode, on the North West side of Bedford River, and made
another new River parallel to the said Bedford river, from Erith to Salters
lode aforesaid, containing an hundred foot in breadth; and imbanked it with
Banks on borh sides, of threescore foot wide at the bottom, ten at the top, and
eight foot in height: The other new Drayns which he and his Participants made
or repaired within this Level being these; viz. Uermudens Ea, Hamonds Ea,
Stony Draine, Nene old Chanel, Pophams Ea, Marshland Cut, Moors Drayne,
Witlesey Dikes, and some other small ones: And the Sluses, those at Salters
lode, Pophams Ea, and Marshland Cutts.

3. For scou^ing the South Level from the overflowings of Ouse, they raised
also a great Bank from Over to Salters lode: The lesser Rivers, viz. of Grant,
Mildenhall, Brandon, and Stoke being defended by smaller Banks.

From Salters lode to Stow bridge, they likewise caused a large River, of one
hundred and twenty foot wide, and ten foot deep, to be cut, for the more speedy
conveying away of the waters; which River is now called Downham Ea: As also two
great Sasses at Salters lode, for the passage of Boats and other great Vessels;
with three Sluses at the end of Downham Ea: And diverse small Drayns, viz.
Grunty fen Drayn; the In-Drayn to the Bank of the Hundred foot River; Reach
lode, and many others.

So that, having accomplished the whole work within the compass of five years,
the said Level was by a Decree of Sewers made at Ely on the 25th. 25 M^^tii.
An. 1653.
of March Anno 1653. adjudged to be fully drayned: Whereupon the said Earl and
his Participants had possession of those ninety five thousand Acres awarded to
them.



CHAP. LV. Lindsey So called by reason that Robert Earl of Lindsey became the
principal undertaker for Drayning thereof.
Level, Extending from Bourne to Lincoln.
OF this, though I might have, not incongruously discourst, under my title of
Kesteven and Holand: yet, forasmuch as it is (in truth) a part of the great
Level beforementioned (however not so now taken notice of in Common
reputation) I have thought it more proper to speak of it here.

The first Printed paper, entitled the Earl of Li^^sey's title etc.
general attempt toward the Drayning of this part of the Country whereof I
have taken notice) was upon a complaint of the Inhabitants at a Session of
Sewers held at Sempringham in the 8 year of the late Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
the Earl of Lincoln, high Admiral of England, with several other persons of
quality, being then Commissioners: Whereupon a general Tax was laid, for
repairing and enlarging the Drayns and Sewers, to carry off the waters, which
then annoyed these parts: But little was done to any purpose herein, as it
seems: for it appears, that at another Session of Sewers held at Swinstede in
the 17 year of that Queens Reign, the Country complained, that they were
drowned more than formerly; so that the Commissioners then decreeed, that those
Drayns which the Duke of Suffolk and others had ordained to be begun, about
the latter end of King Henry the 8 time; as also some others, should forthwith
be set upon; and laid a Tax accordingly: But no payment of that Tax being made,
the work proceeded not.

Nor was there any farther considerable attempt therein (whereof I have heard)
till Ibid. 5 Caroli.
the 5 year of the late King Charles (of blessed memory) that Sir Anthony Ireby
Knight, Sergeant Callice, and other Commissioners, finding all former essays
fruitless, by reason that the Inhabitants would never pay the Taxes, and that
the lands being surrounded had no Cattle upon them for distress; and
considering that the King (as it is observable in all the Statutes of Sewers)
was to give direction in works of this nature; they did by their Letters
represent to his Majesty the necessity of Drayning these lands, and the
Commodity which might accrue thereby; humbly beseeching him to recommend some
person of Honor, to contract with them as Undertaker for performance of that
work.

The King therefore, understanding Ex bundello D^cr^t^rum in Officio ^ocato the
Pett^-bag.
their design to be, for the Drayning of all the surrounded Fens, on the North
side of the River of Glen, in this County of Lincoln; referred the view of
those, lying on both sides the Rivers of Fosse, and Wythom, from beyond the
City of Lincoln to Kyme Ea, unto Sir Henry Vane Knight, Sir Robert Carr
Baronet, and others; who in order to that good work, did in a Session Ibid. 26
F^b. 8 Car.
of Sewers held at Sleford, 26 Febr. 8 Car. (where were also present and
Commissioners, Robert Earl of Lindsey, Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, the Lord
Willoughby, Sir Henry Fines, and others) lay a Tax of xiij s. iiij d. the Acre,
for the scouring and clensing of the said Rivers, and all Gotes and Drayns etc.
within those precincts, to be imposed upon all the Landholders in the said low
grounds, and to be paid before the ix. of April then next following. And for
the better furthering, and completing thereof, the said Commissioners Ex bund.
Dec^^^. in officio praedicto.
meeting again at Boston upon the second of March then next ensuing, reciting
their Decree so made at Sleford, did extend their said Tax of xiijs. iiijd. the
Acre, to the other parts of that Level.

Nevertheless, little was done therein (as it seems) till about three years
afterward; but then the said King, by his Letters Ibid.
Patents, bearing date at Westminster 2 Aprilis in the xi. year of his Reign,
directed unto George Earl of Rutland and others, Commissioners of Sewers for
the said Level; recommended unto them Robert Earl of Lindsey, Lord high
Chamberlain of England (a person of very great honor) to be the sole
Undertaker for the drayning of the whole.

Whereupon the said Commissioners at another Session Ibid.
of Sewers held at Sleford upon the second of June then next following, 2 Iu^ii
11 Car.
proceeded to a treaty with his Lordship for that purpose; and agreed with him
to accept of twenty four thousand Acres, in recompense of his chardges therein:
which was then accordingly decreed, Ibid.
the work being to be perfected within the space of six years next ensuing the
feast of St. Michael th'archangel then following.

And after this, viz. in a Session Ibid.
of Sewers held at Boston the 29. of March the next year ensuing; 29 Martii 12
C^r.
recital being made of that Decree made at Sleford, whereby the said Earl of
Lindsey, for the considerations therein expressed, was to have those twenty
four thousand Acres of land, to be indifferently allotted out of the several
Fens etc. to enjoy to himself and his heirs for ever; viz. as soon as ten
thousand Acres or more, should be drayned, to have his portion thereof
forthwith assigned: As also the like recital, that upon consideration of the
same Decree, and other former preceding Decrees and Ordinances, made at a
^ession of Sewers held at Swinshed upon the xi. of August then last past; upon
full debate and consideration of the former Decrees, and consideration of a
true and perfect scedule of all the Fens etc. (comprised in a Decree of Tax,
bearing date at Boston upon the second of March in the eighth year of the said
King Charles) from Kyme Ea South-wards, as well within the parts of Kesteven as
Holand, to the River of Glen, being part of the said Level, mentioned in that
Decree made at Sleford etc. it did at that time appear to the said
Commissioners; and then to those present Commissioners at Boston, that that
part of the Level amounted to thirty six thousand Acres or thereabouts: And
recital being likewise made; that, whereas at the said Session of Swineshed it
was proposed, that the severals within the said Level, lying from Kyme Ea to
the River of Glen, might not contribute any part of land, to the making up of
the said quantity of fourteen thousand Acres, but that the whole proportion
should be taken out of the Fens and Commons.

Upon consideration had therefore of the premises, the said Commissioners, so
met at Boston upon the said 29. of March (as has been observed) did then
Decree unto the said Earl and his heirs for ever, that full number of ^ourteen
thousand Acres, to be proportioned out of every the said Fens, of that part of
the before-specified Level, lying betwixt the River of Glen and Kyme Ea, as
part of the said twenty four thousand Acres, which by the said forerecited Law
were decreed unto him; viz. Out of the Fens belonging to Bourne Dyke, and
Cawthorpe 1100 Acres: Out of Morton fens 1030. Acres; Out of Hackonby fen 600.
Acres: Out of Dunsby fen 500. Acres: Out of Repinghale, Ringston, and Kirkby
Underwood Fens 450. Acres: Out of Pinchbek and Spalding Nortfen 1200. Acres:
Out of Dousby and Aslackby Fens 750. Acres: Out of Poynton fen 450. Acres: Out
of Billingborow fen 400. Acres: Out of Horbling fen 400 Acres: Out of Swaton
fen 300 Acres: Out of Helpringham fen 450 Acres: Out of Great Hall fens 650
Acres: Out of Little Hale fen 620 Acres: Out of Bicker fen 700 Acres: Out of
Heckington fen 450 Acres: Out of Howell and Asgarby fen 150 Acres: Out of
Ewersby and Awstrop fen 400 Acres: Out of Gosberkirke fen 600 Acres: Out of
Surflet fen 400 Acres: Out of Quadring West fen 450 Acres: Out of Quadring
Upfen 400 Acres: Out of Donington fen 1000 Acres; and out of South Kyme fen 550
Acres.

And in a Session Ibid.
of Sewers held at Bourne upon the xith. 11 Aug. 13. C^r.
of August the next year following, there was a special assignation, in what
particular place in each of the Fens before-specified, the quantities so
decreed, as aforesaid, should be set out; and a certain mistake concerning
Poynton fen rectified.

Which said several Decrees ( viz. that at Sleford 2 Iunii, 11 Caroli; that at
Boston 29 Martii, 12 Car. and this at Bourne 11 Aug. 13 Car. were afterward in
a Session Ibid.
of Sewers held at Sleford 25 Sept. 14 Car. ratified and confirmed. 25 Sept. 14
Car.


And in another Session Ibid.
held likewise at Sleford upon the xiiijth. 14 Mar^ii, 14 Car.
of March then next ensuing, the Commissioners receiving information by the
said Earl; that he had then effectually drayned all the lands between the River
of Glen and Kyme Ea, containing more than thirty five thousand Acres; and
taking view of them, with all the Sluses, Banks, Sewers, etc. therein; did so
adjudge thereof, and that he had made a full performance of his said
undertaking.

And, lastly, in another Session Ibid.
held at Sleford also, upon the 14 of June next following, reciting and
confirming all the former Decrees: And that whereas but three thousand Acres
were, 14 (...), 14 ^^r.
by the said Law of Sleford made 2 Iunii 11 Caroli, decreed for the perpetual
maintenance of the works, within the said whole Level; and that the said Earl
had, nevertheless, at the instance of the Commissioners condescended to ty the
said fourteen th^usand Acres for the perpetual maintenance of the said works,
made between the River of Glene and Kyme Ea, over and above the Rent of iiijd.
the Acre thereupon reserved to be paid out of the said fourteen thousand Acres,
in case the said iiij d. the Acre should not be sufficient, they decreed and
ratified the same accordingly.

After which, the said Earl and his Participants (having been at no less than
forty five thousand pounds charge therein) did enclose, build, inhabit, plant,
plow, sow and reap two years without disturbance: but the third year diverse
clamorous Petitions were exhibited to the Parliament (then sitting) by the
Country people: Whereupon after examination of Witnesses, Orders were granted
from both Houses to quiet the possession of the said Earl and his Participants,
and to secure their Crops then upon the land: Nevertheless the Petitioners, in
contempt of all, entered and destroyed the Drains and buildings; as also the
Crops then ready to be reapt, to a very great value; and have ever since held
the possession, to the great decay and ruin of those costly works, and
exceeding discommodity to all that part of the Country.

CHAP. LVI. The East and West Fenns.
NOrthwards of this Fenny part of the Country, called Lindsey Level, are
diverse other Marshes lying toward Waynflete, the greatest whereof are called
by the name of the East and West Fenns.

Upon a Writ of Ad quod Dampnum in 41 Eliz. concerning the Drayning of these
Fens, it appears Ex Collect. A^^^onii Thomas E^. a^r. nuper desuncti.
, that the East fen (lying betwixt the parts of Holand and Lindsey) was found
to contain five thousand Acres or thereabouts; and that the one half thereof,
being the Skirt, Hills, and Out-rings, might conveniently be drayned; but the
other half, consisting of deeps for the most part, could not be recovered: and
moreover, that the Commons and Severals pertaining to the Towns confining on
the said Fen, did then amount to the number of three thousand and four hundred
Acres, or thereabouts; all which were at that time surrounded. Whether any
thing was done at that time, toward the drayning of those Fens, I am not able
to say: 15 Maii. 6 C^roli.
but in 6 Caroli (15 Maii) there was a Decree Ex bund^ll^ Decretorum in Officio
vocato the Petti-ba^.
made in a Session of Sewers held at Boston, by Robert Earl of Lindsey Lord
great Chamberlain of England, Edward Earl of Dorset Lord Chamberlain to the
Queen, John Shorey Mayor of Boston, Sir Robert Killegrew Vice-Chamberlain to
the Queen, Sir Robert Bell, Sir John Brown Knights, Robert Callice Sergeant at
Law, and others: which Decree makes this following recital, viz. that there was
a Law of Sewers made at Boston 7 and 9 Apr. then last past, by the said Sir
Robert Bell and others, whereby it appeared, that the grounds hereafter named
were overflowed with fresh waters, viz. Dockdike hurne, from Armitage Causey,
and Howbriggs East, to the River of Witham West; and from the said River of
Wytham South, to Hawthorne North, from the East end of Hundell house grounds,
and so along by Raydyke, to the North side of Moorhouse grounds; from thence by
Marcham, Revesby, East, Kirkby and Hagnaby, to Hagnaby gate; from thence along
by Bar load banck, and the West end of Stickney Severals, to Stickney Graunge:
From thence on the North side of Westhouse grounds, along to Blacksyke: from
thence on the North side of Medlam to Gamock stake: from thence directly to the
East end of Hundel house grounds, from Stickney graunge Southwards, on the
West side of the severals of Stickney and Nordyke gate East, to Nordyke stream
South, and the West fenne West, wherein is included Westhouse grounds, the low
grounds belonging to Stickney grange and Thornedales, from Norlands lane along
between Sibsey severals, and the new Drayn, to Hale Causey: from thence along
to the Shottells.

And that all these grounds, as also the grounds mentioned in a Verdict
heretofore given up at a Sessio^ of Sewers held at Boston aforesaid, 16 Ian.
An. 1629. viz. the East fenne, extending in length from the severals of
Wainflet on the East, to the severals of Stickney on the West: and in breadth
from the severals of Waynflet, Friskeney, Wrangle, Leake, and Stickney on the
South; and the severals of Stichford, Keales, Toynton, Halton, St^ping and
Thorpe on the North, were for the most part surrounded grounds: And likewise
that certain severals, and Commons of diverse Lords and Owners, belonging to
Waynflet and Friskeney, lying between a bank called Fen-dyke bank on the East,
and East fen on the West; and abutting on the old Drayn called Simon got
toward the South, and upon Thorpe-Dales toward the North, and certain
severals of diverse Lords and Owners, belonging to Wrangle, lying between the
said old Drayn called Simon got on the East, and Leake severals on the West;
and abutting upon Lade bank toward the North, and upon the old Fendike bank
toward the South, were surrounded grounds most part of the year: And moreover,
that the several grounds and Commons of diverse Lords and Owners belonging to
Leake, lying betwixt the East fen, on the North, and the out-weare Bank on the
South; and abutting upon Wrangle severals toward the East, and upon Sibsey
wearbank, and Stikney Wydalls toward the West; and the severals of diverse
Lords and Owners of grounds, belonging to Stickney Wydalls, lying betwixt the
East fen of the East and North, and abutting upon Ualentine dyke toward the
West, and upon a Drayn leading to Nordyke brigge toward the South, were
surrounded grounds in the winter time.

And lastly, that the severals of certain Lords and Owners of grounds,
belonging to Toyntons next Spillesby, called the Demesns, lying between the
East fen on the South, and a certain Meadow called the East fen on the North,
and abutting upon a Drayn called Toynton beck toward the East, and upon Hare
hills toward the West, were surrounded grounds also for the winter season.

And that it was therefore decreed; that for and toward the natural outfall of
Wainflet Haven, Black got, Symons got, Mandfoster got, New got, and Amton
got, and all or part of the same; as also any other ancient Drayns as the
Undertakers should think or find most necessary to be used; should be enlarged
and made deeper as need should require, with all other necessary works for
drayning of the said grounds, within the extent of the several recited
Commissions of Sewers, bearing date as above is expressed. And that every Acre
of Land and Common mentioned in the said Verdict, and expressed upon the said
view, within the extent of the said Commissions, to be overflown with fresh
waters, which might receive benefit by the said Drayning, should be taxed and
charged with the sum of x s. the Acre, to be paid at or before the xiiij day of
May then next coming, unto William Locton and Gervase Scroope Esquires, or to
any one of them: The said Tax being set upon the said lands and Commons, to the
end that if it should not be paid, the Commissioners of Sewers might be legally
authorized to make bargain for land with Sir Anthony Thomas Knight, and the
rest of the Undertakers: And the said Tax to remain in the hands, under the
Locks and Keys of two of the said parties named, and two of the same
Undertakers, the sum being first certainly known to the said Undertakers, by
authority of the Court to be ratably paid over to the said Sir Anthony Thomas
and the rest of the Undertakers, to be nominated by him, their Heirs and
Assigns, after the said Drayning should be done, wholly, or in part
proportionable. And in default of such payment of the sums of x s. so assessed
upon every Acre, as abovesaid; the said Court, at a general Session of Sewers
of six Commissioners, whereof three to be of the Quorum, should set forth,
decree, and establish, such proportion and portions of the said ground, for
which the sums aforesaid were not paid, unto the Undertakers, their Heirs and
Assigns, in recompense of the said Drayning.

And it was also farther ordered, by authority of that Court, that process
should be awarded, per Curiam, to the Shireeve of the County of Lincoln, or
his Deputy, requiring them to give Summons and knowledge, by way of
Proclamation, in all the Market Towns and fitting places for those parts, and
within the extent of the said Commissions; that all Lords, Owners, Commoners,
and parties interessed in any of the grounds aforesaid, might take and have
notice thereof; and that they should not fail to make return of the said
Process, at the several Sessions of Sewers, to be holden for those parts, at
Boston aforesaid, the xv th. of May then next, upon xl l. penalty.

Which said Decree the said Robert Earl of Lindsey, and other the
Commissioners of Sewers before-specified, did ratify and confirm. And
forasmuch as it appeared to them, that no part of the Tax so assessed as
aforesaid, was paid in unto the said Gervase Scroope and William Locton; they
proceeded in the execution of the said former Decree, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, and according to his Majesty's directions formerly
signified by his royal Letters: And therefore, being credibly informed, that
for the effecting of the said works of Drayning of those surrounded grounds, A
navigable stream from East fen to Bosto^ haven.
one great and navigable stream and River, ought to be cast from out of the
said East fenn and grounds; and so leading from thence by the space of three
miles, or thereabouts, unto the Haven of Boston aforesaid; and that one or more
very large Gotes of stone and timber, and other materials requisite for the
effecting of so great a work, ought of necessity to be built, at the Haven
side; and that many other petty sewers, gutters and streams, should also be
cast, to have their courses to the said main River; and many Bridges built over
the said streams; and other matters done, etc. at the only costs etc. of Sir
Anthony Thomas Knight, John Worsop Esquire, Henry Briggs Master of Arts, and
Hildebrand Pruson, whom the said Court did order to perform all those things,
within the space of four years from the Feast of St. Michael the Arch Angel
then next coming: which said Sir Anthony, John, etc. were thereupon appointed
Undertakers of the said works accordingly: it being also decreed, that in
consideration of such their performance, they, their heirs and assigns, should
have the one half of the said East fenn; as also a third part in three parts to
be divided of all the said severals, which ly in or adjoining to and upon the
said East fenn: and, moreover that he the said Sir Anthony and the rest of his
fellow undertakers, for the considerations aforesaid, should have a full fourth
part in four parts to be divided, of all the said surrounded grounds, lying in
the West fenne, and in the said severals thereto adjoining, butted and bounded
as aforesaid; to have and enjoy in several after the said Drayning should be
sufficiently completed: All which parts to be set forth by six or more of the
Commissioners of Sewers, presently after the said Drayning should be finished,
as aforesaid, in the most fit and convenient places of the said grounds,
whereby the Owners and Commoners of the other parts might hold and enjoy their
several and respective interests, with the least prejudice, and to and for
their best advantage.

And the said Commissioners did also decree, that from and after the perfecting
of this work of Drayning, the said Lands so assigned to the before-specified
Sir Anthony Thomas and the rest of the Undertakers and their heirs, should be
bound by good and sufficient security, to and for the costs and charges to be
expended for the perpetual maintenance of the said works; that is to say, one
thousand five hundred Acres, whereof five hundred Acres of the said West fenn
to be part; and a thousand Acres of the best grounds of the said East fenn, to
be the rest, yearly to be let out; to the intent and purpose, that two thousand
pounds might be levied and kept in the hands of the Mayor of Boston aforesaid,
for the time being, to be employed for and about the repairs of the said works;
and the profits of the said grounds to be to the use of the said Undertakers,
until the value of five hundred pounds should be spent in and about the
repairs of the said works; and then the said profits to be employed and made
two thousand pounds, to be bestowed from time to time, upon the said works for
ever, when occasion should serve.

Provided also, that the said Undertakers should compound with the several
owners and fermors of grounds, through which the said new Stream, River, and
Gutters were to pass, for setting and casting their works thereon and therein;
and if the parties would not agree to take and accept of reasonable composition
for the loss of their grounds, whereby the said public works should or might
be hindered or interrupted; then that six Commissioners of Sewers should set
rates and prices, and the times of payment; and provide for security for the
same.

And at another Session Ibid.
of Sewers, held at Boston aforesaid, 15 Ap^il. 7 C^^lt. Anno 1631.
upon the xv of April, the next ensuing year, recital being made of the Laws
before-specified, and of the undertaking of the said Sir Anthony Thomas, and
his Participants; there was another Decree made; that for their charges
therein, they should not only have the one half of the said East fen, and a
third of all the severals adjoining thereto; and likewise the fourth part of
all the surrounded grounds lying in the West fen, and the severals thereto
adjoining, limited and appointed to them by a former Decree, but some farther
augmentation in certain other particular places.

Whereupon the said Sir Anthony and his Participants began Ibid.
the work in September following, 16 Iulii 10 Car. Anno 1634.
and prosecuted it with so much diligence, that at another Ibid.
Session of Sewers held likewise at Boston, upon the xvi of July 10 Caroli, by
Thomas H^ughton Esquire, Mayor of the Borough of Boston, Sir Raphe Maddison
Knight, Walter Norton, Richard Finsham, George Pulton, Rouland Hale, John
Knight Esquire, and Thomas Bedford Gent.

Upon their view of those late surrounded grounds, viz. East and West fenns,
North fenn, Earls fen, Armetre fen, and Wildemore fen, and other the drowned
Commons and adjacent surrounded several grounds, lying on the North and North
East of the River of Witham, within the extent of the said Commission,
undertaken by Sir Anthony Thomas Knight, and his participants, they adjudged
the same to be so drayned, as that they were fit for arable, Meadow, or
Pasture: And that there was not above sixteen hundred seventy and three Acres
remaining drowned, of three thousand Acres of Pits, Holes, Deeps, and hollow
places; (which were permitted to be le^t covered with waters) besides the
Rivers, Drayns, Sewers, and VVater-courses, within the whole Level, undertaken
by the said Sir Anthony and his Associates, to be drained within four years not
then expired u^till Michaelmass next following, according to the
before-specified Law of Sewers made at Boston xv Maii 6 Caroli; and of another
Law of Sewers, made likewise in pursuance thereof, at Boston aforesaid xv Apr.
7 Caroli.

And in another Session Ibid.
of Sewers held also at Boston aforesaid, 11 Aug. 11 Car. Anno 1635.
upon the xi of August the next ensuing year, recital being made of the former
Decrees, whereby the one half of the said East fen, and a third part of the
severals adjoining thereto; and a fourth part of the West fen, as also the
fourth part of all the surrounded grounds, as well Several as Common formerly
taxed, lying in the said West fen, were decreed to the said Sir Anthony and his
Participants for the Drayning thereof; the Commissioners did fully ratify the
same proportions, as they were then set out by particular metes and bounds.

CHAP. LVII. The Eight Hundred fen.
THere is likewise another great Marsh, lying in this Northern part of the
great Level, called Eight hundred fen (but anciently Haut huntre fen)
containing twenty two thousand Acres, the Drayning whereof was undertaken by
the late King Charles (of blessed memory;) and to that end, in a Session Ibid.
of Sewers held at Boston 28 Martii, 28 M^rtii, 13 Car.
13 Car. a Decree made, that a Tax of xxs. the Acre should be laid upon sixteen
thousand Acres thereof, to be ^evyed upon the Inhabitants of Braytofte,
Swineshed, Wigtoft, Soutterby, Alderchurch, Fosse dyke, Kirton, Frampton,
Wiberton, Hole, Dockdike, and Boston, claiming Common therein.

But this Tax being not paid accordingly, the said Commissioners sitting again
at Boston aforesaid, upon the first of June, then next ensuing, declared the
said King to be the sole Undertaker for the drayning thereof, and that the work
should be perfected within six years next after that present Session, or any
other time that six of the said Commissioners should limit; and did, for
recompense of the charge which should be expended therein, Decree to him the
said King, his heirs and successors, eight thousand Acres thereof, to be set
out by any six of the before-specified Commissioners, after the accomplishment
of the said Drayning.

FINIS.
THE INDEX,
IMprovements by Banking and Drayning, in Foreign Countries, viz. Egypt page 1.
Babylon 5. Belgique Provinces 10. Frizeland 14. Gallia Cis-Alpina 9. Greece 6.
Holland 12. Holstein. 15. Italy, viz. Fossa Mariana 9. Fucine Lake 9. Placentia
9. Pompein Marshes 6. Zeland 15.
Improvements by Banking and Drayning in England, viz. in Cambridgshire 299.
Isle of Ely 356.180. The siege thereof by King William the Conqueror 186.
Thorney 360. Derbyshire 138. Essex, viz. the Marshes on Thames 74. Havering and
Dagenham Level 82. Gloucestershire 213.

Kent.
The Marshes on Thames 59. Lesnes Marsh 62. b. 65. a. Plumsted Marsh 62. b.
East-Kent 36. The Ordinances of Edmund de Passele, John de Ifield, and Stephan
de la Dane there 36. The Ordinances of John de Lovetot, and Henry de
Apuldrefeld there 38. Romeney Marsh 16. The Laws for Conservation thereof, made
by H. de Bathe, a Justice Itinerant in 42 H. 3.19. The Ordinances by John de
Lovetot, and Henry de Apletrefold, 16 E. 1.24. b. The Ordinances made by Henry
de Apletrefeld, and Bertram de Trancrey 18 E. 1.27. a. The Ordinances made by
Thomas de Lodelow 35 E. 3.31. Immunity to the Bailiff and Jurats 33. b.
Incorporation of its Inhabitants 34. b. Huntendonshire 365. a. Ramsey ibid.
Wittlesey mers 363. a. Kent and Sussex 83. The ordinances of John Fogg, and his
fellow Justices, concerning the Marshes betwixt Robertsbrigge, and Romeney 52.
b.
Lincolnshire.
The Marshes on Ankholme 150. Axholme, alias Hatfield Level 141. Holland 219.
a. Crowland 219. a. 179. Kesteven 194. a. Deping fen, ibid. and 206. a.
Lovell's undertaking to drain it 206. b. Kesteven and Holland 198. b. The
Marshes in Lindsey 153. b. Folsedike 167. a. The Marshes on Witham 168. b.
Middlesex.
The Marshes in the Suburbs of London 73. b.
Middlesex and Essex.
The Marshes on Thames 69. Norfolk 288. a. Ma^shland 244. The old Podike first
raised there 245. a. When first repaired, and how 246. b. 248. a. The new
Podike made there 264. a. Northamptonshire 368. Nottinghamshire 138. a.
Somersetshire.
The Marshes there 104. a. Sedgmore 111. Suffolk 298. Surrey. The Marshes on
Thames 65. b. Sussex Marshes 87. b. Pevensey Marsh. The Laws and Ordinances for
conservation thereof 95. a. Yorkshire 136. b. West Riding 115. a. H^lderness
130. Banks and Sewers. Abatement in Tenths and Fifteens, by reason of the great
chardge in their repair 131. b. 258. a. Allowance by the King toward their
repair 121. b. 254. a. Commissions and Statutes of Sewers; Observations thereon
369. Commissioners of Sewers, their compulsorie power in case of neglect in
performance of their Ordinances and Laws 60. a. 66. a. 347. a. Distresses taken
by their authority of such as observe not their Decrees 21.23. b. sold 250. a.
Land sold by them for neglect in paying of Assesments 63. a. 74. a. 82. b.
Their power to make new Trenches and Banks in case of necessity 139. b. 243. b.
298. a. 371. a. b. etc. To impressed Laborers for repair of Banks and Sewers
33.46. a. 47. b. 59. a. 60. b. 61. b. 78. b. 80. a. 100. b. 122. a. 135. b.
160. b. 204. b. 240. a. To make a Statutes and Ordinances according to the Law
and Custom of this Realm, and the Custom of Romeney Marsh 47. b. 48. b. 58. a.
Custom of the Marsh observed in repair of Banks and Sewers 44. b. 45. b. 46. a.
b. 47. a. b. 78. a. Land gained from the Sea, to whom belonging 237. b. 239. a.
Ouse ( sive Wellenhee) The ancient passage thereof to the Sea, by Utwelle and
Wisebeche 246. a. 248. a. 249. a. 256. a. 299. b. 300. a. 302. b. 333. a. 394.
a. b. 395. a. b. 396. a.
The Great Level.
Observations touching it; viz. what it was at first 171. b. How it became
overflowed by the Sea 172. a. Holland and Marshland, how first gained from the
Sea 174. a. How the main Level came first to be a Fen 175. b. The rise, course
and outfalls of the several Rivers passing through it 176. a. How those their
outfalls became obstructed 182. a. Of the vast extent and great depth of the
Fresh waters occasioned by those obstructions of their outfalls 179. a. The
general drayning thereof, when first attempted 375. The chief contents of the
Bill handled in Parliament, anno quarto Regis Iac. touching the general
Drayning 386. Tides. Their flowing higher in Humber by four foot, than formerly
132. a.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 52. farther. p. 10. l. 10. the Belgique. p. 44. a. l. 32. S.
Nicholas. p. 57. l. 30. Marshes. p. 143. b. in margin, ligula. p. 159. a. in
margin, penes Comitem. p. 192. a. l. 6. celeri. p. 200. a. l. 24. Jurors. p.
709. a. l. 9. xxxiiii. Chapt. in marg: vide cap. 38. p. 211. b. l. 20. Camvill.
p. 244. a. l. 12. xxxiiii th. Chapt. p. 299. a. in marg. Cap. xlvi. p. 300. b.
l. 29. xlvi. Chapt.

A Note of the Contents of the Surrounded Grounds in every particular Lordship
in the Level of Ancoime, from Bishopbriggs, to Ferrebriggs in Lincolnshire,
undertaken to be Drayned by Sir John Monson.
The Lordships on the East Side. The Lords of the Manors, or chief Owners,
that adventured, or Consented for the Proportions. Acr. To. Perc. KIngerby 25 0
0 Sir Thomas Puckering Lord consented. Owersbie 350 0 0 Sir John Monson Lord
Adventured. Thornton 208 1 11 The Bishop of Ely. South-Kelsey 419 2 34 Sir Edw.
Ascough Lord Adventured. North-Kelsey 1214 2 3 Mr. Chamberlain Consented for
Mr. Barde. Kadney, Hosham and Newstead 2010 1 39 Sir Will. Pelham Lord
Adventured. Kettlebie 0379 2 01 Will. Tirwitt Esquire Lord Adventured. Wrawbie, cum
Brigge 0645 1 08 Elsham 0807 2 11 Sir Sam. Oldfeild Lord Adventured. Worlettbie
1369 3 13 Sir William Elvish Lord Consented. Bondbie 0881 0 27 Sir Tho.
Williamson Lord Adventured. Saxbie 1122 0 29 Sir Mich. Wharton Lord Adventured.
Horstow 0517 2 16... Dorrel Esquire Lord Adventured. Ferrebye 0275 0 27

The Lordships on the West Side. The Lords of the Manors that Adventured, or
Consented for the Proportions. Acr. To. Perc. Glentham 0099 3 34 Ed. Turney Esquire
Lord Consented. Bishopp Norton 0325 1 18 Ed. Whichcote Esquire Consented. Atterbie
Snitterb. and Waddingham 0885 2 10 The King chief Lord. Waddingham per se 0707
2 12 Sir William Thorold Lord Consented. Redburne 0819 0 34 Sir Thomas Styles
Lord Adventured. Hibaldstowe 0927 1 07 Scawbie 0571 1 16 Mr. Nelthroppe
Consented. Caistroppe 0582 2 01 William Anderson Esquire Adventured. Broughton 1084
3 03 Applebie cum Thornham 1645 1 10 Step. Andersou Esquire Lord Adventured. Roxbie
0573 3 37 Sir Ed. Molesly then Lord Consented. Winterton 0860 0 11 The King
Chief Lord.

The true, but short state of Sir John Monsons Business.
1 The Towns are 26 2 The Lords of Manors that adventured, were 14 3 The Lords
of Manors that consented, were 10 4 So as the Lords that were the chiefest,
and greatest Owners in 24 of the Towns, were either Adventurers in, or
Consenters to the Dreyning, and none of the rest opposed before the work was
finished; and adjudged. 5. That Sir John Monson undertook it, as a Servant to
the Country, upon the desires of the Commissioners of Sewers, and diverse
others, leaving every man free to adventure for his own, that thought it a
bargain of advantage, or otherwise to leave it upon him, to undergo the hazard,
and lay down the money for their parts: As appears by -- The Commissioners
Certificate, and their Petition to the King. The two Exemplifications under the
great Se^l.

And to show that the Drayning hereof is of a public advantage to the Kingdom,
and has been the endeavors of the most Eminent Persons concerned in it, since
King Edward the first's time, the Records following will make it appear.
a Esc. 16. E. 1. n. 47. b Esc. 16. E. 1. n. 47. c Pat. 18 E. 1. m. 30. in
dorso. d Pat. 23. E. 1. m. 15. in dorso. e Pat. 6. E. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso.
f Pat. 6. E. 2. p. 1. m. 17. in dorso. g Pat. 3. E. 3. p. 1. m. 31. in dorso. h
Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. in dorso. i Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. in dorso. k
Pat. 30. E 3. p. 2. m. 11. in dorso. l Pat. 36 E. 3. p. 1. m. 6. in do^so. m
Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 2. m. 31. in dorso. n Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 1. m. 34. in do^so. o
Pat. 15. R. 2. p. 1. m. 37. in dorso. p Plac. coram Rege term. T^in. 4. H. 4.
rot. 13. Linc. q Pat. 6. H. 5. p. 1. m. 21. in dorso. r Pat. 22. E. 4. p. 1. m.
22. in dorso. Other Decrees.
[ s 5. Sept. 12. Jacob.] t 2. Aug. 13. Car.] u 16. Julii 8. Car.] w U^t. Maii
10. Car.] x 19. Julii 10. Car.] y Ult. Martii 11. Car.] z 24. Aug. 11. Car.] A
a 27. Oct. 14. Car.] ^b 19. Feb. 14. Car.] C c 4. Maii 14. Car.] D d
Exemplifyed, 24. Feb. 15. Car.

ANNO XIII Caroli II. Regis, In Parliam. apud Westminster. inchoato 8o Maii.
An Act for Confirmation of certain Decrees of Sewers made by the Commissioners
for the limits of the Level of the River of Ancholme, in the County of
Lincoln.
WHereas Sir John Monson, in the eleaventh year of our late King of Blessed
memory, Charles the first, upon the request of the Commissioners of Sewers for
the parts of Lindsey in the County of Lincoln, And to do service for his
Country, did undertake the dreyning and improvement of the Fenns and Low
grounds lying in those parts upon the River of Ancholme, extending from Humber
to Bishop-Brigge, which were found and adjudged to be hurtfully surrounded,
both by the view of the Commissioners of Sewers, and diverse verdicts of Iuries
impannelled of the ablest Inhabitants, after several views taken: And that the
dreyning of those Fenns were ever heretofore much desired by the parties
intressed therein; and for that the design of dreyning of the same was by the
opinion of the said Commissioners held to be a work not only Honorable but
Profitable for the Country; therefore the said Sir John Monson, according to
the power and direction of diverse Acts and Decrees of Sewers, in that behalf
ordained, undertook the dreyning of the said Fenns and low grounds, and to make
them fit for Arable, Meadow or Pasture; yet so as he admitted as many of the
Lords and Owners, as would adventure with him for their own upon the same terms
he did, and did at his own and his Participants great expenses dreyn all those
grounds, Common and several Fenns, within the parts aforesaid, between Humber
and Bishopp-Brigge, containing by estimation above twenty thousand acres in one
entire Level, or work of dreyning; for the doing whereof the Commissioners of
Sewers have by diverse Acts or Decrees of Sewers Ordained, adjudged, decreed and
set out unto the said Sir John Monson five thousand eight hundred twenty seven
Acres of the said grounds, Commons and Fenns, by certain meets and bounds,
whereby the same are distinguished and known from the rest of the Commons
there; which Decrees, Schedules, and Laws of Sewers, upon the humble Petition
of the Commissioners to his late Majesty, had His Majesty's Royal assent, and
were enrolled in the high Court of Chancery, according to the Statute in that
Case provided, and were exemplified under the great Seal of England, by virtue
whereof the said five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres were held
and enjoyed by the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and Assigns, until
the beginning of the late troubles, the undertaking being performed and so
adjudged upon the view of the Commissioners of Sewers. May it please your Most
Excellent Majesty that it may be Enacted; And be it therefore Enacted by the
Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by authority of the same, That the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and
Adventurers aforesaid, and his and their and every of their Heirs and Assigns,
shall have, hold, possess and enjoy the said five thousand eight hundred twenty
and seven Acres so set out by several Decrees of Sewers by meets and bounds
therein particularly mentioned and expressed, whereunto his Majesty's Royal
assent was had, and by privy Seal certified into his Majesty's high Court of
Chancery, and there enrolled and remaining of Record, according to the several
divisions and allotments since severally and respectively made between the said
Sir John Monson and his Participants and Adventurers, their and every of their
Heirs and Assigns, freed and discharged of and from all title and Interest of
the former owners and Commoners whatsoever.

Provided all ways, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That, if it
shall fall out at anytime hereafter, that the said Fenns and low grounds lying
upon the River of Ancholme, between Humber and Bishopp-Brigge, for which the
said Sir John Monson, his Participants and Adventurers, their Heirs and
assigns, have their said Recompense of five thousand eight hundred twenty and
seven Acres, set out for the dreyning of the same, shall again be hurtfully
surrounded, in default of the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and
Adventurers, their Heirs or Assigns, and shall so continue at any time for the
space of six Months together, except such Lakes, Draines, Sewers, and Portions
of the said parts, as were excepted upon the Contract, not exceeding two
hundred Acres; so that the same shall be found and adjudged defective in
default of the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and Adventurers, their
Heirs or Assigns, by six of the said Commissioners for the time being, whereof
three to be of the Quorum, And that the said view and Judgment be certified
upon record into the high Court of Chancery; then it shall and may be Lawful
to and for the Lords Proprietors, and Owners and Commoners of and in the said
Fenns and grounds, and their Heirs and Assigns, and for every or any of them,
to enter into two thousand Acres of the said five thousand eight hundred twenty
and seven Acres to be set out and portioned by the said Commissioners, so that
the said Commissioners do set forth and allot a rateable proportion of the said
two thousand Acres, out of every of the said Lordships, and to have, hold, and
enjoy the same, and their several Commons therein, in as large and ample
manner, as they do and shall in the other parts left to them, until the said
parts allotted and left to the said Lords, Owners, and Commoners be by the said
Sir John Monson, his Participants and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, or
some of them, sufficiently drayned and again recovered at his and their own
proper cost and charges as is aforesaid. And that after that same shall be
sufficiently recovered and drained, the said Sir John Monson, his Participants
and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, shall have and enjoy the said two
thousand Acres as aforesaid, and so in like manner from time to time to gain
and lose their said Pasture and Common in the said two thousand Acres upon such
and the like Certificates and recovery had and made as is aforesaid for ever.

Provided also, that if the Lords or Owners of the Lands and Grounds within any
the limits or bounds aforesaid allotted to the said Sir John Monson shall
desire their Lands again, be it further Enacted, that if they pay to the said
Sir John Monson or his Assign^, the principal money by him disbursed in
draining the said Level, with reasonable damages for the same, at or before the
first day of May, which shall be in year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
sixty three; or if any difference shall arise or happen between the said Sir
John Monson and any of the said Lords or Owners touching the said principal
moneys disbursed as aforesaid, or damages for the same, which the said Sir John
Monson shall demand; then such sum and sums of money for the said Principal
and damages, as seven Commissioners of the Sewers, or any four of them, shall
by writing under their hands and seals within the time aforesaid upon
examination adjudge and think fit; that then all and every such Lords, and
Owners of Lands there, shall from and after such payment made, have, hold, and
enjoy, to him and them, and his and their Heirs, all and every such, his and
their Lands and Grounds allotted to the said Sir John Monson, and his Heirs, as
fully as if the said Decrees of Sewers, or this present Act, had never been
had, or made, the said Decrees of Sewers, or this present Act, or any matter or
thing in them, or any of them, Contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the
repairing, future maintenance, and support of the said work for ever in all the
parts of it, It shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir John Monson,
his Participants and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, having a hundred
Acres of Land within the said Level, or any six of them, from time to time, and
at all times, when and as often as occasion shall require, to set and impose
Taxes on all and singular the Lands allotted and decreed to the said Sir John
Monson, his Participants and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, And in case
the said Taxes, or any part of them, be not paid at the days and times for
that purpose appointed, within the space of twenty days after personal notice,
or by writing under the hand of two or more of the Participants and Adventurers
present at the laying of the said Tax, left at their dwelling houses, or in
case they have not any there, at the house of the present Tenant or occupiers
of any the said Lands, that then the said Participants, their Heirs and
Assigns, or any six of them, shall have, and are hereby declared to have,
sufficient power and authority in the Law to make Leases for Years or Lives, or
absolute Estates in Fee simple, of all or any part of the Lands of any person,
or persons so failing, liable to the said Tax, as the case shall require, and
every such Lease, Leases, or Sales by them so made, shall be good and effectual
in the Law to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That all and every the Lands
lying within, or parcel of, or belonging unto the Manor or Lordship of Saxbie
in the County of Lincoln, heretofore acted, decreed, allotted, or mentioned to
be decreed, or allotted, by virtue or color of the Acts and Decrees of Sewers
before mentioned, or any of them, unto Sir John Monson Knight of the Bath, and
now Baronet, or some of the Adventurers or Participants^ (...) and ^ifty Acres,
three Roods and twenty (...) of Land, be the same more or less, parcel of the
premises, by the said Sir John Monson and others dreyned as aforesaid, are
hereby fully and absolutely vested and settled in Michael Warton of Beverly, in
the County of York Esquire, his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, by and according
to the limits, meets, and bounds in the said Decrees and Schedules, Laws of
Sewers, or any of them expressed or mentioned; and that no person, or persons,
shall hereafter, under any pretense or color whatsoever, trouble or molest by
any ways or means the aforesaid Michael Warton, his Heirs and Assigns, for
any part or parcel of the aforesaid three hundred and fifty Acres, three Roods
and twenty Perches of Land, or any other of the Lands and Grounds in the said
Manor of Saxby so dreined, but to be held, and enjoyed by the said Michael
Warton, his Heirs and Assigns, freed and discharged of and from all title of
interest of Common and Commoners, and all other titles, interests, properties,
and claims whatsoever; but with this limitation nevertheless, that the said
Sir John Monson, his Heirs and Assigns, performing an Award heretofore made by
Sir Francis Cobb Knight, Dated the fourth of January, One thousand six hundred
and sixty, between the parties abovesaid, the said Michael Warton shall pay
such sum or sums of money, as is contained in the said Award, any thing in
this present Act contained to be contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That all and every the Lands
lying within, or parcel of, or belonging unto the Manor, or Lordship of
Worlaby in the said County of Lincoln, heretofore Acted, Decreed, allotted, or
mentioned to be decreed, or allotted, by virtue or color of the Acts and
Decrees of Sewers before mentioned, or of any of them, to Sir John Monson
Knight of the Bath, and now Baronet, or some of the Adventurers or
Participants, amounting in all unto four hundred and sixty Acres, be the same
more or less, parcel of the premises, by the said Sir John Monson and others
dreined as aforesaid, are hereby fully and absolutely vested and settled in the
Right Honorable John Lord Bellasise, Baron of Worlaby, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, with this limitation, that the said John Lord Bellasise shall allow
for the said four hundred and sixty Acres, such rates proportionable for every
Acre thereof within the Manor of Worlaby aforesaid, as is agreed to be paid
by Michael Warton of Beverly Esquire, to the said Sir John Monson for the
dreined Lands lying within or belonging unto the said Manor of Saxby,
according to the aforementioned Award made by the said Sir Francis Cobb.

And whereas there was one thousand pounds of lawful English money formerly paid
by the said Lord Bellasise to some of the Adventurers, for some parts of the
said four hundred and sixty Acres; Be it provided, and hereby further Enacted,
That the said payment of the said one thousand pounds so formerly paid as
aforesaid by the said Lord Bellasise, shall stand, be allowed, and accounted in
full satisfaction for the whole four hundred and sixty Acres, and not in
satisfaction of some parts thereof only upon account, Nevertheless according to
the foresaid rates mentioned as to the Manor of Saxby in the said Award of Sir
Francis Cobb; and that no person, or persons whatsoever, shall hereafter,
either by virtue or color of the said decrees of Sewers, or under any pretense
or color whatsoever, molest or trouble by any ways or means whatsoever the
said John Lord Bellasise, his Heirs or Assigns, for any part or parcel of the
aforesaid four hundred and sixty Acres, or any other of the Marrish grounds in
the said Manor of Worlaby, so dreyned as aforesaid, and the Lord Bellasise to
bear his proportionable share of the charges of carrying on and perfecting the
said work for the future, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
extend to one hundred Acres of Land, or Marsh ground, situate, lying, and being
within the North Carr of Cadney cum Housam in the County of Lincoln, which one
hundred Acres heretofore was and yet is the Inheritance of Sir Edward Rosseter
of Summerbie in the said County of Lincoln Knight, and heretofore dreyned by
Sir John Monson Knight of the Bath, and now Baronet, undertaker for the
dreining of that Level, his Participants, or some of them.

And be it further Enacted, That the said one hundred Acres of Land be settled
and vested, and the said one hundred Acres are hereby settled and vested in the
said Sir Edward Rosseter, his Heirs and Assigns for ever; but with this
express limitation, that for the future the said one hundred Acres of Land
shall be liable to their respective proportions and rates hereafter to be set
upon them, in the payment of all Taxes, and other duties necessary for the
perfecting and maintaining of the said work for ever, in such way, method and
manner, and according to such Acts, Orders, and decrees of Sewers, as shall be
lawfully made to that purpose, the said Sir Edward Rosseter and his Heirs also
performing such other Covenants and agreements, which are already mutually
agreed on, the said Sir Edward Rosseter also paying, in consideration of the
charges already expended, to such participant, under whose allotment the said
one hundred Acres may fall, such sum, and sums of money, as shall be expressly
set down in writing, as equal, under the hand and Seal of Sir Matthew Appleyard
Knight, and Charles Hall Esquire, before the first day of August, which shall
be in the year of our Lord God, one thousand six hundred sixty and two. And in
case the said Sir Matthew Appleyard, and Charles Hall, shall not agree as
aforesaid, that then Sir Robert Bolles of Scampton in the County in Lincoln
Baronet, shall have and hereby has power fully to determine the whole, before
the first day of October, one thousand six hundred sixty and two.

Provided, that whereas there is a controversy arisen between the Lord Bishop
of Ely and Sir John Monson and his Participants, concerning some Lands lying in
the Manor called the Manor of Thornton in the moor, in the County of
Lincoln, in the parts of Lindsey, being part of the possessions of the
Bishopric of Ely, It be referred to Sir Edward Turner Knight, Speaker of the
house of Commons in this present Parliament, to examine, award, adjudge, and
finally determine, accor^^^g to equity, what portion or parts within the said
Manor, or Land within the said Manor, shall be allotted to the said Sir John
Monson and his Participants, in recompense of his or their dreyning and
melioration thereof; And that if such award and adjudication shall not be made
before the first of May one thousand six hundred sixty and three, That then the
said Lord Bishop of Ely, or his Assigns, shall have, and enjoy the full and
quiet possession of the said Manor, and every part thereof, until such award
and adjudication shall be made, any thing in this Act to the contrary contained
notwithstanding: And in case the said Sir Edward Turner shall happen to die
before the said first day of May, one thousand six hundred sixty and three, or
shall decline the said reference, That then and from thenceforth all the
matters and things contained in this proviso shall be referred to the Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas for the time being, to hear and determine the
same as aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That neither
the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, nor the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church
of Lincoln aforesaid, their or any of their Successors, receive any prejudice
or damage by this present Act; but that their Lands and possessions be
preserved and kept indempnified, any thing herein contained to the Contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, That it shall not be lawful to or for any
person or persons concerned in any Covenants or agreements touching the said
undertaking, to bring or prosecute any Action, or Actions, or Suits at Law, or
equity, for recovery of damages or satisfaction, for or by reason of any breach
of any of the said Covenants, by any ways or means hitherto had, made or done;
but that all persons concerned in any of the said Covenants, as to any breach
of Covenant heretofore made ^e for ever discharged.

And be it further Enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid. That a
Commission of Sewers under the great seal of England, before the first day of
May, which shall be in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty and
two, shall be issued out to twelve persons, whereof six to be nominated by the
said Sir John Monson and his Heirs, and other six to be nominated by the
Inhabitants and Owners of the Lands upon the Level of Ancholme lying in
Winterton and Bishop-Norton aforesaid, or by the Knights that serve for the
said County of Lincoln, which said Commissioners, or any four or more of them,
shall have full power and authority to inquire, as well by their own view, as
upon the Oaths of Witnesses, which they are hereby empowered to Administer,
and to send summons for, and by all other legal ways, whether the Owners of
the Lands upon the Level of Ancholme, lying in the said Towns of Winterton,
and Bishop-Norton, or either of them, or within the precincts of them, or
either of them, have or may receive and sustain any prejudice by Sir John
Monsons undertaking, for which they ought to have reparation; and thereupon to
make such satisfaction to the said Owners as shall be most agreeable to Justice
or Equity, by restoring to the said Owners and persons damnified by the said
undertaking, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, respectively, all or
any part of the Lands lying in Winterton and Bishop-Norton, by this Act settled
unto and upon the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and Adventurers, and
his and their Heirs.

And be it further Enacted and ordained, That the said Commissioners do make to
Sir John Monson, and his Heirs, recompense at the same time out of the residue
of the five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres settled by this Act
on the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and Adventurers, or any owners of
any part of the said five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres,
according to their several proportions, having respect to the Quantities and
Qualities of the Lands that shall or may be taken from the said Sir John
Monson, and his Heirs, out of Winterton, and Bishop-Norton aforesaid, as in
their Judgments shall be most agreeable to justice and equity, which judgment
and orders of them, or any of them, so as there be four or more of them, shall
be made and published in writing under the hands and Seals of the sai^
Commissioners, or any four or more of them, before the five and twentieth day
of March in the said year one thousand six hundred sixty and three, and that
until the said five and twentieth day of March one thousand six hundred sixty
and three, the Lords, freeholders, Owners, and Occupiers of Lands lying in the
said Towns and Parishes of Winterton and Bishop-No^ton, or either of them, and
their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators respectively, shall continue in the
peaceable and quiet possession of all and singular the said Lands and
Tenements, any thing before in this Act contained to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding: And in case the said Sir John Monson, his Participants and
Adventurers, and his and their Heirs and Assigns, shall not within six Months
next after such Judgment, Sentence, or Order, made and published by the said
Commissioners as aforesaid, upon request to be made by the said Owners, or some
of them, perform and execute what on his and their parts shall be so ordered to
be performed and executed, that then the said Lords, Freeholders, and Owners of
Lands lying in Winterton and Bishop-Norton aforesaid, their Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators, respectively, shall stand and be seized, possessed, and
interested of all and singular the said Lands in Winterton and Bishop-Norton
asoresaid, in as full and ample manner as they or those under whom they claim,
bad, held, and enjoyed the same before the said Sir John Monson did undertake
the said dreining. And in case the said Participants shall not in like manor
convey to the said Sir John Monson, and his Heirs, the several proportions
awarded to him by the said Commissioners, as abovesaid, That then it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Sir John Monson, and his Heirs, to enter
into, hold, and enjoy the same to the proper use of them the said Sir John
Monson, his Heirs and Assigns, for ever.

And for the more fair, and speedy execution of the said Commission, by the
time before limited, Be it Enacted and ordained, That in case the said
Commissioners to be nominated by the said parties respectively, upon a Months
notice before given each to other, of the time and plac^ for the execution of
such Commission, shall refuse to join and concur in the execution of such
Commission, that then (...) more of the Commissioners to be nominated by one of
the said parties only, may proceed in the execution of the said Commission as
fully as if the said Commissioners on both sides did agree and concur in the
execution thereof.

Provided also, and it is further Enacted and Declared, by the authority
aforesaid, That none of the Lords, Owners, or Commoners aforesaid, shall be
sued, or any ways molested, for any entries, or trespasses heretofore made, or
done in the said five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres, or any
part thereof, set out for the said Sir John Monson, and his Participants, or
for any entries or trespasses that hereafter shall or may be made, or done,
upon the said five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres, or any part
thereof, until the four and twentieth day of March next ensuing; but that they
and every of them are and shall be, and are hereby released, discharged, and
indempnified for the same against the said Sir John Monson, his Adventurers and
Participants, and all and every person or persons claiming by, from, or under
them or any of them, and that the said Lords, and Owners, shall hold, occupy,
and enjoy the said five thousand eight hundred twenty and seven Acres, until
the four and twentieth day of March, next ensuing, without any disturbance to
be made by the said Sir John Monson, his Adventurers or Participants.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if the
Commissioners of Sewers for the time being, or any four or more of them shall
adjudge it necessary to make any new drain, or cutts through any part of the
said Level, and shall appoint where and how the same ought to be done, that in
every such case the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, shall
allot to every person and persons such damages as they or any four or more of
them in their Judgments shall think any such person or persons shall or may
sustain by any such new cut or drain, which being in the first place paid or
tendered unto such person or persons, it shall be lawful for the said
Commissioners, or such person or persons as they shall authorize and appoint,
to make any such new cut or drain, through any part of the said Level.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if it shall appear
to the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, that the Lands and
Grounds in South-Ferraby, in the said County of Lincoln, are or shall be
undermined, washed away, and made worse by the new Cuts, Drains, or outsalls,
That the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, shall have power, and
are hereby authorized and required to give satisfaction to every person or
persons so dampnified, out of the said five thousand eight hundred twenty and
seven Acres, as they or any four or more of them shall think fit.

Exs. Copia vera, Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.




