Reflections On the Council of TRENT, In Three Discourses.

I. That the Protestants, without any necessity of inquiring into the Decrees
of the Council of Trent, have sufficient reason to reject it.

II. That the Doctrine of the Council of Trent is contrary to the ancient
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

III. That the Council of Trent was so far from reforming the disorders which
had crept into the Church, that it really made the breaches in its Discipline
wider, and cut off all hopes of correcting the ancient abuses.

A Conclusion of the foregoing Discourses.

Concerning the State of the Church of England, and how she has bin more
successful in the Reformation of her Faith and Manners, then the Church of Rome.

By H. C. de LVZANCY, Mr. of Arts of Christ Church in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed at the Theater, And are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the Angel
in St. Paul's Churchyard, Peter Parker at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, William
Leak at the Crown in Fleetstreet, and Thomas Guy at the Corner Shop of little
Lumbard-street and Cornhil, 1679.

Imprimatur,

HEN. CLERK.
Pro-Cancel. Oxon. Martij 17. 1677.
TO The right Reverend FATHER in GOD HENRY By Divine Providence LORD BISHOP OF
LONDON, Dean of his Majesty's Chapel-Roial, AND One of his Majesty's most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
MY LORD,
I Presume to address to your Lordship, a Treatise against the Council of
Trent, that is, against a Conventicle of this last age, wherein the ancient
Faith was oppressed by the establishment of modern errors, and Religion crushed by
the interests of a politic faction.

Besides the particular obligations I have to offer to your Lordship the best
of my acknowledgments, I could not have made a more suitable dedication of this
Book, then to a branch of that Noble Family, which was ever zealous for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints; and to a Bishop of that Church, which has
always declared it self against the unhappy policy of that See, which builds
its own greatness upon the ruins of the simplicity of the Gospel.

These two singular qualifications, appear so eminently in the conduct of all
your Lordships affairs, that to them we are to attribute that extraordinary
application, whereby you answer all the ends of your high calling; and content
not your self with the advantages and honor, but descend to the most laborious
and difficult parts of so great a charge: that diligent and strict watch,
whereby you do not only preserve your own Flock, but discover all the designs
and artifices of its enemies; that unblamable conduct, which the most violent
and partial of your ^dversaries cannot but admire: that servent charity which
directs to your Lordship as to a sure refuge all them that desire to forsake
either vice or error: but above all that evenness and steddiness of mind, which
a St. Basil.
Father of the Church calls the Life and Soul of Episcopacy, wherewith Almighty
God has endu'd your Lordship in so eminent a degree, that it may be looked upon
as your peculiar Character.

My Lord, it would be a noble subject to reflect upon a few late instances you
have given, that you prefer your honor and conscience above all interests
whatever; that you have no concern but for the welfare both of Church and
State; and tho the greatness of your quality sufficiently entitles you to the
highest honor that either of them can bestow; yet you owe your advancement
purely to your own merit.

But My Lord, I am prevented by the acclamations of the public and the voice of
the whole Nation, which by the great things you have already don is making
judgment of the yet greater happiness it shall one day derive from your
Lordships future undertakings. This is become the employment of persons more
proportioned to such a work; and it is the utmost of my ambition to be admitted
amongst the meanest of them, who are daily beseeching Almighty God, that he
would still prosper your Lordship in the accomplishment of those noble designs
wherein you are happily engaged for the good both of Church and State.

I am with all imaginable respect and duty,
MY LORD, Your Lordships most Humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servant.
De LUZANCY.

THE PREFACE.
THE occasion of these ensuing discourses which are here made public, was a
Treatise entitled, Considerations upon the Council of Trent. Its author has
managed his subject with so much dexterity, that I could not but judge it
agreeable to that love all Christians ought to have for truth, and to my own
duty in particular to dispel the mist he has attempted to cast before men's
eyes.

To perform this with solidity, I thought it not so proper to rely upon any
particular historian of that Council, there being but four who have treated of
it, whose testimonies are not free from exception. Soavius is suspected by the
Romanists, (as Palaviciny by the Protestants) tho with less justice. Scipio
Henricus is more addicted to his Society then to his Church, and more intent to
defend the Jesuits, then to justify the proceedings of the Bishops. And for
Aquilius his Survey De tribus Historicis, it is rather a Pamphlet injurious to
the Church of Rome it self for its want of sense and learning, than a just
censure. But it appeared much more easy and useful, to give a true character
of the Council drawn out of its own acts, and show such essential defects in
it, that all the artifice of its defenders can never satisfy a rational and
impartial enquirer.

There are two things to be considered in this Council; the manner wherein it
was celebrated, and those points it determined, which later either respect
articles of Faith, or reformation of manners. This order I have exactly
followed, by endeavoring in the first discourse to evince that the manner of
holding this Council was altogether irregular, and that Protestants may
lawfully reject it without any further discussion of its decrees: in the
second, that its decisions are contrary to the ancient Canons of the Church:
and in the third, that the reformation which was then pretended to be made, was
no better then a new violation of Discipline, and a perfect illusion of the
World.

In these discourses I avoid the citing any authors, but such as for their
learning and piety are venerable in the Church of Rome; a design which no
judicious persons can ever disapprove, since it hapens but too often that we
combat men, whose sentiments their own communion disowns; and after a long and
tedious disputation we receive no other answer, but that the Church of Rome is
not bound to make good all the assertions of her private followers.

And indeed she would be strangely put to it, should she warrant all the dreams
of Suarez, Vasquez, and other Jesuits. Since it is easy to demonstrate, that
they are more contrary to her then to us; more pernicious to their mother then
to their enemies; and as a learned Petrus Aurel.
Man of their communion observes, fitter to raise new Heresies, then to destroy
old ones.

There being therefore so great a difference between their doctrine, and that
of their Church, I have the justice and honesty not to charge their excesses
upon a communion, which notwithstanding its many errors, cannot cease to be
great and venerable: but the acts of Trent, the Councils of the Catholic
Church, the writings of the Fathers, and the decretal Epistles of the Popes
themselves being still extant, it is from thence that the assertors or opposers
of that Council must fetch their arguments.

I make no doubt but that this writing will increase the hatred of my
adversaries; and I foresee that the blackest colors of calumny will not be
dark enough to draw my picture with. It Is the ordinary way of many Zealots, who
make it a part of their virtue to slander persons on the account of their
Religion, and to persecute them, to the end either to induce them thereby to
turn back to the communion they have left, or at least to discredit them in
that which they have embraced.

No Christianly affected man can see such dealings so opposite to God's Spirit,
without great sentiments of sorrow and compassion: nor deplore too much the
state of those men, who break through all the laws of charity by a principle of
Conscience; and certainly a party must needs be strangely weak, when its
defenders run to Pamphlets and injuries to maintain it.

The greatest and most signalized revenge I Will take of them and of their
writings shall be a constant silence. As their arguments shall never find me
dumb, so their reproaches shall for ever make me deaf. The living God who
understands the language of our hearts shall be the only witness of mine: to
him alone I will complain, and if at any time I pray for the ruin of my
persecutors, it shall be as St. August. in Psalm. 118.
Austin tells us, David did for the destruction of his Enemies. He hated them
with a perfect hatred, he could never be reconciled with the sin, but
nevertheless loved very tenderly the sinner; and at the same time he would have
suffered death to confound the one, he would have given his life to save the
other.

REFLECTIONS On the Council of TRENT.
Discourse I.
That the Protestants, without any necessity of inquiring into the Decrees of
the Council of Trent, have sufficient reason to reject it.

I.
THERE are no true Christians, whose very being so imprints not in them a
profound respect for the Councils of the Church, since they consider them as
Sacred Conventions, wherein that Holy Mother both instructs and reforms her
Sons, and wherein Bishops speak forth the dictates of that Spirit which
proceeds from the supreme Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. thereby preserving
as well the faith of their people from being undermined by the overgrowing
malice of Heresy, as their manners from being corrupted by the remissness of
her discipline.

The Catholic Church has always judged them of so absolute a necessity, that
when ever the Devil attempted to disturb her peace, so soon she gathered her
Members from all parts of the Earth to oppose him, and to learn from the Divine
Scriptures, how that dreadful Enemy was to be conquered. So when Arius
endeavored to deprive us of our Redeemer, by the denial of his Divinity, the
whole Church thundered upon him in the Nicent Council. Macedonius, whose
blasphemous Tongue inveighed against the Holy Ghost, was no better treated in
the Constantinopolitan. That of Ephesus proved no less Enemy to Nestorius. A
thousand Anathema's were pronounced against Eutiches, by the Fathers met at
Chalcedon. And because the Nestorians, even after Nestorius his condemnation,
were resolved to maintain his Errors under the name of Theodorus Bishop of
Mopsuestia, Theodoret Bishop of Cyr, and Ibas Bishop of Edessa, and did
likewise pretend, that the first being dead in the Communion of the Church, and
the two others having been received in the Chalcedon Council, the said Council
had approved of the Nestorian Heresy; the fifth General Synod gathered at
Constantinople, condemned the three Chapters, their Authors and Defenders;
amongst whom was poor Pope Vigilius reckoned, notwithstanding all his
Infallibility.

It had been the constant desire of Men, that the Council of Trent would have
taken these first Assemblies for its rule, kept both their form and spirit, and
showed in these last Times, where Charity is so cold, some footsteps of those
where it was so flaming.

II.
There were no reasons wanting to raise in us the most ardent desires that it
should have been so. There was scarce any Religion to be found in men;
Superstition had so blinded their minds, and fleshly lusts infected their
hearts. And at the same time, that ambition had put Arms into the hands of
Princes to disturb the world, the bloodless, but more pernicious and obstinate
quarrels of Divines, wasted the face of the Church.

The immediate foregoing Ages had brought forth Councils that contradicted
each other. All Europe stood amazed at those of Constance, Basil, Florence, and
the Lateran. The sacred Persons of Kings were become so desp^cable, ^s to be
excommunicated and degraded without the least scruple. The Divine Authority of
Bishops was brought to nothing; and it was hard to judge, whether ignorance or
corruption was more predominant in the Clergy.

Nay the Popes themselves (if you believe their Bulls) seemed to be sensible of
so many Exorbitances. Pope Pius 4. Bull. Conc.
Pius the Fourth confessed, He could not but be struck with horror; when he saw
how much both Heresy and Schism had prevailed, and how much Christian manners
stood in need to be reformed.

Paul. 3. Bull. ind. Conc.
Paul the Third before him had acknowledged, That Heresy and Schism had
vitiated all things.

But Adrian the Sixth goes further, and in his Letter to the German Princes,
does not think it enough to say, That the whole world groans under inveterate
and insufferable abominations; that he desires earnestly a Reformation: but
adds, Epist. Adr. ad Princ. Ger. Reperit. in fascic. rer. expet. and fug. p.
173.
That the Church of Rome, the Apostolical See, is the offspring ^f so many
disorders. We know, says he, ^here have been many abominations in this ^oly
See, abuses in Spiritual affairs, exces^s in the Laws, and that all things are
per^erted: and it is no wonder that the disease ^ath flown from the head to the
members, from the Popes to the inferior Prelates.

This is also the Confession of those ^rave and learned Consult. Doctor. sub
Paul. 3. Reper. in fine 3 Tomi conc. edit. Colon.
Doctors, who being ^onsulted by Paul the Third, about the ^ntended
Reformation, answered him po^^tively, That such an Enterprise would ^rove
impossible and useless to the Church, un^ess it began at the Head.

III.
'Twas requisite therefore to come to that so much expected Reformation; recall
the ancient Doctrine and manners of the Church; and demonstrate by a sudden and
efficacious remedy, that the Popes were not deaf to the cries and complaints of
so many Nations.

But 'twas necessary also to make the humane Grandeur of the Apostolic See,
agree with the Spiritual necessities that Souls were in; exhibit some kind of
help which they should be always masters of, and like experienced Physicians,
draw infinite advantages from that universal Crisis of the World.

Nothing was ever better contrived for that purpose then the Council of Trent.
And he that will survey it without being blinded with any preposterous Zeal,
will easily be convinced that Paul the Third, the Promoter of it, was a Man of
great abilities; and that his Predecessors, trepidaverunt timore ubi non erat
timor. Psalm. 53. 6.

IV.
The Pope passes his word to call a Council, and against the express promise
that Adrian the 6th had made of having it in Germany, according to the constant
maxim of the Canons, Conc. African. conc. Basil. Sess. 31.
To end Causes where their occasion began, he calls it at Trent.

This Council summoned at Trent, is so afraid not to be accounted a General and
a Lawful one, that it entitles it self at the beginning of all its Sessions,
Sess. 1, 2, 3 etc.
Sancta and oecumenica Synodus in Spiritu Sancto legitime congregata.

Who now would not think, after such big words, that from all places where our
Blessed Saviors name is known, Bishops did flock to Trent? Who would not have
expected to meet there with some Eastern Patriarchs, or African Prelates? Who
would not have promised himself in reading the Subscriptions of this Council,
to ^ind more than 300 Witnesses of his Faith, as at Nice; 600. as at Chalcedon;
and (in our very times) 300, as at Constance; or 400, as at Basil? Who would
not have ^ntertain'd hopes of hearing there, many Athanasius's, Cyril's,
Eusebius's, Spiridio's, Paphnutius's, etc? In a word, Who would not have
flattered himself, that our holy Faith had now bin made most clear and
manifest, and that Gods Spirit, a Spirit of liberty and peace, 2 Cor. 3. 17.
had animated that great Body? Nevertheless, what must we say, when we see
appear there not any of those remote Bishops, nay scarce any of the nearest,
not so much as one of Germany, Poland, England, Denmark, Sueden, or France?
That grand ecumenical, holy, admired Council, is reduced to three Cardinals,
five Archbishops, 36 Bishops (for the most part without Churches) some
Mendicant Divines headed by Lainez and Salmero, two stars of the Firmament,
worthy sons of the grand, holy, ecumenical company of Jesus.

The Sermons which were made at every Session, and their manner of discussing
the controverted Points, are an evident proof of the mean parts (not to say any
thing sharper and truer) of all these Divines. Nay, and to supply so remarkable
a defect, we hear of no extraordinary qualities, nor eminent and surpassing
Virtue, nor gift of Tongues, nor working of Miracles, nor Spirit of Prophecy

Notwithstanding, this small handful (...) People take upon them to explain the
most obscure and intricate matters; to give them (after a slight and
precipitat^ survey) a final determination; and to make more Canons in one
Session of four hours, then the four first General Councils all put together
had done in four hundred Years.

V.
The Pope claims to himself the power of calling that Council. He does not
consider it as a privilege, or an usurpation which the silence of those that
are interested therein seem to render lawful, but as an inseparable and
inherent right to his See. Bull. pro. contin. Council.
Nos, says Julius the Third, ad quos ut summos pro tempore Pontifices spectat
Concili a generalia indicere and dirigere, etc.

Who could imagine Christ's Vicar to be a man of so small sincerity? Eust. l. 3.
de vit. Conc. c. 6.
Eusebius; Socr. l. 2. c. 6.
Socrates and Theod. l. 1. c. 8.
Theodoret affirm, that the Nicene Council was called by the great Constantine.
The Act. Council. Ephesians. actio. 1. 2. part.
first Constantinopolitan; which is the second General, was called by
Theodosius; that of Ephesus by Theodosiue junior; that of Epist. Synod: Con.
Chalced. post. act. 16.
Chalcedon by Marcianus; the Council. 5. coll. 8. Epist. Just. ad Conc. act. 1.
fifth General by Justinian; the Conc: 6. act. 1, 2, 3.
sixth by Constantine the Fourth; the Council. Nic. 2. act. 18. act. 1, 2, 5.
seventh pretended General Council by Constantine and Irene his Mother; the
Conc: 8. act. 10.
eighth by the Emperor Basil. All these are accounted General in the Roman
Church, and full of so evident proofs, that the Cardinals Cus: de Conc. Eccl.
Cath. l. 2. c. 2.
Cusan, Jaco: de conc. l. 3. ar. 1. col. 11.: 37.
Jacobatius and Zabarella confess, that in the Primitive Times, the right of
calling Councils belonged to the Emperors: but so many that were assembled in
Germany, England, France, Spain, Italy, etc. that of Constantia by Sigismundus,
that of Pisa by Maximilian (gathered for the most part to depose Popes) make it
appear that so great a Truth was not wholly worn out in the last Ages.

VI.
It is pleasant to consider, how different the style of Popes in former times
is from that of the present. We were in hopes, says Pope Leo to the Emperor
Marcianus, Epist. 44. that your clemency would condescend so far as to defer
the Council; but since you resolve it should be kept, I have sent thither
Paschasin. Has not the Roman Church, says Pope Epist. Steph. post. Conc. 8.
Stephen to another Emperor, sent her Legates to the Council when you commanded
it? We do offer these things to your Piety, says Pope Epist. Hadri. ad Imper
Lect. in Council. Nic. 2. act. 2,
Adrian to the Emperor Basil, with all humility, and veluti praesentes genibus
advoluti, and coram vestigia pedum volutando.

But Pope Paul the Third speaks quite in another manner, Nulli hominum liceat
hanc paginam infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. The Bull of Julius
the Third, is yet more bold, and ill becomes the humility of one that writes
himself, The Servant of Servants. So that it must needs be, that either former
Popes were extremely ignorant of the extent of their Power, or that the
ambition of the later is grown too exorbitant.

VII.
The Author of the Considerations upon the Council of Trent, seems to be
persuaded of this want of Jurisdiction in the Pope, and he is at such a loss to
excuse it, that he has nothing to say, but that in the Troubles that Europe had
bin engaged in, this right was devolved to the Pope. But was not Europe more
disturbed when Frederick the First gathered a Council at Raden. de reb. gest.
Fred. c. 48.
Pavia, where the German, English, French, Italian, Hungarian, and Danish
Bishops met together? When Charles the Sixth, King of France, called one at
Council. Rhem. an. 1131.
Rhemes, whither (the Emperor being pleased to be present) the King of England
and many other Bull. ind. conc. ad fin.
Princes sent their Ambassadors? Or when both the Pisan and Constantian
Councils were indicted by the Emperors with so great applause of all Christians?

VIII.
Nor is it more difficult to prove, that the Pope has no right of presiding in
Councils: nor ought we to recur for that to many subtle distinctions or deep
Ratiocinations. We need not put our selves upon the rack, as the Cardinals
Baronius and Bellarmine frequently do, to render that probable, which is
evidently false, and to make people wavering in things, which are undoubtedly
true. We need but open those Books wherein lie the precious and everlasting
Monuments of Antiquity, and the precedent conduct of so many holy Bishops.

Constantine the Great presided at the first General Council, as Pope Reper.
post oct. Council.
Stephen does acknowledge in his Letter to the Emperor Basil. Theodosius senior
did the same at the second: and from the small Epist. Just. post 5. conci. page
605.
remains that we have of this Council it appears, that nothing was done therein
but by his Orders. Sozom. l. 7. c. 6, 7.
Theodosius junior sent Count Candidian to preside in his stead. And some
contestation happening to be amongst the Bishops, he Act. Council. Ephesians. Can. 17.
writes to them in these terms, Our Majesty cannot approve of and own as
lawful, what has bin done hitherto. And these very Bishops, that had a great
veneration for their Emperor, tell him in their Epist. Synod. Council. Ephesians.
tom. 2. conc. ca. 22.
Synodical Epistle, They have done nothing but ^y his motions, and that they
have made use ^f his Letter as a Light to conduct them.

The fourth General Council has no ^ess evident Testimonies for it. The
resistance which was made to Pope Council Chalced. act. 1. 4, 5. relat. Syn. ad
Leon. post Council.
Leo's Legates, requiring Dioscorus to be put of the Assembly; the affair of
Juvenalis and Thalassius; that of the ten Egyptian Bishops; that of Bassianus
and Stephen, which were all determined by the Emperors Judges, leave us no
ground to doubt of this truth. Justinian was President at the Fifth, as is
clear from all the Acts of that Council. And that great Prince, whom Baronius
abused so unworthily, declares in his Epist. ad Syn. Coll. 1.
Letter written to the Synod, That he considered the Bishops reunion as the
foundation and beginning of all the happiness of hi^ Reign.

The Sixth is so clear, and its Session were so many characters of such a
presidency, that an adorer of the Popes new Power endeavored to discredit the
Act^ of it, because, says he, Pighius de 6. and 7. Synod.
The Emperor, with his Judges, plena autoritate praesidet, presides with full
authority.

Anastasius did whatever he could to deprive us of the Seventh, but Pope Adrian
did repair abundantly that defect. We offer these things, says he in his
Letter to Constantine, to the end they may be carefully examined, for we have
not exactly gathered these testimonies we present to your Imperi^^ Majesty. We
received these Letters from Adrianus BP of Rome, Council. 7. act. 2.
says the Emperor, directed to us by his Legates, who also sit with us in the
Synod. We commanded them to be publicly read.

There is no Italian whom these word; would not stagger.

The Eighth expressly says, Act. 7, 6, 8, 10, etc.
Praesidentibus Imperatoribus; and because the Popes Legates pretended, that the
Bishops who were defenders of Photius, having bin ^ondemned by the Pope, ought
not to be ^eard any more, as sentenced by their last judge, the Emperors
Envoies to the Council, answered, That the Prince com^ands them to be heard the
second time; Im^erator vult and jubet.

Who, after so many Presidents clearer ^han the light, will not wonder to hear
Leo the Tenth in his Lateran Council, ^ay imperiously, and in such a manner as
gives a truer Character of him, than all ^is Historians, The Pope of Rome only,
as ^eing above all Councils, is fully empowered to ^all, to transport, and to
dissolve them? And who, after a particular account of 100 Provincial Councils
for 1000 Years, where the Pope was never spoken of but ^or the condemning of
his pretenses; who, I say, will not confess with Cardinal (...) Zabarella, That
the Pope has so generally ^nvaded the Rights of particular Churches, that other
Bishops signify almost nothing; and (...) God be not merciful to his Church,
Vehementer periclitatur?

Zabar. cap. licet. extrav. de elect.
IX.
Nor does their pretended Power o^ confirming Councils stand upon bette^
grounds than the other two. For if by the word Confirmation they understand an
external engagement, whereby all faithful People are to obey the holy
Constitution of these Divine Assemblies, such an Authority belongs so properly
to Princes and makes so considerable a part of the^ Dignity, that no man can
appropriate (...) to himself without a manifest Usurpation and violation of the
Sacred Majesty o^ Kings. It Is in that sense De Vit. Constable. cap. 27.
Eusebius said of Constantine. Quae ab Episcopis erant sa^citae regulae, suu
confirm^bat and consignab^^ autoritate. And to the same purpose Novel. 131. c.
1.
J^stinian, speaking of the Canons of the first Ages says, Sancimus vicem
legum obtine^^ sanctas regulas. But if by Confirmation they understand the
internal obligation laid upon all Christians, of hearing those whom God has
made their guides (an^ especially when they speak in Council^ where the Holy
Ghost has promised to b^ with them) to reduce it to the Pope, (...) the
greatest Chimera in the World. Th^^ is to make these Venerable Assemblies a^
object of scorn and derision; to give occasion of disbeleiving the certainty of
the truth they set forth, or the justice of the laws they impose; and turn all
Christendom into a club of Independents, given up to the guidance of their own
reason.

Is it probable that the Holy Ghost should be absent from a meeting of 300.
Bishops, among whom we find Athanasius, Osius, Maximus, etc. and be present to
Liberius a Subscriber of the Arian Heresy?

That he should not be in the Ephesin, Chalcedonian, and Constantinopolitan
Councils, where you have Cyril, Leo, Proclus, Flavian, etc. and yet in Vigilius
a defender of the three Chapters?

That he should not vouchsafe his presence to three hundred Bishops met at the
sixth general Counci, and yet inspire Honorius a patron of the Monothelites?

Is not this to include the Universal Church in the Pope, which is a dangerous
heresy? To acknowledge him to be above Councils, which the Sess. 21.
Basilian Council (the Popes's Carthage) as well as the famous Appel. Sorbon a
council. Later. in fasci. rer. expet. and fug.
Sorbon style an other heresy? and in fine, to open the door to a thousand
inconveniences, the renowned distinction excathedra cannot help?

X.
These weighty reasons induced the cent. Gravam. 1. Par. recus. council.
German Princes to protest against that Council. Many Kings of France had done
the same before: and Francis the First (whose name alone in a World of of great
Men) was so fully persuaded of its being no Council, much less a General one,
that the subscription of the Letters he directed to them, was only this,
Conventui Tridentino.

But above all Henry the Eighth King of England, a cleer-sighted Prince, and
extremely well learned in the true concernments of Princes, opposed it with a
greater constancy. It Was not out of any motion of Heresy or Schism he dealt
thus; for he lived yet in the Roman communion. Nor out of any ambition, since
all the historians, nay those themselves who endeavored most to defame him,
acknowledge he had been all his lifetime the general Arbiter of Europe. Nor yet
out of any fear of, or aversion to Councils, since at the same time that he
protested against the Council of Trent, he declared he was ready to submit to
any other lawfully called, and to send thither the Bishops of his Realms. But
the true and only cause was, that he perceived of how great importance an
attempt of that matter would be for all succeeding ages, and what slavery all
Christian Princes would be reduced to, if he should let it pass. So that if the
Council of Trent were as orthodox as the Nicene, and we had no other reasons of
rejecting it, this we have alleged is sufficient to satisfy all unprejudiced
persons.

It Is an essential defect and a fundamental one, at the beginning of an affair
of the highest concernment. Whatever you intend to raise and build upon it,
cannot be but weak and ruinous: and till the Pope be pleased to do us justice
in that point, we do well to stop our ears to all others.

XI.
But should we set aside all these considerations, and grant that the Pope
could both call and preside in this Council, we maintain he ought not to do it.

How came he to be judge of those, whose adversary he was? to sentence his own
accusers, and to rule in a Council demanded with so many tears, and obtained
after five and twenty years delay, only to reform him?

The heats of Leo the 10th against Luther are very well known. That Pope who
had for so many years trampled upon the neck of Europe, was almost distracted
to see a despicable Friar rebel against him, and attack indulgences, of which
his predecessors had always bin most tender.

So considerable an adversary gave more credit to Luther, than either his own
merit, or the justice of his cause could have done. Nor was he to be accounted
an ordinary man, that had answered Pope Leo so briskly, and stoutly received
all the Vatican thunders. He made his appeal to a future Council, and was the
more easily induced to defer till then his condemnation, or justification,
because ^e never imagined Pope Leo, his public and professed Enemy would become
his ^udg.

The German Princes went further, and after their accusation brought against
^he Pope for Heresy and Simony, they (...) appealed to a lawful Council.

It Was at least the Popes duty to purge himself of so many accusations, and to
^cknowledge according to the rule of the (...) Canonists (his most famous
oracles) that ^n such occasions he was deprived of all power.

The Archbishop of Colen having been excommunicated by Paul the Third, refused
the Pope for his Judge, as having bin attainted of Heresy and Idolatry long
before; and protested that as soon as a free Council should be opened, he would
appear there to accuse him according to the ancient Canons.

King Henry the Eighth declared in his Manifesto, that the Roman Bishops orders
did not concern him at all; that the Pope had conceived a deadly hatred against
him; and that he sought after all occasions to be revenged of him, for having
Appel. Prin. Ger. fascieul. rer. expet. and fugien.
Can. ne quis in prop. causa.
shaken off his tyranny, and withstood the intolerable contributions exacted of
his Kingdoms by that See. These different appeals had been made in all
requisite terms: and were not intended as a pretense to annul the Council, but
were offered before it was commenced without ever being recalled. What ever
sligh^ pretenses the Pope had against Luther and the Princes of Germany, he had
none at all against Henry the Eight and the Archbishop of Colen. The one was a
Prelate who demanded to be ruled by the Canons; the other a great King, never
suspected of any Heresy; one that was honored with the glorious name of
Defender of the Faith: and tho we don't pretend to canonize all the actions of
that incomparable Monarch, it is well known his greatest guilt was the
following the examples of his Predecessors, in converting to the good of the
State, those immense riches which the Roman Luxury and idleness was maintained
with, and taking away those Monasteries, whose People were become abominable
and scandalous to the Church.

XII.
For these very reasons in former ages ^he Athan. apol. 2.
Catholic Bishops, defenders of Atha^asius his person and faith, rejected the
Council of Tire, because, said they, Theognis and Eusebius were his judges; and
that Gods Law, Inimicum neque te^em neque judicem esse vult. Epist. ad Innoce.
1. Conc. post Epist. Inn. 27.
St. Crysostome ^efus'd to appear before Theophilus, only because he still
seemed guilty of the crimes ^id to his charge, and was his enemy, ^uod contra
omnes Canones and leges est. And ^his is so equitable, that Pope Nicol. 1. Ep.
7.
Nicholas ^he First, and Celest. Extrav. de Appell. can. secundo requiris.
Celestine the Third ac^nowledged, that ipsa ratio dictat, ^uia suspecti and
inimici judices esse non de^cant.

Libr. 1. de Council. c. 21.
Cardinal Bellarmine is so embarass'd by the laws which those two Popes con^ess
to be of natural equity, that he admits of them, except when it concerns ^he
supreme judge. I pity that great defender of the Popes, for giving so mise^able
an answer. For if it be true, how ^ame it to pass that Pope Vigilius's
constitution (which he certainly pronounce^ ex Cathedra) was condemned in the
Council. 5. act. 8.
Fift^ general Council? Why does the Council. 6. Act. 26.
Sixth a^^so excommunicate Pope Honorius for b^^ing an Heretic? Exclamaverunt
o^^nes Honorio haeretico anathema. And the Council. 7. act. (...).
Seventh, Detestamur Sergium, Honorium^ etc. What means the Council. 8. act. 7.
Eight in forbid^ing Popes ever to be judged, but when they are Heretics? Why
did the^ Basilean and Council. Co^^. Sess. 4.
Constantian make it an a^^ticle of Faith, that the Popes are subje^^ to a
superior Judge when they becom^ Heretics, Schismatics or scandalous* Why were
Pope Responsio synod. council. Basil. p. 105.
Anastasius, John the Thirteenth, and a 100 others deposed? ^o^ must needs
either condemn this shinin^ cloud of witnesses, and with them all the ages of
the Church, or confess that Pop^ Paul the third had no reasons to presid^ at
Trent.

XIII.
It Is no new thing to appeal from the Popes judgment. Saint Austin writing (...)
the Donatists, and speaking of the sentence Council. Basil. Sess*
given against them at Rome, uses these words. Let us suppose, August. Epist.
162.
says he, that the Bishops who judged their cause at Rome had not judged
aright, there yet remained a Council of the Universal Church wherein your cause
with your judges might have been judged again, and their sentence annul'd had
it been unjust.

But without looking back to the Primitive times, the histories of our age
afford us a thousand examples of this kind. Nothing is more frequent in the
English; French and German records. Nay the Monks themselves claimed right to
such appeals. Luther was not the first who attempted to make use of them; and
we read in Paul Langius his An. 1328.
Chronicles, that Cesano a Friar appealed from the sentence of Pope Martin the
fifth as being Heretical, tho in a matter of very little concernment, it being
only to know, to whom belonged the propriety of the Franciscans's bread.

XIV.
But laying aside all these reasons, how could the Pope be president in a
Council called only for his reformation? There is none but know that the
disorders of the Church had no other Origin then the Court of Rome. Nor did
Protestants only think so, but those also of the Church of Rome. And tho both
were extremely opposite in their opinions concerning the remedies for so great
a disease; yet they all agreed in their apprehensions of its cause. Pope Adria.
Epist. ad Princ. Germ. in fascic. rer. exp. and fug.
Adrian the sixth and the Counselors of Consul. Paul. 3 in fin to. 3 council.
ed. Colo
Paul the third acknowledged it with much sincerity. This was the sentiment of
Princes as well as Doctors. Their Haran. de Mr. de Ferriers ambas. au Concile
de la part du Roy tres Christ.
public Ministers did always touch upon that string. Pope Onuph. in Marcel.
Marcellus the second did not apprehend how his Predecessors could abhor the
very name of reformation. And it is like that had God bin pleased to prolong
his life, he would have done great things.

The reformation of Popes was a wound never searched without making them fall
into dreadful fits. All Christians desired the primitive times in matters both
of Doctrine and discipline should be brought again. But they were afraid at
that word; and the only representation of such a Council as those four which
Pope Gregory the Great reverenced as the four Gospels, was a phantome, which
all the exorcisms in the World could not drive away.

We need but read Onuphrius their historian to be acquainted with their fears.
Cardinal Pallavicini could not conceal them; Cardinal Bellai represents in his
memoires, how much Pope Paul the Fourth was frighted. And all the World was so
far persuaded, that this only thing hindered them from proceeding, that Monsieur
de Ferrieres Ambassador of his most Christian Majesty to the Council, told
them not only in his Masters name, but also of all the Gallican Church, that
more than an hundred and fifty years since, a reformation of the head and
members had bin expected in the Church; that it had bin required in the
Constantian, Basilean, and Ferrarian, Councils, but could never be obtained;
that it was no hard matter to guess at the reason of so many delays.

Collec. Lovan. Orat. in Con. habit.
XV.
The truth on it was, the Popes wounds were grown altogether incurable. There
had bin a kind of prescription against all their abuses. Many holy men had
inveighed against them on all occasions but in vain; and thus usurpation had
lasted so long, that they did account it a lawful authority. It Was so pleasing
to them to thunder at all the World upon the smallest occasion, that they could
not renounce it without thinking themselves undone. In a word they were not
taken so much with the humble and penitent lives of the Popes Adrian and
Marcellus, as with the audacious and voluptuous ones of Boniface, Leo and
Hildebrand.

Nevertheless this sick and languishing person is allowed to govern his own
Physicians. The general complaint of the World is, that the Popes swelling
ambition has made him break through all laws; that the Court of Rome is become
a sink of wickedness; that the vices of the head infected the members; that
without the reforming of this head there is no hope left for laying of any
solid foundation.

And yet he presides in his Council. He calls, directs, and transports it by
his ^ull and sole authority (tho the 400 Pre^ates met at Can. Basil. Sess. 33.
Basil had made it a point of the Catholic Faith, that 'twas not in his power:)
his Spirit fits the mouth of his Legates, and the fear of him strikes the hearts
of the Bishops.

XVI.
Paul the third being afraid of nothing so much as of a free Council where
Protestants should be heard, provided so well against these two inconveniences,
that the Conventicles of Tire, of Antioch, or of Ephesu^ in comparison of that,
would have bin thought freedom it self.

Peace being the source of all freedom in an Ecclesiastical assembly, where all
the members of it are styled by Scripture Ephesians. 6. 13.
Evangelists of peace, that Pope was extremely diligent in fomenting War through
all Europe. This we are assured of by the speech of Cardinal de Monte, that of
Cardinal de Lorraine, the letters of the Lantgrave de Hesse, of the Duke of
Saxony, and of that A copy of that letter drawn upon the original with all due
forms, is to be seen in the Bishop of Venice's library.
Pope himself to the Switzers, wherein he acquaints them, he has made a league
with the Emperor to undermin^ Protestants, and intends for that purpose, to
raise all the forces of the Ecclesiastical state.

What name shall we give a Council which has such a Pope for its president?
Does he deal out of charity or ambition? Does he design to convert Souls by
force of Arms? What can they think of the Church, who are supposed to be
separated from her? How long is it since Councils were taught to War with any
other weapon then Scriptures, then tears and Prayers? Is that Pope to be
trusted, who at the same time he offers to receive his Children into his
bosom, can lift up his hand to strike them?

Julius the Third was of a greater sincerity, and scorned to deal deceitfully.
When he called the Fathers to Trent, he openly agreed with the Emperor to make
War against France, about the Dukedom of Parma; and to speak as Onuphrius (who
is more his Panegyrist than his Historian) set Italy and the rest of Europe in
a flame.

Onuph. in Trent. 30.
What peace then or freedom could a Council enjoy, when all Europe was
em^roil'd, and groaned under a bloody War? and what designs of reunion and
charity could a Pope entertain, who sought nothing but confusion and trouble?

Pius the Fourth seemed to be ashamed of it. He was so little convinced of the
validity of what ever had bin done at Trent, that when he recalled again his
Synod the third time, he was at a loss how to term it, whether it should be
considered as a new one, or but a continuation of the first; Frenchmen claimed
the one, Spaniards pretended the other. The Pope (says his Onuphr. in Page 4.
Panegyrist) met with an expedient to make them agree, and he did so contrive
his Bull, that all were equally satisfied: that is to say, he daubed up the
business; he flattered each one with a fancy they had bin victorious, but he
gave occasion at the same time to all clear-sighted men, to wonder at a conduct
so far distant from the candor and ingenuity of the first Ages, and so full of
carnal wisdom, which the Apostle styles Romans 8. 6.
Death, and to believe, that he never intended to heal the wounds of the
Church, but only to cover them, and create her new ones.

XVII.
What is the reason the Pope is so earnest for the Council to be held in Italy
and stops his ears to the cries of Germany, the complaints of Protestants, and
the entreaties of so many Princes and Bishops? Did France, where the eldest Son
of the Church commands, give him any cause to fear? Did Germany, where Charles
5th commanded? Did Spain, where people were grown adorers of his Grandeur? Was
this Council for being had in any of these Kingdoms, under the subjection of
most Christian and Catholic Princes, in danger of becoming either less free or
less Orthodox?

Had the Pope bin inflamed with the zeal of that faithful Shepherd, of whom it
is written, does he not leave the ninety and nine, and go into the Mountains,
and seeks that which is gone astray Mat. 18. 12.
? how great joy should have possessed his Soul, for having the place shown him,
where to find his wandering Sheep: where all European Bishops might Respons.
ordin* imper. legatis Pontif. fascicul. rer. expet and fug. p. 173.
have met together; and England, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and Germany, sent
their Prelates? Should he not have bin ravished at the occasion given him, of
rendering the Protestants inexcusable? of reproaching them as Christ did
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a hen
gathers her chicken, and ye would not, Matthew. 23. 37. of accusing them of
Schism, and applying to them all Saint Austin's arguments against the
Donatists? Had not Pope Paul the Third, and his Successors aimed at some other
end then the love of Catholic truth, why did he oppose the only thing that
could render it victorious? Is there any president of such a conduct in former
Ages? Is it not clear that there is in it some mystery? And if so, was it to be
wondered that Protestants should apply themselves to search into it, and prevent
its consequences?

XVIII.
The choice of a free place where truth should command, had bin always a
terror to the Popes. As long as the Apostolic See is not ruled by Adrians and
Marcellus's, it will never without horror call to mind the Councils of
Constance and Basil. Every Country wherein Bishops may say, It seems good to
the Holy Ghost and to us, Act. 15. 28. shall be accounted by the Bishop of Rome
a Land of bondage. The Pisan Council shall be termed a Latrociny by the
Lateran; and most holy decrees shall be looked upon, as so many bold and rash
attempts.

Paul the Third chooses therefore Trent to assemble his Council at. This Town
indeed was out of the Ecclesiastical state, and the Cardinal of Trent commanded
therein; but as an Author of the Roman communion pleasantly observes, the Town
was subject to the Cardinal, and the Cardinal to the Pope.

Paul the Third had bin informed by his predecessors example, that nothing made
so much to the mastering of a Council, as the choice of the place. He succeeded
in it admirably well. Trent was not so far from Rome, but the Holy Ghost might
come thither in a few days, and many legions of Italian Bishops resort
thither; as it was done at the question of Residence and divine right of
Episcopacy, when 40 Apulian Bishops, set aside for the most pressing occasions,
came in as fresh supply. But he had forgot how Nicholas the First, Innocent the
Third, Clement the Fifth, Innocent the Fourth do Cleme. pastor de sentent. and
rejudicata, can. sine, de conjug. Cause. 33. Pro. 2.
teach, that no man is bound to appear in a place where he has just reasons to
fear the multitude.

XIX.
The event has shown us, that the fears of those Princes were not groundless.
Their intention was only to obtain a free Council, where none should be
condemned unheard, truth examined without prejudice, and matters weighed with
the greatest care.

For we must not imagine so many great Kingdoms, holy Bishops and learned men
sought their own ruin. They desired no more then the examination of their
doctrine, to persevere in it if it should be judged orthodox, or to renounce it
if it were not so; and for this reason the favor should be granted them, which
was never denied to any, to wit of being heard.

An Ammian marcel.
Heathen does so much justice to Pope Liberius, as to confess, that he chose
rather to banish then to condemn Athanasius without hearing his defense. But if
they were afraid to place us in Athanasius's rank, it is certain that Arius,
Macedonius, Paul of Samasate, Nestorius, Pelagius, and the most abominable
Heresiarchs have bin heard. And the Church always judged she could not deny
them a thing of natural right.

XX.
Nevertheless the Pope rids himself of all these Inconveniences of the
Primitive Church; and for fear other Bishops that are present at the Council
should speak for them, he deprives them of all freedom of proposing any thing.
Tho they are his It Is the title, the Pope gives Bishops in all his Bul^s.
venerable Brothers and born Judges of Councils as well as he, they have never
the more liberty for it. All things are done proponentibus legatis, At every
session.
and these Legates do propose but what they please.

When any one touched with a sense of his duty, intends to speak, he is
silenced. If he be a Frenchman or a Spaniard, they tell him, it is unbecoming
the Majesty of a Council to contest. But if he be an Italian (that is, a shadow
and a Sceleton of a Bishop) he has his ingratitude reproached, and his Soul
terrified by violent threats.

Ibi est herus, tergo metuas. There is at Trent but the image of a Council. The
true one is at Rome. Speech of the French Ambassador related in Thuanus, page
54.
Quid a patribus judicandum proponitur, aut ab ^is judicatum publicatur, quod
non prius Romam missum Pio Quarto placuerit? The main design is to cheat the
People, and not to establish any real good for the Church. The holy Ghost does
not shine on the Fathers at Trent but by reflection; and tho he has not promised
to be in the conclave, but in the Council, yet he does not come to the one but
as sent by the other.

What can the result be of dealings so contrary to the Spirit of God, but to
incline men to renounce an assembly, where, as speaks Mr. Ferriers's, Pope Pius
the Fourth left no place for the laws, no footsteps of the ancient Councils, no
vestige of freedom. Thuanus, ibid.
Vbi nullum legibus locum, nullum antiquorum conciliorum, nullum liberatatis
vestigium Pius Quartus relinquat.

Nor are the Authors of these last words either Protestants or Heretics.
Neither is it that famour Venetian, whom they call Atheist, because he brought
out of darkness, those artifices the Popes made use of, to betray the cause of
God: but the Legates of the most Christian King: Men of admirable integrity and
erudition, wonderfully addicted to the Church of Rome; and public Enemies to
those that had separated themselves from it.

XXI.
But to be fully persuaded of the violence offered the truth, and that its
vindication was not the scope of their endeavors, we need but consider the
secret power given to the Popes Legate to transport, or to dissolve the Council
according to the occurrences. Is it not a manifest and evincing argument, that
the Fathers gathered at Trent were treated like Children? made use of but only
for a show and pretense, when an occult and an overuling spirit agitated the
whole mass?

Had the Pope dealt sincerely and without mistrust, what need such an
anticipated power? But if he could not suppress his fears in a place he had bin
so much cautious of to be made secure, are not the very same fears much more
reasonable in such, as could there hope for no security?

The dissolving of Councils is the last shift the Popes betake themselves to.
Eugenius the Fourth attempted to secure his tottering power at Basil; and
indeed that Council had vanished into smoke, but that the Emperor, Princes,
and Bishops, forced him to repair thither: Plat. in Eugen. 4.
by threatening to condemn him for a stubborn and obstinate man, if he should
refuse it. Proud Plat. in Alex. 4.
Le^ the Tenth succeeded more happily, and tho Alexander the Fifth testified at
his death, all things had bin done at the Pisan Council with all imaginable
sincerity and integrity, yet he declared it a mere conventicle.

XXII.
Had they intended to render truth manifest and palpable to all Christians, why
did they take a course for discussing it o^ suspicious and unheard of till
then? What means that so extraordinary distinction of Congregations and
Sessions, the first to deliberate, the other to decide and decree^ Had they
learnt this from the first Councils of the Church? Must articles of Faith be
handled secretly? Tertul.
Is there any thing more dreadful to the truth then to be absco^ded? And is
there any rational man that suspects not they are willing to disguise and
betray it, when he sees them so cautious and overprudent to conceal from him
their way of examining it?

Is infallibility to be found in the Sessions or in the Congregations? not in
the last, since they are composed of private Doctors; nor in the first, since
nothing is examined in them.

And Gods Spirit, a Ephesians. 1. 10. These. S. 21.
spirit of Wisdom and discretion, forbids to determine any thing but after a
long and serious trial.

XXII.
Hence we draw, how weak is an answer of the author of the considerations upon
the Council of Trent, which seems to him the most solid ground of all his
discourse.

The inconsiderable number of Bishops who voted in that Council is objected to
him. And we say that it is a great temerity in those few Bishops and Divines,
to have made in so short a time, and upon so important matters, such a
prodigious number of decrees; and an other yet greater and more unpardonable
then the first, to have bin so bold to propose them as the decisions of the
Catholic Church.

To this he answers two things, first that those Bishops and Divines were men
of an extraordinary merit. Secondly that whatever this small number had done,
was approved of, received and ratified by the greater number, which amounted to
above two hundred at the least Session.

For the first part of his answer concerning their extraordinary merit, he must
give us leave to tell him, Pope Paul the fourth was incomparably better
acquainted with it then he is, and consequently more to be believed. And Il.
Council. de Trent. Page 408. Memoires du Cardinal Bellay. p. 155.
he said of them to Cardinal Bellay, It had bin a great weakness in his
Predecessors, their having sent to the Mountains of Trent threescore Bishops
of the less learned, Sessanta Vescovi de manco habili, and forty very ordinary
Divines, and quaranta dottori de meno sufficienti.

For the second we acknowledge with him, that at the end of the Council two
hundred and 50 Bishops, the greatest part Italians, ratified the decrees of
those other. But he ought to acknowledge with us, as a matter of fact, that
after the arrival of those new Bishops, there had not bin any new examination
of so many decrees, but only a simple reading. Whence we conclude many things
so disadvantageous to him, that it would have bin more secure and handsome for
him, to have let that objection alone, as he did twenty others.

And first that it is against all Canons, all right, and rules of common sense,
that Bishops newly come should determine points they never examined.

Secondly, the surveying of these points was either necessary, or not. If it was
so, they were bound therefore to undertake it. But if there was no such
necessity, why did the first Bishops impose it upon themselves?

Thirdly, the last Bishops avoiding any new examination did therefore acquiesce
in the precedent: and so it is a ridiculous petition of principle, and the
greatest dishonor the Council could be blemished with, to say the Fathers rely
upon some Bishops de manco habili, and some Divines de meno sufficienti.

Fourthly, that by this means Protestants continue still in the right, for
complaining they have bin condemned without being heard: that they can and
ought to maintain their Doctrine till it be lawfully proscribed, it being
probable so many great Kingdoms, three parts of Germany, and a considerable
part of France and Poland, were further from being mistaken, then a few Bishops
de manco habili, and a few Divines demeno sufficienti.

XXIV.
There Is none can forbear laughing, at the simplicity of him that collected the
subscriptions of that Council; who to dazzle the eyes of ignorant People, writes
a patriarch of Jerusalem and six Greek Prelates; Greeks born in Italy, who had
nothing Greek but their names; as lately Cardinal de Rets was Archbishop of
Corinth, tho he had never bin there. The same is to be said of the pretended
Archbishops of Armagh and Upsal who sat at Trent, when the true Prelates of
those Sees protested against the Council.

And for those titular Bishops who appeard there in so stupendous a number,
the Pope did never reflect that in sending them thither, he published to all
the World, how much an enemy he was to the Spirit, Discipline, and rules of the
Church, which has always considered the Election of Bishops without
Bishoprics, as constant violations of her most holy laws.

XXV.
But all these Shepherds, as well those that want Sheep, as those that are
know^ by theirs, John 11. 14. are tied up to the Pope by a more solemn and
dreadful Oath, then that which obliges them to their natural Princes.

This Oath is not only contrary to all antiquity, wherein it is impossible to
find any footstep of it; not only unworthy the Episcopal rank, not only
injurious and scandalous to Kings, who thereby can never hope for true and
faithful allegiances from their Bishops: but also horrid and abominable in all
its parts.

A private author would never be believed, that should undertake to evince the
consequences of it. They would suspect him of being prepossessed and swayed
more by his own passion then the truth. But lets hear how the Pope himself
interprets this Oath. No Bishop of the Church of Rome can disown the
interpretation of his holiness. For it is the universal Doctrine of all Divines
(except some scandalous Jesuits) that we must in all our swearings answer the
meaning of the lawgiver, otherwise we attempt to deride God, and make his word
a witness to our falsehood.

But Pope Pius the Second makes the extent of this Oath so large, that writing
to the Bishop of Mayence he Epist. ad Episcop. Mogunt.
tells him, It is not lawful for a Bishop to speak true against the Pope. Non
licet verum dicere contra Papam.

If we give any credit to that Popes words (which the Author of the
considerations cannot disown, for he spoke ex Cathedra) in a thousand
occurrences they that take such an Oath must needs be either perjured or
betrayers of the truth of Christ.

But what can we hope from Bishops who sit in a Council thus enslaved to the
Popes will? since a Heresy maintained by him, (as but too many have bin) they
cannot oppose, without forswearing themselves; and if they remain dumb at such
enormities, they shamefully betray the station Christ has given them in his
Church.

What would the Nicene or Chalcedonian Fathers have said at this acclamation of
the Apulian Bishops, Milinaeus de Council. Trident. Number. 21.
Nihil aliud sumus praeterquam creaturae and mancipia Sanctissimi Patris? What
would Domnus o^ Dioscorus have desired more? and if Paphnutius could not
forbear weeping, to see Athanasius's seat filled by his accuser, and himself
thrust into a place due to that vile man, is it possible there was not one
Bishop at Trent seen to shed tears at so strange a contempt of Episcopal
dignity?

XXVI.
And indeed the most holy Father used them all ut creaturas and mancipia. James
of Clodia Fossa, saying he could not suffer tradition to be paralleled with the
Scripture, was expelled the Council. Peter of Justinianople being but suspected
of what they called Lutheranism, was forbidden to come there, and take place
amongst the Bishops. Another was proclaimed Schismatical, and threatened to be
rejected, for affirming there had bin many lawful Bishops never called or
confirmed by the Pope. Nay another was deposed because he said, the Pope should
be contented with the title of Holy, which God is satisfied with without
affecting that of most Holy. So that it was not without reason, the Cardinal of
Lorrain complains, Thunus l. s. page 13.
the Council was not free, since nothing could be proposed or resolved, but
what was the Legates pleasure, nor could they propose any thing but what was the
Popes.

XXVI.
But to convince all unprejudiced persons, we need but consider the safe
conduct granted to Protestants.

Tho the Fathers of Trent were engaged in honor, to blot out the memory of the
Constantian Council, (whose wounds continued still bleeding) by testifying to
their adversaries all imaginable sincerity and Candor, yet they gave them
greater occasions then ever to distrust.

Protestants require nothing but what had bin accorded to the Bohemians by the
Fathers at Basil; but they are plainly denied. They beg at least a safe conduct
which they many confide in; but it is doubted whether it may be granted them, and
they are told it shall be given in the Congregation (viz. in the Friars
meeting) and not in the Session (viz. in the Council.) At last after having bin
thus baited, they o^tain safe conduct which has respect only to the Germans and
worded in such captious terms, that thereby the Pope had reserved to himself
the power of burning all the English, Swedes, Danes, and French that should
come to the Council; nay the Germans themselves: tho they could blame nothing
but their own simplicity:

Notwithstanding whatever reasons Protestants had of declining such a Council,
after the example of the Holy Fathers, and the judgment of the wisest men then
living, they (trusting the justice of their cause, and seeing in that noble and
magnificent safe conduct hope was given them of disputing and proposing their
difficulties) sent their Divines to Trent and exposed them to all dangers,
without any other defense then the truth, which is called in the Scriture, the
shield of the just. These Divines thus authorized by their Nation, being
arrived at Trent, conceal not themselves. They avoid not the sight of men. The
whole Council is acquainted with their coming. They speak to the Ambassadors,
make their addresses to the Popes Legates, conjure them to pity the calamities
of Germany; and after having presented them with the confession of their Faith,
they beg no other favor from them, but to have it read in the Council, for its
being either approved of, or condemned. The Legates do not burden them with
Irons, or tumble them into Dungeons, they are so far from being murdered, that
their life could not be more secure in the Prince of Saxonies or the Landgraves
Chamber. But they receive no answer; their confession of Faith remains buried,
the Legates keep it in Petto, nor are the most entire submissions and ardent
entreaties able to bring it forth. Thinking perhaps that the quality of a
Priest, or of a Divine had no great influence upon an Apostolic Legate, they
made use of the Emperors Ambassadors. That Prince was the Soul of the Pope, as
the Pope was of the Council. But all these endeavors are frustrated, there is
somewhat unknown and unperceived which strikes dumb their Eminences.

Who ever heard of any such dealings? If Protestants decline the Council
grounded upon a thousand unanswerable reasons, all the World rises against
them; nor are the names of Heretics, Schismatics, nay Atheists sufficient to
express their imputed perfidiousness. But tho they come and strike Heaven and
Earth with their complaints, an ignorance is pretended of their being there.
The Fathers have neither ears, nor hearts, nor mouths, to hear their prayers,
feel their grievances, and answer their proposals; and they are forced to beg
and expect from God that justice which men deny them.

XXVII.
It Is evident from so many instances, that Protestants did never reject
Councils. There is no Christian whom the Authority of the Church does not
overcome, he deserving to be debarred from the quality, advantages and hopes of
a Son, who hearkens not unto his Mothers voice. The Church has a true
jurisdiction, a real and effective authority. All contrary Doctrines flow from
independency and Enthusiasm, two blind and furious Monsters every where to be
profligated. But the very same Protestants so great admirers and defenders of
the Church, require she should speak in lawful assemblies. When they shall be
condemned in Councils like that of Nice and Chalcedon, then they will receive
their sentence with as much joy as respect.

But when a new and unlawful meeting, guilty of essential, aver'd and
incontestable defects, nay acknowledged to be such by the most learned and
disinterested men of the Roman Communion, shall claim the same authority as
these Divine assemblies, they will be very careful to keep their ancient ways;
and far from being deterred by the threats of that proud and uncharitable
Church, which excludes from heaven all those she cannot keep blindfold in her
bosom, they will augment the glorious company of many holy Fathers, whom the
overpowring number of unjust Councils, could never bend to betray the cause of
Christ. Such an one was St. Athanasius who rejected the Council of Tire;
Maximus Patriarch of Jerusalem, that of Antioch; Cyril that of Syrmium;
Paulinus that of Milan; and Chrysostom, an example of Christian constancy,
that ad quercum.

In a word they will receive those curses pronounced against them as so many
blessings, and without going any further into the discussion of the Tridentine
Councils decrees, they will conclude with the words of Cardinal L. 2. De
Pontif. c. 18.
Bellarmine, Si legitima Synodus non fuit, planum est nullam authoritatem
potuisse habere: and nullius roboris sunt illius Canones.

REFLECTIONS On the Council of TRENT.
DISCOURSE II.
That the Doctrine of the Council of Trent is contrary to the ancient Doctrine
of the Catholic Church.

I.
WHOEVER peruses the Council of Trent, cannot but be strangely amazed, to find
its style so altogether unlike that of the ancient writings of the Church.
There is in those I know not what characters of holiness and Christian majesty,
which command reverence from all: but in this we meet with a sort of so unusual
and dubious expressions, that show the Authors of it were incomparably better
versed in political practices, or Books of Schoolmen, then in the Works of the
Fathers.

They never intended, in many of their Canons, to fix a true and uniform sense,
which all People might rely upon, but a double and captious one, apt to receive
contrary interpretations; to satisfy men of different interests, and give them
the mutual pleasure of believing their assertions upheld by the authority of the
Council.

And thus the Jesuits and Dominicans were equally contented with the Canons
concerning Grace, and Justification. Each Party drew the authority of the
Council to its own side: and there has not bin any Writer of these two Orders,
who in their many Books, as opposite one to another as light is to darkness,
has not alleged these very Canons, as invincible proofs against his adversary.

II.
But if any should enquire further, and search into that vast multitude of
Decrees unknown till then, he must needs wonder to find them built upon so
sandy Foundations.

The most general Basis of them is laid in the fourth Session, where the
Council proposes two objects to our Faith; to wit, Sess. 4.
Books which are written, and Traditions which are not written. And they
pretend as a necessary consequence, that whatever we oppose against the Church
of Rome, is of that kind. This is the Epitome of all the Council.

Nevertheless, least any one should be offended at the word Tradition, and
persuade himself that they intend by it to equal men's authority to that of God,
or humane Ceremonies to the sacred Precepts of the Gospel; they give of it a
most magnificent character, calling it, Sess. ibid.
The Word of Christ, a Doctrine inspired by the Holy Ghost, for the ordering
our Faith and manners, and preserved in the Catholic Church by a continued
succession.

If that Principle be true, there is an end of all Controversies; and were the
Church of Rome as able to prove it, as she is ready to advance it, we might
hope to see in our days, that blessed Word of Christ accomplished, John 3. 16.
There shall be one Fold and one Shepherd.

And indeed there is no Protestant in the World, who does not admit of a
Tradition endued with these Qualifications.

First, That it be the Word of Christ.

2. Inspired by the Holy Ghost.

3. In matter of Faith and Manners.

4. Preserved in the Catholic Church by an uninterrupted succession.

But there is no Protestant in the World that does not maintain, such a
Tradition cannot be proved: and is nothing else but one of those rich and
splendid Idea's, as admirable and flattering in their speculation, as
impossible and deceiving in their practice.

III.
For the perfect evidencing whereof we need but consider the following
Proposals.

First, That of all places of the Scriptures, whereby the Church of Rome
asserts her Tradition, there is not so much as one alleged by the Fathers in
her sense.

Secondly, That none of the Fathers ever understood Tradition otherwise, then
for the unanimous consent of the Doctors of the Church, grounded upon a word
which is written.

Thirdly, That no places in Scripture are express for the authorizing such
Tradition, but many positive and clear to prove the sufficiency of Scripture.

Fourthly, That among the Traditions of the Church of Rome, she proposes many
to our belief, which do not appertain at all either to Faith or manners.

IV.
The Scripture is most holy, most infallible, most perfect in it self. The
Gospel has added what was deficient in the Law. And the Apostles Writings
supplied the defect of the Gospel. There we must stay. (...). Basil. l. de
confess. Fid. Cathol.
It Is no less crime, in S. Basil's opinion, to add that which is not written,
then to reject that which is written.

And it is a stupendous boldness, when God has vouchsafed to reveal his will to
men by a certain and infallible word, to substitute another, neither clear nor
undoubtedly received.

V.
That new word, which is ascribed to God, has properly and by its self relation
to those things which cannot be proved by Scripture, as one Andradius.
of the Divines, present at Trent, has taken notice of, otherwise it would be a
written word.

But if it be so, nothing is more unworthy of Christ, and less agreeable to his
divine Oracles. It is to render his truth suspected, or uncertain; to expose
Christians to infinite errors; to give them as many masters as there are
persons who will profess themselves the Guardians of that word; and to make it
the object of all men's scorn; since according to the excellent saying of S.
Jerome, Hieron. in Math. c. 8. 13.
Quod de Scripturis autoritatem non habet, e^dem facilitate contemnitur qua
probatur.

VI.
We find not that Christ in his holy Gospel sends us to Tradition, whereby we
may come to the knowledge of him. John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, they are they that testify of me.

The Apostles speak as their Master. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that ye take
heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in your hearts. Homil. de S. Spirit.
Many, says S. Chrysostom, pretend to speak from the Holy Ghost, but they do
it falsely, as long as they speak from themselves; as Christ testifies he spoke
not from himself, but from the Law and the Prophets; so if they proffer us any
other thing then the Gospel, under pretense of its being inspired by the Holy
Ghost, let us be far from believing it.

Is there any thing worse, says Epist. ad Flavian. Refer. Can. quid autem.
Pope S. Leo, then to have impious sentiments, and yet not to be willing to
assent to the more learned and wise? Those are guilty of this folly, who when
they are hindered from knowing the truth by any obscurity, do not recur to the
Prophetical Books, the Apostolical Writings, and Evangelical authority, but to
themselves, and so become Masters and Teachers of error, because they refused
to be Disciples of Truth.

It would have bin very easy for Cause. 24. quaest. 3. Can. 30.
S. Austin, in that long and tedious Disputation with the Donatists concerning
the Catholic Church, to have made an end of it, by sending them to Tradition.
But instead of doing so, Let us not hear, says he, Haec dico, haec dicis, but
let us hear, haec dicit Dominus. Lib. 2. de Bapt. contr. Donat. c. 3.
We have the Lords Books; Both of us acknowledge their authority, both of us
believe them, ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram: nolo
humanis documentis, se^ divinis Oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari. We
seek, as he there adds, where the Church is: what shall we do? in verbis
nostris eam quaesituri sumus, an in verbis Domini? I think it is to be sought
in his words who is the TRUTH, and knows perfectly her who is his Body. Habeo
manifestissimam vocem Pastoris mei, commendantis mihi and sine ullis ambagibus
exprimentis Ecclesiam. If I suffer my self to be reduced and separated from his
flock (which is the Church) by the words of men, I will impute it to my self
whereas he advertised me, saying, John 3. 27.
My Sheep know my voice.

It Is the constant Doctrine of that admirable man in all his Works.

In his Letter to S. Jerome, I confess your Charity, says he, Epis. 19. refer.
Can. Ego solis. Did. 9.
I give those Books alone which are termed Canonical, that honor as to believe
none of their Authors did ever err.

In his Letter to Vincent, Epistol. ad Vinc. refer. Can. noli Frater. Dis. 9.
Do not oppose therefore, Brother, to so many and undoubted places, some of the
writings of the Bishops, either ours, or those of Hilary, Cyprian, and
Agrippinus. All these writings want the Authority of the Canon, and we receive
not their testimonies as things which it is not lawful to dissent from, if they
are dissenting from the Truth.

Upon the 87. Psalm, You read not in the Gospel those whom you name; neither do
I see those whom I allege. Let us lay aside our Books, procedat in medium
Codex Dei.

Finally against Maximinus the Arian, who relied upon the Council of Ariminum.
I ought not, says he, Libr. 3. c. 13.
to cite you the Nicene Council, nor you that of Ariminum, as prejudices for
our cause, Scripturarum autoritatibus non quorumcunque propriis, sed utriusque
communibus test^bus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione, concertet;
and utrique tanti ponderis molibus cedamus.

Nay 'twas not only Bishops that thought so, but Laymen themselves. We are
taught by the Gospel, says Ex (...)* Theod. l. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 6.
Constantine to the Nicene Fathers, the Apostolical Writings, and the Oracles
of the Prophets, what we must know of God: let us therefore draw the
explication of our doubts from the words divinely inspired.

VII.
We intend not hereby to detract from any part of the high esteem every
Christian ought to have for the Works of the Fathers. We consider them as the
Masters of the Church, who instructed her, not only by the learned productions
of their minds, but by the purity and good examples of their lives. We honor
them as Preachers, who spoke no less by the wounds they received for the
defense of Christ, then by the words they made use of to make known his
Doctrine. Nor could we behold without a just resentment a Minister of our Age
to abuse their Writings in a Book entitled De vero usu Patrum. We acknowledge
with the great S. Austin, l. 2. de nup. and Conc. c. 24.
that these holy Men were stabiles in antiquissima and robustissima Fide. We
call with the Primitive Councils our present Faith the Faith of our Fathers
Conc. Chalced. ac. 8. 8. 10. etc. Epis. Eusebius. relat. a Theod. Eccl. Hist. l.
1. c. 11.
. But we are not convinced that our respect should endue us to believe them
infallible. After Gods Word none is of greater weight to us then theirs; but we
are not bold enough to mingle and confound them. As a body grows not luminous
but as it comes near the Sun to receive its impressions, so we do not see in
them any certainty of light, but as they are conformable to the Scripture,
which is certainty and light it self. And we think we give them all the praises
they can expect from us, when we say, as S. Athan. Ep. ad Epict.
Athanasius did, of the Nicene Fathers, that their Expositions of the Nicene
Faith, according to divine Scriptures, are sufficient to destroy all Impiety,
and confirm the belief of Christ.

VIII.
But that which is more to be wondered at, is, that none of the controverted
points has ever bin preserved in the Catholic Church, as a point of Faith, and
agreeable to the consent of the Fathers: a truth expressly maintained by a
learned u Bishop of this Kingdom, Jewel.
who successfully challenged any of the Roman Communion to a contradiction.

I would call for no other evidence then the Canon of this very Session,. 4.
which ordains under pain of Excommunication to admit of those Books as
Canonical, that had never bin such, with the same veneration as those which had
bin constantly kept by the Church. All Conc. Laodic. can. 54. Jos. l. 1. contr.
App. Eusebius. l. 3. Hist. Eccl. c. 20. Melit. Sardic. apud Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 26.
etc.
Councils, Fathers, Ages, ancient and modern Writers exclaim against that
Decree, and there is no man, tho but commonly read in Ecclesiastical writings,
that can deny it.

Notwithstanding the Council does anathematize those that dissent from its
Canons. Pope Paul and Pius the IV. exact a dreadful Oath of it, and make the
People swear upon the Gospel, to receive as certain and undoubted that which
all the learned of the Church of Rome had looked upon before as evidently false.

IX.
The Decree which consecrates the vulgar Translation is most strange, but
nothing is like the declaration of the Cardinals, who assure us, Quod ne vel
iota unum repugnat in veteri vulgata Latinae linguae editione, tho Pope Clement
VIII. confesses in the Preface to his Edition, Bull. Clem. VIII. ante Edit.
Vulg.
many things were purposely omitted which should have bin changed. Let it be
said with all due respect to their Eminencies, that so surprising assurances
show either deep ignorance, or a wonderful unsincerity, or the greatest
boldness in the World.

X.
The Sess. 6. Can. 32. q. 24. etc.
Articles of Justification, which establish the merit of our Works in a manner
so injurious to the Grace of our Redeemer, are no less opposite to the ancient
Church. That holy Mother constantly instructed her Sons in all times, Ephesians. 2. 3.
That we are by nature the Children of wrath; Phil. 2. 13.
That God works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. 2 Corinthians.
3. 5.
That we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God.

She has bin taught by Christ himself, John 15. 5. Ibid. 8. 36.
Without me ye can do nothing; if the Son shall make you free, you shall be
free indeed, Ibid. 6. 44*
and no man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him.

She has bin informed by her Doctors, that when God is pleased to Crown in us
our merits, he Crowns but his gifts: that unless he gives us what he commands
us, his Law instead of a spirit giving life, becomes to us a killing Letter.

She has determined in her Council Council. Arauz. c. 12.
, That no man is free for doing any good thing, but by Gods Grace: that God
expects not our will, but prepares it according to what is written in his word
Can. 8.
; that when we fall into any sin we do it of our selves, and of our own will,
Can. 23.
but when we do any good Action, it is out of his alone.

Let any unprejudiced person read the Canons of the Council of Orange (where S.
Hilary being President, Christ's Grace triumph't so entirely over all its
enemies) and compare them with those of Trent, he will be amazed at so strange
a contrariety.

But when we are so earnest in throwing down our pretended merits to raise a
glorious Trophy to our Faith, we intend not to patronize Libertinism, and give
way to those licentious opinions, which are the natural consequences drawn from
the Doctrines of some Reformers.

Faith, whereby a man is justified, is not barren, and like that of the Devil,
which is of no use but to prolong and foment his disorders. It is a Faith
which, as the Apostles styles it, Gal. 5. 6.
works by love; which makes us look upon Christ as the Foundation and only
Source of our Salvation; breeds in us an ardent desire of him. That love which
is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost Romans 5. 5.
promts us to put our whole trust in him, and to practice by the Sovereign
power of his Grace, what his Gospel teaches is required of us.

S. Austin incomparably expresses this great Truth in these words, which the
Church has so much admired as to make a Can. Charitas de poenit. Did. 2.
Canon of them. John 6. 47.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that beleives in me has everlasting life:
He therefore who has not everlasting life, believes not in Christ: but he
believes in Christ that has Charity, for to believe in Christ est tendere in
ipsum amando, is to be inclined to him by Love. It is to this the remissions of
sins has bin promised, huic remissio peccatorum promittitur. But if Love
cannot be separated from Christian Faith, how can he that wants Charity have
Christian Faith, that is, believe in Christ?

Faith is therefore the Spring of our love, and love the Source of our Works.
Can. Charitas.. Ergo. ibid.
What is it to love God, continues that holy Doctor, but to be inwardly
adherent to him; to conceive an ardent desire of seeing him, an hatred of sin,
a distaste to the World, a Charity for our Neighbor, whom he has commanded us to
love, and so strictly to observe in our Charity the rules he has prescribed us
in his Law, as never to pervert its order.

But let it be far from Christians to think our Faith or Love come from us. If
any beleives, says the Can. 7.
Council of Orange, he can do any good action, quod ad salutem pertinet vitae
aeternae, by the strength of nature, and without being enlightened and inspired
by the Holy Ghost, who poures into our hearts a suavity which makes us assent
to, and believe the truth, that man haeretico fallitur spiritu, not attending
to what Christ pronounces in his Gospel, John 15. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing. Nor to the words of the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 3. 5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God.

There are in man, says the same Council, Can. 20.
many good things, which man does not do; but in those he does, there are none
but what God does in him.

No man, says another Canon, Can. 22.
has of himself but falsehood and sin; but if any has truth and righteousness,
it is of him Quem debemus sitire in hac eremo, ut ex eo quasi quibusdam guttis
irrorati non deficiamus in via.

Good God! how far are the Canons of Trent from the holiness and humility of
these! how repugnant to the established Doctrine of the Church, and the
sentiments of the Fathers, are the proud and Pelagian principles of the Jesuits!

XI.
The Anathema's of the seventh Session being no better grounded, are not more
to be feared; the Council cuts off from the Church, which is the Body of
Christ, those who admit of more or less then seven Sacraments.

It is evident that such a Principle cannot be proved by the Scripture. We must
then recur to the unwritten Word. Sure so important a truth has bin preserved
in the Catholic Church, and nothing ought to be more obvious in the writings of
the Fathers.

Nevertheless, not a word for twelve whole Ages; and that so long uninterrupted
silence had never bin broken, had not the master of the Sentences and other
Scholastics brought it into the World.

Indeed we find every where in the writings of the Fathers that the Adult must
give an account of the Faith they professed at their Can. ante Baptisa.
Baptism, and receive the Can. baptisand.
imposition of hands from the Bishop. We meet every where with Repentance,
Penance, and Confession of Sins. We see Can. postquam de Consecrat. did. 4.
every where the power of ordaining Priests so committed to the Bishops by
Christ, that all Ordinations from other hands were esteemed unlawful and
sacrilegious. But we find no where all these things to be Sacraments. And no
man can sufficiently wonder how the Fathers at Trent propose as an Article of
Faith grounded upon Tradition, a thing they are obliged to confess was never
spoken of in the Church for twelve hundred years.

XII.
The Unwritten word does no more favor the Canon which establishes
Transubstantiation then the others, and we have from the ancient writings so
many places against this Doctrine, that we cannot conceive how it came into the
World.

Lib. 4. c. 40.
Tertullian writing against Marcion, who denied that Christ had a real Body,
tells him, Christ made his Body of the Bread he distributed, saying; This is my
Body, that is, the figure of my Body, Figura Corporis mei; but it had never bin
a Figure, Si veritatis corpus non esset, had not the Truth, (Christ) had a real
Body.

Christ, says Dial. 1. page 18.
Theodoret, honored the Symbols and signs of the Sacrament with the name of his
Body and Blood, not changing their nature, (...), but adding his Grace to their
nature.

S. In cap. 1. Epist. ad Ephesians. and refert. Can. duplicit. de Consecr. did 2.
Jerome is no less positive then Theodoret, The Flesh and Blood of Christ,
says he, are understood two several ways, either of that spiritual and divine
Flesh, of which he says himself, My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is
drink indeed, and, John 6. 55.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
life in you; or, my Flesh which was nailed upon the Cross, and my Blood which
was shed by the Soldiers Spear.

S. in Psalm. 54.
Austin, who is justly esteemed the Oracle of the Western Churches, adds a
pregnant testimony to this Assertion. The first heresy, says he, in the
Disciples of Christ was occasioned by the hardness of his words; for when he
told them, John 6. 55.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
life in you: they not apprehending him, said one to another, John 6. 60.
This is a hard saying, who can bear it? In saying this is hard, they separated
themselves from him. But he remained with his twelve Disciples, and taught them
saying, John 6. 63.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; the words I
speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. Do you understand them in a
spiritual manner, they are spirit and life; do you understand them in a carnal
manner, they they are no less spirit, but not for thee who understandest them
not spiritually. Spiritually apprehend what I have said, Non hoc corpus quod
videtur manducaturi estis, and bibituri sanguinem quem effusuri sunt, qui me
crucifigent. The Sacrament I recommend to you quickneth when it is understood
spiritually, but the flesh profits nothing. They answered him according to
their apprehension, for they understood this flesh, as it is used to be sold in
a carcass, or torn in the shambles. Jesus knowing their error, said to them,
What I told you of giving you my Body to eat, and my Blood to drink,
scandalizeth you; but what will you say, if you see the Son of Man ascending to
the place where he was before? He resolves here what he had proposed to them;
he shows them that which they were scandalized by, to the end they might
apprehend him. In this manner they thought he would have given them his Body,
Ille dixit se ascensurum in coelum, utique integrum, When you shall see the Son
of Man ascending to the place where he was before, then you will know he gives
not his Body as you understand it. You will then apprehend that his Grace non
consumitur morsibus; till the end of the World the Lord is above, but yet the
truth of the Lord is upon Earth with us; Corpus enim in quo resurrexit in uno
loco esse oportet, veritas autem ejus ubique diffusa est.

That incomparable Doctor speaks after the same manner when he teaches, that
all places of the Scripture, which seem contrary to truth and good manners, are
to be understood in a figurative sense.

If you find, De Doctrine. Christ. lib. 3. c. 10. 16.
says he, a Commandment which forbids a crime, or enjoins any good action,
then its sense is not figurative; but it is otherwise when it seems to command
a crime, and prohibit a good action. John 6. 55*
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood ye have no life
in you, says Christ. That word seems to command a crime, figura est ergo, it
is therefore a figure, which bids us communicate in the Passion of our Lord,
and recall into our memories with suavity and utility, that his flesh has bin
wounded and nailed upon the Cross for us.

XIII.
To what the Church of Rome believes concerning Transubstantiation, we may add
her practice in taking away the Cup. She is not contented with changing the
nature of a Sacrament, but thinks it lawful to tear and divide it.

All the learned men of her Commumunion assent to the following Propositions.

First, That Christ instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood under both
kinds of Bread and Wine.

Secondly, That he instituted it thus for all Christians, and said Matthew. 26.
26.
drink, as he said eat, without any distinction of of Priests and Laymen being
the Savior of all.

Thirdly, That at least for twelve hundred years such a practice has bin
faithfully observed in all the Churches in the World, and is still in the
Eastern.

Fourthly, That its intermission is not grounded upon any invincible reason, or
irremediable inconveniences. For it would be the greatest piece of nonsense in
the World to affirm, that the Church of Rome in the thirteenth Age has seen
inconveniences, which the Catholic Church could not foresee in twelve hundred
years, and the Greek is still ignorant of.

Yet the Council of Trent perseveres in so considerable an innovation, stops
its ears to the cries of an infinite number of Souls, who beseech their Fathers
substance might not be so cruelly divided, and styles this a Liberty the Church
has always bin Mistress of, to dispense Sacraments as she judges it convenient.

But suppose the Sacrament to be no less complete under one kind then both, and
that the Cup is but an addition to it: We, notwithstanding, maintain the Church
has no authority to change any thing Christ has instituted, and prescribes the
observation of. All reasons in such occasions must be suspected, when Christ
himself speaks, promulgates himself his own Laws, and commands them to be put
in execution, as he has done here, all our pretended inconveniences are then
gross errors; nor must we affect to be wiser then the eternal Wisdom, who
foresaw better then we can do, the reasons of our scandals.

Had Christ instituted all the Ceremonies the Church judged necessary for the
greater decency of her Worship, and commanded the observation of them, it would
be a dreadful crime to cut off the least.

But Pope Gelasius speaks not of that division as of the taking away of a
simple Ceremony; Epist. ad Majoric. and Joan. Episc. and refer. c. comperimus
de consecrat. etc. did. 2.
We heard, says he, that some by I know not what superstition, after having
received the sacred Body refused the Cup of the precious Blood. But for such,
aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur. The reason of
that learned Pope is worthy to be weighed, because, says he, divisio unius
ejusdemque mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest pervenire. One and the
same mystery cannot be divided without a grand sacrilege.

Pope Gelasius and the Fathers of Trent are wonderfully opposed: these say the
Sacrament is no less perfect under one kind then under both; that such a
division is a wise dispensation, which cannot be reasonably contradicted: the
other calls the distribution of the precious Body and Blood one and the same
Sacrament, and styles that prudent dispensation, a division of two things
united by Christ, which cannot be done without an horrid sacriledg.

Which then of the two, Gelasius or Paul III. must be supposed to have
pronounced ex Cathedra? If the Jesuits are chosen Judges between them, Gelasius
shall be condemned: for Salmero and another of his Society were so impious as
to say in the midst of the Council, that sometimes the Devil transforms himself
into an Angel of Light, but now appears covered with the Cup of Christ's Blood
to offer a draught of poison.

But as if it had not bin enough to have committed so great an enormity,
without adding to it an insufferable ignorance, these two most holy and learned
Fathers (as a most holy and learned Jesuit styles them, all the members of that
Society being ipso facto most holy and learned) begged of Cardinal Madruccio,
That it might be added to the Canons already made, that the Sacrament was
instituted under both kinds only for the Apostles and Priests.

XIV.
The Canons of the fourteenth Session are no less opposite to Antiquity,
wherein the Council defines Repentance to be a Sacrament: a Doctrine unknown
till the time of Eugenius IV. The Archbishop of Caesarea tells us in a Book he
entitled De Reformatione Scholasticae (which he considered as a great step to
that of the Church) that Eugenius ascribed it to the Florentine Council, tho
such a Decree had never bin read or seen there. It Is an effect of the Popes
usual sincerity. So that for twelve hundred years together the Church is silent
in this point.

Now what must a Christian think of a Council, that gives to our human
satisfactions and poor Sacrifices the power due only to the unspeakable merits
of Christ?

Who without just indignation can hear that our Alms and Fastings expiate our
sins, and preserve us from eternal Death? Did ever any Councils, Fathers, or
Divines run into such excesses? nor do we pretend to embrace the other extreme,
and diswade Christians from that life, which the Saints term a Cross and a
Martyrdom. We think that it not only obliges Penitents but Innocents also, and
we are struck with fear at these words of Christ, Luke 23. 3.
Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. But far be it from us to
confine our Repentance to some trausient and slight exercices of Piety. We
require that sinners die continually to themselves, that they think no
pleasures lawful but such as the miseries of humane life render necessary and
unavoidable; that they endure rather then enjoy them, and bewail the blindness
and obdurateness of an infinite number of Souls, who being made drunk by the
pride and wantonness of the World, are irrecoverably ruined.

But when a sinner groans under a voluntary pressure, fasts, prays, and
impoverisheth himself to enrich the poor, instead of puffing him up with
self-conceit, and flattering him with a persuasion that he satisfies God, we
depress him more and more, still repeating to him this Lesson, That according
to the Oracles of the Word of God, and the practice of his Saints, August.
the most laudable life examined in his Justice, is an abomination in his
sight, and that the greatest penitent in the most burning fervor of his Penance
for his sins past, stands in need at every moment of new mercy to obliterate
and forgive the present.

XV.
Nor do we less wonder at the Anathema pronounced by the Fathers at Trent,
against those that think Attrition with Confession insufficient for the pardon
of sins. That is, those who believe the very same that till then was constantly
a part of the Churches belief, and are persuaded that a man desisting from sin
against God, out of fear of punishment, is not accounted guiltless by him.

This their Assertion is so true, that the learned men of the Church of Rome
are at a loss to give a favorable interpretation to the words of the Council.
And we have seen a Jansenius lib. 5. de Great. Christ. Salvat. c. 34.
Bishop in Flanders so admirable and profound every where else, scarce
understood when he endeavors to make the Council speak, what he is persuaded it
should.

To perceive at first sight all the consequences of this Principle, we need but
consider the abominable interpretations Jesuits have given of it. Both the
doctrine and practice of these Friars is so enormous upon that point, that we
want words to express it. This is the foundation whereon Bauny, Escobar,
Tambourin, Sanchez, Vasquez, and other such Monsters, build their infamous
Morals. Wherein they are not contented to teach all manner of crimes, but
afford means how to commit them with impunity, and as much as in them lies,
cheat both God and their consciences. But leaving these favorers of sin to Gods
judgments, let it suffice us to say, that we are so far from blaming Fear in
general, that we acknowledge Psalm. 120. 19.
there is a chaste fear which endures for ever more. We learn from the sacred
Writings, that fear of eternal pains is the beginning of Wisdom. None, says S.
In Ps. 144.
Austin, can come to love but by fear, he must begin with the chain of Iron,
before he be adorned with the Golden Neck-lace.

So when God strikes a sinner with the fear of his Judgments, it is the first
step to his Conversion: but if he never goes further he shall never be
justified in his sight. Love is at least an essential condition for the
forgiving our sins. We are justified by Faith, but it is by Faith that works
by Love Gal. 5. 6.
, not by a dead Faith, which brings forth nothing, nor by a sterile one, which
goes not so far as to produce fear; nor by a slavish one, which only refrains
us through the apprehensions of punishment, and would never leave off sinning, did
it not still behold the thunder of Divine vengeance always hanging over it;
but by a Faith full of Love and pious zeal, which in the strictest bonds unites
our hearts to our crucified Savior, gives us a lively representation of his
sufferings, revives in us an ardent desire of shaking off the vices of the old
Man, to be invested with the life and virtues of the New. To renounce all
things for our Redeemer, and at least to love our God, as S. Austin excellently
prescribes, with as much fidelity and ardency as we have loved the Creatures.

In the Epistles of the Apostle Romans 8. and 9.
we find that the great advantage of the Sons of God, above those of the Devil,
and their true and intrinsecal distinction, is, to have bin divested of the
spirit of bondage to fear; which belongs properly to the Jews, and to have
received the spirit of Adoption, which is the lot of Christians. The one brings
them to God as to their Father, the other frights them as with the presence of
their Judge.

But till Faith, Aug. in Psalm. 127. Id. l. de Catec. rud. c. 5.
which works by Love, has enlarged our hearts, and begotten in us the
disposition of Sons, there is no hopes of pardon. For let us dispute to the end
of the World, tire our Readers with the multitude and subtlety of our
distinctions, and make our fancies the Rules of Gods Decrees, those only shall
receive pardon whom Grace has converted, and made his Sons.

Fear is good and useful, Id. Ser. 6. de Verb. Apost.
bonus est iste timor, utilis est, those that are struck with it, saluberrimo
timore quatiuntur. But it is insufficient, and something more is required. It Is
the Jews gift, the Character of the Slaves, the spirit of the old Testament,
Id. Ibid.
ibi plebs long stabat, timor erat, amor non erat. It Is an effect of that
universal infirm Grace God has granted to all men, but not of that particular
and victorious one which Christ has got for us by his death, and poured into
our hearts by the Holy Ghost. Id. l. de spir. and litt. c. 19.
Cum enim adest vivificans spiritus, hoc ipsum intus conscriptum facit diligi,
quod foris scriptum lex faciebat timeri.

The Fathers of the Primitve times apprehended the nature of that fear quite in
another manner then the Fathers of Trent did.

First, They did consider that its Source was nothing else but a prodigious
self-love. They that are in those dispositions of fear the Council is satisfied
with, do not seek so much to return to their God, and give themselves to him,
as to preserve their quiet and their bodies in the future life. Id. Sermon. 114.
de temp. c. 3.
Propterea enim timentur apud inferos poenae, and dolores ac tormenta
Gehennarum.

Secondly, They knew that a man whom fear only refrains from sinning, loses not
the love and desire of sin, but sins still in his heart, Id. l. 1. ad Bonif. c.
9.
Sic profecto in ipsa intus voluntate peccat, qui non voluntate, sed timore non
peccat.

S. Id. tract. g. in Epist. Joan.
Austin compares these persons to a wife who is not true to her husband but
because she is afraid of being punished if she be found not so. It Is certain
she commits adultery in her heart, since she would not persevere innocent if
she could contract guilt without punishment.

It Is like a Wolf, says that holy Doctor, who being surprised by the watchful
Shepherd, and the cry of the Dogs, is obliged to fly without doing any harm: he
is not cruel and bloody, he tears no Sheep in pieces. Venit fremens, redit
tremens, Id. Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. c. 9.
he came on raging, returns trembling, but in these two circumstances he is
still a Wolf. He does not execute his bad design, nor yet does he leave it.
Lupus est tamen and fremens and tremens.

Thirdly, They were persuaded that the righteousness which fear produces in a
sinner is from the Law and men, which the Apostle counts Phil. 5. 8.
but dung; who sees not, says one of the Fathers, Fulg. l. 2. de Incar. and
Great. Christi. c. 27.
that righteousness which is from the Law comes from men, but that which is by
Christ comes from God? Justitiam vero quae ex fide Christi est, non esse nisi
ex Deo. A man may be still sinful and Gods enemy with such a righteousness.
Ideo cum in illa quae ex lege est justitia sine querela conversaretur
Apostolus, fuisse se impium non negat.

Fourthly, they taught, That sorrow conceived only out of fear of punishment,
is a sorrow of Infidels, and that if God were satisfied with that, there is no
man in the World that could choose but be innocent; since no man that has but
the least Idea of the life to come, but is moved with its apprehension. Aug.
Epis. 144. ad Anast.
Non enim peccare metuit sed ardere.

This is a principle the Fathers have with unanimous consent maintained. This
the Popes in former Ages taught. Nay those that sit now in the Apostolical See
would do so too, if with the modesty and humility of their Predecessors they
had not also rejected their doctrine.

XVI.
The Council seems, in its last Session, to gather all its strength against
those who reject Purgatory, and deprive Saints, Images, and Relics of their
due honor.

Yet it appears the Fathers of Trent agreed, that all those things, Purgatory
excepted, are not founded upon Scripture, but only upon the General Councils
and Writings of the Fathers. This is Sess. 25.
collected out of the very words of the Decree, the Council there speaking of
Ecclesiastical antiquity, but not a word of the Scripture.

A Person of extraordinary merit has undertaken to lay open the mysteries of
Purgatory; and as he leaves nothing unsaid on that subject, so none can take it
ill if I refer my Reader to him.

For those other things, Invocation of Saints, Images, and Relics, it is easy
in a few words to show how infirm their ground is in the ancient Doctrine of
the Church.

All learned men in the Church of Rome admit of the following Propositions.

First, That nothing in the Scripture authorizes these practices, or at least,
nothing sure, fixed, clear, and undoubted.

Secondly, That all places taken out of Scripture, by modern Writers, to prove
these things, have never bin made use of by the Ancients for that purpose, and
so are of no authority, the ancients being most holy and assured Interpreters of
the Scriptures.

Thirdly, That till the seventh pretended General Council, that is, for eight
hundred years, there was not any decision made of them.

Fourthly, That to this pretended General Council, we oppose others
acknowledged General by the Collector of the Councils, but as all learned men
confess, endued with these Qualities.

1. More exact in the Discussion of matters, as it appears by their Acts. 2.
Called by an holy Emperor and peculiar Benefactor to the Church of Rome. 3.
Free from all Suspicions of oppression which the seventh is guilty of. 4. That
the consent of the Fathers upon that Doctrine is neither clear nor unanimous,
and that if in any of later date there be some places tending that way, there
are in the same, and many others a thousand contrary places to invalidate them.
5. That if we speak according to the Principles of the Church of Rome it self,
there can no more then a simple probability be pleaded in this case, and that
none of the greatest neither, but to both parties favorable.
But there is not a Divine in the World who dares affirm, that an Article of
Faith can be built upon a simple probability, nor declare them impious and
blasphemous who have a contrary probability, nor excommunicate them and
separate them from the Church, that is, inflict upon them the most dreadful
punishment.

How could the Fathers of Trent therefore do this? why did they not fear that
threatening of the wise Man Prove. 26. 2.
, Sicut avis in incertum volans and quolibet vadens, sic maledictum frustra
prolatum venit super eum qui misit illud? Nor that of Origin Orig. sup. Lect.
cap. 24. Hom. 14. and refer. Can. cum aliquis. cap. 24. quaest. 3.
when a man is unjustly put out of the Church, he cease not to be within,
when he that thinks himself within may be really out?

XVII.
Saints pray in general for all Christians. For tho they triumph in Heaven, yet
they are her members, who strives and combats upon Earth. They are indeed
united to their Head, which is Christ, but yet they still preserve the
remembrance of the Body, which is the Church.

They are a part of that Spouse, who, as S. Bernard Ser. 1. super Cantic.
says, sighs after the Bridegroom, and begs a kiss from his mouth; wishes
for the end of the World, that Christ would hasten his Judgment, and manifest
that day wherein he will begin to be all in all.

It Is in that very sense the Apostle says, Romans 8. 22.
The whole Creation groans and travails in pain till now, even we our selves
groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit the Redemption of our
Body, (...).

So S. Cyprian Lib. de immortal.
assures us, That the Saints being secure of their immortality are careful of
our Salvation.

S. Jerome argues against Vigilantius in this manner. If the Apostles and
Martyrs being yet in their Bodies, can pray for others, much more when they
have conquered, are crowned and triumph.

And S. Austin yet more perfectly, The Saints in Heaven, says Lib. de Cur. pro
mort. gerend c. 16.
he, offering their prayers for the necessity of those that pray, God grants to
every one all those comforts he judges most suitable to them in the miseries of
the present life.

But there is a vast difference between the Invocation whereby we direct our
Prayers to the Saints, and the intercession of the Saints for us. And none of
these things are to be found in the Tradition.

1. That the Saints pray for any particular person. 2. That they obtain any
favors for us by their own merits. 3. That it is lawful to honor them with a
religious worship.
XVIII.
And to discover with how little sincerity the Council of Trent speaks of this
custom, that it has bin preserved Sess. 25.
a primaevis Christianae Religionis temporibus, it is enough to say, that their
most learned Men confess it was the sentiment of the Primitive Fathers, that
the Souls of the Saints should not enjoy the sight of God till the day of
Judgment; and consequently could neither speak in favor of us, no offer to him
our prayers. S. ^ene, Justin, S. Clement, Tertullian, Origin, Lactantius, S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Eutimius, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Aretas,
are said to have bin of that opinion. Nay S. Ser. 3. and 4. in fest. omnium
Sanct.
Bernard preached it: which shows that this Doctrine continued till the twelfth
Age of the Church.

XIX.
Indeed we cannot too much honor those holy men, who preserve with an undaunted
resolution the precious Tresures committed to their charge. We must admire them
in the powerful effects of Christ's Grace, who in a corruptible flesh and a
sinful World has preserved them pure and undefiled. The constancy of Martyrs,
the austerity of Penitents, the inviolated purity of Virgins, who despised all
other ambition besides that of being near the Lamb, deserve all our Praises.
Nay a true Christian makes his actions conformable to his Praises, imitates
what he extolls, and considers those excellent Patterns as so many reproaches to
the disorders and remisness of his life. But he is not induced thereby to
invocate them, to ascribe to them what is due to God alone, and offer them
Prayers, which being commanded neither by the Precepts of Christ, nor his
Apostles, spring rather from a blind Superstition, then a well ordered Piety.
Tertull. de Orat. c. 12.
Non Religioni sed Superstitioni deputantur.

XX.
But supposing the Church of Rome had some small ground in Antiquity for the
Invocation of Saints, she has not the least shadow of reason for the
worshipping their Images.

Nor is it difficult to prove, that Images Eusebius. l. 1. Hist. Eccl. c. 17.
are a remnant of heathenish Ceremonies, which a blind zeal for the memory of
the Apostles brought into the Church. Hence the Fathers of the Primitive times
became extremly zealous to interdict not only their worship, but their very
sight in the Churches. So Origin, Eusebius Eusebius. in Clron. an. 197. and 119.
Just. orat. ad Ant. p. 132.
Justin Martyr, etc. inveigh on all occasions against Images. The Eliberitan
Council, where the great Osius Can. 56.
was present, he whom the Councils Conc. Nicen. 2. ac. 6.
style their Father and Master, condemns by an express Canon the placing any
sort of Images in Churches. S. Epistol ad J^a^. Hi^rosolym.
Epiphanius forbids the having Images in Churches, or in the Crypts of the
Martyrs. And to show that his practice did not contradict his Precepts, he
gives an account to John Patriarch of Jerusalem, how having found at the
entrance of the Church at Anablatta an Image of our Savior, painted upon a
Curtain, he tore it, and wished the Priests to make use of it for the burial of
some poor person.

XXI.
But it is clearer then the light, that by the word Adoration the holy Fathers
meant all manner of Worship. Those famous men had a Divinity of sense not of
terms: they were not acquainted with those Distinctions which became the whole
business of Scholastics in succeeding Ages. They no less included external
worship then internal, and thought not the one less dangerous then the other.

S. Augustine was not persuaded that a man could so purify his intentions in
adoring an Image, but that the Wood and Stone must needs bear some part in it.
Who is the man, says that holy In Psalm. 113. 2. par. Psalm.
Doctor, who looking upon an Image, either worships or praises, qui non sic
officitur, ut ab eo se exaudiri putet? hoc enim facit and quodammodo extorquet
figura membrorum. I know, says the same Saint, in his admirable Cap. 34.
Book De Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, That there are many worshippers of the
Sepulchers and Pictures of Martyrs, Multos Sepulchrorum and Picturarum
adoratores. But I advise you not to take occasion thence of slandering the
Catholic Church, in aggravating the faults of those People whom she her self
condemns, quos ipsa condemnat and corrigere studet.

This excellent place shows that there are many disorders in the Church, the
Church is not at all guilty of; and that those are in the wrong, who charge a
whole Society with the faults of some of its particular members.

So that when we speak against worshipping of Images, we exclaim not against
that shameful traffic exercised in the Churches of the Mendicants, neither
against those Chapels set round with pieces of wax and silver, nor against
those false Miracles, which are only so many baits, whereby covetous Monks
delude the ignorant and simple, and enrich themselves.

All these things Ecclesia Romana condemnat and corigere studet. It is well
known the pious men of these Monasteries are troubled at such abuses, and
Bishops wish they were able to apply a remedy to them. But we combat the
Decrees and Canons of the Roman Church; things to which the contrary sentiments
are by her styled Impiety. We give them no other sense, then she her self would
put upon them; and we maintain in their most favorable interpretation, that she
has made Laws of some points, quas ipsa Ecclesia Catholica condemnat, and
corrigere studet.

XXII.
There is not a learned person in the Church of Rome, who does not consent,
that to paint God Almighty has bin accounted a crime for twelve hundred years.

It Is not lawful for a Christian, says S. Lib. de Fid. and Symbol. c. 17.
Austin, to put in any Church the Image of God in a humane shape. Nevertheless
the Council of Trent makes it a Virtue to admit of them. There is not a Church
in which you may not see the unworthy Pictures of an immense and
incomprehensible God, whose most perfect delineation consists in the
impossibility both Men and Angels lie under of conceiving any. The Popes
Chapel is filled with them, and his holiness is pleased to forget that one of
the chief Patrons Damascenus, Ortho^xae Fidei. l. 4. c. 17.
of Images calls it a folly and an extreme Impiety.

XXIII.
Neither is there any understanding person who does not acknowledge, that ^he
most obstinate Defenders of Images never went so far as to maintain, that ^his
sovereign Worship should be ren^red to them which is due to God alone. ^Tis by
this only reason, they pretend to free themselves of that Idolatry which was
laid to their charge. So that it is a mere evasion of those who answer to all
the authorities of the fifth, sixth, and seventh Ages against Images, that they
were levelled only against Divine and supreme worship, being a ridiculous
dealing, no way chargeable upon grave Men. But the Church of Rome to persuade
the receiving of these things, calls them with an incredible insincerity,
Ancient practices; strives to amuze people by swelling and high flown words;
and because he miserably abandons himself to his own reason, and sinks under
the most horrid Impiety who respects not true Councils and Fathers, that of
Trent speaks of nothing but Apostolical Traditions, Consent of Fathers, and
authority of Councils.

XXIV.
All these magnificent promises are reduced to a miserable Conventicle, held in
the eighth Age, to which no Western Bishops, nor any of the two parts of the
East, not one of the three Patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria,
came; which Pope Nicholas I. and Adrian II. durst never call General.

A Council Paul. Diac. Hist in Constant.
called by a cruel and disordered Prince, wherein Irene his mother sat
President, so ambitious and unnatural a woman, that she commanded the eyes of
her own Son to be plucked out.

A Council, at which the most considerable person present was Thalossius
Patriarch of Constantinople, a man who, as Pope Adrian Epist. in Council. Nic.
2. Act. 3.
describes him, from a Layman became Bishop, from an illiterate Courtier,
Patriarch of Constantinople, whom the same Pope (says Id. bid.
he) abhorred as a Monster, ut monstrum exhorruit, made Bishop against all
Ordinances and Canons.

A Council that founded its Decrees upon Visions and mere Fables, such as one
of the meanest spirit must needs be offended at. The Image of our Savior given
to King Abgarus, the Leprosy, Baptism, and miraculous recovery of Constantine
are things of that nature, as the learned in the Church of Rome do now account
supposititious; not to allege many others, which deserve that the Council of
Act. Council Franc. l. 3. c. 26.
Francfort should object, That those Nicene Fathers not being able to prove
their Decrees, either by the authority of the Scripture, or the testimonies and
examples of the Saints, had recurred to fancies and Dreams.

A Council which the Assembly at Francfort Ibid. li. 1. p. 79.
of 300. Bishops, headed by Charles the Great, declared to be so annulled and
abrogated, that it ought not to be put in the order of Councils, unless of such
as Ariminum.

Lastly, a Council which the learned Defenders of Images were so loath to
defend, that it had continued buried in a deep oblivion, had not the Jesuit
Mainbourg Histoire des Iconoclastes.
three years since raised it from its Grave, but alas! in what a manner!

First, he affected (and this is his confession and glory) to write in a
Romantic style upon one of the gravest Controversies in Religion; as if
matters of Divinity, and the Oracles of the living God, were of the same metal,
as those abominable Books.

Secondly, in writing against Iconoclasts he never directed his arrows against
them, but designed to fix them in the hearts of the Jansenists. Preposterous
and irrational fancy! being put to it how to recover the lost honor of his
Society so trampled on in the sight of all Christendom, he resolved to attack
once more his Conquerors, not out of any hopes of Victory, but out of
impatience the natural product of Pride.

He durst not therefore come into the open Field, and renew that Quarrel his
Society had so shamefully begun, and so unhappily prosecuted; but betook
himself to by ways, and thought it more secure and glorious to represent the
Jansenists under the notion of Iconoclasts, and the imputed rebellion of the
one against the Apostolical See, under the history of the other.

Thirdly, He so ill contrived his design, that he lost the Character of both,
and only betrayed himself to be of a spirit bold and temerarious; who with more
then a Jesuitical impudence delivers lies as confidently as others do truth.

His History of the Arians, and this of the Iconoclasts, both daughters of the
same brain, both written with the same design, had also the same fate. Neither
was answered; those whom they were chiefly levelled against, being there so
unskilfully delineated as not to know themselves: nor indeed would they ever
have done so, had not that Author, doting upon his so well resembling Babe,
and the Jesuits (who like the Spaniards, triumph as well when beaten as when
Conquerors,) spread it through the World. But I have spent too many words upon
so inconsiderable a Writer.

XXV.
To return then to our purpose: who of any sense or reason, hearing the Fathers
of Trent Sess. 25.
say, that they permit the worship of Images, juxta Catholicae Ecclesiae usum a
primaevis Christianae Religionis temporibus receptum, Sanctorumque Patr^m
consensionem, and Sacrorum Conciliorum Decreta; and then seeking all these
great things, finds, 1. That for 800. years the Catholic and Apostolic Church
has determined nothing of it. 2. That all the Fathers are contrary to it. 3.
That those sacred Councils so magnificently alleged, are nothing but a
miserable Conventicle at the end of the eighth Age. 4. That England, Germany,
the Low Countries, Sweden, Denmark, part of France and Poland, declare against
it.


What man of any sense, I say, considering all this will not conclude,

1. That we ought to distrust all the Decrees of Trent, and some being
evidently false, give little credit to the most true.

2. That the Fathers of Trent had not the Charity of the Apostles, whose
Successors they were, since they excluded from their Communion so many
considerable Churches for a point, which themselves acknowledge not to be
grounded on Scripture.

Not necessary to Salvation,

Not related to Faith, Manners, Sacraments and Discipline.

And Protestants not requiring Images to be pulled down, as did S. Epiphanius,
and S. Serenus, but only their use to be ordered, as it was in S. Austin and S.
Gregory's time.

3. That the Church of Rome being immovable upon the Controverted points, she
must give us leave to address to her Council the same words the Fathers of Act.
Conc. Franc. ibid. ibid.
Francfort did to the Nicene. Out of what fury or rather madness does unius
partis Ecclesia attempt to establish that which has never bin established by the
Apostles or their immediate Successors, and oblige them either to undergo the
Anathema so vainly pronounced against them, or disobey the Apostolical
Constitutions?

Were they not promted by her, who is called in Scripture, the ancient poison,
the guide of Death, the root of all evil, they would never strive to fix the
name of General Council to their Assembly, had without the consent of many
Catholic Churches. They would never take upon them to anathematize with such
boldness so many and so considerable Churches, which are no less then they the
Body of Christ.

REFLECTIONS On the Council of TRENT.
Discourse III.
That the Council of Trent was so far from reforming the disorders which had
crept into the Church, that it really made the breaches in its discipline
wider, and cut off all hopes of correcting the ancient abuses.

I.
WHatever Ecclesiastical disorders are recorded in the Writings of the
Ancients, they seem in no respect equal to those which infested the Church
about the time of the Council of Trent. In the first Ages indeed, the zeal and
severity of Christians rendered every fault conspicuous; but in the last the
most pious could hardly suffice to express her real and constant evils. This
produced the desires of a general Reformation; especially that he who pretends
to be upon Earth the supreme Judge of all men, would judge himself, take some
pity of his own Soul; and since the distempers of the Church owed their
original to the Apostolical See, begin at that part from whence the cure of all
the rest was hoped for.

II.
Whereas then the Worlds recovery depended on that of the Popes, they ought
willingly to have embraced the occasion of doing so great a good. Nor could
less be hoped, then that considering the promotion of Piety as their proper
Interest, they would sacrifice all others to it: and the Council of Trent,
which lasted eighteen years, raised the expectations of all good Christians,
that the tears of so many Nations would not be shed in vain. But by the
dreadful judgment of God it miserably baffled the Churches cries, and instead
of closing her wounds, opened and created new ones.

For to evince the truth of which so great reproach, we need only consider two
particulars,

1. The distempers of the Church.

2. The remedies applied to them. And from the consideration of these, there
will none, I hope, but confess, that the Fathers of this Council acted the part
of an unfaithful Surgeon, who to cure a less noble part, inflicts a deadly
wound to the heart of his Patient.

III.
We intend not here to treat of any personal defects, which showed themselves
in the Popes private life, but shall confine them only to those which were
public, when they dealt as Popes, as infallible, as the Oracles of the Holy
Ghost, as masters both of Men and Angels, as judges both of the quick and dead:
in a word,;as men of whom, according to their own Espenc. in cap. 1. ep. ad
Titum.
Books, it is not allowed to enquire, Domine cur ita facis?

IV.
That Ambition and Covetousness have bin the two originary sins of the Popes;
and that to these two Heads may be reduced all the rest, the very complaints of
their own Historians, and most famous Authors do evince. By the first, they
made a shift to raise themselves above Spiritual and Temporal Powers, to
excommunicate and depose Kings, to invade the jurisdiction of other Bishops, to
break through all ancient and modern Canons; and instead of being ruled by the
General Councils of the Catholic Church, to exalt themselves above them. By the
second they made use of all sacred and profane means to enrich themselves,
reduced all Benefices into that state, as not to be attained but by Cardin. of
Cambray, l. de reform. Eccl.
Simony, and sacrificed all things to the raising of their Families. As for the
honor of their Dignity, the glory of the Gospel, and the consideration of the
scandal of the Church, these could never overpower in them the more strong
impressions of Flesh and Blood. The invention of Croisados being worn out, they
had recourse to that of Indulgences, set to sale the absolution of sins; and
Centum gravam. grav. 1. and 3.
whosoever filled the Apostolic Treasure, tho he were more profligate than the
bad Thief, became more innocent then the good.

V.
Nor was it enough barely to fall into so many disorders, unless they undertook
also to Canonize them, and thereby bring themselves under that dreadful Curse
which God pronounces against those that call evil good. 'Twas for this purpose
that Rome has bred up such Doctors, as flatter the Popes even to Idolatry,
stiling them Gods upon Earth. These gave birth to the monstrous Doctrine of
Infallibility, never before heard of in the Church for 1400 years. These had
the face to maintain, that if all the World should oppose their Sentiment, all
the World must be slighted. And to sum up in a word, all that can be said on
that matter, they have so far enslaved themselves to their passion, as to
decree in one of their Canons, that Distinct. 40. Can si Papa.
if the Pope should be neglectful of his Brethrens salvation, improfitable to
the Church, dumb in what concerns her good, tho he should carry along with him
to hell an innumerable number of souls, yet no man living can presume to
correct him.

VI.
These things are neither exaggerations nor slanders, but mere matters of Fact,
which the best Authors of the Roman Church, as Monsieur D'Espences, Gerson the
Chancellor of Paris, Marsilius of Pavia, the Cardinal of Cambray, the Cardinal
Cusan, Aeneas Sylvius afterward Pope, do equally complain of. And without ever
mentioning the impertinencies of Canonists, August. de Ancona, de potest. Eccl.
c. 18. art. 1.
some of whom teach, The Pope has power to excommunicate Angels; or the
Impieties of some Bald. l. ult. de sent. rescinden.
Divines who maintain, he can establish any thing against the Law of God and
Nature both: What can be more amazing, then to hear the Popes speak themselves?

Nicholas the First, in his Letter to Michael, In fine Tom. 3. Council.
says, That the Pious Emperor Constantine, had called the Pope God, and that
it is evident God can be judged by no man. This piece of madness his successors
liked so well, that they made an express Canon satis evidenter.
Canon of it.

Boniface the Eighth defines in a In cap. unam Sanctam. excomm. de Maj. and
obedient.
Decretal of his, That all humane Creatures are bound, necessitate salutis, to
submit to him as to the King of kings, and both Spiritual and Temporal Lord
over all the World.

His successor Derenun. cap. post transl.
pretends lawfully to dispense with that which was contrary to the Apostles
commands, Been dispensat Dominus Papa contra Apostolum. Let all the World know,
Plat. in Greg. 7.
says Gregory the Seventh, out of an excess of modesty and humility, That we
give and take away all Kingdoms, Empires, Principalities, and all Goods men are
capable of possessing.

VII.
Nor did these Servants of the Servants of God live any otherwise then they
taught. There could no Crown in their times be assured upon the Head of any
Prince, whatsoever Right, Birth, or Election had there established it. And
indeed, we would scarce believe the precedents of Philip, Frederic, Lewis, etc.
had we not beheld in our own days what Leo the Tenth, Julius the Third, and
Sextus the Fifth had done. The public Records of England, Germany, and France,
are filled up with their bold enterprises; the raising Subjects in rebellion
against their natural Princes, the absolving them from their Allegiance; the
putting great Kingdoms into combustion, at once undermining them by civil
Dissentions, and procuring them to be invaded by Foreign Enemies; the swearing
Friendship with Francis the First, and at the same time helping Charles the
Fifth to subvert him; and again, entertaining correspondence with Charles the
Fifth, whilst he solicited Francis the First to war again, are part of the
transactions of St. Peter's Successors, the heads of the Church, and Vicars of
Christ.

VIII.
But for their Convetousness, who is able to express it? Annats, expectative
Graces, sacred Reservations, Preventions, Mandats; things abominable in all
their parts, were called by them, Pious artifices to maintain the Apostolic
See. That which in its own nature was properly a Crime, an Abomination, and a
Simony, was turned into an holy action by a Pasce oves meas.

IX.
All Friars who grew weary of being governed by their Bishops, and kept in the
hardships of Penance, sent money to Rome, where there was not a door in the
Conclave but was open to their Gold. Great sums to the Datary, prevailed more
then all their tears could have done. No Canons, no Councils, no Fathers,
resisted their bribes. They purchased Privileges, subtracted themselves from
the Sacred Jurisdiction of their Bishops: and tho the very Injunction of their
new gained liberty, was a real Simony, a disobedience, and an effect of the
corruption of their hearts, yet the disturbers of it were threatened in their
Bull. Pont. ubique.
Bulls with St. Peter and St. Paul's indignation.

X.
But that his Holiness, not satisfied with the oppression of the Clergy, should
not spare the Laymen neither, is above all imagination. The Records of the
Parliament of Paris, speak every where of the Popes oppressions. Sir Roger
Twisden has writ an excellent account of the insupportable Taxes England
groaned under; the natural piety and generosity of the English inviting the
Popes to abuse it into an occasion of leaving no limits to their Covetousness.
For Germany, and other Provinces, who in the World is unacquainted with their
grievances? And is there any Roman Catholic, who if he consider things
impartially, confesses not, that Leo the Tenth was the cause of greater evils
to the Church then Luther?

XI.
The Pope himself verified that word of the Prophet, The Priests shall eat the
sins of the people. There was no Espenc. ibid.
crime which had not an Asylum at the Penitentiaries. The obscene Books of the
Jesuits Sanchez, and Hurtado, are purity it self, compared with the Book of the
Apostolical Tax. All the Casuists together never taught the World so many
crimes as this one profligate Book. We suppress it, because we would not offend
the modesty of our Reader. There are no tongues or words pregnant enough to
express so great an infamy: but yet to give some hint of it, let us hear the
Popes Secretary, Our sins, says Plat. in Marcel.
he are raised to such an height, that we have scarce any hope of mercy left
us. 'Twere a vain attemt to describe the greatness of the Priests covetousness,
especially of them that govern. How unbounded is their ambition, obscenity and
luxury? How deep is their ignorance both of themselves and Christ's doctrine
also? How full is the little Piety they had left, of hypocrisy and
dissimulation? and how instead of concealing the crimes they commit, do they
affect rather to make them appear?

XII.
This then was the disease of the Roman Church: let us now examine whether the
Council of Trent has truly reformed so many abuses; whether it has preserved
the respect due to Princes, rendered the rights of Bishops inviolable, taken
away the Simonies and Extortions of the Court of Rome; and whether Mr.
d'Espences complains wrongfully, Quod tot annis and tot annorum centenari^is
nil in ea emendatur.

XIII.
As for Princes, the injuries which the preceding Popes had done them, were so
far from being repaired, that Julius the Third was so bold as to excommunicate
the Queen of Navar, give her Kingdom over to depredation, and confiscate her
Goods.

XIV.
As for the Holy Father, they work out his reformation in a pleasant manner. It
is considered as a Crime to speak of reforming him, of searching into his
wounds, or taking any account of his excesses. And when the Cardinals, hurried
on by the force of truth, and the cries of all men, are obliged out of mere
shame to propose the mending any abuse, they always add, Salva tamen
Apostolicae sedis autoritate. So when plurality of Benefices is condemned, it
is Salva semper Apostolicae sedis autoritate: when that intolerable abuse of
Dispensations is cut off, it is salva semper sedis Apostolicae autoritate: when
any Penance is imposed upon nonresident Bishops, it is salva semper Apostolicae
sedis autoritate: when Friars are put again under the jurisdiction of their
Ordinaries, and obedience to their Canons, it is salva semper Apostolicae sedis
autoritate: that is to say, The authority of that Apostolic See, which has
patronized their first violation of the discipline, shall be at liberty to do it
a second time. They dare condemn no crimes, without impowring the Apostolic See
to commit them over again. A Law, however just and necessary in it self, cannot
be enacted without leaving to the Apostolical See the liberty of infringing it.
And thus they make of the Apostolical See, a sanctuary and retreat for all
disorders.

XV.
Nothing is better known at Rome, then the lives of a great many Cardinals.
Heaven and Earth are offended at their Pride. Their plurality of Benefices,
Bishoprics, and Abbeys, is monstrous. No secular Princes are attended with
greater magnificence. Never had the most luxurious Heathens either Palaces so
gloriously adorned, or Tables so delicatly furnished: and whatever we read of
the Gardens of Lucullus, or the pleasures of Tempe, is far short of the luxury
of their Country Houses. Yet they are Clergymen, that is, a sort of people who
not only vowed in their Baptism to renounce the World, but declared it also in
their Ordination, That the Lord was the lot of their inheritance, and his
Gospel a commandment to die and bury themselves with him.

Notwithstanding, when their Reformation was spoken of in the Council, the
Legates presently declared, that the Reformation ought not to extend unto their
Eminencies; to which a Pious and Learned Bishop, more daring then the rest,
moved to see Sacred Episcopacy so trampled upon by them, made Life of Dom.
Bartholmy des Martyrs.
answer, that the most illustrious Cardinals, ought to have a most illustrious
Reformation, Illustrissimi Cardinales indigent illustrissima reformatione. But
they are deaf to this voice of Heaven; and instead of sincerely advancing the
Interest of the Gospel among themselves, to the end that the spring it self
being purified, the stream might be so too, 200 Bishops and five Cardinals
busy themselves in ordering the subsistence of Franciscans, and shaping the
habit of Nuns.

XVI.
Nothing is so certain as the shameful traffic of the Datary and Chancery; none
but the wilfully blind can deny it to be a gulf which swallows up the riches
of many Kingdoms, and sucks the purest Blood of the people. But they must first
have renounced the Gospel and their own reason, who confess not, that it is a
continual commerce of abominable Simony, a violating of the most Holy Canons,
and a pernicious attemt upon the authority of Princes and Bishops. What Council
in former Ages, what custom of the Church, what legitimate Title impowers the
Popes to give Benefices of other Kingdoms? What new Gospel teaches him to raise
vast sums upon the account of Spiritual matters? What right has he over those
Churches he has never ministered unto? Which of the Fathers, or what Authors
can he allege to maintain such usurpations? Nay, who in the latter times ^id
not rise against such an execrable abuse, and spoke not to him in the words ^f
a famous Emperor, Cesset altaribus im^inere profanus ardor avaritiae, and
sacris ^dytis repellatur piaculare flagitium?

Yea, the Council very well saw all this; was in the Diocese of all these
Bishops, that so intolerable disorders spread their ^ranches. The Canons of the
Sacred ^ouncils of Nice and Chalcedon are set before their eyes as so many
eternal Witnes^es of the Churches Spirit; but instead ^f following their rules,
they wholly bu^^e themselves in cutting off some small ^^uses, reforming of a
Country Vicar; (...) for the rest, Salva semper Apostolicae ^^dis autoritate.

XVII.
Of all the different kinds of Simony the Court of Rome is guilty of, none is
so certain and aver'd, as the Annats. Plat. in Bonif.
Boniface the Eighth, and John the Twenty second, invented them; two Popes,
Baronius styles Monsters. The Council of Conc. Basil. Sess. 21.
Basil prohibited them under pain of Excommunication; and because the Fathers
were informed that they came from no other source then the Pope, who by a Pasce
oves meas, Joh. 4. 6. makes all crimes lawful, they add those so remarkable
words, That if the Bishop of Rome, who more then any other, ought to observe
and execute the Canons of the Councils, comes to scandalize the Church,
attempting any thing against such a prohibition, let him be proceeded against
by a General Council.

The most considerable Authors of the Church of Rome, both for Learning and
Piety, complain most bitterly of this The Faculty of Sorbon calls it, not only
a Crime, but an Heresy. Paul the Third his Counselors, who had bin first
obliged under pain of Excommunication to declare the truth (that being
necessary to make truth reach the Pope) spoke after the same rate.

Nevertheless, The sacred, holy, and ecumenical Council met at Trent, in the
name of the Holy Ghost, to be ruled there by the word of God, the writings of
the Fathers, and the Apostolical Tradition, thinks not fit to take away the
Annats. The Holy Ghost just goes so far as to correct small abuses, frivolous
nothings, but reaches not to Heresies and Crimes; Salva semper Apostolicae
sedis autoritate. There is not in so vast a number of Bishops one single
Nathan, or Elijah; or if it be too much to seek Prophets among them, there is
not a single Ambrose or Basil; none of all these Vicars of Christ, who durst
say with his Master, Our friend sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of
sleep, Joh. 11. 11.

XVIII.
And indeed it would have bin a kind of Murder to have cut off Annats. Rome
would have bin no more a triumphant City, all its Palaces would have bin either
pulled down, or interrupted in the building, and especially that of Pius the
Fourth, raised during the Council, of which the Archbishop of Life of Dom.
Barth. des Martyrs.
Brague told him, That the stones would have served better to build an Hospital.

To banish Painters, Musicians, Poets, from St. Peter's See: to make a Pope in
our days live like S. Leo or S. Gregory: to rule a Cardinal-nephew according
to the Council of Carthage, and the examples of S. Charles: to require the same
severity of life from an eminentissimo Cardinale, as we saw in Cardinal
Baronius, and some years ago in Cardinal Bona: Such demands, I say, would have
brought a blemish upon the Council never to be obliterated; and instead of
procuring its confirmation, fired upon them all the Vatican thunders. How could
a Cardinal undergo the hardship of riding, without a retinue of 200 Coaches,
and an infinite number of staffieries? In the Apostles time, the most common
Motto was, The world is crucified to me, and I to the world, Gal. 6. 14.
Priests then had no other liveries then the blood of Martyrs, no other retinue
then a vast number of poor, no other Palaces then Prisons; but in our Age, you
cannot walk in the streets of Rome without hearing People cry out, The equipage
of his Eminence, the Mules of his Eminence, the staffieries of his Eminence,
the perfumes of his Eminence, the Music of his Eminence, the Abbeys and
Bishoprics of his Eminence, etc. that is, of a Deacon in the Diocese of Rome,
of a Parson in the City or Suburbs, of a man maintained by the alms of the
Church, dead to the World and its vanities, persuaded that there is a life to
come, and that the shortest way to enjoy its happiness, is to renounce all the
pleasures and honors of the present.

XIX.
The Fathers therefore at Trent were not cruel to the Pope, nor Pius the Fourth
ungrateful to them. He confessed in a full Conclave, They had used him more
gently then he would have done himself: and that Council, which otherwise had
passed for a Conventicle, became so sacred, that this Pope never spoke
afterward without an honorable mention of it in all his discourses. But this
Popes own confession is too puissant a proof against him, it is the testimony of
his own Conscience. Those Physicians flattered so much their Patient, that he
was ashamed of it, and instead of applying powerful Remedies to his inveterate
Distempers, they took no notice of them. It Is wrongfully therefore they accuse
the Popes self-love, or the blindness incident to those who separate themselves
from unity to constitute a particular order, as speaks St. Gregory and St.
Austin.

Pius the Fourth was convinced of the need he stood in of being reformed. But
the Fathers put a bar to his desires, huc usque venies; without them he would
have gone further.

XX.
Nay, least the small Reformation they made of some few things, should last too
long, they found out an expedient from which experience showed, the success of
the whole was expected; and this was the liberty left to the Pope, of
dispensing with all the Ordinances of the Council. That only favor deserved all
Pope Pius's acknowledgments: he and his successors made so good use of it, that
it will not be amiss to give some examples thereof.

It had bin observed for many Ages, how much the exemtions of Friars were
injurious to Episcopacy, and scandalous to the Church; wherefore the Council
cuts them off: but Pius the Fourth using his power of dispensing,
re-establishes them with greater authority then before; so that there has bin
scarce any Bishop since, zealous of his duty and the honor of his Divine
Character, whom a pitiful Friar, whether more fraught with boldness or
ignorance, I shall not determine, armed cap apied with his privileges, durst
not impudently oppose.

Some abuses concerning Dispensations, Expeditions for Benefices, and other
pretended favors of the Apostolical See were removed; the Pope uses his right
of dispensation, and scarce had the Trent Fathers got home from reforming them,
before Pius the Fourth had again brought up all those Impieties.

XXI.
The Council had Sess. 25.
handled the matter of Indulgenc^s with as great dexterity as moderation, and
in its Decree not one of the following Propositions, which the Friars have
since b^nd^ed about with so violent heat, is to be ^een.

1. That Indulgences are authorized by the Scripture. 2. That they are granted
and received for the dead. 3. That they are a super-abundance of the merits of
the Saints. 4. That they are any thing else but a relaxation of Canonical
Penance, accorded only to those who pray, who demand, who work, Cyprianus de
lapsis.
petenti, operanti, roganti. 5. That the Pope has greater power to grant them,
then any particular Bishop.
No man had reason to complain of so wise and moderate a Decree; but the Pope
uses his right of dispensing, too many People being interessed in keeping
Indulgencies. The Vatican magnificence, the softness of the Cardinals, and the
Friars idleness, owed their maintenance to that solid and clear Revenue. You
see therefore Bulls both for the living and the dead, dispersed into all parts
of the World; every Church has its priviledg'd Altars, and a thousand Books
are made public, most of them dedicated to the Pope, and approved by the
Inquisition, wherein they are called Heretics and Atheists, who oppose the
Opinions which the Council has left undetermined.

The style of these Bulls is as extraordinary as their matter; the Popes grant
two, four, six, or seven thousand years of true pardon (and indeed the word
true looks very pleasantly in that place;) he remits not only the pain due to
sin, but the sin also into the bargain; sometimes to make the most on it he
divides it, and pardons but a third part; sometimes one half; sometimes all, just
as his Holiness is in humor. And that we may not tire our selves with too much
pains, in getting so precious and rare a favor as the pardon of our sins, a man
most deeply engaged in the love of the World, most buried in all its pleasures,
the most taken with its glory, one that is a public sinner, guilty of all the
excesses which libertinism or atheism are able to inspire; such an one as this
must be excused from too much troubling himself. The bearing of a Medal, bowing
to a Saint, walking to such a Church, or the like, will wash him whither then
snow, and presently render him as innocent in the eyes of God as the best of
them, who think it worth their while to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2. 12. who are at the trouble of mortifying in themselves the
body of sin by an incredible perseverance, by continual Fasting, Prayers, and
Alms, that they may present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God, Romans 10. 1.

XXII.
Thus the power of Dispensing opens the door to infinite scandals. But the Pope
was empowered to do what he would, the Council Locis supra citat.
granting him that which he could never hope for, viz. the affertion of his
infallibility, and pre-eminence above general Councils: two Opinions that had
never bin heard of for 14 Ages, and were scarce brought forth into the World,
but all learned and pious Men opposed them, the 400 Bishops at Basil, and the
famous Sorbon, stiling them pernicious Heresies; but the Fathers of Trent,
being afraid to contradict openly so considerable an authority, and yet desirous
to have their intent, dealt after a most pleasant manner, they take away these
two words, Infallibility and Superiority, but preserve carefully the thing.

1. The Council declares, the Church of Rome is Mother and Mistress of all
Churches. 2. The Council affects to stick at many matters, and remits their
decision to the Popes judgment.
Now what man of sense is there, who would not draw these two Consequences?

1. The Church of Rome being Mother of all Churches in the World, and a general
Council being composed but of particular Churches; the Pope being Bishop of
Rome, is therefore Father and Master of all Bishops and Councils. 2. There is
Infallibility in the Church: this must either be in the Pope or in the Council;
not in the last, since the Council cannot and dares not give their Opinion in
many and weighty matters: therefore in the first, whose Church is Mistress and
Mother of all Christian Churches in the World, and whose sentence an
ecumenical Council submits unto, as to an Oracle, which must fix its
uncertainty.
But the same man should, with their good leave, to these consequences add a
third, which is, Sess* 7.


3. That the faculty of Sorbon is Heretical. The Learned Gerson, Chancellor of
Paris, is an Heretic. The 400 Bishops at Basil are Heretics. Pope Pius the
Second an Heretic. Martin the Fifth an Heretic. And generally all the Learned
Men of the Church for these 200 years are Heretics, for they all call that
Doctrine of Infallibility and Superiority, a pernicious Heresy. XXIII.
These two Points, Infallibility and Superiority, being once stated, what
reformation could be expected in the Church. If the Pope be infallible, What an
insolent boldness is it to subject him to other rules then his own? And if the
Church of Rome be Mistress and Mother of all Churches, What right have these
Churches to give Laws instead of receiving them from her? And therefore I
cannot sufficiently admire how the author of the Considerations upon the
Council of Trent, durst assert, That the Pope had bin ill used at Trent, and
nothing was said of his Supremacy. We leave it to all persons to judge of the
truth of this Assertion, we can only say, That the Authors who had written till
then with the greatest ardor to promote the Apostolical Grandeur, had never
given her the ambitious qualifications of Mother and Mistress; nay, they were
so far from raising the Pope above Councils, that they call such a Doctrine a
Schism and an Heresy.

XXIV.
But as if Infallibility and Superiority were not enough, the Council adds a
third, a Vow of true obedience. The word true obedience, is no less pleasant
then the trae pardon of sins. The Court of Rome is so used to equivocations and
ambiguities, that her fears appear in her own Decrees.

All Christians therefore, whether Clergy or Laity, are tied up, or rather
sacrificed to the Pope by a solemn Oath; so as let him be as much Arian as
Liberius, as much a Monothelite as Honorius, as unlearned as Celestine the
Fourth, as Simoniacal as John the Twenty second, as unclean as Alexander the
Sixth; let him be as insolent toward Kings, as Hildebrand to Frederic,
Boniface to Philip August, Innocent to John King of England, Leo the Tenth to
Henry the Eighth, Julius the Third to the Queen of Navar, yet he cannot be
resisted; it is not lawful to disobey the Father and Master of all Churches, to
believe him in the wrong, whose judgment is above all Councils, and to oppose
him to whom you are sworn upon the four Gospels.

XXV.
These reasons occasioned the doleful complaint of Monsieur Espenc. loc. cit.
d' Espences, then present at the Council, who says openly, That the Church is
in a more desperate condition then before, and that by reason of the Italian
Bishops, whom he calls the Helena which triumphed at Trent, there is no hope to
cure her wounds.

Gentianus Hervaeus, Doctor in A Letter of his was translated into French, in
the contestation between the Jesuits and the Disciples of St. Austin, Printed
at Paris, 1665.
Sorbon also, and present at the Council, speaks after the same rate, and
differs only from the others, in that he ascribes all the miscarriages of the
Council to Lainez and Salmero, both Jesuits.

Thuani Hist. Conc. Trid. p. ult.
Julius Sanelius being returned from Trent, whether he had bin brought by the
Cardinal of Lorrain, gave an account of that Assembly in these terms, That in
the Council of the Apostles it had bin said, Visum est spiritui sancto and
nobis, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us; but in that of Trent, Plus
nobis quam Spiritui Sancto, more to us then to the Holy Ghost.

It appears therefore, that the pretended Reformation of the Pope and Court of
Rome is a mere Chimera; nor is it an harder matter to evidence, that the
Reformation of the Church is a mere disorder. It may be said, and very truly,
that the sins which Laymen lie under, have no other source then the bad
examples of the Clergy; and we may learn both from profane Writings and Divine,
from Historians as well as Prophets, that the good or bad life of Priests has
ever had an unspeakable influence on mankind. But it is another truth no less
certain, that if the sins of the people come from the Priests, those of the
Priests spring from the Bishops: this being a daily experiment, that as the
Clergy is holy when it is governed by Saints, so it becomes abominable to God,
when the life of its head does not answer the duties and excellency of his
dignity. The shortest way therefore to reform the Church, was seriously to
reform the Bishops.

But instead of reforming the Episcopal Order, the Fathers of Trent gave it two
mortal wounds.

1. To declare Bishops in many cases the Popes Delegates. 2. To leave the
question of their residence and jurisdiction undecided.
1. The first of these two things brings Episcopacy unto a strange abatement,
renders the Pope master of all Bishops Jurisdictions, breaks all ancient
Canons, runs down the interests of all Princes, encroaches upon the Rights and
Liberties of Churches, gives the Bishops a quality unworthy the successors of
the Apostles, and forces them to receive that as a borrowed and begged
privilege which belongs naturally to them.

The second, causes Episcopacy to be looked upon as a mere humane emploiment,
or Civil Magistracy. Such a Bishop could never have the confidence to say with
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 3. Do you seek a proof of Christ's speaking in me? Nay,
he would no more value his sacred character, then one of the Kings officers do
his, and regard the duties of his Divine calling, rather as rules instituted
for decency, then as unchangeable obligations, so strictly required from him,
that without them he has no hope of salvation.

XXVI.
Jurisdiction is no less essential to Episcopacy, then the power of ordaining
Ministers; a proposition we could easily demonstrate to be unanswerable, would
it not render this Discourse too big; and had it not bin already done by a
learned hand, against the infamous Doctrine of ^oth English and French Jesuits.
(For Jesuits are every where the same.) Ordination and Jurisdiction are so
twisted together, that they cannot be divided without their ^^utual
destruction. Bishops receive both from the same hand, and are no less
instituted by Christ in the Church to govern (...), then to continue the
succession of the Governors.

XXVII.
Nay, may it not be affirmed, that Jurisdiction is both as essential to
Episcopacy, and (...) necessary to the Church as Ordination. ^or the Church
being, as St. Paul says, a (...), i. e. a society consisting of Rulers, Petrus
Aurelius.
and others submitted to them, without Jurisdiction it can no more be such a
society, then without Ordination those rulers can be continued. Therefore as
no^ Bishop ordains in the Catholic Church, a^ the Popes, or any other
Patriarchs delegate, but by the fullness of power he receives from Christ, so no
Bishop exercise^ any act of Jurisdiction by any delegation but by that power he
is invested with a^ Bishop, successor of the Apostles, and Vicar of Christ.

A Bishop that acts or believes otherwise betraies that dignity entrusted to
hi^ by Christ, which he ought to maintain (...) the last drop of his blood.

XXVIII.
Nor pretend we thereby to say the such a Jurisdiction may be exercised in
^^very place, and over all persons; the patition of Dioceses shows the
extraord^^nary wisdom of Councils and Prince^ Nor may any one transgress the
limi^ they have put among Bishops, without d^^claring himself an enemy to all
disciplin^ Now all the following Propositions a^ certainly true, at least to
all admirers (...) former times, whom I take to be in E^England in a greater
number then elsewhere.

1. That no man, or no part of a Diocese, can be subtracted from a Bishops
Jurisdiction, but by the authority of a Prince or Council. 2. That no man can be
subtracted from the Jurisdiction of his Bishop, without being put at the same
time under another. 3. That however a Bishop deals with any man, either
subtracted from his Jurisdiction or added to it, it is always of himself, and
by the power he received from Christ. 4. That the exemtions of Friars and
Monks, are a Schism raised by the Popes. 5. That the name of the Popes
Delegates (in its most favorable sense) given to the Bishops in things which
belong to them, is plenojure, and by all Laws a most shameful injury to the
Episcopal order. 6. That nemo est qui non perhorrescat, to use the words of a
Learned Gentian Herv^eus, loc. citat.
Doctor of Sorbon, at the speech of the Jesuit Lainez in the Council of Trent,
That all the power of Jurisdiction has bin by Christ conferred on the Bishop
of Rome, so that the Jurisdiction of Bishops is not fundamental but derived.
XXIX.
Now concerning the divine right of Episcopacy, the Fathers of Trent committed
two great faults: the one to bring it into question, and the other to leave it
undecided. As for the first, it had bin received in the Church for fourteen
ages taught by the Fathers, embraced by their Disciples, and only impugn'd by
the Italian Canonists. For the second, such an indecision is a ground for any
man in the Church of Rome to deny, doubt of, and contradict the institution of
Bishops; these three things being the nature of all undecided points. So a man
may maintain there is no government at all in the Church, and consequently no
Church, since it does not appear that Christ has instituted any other then
Episcopacy: and certainly to find any other, the Scripture must be strained in
many places, and the constant, universal, and never opposed practice of
fourteen hundred years be impudently contradicted.

XXX.
But what is most pleasant in this Indecision, is, that the Pope has verified
the word of the Prophet, Psalm. 35. 8. Let the net that he has hid catch
himself, for all these following consequences flow from it.

1. That the Holy Father is no Pope by divine right, Jure divino, for the
Popedom being nothing else but an extension of Episcopacy, he is no Pope but
because he is Bishop. No Divine durst yet advance any other opinion.

But the Episcopacy of the Holy Father is not different from that of other
Bishops, being in all respects of the same kind, Episcopatus unus est. And the
Italians, who are so abundant in novelties, when they undertake to raise up the
credit of their Master, have bin dumb in this matter.

Therefore if the Popes Episcopacy is not Jure divino, his Papacy is not so
neither, since one is engrafted upon the other; and if the Holy Father is not
Pope Jure divino, what ground can be laid for the ambition and usurpation of
Cypr. de Unit. Eccl.
the Apostolical See? What shall we do with the fine and rare Doctrine of
Infallibility.

2. The Council has imposed the belief of its new Decree upon all Christians,
under pain of eternal damnation; but if they are only Ministers from the
Church, and not from Christ, with what eyes shall we consider so stupendous a
boldness? Who has empowered a company of men to make Decrees of divine Faith?
And how, without being authorized by God, did they exact an obedience only due
to Ministers sent from Heaven?

3. It Is a crime in a Roman Catholic to believe the Council of Trent did not
lawfully what it did, otherwise such a meeting is a dream and a chimera. But
who is that Roman Catholic of any sense, who can be persuaded of it, seeing
it is allowed in the Church of Rome to deny any of those Bishops had the least
authority from God to do what they did.

XXXI.
And indeed who will not wonder the Fathers of Trent so peremtorily give their
verdict of things they confess not grounded upon Scripture, and which were
converted for many Ages, as Images, Prayers to the Saints, Indulgencies, etc.
and leave undecided a point so evident in Scripture, and so constant in
Tradition.

XXXII.
It highly therefore concerns the truth, to find out the mystery why they were
so obstinate at Rome in an undecision so extremely pernicious to the whole
Catholic Church, to that of Rome in particular, and to the Pope himself.

The truest cause is the pride of the Eminentissimi Cardinali. They were used
long since to trample on the necks of Bishops, and to keep them in quality of
their Secretaries, or Stewards. An enormity proceeding from the poverty,
weakness, and sad condition of the Italian Prelates. A Bishop, to gain respect,
needed to be privy to the pleasures or designs of the Cardinal. At Pope Pius
the Fourths Counsel, Bishops stood bare-headed, whilst gli Eminentissimi sat,
and were covered. And by a disorder no where to be found but at Rome, a gray
hair'd Bishop, or Archbishop exhausted with austerities, and considerable for
services done the Church, was seen at the feet of a young, powdered, perfumed
Cardinal, puffed up with pride, softened by wantonness; and in a word, whose
Eminency had usually nothing more eminent then most eminent vices.

XXXIII.
'Twas then impossible to speak in the Council of the Bishops Institution,
without putting Cardinals in mind of theirs: one is so ancient and divine, the
other so new and humane, that the very thoughts of them could not choose but
make Cardinals ashamed.

For if they consider their dignity as Spiritual, they are only Priests or
Deacons, submitted for that very reason to their Bishops, and without power of
voting in Councils.

Or if they consider it as a temporal honor, they have nothing to do with the
affairs of the Church. They are in the order of the sheep, not of the Shepherd,
and instead of being so proud as to ambition speaking and ruling in Councils,
must beg with a profound humility to hear and be ruled.

Or at last, if they are in a middle state, as a Jesuit (a man of a middle
state also, as fit as the rest of his company to unite great extremes)
describes them, they ought to fear the condemnation Christ has interminated to
those who serve two masters.

And thus it was of a very high concernment for Cardinals to leave a question
undecided, which would have restored them to their ancient condition, and done
justice to the sacred character of Bishops. How dangerous soever seemed the
consequences of such undecision, they followed the Italian maxim, To keep the
present usurpations at the price of the most equitable Laws.

XXXIV.
Nor were they less interess'd at the question of Residency. For if the
decision of the divine institution of Bishops destroyed their honors, that of
residency finished their pleasures, sent them to their Diocese, and cut off the
sweet and luxurious life of Rome.

Nevertheless, it was required by the Spanish and French Bishops, that
Residency should be declared Jure divino. Of all Christian Truths, none is so
powerfully expressed in the Scripture, so conformable to good sense, so
inculcated to us by the Writings and Examples of the Fathers.

Nay, without gathering a thousand testimonies from all parts of the Scripture,
let us only say to the Bishops what Saint Jerome says to Nepotian, Interrogent
nomen suum, and no doubt it is enough to persuade them.

There is none of these Bishops absent from their Dioceses, who dares read
without fear that parable of the Gospel, wherein Christ calls himself the good
Shepherd, expresses in a style full of love, that (...) takes all imaginable
care for hindering them from going astray; that he has a voice whereby his
sheep know him, and discern him from foreigners, or mercen^^ries; and, what is
more, that he has (...) life to spend for saving them from death.

XXXV.
Now Bishops are in the Church to re^present Christ to the life, either because
he has committed to their care the go^vernment of his people, or because they
succeed the Apostles who are his wit^nesses. A Bishop that wants a watchfu^
care to look after his sheep, a voice to ca^ them, and above all, a life to
lose for their sakes, is a thief, that comes not but to steal, to kill, and to
destroy.

This great duty gave occasion to the Fathers to call Bishops, Sponsos
Ecclesiarum suarum, the Bride-grooms of their Churches. Thence they drew these
important conclusions.

1. That the polygamy of Dioceses is no more lawful to a Bishop, then polygamy
of Wives to a Christian.

2. That as in a Christian Marriage, a husband must be entirely to his wife,
concenter in her all his desires, and love her after God above all the world;
so a Bishop that is tied to the Church, must banish all other thoughts, then to
live and die in her bosom.

3. That as we learn from the sublime Divinity of the Apostle, that Christ
loved entirely his Church, never abandoned her, died for her, and remains with
her till the end of the world; so a Bishop must be jealous of the Church Christ
has entrusted him with, watch continually for her; and because she lies in the
midst of a thousand enemies, persevere in her defense till his last breath.

XXXVI.
We need but read St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, to see the Disciple
Preaching as he had bin taught by his Master. All those great qualities he
requires in a Bishop, that irreprehensible life, that exact watchfulness, that
sound doctrine, that incredible patience in exhorting, that prudent behavior
amongst so many different sorts of people, old men, youths, widows and virgins,
have no other foundation but residency.

And the Fathers were so thoroughly convinced of this duty, that when they speak
of Episcopacy, they style it a burden dreadful to the shoulders of angels
themselves, along and tedious death, a source of infinite cares and
solicitudes; all which expressions are mere mockeries, if they did not suppose
residency Jure divino.

Their examples are more pressing then their precepts. And St. Athanasius, St.
Austin, and Pope St. Gregory, did actions answering to, and surpassing their
words.

Nay, God has not permitted the Church of Rome it self, in the darkness of its
incredulity, to be destituted of such precedents. St. Charles, nephew to Pope
Pius the Fourth, retired to his See, maugre all the entreaties of his uncle.
Cardinal Bellarmin, the Popes great adorer, would never accept of a
dispensation profer'd to him for non residing; and he has left us an excellent
Letter to a nephew of his, wherein we may see that tho Jesuit and Cardinal, he
could never be induced by the Pope himself to betray his conscience.

XXXVII.
But the Cardinals presiding at Trent, and the Italian Bishops did not care
very much to shake the very principles of Religion, and so recur to the softest
interpretations of Casuists. The first foresaw, that if residency be declared
of Divine Right, there would be no pretense or excuse at all to live at Rome.
The loss of Rome for a Cardinal is no small sacrifice; and there is a great
difference between these two, to lie concealed in his Diocese, and to shine in
a Court known to be the most proud, rich, and voluptuous in the World.

The second should have hazarded too much in striving against the Cardinals.
They lived in their families, eat the crumbs which fall from their tables, and
made a part of their retinue. Those of them who were less despised, had also
more ambition: they aimed at Cardinalship; and Residency was the nearest way to
be deprived of it. They forgot therefore that they were Bishops, and chose
rather to betray their character, then leave their pretenses and pleasures.

XXXVIII.
What then has the Council done in its so much boasted of Reformation? Great
things indeed.

Those two hundred Bishops that had bin five and twenty years before they could
meet, and eighteen after they had met, answered perfectly the expectation of
all Christendom.

1. They have forbidden Prayers in a known Tongue.

2. Ruled the Churchwardens.

3. Ordained, that Friars could not vow but being sixteen years old.

4. Approved the Jesuits's order, that is, strengthn'd the enemies of Christ.

5. Shaped an Index expurgatory, as barbarous in its form as in its name.

6. Established Inquisition, a new tribunal which may be properly called, the
eleventh persecution of the Church.

XXXIX.
But to speak seriously, we must say with Mr. D'Espences, and the most
considerable men of the Roman Communion.

1. They have encroached upon the liberties of all Churches.

2. Raised the Popes power, and brought Episcopacy to nothing.

3. Cut off all hopes of Reformation, and canonized all the vices of Rome.

4. Made breaches in the Discipline which shall never be made up; and induced
those who have some knowledge of the ancient Canons, to ask them in Saint
Austin's words, Curare est hoc, an occidere? Levare de terra, an praecipitare
de coelo?

A CONCLUSION Of the foregoing Discourses,
Concerning the State of the Church of England, and how she has bin more
successful in the reformation of her Faith and manners, then the Church of Rome.
I.
THE Anglican Church is not any private Society, but a part of that body which,
as the Scriptures tell us, is spread over the face of the whole Earth. Her
intent is only to be a member of the Catholic Church, from whose Spirit she
receives life, and governs her self by her laws. She does no less abhor Heresy
and Schism, then the Roman seems to do; only she does not attribute that name
to all persons and things, but knowing truth and charity to be the most
precious gifts, the holy Jesus purchased by his death, she is the less easily
moved to accuse any of forsaking them.

II.
Her extent, greatness and prudence, with the moderation of her conduct, has
always made her seem the main and most considerable body of the Protestants;
and hence arises that ardent zeal of the Sea of Rome, either to recover or to
destroy her: hence proceed so many artifices to tempt and draw away the
Children of this holy mother, that for these hundred years its emissaries have
labored to raise new Churches within her. But he who commands the winds, and
imposes silence to the Seas, will suffer no tempest to arise within her breast,
unless it be to render her the more glorious. She has always lived in unity,
catholicism, and which is the spring of them both in that holiness which God
requires.

III.
Neither Calvin nor Luther were the authors, or reformers of her Faith, nor
does she look upon them any otherwise then the Church of Rome does upon
Baronius or Bellarmine. She indeed considers them as great writers; but yet as
men on whose words she founds no part of her Creed. The Art. 6.
word of the Prophets, the Gospel, and writings of the Apostles are her laws.
God having spoken so clearly and plainly, she looks for no other instructions
then his word; and according to that she being a national and independent
Church, and consequently having just authority, did reform her self.

IV.
The reverence she has for the Scriptures carries her neither to Enthusiasm,
nor a private Spirit. She Art. 20.
explains not the word of God by any humane exposition.

She knows there is nothing so difficult in one part of the Scripture which is
not plainly illustrated by another more easy. She therefore compares the one
with the other; as did the Fathers in former Ages. She seeks the will of God,
by the light God himself has given; and knowing that he cannot and will not
deceive her, she relies upon and wholly delivers her self up to his care and
conduct. St. August.


She acknowledges no other Infallibility then his. She knows all men are
subject to error and falsehood; and the greatest Saints themselves may truly
say, 1 John 1. 8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

V.
The Church of Rome flatters her self with an Infallibility which she can
reduce to no certain principal. The Pope assumes it to himself, as if he were
the only source of it, and the Italians call all other opinions Heresy. The
rest of her communion attribute it to a General Council, and anathematize all
those who think the contrary. So that this Infallibility is reduced to that, as
to prove either the Pope or Council to be in Heresy. The Church of England cuts
off such an abominable division. She acknowledges the power of God and the
infirmity of man, the eternal and essential truth of the one, and the falsehood
the other is subject to. She hears with trembling the word of the Apostle, Let
him that glories, glory in the Lord: she therefore gives the glory to God, and
in this life she looks upon Gods word as the pillar of Fire, which led the
Children of Israel through the desert, and never forsaked them in so many
intricate marches.

VI.
If the Catholic Church has not erred, at least in fundamentals, it is not by
reason of any promise of Infallibility which God has accorded to men; but
because that he being a God of mercy, has had in all times some faithful
servants, whom he made acquainted with his ways, and who have walked according
to his word. The gates of Hell have not prevailed against them, because they
were filled with that charity, which triumphs over both visible and invisible
Enemies.

And God having resolved in the decrees of Jer. 31. 3.
charity (which the Scripture teaches us he has loved the Church by) to be
served in spirit and truth to the end of the World, he has not permitted his
word to be taken away from her, how bloody soever the persecution of Martyrs
has bin; how blind soever the ignorance was, in which many ages had bin
involved; how terrible soever the corruption appeared, in which we see the
World every day plunge it self.

VII.
The holy Church of England stops not that Fountain, out of which John 3.
waters flow to life Eternal. The Word of God being the foundation of our
happiness, and the key of the World to come, she permits all People, persuades,
exhorts, and commands all ages, all conditions and qualities to peruse it.

St. Chrysostom was of opinion, that all Merchants and men of affairs, who had
not zeal enough to read the Old Testament, should at least read the new. St.
Jerome prescribed to many Ladies of quality, the manner of teaching it their
Daughters. St. Austine in his Sermons declares to his People, that the
multitude of their sins proceeded from their neglect of the Scriptures.

God having resolved in process of time to accomplish the great work of
Predestination in his Elect by his word; to neglect the reading of it, would be
to reckon himself excluded of that blessed tribe. The Church of England follows
that opinion. Her Bishops are not contented with instituting it in their
Synods, and the Priests preaching it in their Churches, but the Holy Ghost
being of all Nations, and languages, it has bin their business so justly to
translate it, as the most ignorant can make use of it: and so all the World may
equally have this great treasure; for it is folly for any one to persuade
themselves, that it is only open to the learned. There needs no science, but
much humility and Faith toward God, for the knowing this truth of Salvation.
Let a Man have learning without humility, the most ignorant person understands
better then he does. Men teach the mind and corrupt it, but God instructs the
heart and it is converted.

VIII.
But because it is easy for our reason to be seduced, and nothing is worse for
any Man, then to abandon himself to his own sense; the Can. de Concio.
Concionat. An. 1571.
Bishops order their Curats, to look back on the former ages, to get the
explication of the Scriptures from the holy Fathers, to hearken to the Church
in her Councils, and never to fall from her interpretations and ordinances.

The Church of Rome runs into one extremity, and some authors to another; the
former so look on the Fathers as to equal their authority with that of God; the
others under pretense of hearing God, hear no body, and treat those holy Saints
and August Councils with such contempt, as merits a thousand Hells.

The holy Church of England keeps her self in an exact mean. She rejects,
condemns, and trembles at the folly, pride and ignorance of those unhappy
wretches, before whose eyes the Devil has cast so great a mist, and who think
it better blindly to cry Scripture, then to hear those who are the most
faithful interpreters of it.

She with great respect and reverence, looks upon those former ages, where
truth was not disguised, nor charity cooled; but she rises not to such an
excess, as the Church of Rome: and whatsoever grace God has given to his
servants, she always acknowledges, that they are but rivulets, which can never
be equaled with the Ocean from whence they proceed.

IX.
They therefore are mistaken, who confound this holy Church with such
unreasonable persons, as refuse to be instructed by the examples and writings
of so many holy servants of God. She receives ^ot tradition in any other sense,
then is according to Scripture. She will hold ^ll that as holy, which can be
alleged ^onformable to that excellent rule of St. Vincent of Lerins, quod
semper, quod ubi^ue, quod ab omnibus servatur. She will al^aies receive with a
profound reverence ^he unanimous consent of the Saints: and ^ever appeal from
the decrees of the Church assembled in general and legitime Councils. For tho
the Church has no power to ordain any new article of Faith, either to add or
cast out any part of it; nevertheless she has sufficient Authority to declare
her opinion in any point of Faith; and seeing that she does it, all Christians
are bound to submit themselves to her judgment, what seeming truth soever there
appears on the contrary; and it is much more probable for one particular person
to be deceived, to whom God has promised no other assistance but that which is
common to all Christians, then the Catholic Church, to which Christ Meth. 28.
15.
is present till the end of the World, and has promised to send his Spirit,
there where they Mat. 18. 20.
are gathered together in his name:

Christ in speaking to inferiors said not, Luc. 10. 16.
he who hears you hears me; they therefore have no right to be heard, nor
consequently to speak. He said to his Apostles, and Bishops, whom he has
ordered to govern the Church in their place: it is therefore their business to
speak, and right to be heard; and those who teach without or against their
order, do break the ranks, in which God has placed them.

X.
But to attempt the reducing the Catholic Church to one part of Europe; and to
force the name of Roman upon those, who ought not to receive it, and to exclude
them from Salvation who are both Christians and Catholics without being Romans,
is the greatest absurdity in the world.

But to confine that part of Europe to the Pope; to make him the center of
unity which belongs alone to Christ, is the greatest impiety and most
insufferable extravagancy that can be imagined.

But that any man should call himself the High Priest, the Universal Bishop of
the Church, that is, take those titles which his Can. null. did. 99. Can. Ecce.
did. de. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32.
Predecessors looked on as an execration, and which he has not gotten but by
an immensurable ambition, is beyond all imagination.

But that the same person, under pretense of a Pasce oves meas, which he has
expounded as he pleased, contrary to the opinion of the Fathers and Councils,
should march in the head of all his Brethren, and raise Clergy men of the
meanest order, such as are Cardinals, above the holy order of Bishops; should
excommunicate Kings and depose them, give their Kingdoms to a depredation;
dispense Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance which they have sworn to their
Prince, and color all these attemts as done by the authority which Christ has
given him, the Church of England will never admit of such Principles, as the
most forlorn sinners cannot look upon without horror.

XI.
If the Pope would do all for the truth, and nothing contrary to it; if he
would limit himself to the word of Christ, and the practice which the Church
has prescribed him, and go no further then St. Leo or St. Gregory, she will
communicate with him. She will rob him neither of the dignity of Bishop nor
Patriarch. Christ gave him the one, and the Church granted him the other. She
acknowledges, that the ancient See of Rome is one of the most considerable in
the world; that has bin formerly ennobled with as many Martyrs as Bishops;
that he has bin mightily respected in Councils; and that the Emperors have
dignified him with great privileges. But when he pretends to draw thence an
occasion of exalting himself above others; and that according to the remark of
a famous Emperor, at the Council of (...). Conc. Florent. p. 518. tom. 32.
Florence, He looks on the praises which the Saints have given him in their
Epistles, as titles and privileges from Christ; the Church of England opposes
it with as much constancy as justice, and not being able to cure the wounds of
that Bishop, she leaves him to the judgment of our great God.

XII.
The pride of the Pope has caused the separation of the Greek Church, and made
a breach between East and West, which will never be made up. It has also bin
the occasion of the one part of the West being divided from the other. And it
is not ten years since, in the affair of the four French Bishops, it had like
to raise a Schism and a division in the rest.

XIII.
But supposing the submission of all the rest to Rome should be lawful, yet
that is nothing to the Church of England, which was never any part of it. It
plainly appears, she received the Faith almost as soon as Christ brought it to
the world: but although the time be uncertain, yet none can think, that she was
ever instructed by the Church of Rome. Vener. Beda. l. 2. c. 2.
Her manner of observing Easter, as in the East, and her Ceremonies (very
different from those used in the Church of Rome) show that she received the
Gospel from thence. St. Gregory having sent hither Austin the Monk, and that
Holy Saint requiring the Clergy to submit to the Popes authority, the Abbot of
Bangor, in the name of all the rest, answered in such terms as showed the
purity and simplicity of the former times, Spelm. page 108.
We submit our selves, says he, to the Church of God, to the Pope of Rome, and
to every good Christian; and love each of them with such a degree of charity as
is due to them, to assist them both in our works and Councils, to become sons
of God; we know no other respect due to him, whom you style Father of Fathers.

XIV.
It is therefore certain, for six hundred years at least, that the Church of
England has in no manner bin subject to that of Rome; her Councils and
promotions of Bishops, and generally all that belongs to Religion, has bin
transacted without the Church of Rome being at all concerned in them.

It would be much against the honor of the Pope, if those means should be made
known, by which he has endeavored to establish himself for the succeeding
ages. The public Acts of this Kingdom, of a far greater authority then all their
legends, are ^ully charged with his Oppressions. What pains did the Kings take
to put a stop to them? with what constancy did the Clergy oppose it, till the
time of Henry the Eighth? That history was writ with as much impartiality as
truth, by the Learned Sir Roger Twisden. It appears by all public Acts, that
the Pope has wonderfully endeavored to make use of all conjunctures of times,
to get footing into this great Isle. He has bin enriched by the liberality of
her Kings, by Factions which he sowed in the heart of the Kingdom, and by the
Wars which he brought upon it from abroad.

XV.
Henry the Eighth, whom all the Popes have so cried out upon, went not further
then his Predecessors, and the title of supreme Governor in these his Realms,
well understood, is no less due to him then to any other Prince in the World.
This King, or any of his Successors, pretend to no more authority over the
Church, then Constantine, Justinian, or Charles the Great. They have neither
power to administer the Sacraments, nor to Preach the word of God.

They meddle not at all with any thing which belongs to faith or manners, and
leave to their Bishops all the power in those matters, which Christ himself has
given them.

They make no Canons, tho they add Sanctions to them; and declare, the
knowledge of Spiritual affairs is not a right of their Crowns.

They only take care of the outward administration of the Church, to see Canons
executed, and hinder foreign authority, under pretense of piety, from disturbing
the quiet of their people. Upon this account, the Bull of no Pope is received
in France without the Kings consent; all privileged men are daily restored to
the jurisdiction of the Ordinaries; and when any thing does endanger the
liberties of the Gallican Church, or the Laws of the Land, the Pasce oves meas
is of no force, and the Kings authority stops the attemts of the Holy Father.

In Spain the King has the disposal of all things belonging to the outward
Government of the Church. The Inquisitors condemn in the Kings name: and when
the Council of Trent was there received, 'twas by the command he gave his
Subjects to do it; nor do the Kings of England claim any more.

XVI.
'Twas not the title of Supreme Governor which did most of all distaste the
Pope. He could easily bear with that in all Kings, for it is but what naturally
belongs to them; he knew that every King has such authority over the Church: but
he feared the consequences of it, which indeed are very terrible to a Pope.

Henry the Eighth by that did suppress the Bulls which came from Rome, and
retained in his own Realms those vast sums, which before were yearly carried
out of them. This was transacted in the sight of two great Kingdoms, inclined
enough to do the like. The Pope therefore thought, that in prudence he ought to
cry out on that Prince; but because a man cries in ^ain, when things are
represented in their ^rue and lively colors, he gave his defenders liberty of
forming Chimera's, to the end they might work upon the people such an effect in
this point as he desired.

XVII.
The Church of England need not recu^ to an extraordinary mission, nor to those
arguments so far distant from reason, to prove her self a Church. She has not
confounded the order of things, and assumed a Government lately sprung up.
Since she has received the Faith which was according to Nicep. l. 2. c. 40.
Nicephorus in the first age, and to Bar. to. 1. an. 35* n. 5.
St. Beda some small time after, we see the succession of Bishops has
continued without the least interruption or change.

XVIII.
The Usurpations of Popes, the com^merce of Italians, and most of all the
ignorance wherewith God for some tim^ permitted the West to be blinded, mad^
them fall into the errors of Rome. But when God looked upon the Church in h^^
mercy, and had opened her eyes, she la^bored to reform her self, but not in a
tu^multuous manner, and spilling of blood^ She was not left to the conduct of
the blind People; which will suffer nothing but what pleases them best, and
which is delighted only with extremes. The King calls a Council of the whole
Kingdom, stored with wise and holy Bishops, as appears both in their lives and
works. This Council formed the articles of a reformation: which being seconded
by the law of their Prince, according to the custom of all Monarchs, were by
that great Kingdom received with a general respect.

XIX.
These holy Prelates in the Reformation had nothing carried on either by heat or
violence: an extraordinary and unusual prudence appears in all their Canons:
they busy not themselves in calling the Pope Antichrist and Rome Babylon, but
render them the same respect they had ever done. They judge themselves without
judging others, and are content to pray for other Societies, without
pronouncing either their Salvation or condemnation.

XX.
As they do separate themselves only from the errors of the Church of Rome, so
they do pretiously preserve what does not bear that name: otherwise 'twould not
have bin the work of a pious zeal but of a wicked madness. None can deny that
there are many great and holy rites in the Church of Rome. They therefore by a
judicious distinction have thrown out those practices which were evil, and
retained the good.

XXI.
Having therefore two businesses in hand, to wit, the reformation of Doctrine
and ordering of manners, they have made use of the shortest and easiest means
They compared all to the Scriptures and customs of the first Ages. There is no
point of their Faith which may not be proved by Scripture: nothing in their
Discipline which is not conformed to the ceremonies of the first 500 years.

XXII.
The Church of England therefore has the comfort of having her Doctrine
founded on the Scriptures, so believed by the holy Saints as she believed it:
her Canons conformable to the ancient Canons, her Liturgy like the first
Liturgies.

When she goes about to interpret the Scriptures, she exacts not of her
Children a blind obedience, as does the Church of Rome. She thinks not to make
any volume Canonical, which was never really so; but she follows the tracts of
the Saints, and of the Councils: and has learnt from the primitive Church,
which books in the Holy Bible are the grounds of our Faith, and which only the
object of our Piety.

XXIII.
We may say the same thing of all those points, which raise the difference
betwixt us and the Church of Rome. The most considerable one is that of the
Eucharist. She treats that incomprehensible mystery with the respect due to it.
She neither presumes nor pretends to comprehend more of it then Christ has bin
pleased to reveal to them, and the ancient Church understood.

It is manifest first, that Christ instituted the Sacrament of his body and
blood.

Secondly, that he is really present in it. Thirdly, that he abundantly
communicates his grace and his holy Spirit, to those who before they receive it
seriously try themselves; as the Apostle speaks, and who not only forsake Sin,
but the very appetite of sinning, and labor to order their life by his example.

But the manner of his being present is uncertain. Christ says nothing of it:
it appears no^ that the primitive Church has known how. That of England
receives with thanksgiving what he has bin pleased to reveal to her, and
adores with a submissive silence what he has not bin pleased to let her know.

We understand nothing of the Lord's Supper but by the Scriptures and the
practice of the primitive times: and when we limit our selves to that, without
going any further, the manner of expounding it is not difficult. The Infinite
love of God toward us in that Sacrament destroies not the order which his
wisdom has put in things. We leave to Faith all the latitude of it, without
contradicting the principles of reason. But when men pretend to make
Evangelists speak as Scholastics, or Scholastics as Evangelists, and look for
Transubstantiation, concomitancy, and existence of the accidents without their
subject, etc. all seems obscurity and darkness. We sacrifice not our reason to
faith, but we throw aside both of them in saying that God explains himself
after a manner contrary to those principles which he has established.

The Church of England is therefore in (...) right of supposing as received
what she beleives, and the Church of Rome is ob^^ged to prove what she
advances. The former supposes the miracle which Christ ^ath wrought, adding
nothing new or ^npossible; the other proposes a thousand things to our belief
of which Christ ^ath said nothing; and which are in themselves greater miracles
then that about which the two parties differ, besides that they draw idolatrous
practices.

XXIV.
The Church of Eng. does not only think her self bound to believe what Christ
says of the sacrament, but she administers it, ^s he has given it us. She
orders the Sacrament under both kinds, according ^o the command of Christ and
to the pra^tice of the Catholic Church: and the whole World know the
unchristian grounds upon which an Italian Bishop in the Council of Trent
thought it was not to be granted, for fear of making an argument against the
pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome.

XXV.
It is unreasonable that she does not permit service to be read in the vulgar
tongue, and the Bible to be ^ranslated. She knows nothing was ever grounded
upon a less foundation then that; and without looking on the orders of St.
Paul, which are so exact thereupon, is there any thing in the World so contrary
to reason as to pray to God in an unknown Tongue, which exposes the Prayers to
the scorn and irreverence of those that offer them?

The Eastern Church did always pray in Greek, or in languages used by her
diverse Nations. Whilst the Latin was the language of the West, it was fitting
that the service should be read in it: but by the distraction of the Empire,
the incursions of Barbarians, and the various revolutions we find in history,
that language having lost its life, and given place to the various Idiomes of
all Nations, it was fitting 2 Cor. 14.
men should pray in such languages as may be understood: but it being more for
the interest of the Pope to keep people ignorant, he has opposed so necessary
a practice. St. Jerome translated the Bible into Dalmatian, the language of his
own Country: there are also to be ^ound manuscripts of the Bible in most
languages of the World. The more universal and dangerous heresies were, the
more the holy Saints exhorted the People to look in the Scriptures for those
remedies which God has granted against them.

XXVI.
The Church of England has therefore turned the Liturgy into her Mother
tongue. The Priests and the Congregation there present, send the same Prayers
to Heaven: and to take away all marks of Enthusiasm or novelty, she has
composed the admirable Book of common Prayer.

It is nothing but a collection of the most pathetical and instructive places
of Scripture. That which she has not from thence are the very words of the
Fathers, or ancient collects which by tradition were received from the
primitive Church. All is sound, all is holy: we address our selves to God, in
God's own language, and we speak to him, as he has spoke to us. It Is a happy
obligation for a Christian to pray after such a manner wherein a vain
imagination bears no part; his mind is enlivened; his heart softened: by that he
can preach to himself, and understand the most important truths of Salvation.

This is not contrary to the exercise of the inward prayer, which St. Aug. Ep.
191.
Austin call^ the voice of the heart, by which we be^ and are supplicants to
God for his mercy^ and the Church of England is so far from forbidding
Christians to prepare themselves for the life to come, by a seriou^
consideration of the miseries and inconstancy of the present, and to learn how
to love Christ, that by her they are commanded to do all this: and the Bishop
say to each of them in giving them the Gospel as the Angel did to the Ezech. 3.
1.
Prophet^ comede volumen istud, Eat this Book and convert it into your own
substance.

XXVII.
This makes it appear with how much less sincerity our adversaries, who have
but a blind zeal, think to offer a great sacrifice to God in calumniating their
Brethren, and accusing all the Protestants of renouncing all the exercises of
Christian Piety, and of retaining nothing but a mere morality, which is to be
met with in any honest Heathen.

And indeed, if going in Procession, carrying Images about one, counting Beads,
and a hundred such like nothings are counted Piety, she acknowledges none of
them. But if the renouncing of our selves, the mortifying our senses, the
humility of our hearts, the love of our neighbor, forgiving our enemies, the
meditation of the Gospel, be styled holiness, she teaches and practices them
faithfully.

XXVIII.
The holy Church of England proceeds farther; and the Church of Rome has no
really holy practices which she does not follow. Confession so ancient in the
Church, is in use here also; but the liberty thereof is left to movements,
which God himself inspires into the hearts of sinners. The Church had so done
for twelve Ages, and until the pretended general Lateran Council, there was no
Statute made about it. She desires it should be wrought by the Holy Ghost, that
the Spirit of God should throw a sinner at the feet of the Priest, and not the
fear of Excommunication.

XXIX.
She does, as they, believe the usefulness and necessity of fasting. All
Scriptures and Traditions are full of the praises which God and his holy Saints
have attributed to it. Lent, and the abstaining from certain meats on certain
days, are practices so ancient in the Church, that none can blame them without
an insupportable ignorance and temerity.

She observes all these things with a great deal of edification. Her Bishops,
and many of her Clergymen, fast after the manner of the Primitive Christians,
that is, eat but once, and that at night. Abstinence from flesh is always
injoined with their Fasts. They abhor the shameful subtilties of the Casuists
of the Church of Rome, who retain nothing of it save the name, but in effect
destroy it. Their fasting and abstinence have nothing superstitious. He that
eats not, is not scandalized by him that eats, Romans 14. 1. The strong do
patiently bear with the weak, and pray God that he strengthen them.

XXX.
Nor does the Church of England condemn Monastical life. She praises them that
retire into solitude, therein to bewail their crimes, who forsake all to find
all in Jesus Christ. It cannot be denied, but whatever irregularities the
greater part of the Church of Rome be in, there are amongst them a very great
number of good people, whom God will recompense rather according to their heart
then actions. Had they, when Henry the Eighth suppressed them in England,
walked in the duties of their Calling, they had bin still in being.

The Popes anger was not because they had bin suppressed, for Popes themselves
show by their examples, that these sort of suppressions are sometimes necessary:
but 'twas because it was done without his authority, which then becomes a nice
point in Law, pernicious to all states, and contrary to the respect due to
Kings. This Prince found them in ignorance and corruption. They were a burden
to the State, a scandal to the Church, a subject of grief to all good people.
Their zeal for asserting the temporal authority of the Pope was inconceivable,
and they treated their Bishops with extreme scorn. When so many evils gathered
together are incurable, who doubts but that the root thereof should be pulled
up, and the hazard be run of losing a blessing, which cannot be preserved but
by greater evils?

XXXI.
Good Monks are certainly of great example. The conferences of the Priest of
Marseilles, show that the East was filled with the fame of their virtue. In the
West, the Order of St. Bennet had, during many ages, furnished all the Sees in
the Church, and bred up more Saints and Bishops then all the other Orders
together had of Religious persons. But those were neither insolent Monks, who
Hieron.
from the bottom of their Cells would condemn all the World besides; nor
vagabonds, who made a trade of their poverty; nor people who having renounced
the World, had yet more intrigues and restless desires then those who had not.
They that got their livelihood by the sweat of their brows, were no less
separated from Ecclesiastical emploiments then secular, and ^ived in a
continual humility and pe^^ance.

XXXII.
The Orders in the Church of Rome, which continue still in the same state, are
worthy of Veneration. It is a most false argument for looking upon them as
people of no use to the Church. They serve her in their way: and truly it is a
very great service they do her of praying and groaning continually for her.

We must not judge the usefulness of men by their actions, but by the station
God has placed them in. A person that does ^ut little in his calling, is often
more useful to the Church then another that does much out of his calling; the
will of God, and not that which appears to men, being the rule of the utility
or inutility of those that serve him.

XXXIII.
It is clear, following this principle, that though there are yet many good men
in the present corruption of Friars Orders, nevertheless the Church of England
has done well in not suffering any.

She rejects them not, because they are Friars or Monks, but because the
greate^ part of them is not in that condition they ought to be in. It is good
to show clearly, and to make the devout of the Church of Rome see that they are
injurious in reproching that of England, for having banished Friars.

XXXIV.
Is there in the World any more effeminate and idle life, then that of the
Claravallis.
Clervaux and the Cisterciens? Is not the ignorance, idleness, and sloth of
these Friars, beyond all imagination? Does there appear the least trace of that
laborious and penitent life of their holy Founder? Will not a man that has
read St. Bernard's Epistles or Sermons, when he sees these Monasteries, think
himself in another World, finding people that call themselves his sons, who
have nothing either of his spirit or manners?

For the Mendicants, we need but hear the Bishops to be acquainted with their
nature. They are as great a charge to the Church as to the State. The Country
is ^carce large enough for their ramblings, and the City for their visits. The
factum ^f my Lord Archbishop of Sens, one ^f the greatest Prelates of the
Church of Rome, is a proof of what they can do. We spare the Reader the recital
of their ^candalous manners. But if these Monks ^ave so little care of their
reputation, as (...) say, that this is the practice but of one ^articular
House, we can prove to them ^y a thousand like examples free from all
^xception, that it is not in the City of Provins only, but in all other they
live ^ccordingly.

It remains, that we speak of the Jesu^^s whom all have spoken against, ever
^nce the World knew them. If the acts ^f the Clergy of France, the Writings ^f
Sorbon, the Decrees of the Parliament ^f Paris may be credited, Christianity
^ath never had greater enemies. Never ^id people that profess poverty and
obe^ience, so earnestly affect glory and ^iches. The better sort of the Roman
Communion in England it self, cannot en^ure them. And all the World knows a
person of eminent Quality, most zealous for the Church of Rome, who ardently
desires its re-establishment, but on condition that the Jesuits be for ever
excluded the Kingdom.

XXXV.
Whence therefore comes it that the Church of Rome, which cannot be ignorant of
so palpable disorders, preserves the Friars with so much care? It Is a mystery
which must be laid open.

There are two sorts of persons interess'd in their conservation; the Pope^ and
men that are worldly given. Th^^ latter, who would be Christians without
submitting to the duties of the Gospel^ are very glad to find so easy and
indulgent guides, who give them pillows to lea^^ on, Ezech. 13. 18. as speaks
the Prophet^ that is, to sin with less disturbance. Now to glory in a great
number of followers^ it is enough to entice and allure those^ whom a half piety
and shadowed devotion keeps still in their sins. The Pope o^ the other side
supports them, not only by acknowledgment, as people to whom h^ ows a great
part of his grandeur, but wit^ design of making use himself of them upon
occasion.

Before the Court of Rome had invented Privileges and Exemtions, the Monks that
lived in submission to their Bishops, and in an happy ignorance of the disputes
of the Schools, were but of small use to it; they sought after sanctity more
then science. But when the Pope began to encroach upon the Jurisdiction of
Bishops, he began by substracting from their authority Monasteries, which being
weary of the vigilance of their Prelates, were wrapped with joy of having none
that should examine their actions.

That they might not seem unworthy of Popes new favor, they began to make head
against their Bishops, to study Decretals, aspire to Scholarship, and change
their ignorance into a demi-science, which has brought so many evils upon the
Church.

And indeed, since they have bin extremely faithful to the Pope. Of nine
Divines which he sent to the Council of Trent, seven were Monks. The Holy
Father requires not them to defend his rights by good arguments, by reading the
Fathers, or studying learned Languages, but only to clamor and cry out. They
are not engaged to prove, that those who deny the supremacy and infallibility
of the Pope, are Heretics, but to spread abroad that they are Heretics. In the
affairs of the five Propositions, and the magnificent Formulary of Alexander
the Seventh, the Jesuits never put themselves to the trouble, of showing that
the five Propositions were in Jansenius, but only clamor'd that they were
there. They thought not themselves obliged to demonstrate, the Pope had power
to exact the signature of the Formulary, but only barked all about, that those
that subscribed not to it were worse then Arians.

XXXVI.
There are in France fifty thousand Monks at least; the greater part are
Preachers and Confessors, that is, people that bear relation to all places of
the Kingdom. Does any write against Religion or manners, maintain the most
scandalous Principles in the World, and the most opposite to those of the
Gospel, there is not one that appears to defend either. But if any speak
against the usurpation of the Pope, then the Theaters, streets, public places,
private houses, and palaces of the Grandees, are full of Monks, that cry with
open mouth that Heresy has infected the whole World. Had Charles the Fifth,
who aspired to the universal Monarchy, used this means, he had infallibly
succeeded. The best policy in the World, is to have in all Kingdoms thirty
thousand Agents who have influence on an infinite number of Persons, and are
maintained at so small a rate by him that emploies them.

XXXVII.
The Church of England is therefore in the right to reject such Friars as they
are now. King Henry the Eighth knew that with them, it was impossible a King
could be master of his own Estate, and a Bishop rule his Church. And these two
things being equally necessary to the repose and welfare of a Nation, this
action of his is not to be condemned.

XXXVIII.
In banishing Friars, the Holy Church of England has banished at the same time
all those novelties wherewith they abused the credulity of People,
indulgencies, relics, fraternities, and all that which is commonly taken for
a true piety. She has substituted in their place, prayer, reading of the
Gospel, preaching, and generally all that may conduce to the converting the
heart. Her design in it is not to draw after her a multitude of Women laden
with sins, who always learn and are never instructed, but to establish in her
Sons such things as are solid and durable. In primitive times all these ways
were unknown; true piety decreasing, the Friars thought it sufficient to
substitute in its stead an appearance of it. The holy Church of England
believed she ought to deal quite otherwise for the welfare of Christians, and
that she was obliged to endeavor to render them like those of the golden age,
as much as that of Iron wherein we live would permit.

XXXIX.
Of all practices of antiquity there is none so venerable as the manner of
sanctifying the Lords day. The holy Church of England celebrates it with an
admirable piety. Saint Augustine believed that it was less criminal to till the
ground, then to dance on this day. Both the one and the other is equally
forbidden in England. Plays, Balls, pleasures, journies, are things not so
much as to be mentioned.

XL.
The Church of England limits not its self at the sanctifying of the Lords day.
She has diverse other days to excite the piety of her Sons; and those are the
festivals instituted in honor of the most glorious mother of God and the
Saints. As this custom is very ancient in the Church, and a man cannot open
the writings of the Fathers without finding marks of it, she thought it fit to
preserve religiously such observances.

By this the Church makes to appear the union of her body in what state soever
her members be. By this she gives glory to the grace of Christ, who has workt
in them all these things. By this she brings Christians to follow the examples
she proposes them, and to believe that nothing is impossible to Christians,
Romans 3. 1.
who in the flesh walk not after the flesh.

She takes care then that the People read their lives and the preachers make
their Elogies, and that both the one and the other endeavor to imitate them.

By this also may be seen her moderation. She runs not into the excess of those
furious and unreasonable men, that will not hear the very naming of a Saint;
nor yet degenerates to the invoking of them as in the Church of Rome, but
equally avoids impiety as superstition.

XLI.
The like moderation appears in respect of Images. She judges it a crime to
adore them, to bend the knee before them, and sticks not to call this Idolatry.
But she beleives not Idolaters those that only retain them.

XLII.
She has with no less wisdom retained Ecclesiastical habits, and ceremonies
necessary to Divine worship. Her Canons are extreme severe for the first of
these. She knows a Priest has nothing to do with the World; and that he must
understand, he is even outwardly separated from it.

For the second, she has retrenched all the profane pomp of the Church of
Rome, but has avoided the frightful nakedness which appears on the other side.
Her ceremonies have neither the appearance of Grandeur, nor affected baseness.
In the Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches may be seen whatever can excite the
Piety of People to praise God. But nothing which occasions to say, that the
luxury and vaniety of the World is brought into the sanctuary.

XLIII.
There remains but one thing, at which the Church of Rome is offended
altogether as unjustly as in many others, that is, the marriage of Priests.

Sure Celibacy is a most holy, exemplary, and upon many occasions a necessary
thing. Twere to be wished that those who are called to the ministry of Angels,
had their purity; and that it might be said of them neque nubunt neque
nubuntur; but being made of flesh as well as spirit, of flesh subject to the
infirmities of other men, the remedy God has ordained, and so highly
recommended in the Scripture, must not be denied them.

The Church of Rome has never looked upon Celibacy but as an Ecclesiastical
law. This opinion is maintained and taught publicly every day in Sorbon. The
obligation thereunto is imposed as a point of Discipline that has no relation
to Faith.

Now the Church is absolutely mistress of whatever is of Ecclesiastical right.
She may introduce, continue, change, what, and as she judges expedient.

The holy Church of England has thought fit to alter this point in her
Discipline. She has weighed all the circumstances, seen all the
inconveniences, considered the good and evil that may accrue thereby. It has
not appeared that she ought to lay a yoke on the necks of such as have not
grace enough to bear it. And she has promised her self that those to whom has
bin granted a sufficient measure, would endeavor to increase and multiply it.

Nor has she bin deceived in so judicious a conduct: she has the glory to see
the greater part of her Bishops and Clergy like to the great Apostle, and at
the same time the consolation to know, that the others live in their houses in
such sort, as to be the examples of all Christian Families.

I cannot see what answer a moderate person can give to this reasoning. For to
return to the Pope, and to say that this cannot be done without his consent,
because he is master of the whole discipline, is a miserable reason; and no
Church of the Roman Communion, but that of Italy, will ever assent unto it.

XLIV.
The Clergy of England is generally the most Learned in the World: and if the
common people retain something of the natural dullness of the vulgar, it has
nothing of the ignorance. This must be ascribed to the care and capacity of
their Teachers, and above all to the famous Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge. These are two Seminaries of Virtue and Science. There may be found
whatever can be desired, for greatness of Revenues, magnificence of Buildings,
and infinite number of Books, collected with incredible expenses and care,
during several Ages. Clergymen are there for many years before they are
entrusted with the care of souls. They pass from the studies of humane Arts and
Sciences to that of Divinity, and the Oriental Languages. Their Professors are
endowed with all the abilities that can be expected from men, who besides vast
natural parts, have born the burden and heat of the day.

The Bishops are not such as those whom Monsieur D'Espences calls Barbatulos
Juvenes, who in so sacred and high dignity as Episcopacy, are not yet free from
the passions of the World. Their zeal for the salvation of souls, their
punctual visiting their Dioceses, their charity to the poor, their hospitality,
their fidelity to the King, and their love for their Country, are qualities
they are so much owners of, as their greatest enemies cannot but admire them.

We do not hereby pretend, that all those whom they govern are saints. It is to
be acknowledged with a sensible grief, that in the Church of England are too
too many who tresure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and
live after such a manner as is little conformable to that which they have
promised in their Baptism.

But we must not conceive from thence an ill opinion of a Church, which has
nothing in her but what is most holy. If we should judge of the Romish Church by
those disorders which have crept into the very Sanctuary, what conclusion might
there be drawn? This cannot be done without opposition to the Judgment of God,
who has left the wicked in the midst of the good, and has permitted the
number of the latter to be less then that of the former, for reasons best known
to himself. It is a secret of his Justice and Mercy, which shall not be
manifested till the last day.

Aug. ser. de dedicat. Eccl.
The dross is in the same furnace with the gold; that is consumed, and this
purified and embellished by the fire. There is much more dross then gold, but
it suffices that the workman know them.

In a word, there is not one that considers the Church of England without
prejudice, but does at the same time admire the sanctity, moderation and wisdom
of her conduct. A Christian will find there, that the veneration which is given
the Scripture, excludes not the esteem which is due to the Church, nor the
esteem paid to the Church any way extenuate the sovereign obedience due to the
Scriptures. He will see that she practiceth nothing but what the Primitive
Times have done, and that she leaves nothing unpractised but what those happy
ones never knew. He will compassionate a vast number of people so miserably
abused in the Church of Rome: and when he shall have had a clearer inspection
into this of ours, calumniated from without by the Jesuists, from within by
such of her Children as have not perfectly submitted themselves to her orders,
he will say with those that fell from the party of Donatus, Nesciebamus hic
esse veritatem, nec eam discere volebamus. Nos falsis rumoribus terrebamur
intrare; quos falsos esse nesciremus, nisi intraremus. Gratias Deo qui expertos
docuit, quam vana and falsa de Ecclesia sua mendax fama jactaverit.

FINIS.

