THE FURTHER INFORMATION OF Stephen Dugdale, GENT.

Delivered at the BAR of the HOUSE of COMMONS.

Pursuant to an Order of the said HOUSE, On the 30 th of October, 1680.

November. the 24th. 1680.
By virtue of an Order of the Honorable House of Commons, I appoint Tho.
Parkhurst, and Tho. Simmons, and no others, to Print my Informations, Given at
the Bar of that Honorable House.

STEPHEN DUGDALE.



LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside: and Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street. M. DC.
LXXX.

THE FURTHER INFORMATION OF Mr. STEPHEN DVGDALE, Given to the HONORABLE the
HOUSE OF COMMONS, Pursuant to an Order of the said HOUSE, On the 30th of
October, Anno Dom. 1680. as follows: ( Viz.)
THAT about the 21 st of September 1678, I being in Company with Mr. Evers and
one Hobson; in Discourse had amongst us, they both then declared, That their
Design in Carrying on the Plot, was to kill the Duke of Monmouth as well as the
KING; which Horrid Acts the Lord Stafford about the same time proposed for me
to do: And that one George North (who was Nephew to Pickering, and Servant to
my Lord Aston) declared to me, that they had lately taken his said Uncle (who
was likewise one appointed to kill the King), and put him in Newgate; which if
true, he said he thought the King deserved an Execrable Death, as was intended
him, by reason of his Whoring and Debauchery.

That in September 1678, Mr. Evers told me, That Mr. Beningfield had a Packet
of Letters delivered to him from the Post House, which he feared the Lord
Treasurer Danby had notice of; therefore he delivered them to the Duke of York,
who delivered them to His Majesty, who was pleased (after he had read them) to
give them to the Treasurer, not much Crediting them, for that they had after
such manner been transmitted to him; by which unwariness the Design was
undiscovered, which the said Packet of Letters would have Confirmed of the
Plot.

That I have received many Pacquets of Letters for Evers, some of which I have
broke open, and found them to be, and tend to the Establishing of the Romish
Religion here: As also several Sums of Money, which by several persons employed
to put forth, was for the Use of the Jesuits to carry on the Design. To which
end Mr. Evers told me, That there was several Gentlemen in the County of
Stafford had Moneys in their hands, though they were shy of being so known; but
nevertheless had entered into Covenant to do it at St. Omers: To confirm which,
I received a Letter from Mr. Warner a Jesuit, that the money should be speedily
returned to Mr. Harcourt the Jesuit here.

That in another Letter directed to Mr. Evers, which I broke open, and found
the same to be my Lord Stafford's handwriting: The Contents of which was, That
things went well on beyond the Seas for carrying on the Plot, and hoped it did
so here in England; and for the Pardoning of those that were concerned therein,
Mr. Evers told me, That there were several Indulgencies, which he believed came
from Mr. Ireland, to whom they were transmitted from Rome.

That the night before I went away from my Lord Astons upon Discovery of the
Plot, I took several Letters and Papers which related thereunto, and burnt
them, fearing the same would detect me, if found; not then having thoughts to
discover my self; which if I had happily kept and preserved, would have much
more Evidenced the whole Design in carrying on the Plot: In several Letters
relating to the same, I have heard the Names of Oats and Bedlow, named as
persons therein employed; but I did not then know them.

That I very well remember, that the Jesuits had a Meeting in London, in April
1678. for that Mr. Evers, and other Jesuits went up from Staffordshire unto it,
who desired me when I went to escape, to be secret; and that I should, if I
were ever brought to Examination, deny my knowledge in every particular, which
I then, and when I burned my Papers, was resolved to do: And the said Mr. Evers
at several times told me, That the Pope out of his Revenue had granted several
Sums of money, in order to put the Irish into a Condition of opposing the now
Established Government; for it was his Gracious pleasure, to consider what a
Tyrannical Government they lived under. To which purpose I opened a Letter from
Paris, which was directed to Mr. Evers, the persons Name I have forgotten; but
it was to this purpose, That he had lately received a Letter from Rome, to
confirm, that the Pope did still hold his good purpose, for the relieving the
poor Irish, and that they were considering how to procure them Men as well as
Money: but as to that and other things, there would shortly be an Express from
thence to England, which would be about the latter end of March 1677/8, as I
best remember; and that Mr. Evers company, with Mr. Cottons, Mr. Vavasors, Mr.
Gavens, and Mr. Peter's, were requested to be at London, whither Mr. Evers and
Mr. Peter's went; and when Mr. Evers came home again into the Country, he told
me, That Mr. Ireland and Mr. Simons would be in the Country the latter end of
June, for considering the best way and means, for the carrying on the great
Work, as they called it.

That it was always agreed at our Meetings, That to disturb the Peace in
Ireland and Scotland, would be a means to weaken England so much, that their
attempts might be easier managed, which could not be done without a good
Assistance beyond the Seas, which Mr. Gaven said, we needed not to fear; for
though they had great troubles with them both in Flanders and France, and those
Countries, yet there would not be men or money wanting to carry on their
Design, for the Glory of God: And if so, their Endeavors should be no ways
wanting here; which was not only to kill the King, but the Duke of Monmouth
also, but to lessen the power of the rest of the Prot^stants: To which Mr.
Peter's asked, If they were assured, that the Gentlemen were all true to them in
Assisting them with money? for if that should fail, our own Stock will serve us
little. Upon which I told them, I would give them One hundred pound more, to
the Four hundred pound I had before settled on them, which was taken very
thankfully, with promises that I needed not to fear to have a free Pardon
procured for my Sins past, and to be a Saint in Heaven, placed to all Eternity,
for that I had been so much Instrumental in so Pious a Work: and Mr. Vavasor
said, That the moneys which was out at Use to carry on the said Design, for
that there would be occasion for it speedily; and to that end, one Mr. Jackson
was Chosen by the Jesuits, as likewise Mr. Evers, to gather in the money about
him, who in his place appointed me to go to Mr. Dracott, Sir James Simons, Mr.
Heveningham, and other persons that were Contributors thereabouts. Mr. Peter's
was appointed to receive of one Mr. Gerrard his Contribution-money; but being
the Priest of the House, Mr. Evers was willing to do it for him. Mr. Gaven
undertook for several private Gentl^m^n about Wolverhampton (viz) of Mr.
Gifford of Chillington, Mr. Fitz-Herbert, Mr* Gravener, Mr. Winford, Mr.
Humphrey Elliot, with several others; of which money I received Five hundred
pound at Wolverhampton of Mr. Vavasor and Mr. Gaven, which Sum of Mr. Evers,
with other moneys, returned here to Mr. Harcourt; and it being then asked, Who
was to speak to Mr. Howard for his money? It was answered, Mr. Broadstreet,
though Mr. Evers said, he would do it himself: but for Mr. Herbert Aston, who
was also a Contributor in the said Design; and being in debt, ought to be
looked on accordingly: To which Mr. Vavasor replied, That it was for a good and
Charitable Use, and God would the more increase his store; or to that purpose:
which moneys so Collected and Received, or should come in, should be returned
to Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Ireland, who should receive Orders how they should
dispose of the same; and if any doubt should arise, they should repair to Mr.
Benefield, who would resolve the same.

That at another time Mr. Ireland told me, when I came to London, he would give
me Instructions, and order how I should proceed in my Undertakings. To all
which I did seem very content; and told me he would speak to Groves, that I
might have notice how the Design went on, for then he could not tell, till he
had spoken to my Lord Bellasis, and my Lord Arundell of Warder, who would prove
the Loyal'st men of Trust and Council of any persons in the World; but before I
received my Letter from Mr. Ireland, the said Groves was in Newgate.

That I saw a Letter from Mr. Harcourt, who told Mr. Evers, That he had lately
received a Letter from Mr. Warner; wherein was mentioned, That Mr. Warner had
used all care imaginable for the helping on the design in hand, and that there
was Four hundred pound of the said money in Mr. Ireland's hands for that
purpose; and I heard Mr. Peter's tell Mr. Evers, that he was very glad that Mr.
Whitebread was made Provincial of the Jesuits, for that he would be very
careful in carrying the design on, and a close man in his business; and they
then agreed that my Lord Arundell of Warder was the only man we had to trust
to, being a Wise man, and much in favor with the Duke of York.

That in a little time after this Discourse had; I received in a Letter of
mine, 3 Letters enclosed from Mr. Beningfield, one from Paris, and one from Mr.
Harcourt; that from Mr. Beningfield, was to let Mr. Evers know, that he had
spoken with my Lord Arundel of Warder, and that my Lord was very willing to
assist in what was requested by Mr. Evers and Mr. Vavasor, which Letters I
intercepted, and I never let Mr. Evers know, to whom they were directed, that I
had received them; but being not long after in Discourse with him in his
Chamber, I asked him what Persons of Quality or Note did (besides those he had
mentioned to me) countenance our Design, to which he answered, that there were
several in other places, where the business went on as well as here, and at the
same time told me, that he had Writ to Mr. Beningfield, to request my Lord
Arundel of Warder to be assisting in the matter which then was in hand, and I
desiring to know of him whether my Lord was concerned in their Design, he told
me, that his Lordship was to undertake the most part of the Design, and with my
Lord Bellasis to give Order, both as to the taking the King's Life away, and
the Duke of Monmouth's; and for the Establishing the Romish Government here.

That about the middle of September 1678 a Letter came to my hands, of Mr.
Evers (which I opened) the Contents whereof were to this purpose, that he had
been with my Lord Arundel, and my Lord told him, that he spoke to the person he
was requested, and it was both their Opinions, that it was the best way to
speed their Design. The persons name, which sent the Letter I know not; for
there was two Letters for his name, which were I. W.

That when the Design was set on foot, it was not for the taking the King's
Life away, but to provide for themselves Money and Arms against the King died,
for it was always thought amongst us, that the D. of M. would stand for the
Crown after the King's Death; and then our hopes would be frustrated for ever
having here the Romish Religion established.

But the perceiving and seeing it was his Majesty's whole Endeavors, to
Establish and secure the Protestant Religion so firm, that it should not be
removed for the future. It was by Decrees thought fit, that this way that is
now designed and endeavored to be carried on, would most answer their wicked
ends, and for those that had bin active therein, they agreed should have
Rewards, and thinking that I (amongst the rest) had deserved something, Ordered
I should have an equal share with one Captain Aderley, who was an Agent in the
said Plot; but how much it should be, and in what, after the Design took
effect, was not then declared, but was to be determined by the D. of Y. and my
Lord Arundel and some other persons; but it should be such a share, as should
make me, and my Posterity happy. Which I accepted with great thankfulness to
Mr. Evers, Mr. Gavan, Mr. Peter's, and Mr. Leviston, who then promised to see it
fulfilled to me, alleging at the same time, that there would be lands enough
of the Protestants, to reward every one, that had been active in the said
Design.

That in the Summer 1678, I met with one Humphry Elliot, who fell into
Discourse with me about Mr. Ireland, who, said he, had told him, that I was to
go up to London, upon an occasion that would also oblige him to come up, which
Discourse something startled me, which he perceiving, told me I need not fear
him, for if I suffered, he was like to suffer as well as I, and begged of me
not to impart my mind to any one except my Lord Stafford or Mr. Evers, or whom
they should appoint.

That for the carrying on the whole Design in several other Counties, Mr.
Peter's, Evers and Pool told me, that there was for a part of Worcester
appointed one Mr. Turner, and three more whose names I have forgot: and for a
part of Darbyshire, and a part of Nottinghamshire was appointed one Mr. Turner,
Mr. Bennet, and Mr. Pool of Spnikehill, and one Mr. Heaton, which were to take
care of their several Liberties, as well for engaging persons in the Hellish
Design, as for raising of money of the Gentlemen to carry it on, and to give in
their several accounts to the Provincial, who was then appointed for that
purpose, to see which was the best Benefactor, though at the same time Mr. Pool
told me, that he thought Mr. Turner was no ways fit for such an Employ for
that, though he was a Priest he was given to Drinking.

That being sent to Dr. Richard Needham with a Letter, and discoursing him,
found him very Zealous to promote the Plot, who told me he had been 200 Miles
about it, and that his pains he thought were well bestowed in so good a work,
and that it should fall out in his days, that might be spoke of in after Ages:
That honest Dick Needham was a Promoter, and one Entrusted for the Establishing
of the Romish Religion, and the Subversion of the Heretical Government. And
being sent at second time to Dr. Needham's and Mr. Pool's, and going first to
the said Mr. Needham's at Satton in Scarsdale in Darbyshire with letters, in
order that Mr. Needham might transmit them from place to place, according as he
was thereby directed to the Gentlemen's houses near adjoining, the purport of
which letters were for the promoting and carrying on the Design of subverting
of the Protestant Religion. And Mr. Pool being there, I dispatched my business
with him, which was to the same purpose, and Mr. Needham being to receive
orders from Mr. Pool and Mr. Bennet, Mr. Pool after Mass gave him further
Instructions, as to what business he was to undertake, who made this reply,
that both he and his Son should be at their Command, to serve in so good a
cause, in the destroying of the Protestants, and introducing their own
Religion, and having received his letter from me, and what I had to Communicate
to him by word of mouth, the Content of which Letter was, that he should go to
Westhallam to acquaint Mr. Pawdrels, that Mr. Evers, Mr. Vavasor and Mr. Peter's
would be at Westhallam, within a short time, and desired that one Mr. Busby
might be at home, for they and some other Gentlemen would be sure to be there
at the time appointed about the great work they knew of which so much concerned
them all.

That I have Intercepted several Letters that came to Mr. Evers from St. Omers,
and Paris, wherein was mentioned, that they were in good forwardness, and that
they had disbursed 500 l. upon Account for Arms, as also 700 l. was mentioned
in other Letters to be laid out for the same purpose, in some of which Letters,
it was pressed to Mr. Evers for return of Moneys for discharging those
Accounts. And I have likewise seen Letters to Grove, Ireland, Beningfield and
Harcourt, for the sending money over to those Persons, and that Mr. Ireland, and
Mr. Vavasor differed in their accounts about the same, the last time Ireland
was in the Country.

That about July 1678 a Packet came directed to me from Mr. Evers, which came
to 2 s. 6 d. which I opened and there it was expressed, that all things were
ready which were bespoke, and all paid off, but how it was Ordered I never
knew, and when I have been in business with them, it has been often given out,
that the King of France did know of this Design, and would be Aiding and
Assisting therein, which I was ever of another opinion, and they then declared
that there was in England above 200000 men, which would prove true, if occasion
were, with some supplies, which they said they were sure of from other parts
beyond the Seas.

That about August or the beginning of September 1678 Mr. Peter's and Mr.
Vavasor told me that there was to be a great meeting of the Jesuits and Secular
Priests at Boscobel, besides several private. Gentlemen that were to be there,
to receive the Oath of Secrecy* which Mr. Gavan was appointed to Administer to
about forty persons, particularly at that time, it was given to Sir James
Simons, Mr. Gerard, Mr. Fitzherbert, Mr. Vavasor, Mr. Lewson, Mr. Broadstreet,
Mr. Turner, Mr. Manley. Mr. Francis Lewson, and several others, the said Mr.
Gavan at the same time publishing an Act of Indulgence, which he lately
received from Rome to those that were active in promoting the wicked Design of
killing the King, and the Subversion of the Protestant Religion, I promised to
be there, but went not, for which they were angry, and Mr. Peter's and Mr.
Vavasor both told me, that the occasion of their meeting was to Consult means
how to carry on the Plot.

That presently after I had made my Discovery to the Justices of the Peace,
they Issued out their Warrants for the apprehending of George Hobson and George
North beforementioned, who were both thereupon apprehended, which my Lord Aston
hearing of, it was Reported that his Lordship should say in great Passion, That
he was sorry he did not run me through before I went out of his House.

That about the beginning of September 1678. Mr. Evers told me in great secret,
that my Lord Aston was to go in October next following to St. Omers, and
probably from thence to Paris, which my Lord afterward told me, he was to go
over, in order to dispose of the Arms, which were provided there; the number
whereof were as my Lord and Mr. Evers told me 30000. which were to be landed
here and in Ireland, and further discoursing Mr. Evers in that Affair, he told
me, that some out of caution to themselves, would have their names entered at
St. Omers, as it had been before, the better to disguise their Design, and that
about two years last past, he with Mr. Cotton went over to enter their names,
and that several of them had continued to do the like in this Affair and
Design: But after the news was, that the Plot was discovered, I never heard my
Lord Aston speak to me more of his going over.

That in addition to what I have already declared concerning my Lord Stafford,
is, That his Lordship in September 1678. in the great Parlour at Tixal
discoursed Mr. Evers and me, and told us, That the reason of his
dissatisfaction against his Majesty, toward whom he had always carried himself
with all sort of Loyalty, as he had done toward his Father, whereby not only
he, but others and their Families had been hereby ruined, and that in
particular, of the old Lord Aston, who had been a great Sufferer, and his
Father the Ambassador had spent 30000 l. out of their own Estate, was for all
this no hopes of any Recompense, for he plainly saw, as any thing fell to be
given, it was rather disposed of to Rebels and Traitors, than to those that had
served him, and that were Loyal; And therefore these things had wrought with
him, and were sufficient to change his mind against the King, if there were not
the matter of Religion in question, which was a Consideration above all others;
And his Lordship also took notice, that at any Sessions of Parliament when
there fell out any thing to the prejudice of the Catholics, the King was
always willing to expose them to the Parliaments mercy, both in Estates and in
any thing else, that might befall them.

That at a general Meeting in September 1678. had at Tixal aforesaid, where
there was present the now Lord Aston, Lord Stafford* Sir James Symons, Mr.
Hevennigham, Mr. Howard Mr. Gerard, Mr. Vavasor, Mr. Lewson, Mr. Peter's, Mr.
Symonds, Mr. Herbert Aston, Mr. Fitter, Mr. Broadstreet, and to the best of my
remembrance Mr. Dacot; upon a full debate had of all their precedent
Transactions and Instructions in carrying on their Design; It was then by them
severally agreed and resolved upon, to perform the Oaths they had severally
before taken, which was to Kill the King, and to Establish their Romish
Religion here in England; and they did there also severally promise to Aid and
Assist me, in what I was to undertake, as well for Money, as other Necessaries:
and then my Lord Stafford promised me, to make good his promise formerly made
me, both as to Money and other Necessaries.

Stephen Dugdale.
Jur. 15o Novembris 1680. coram,

Tho. Stringer. Will. Roberts.




The Gentlemen's Names in the Plot, viz.
LOrd Stafford. Lord Arundel. Lord Bellasis. Lord Aston. Sir Francis Symons.
Mr. Hevennigham. Mr. Howard. Mr. Fowler. Mr. Gerard. Mr. Gifford. Mr. Baz.
effits Herbert. Mr. Elliot. Captain Atherley. Mr. Dracot. Mr. Richard Needham.
Mr. Grove. Mr. Hobson, and Mr. North.
Jesuits Names in the Plot.
Mr. Ireland. Mr. Bedingfield. Mr. Harcourt. Mr. Vavasor. Mr. Evers. Mr.
Catmer. Mr. Lewson. Mr. Peter's. Mr. Broadstreet. Mr. Poole. Mr. Turner. Mr.
Anthony Turner. Mr. Gavan. Mr. Heatne. Mr. Fitter. Mr. Pearson. Mr. Whitebread
Provin. Mr. Busby. Mr. Arthur. Mr. White. Sir John Warner. Mr. Clifford. Mr.
Worstley. Father Mumford. Mr. Godwin. Mr. Winford. Father James. Mr. Symons.
Mr. Charles, and Mr. Peter's.
Priests Names in the Plot.
SIr Francis Luson. Mr. Tomers. Mr. Fitter. Mr. Smith. Mr. Atkins. Mr. Morley.
Mr. Cunney. Mr. Thompson. Mr. Sheppey. Mr. Dowdell. Mr. Fitzherbert. Mr. Trill.
Mr. Fanford. Mr. Weeden. Mr. Bennet. Mr. Gravener.
Messengers Employed in this Design.
MR. Oats. Mr. Bedlow. John Carrington. Joseph Tarbox, and Mr. Needham.
Persons Employed to get Company together.
WIlliam Hanson. Rob. Pullinger. John Harker. Gerard, and Briscoe.
FINIS.
An Advertisement.
HAving given in this Information, by Memory, at the Bar of the Honorable
House of Commons; which when I perused, as it was taken in Writing from my
mouth, I found that I had misplaced many Paragraphs as to Order of Time: For
instance. I begin with Sept. 1678, and afterward give an Account of things
done in March 1677/8, and in April and July 1678: it was not thought convenient
to alter it in the Printing, but to Publish it as delivered. Of this I thought
good to give the Reader notice.

Errata's in the Transcriber and Printer.
Page 6. Line 17. next to the word Design, add should be called in. Page 7.
Line 8. dele of. Page 18. Line 17. read Dracot. Page 19. Line 5. read Sir James
Simons. page 20. Line 2 d. read Mr. Francis Luson. Line 3 d. read Towers.


