THE MOCK-TEMPEST: OR THE Enchanted Castle. ACTED AT THE Theater Royal.

Written By T. DUFFETT.

Hic totus volo rideat libellus. Mart.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the Pope's Head in the lower Walk of the
New Exchange in the Strand. 1675.

THE INTRODUCTION, Spoken by Mr. Hains, and Mrs. Mackarel.
Mr. Hains Enters alone. YOU are of late become so mutinous,
You Have forced a reverend Bard to quit our House.
Since you are so soon misled to ruin us,
I Will call a Spirit forth that shall declare,
What all your tricks and secret Virtues are.
What? ho Ariel!
Enter Betty Mackarel. Here Is Betty -- Now rail if you dare:
Speak to'em Betty -- ha! ashamed, alas poor Girl,
Whisper me! -- Oh I Will tell 'em -- Gentlemen! she says,
You Are grown so wild she could not stay among ye,
And yet her tender heart is loath to wrong ye.
Spare 'em not,
Whom kindness cannot stir, but stripes may move.
Bet. O Mr. Hains! I Have often felt their Love.

Ha. Poh, felt a Pudding that has taken vent,
Their love cools faster, and as soon is spent.
Think of thy high calling Betty, now thou art here,
They gaze and wish, but cannot reach thy Sphere,
Though every one could squeeze thy Orange there.

Bet. Why this to me, Mr. Haines (do you conceive me) why to me?

Ha. Ay, why this to Betty?
O Virtue, Virtue! vainly art thou sought,
If such as Betty must be counted naught:
Examine your Consciences Gentlemen!
When urged with heat of love, and hotter Wine,
How have you begged, to gain your lewd design:
Betty, dear, dear, dear Betty,
I Will spend five Guinnyes on thee, if thou'lst go:
And then they shake their (do you concieve me) Betty is it not so, their yellow
Boys.

Bet. Fie Mr. Hains, you are very rude (do you concieve me.)

Ha. Then speak your self.

Bet. Gentlemen! you know what I know.
If you are severe, all shall out by this light:
But if you will be kind, I Will still be right*

Ha So that is well -- make thy Cursy Betty.
Now go in Child, I have something to say to these Gentlemen in private. Exit
Betty.

PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. Hains.
SInce Heroes Ghosts, and Gods have felt your spite:
Your She Familiars, and your dear delight;
The Devils shall try their power, w'ee to night:
Some do believe that Devils never have been,
Because they think, none can be worse then them:
But Female Sprights by all are felt and seen.
You see our Study is to please you all:
Lets not by stiff Tom Thimbles faction fall;
Whose censures are mere ignorance in disguise,
The noise of envious fools, that would seem wise.
If Bacons Brazen-head cry -- that will not pass,
Strayt all the little Fops are turned to brass,
And Echo to the braying of that Ass:
Although we take their shapes and senseless sounds,
Lets not be worryd by our own dull Hounds:
Let not their noise that got your Money there,
Deprave your Judgments, and your pleasure here.
Ye men of Sense and Wit, resume your Reign.
They Are honored who by noble Foes are slain;
Such comforts wounded Lovers have who swear,
When their tormenting pains are most severe,
Dam'ee!
It does not vex me to be Clapped by her:
Gad she was handsome, though the sport is dear.
But who in your sight at their mercy lies,
Much like an Eastern Malefactor dies,
Exposed in the Sun to be devoured by flies.
Let Language, Wit and Plot, this Night be safe,
For all our business is to make you laugh.
Persons Represented.
Prospero a Duke, Head-keeper of the Enchanted Castle. Alonzo a Duke, his
mortal Enemy. Quakero Son of Alonzo. Gonzalo a Subject of Alonzos. Antonio his
Friend. Hypolito Infant Duke of Mantua, Innocent and ignorant Hectorio a Pimp.
Miranda the harmless daughters of Prospero. Dorinda the harmless daughters of
Prospero. Stephania a Baud. Beantosser Wenches. Moustrappa Wenches. Drinkallup
Wenches. Ariel a Spirit waiting on Prospero. A Plenipotentiary. Wenches,
Bridewell-Keepers, Spirits, Devils, Masquers, and Prisners
The Scene in LONDON.

ERRATA.
P. 1. for breaking r. beating Doors. P. 6. 1. (...) for o^t. r. (...). P. 10.
l. 23. for (...) r. b^^k. P. 12. l. ult. for it r. spit. P. 32. l. 2. for
galled r. gally'd. l. 8. for Gentleman r. Gentlewoman. P. 49. l. 23. for puts
r. puffs. P. 50. l. 33. after Trapstick. add Alonz. By thy stealers and
Pickers. P. 53. l. 18. for Face r. Lace.

THE New TEMPEST OR THE Enchanted Castle.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A great noise heard of breaking Doors, and breaking Windows, crying a Whore,
a Whore, etc. Enter Beantosser, and Moustrappa. Bean. WHAT a noise they make!


Mous. A roaring noise, we shall have foul weather.


Enter Drinkallup. Drink. The Dogs have us in the Wind, 'twill go hard.


[ Exeunt Beant. and Mous.] Enter Stephania. Stepha. Hectorio! Hectorio!


All. Hectorio! Hectorio! Hectorio!


Enter Hectorio. Hect. Here here Mother, what cheer, what cheer.


Stepha. Never worse, never worse, bar up the Doors, bar up the Doors: Oh!
Oh! [She whistles, Wenches run on and off again.]


Enter Moustrappa. All. Bar up the Doors, bar up the Doors.


Mous. Let Us make all fast enough, and let'm roar the Devils head off.


Steph. Beantosser, Beantosser.


All. Beantosser, Beantosser, Beantosser.


Steph. Why where is this damned deaf flunder mouthed drab?


Enter Beantosser. Bean. Here here, a pox of these full mouthed Fox hounds.


Hect. They hunt devilish hard, I Am affrai'd they will earth us.


Steph. Give Hectorio a dram of the Bottle, the Whey-Blooded Rogue looks as if
his heart were melted into his Breeches.


[ Exeunt Beantossor and Hectorio.] [ Enter Wenches armed with Spitts, Forks,
Tongs, Chamber-Potts, etc. they pass over the stage.] Steph. Bear up, bear up
my brave Amazons, you have born Ten times as many men in your times, beigh my
Girls, stand fast my stout bona Roba's; run, fly, work nimbly, nimbly ye
Queans, or all is lost. [Exeunt all]


[A great noise again.] Enter Hectorio, Alonzo, Gonzalo, Quakero. Alon. Good
friend, stand to thy tackling, and play the Man: where is Mother Stephania.


Hect. Pry'thee old Goat tie up thy Clack, and move thy hands.


Quak. Friend, friend, look thee, bridle thy unruly member -- to wit, thy
tongue.


Hect. Work, work, my heart of Gold.


Quak. Ha, ha, ha, my Father to whom thou spakest so unadvisedly is Duke of
that building which do-eth sustain my Lord Mayors Cattle, Vidicilet, his Dogs.


Hect. Fill the sweating Tub with Stones, and set it against the Door, quick,
quick.

Within -- The Sweating Tub, the Sweating Tub! Stones, Stones!


Quak. He is moreover perpetual Whiffler to the Worshipful company of
Pin-makers, as I my self am.


Hect. Confound thy Father and thy self. [A noise within.] What care these
Roarers for the worshipful Pin-makers.? Silence, and to work, or I Will ram thee
into a Chamber Pot, and throw thee out at Window. [Exeunt all.]


Enter Steph. Bean. Mous. and Drink. Steph. Stir, Wenches, stir, bring out all
the Jourdans full of Water.


All. The Jourdans, the Jourdans, etc.


Bean. Drink. and Mous. run off several ways crying the Iourdans. [ A great
noise within, all crying a Whore, a Whore, a Whore, etc.] Steph. Send a Legion
of Devils down their yelling throats to pluck their lungs out. -- Out ye
bauling Curs, ye ill-bred hounds, here are Whores enough for you all, All, if
you would behave your selves like civil Gentlemen, and come one after another.

She Whistles, Enter Wenches. Down, down, down to the Sellar Windows. --


All. The Sellar Windows, the Sellar Windows. [The Wenches run down the Trap
Door.]


Enter Bean. Mous and Drink. hastily one after another. Bean. Undone, undone,
not one drop of Water in the house.


Mous. With hard labor all their moisture turns into sweat.


Drink. They Are dryer then hung Beef, and almost as black too.


Bean. Your advice, your advice Mother.


Drink. Dispatch, or we are ruined. --


Steph. Get up in the Windows, you musty Queens, make water in their Eyes, and
burn them out, I Am fure you are hot enough. --


Enter Hectorio. Hect. Turn out, turn out all hands to the Back door: is this a
time to prate ye spurr-gald jades, ye over-rid Hackneys. --


Mous. O you huffing Son of a Whore.


Drink. You rotten Jack in a box.


Bean. You foul mouthed Nickumpoop.


Hect. Prate on, prate on, do you hear how it Thunders? -- stand still and be
damned, I Will shift well enough for one.


[The noise renewed.] [ Exit Hectorio.] Steph Turn out, turn out Seditious
mutiners, ye or I Will have ye all flead -- Out, out! [ Exeunt Bean. Mous. and
Drink.]


Enter Gonz. Alon. and Quak. Gonz. More noise and terror then a Tempest at Sea.


Enter Beantosser. Bean. The green Chamber, the green Chamber. [Stephania
whistles, the Wenches come up from the Trapp-door.]


Steph. Aloft, aloft, to the green Chamber, all to the green Chamber -- Aloft,
aloft. -- [ Exeunt Beant. and Wenches.]


Alon. My Honor, my Reputation. --


Quak. Yea! Reputation, Reputation! -- Woo man, ah! ha!


Steph. Reputation! ye crop-ear'd whelps, Reputation! is not my Reputation
dearer to me then your lives, and Souls? Down with the Close stool upon their
heads.

You louzy farandinical Sots, Reputation! I have had Lords -- Lords! thou
whey-bearded Ananias, and then I had a blessing on my endeavors; but this is
justly fallen upon me, for dealing with such zealous Whore-masters, thin-gutted
3 d. Customers -- Out of my sight, and to work, or by the beards of my renowned
Predceestors I Will have you hung out like Wool-sacks to defend my Walls. See if
thou can preach the Rabble to Silence, thou canting Hypocritical Abednego.


Quak. Yea, thou babylonish Whore in grain, thou Harlot of a London dye, thou
shall see the strength of the power of a um -- Thou shall see, I say, look ye
Friends, Brethren and Sisters -- Give heedful attention, and a, and I say a um
-- [A shout within, and dirt thrown in his mouth.] [Exeunt all.]


Enter again Steph. and Bean. Bean. We are gone, we are gone, they are all broke
in the Closet Window,


Enter Hectorio. Hect. Hell, and Devils, they are untiling of the House.


Enter Wenches. Steph. Let off the Bottles of Stepony, they may think they are
Guns.


Bean. Clap up the middle hatch with the Iron spikes.


Hect. Take down the false Stairs.


Enter Moustrappa. Mous. Open the Trap-door, that falls into the Common-shoar.


Enter Drinkallup. Drink. Hang up the tenter Hooks. --


Steph. Set the great Chest against the stair Door. [Stephania Whistles, Enter
Wenches.]


All. To the great Chest, the great Chest.


[ Exeunt all but Stephania.] Hect. within Heave all together, heave Cats,
heave.
Heave Cats, heave -- cheerily, cheerily.

Enter Alonzo. Gonz and Quak. Alon. Gonz. Quak. -- Murder, murder, murder.


Steph. Oh, you obstreperous Woolves, a Rot consume your Windpipes, you are
louder then the rabble.


Alon. O, this base, this cursed business!


Steph. Cursed business, thou invincible Fop, thou Brazen headed Ignoramus --
Have thou a mind to be limbed? one word more, and all the Doors shall fly open:
Cursed business, with a pox to ye.

[She whistles.] Enter Wenches -- And go off again. Come tag-rag-and long-tail,
Old Satin, Taffaty, and Velvet, rouse about, charge 'em briskly, shower the
Coals on their pates. -- He calls Wenching, base cursed business -- Oh you rake
Hells, sons of unknown Fathers.


Enter Beantosser. Bean. Hell take 'em, they clime the Walls like Cats.


Steph. Down with the Tables and Stools upon 'em.


[ Exit Bean.] [The noise renew'd] Enter Hectorio. Hect. Sound a Parle, sound a
Parle, or they will break in upon us -- There Is no hope left.


Steph. A Parle, thou impudent miscreant! false hearted Caytiff I Will rather
like a noble Roman Virago, make my House my Funeral pile.


Hect. All are resolved not to fight a stroke more, sound a Parle but to gain
time.


Steph. To delude the Foe I consent, but never to yield.


[She whistles.] Enter Drink. Bean. and Mous. Sound a Parle, and hang out the
White Flag. [A Horn sounds within, and one passes over the Stage with a Flannel
Peticoat on a Stick: another Horn sounded on the other side.] Hect. Hark, they
answer us.


Steph. Go you Drinkallup, and see what they will demand.


[ Exit Drink. and returns immediately] Drink. Here Is a Plenipotentiary desires
admittance.


Steph. Let him be blinded, and introduced by the Postern -- Casement -- Come
fellow Soldiers, lets sit in State, and receive him with undaunted
Countenances, as blustering Warriors do, though we are like to dye for fear.

A Guard of Wenches Enter. Master of our Ceremonies, introduce the
Plenepotentiary.


[A dirty fellow led in between two Wenches.] Steph. Fellow Soldiers it is a
Maxim in War to treat with our Arms in our hands -- (Guard, deliver us your
Weapons) -- and while we talk of peace to prepare for a Battle; therefore
Guard go you and mend the backs of the Chairs. [Exeunt Guard.]

Plenipotentiary, be not dismayed with the glittering Splendor of our Court,
but boldly deliver what thou have in Charge. --


Plen. My Master, the many-headed-monster-Multitude, to save the great effusion
of Christian Chamberly, will grant you peace on these terms.


Steph. Say on.


Plen. First, they demand the Dominion of the Straights mouth, and all the
Mediterranean Sea -- That every Frigot, Fireship, you have, shall strike, furle
up their sail, and lie by to the least of their Cock-boats, wherever they
meet, and receive a man aboard to search for prohibited Goods, and permit him
to romage fore and often without resistance. --


Stepha Umph. -- My friends, this is very hard.


Plen. Secondly, That all their Vessels shall have and enjoy a free-trade into
and out of all your Ports without paying any Custom. --


Steph. The duties of Importation are my greatest Revenue, and must not be
parted with.


Bean. But though your People pay for import, we will engage to pay them at
going off.


Mous. As we have always done heretofore.


Plen. Lastly, That you re-imburse the charge of the War, pay for the Cure of
the wounded, and the recov'ry of those that have surfeited on your rotten Ling
and Poisonous Oil, and allow Pensions for those that are dismembered -- What
say ye, Peace, or War?


Steph. War.


All. War, War, War.


Steph. Return for answer, that we will rather dye at their Feet, then submit
to such dishonorable Conditions: -- Begone: -- And so she prayed me to tell ye.


Plen. Though you refuse peace, I scorn to carry back my present, -- there.
[Throwes out a bunch of Carrets.]


Drink. We scorn their Courtesies, and their dry toys.


Plen. Are ye so fierce? if the Seige continue, you will Petition for 'em: look
for Fire and Sword -- And so she prayed me to tell you.


[ Exit Plen.] Steph. Arm, Arm, give the word, Arm, Arm.


All. Arm, Arm.


Within. Arm, Arm, Arm, [Exeunt All.]


[The noise of the assault renewed.] Enter Steph. Bean. and Mous. Steph. Many a
brush have I gone through in my time, but never was any so sharp.


Enter Hectorio. Hect. God's Death, our Ammunition's spent, the dear dear
dyet-drink's gone.


Steph. And yet these Canibals, more insatiate then the Sea, are not satisfied
with our best goods; pull up the Harths, and down with the Chimnies.


Exeunt Bean. and Mous. Hect. It Is in vain to strive.


Steph. Thou Cow-hearted cormorant, shall we be all lost for thee?


Hect. No, it is for thy obstinacy, thou insatiable shee-Woolf.


Steph. Rot your Sheeps blood.


Hect. Confound your brutish heart and bacon, face.


Steph. Nounz, stir about, or I Will beat thy brains out with my Bottle.


Hect. One word more, and by the Lord, Harry.


Steph. Thou dare not for thy Blood, thou dare not.


[She Whistles,] Enter all the Wenches. Steph. For shame let not the Army see
our difference, or thy Cowardice. --


Hect. Pull down the House, and bury them in the Ruins: come along boldly, my
dear hearts, follow me, I shall find a time. --


[Exeunt Wenches.] [ Exit Hectorio.] Steph. To be hanged -- I don't doubt it.


Enter Beantosser. Bean. O save the Syring and the Pot of Turpentine-pills for
my sake. -- [ Exit Bean.]


Steph. Save nothing, cut off your Legs and throw at 'em. Out with the
Exchange Woman's Trunk of Perfumed Linen which the Old Knight used to play hey
Gamer Cook in -- Out, out; save nothing. [ Exit Steph.]


Enter Hectorio, and Moustrappa Hect. Fill the old Justices greazy Nightcap
with the Rosary of Beads the Friar pawned here but last Night, and down with
'em.


Mous. I wish they were all Cannon-bullets for their sakes.


[ Exit Hectorio] Enter Stephania, hastily. Steph. Hold, hold, if you throw out
the Beads, they will take us for Papishes, and then there is no Mercy; otherwise we
may still hope for pity because we are all of one Religion.


Enter Hectorio. Hect. Set the Led Cistern against the Door; all hands to the
Cistern, to the Cistern. [Steph. whistles]


Enter all the Wenches. Steph. My Girls, my Daughters.


Hect. Fellow Soldiers, dear hearts now for the last push.


Steph. All hands to the Cistern, away* -- [Exeunt all.]


Enter all pulling at a Rope. Hect. Hoa up; hoa up; cheerily, cheerily, pluck
all together. --


All. Hoa up! hoa up! hoa up!


Enter Steph. whistling. Steph. Down, down, all hands down, they are going to
spring a Mine. [All run down]


Enter Beantosser, and Moustrappa. Bean. There Is a fresh Brigade of sturdy
Bloodhounds come from the Butcher-row.


Mous. The Bar of the Door's broke. --


[ Exeunt Bean. and Mous.] Steph. Bar it with the Constables staff that lay
here last Night.


Enter Drinkallup. Drink. O Mother, save your self, save your self.


Steph. Must our mouths be cold then? [She whistles.]


Enter Hectorio. Hect. All Is lost, all is lost. -- [ Exit Drink.]


[ Enter Bean. and Mous. Bean. They break in like a full Sea upon us.


Mous. O Mother, Mother, shift for your self.


Steph: Name not me: the Justices, and Jaylors, are my very good Friends, and
Customers.


All. Ah, there is no trust to Friends now.


Steph. If I dye, I dye, but I pity your tender backs, and grieve for the
present want all these young Gallants will have of so many excellent Beauties.
[ Exeunt Hect. Bean. Mous. and Drink. and return presently.]


Hect. Yet, yet, you may 'scape perhaps.


Bean. The poor hearts fight as if they were all Scanderbegs.]


Mous. Yet, shift Mother in two minutes, 'twil be too late.


Steph. No, here will I stay, and like a Phaenix, perish in my Nest, the Fates
so Decree.


Bean. Then let us among 'em, and dye all together, or break through. --


All. Agreed, agreed. [Exeunt all.]


A great noise of fighting, crying Fire, Murder, etc. The Rabble, and Wenches
enter fighting. It Rains Fire, Apples, Nuts. -- A Constable and Watch enter,
and drive all off. Act. I. Scene II.
[ The Scene changed to Bridewell.] Enter Prospero, and Miranda. Pros. MIranda,
where is your Sister?


Mir. I left her on the Dust-Cart-top, gaping after the huge noise that went
by. --


Pros. It was a dreadful show.


Mir. Oh woe, and alas, ho, ho, ho! I Am glad I did not see it though.


Pros. Hold in thy breath, and tell thy Virtuous Body, there is no harm down,
they are all reserved for thine, and thy Sister Dorindas private use.


Mir. And shall we have 'em all, a-ha! that will be fine i'fads; but if you
don't keep'em close, pray Father, we shall never have 'em long to our selves
pray; for now every Gentlewoman runs huckstring to Market, the youth are bought
up so fast; that poor Publicans are almost starved, so they are so.


Pros. Leave that to my Fatherly Care.


Mir. And shall we have 'em all, ha, ha, he! O good dear hau, how the Citizens
Wives will curse us. --


Pros. Miranda, you must now leave this Tom-rigging, and learn to behave your
self with a grandeur and state, befitting your illustrious Birth and Quality.
-- Thy Father, Miranda, was 50 years ago a man of great power, Duke of my Lord
Mayors Doggkennel. --


Mir. O lo, why Father, Father, are not I Miranda Whiffe, sooth, and arn't you
Prospero Whiffe, sooth, Keeper of Bridewell, my Father?


Pros. Thy Mother was all Mettle. -- As true as Steel, as right's my Leg, and
she said thou were my Daughter; can thou remember when thou were Born, sure
thou can not, for then thou were but three days old.


Mir. I'fads, I do remember it Father, as well as 'twere but yesterday.


Pros. Then scratch thy tenacious Poll, and tell me what thou find backward
in the misty black and bottomless Pit of time.


Mir. Pray Father had I not Four, or Five Women waiting upon top of me, at my
Mothers groaning, pray?


Pros. Thou had, and more Miranda, for then I had a Tub of humming stuff
would make a Cat speak.


Mir. O Gemine! Father how came we hither?


Pros. While I despising mean, and worldly business, as mis-becoming my grave
Place, Quality, did for the bett'ring of my mind, apply my self, to the secret
and laudable study of Nine-pins, Shovel-board and Pigeon-holes -- do thou
give eat Infant*


Mir. I do, most Prudent Sir.


Pros. My Brother, to whom I left the manage of my weighty state, having
learned the mysterious Craft of coupling Dogs, and of untying them; and by
strict Observation of their jilting carriage, found the time when Venus,
Countess, Lady, Beauty, and the rest of my she subjects, were to be obliged, by
full allowance of their sports, soon grew too Popular, stole the hearts of my
currish Vassals, and so became the Ivy-leaf, which covered my Princely Issue,
and sucked out all my Juice. Do observe me Child?


Mir. Yes, forsooth Father, this story would cure Kib'd-heels.


Pros. This Miscreant, so dry he was for sway, betrayed me to Alonzo, Duke of
Newgate; and in a stormy and dreadful Night opened my Kenell Gates, and forced
me thence with thy young Sister, and thy howling self.


Mir. Father! did they kill us then, pray Father?


Pros. Near the Kenell they dared not for the love my dogged Subject bore me.
-- In short to Newgate we were carried, -- And thence all in a Cart, without a
covering, or a Pad of Straw, to Hyde Park-corner, we were hurried there on the
stubbed Carkase of a Leafeless Tree, they hoysted us aloft to pipe to winds,
whose murmuring pity whistling back again, did seem to show us cursed kindness.


Mir. O poor Father! -- But whereof, how did we 'scape Father?


Pros. Some Friends we had, and some Money, which gaind the assistance of a
great man called Gregoria Dunn', appointed master of that black design: now
luck begins to turn. -- But ask no more; I see thou grow'st pinck-ey'd, go in,
and let the Nurse lay thee to sleep.


Mir. And shall she give me some Bread and Butter, Father.


Pros. Ay, my Child, -- Go in. -- [ Exit Miranda.] So she is fast. -- Ariel,
what ho my Ariel?


Enter Ariel flying down. Ari. Hayl most potent Master, I come to serve thy
pleasure Be it to lie, swear, steal, pick pockets, or cerep in at Windows --


Pros. How did thou perform the last task I set the?


Ari. I gathered the Rabble together, showed them the Bawdy House, told them
they used to kill Prentices, and make mutton pyes of 'em -- I led them to the
Windows, Doors, backward, forward, now to the Sellar, now to the House top --
Then I ran and called the Constable, who came just as the Rabble broke in, and
the defendants were leaping from the Balcony, like Sailors from a sinking Ship.
The Duke and his Trayn I clapped into a Coach.


Pros. Are they all taken and safe?


Ari. All safe in several parts of this thy enchanted Castle of Bridewel, and
not a hair of 'em lost.


Pros. It Was bravely done my Ariel! What Is a Clock?


Ari. Great Tom already has struck ten:
Now blessed are Women that have men,
To tell fine tale, and warm cold feet,
While lonely lass lies gnawing sheet.

Pros. We have much to do e're morning come: follow me, i will instruct thee
within.
Before the gorgeous Sun upon* House top does Sneer,
The Laud knows what is to be done, the Laud knows where.

Exeunt. The End of the First Act.
Act. II.
Scene. I.
Enter Miranda and Dorinda. Dor. OH Sister sister, what have I seen pray?


Mir. Some rare sight I warrant.


Dor. From yonder dust-cart-top, as I star'd upon the noise, I thought it had
been fighting, but at last I saw a huge Creature, for ought I know.


Mir. O whereof you mean the Coach.


Dor. Coach! i'fads, I thought it had been a Fish, I Am sure it was alive, and
it ran roaring along, and all the People ran away from it for fear it should
eat 'em.


Mir. O lo, O lo Sister, O lo! -- ha ha he --


Dor. Why do you laugh at one Sister, indeed it had eaten men, for just by our
gate it stood still and opened a great Mouth in the belly of it, and it 'em out
all whole:


Mir. Oh but Sister, whereof I can tell you news pray, my Father told me in
that Creature was that thing called Husband, and we should see it shortly and
have it pray, in a Civil way.


Dor. Husband, what is that?


Mir. Why that is a thing like a man (for ought I know) with a great pair of
Horns upon his head, and my father said 'twas made for Women, look ye.


Dor. What must we ride to water upon it, sister?


Mir. No, no, it must be our slave, and give us Golden Clothes Pray, that other
men may lie with us in a Civil way, and then it must Father our Children and
keep them.


Dor. And when we are so Old and Ugly, that no body else will lie with us, must
it lie with us it self?


Mir. Ay that it must Sister.


Dor. You see my Father gets men to lie with us, is not he a Husband then?


Mir. No, you see he has no Horns.


Dor. May be he sheds 'em like a Buck, or puts 'em in his pocket like a rich
Citizen, because he will not lie with us himself when he can get no body else.


Mir. Fie Sister; no! Fathers and Mothers are kinder and wiser now then they
were heretofore look ye; for when they see their Daughters will be modish and
kind, they provide 'em Gallants themselves to lie with them.


Dor. But if we must take those our careful Parents get, only for profit, it is
as bad as marrying.


Mir. They do it only 'till they get us Husbands to ease them of the trouble.


Dor. O whereof Sister, my Father may spare himself of that trouble, for I am
old enough to shift for my self in a civil way, for I was 13. last quarter
Sessions, ay and wise enough too.


Mir. So we all think i'vads, but they can get us Coaches and Settlements,
whereof if we were left to our selves, we should creep into holes, and yet
nothing but Bastards.


Dor. If our fathers don't get us Husbands quickly, we will make him lie with us
himself, shall we sister?


Mir. Ay ay, that we will, but lets go in now, He Is about something I long to
see the end of, come lets not despair, the flesh is strong.


Dor. O for a Husband sister how I long.


Exeunt Miranda and Dorinda. Act. II. Scene. II.
Enter Alonzo, and Gonzalo affrighted. Alon. GOnzalo Oh -- my lodging is
enchanted.

Gone. Mine with a Devil and like your Grace is haunted,
Which plays more tricks then e're the witch my Aunt did.

Alon. First doleful groans at both my ears were lugging.
Then whistling voice like wind in empty muggin.

Gone. Shrieks as of switcheld lass I heard, and anon
Sighs of enchanted ghost like roaring Canon.

Alon. With Princely hoof I knocked, and noise did follow,
By which I find O, Heavens! the House is hollow,
My bed of state --

Gone. Of straw you mean -- now good my Lord do not lie.

Alon. Millions of devils moved, black, white, and motley,
Six legs a piece, sharp claws.

Gone. Aye mine were so Sir,
Each tooth a needle, and each eye a saucer.
They stole my shoes, and in a hole I found 'em.
The white possessed, black Armies did surround 'em,
Feircely the black attaqu'd, and white defended,
Horror and death in every Seam attended.
The nimble black like hopping Devils ventured,
Mounted the works, and on the half moon entered.
But here the white serty'd as thick as sawdust,
And beat them off.
Then marched up the red listed Reformadoes,
But what they did I dare not tell for fear.

Alon. Sage matrons say, where such kind Foes appear,
The Lord of the pasture shall not dye that year.

Gone. Unless he is eaten out --

Alon. On large deal board by prudent vermin chosen,
Two Armies more were fighting for my hosen.
If I but offer composition for my sock,
All leave the field, and to my Carcass flock.
No Fairy pinches half so close, nor no Witch.

Gone. It Is worse then nettle, sting of Wasp, or Cowitch.

Alonzo pulls a Louse out of his neck Alon. Treason treason, O here is one of
the white devils, treason treason, my guard my guard, Oh ho hoe.

Fortune has cheated me of all, pize on her,
I am no Duke now, but a poor Prisoner.

A noise of horrid Instruments. Gone. Oh what horrid noise is this assaults our
ears.

Devils rise and Sing. 1 De. Where be those boys,
That make such a noise,
And will not eat their bread and butter?

2 De. Without all doubt.
The are hereabout,
We Will teach 'em to make such a Clutter.

3 De. Who are the ringleaders, who rules the Boast?

4 De. Alonzo the Duke, and another old Toast.

1 De. We Will put water in their porridge,
And straw in their beds,

2 De. Shoes on their feet, and a Comb in their heads.

Chorus. We Will put etc.
And straw etc.
Shoes etc.

Alon. O save me, save me, Gonzalo

Gone. I would give him the best member I have, to save my self.

Alon. These great He Devils will hearken to no such Composition.

The Devils Sing again. 1 De. Rogues that from their Liquor shrink,
Shall scorch to death for want of drink.

2 Dev. And who with false glass good fellows betray,

3 Dev. And tipple small beer in stead of their wine,

4 Dev. Then bubble their poor weak brothers at play,
To the whip and the stocks we will confine.

1 Dev. So poor, so poor, they still shall remain;
Mirth, or good Wine, they shall never have again,
Nor never, oh never, be eased of their pain.

Chorus. So poor, etc. --
Mirth --
Nor never --

Gonz. Never, oh never, eat Custard again!
Oh murdering Sentence -- Oh, ho, ho!

Alonz. Never, never -- O Inhumane Correction!
Oh, they begin again -- Oh. --

The Devils Sing. 1 Dev. Who are the pillars of the wenching Trade?

2 Dev. The zealous professor, and brisk City blade.

3 Dev. The Gallants, and Bullies,
Do often grow poor, and bare, and bare.

4 Dev. But these Canters, and close City Cullios
Are never without Money, or Ware.

1 Dev. What Slave permits
Such Hypocrites
In peace to taste of all our sweets?

2 Dev. In the midst of their joys, they discoveries fear,

3 Dev. And their Wives, if they have any, shall make the score clear.

4 Dev. With Claps, and with Duns, we torment them all day,
And at night we take them and their Doxies away.

Chorus. With Claps etc. --
And at night etc. --

Alon. Pox of the Devil, it is too true, they did take our Doxies away.


Gone. Ay, and I would procure 'em a whole Regiment, for my Ransom.


Alon. Alas, they were but Oysters before their meal; besides they were so
rotten, they would melt in their mouths, all their bones were turned to
gristle: We are kep'd for the standing Dish.


Gone. Nay, then I am safe enough, for I have no more standing Dish, then a
post, my hearts no bigger then a Pins-head.


Alon. My poor Boy Quakero's, gone too, Oh, ho, ho!

The Devils Sing. 1 Dev. Say, say,
Shall we take up these Rogues, and Carry them away,
With a tory, rory, Tory, rory, rory, Red-Coats?

2 Dev. Aye, aye.

3 Dev. Aye, aye.

4 Dev. Aye, aye.

1 Dev. Aye, aye.

Chorus. With a Tory, rory, Tory, rory, rory, rory.

2 Dev. No, No,
'Till we show them their Crimes, let them stay.
With a Tory, rory, Tory, rory, rantum, scantum.

3 Dev. Let 'em stay.

4 Dev. Let 'em stay.

1 Dev. Let 'em stay.

2 Dev. Let 'em stay.

Chorus. With a Tory, rory, Tory, rory, rory, rory.

1 Dev. Cabbage is windy, and Mustard is strong,
But a Lass with a wide Mouth, and a liquorish Tongue.
Will give thee the Palsy, though never so young.
Then first let their Pride, let their Pride come along.

Chorus. Cabbage. --
But a Lass --
Will give --
Then first --

Enter Pride, represented by a Painted, gaudy Woman, with a Glass in her hand.
She Sings. Pride. Lo here, here is Pride, that first lest them aside,
An honest true Trojan, and then she died.

Enter Fraud, a female Quaker Sings. Fraud. With upright look, and speech
sincere,
In public, I a Saint appear.
But in private I put out the light,
And I serve for a Whore, or a Baud.
I have taught them to cheat, Swear, and Fight,
For by Yea, and by Nay, I am Fraud.

Enter Rapine, dressed like a Padder, with a Pistole in his hand. Sings. Rapine.
Send out a Scout
To yonder Hill.
Stand, and deliver.
You dog, must I wait.
I Am thy fate:
Dispatch, or I Will send thee to Hell.
From Fraud, they thus proceed to force.
And then I Rapine, guide their Course.

Enter Murder. A man dressed all in Red, with two Bloody Daggers in his hands,
and his Face and Hands stained with blood. Sings. Murder. Wake Duncan! would
thou could.
Disguised with blood, I lead them on,
Until to Murder they arrive.
Then to the Gallows they run.
Needs must they go, whom the Devils drive.
1 Devil Sings. Alas poor Mortals.
They gape like the Earth, in the Dogg-dayes.
What a rare life the Frogg has?
Drawer, Drawer.

Dev. Anon, Anon.

1 Dev. Give 'em drink, or they are gone,
Ever their torment's began.
Pour, pour, pour, pour.
Hark, hark, how it hisses,
See, see, how it smoaks:
Who refuses such Liquor as this is,
May he pine, may he pine, may he pine
'Till he choakes.

Chorus. Hearks, etc.

The Devils sing, and Dance round Alonzo, and Gonzalo. Chorus. Around, around.
Around, around, around.
Let Us sing, and tear the ground,
There Is no such sport below,
Where sinful mortals go.

[Exeunt all the Devils.] Gonz. Oh, oh, are you alive my Lord Duke.

Alon. I cannot tell, Ah, ha, -- Feel me, feel me, what a drench they gave us,
sure 'twas Spirit of Brimstone. -- I am all in a flame.


Gonz. Their design, is to roast us as some do Geese, by putting a hot Iron in
their bellies, I begin to drip, they may make a Sop in the Pan already.


Alon. Anon they will cut off slivers from us, as they did from the whole Ox, in
St. James's Fair.


Gonz. Oh, it is intolerable: methinks I hear a great she Devil, call for
Groats worth of the Crispe of my Countenance. -- They are all for Gristle.


Alon. Another cries Six peny-worth of the brown, with Gravy, Shalot, and
Pepper, Oh there is a Collop gone!


Gone. Shalot, and Pepper, was well though of, for if I am not well seasoned,
there is no eating of me.


Alon. Indeed old Lord, you have a kind of Ven'zon haugou.


Gone. How can it be otherwise, my Lord, when I Am roasted with the guts in my
belly?


Alon. If Shat'lin, or Locket had us, what Olio's, Raggous, and Pottages, would
they make?


Gone. So new a Dish never came from France, they would get the Devil and all by
us.


Alon. We should out-stink French Cheese.


Gone. O help help, here is Raw-head and Bloody bones, the Master Cook of Hell.
[A noise of horrid Music; a Devil arises with a Crown of Fire.] Sings. Arise,
arise, ye Subterranean Feinds,
Come claw the backs, of guilty hinds:
And all ye filthy Drabs, and Harlots rise,
Which use to infect the Earth with Puddings, and hot Pies;
Rise ye who can devouring glasses frame,
By which Wines pass to the hollow Womb, and Brain;
Engender Head-akes, make bold elbows shake;
Estates to Pimples, and to deserts turn.
And you whose greedy flames man's very entrals burn,
Ye ramping queans, who rattling Coaches take,
Though you have been fluxed 'till Head and Body shake.
Come Clap these Wreches 'till their parts do swell:
Let Nature never make them well.
Cause Legs, and Arms to pine, cause loss of hair,
Then make them howl with Anguish, and sad groans.
Rise and obey, rise and obey, Raw head and bloody bones.
[Exit Devils] Devils arise with Bellows, and blow Alonzo, and Gonzalo, off the
Stage.


A Dance. The End of the Second Act.
Act III.
Scene I.
Enter Stephania, with a Pitcher, Beantosser, and Moustrappa, all drunk. Steph.
THere was a noble Marquess,
Took up his Maidens carcass,
Fast by the Fire side.
A very homely Damsel,
Her lips were soft as Lambs wool,
Or marrow Pasty-fri'd.
This is but a kind of a doleful Tune, to beat Hemp to, but hanged lets squeeze
the Picher, here is to thee my doughty Amazon.


Bean. Right reverend Trot-up-and-down, I Will do thee reason here Moustrappa.


Steph. Come bouze it about, and a fico for the Justice. Fortunes a Whore, and
will be kind to her Sisters.


Mous. Of the first Five men, we met Three were John's, and Four of those were
Cukolds, -- Which is a good sign, and so squeez the juice. --


Bean. A strong point of Consolation, let me kiss thee for that, thou pretty,
pocky, well favored Crack.


Sing. Steph. Fill the Dish Molly,
And think of a Cully.
Here Is a health to the best.
Give us more Drink, a Surgeon that is jelly.
And a pox take the rest.
Molly fill.
We cry still,
Fill again, and drink round.
'Till we empty the Pitcher, and fill up the Crown.

Bean. Hold, hold, our Sister is grown hollow hearted, and like a jilting
Queen, forsakes us in our Tribulation.


Mous. It Is even what I looked for, -- The last Dish came as slow, and frothy,
as the last words of a declaring Quaker.


Bean. When the Spirit sinks down his Throat, and rattles like the departing
Water in a leaky Pump.


Steph. Blame her not, you here she is sound still, ha! will thou so? Knocks
the Pitcher. Why that's very fair, -- She says, she will do w'ye for a Groat a
time, 'till you are not able to stand: I Will be hanged if the worst Jugg in
Town, will do cheaper.


Bean. Look Moustrappa Weeps, -- Hang losses, though our Dancing Schools
ruined, we have saved our Instruments: And as ong as Men drink, and Women
paint, we shall still jog on.


Steph. There are more of our Dulcimers thump'd every Night in Covent Garden,
then there are Ghittars scraped in a Week, in Madrid; therefore I say, staunch
thou false hearted misbeleiving Jewes-Trump, do not many industrious Females
live well by bidding Gentlemen welcome to Town, singing at their Chamber doors?


Bean. And trucking their English small Wares, for French Toys.


Mous. O this was a dreadful bout for poor Moustrappa. In robbing me, they
pillaged six Brokers: ruind my Credit and quite killed my old dealer, honest
Jack the Mercer; for just as I had brought his Body to such a state, that none
else would touch him so that I could set my own rates, they took me from him;
the French Farendine, he gave me for a Gown is gone too. -- But let the World
rub, when it is at worst 'twill mend.


Bean. The devil take thee, for putting me in mind of my losses: hang me if I
can forbear weeping too.


Steph. Then thou art in danger of drowning for the water's above thy mouth,
and there is no passage by the Nose, for the bridge was down long ago; and so
she prayed me to tell ye.


Bean. My friend is a brisk French Merchant, I knew him a Tailors Trotter: but
from 3 Ounces of Jessimy-butter, half a Pound of Powder, and 6 pair of
Jessimy-Gloves, by cheating the King of his Customs, and his fellow Subjects
of their Money, he is come to his beaten Farendine Suit every day: had not this
befallen me, I had reduced him to his first being, and I had hazarded the
saving of his Soul, by the ruin of body, and estate. -- But he is but
repreiv'd, -- the pox will take him, for he is a Termagant at laced Mutton.


Steph. Mischief light on ye both, for minding me of my losses; there was
scarce a Manchild in Town, gentle, or simple, from Fifteen to Threescore, that
did not pay me Tribute. -- When I walked the Streets, the Shopkeepers bowed,
the Prentices winked; If five, or six Gallants stood in the way, Lord what
rustling and cringing was there to Madam Stephania? -- Aunt, cries one, how
does my little Niece? -- The Aunt, and the Niece, may both be damned, for any
thing you care to please: me he slips a Guinny. When shall we cut up the Giblet
Pie? cries another. -- Go you are a wag, cry I: there is half a Piece. Says a
third, is there never a fresh Runlet tap'd? yes quoth I, but you shall be
hanged e're you lick your lips with it; and so she praid me to tell ye: still
something's coming, for every now and then slips in a close thriving Tradesman,
look ye Mrs. quoth he, I do not use these things, but the case is thus, I Will be
at a word, I want a Wench; give me good sound ware, here is your Money, ready
Money: I will not build Sconees, and bilk you, as your Gentlemen Bullies do, let
me have weight and measure, one words as good as a thousand. Well quoth I, put
your business into my hand, I Will use a Conscience, aye, and I did too, for as I
hope for freedom; sometimes I have hardly got 8 d. in the Shilling. But such
were sure Customers, they never left me for fear of discovery. Oh! I could tell
you such stories of Vestry-men, and Burgesses, as would make the Bells ring
backwards, in faith, -- Me, and my business, was the whole talk of the Town,
but all was kep'd secret, not a word mentioned, unless it were in some
Coffee-house, or the Streets. -- But now they all forsake me -- but 'twill rub
out when it is dry, and so I squeeze. --


Sing. Tough Hemp must we beat?
Dry Bread must we eat,
And be bumbled, and jumbl'd, and grumbl'd at too, too, too.
And drink nothing, but Wat, Wat, Water that is cold?
Then Harry, and Mary, be merry and cheery, as long's we can do, do, do.
And drive away sorrow, until we are old.
Come bouze it about, and lets squeeze out the Pitcher.
He Is a Rogue that stands out, and shall never be the Richer.
Bean. Here Is Ten go downs upon Re. Moustrappa.


Mous. Put rem to it or I renounce thee.


Bean. Renounce me Puss, not pledge me, thou salt Suburbian Hackney, not pledge
me.


Mous. Well Mrs. Beantosser, I hant stood three years at Livery, and been hyr'd
for 6 d. a side on Holy days* by Chimny-Sweepers, and Cobblers 'Prentices, I
hant so. --


Bean. Who has Mrs. Gillian flirt! Mrs. To and again, who has?


Mous. I name no body, but touch a galled Horse, and hell wince.


Bean. But I know who has been taken up in the common, and rode so many heats
that they got the French, fashions that was even your own sweet Monkey face, I
scorn to go behind your crooked back to tell you so.


Steph. Fight Dog, fight Bear, still here is the juice of life.


Mous. I never danced naked at the French house for Mild-Six- pences, goody
Lerry-come-twang.


Steph. Out, out, that is old, that is old.


Bean. Nor I never walked the Streets at Night, stark naked in a Buckram Suit,
trimmed with black Ribons at the Codpeice, Mrs. Gincrack, Mrs. Nimble-go-through.


Steph. No, no, that thou did not old Tru-peny, that was the Tailors Wife, --
but it is old too. --


Bean. Who dressed her self in man's cloahes to commit with another Woman's
Husband under his natural Wifes nose, not you?


Mous. Who goes every Night upon Water to see men swim on their backs, and show
beastly triks, not Beantosser, no?


Bean. Who uses to be drunk at Tavernes tear her friends Wigs, and then give
all the Money, she has for a frisk with the Drawer, not Mrs. Betty Moustrappa?


Mous. Who storms the Fort in private with a Leathern Gun.


Bean. Go you are a mean spirited Crack, to be kep'd by a Club of Prentices: and
so she praid me to tell ye.


Mous. It Is better to receive small ware then give broad Gold, as hou do
like a silly Trapes.


Bean. The foul names thy own, and I Will dash it down thy Throat.


Mous. Help, help, murder, she will murder me.


Steph. Hold, hold, hold, keep the Kings Peace, I say keep the Peace, do you
not tremble to use such bug words, if any body should hear you it would bring a
scandal on the house, and make 'em think us Whores, Restore her nose
Moustrappa, and you Beantosser, give back her Eyebrows: I say squeeze the
juice, and let acts of Hostility cease, I was governaunt at home, and I will be
justice of Peace here.


Bean. I will have no Justice. --


Steph. Beantosser be orderly, and thou shall be my Clerk.


Mous. No private bribery to Corrupt Justice, and to show that I desire all
things may he done without favor or selfishness, let Beantosser be hanged, and
give me her clothes, and so I squeeze.


Bean. Justice, an't please your Worship, I Will swear the peace against her.


Steph. Bear back, bear back, good People don't press upon the Court. --
Constable stand by me, and go fetch the offender before me.


Bean. I command thee to come before my Lord Justice. No -- good people will ye
aid and assist me. -- We are resolved to assist Mr. Constable Beantosser to the
death. -- La you there now.


Mous. The Justice is an Ass, the Constable a Sheepshead, and all the good
People a Whore, and a Baud: and so she prayed me to tell ye.


Bean. Grant me a humming Warrant to compel her to come before you volens
nolens of her own accord.


Steph. How, how, thou art an evil Counselor, and a Traitor; thou seek to
deprive me of my honorable Employment by force quoth'a, no, some wiser then
some: I am a Justice of peace, and must keep the peace. But if I grant a
Warrant to compel, I break the Peace. If she comes, she comes, all must be done
in a peaceful way: Volens nolens quoth'a.


Bean. Right Worshipful, it is a common way to grant a Warrant.


Steph. Ay, ay, it is so common that we Magistrates are all the worse for it, it
makes justice so cheap that no People of fashion care for using any.


Bean. An't please your Worship,


Steph. Please me, and please thy self, I say still.


Bean. To accept this small present?


Steph. Hay! more Plots, how dare thou corrupt Justice, thou Treacherous
Strumpet! devour the bowels that gave thee Suck? Now do I know she wants
Justice, because she would buy it -- Clerk, take up the Bribery, and give it to
the poor: since my Clerk is absent I will vouchsafe to do it my self. -- But
did this audacious Tatter-de-mallion declare with her own Corporal voice, that
she would not come before us?


Mous. I did, and I do again send thee word by my self, that thou shall come
before me, -- If thou will not, I command thee to stay there, -- and so I
squeeze.


Steph. Does the Rebel send word, her self being present, that she will not
appear? -- it stands not with our high place to put up such affronts. --
Head-Constable, knock her down, and keep the Peace. Bean. and Moust. fight.


Steph. So now the whole Courts in an uproar, fight, 'till the Devil part you.
-- Hold, hold, fall off, and unite against the common Enemy.


Enter Hectorio, and Drinkallup, drunk and Singing. Drink. Francky, was his
name a,
And Francky was his name a;
His Beard was black, and his Gills were Red,
And his Bill was all of the same a.
With weapon full sharp, he fought 'till he was dead,
With a Heycock of the game a,
And Francky was his name a,
And with weapon etc.

Hect. Francky's dead, and gone a,
Poor Franchy's dead, and gone a:
Thy brows are black, and thy lips are Red,
And thy bellies soft as the down a.
Let me be thy Worm, and at every turn,
I will tickle thy flesh, and bone a.
Then prithee cease they moan a,
Since Francky's dead, and gone a.
Let me etc. --

Steph. Silence in the Court, to keep a sound Peace, I make you both my
High-Constables of Westminister.


Bean. Agreed, agreed.


Mous. Agreed, agreed.


Steph. Then by Virtue of my Warrant, which shall be made when we are at
leisure, bring those disturbers of the Peace before me.


Bean. Woman, leave thy babbling, and come before the Justice.


Mous. Hectorio, be uncovered in the Court, and obey the Officers.


Hect. What Court? what Officers?


Bean. Why Stephania is Justice of Whorum, and we are both Head-Constables.


Hect. Then Officers, look to your Throats, for there will be above Ten
thousand up in Arms to Night. Sings. -- And their bellies soft as the down a.


Steph. He has confessed, and shall be hanged 'till he is dead. Come thou
Rake-hell, villain, dog, where are they, what is their design, who leads 'em on,
who brings 'em off, make his Mittimus, before he answers, and send him to
Tyburn.


Hect. Old touch and go, why so hasty? -- My Lord Bacchus leads 'em on: my Lady
Venus brings 'em off: their design is to rise up in their Beds, at midnight, to
stab all the Women, and be head all the Virgins they Catch.


Drink. Sings -- With a Hey-cock of the game a.


Bean. O inhumane Canibals!


Mous. Let 'em do their worst, the Women will be hard enough for 'em, man to
man.


Steph. And I believe the Virgins had notice of their design, for there is not
one left in my Liberties: Head-constables, dispatch this Westminster Wedding, I
say, tie 'em up.


Bean. Will Not your Worship examine the Woman?


Steph. I say, take her away, shes a Pick-pocket I know, by her laced Shoes:
besides, hark ye, she is a Witch, she carries an enchanted Ring about her which
turns Rich men to beggars, and makes an Ass of a Justice of Peace.


Drink. Gentlemen of the Jury, this Villain is no honester then he should be,
he robbed me of a dozen of precious Turpentine guilt Nutmegs, and a Pewter
Squirt.


Hect. Which is flat felony, for that is the Iron work to her Plough, without
which it must stand still, and her Familiars must starve: and so she prayed me
to tell ye.


Drink. But because the old Rogue is a true friend to the Chuck-office, I care
not much if I save him, therefore you may bring in the Felony, Manslaughter.


Hect. Gentlemen, I am a Witness for the King, and so lets squeeze all round.


Mous. Art thou her Cozen after the flesh?


Drink No, he is my Husband's Brother, for they tumbled both in one Belly.


Bean. Then thy Husband has a whole Legion of Brothers, for half the Town have
tumbled in the same place: and so she prayed me to tell ye.


Steph. Woman, put me in good Bail, or take her away Jailer.


Hect. Hold, hold, what Bail do thou demand?


Steph. Two substantial Citizens, Aldermens fellows, or common Council men,
but no Cuckolds.


Drink. No Cuckolds, Jailer take me away, -- hold, hark you, If you will take a
Hundred that are Cuckolds, by the help of my friends here they shall be
produced presently. -- Nay don't bob down your heads, I did but try him.


Steph. No, no! no Cuckolds.


Hect. This is flat Tyrany, thou may as well demand a Tribute of Maiden-heads
in the Teens: but Miracles are ceased.


Steph. What is this notorious talking Rogue in for?


Mous. For Robbing of the Vestry.


Steph. How Sirrah, who made you a Churchwarden?


Mous. It Is but a Vestry matter, and may be agreed at the next Tavern.


Bean. Who will pay Scot and lot, as they say, and serve in all under Offices
of trouble, if every Rascal shall usurp that very Office, where they may reward
themselves?


Steph. Ay, without Authority, or paying a farthing for it, when it is well known
substantial Housekeepers have given hundreds or't.


Bean. Yes, and thrived upon it too, with a blessing on their pious endeavors.


Steph. Head Constables take 'em away to Limbo.


Hect. We defy thee, and thy Head-Constables, to mortal battle.


Steph. Then blood will ensue: and so she prayed me to tell ye. -- Sound a
charge, and keep the Peace.


Music plays, they dance, and Exeunt. Scene. II. Act. III.
Enter Ariel, and Quakero. Ariel Sings. FOllow me, and follow me, hey jolly
Robin.
The Moon shines bright,
And Women are light,
And most men had rather eat then fight.
Then leave off your Coging.
And follow me, a follow me hey jolly Robin.
Quak. Four corners on my bed,
Four beauties therely spread.
If any evil come to me,
O goodness sweet deliver me.
Blessed be thanked, it is now again departed; this Charm I learned in the
days of my Paganis-me, before I attained to the inworking and the
bowel-yernings of the outgoing of the over-flowings; but now that I am mounted
into the Saddle, and exalted to the House top, and lifted on the sounding Tub
of reformation, I am above the Fruit-mongers of the hard Streets of
stony-heartedness: and I am above thee Satan -- ha it comes again.

Four corners on my bed.
Ariel Sings. Turn thy Stocking, and tie thy Shoe hard.
Thy mouth being washed, and wiped thy beard.
Come away, come lets be jogging.
Bo, bo, bo, bo,
Hark, hark, how the Bettern bellows
Now is the time for good fellows.
To it -- to it -- to it -- to it.
The Citizens Wife.
Leads a merry, merry life,
While her Husband at home does grunt and groan.
Whoo whoo oo oo oo -- whoo ooo oo.
Alas poor man he is sick of the yellowes.
Cuckoe, cuckoe.
Hark, hark, what the little birds tells us.
Cuckoe, cuckoe, cuckoe.

Quak. Torment me no more thou Hobgoblin, thou Robin-good-fellow, thou Will
with a wisp, thou Spright, thou Fairy, thou, thou nothing, thou something --
ha, what should this be, assuredly here has been some Crouder slain against
his consent, or murdered wrongfully, or else it is the Soul of some profane
Singing-man that rejoices and gibeth at the death of the Duke my father, Oh!
O! O! it comes again.

Four corners on my bed.
Four beauties --
Ariel Sings. Youth, youth of mortal race, give ear,
Thy Daddies dead, thy Daddies dead.
To Stocks his feet, to Pillory his Ear,
To whip of thong his flesh is ay turned;
And tough battoon does thump his bone.
O hone, O hone, O hone, O hone.
Then little youth Nandy.
Drink Ale and Brandy.
His knell is hourly rung on his back.
Hark now I hear it, thwick, thwick, thwack,
Thwick etc. -- thwack.

Quak. This doleful madrigal says my Father is in Limbo, that is Mortus est,
that is, he is dead, that is, he is departed, he is gone, he is fled, he is no
more; He is, he is, I say, he is, that is, he is not.

His feet Stock Fish, his ears Pilchards, his flesh
Thornback, and Tough Battoon does thump his bone.
O hone, O hone, O hone, O hone.
Friend Quakero, this is no mortal business, though thou have done Satan right
noteable service in perverting many, believe him not, I say believe him not:
have thou forgot how it was resolved in a full dispute, where a friend, even
Guly Penno, declared that Satan was a liar, nay thou have not forgot, believe
him not, yet I will go to find out and be satisfied in the truth of the lie.


Ariel. Thwick, thwick, thwick, etc. Exit Ariel.


Quak. Hark, it is there again, it luggeth me by the Ears, even as a Swine is
lugged by a Mastiffe-dog: or as one of your wicked Idolatrous Misses is led by
the rattling of a guilt Coach, or as, as I say, or as ah ha em, or as ah a aa.

So much for this time. Exit Quakero.


The End of the Third Act.
Act IV.
Scene. I.
Enter Prospero, and Ariel. Prospero eating a piece of Bread and Butter. Pros.
NOw does the charmed impostume of my Plot
Swell to a head, and begin to suppurate,
If I can make Mantua's Infant Duke,
Switchel my young giglet Dorinda.
Sincere Quakero to my power bends,
And shall with my discreet Miranda yoke,
Or be tormented ever here,
In my enchanted Castle of Bridewellow.
Great pity it is -- for he is a pretty fellow.
Ariel!

Ari. What says my mighty and most potent Master.

Pros. How do these right puissant Ragamuffins bear their durance?

Ari. The Duke with haughty mien, for lack of food,
Sits cracking Fleas, and sucking of their blood.
With him is good Gonzale.

Pros. Is he so, Adsbud. Throws away his Bread and Butter, in passion.

Ari. From eyes of Glass the gummy tears that fall
Down Ivory beard like Crystal vermin crawl.
The rest are picking strawes, and so that is all.

Pros. Where is Quakero, that young Princely Sprout?

Ari. Like Lanthorn-jack I led him all about,
And now he is blowing of his nails without.

Pros. Alas poor Trout.


Ari. I have so galled 'em, 'twould make your Graces hair stand on end to see
how they look; though your heart more stony was then Cobblers wax in the dog
days, 'twould make it in your mouth dissolve like Culvers dung.


Pros. Do thou think so Spirit?


Ari. It makes mine open and shut, open and shut, like a fat Hostesses greazy
Pouch, so it does: and then the poor old Gentleman and her daughters have
almost torn one another to pieces -- I pity them.


Pros. And I will -- have thou that art so young a Spirit, so little too -- had
a touch a feeling of their Case, and shall not I have a relish? -- Well, Ariel
go let a Table be brought to them furnished with most sumptuous Cates, but when
they try to eat, let two great Babboons be let down with ropes to snatch it
away.


Ari. O Sir Punchanello did that at the Playhouse.


Pros. Did he so -- then bend thy ayry ear. whispers


Ari. More toil -- I pry'thee now let me mind thee of thy promise then --
where is my Two-penny Custard?


Pros. Ho now moody, doe'st thou murmr?


Ari. No my Lord!


Pros. Thou lie, Malignant thing, thou do.


Ari. I pri'the my Lord, ben't so touchy.


Pros. Have thou forgot the hairy Woman I freed thee from, who sent thee every
morning down her Gormandizing throat with a Candle and Lanthorn, to tread the
Ooze of the salt deep? -- At other times she made thee pass up against the
strong Northern blasts, when the capacious Bay was baked with brandy 'till thou
had cleared thy passage to her nose, on whose sulfurous top thou fat'st
Singing like a little Chimny Sweeper, have thou forgot her?


Ari. No my dread Lord.


Pros. If thou more murmur'st, in some small dimple of her Cheek I Will peg thee,
where Twelve Summers more thou shall lie stewing like a Maggot in a Holland
Cheese.


Ari. O pardon great Sir this once, and I will be a good Boy, and never do so
more.


Pros. Then do as I commanded, but make have least the Conjurers of to'ther
House steal the Invention -- thou know they snatch at all Ingenious tricks.


Ari. I fly most potent Sir. Exit Ariel flying.


Pros. Now for the infant Duke of Mantua. Hipolito my Child come forth.


Enter Hypolito playing with Nickers. Hyp. Anan, anan, forsooth -- you Sir,
don't you stir the Nickers, I Will play out my game presently.


Pros. Come gentle youth, exalt thy ducal chin, for thou shall have a Wife my
boy.


Hyp. A Wife Sir! what is that, I never saw it?


Pros. No my boy, but they are now so common, young men can hardly walk the
streets for them.


Hyp. Don't go away, you Sir, I do but stay for a Wife, and then I Will play out
my game -- O good Sir, let me have it quickly.


Pros. And so thou shall, for my daughters sake; if he should know Wives were
growing out of fashion, I fear he would not marry, for the stripling has a
gentile fancy, I see by the neatness of his clothes.


Hyp. Will it play at Bullet with me?


Pros. Ay and Cat, and Trap-ball too.


Hyp. What is it like Sir? what is it like?


Pros. It Is so inconstant I scarce know what to liken it to, it is still
unsatisfi'd, restless and wrigling like an Eel.


Hyp. O pray let me have it then; I love Eels mightily.


Pros. But like an Eel 'twill slip from thee.


Hyp. But I Will bite it by the tail then, and shake it 'till it lies still.


Pros. A shrewd youth! well thou shall have it, it is beautiful as a
Colly-flower, but like that too, when it is kep'd long, nothing is more
unpleasant.


Hyp. O Sir! I will not keep it long.


Pros. A very hopeful Lad! -- But it will not part from thee.


Hyp. Then I Will beat it, and kick it, and run away from't.


Pros. Modishly said y'gad, still hopeful -- but she will save thee that trouble,
and leave thee as soon any other will keep her; for she is wild and skittish as
an unbackt Colt.


Hyp. Is it like a Colt? O Lemine! then I Will ride upon it.


Pros. A lass poor youth! thou will soon be tired, and thrown off.


Hyp. No Sir, I shall never be weary of Riding; and I Will hold so fast by the
Mane and the Tail, that I will not fall off.


Pros. O sie, you must not use it like a Beast.


Hyp. What must I do with it then?


Pros. Why you must eat and drink with it.


Hyp. What is it a Fork, and an Earthern-Pot then?


Pros. No, but she may make Forkes, and crack too many Pots.


Hyp. Then she shall teach me to make Forks.


Pros. Hold there, -- you must enjoy none but her.


Pros. Enjoy, ah ha! enjoy! what a word is there? enjoy! O rare! -- what is
enjoy Sir?


Pros. Why, that is to be happy.


Hyp. Enjoy to be happy, then I Will enjoy all the Wives in the World; -- For I
love to be happy Sir: enjoy!


Pros. I Will tell you more hereafter; go in and read your Hornbook, that
Treatise of Abstruse Philosophy I gave you last.


Hyp. I go forsooth. Exit Hypolito.


Pros. Now by my best hopes, a shrewd youth, a very shrewd youth, and a
notable head-peace -- I Am glad he is grown so prudent. If all that Marry in this
Age of liberty were so Politic, we should see better times.


Enter Hypolito crying. Hyp. O lo! o lo! o lo! Oh, ho, ho, ho!


Pros. What Is the matter? what grand intrigue of Fate can reach to the
disturbance of thy manly Soul?


Hyp. Manly Soul, quoth a, 'twould disturb any man's Soul: I Am undone Sir,
while I was talking with you about a Wife, Tom Bully stole away my stones.


Pros. Hah thy stones, what stones?


Hyp. Why my bowling stones. O ho ho, now I cannot teach my Wife to play Nickers.


Pros. I Am glad it is no worse; O fie, fie my Lord, you must leave off this
boys Play now, and learn to play with Children; go, go in.


Hyp. By never, I Will pay that Rogue Tom Bully, when I catch him.


Exit Hypolito. Pros. Now I must instruct my Daughters.
Long sleeps and pleasures follow every Novice:
But plots and cares perplex grave men of Office.
Ye Gods!
More blessed are men of mean and low condition,
Then Bridewell-keeper is, or sage Magician.

Exit Prospero. Act IV. Scene. II.
Enter Miranda, and Dorinda. Dor. OH Sister! I have such a twittering after
this Husband,
And my mouth does so run in a civil way.

Mir. Are you not breeding Teeth Sister?


Dor. Zooks, if I am the King, shall know it.


Mir. 'Vads Sister, ever since my Father told me of it, which is at least six
Hours ago, I cannot rest Day, nor Night, for ought I know.


Dor. Its hole's hereabout, whereof looky' my Father said that it should get me
with Child pray.


Mir. O lo! get you with Child, what is that?


Dor. I cannot tell, but I do so shake and laugh when I think often.


Mir. Heigh ho! whereof Sister you are afraid? -- Let it come to me, vads
Sister I will not be afraid.


Dor. Zooks Sister, if my Father should send a hundred to get me with Child in
a civil way, I wouldn't be afraid.


Mir. O but Sister, whereof looky', my Father said that a Husband was wild as a
Cock-Sparrow or a Curl'd-Lamb, that he did now pray.


Dor. Then I would chirrip to it, and make it hop, and stroke it, and make it
wag its tail and Cry blea, 'till it 'twas as tame as a little Lap-dog, but my
Father says they are always gentle at home: and wild abroad.


Mir. Whereof Sister hark ye, now lets leave this idle talk, and play the
Scotch Morice.


Dor. Then I Will play forward, and backward, for that is the way now.


Mir. No I will not play Boys play, -- I Will tell you what, you should be a School
Mistress, and --


Dor. No Sister, no I Will tell you what? You should be a Citizens Wife pray, and
so I should be a Lord looky', and I should come in a Golden-Coach and be your
Husbands Customer.


Mir. Ay 'vads that is pretty.


Dor. So I should meet you at the Playhouse, and say Madam looky' it is a
thousand pitties such a glazing Di'mond of beauty should be the Slave of a dull
Mechanic Cit. and cry what do you lack? Whereof you should cry then, O Lord Sir,
you are mistaken Zooks.


Mir. O Lord Sir, you are mistaken Zooks!


Dor. Then I should say Dam'ee Madam! you are a necklace for a Prince, I Will
settle Three Pounds a Year upon you, and you shall have a Silver Baby, and a
Silver house, and eat nothing but Golden Custards, and Silver-Stew'd-Pruines:
then you should say whereof you have got a Wife of your own, my Lord?


Mir. Then you should say whereof you have gotten a wife of your own my Lord.


Dor. Then I should throw my Wig, and say, Oh Madam! if you love me, name her
not. She Is so dull and musty, the very thought of her will make me swoun,
Damher. But you I dote upon. So then you should let me lie with you in a Civil
way.


Mir. O ay, ay, I love that y'vads!


Dor. And then another should lie with you, and another, so at last you should
be caught in a Baudy-house with your Husbands under Prentice looky', and so be
brought to Bridewell as Mrs. Tweedlebum was the other day.


Mir. No, no, Sister, I wont play so -- I Will tell y' what, lets play
Truss-fayl, do pray now Sister.


Dor. Come then, I Will lie down first.


Mir. Truss.


Dor. Fayl.


Mir. Send me well upon my Gray Nags tail. O Sister, Sister! here is the
Husband thing coming.


Enter Hypolito reading gravely in a Horn-Book. Dor. Looky, looky, O sweet
Father its Legs are twice as long as ours.


Mir. What Is that before so trimmed up with yellow Pissabeds, and green Blew
Bottles.


Dor. See, see it pulls off half its head.


Mir. Run Sister, run, I Am so afraid 'twill pull your head off too.


Dor. Zooks! I would rather lose a hundred Heads if I had 'em, then stir a foot.


Mir. Oh! it looks angry, I Am so afraid for you Sister.


Dor. Fear not me, if I offend it, I Will ly down and paw it with my Four-feet,
as our Shock does when we beat it.


Pros. (Within) Miranda, Miranda!


Dor. O Sister! my Father calls you, -- whereof she says she will not come
for'oth.


Mir. She fibs, she fibs Father, -- I would come, but I am not here for'oth --
you spiteful pissabed Slut.


Dor. But you are here for'oth.


Mir. I wonder you are so simple Sister, as if I could not tell where I am better
then you -- for ought I know.


Dor. I will take Husband first that I will.


Mir. Hussy, am not I the Elder?


Dor. Then you shou'dn't set your Wit against a Child.


Mir. Well then Sister, I Will tell y'what, we will play heads or tails, who goes
first, that is fair now, e'nt it?


Dor. Ay, and she that don't win shall lose and keep the door.


Mir. Well there is a good Girl, now toss up.


Dor. A ha! my tails turned up, you must watch.


Mir. Good dear Sister have done quickly, prithee do for because you know why
Sister. Exit Miranda.


Hyp. Prospero has often told me, Nature makes nothing in vain, why then is
this kip kap here -- it is not aw nor e nor oo, nor lm n o-q-py you -- it
strangely puzles me; I Will ask him when I see him next.


Dor. Thing, thing, fine long thing*


Hyp. Bessy come bunny, come buy me some lace Sugarcandy, Cloves and Mace. Sure
I am ready for a Wife now, I can read my abstruse Horn Philosophy.


Dor. O Rare thing, it talks just like one of us.


Hyp. Ha -- what thing is that? Sure it is some Infant of the Park, dressed in her
Mothers gayest beams of Impudence, and sent down here to play at Hemp and
Beetle; but stay, is not this that thing called Wife? What art thou, thou
fleering thing?


Dor. Alas I am a Woman, and my Father says I must be a Wife in a Civil way,
pray thing don't be angry.


Hyp. Angry, no, I Will sooner break my Trapstick; mun if thou art that thing
called Wife, which troubles poor men so that they cannot Wench in quiet --
Prospero says that I must enjoy thee.


Dor. If thou art that thing called Husband which art always sullen and
niggardly at home, but merry and expensive abroad. which feedst a Wife with
tripe and Cowes heels, and treatest a Mrs. with Woodcock and Teale, and fine
things, and at last turnest off a Wife with just enough to buy Bread and Cheese
and worsted Farendine, but maintainst thy Miss like a Princess, my Father says
thou must get me with Child for ought I know.


Hyp. Get thee with Child, O lo! what is that?


Dor. Whereof I cannot tell, but I think you must dig it out of the Parsly-bed.


Hyp. Show me the Parsly-bed then.


Dor. I will not, you ha, got nothing to dig with: you said you must enjoy me,
what is that pray?


Hyp. Why Prospero says you are like a Colt, and then you should be backed.


Dor. Phoe, I will not play so.


Hyp. Will Not you, then look to it, for you are but a Colly-flower, and though
you are so proud to day you will stink to morrow.


Dor. Zooks this is the filli'st Husband-thing I ever saw: I Will run into the
Garden, and teach him more wit in a civil way.


Hyp. Nay if you run from me like an Eel, I Will bite you by the tail.

Exeunt running after each ohter.
Pros. (Within) Miranda! Dorinda! Daughters, Daughters!


Enter Miranda hastily. Mir. Oh I Am glad my Father comes, for when Fire and
Flax are together, none knows how soon mischief may be done. Dorinda, Dorinda,
my Fathers coming.


Enter Dorinda and Hypolito hastily. Hypolito runs off. Dor. O Sister pray lets
Dance our new Heroic Song that our Father may not know who was here.

They Sing and Dance. Enter Prospero observing them.
Mir. Here comes a lusty Wooer, my dildin, my darling.
Here comes a lusty Wooer Lady bright and shining.

Dor. I Woo for one of your fair Daughters, my dildin, my darling.
I Woo for etc. -- Lady bright etc.

Mir. I Am glad I have one for you my dild, etc.
I Am glad etc. -- Lady bright, etc.

Dor. She looks too brown upon me my dild, etc.
She looks etc. -- Lady etc.

Pros. Enough, enough, all this will not blind me, come, come, come stand, stand
you here, and you there, nay, nay, nay, no (...).


Mir. Indeed, and indeed, pray Father, I did but keep the door.


Pros. Did thou keep the door for thy younger Sister?


Mir. Yes forsooth, pray Father, that I did.


Pros. Blessing on thy pretty heart, cherish that gentile Motherly humor, thou
have a generous Soul; and since I see thy mind so apt to take the light
impression of a modish Love, I will unfold a secret to thee -- That Creature*
that thou saw, is a kind of a Creature which is much like another Creature,
that shall be nameless, and that is Quakero.


Mir. But Father, pray Father, shall that Quakero Creature be my Husband? You
said I should have a Husband before she, that you did.


Pros. Shortly my Miranda thou shall see the flower of this bud; this Chit,
chit, chit, chit, Cock-sparrow husband may serve thy Sister well enough, thou
shall have a ho-ho-ho-ho-Husband, a Horseman, goin I Will provide for thee.


Mir. Let me have the ho-ho, quickly then pray Father.

Going out she returns again. Father, Father, I forgot to make my Cursy; b'wy
Father.

Exit Miranda.
Pros. Come hither Dorinda, why saw you this Husband without my order?


Dor. Who I! truly I didn't sawed him 'twas he sawed me.


Pros. Come, come, your Sister told me all.


Dor. Then she fibs for ought I know, for she would have seen him first, if I
would have let her.


Pros. Tell me what past between you?


Dor. Nothing passed between us but our great dog Towzer.


Pros. What did he do to you? come confess.


Dor. He did nothing, but I am afraid he would if you had not come.


Pros. Why, why speak out?


Dor. Because he came toward me with his tail up as stiff as any thing.


Pros. Ha, I thought as much; wha what did he do then? the truth, I charge you.


Dor. Why he did nothing but walk to his Kennel.


Pros. Walked to his Kennel -- who?


Dor. Why our great dog Towzer.


Pros. Pho, thou understandst me not, what did the Husband-thing do to thee?


Dor. Why nothing at all, for just as we got to the Parsly-bed, you frightened
it away.


Pros. I charge you see it no more, 'twill Poison you, and make you swell as
big as a house.


Dor. Not see it, I Will run th'rough Nine Walls, but I Will see it, and have it
to, though it make me swell 'till I break in pieces.


Pros. Go get you in, you are a naughty Girl.


Dor. The World's come to a very fine pass for ought I know, one cannot play
with a thing an hour or two alone, or be in bed with a man, but one must be
naught: I will not endure it much long, that I wont so. Exit Dorinda.


Pros. So -- my wishing Pipe
Has swelled my hopeing Cistern to a Flood.
Dorind' and Polito's agreed, that is good.
Now for Miranda, and the youth Quakero;
When they are coupl'd too -- there ends my Care'o.

Exit Prospero. Act IV. Scene III.
Enter Alonzo, Gonzalo, and Antonio. Gonz. MY hands are so tired with stareing
about for meat, that my feet can look no further -- I must rest my old bones.


Alon. Old Lord I cannot blame thee, for I am seized with such a griping, that
I cannot rest. -- My Courtyers used to tell me I had no humane imperfection;
But here I will put off my hose and keep it no longer for my Flatterers Music
as in Air.


Gonz. Ha, these are a sort of doggish greedy Devils, come to devour the meat
ever it is dish'd up.


Anto. Do not for one repulse forgo the great design you were about to act.


Gonz. Oh help, help, something unseen has tied my hands behind me.


Alon. Mine are stolen away too, and it is well for 'em, for my mouth is grown
so angry for want of meat, that if they should again appear empty it would
devour them.


Anto. Sure it is the Devils hock-tide, for mine are bound too.


Music. Alon. O hark my fiends,
I fear we shall behold another horrid sound.

Gonz. The Devil takes his time when we are bound.

Alon. He thinks to save his Bacon, feeble feind,
But with bound hands our hands we will unbind.

Enter Ariel Singing. Song. Dry your eyes, and cease your howling:
For your Broth is set a Cooling.
While you are in this Castle staying,
Eat and Drink, never talk of paying.
Wine and Women here are plenty,
You shall taste of every dainty.
And as soon as you are weary,
Here are Crowds to make you merry.
Exit Ariel. Alon. I marry this is comfortable.


Anto. No Music like that which powdered Beef Sings,
A consort of Carrets with hey ding a ding.

Gonz. We Will dye for our meat, then our lives shall maintain.
No butt'ring of Parsnips like long live and reign.
O for a dainty vision of buttered Neptunes Tritons
And Nereides.

Two Devils descend, bringing down a Table with meat and drink on it. Anto. See
my Lord a stately Banquet, adzooks!


Gonz. First come, first served.


Alon. Happy man catch a Mackarell -- But stay is not this meat and drink
brought to Poison us?


Gonz. Here may be more Spirit of Sulphur: but hungers sharp, and I will taste
in spite of the Devil.


Anto. And I will have a Soop.


Alon. If both resolve, I Will take my part; Devil do thy worst. As they try to
eat, Gonzalo and Antonio are snatched up into the Air, and Alonzo sinks with
the Table out of sight.


The End of the Second Act.
Act V.
Scene I.
Enter Quakero, and Ariel. Quak. I Will be no longer seduced by Yea and Nay, I
defy thee.


Ari. I defy thee.


Quak. Thou art a Torch of Darkness, and a Snuff of the Candle of the Socket,
of the Dominion of Darkness.


Ari. O minion of Darkness.


Quak. Thou lie, I am no minion of Darkness, for look thee, a lie is a lie,
but the truth is not a lie, and therefore thou art a liar because thou lie,
as one of us has he is sweetly in his Scourgestick of Prophanishness, he is a
right precious one, truly, truly.


Ari. You lie, truly.


Quak. Out thou reproacher of friends, thou Bearward of the Bull and Mouth,
thou Lambskinner of Lumbard-street, thou waspish Woolf of Westminster, thou a
a, I say thou um ah a, thou-avaunt, begone, fly, vanish, I defy thee, I abhor
thee, I renounce thee, yea, I will scarecrow thee, I will top and scourge
thee, and I will humguig thee, for I see by thy invisible Horns that thou art
the very Devil.


Quak. Out Dragon, Bell and the Dragon, I knew thee long agone.


Ari. I knew thee long agone.


Quak. What do thou know of me? Speak, say thy worst, what do thou know of
me? -- I may fail, but I cannot fall, for I am a Friend -- a Chosen -- One of
Us.


Ari. A Chosen one of Us.


Quak. None of thy Usses, Satan, none of thy Usses; therefore cease to torment
me, for I will not speak one word more.


Ari. One word more.


Quak. Nay but I will not -- I will Padlock my lips with Patience, and set the
Porter of peaceishness at the Wicket of my Mouth, who shall knock thee down
with the Silver head of saving-gableness which is on the long Cane of
Conscientious Reproof: So that thou shall no more enter into the Meeting House
of my heart, look thee -- Obadiah Cod, one of Us, who now sleep -- eth did
declare soundly what thou were, and I find it all as Poo Cod said.


Quak. Mock on, mock on, I will try if thou will answer me while I sing my
Sorrows to the snapping of my Thumbes: thy gibing is all but nonsense.


Ari. All but nonsense.


Quakero Sings. Ariel answers like an Echo. Quak. How do do?


Ari. How do do?


Quak. What Is that to you?


Ari. What Is etc.


Quak. Pull out thy whistle, and tune up thy Pipe.


Ari. Pull etc.


Quak. Under yonder hollow Tree, Nan lies asleep.


Ari. Under etc.


Quak. Her thing is her own, and I Will bounce it anon.


Ari. -- and I Will bounce etc.


Quak. What care I for treasure, if Nanny but smile?


Ari. -- if Nanny etc.


Quak. Within this shining place,
There Is not a better Face;
Faith now she is down, there I Will get her with Child.

Ari. Kind Nanny smiles, and she
Does sigh and snore for thee;
O strange Simplicity,
Follow me, follow me, and thou shall see.

Quak. Does Nanny sigh and snore for me, O Lo! umph, I ham mollified: Nanny
snore for me -- think of thy Soul Quakero, I say think of thy Soul; if the
flesh prevail, thy Soul is but a dead man.


Ari. Follow me, follow me, and thou shall see.


Quak. Hark I am called again -- this voice may be a Vision -- go Quakero, I
say go -- but it may be a snare, a trick to draw me into derision, go not
Quakero nay but I will not go -- Nanny sigh and snore for me, O dear!


Ari. Follow etc.


Quak. Again -- Well I will go and advise with Friends, but why should, thou
advise, look thee, thy intention is good, though the Action may wander, it
matters not, I say, it matters not. -- Nanny sigh and snore for me, I will go
-- yea assuredly I will.


Ari. Follow etc.


Quak. Nay but I will not, it shall not be said Quakero followe'd the Devil. --
But look thee, go thou before, and I will come after, -- if that will do.
Exeunt.


Act V. Scene II.
Enter Prospero and Miranda at one Door. Ariel and Quakero at another. Ariel
goes off immediately. Pros. ADvance the frizled frouzes of thine Eyes, and
glout on you fair thing.


Mir. O dear sweet Father, is that a ho ho ho a Horseman, Husband?


Pros. It is my Girl, and a yerker too; in faith were he not tired with seeking
of his Company, he would play thee such Horse-tricks, would make the sneer
again.


Mir. It Is a most crumptious thing; i'vads if you will let me have it, I Will make
no more dirt Pies, nor eat the Chalk you score with, nor spoil your Garden to
play with the Carrets before they are ripe -- pray sweet honey Father.


Pros. Well I Will leave ye together. But I charge you let him not touch your
honor.


Mir. My honor O lo! pray what is that father?


Pros. It Is a kind of fluttering Blood which haunts the head and hinder parts
of men, some call it Lifeblood, because death often ensues when those tender
parts are touched: in Women its seat is on the nose, and on the --


Mir. Where else pray tell me, that I may defend it.


Pros. That Is the ready way to make it be betrayed. -- No Child of my bowels,
thou shall never know thy honor from me.


Mir. Now do I long to have this secret of my honor opened: prithee now,
Father tell me where it is.


Pros. Why, -- I know not what to say -- On thy Elbow.


Mir. My Elbow, O lemine! fear it not then, for my honor is so hard with being
thump'd and leand upon, that a hundred touches cannot hurt it.


Pros. All falls out yet even as my Soul would wish, but I must Watch, I don't
like this leering Quakero, such zealous youths are very Tyrants in secret.
Exit Prospero.


Quak. Assuredly Satan thou have told truth, for she is here; But yet thou art
a liar Satan, for she is not here, that is to say, she sleeps not, I will
declare before her umph a ha h. --

Most finest, most delicatest, and most lusciousest Creature, whose face is
more delicious then a Pot of Ale with Sugar and Nutmeg, after a long Exercise.


Mir. Ha.


Quak. The savor of whose breath is more comfortable then the hot steam of a
Sundays Dinner.


Mir. O Lo!


Quak. Whose Paps are whiter then two Norfolke-dumplins stufft with Plums --
and softer then Quaking-puddings.


Mir. Why did you ever feel my Bubbies?


Quak. Nay assuredly, but I hope I shall --


Quak. Whose soft Palms are pleasanter then a warm cloth to my Sweaty-back,
or a hot Trencher to an akeing Belly.


Mir. O rare!


Quak. Whose Legs are smoother then my Chin, on a Saturday-night, and sleeker
then thy Elbowes.


Mir. O my honor, my honor, my Father says you must not touch my honor pray.


Quak. Nay Sister far, far be it from me to soil thy honor. Thy nature is more
inviteing then a Christning-Bowl of warm red Wine deekt round with Lemon peel.


Mir. Oh my dear ho, ho, ho, I can no longer forbear.


She embraces him. Quak. Ah Sister mine; Now I ham even like unto that little
Creature called a Cat, when his back is stroaked, he longs to play with his
tail.


Mir. And what are I like then, tell me what I are like?


Quak. Why thou are like a pretty little Mouse verily. -- But then I ham
twofold luck thee: first I ham like a Cat, and secondly I am not like a Cat.
-- First, I ham like a Cat, for when the Cat smells the pretty Mouse, he is
restless and eager; Nay, he cannot stand still, but frisketh, and jumpeth, and
dance -- eth 'till he has devoured hit; -- In like sort, firstly, I ham like a
Cat, look thee, for I am inflamed, and eager truly: nay, I am even ravenous
after the pretty tender Mouse, as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps. But secondly*
I ham not like a Cat, look thee; for that seeks the destruction, and the
nothingness of the Mouse, but I thirsts for the Propagation, look thee, and
the somethingness, yea the fullness of hit -- ha, ha, hae.


Mir. And am I like a Mouse i'vads?


Quak. Unfeignedly.


Mir. Then I Will run into my hole.


Quak. And I will pursue even unto thy very hole, till I have overtaken thee.
Exeunt.


Enter Prospero hastily. Pros. Ah how nimble this zealous youth is -- Miranda!
-- Miranda! Enter Miranda, and Quakero. And you Quakero, come back, or I Will
throw you over the Balcony, and try if you have as many lives as a Cat.


Mir. Zooks, Father you have spoiled the rarest play of Cat and Mouse.


Pros. Thou shall be mouz'd my Girl, but every thing in season, Rome was not
built in a day, go in and trust me.


Mir. Shall Not my Puss go with me; come Puss, come little Puss.


Exit Miranda. Pros. Hypolito my Child! Enter Hypolito. Come hither discourse
this trusty Nicodemus, 'till my return, you must be acquainted with him. Exit
Prospero.


Hyp. Pray Mr. Nichodemus, what did your Periwig cost you?


Quak. Ha, ha, ha, he!


Hyp. Ha, ha, he, how much is, ha, ha, he!


Quak. I will be avenged of thee Satan!


Hyp. Sa -- tan, my name is Hypolito!


Quak. I will no more stir up friends to despise Government, and teach them
it is a great point of Faith, rather to believe an ignorant upright Tailor, or a
precious enlightened Weaver, then a Book-learned Tythmonger verily.


Hey. Hey brave Boys you Rogues Mr. Nichodemus, will you play at Nickers you
Sir, or Spand-farthing?


Quak. Out thou lewd scoffer, I ham a Professor.


Hyp. A Professor, what is that?


Quak. That is a friend.


Hyp. And what is a friend?


Quak. Why a friend is one of Us.


Hyp. And what is one of Us.


Quak. Why one of Us is a -- I say is a -- um a -- ha, ha, ha, he.


Hyp. Pray Mr. Nichodemus, let me be one of Us, ha, ha, ha, he.


Quak. I would thou were, I say, I would -- thou were, but thou know not the
Splendor of the obscurity of the revealed secret, umph -- ha, thou
understandest not?


Hyp. Yes I understand you well enough, but only I don't know your meaning.


Quak. What Religion art thou of?


Hyp. Religion, why I am a Duke.


Quak. What Faith do thou profess?


Hyp. Why Faith and Troth, and adznigs, and by this Cheese.


Quak. Ah thou art a beast, and should be chastised; -- therefore provoke me
not: -- I say provoke me not.


Hyp. Not provoke thee -- but I will provoke thee: take that.


kicks him. Quak. I ham not provoked.


Hyp. Then have at the again.


Quak. I ham not provoked yet.


Hyp. There, then there. kicks him.


Quak. Nay, but I ham not yet provoked.


Hyp. No then I Will wear out my Shoes, but I Will provoke thee; there, there,
there, and there.

kicks him.
Quak. Hold, hold, I say hold, for I ham provoked, and I will chastise thee.
The Quaker throws off his Coat, and beats Hypolito 'till he lies as dead.


Hyp. O murder, murder, I Will fight no more: you pull by the hair Mr
Nichodemus.


Enter Prospero. Pros. What dismal noise is this -- ha! Hypolito dead, then all
my toyl's in vain: -- O thou unlucky chit, I wish I Would been betwattl'd, when I
had to do with thee.


Quak. Unfeignedly I was provoked, therefore I say have Patience, that is to
sayo be pacified.


Pros. Out thou stinking, sneaking Bastard, he is quite dead: If ever thou
serv'st me so again, I Will whip thee 'till the Blood drops at thy heels.


Quak. Dead! then by Yea, and Nay, I never saw him in my life.


Pros. O cruel luck! Ariel, what ho my Spirit Ariel.


Enter Ariel. Ari. What says my mighty, and most Potent Lord?


Pros. Most potent Lord! most Potent Fiddle-stick! See thou lazy droan of a
Spirit, what mischief here is done.


Ari. O lo! O lo! O Laud! Ah poor Polly, how sadly his finger's scratched; but
I Will fly to Mother Damnables, and fetch some Pilgrim salve to cure it. Exit
Ariel.


Pros. Miranda! Dorinda! Enter Miranda, and Dorinda. O my Girls, we are all
undone, look there Dorinda, thy poor Polly's dead.


Mir. O my dear Puss cat, shall us play Cat and Mouse?


Pros. Touch him not you Harlotry baggage, why when I say -- come away.


Dor. Alas! What Is worse then ill luck?


Enter Alonzo, Gonzalo, and Antonio, as driven in by Spirits.


Alon. Never were Hogs so driven to Rumford, as we are hunch'd along.

What my Boy Quakero, and alive, touch my Flesh.


Quak. My Father after the Flesh, O sorrowful joy.


Pros. You stare as if you had never seen me: have so short a time as 50 years
made you forget Prospero?


Gonz. How my good old Neighbor Duke Prospero!


Alon. The Devil it is: O strange, I thought he had been hanged long ago.


Anton. Laud, how a little time will change folks, I had quite forgot him, and
yet I remember him as well as if 'twere but yesterday.


Pros. Had I lived 'till now where you sent me, I had been dead 20 years ago --
Know 'twas I trappan'd you to this my enchanted Castle of Bridewello, where I
yet govern, and am Lord Paramount. I meant to be friends with you all, and
Marry that strippling to my eldest Girl; but see what he has done to the
Infant Duke of Mantua.


Gonz. Never stir, if it be not honest little Duke Polly.


Anto. Alas poor Duke, as towardly a Child as ever broke bit of bread.


Alon. And what do thou now intend? we fear thee not.


Pros. Quakero shall be hanged, and you shall be all tortured; ho within there,
prepare the Pillory, the Whipping-post, the Stocks, and Cat of Nine tails --
entreat me not, dispatch.


Mir. I can hold no longer, O, ho, ho-ho-ho.


Quak. Ah, ha-ha-ha-e.

Enter Devils.
Pros. Away with them, See it done.


The Scene of Bridewell. Ariel flies down. Ar. Stay my most Potent Master, I
come from the sage Vrganda of Wildo streeto, that renowned Enchantress, who has
disarmed all the Knights of the White Spear and Nut-brown Shield: And that most
mighty Necromancer Punchanello Alquiffe, who with one breath puts Candle out,
and in Rains Fire, makes Sea of painted Clout to move, and Devils dance: by
their aid I have composed a Suppositorial Ligneous puff and blow, which would
recall life though Nine days lost, see here it is come.


Enter Devils with a great pair of Bellows. Pros. It Is joyful news.


Ari. All must assist in the Ceremony.


Pros. Come then let us about it.


Ariel. Help, help Lordlings, and Ladies help
To raise up great Heroic whelp.

Ariel Sings. Prospero, Prospero
Looks feirce as a Hero;
If Polly should dye, poor I shall be killed I fearo. Chorus. Then blow the
Bellows, blow the Bellows, blow the Bellows, blow; blow and puff, blow and
puff, puff, puff, and blow, blow, blow.

Let not his Soul,
Get out of the hole
And all shall be well I tro, tro, tro, etc.

Pros. We conjure thee to wake
By a Two-peny Cake,

Alonz. By a Ginger-bread-role,

Mir. By a thing with a hole,

Dor. Which thou love with thy Soul;

Gonz. By a Rattle and Drum,

Anton. By a great Sugar-plum,

Foran. As big as thy Thumb.

Chorus. Polly, Polly, Polly,
O Polly, Polly, Polly!
To dye is but folly.
For shame lie not there,
While thy Doxie is here.

All. How is it.

Ariel. By the Mass
As 'twas.

All. Alas.

Ariel. Prospero, Prospero,
Looks, etc. -- As before.

Chorus. Then blow the Bellows, etc. -- As before.

Pros. We conjure thee again
By a hobby Horse fine,

Mir. By thy Bullets and Cat-stick,

Dor. By thy Rearer and Trap-stick,

Gonz. By thy Marbles and Nickers,

Anton. By thy Top and thy Gigg,

Faran. By thy Beard, and thy Wigg.

Chorus. Polly, Polly, etc. -- All as before. Then Hypolito rises

Ariel. Victoria, Victoria! He lives, he lives, he lives.

They Dance confusedly round him. Chorus. Then let us hugg him, and logg him,
and tugg him, and smugg him: with a hey brave Polly, and ho brave Polly and
fake him, and shake him, and wake him, and never forsake him, with a hey brave
Polly, and ho brave Polly.


Pros. So, so, so, welcome to life again, now the man shall have his Mare
again, and all friends.


Alon. Thanks Prospero, and gentle Ariel.


Gonz. Thanks Ariel, and gentle Prospero.


Enter Stephania, Beantosser, Moustrappa, Drinkallup, and Hectorio. Steph. Ha,
is it so, more Officers then head Constables, you may dismiss the Prisoners and
adjourne the Court.


Bean. What to the old place in Moor-fields.


Mous. Ay, ay, and make Proclamation that all good Religious People may take
notice of it.


Steph. No, no, we will meet here again to morrow. And so she prayed me to tell
ye.


Drink. If any forget the place, that man in black may instruct them, for he is
Chaplain to the Society.


Pros. Set open the Gate, you may march off, you have had punishment enough for
once. [Exeunt Baud, and Whores]


Pros. Now to wipe out the remembrance of all past sorrow, I Will show you the
pleasures of my enchanted Castle. -- Ariel, see it done, and then be free.


Ariel. I Will about it strait. [ Exit Ariel.]


MUSIC. The Scene drawn discovers Bridewell with Prisners in several postures
of labor and punishment, then a Baud and Pimp drawn over the Stage in a Cart
followed by a Rabble; then arise Caliban, and Sycorax. Sycorax. My Lord great
Cac-Cac-Cac-Cac-Calyban
For my sweet sake,
Some pity take
On beauteous Nymph in Caravan:
And check with seemly snout,
The Rabble rout.

Calyban. Sweet Sycorax, my Mopsa dear,
My Dove, my Duck,
My Honey suck-
-le which have neither pricknor peer,
I Will do it, take tail of Shirt,
Cleanse Eye from Dirt.

Syc. Give all the rest of this fair Crew,
A play day too;
Let Pillory
And Stocks agree,
To set all free:
Let the Beetle and Whip, be both laid to sleep,
And Prisoners Condemned, live for want of a slip.

Call. Dear Dowdy be jocund, and sleek
The dainty fine furrows of thine Olive Cheek:
I cannot deny
My pretty Pigs nigh,
With a Nose like a Rose,
And a lip as green as a Leek.
Be calm ye great Parents of the Punck, and the Pad,
While each Bully and Lass sing and revel like mad.

Chorus Be calm, etc. --
While each, etc. --

Pimp. Compel this roaring rout to fly.

Baud. And we will obey you by and by.

Chorus Compel, etc. --
And we will, etc. --

Rabble. Give's something to drink, and we will go hence,
For we meant your honors no offense.

Caly. Here, here ye dogs, here is Eighteen-pence.

Syc. But ere you go, lets have a Dance.

Chorus Here here, etc. --
But ere you, etc -- They Dance, and Sing this Chorus. Be calm ye great
Parents of the Punck, and the Pad:
While each Bully and Lass, sing and revel like mad.
Exeunt Rabble. The Prisners make a noise.
Caly. Head-keeper, let Correction cease,
Let every back and bum have peace.

Syc. Do not the noble Crew beguile,
They came to sing and dance a while:
And you of pleasure make a toil.

Caly. Be still, be still, ye whips, and ye backs,
Obey, obey, my lovely Sycorax.

Chorus Be still, etc. --
Obey, etc. --
The Head-keeper flies down and sings.
Head-k. Her I Will obey whose breath's so strong, one blast
Sent from her Lungs would lay my Castle wast;
Come down my furies, lash no more,
But gently pour in
Salt and Urine,
To cleanse their crimson Face from gore:
Whatever they are, or what'ere their transgressions,
Free all in the Castle, free all;
Make it as quiet, as at quarter Sessions,
When they make visits to Westminster Hall.
Here Four Keepers fly down. To the Houses you know,
Round, round, must you go,
And search every place where their Revels they keep:
But no more 'till I call, shall ye handle the whip.

Chorus To the Houses, etc. --
Round, etc. --
And search. --
But no more -- Exeunt Keepers.

Caly. Now the Tyrants are gone that made ye afraid:
Let each Daughter and Son,
Make have to come on;
And be merry, be merry, be merry,
Be merry, as a Maid.

Chorus Now the Tyrants, etc. --

While the Chorus is Singing the Prisners are steed, and make ready for a
Dance. The Scene shuts. A dance with Bottles in their hands. Pimp. Bullies my
Lads, your Battle sound.

Baud. And let sweet Echo from each Last rebound.

Chorus. Bullies, etc. --
And let, etc. --
A Dance.
Chorus. Drink up all.
Drink up all.
Drink up all.
-- Up all.
Drink up all.

The Scene opens, discovers the Sea; -- The Night going down Aurora, and the
Sun rising -- the Music sitting in an Arch of Chariots. Caly. See, see black
Queen of Night, is sneaking down,
And under sable Arm, she hides pale Moon.
And Dame Aurora, yonder with eyes gray,
Shedding Od'rifferous dew, and breaking day.
Behold the Skies Head-Waggoner, the Sun,
With Fiery steed up yonder Hill does run.
Miss Thetis would from Watery Bed pursue.
Begone fond Minx, must none have Sun but you?
Sing.
Caly. Now your drink, and your Drabs you shall safely enjoy.

Syc. No Constables or Watch, shall your quiet destroy.

Chorus. Now, etc. --
No Constable, etc. --

Pimp. We Will closely convey you by a private back door:
Your Ale and Stepony we will fill on the Score.

Baud. We Will treat ye great lubbers, as ye sail in the Straits,
With Trumpets and Cymbals, and loud City Waits.

Syc. In each room a soft Bed, or a Couch we will lay,
To please you all Night, and delight you all day.

Chorus. In each room, etc. --
To please you, etc. --
A Dance. Ariel appears in the Air, and Sings.
Song. Where good Ale is, there suck I,
In a Cobblers Stall I lie,
While the Watch are passing by;
Then about the Streets I fly,
After Cullies merrily.
And I merrily, merrily take up my clo'se,
Under the Watch, and the Constables nose.

Pros. Henceforth may our Enchanted Castle be,
From Ign'rant Sprights, and sullen Devils free:
May beauteous Nymphs like little Lambkins play,
While Swains with amorous Pipes drive care away,
Our harmless mirth' shall still attend you here:
It Is mirth that makes you Youthful brisk and fair.
That our Mock-Tempest, then may flourish long,
Clapp all that would seem beautiful and young.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE by Miranda.
GEntlemen look'ee now, pray, my Father says that I and my Sister
must have ye all i fads:
Whereof I cannot tell what to do, I Will swear'o;
If I take you, I lose my dear Quakero:
His things are precious, and his love is true;
But there is no trust in ought you say or do:
Yet for ought that I know,
My self could serve you all as well as any;
But my Father says, pray,
One Dish of meat can never serve so many;
For though you all agree in one design,
To feed like Scholars on the tender Loyn;
In this you differ with them, pray;
One little Chop, and one plain Dish will do.
You must have Sause, warm Plates, fresh hau-gou's too;
The large Pottage of glittering show and dress,
Must cheat you to the little bit of flesh.
My Father says,
Since with such charge we purchase your Contents,
He thinks it is fit we should have Settlements:
For when you have enjoyd, what that is, I cant tell i ^ads; but I believe you
can, --
Tare dronish, cold and dull as any thing;
Just like a Be, when he has lost his sting:
And though with all our tempting sweets we strive,
We never shall catch you more within our Hive.
Then must our sinking joys never rise again?
Must we be kind, and show all in vain?
You loved the jilting Mother much and long;
She Is old, the Daughter's active brisk and young:
If you neglect us still, pray,
May all your stony Pride unpit i would fall;
And may our harmless Devils take you all.

