PSYCHE Debauched, A COMEDY, As it was Acted at the Theater Royal

By T. D.

LONDON, Printed for John Smith in Great Queen Street, 1678.

The Actors Names.
King Andrew, Mrs: Corbett. Nicholas, Princes in love with None-so-fair, Mrs.
Knep. Phillip, Mr. Charleton Bruine, the White Bear of Norwich, Mr. Harris.
Apollo, A Wishing-Chair, Mr. Lyddall. Jeffrey, Bruines Man, Mr. Coysh. Costard,
A Countryman, Mr. Poell. Justice Crabb, (For the God Mars,) Mr. Wiltshire.
Tag-rag, Common Prisoners. Brazen-nose, Tatter'd-hoe, Bullbarrow, Shrubs-hall,
Wou'dhamore, K. Andrew's 3 Daughters, Mrs. Rutter. Sweetlips, Mrs. -- None-so
fair, Mr. Haynes. Redstreak, Costard's Wife, Mr. Cory. Twattle, Ladies
attending on None-so-fair. Glozy, Woossat, [representing Venus,] Mr. Clarke.
Priests, Masquers, etc.

PROLOGUE.
NOw Fancy's up; lest waiting palls the jest;
Psyche the second's coming half undrest:
But in that Garb you like fine Women best.
Let our Rich Neighbors mock our Farce; we know
(Already, the utmost) of their Puppet-show.
Since they'gainst Nature go, they Heaven offend,
If Natures purpose then cross Natures end;
Unnat'ral Nature is not Natures Friend.
[ -- There Is Nature for you.
As Aesop's Cat dressed in a Nymph's disguise,
Their gaudy Trifle may at first surprise;
None but the (Dirty-rout) will like it twice:
A well dressed Frollick once may please the eye;
But Plays (like Women,) cannot so satisfy.
Ye masked Nymphs can tell, there is something in ye,
Besides a painted face that gets the penny:
Yet all the Fame you give'em, we will allow
To their best Plays, and their best Actors too.
That is, the Painter, Carpenter, and show
Beaumont, and Fletcher, Poet, and Devow.
But Sirs, free harmless Mirth you here condemn,
And Clap at downright Baudery in them.
In Epsom-Wells, for example --
Are they not still for pushing Nature on,
Till Natures feat thus in your sight is done.
Oh Lord! --
Take off their Psyches borrowed plumes awhile,
Hopkins and Sternhold rise, and claim your style;
Dread Kings of Brentford! leave Lardellas Hearse,
Psyches despairing Lovers steal your verse:
And let Apollo's Priest restore again
What from the nobler Mamamouchy's ta'n.
Let Them restore your Treble prices too,
To see how strangely still they bubble you,
It makes me blush; and that I seldom do.
Now Psyche's stripped from all her gay attire,
TE DE POLYKAGATHOY, Behold the Fire!
But Oh! a long Farewell to all this sort,
Which Music Scenes, nor Preface can support.
Yet you admire it, make'em thankful for it:
Alas their Charge was great, and you must pay't.
If they should purchase at a cursed Rate,
The New-come Elephant, and shew't in State;
Get him a Room with Pomp and Lux'ry dressed,
Would you pay Crowns a piece to see the Beast?
Show some of your good Natures here kind Sirs;
If our Conceit less proud or gay appears,
She Is less expensive, and more brisk then theirs.
THE Mock OPERA.
ACT. I.
SCEN. I.
Enter None-so-fair, Twattle and Glozy. Non. OGlozy! What a crumptious place is
here?
Where none can see one play with ones none Dear.
Under each buffi kind Sun does warm;
Here one may kiss, and laugh, and think no harm:
For Country Love has neither joys nor fears,
And Bushes break no Trust, though Walls have dars:

Gloz. No Milly None-so-fair, they are not of Oal ali an mind.
Man hunts not here for mankind,
Wire on Hare not man prevails,
Nor are men caught with Pipe like Quails,
No salt is here thrown on their Tails.

Tw. No Gossip Glozy,
You may here sing Hey down with every Olown,
And none will diclose ye,
As at London lewd Iown.
Poor Rusticks cannot cheat, nor lie, nor swear;
Incroach on Neighbors spot of ground,
Or put dumb Creature into Pound;
No Covent Garden Tricks are practisd here.

None. Ah! Gammer, Twattle, Ah! my poor Lady,
I wish I were no Princes Born.
But so me poor Shepheardess Forlorn,
To sleep all day on Mowes of Hay or Corn.
How green's the Grass? how Fine's the Tree?
How luscious is the Black-berry?

Glozy. But Oh! How sweet's the Company?

Twat. The Company. --

Non. That -- That; Oh goody Glozy, Oh Gammer Twat^
I Will never go home again that is Flat.
Maids are not here confined to Rules
As at your Whoresom Boarding Schools.

Gloz. How silly is the Show and Pomp,
That Is practiced there by every Romp;
First Mock-Wedding's to be seen,

Twat. And then with great Din, comes Mock-lying In.
Mistress of School, must be Midwife, Old Fool;
Mammy, and Dad, and Nurse must be had;
And Cradle and Ladle, and Fiddle-come-faddle,
You Would think 'em all Mad.

None. When Gossips are come, and fill up the Room;
Glass goes about, till Girls cry out, A ha, a, ah ha.

Gloz. Drink goes down, Midwife, Run, sport's begun, all undone.

Hold her back, or 'twill crack by my fack.

Twat. Alack, alack, -- Caraways, run Jack Ah, a, a, ha.

Non. Then she must whine for the Burnt Wine;
Stools, Tools and Fools fly about;
And at last comes out great Baby of Clout:
Then Christning comes, and Sugar Plums,
And Mistress Tippling like old Crony:
Gives dainty words as sweet as honey,
And all to gets poor Childrens Money.

Gloz. Each strives to be in Mistress Books,
Though Purse of Parents bleed, Gadzooks.

Twat. And when e're they do play Truant,
If she will say she never knew on it,
They do not care one souse, 'gad knows,
How silly Beldams led by the Nose.

Non. And then Forsooth we must have Shoes:
Gods, Devils, and Goddesses,
Swayns, Satyrs, and Shepherdesses,
Soust in dull Rhyme, and served in several Messes,

Gloz. Yet glittering Scenes, and Golden Dresses,
Will Not make amends for doggrel Verses.

Non. No, not even there where Dance and Song,
Supported by the Mighty, and the Young,
Though practiced never so often, never so long,
Though never so much imposed upon the Town,
Their own flat stuffs wrought up to pull them down,
As a great Owl, which on bare stump bawls,
Swelled with the whooping Music of his Throat,
Down to the wrath of Larks and Linnets falls.
So boasting Scribblers on their Labors dote;
But all their swelling Hopes and Huffs,
Critic out, like Candle puffs:
And then they smoke, and stinck like Snuffs;
So School-Girls that have in the morn
Been Cock a Hoop, and ruled the Roast,
E're Noon even like an over-soak'd Toast,
Sinck to the bottom of the Pot of scorn:
These woaful Chances I have lately seen,
And never will go to School again,
No not to be a Queen.

Twattle. Oh None-so-fair; sweet Miss!
You need not have run from your good Father, I wis;
For Prince Phillip, or Prince Nicholas, if you had but said the word, would
have married you while one can say what is this?

How say by that? --

Gloz. -- Well rim'd goody Twat.
Not a Prince in the street, but was so loving
He Would a kissed your Elbow to bake in your Oven;
So says every one that knows thee.

Twat. Well said goody Glozy:
Though the Coif of your heart were dry enough, God wot,
You would not let it be smoothed, while loves Iron was hot;
When loves strong Charms your smoothing-board invirons,
You laugh to see poor Princes shake their Irons.

Non. Not Sugar-cakes, nor Ginger-bread,
Me from this Country life shall lead:
The live long day about the Fields we saunter,
Sloes, Black-berries, and Hawes we never shall want here.
At night we (...) Gooding,
For Bacon, and Kale, and nappy Ale,
Stout Bees, and figged Pudding.

Gloz. Ah! but sweet Lady, we want the Ready, --
And we cannot fill our Guts, if we buy not,

Twat. Oh, but Lady None-so-fair, look ye, do you see, Glory will make them come,
and bring it to us with a why not:


Non. What ayle Gammor Glozy, I mar'l what a dickens
Don't all the Fields grow full of Hens and Chickens?
Don't Birds grow upon Trees like Pears, what would she desire?
Don't Pyes grow in a little Brick-house, close, by the Fire?

Twat. And sometimes Missey we will ^rudge a nutting.

Non. Faith, Gammor Twattle that was we'll put in: She Sings.
Then the Nymphs and the Swains
Shall trip it over the Plains,
And crown me with Garlands of Roses,
And marry me with a Rush ring:
Then how we will firck it, caper, and jerk it
Under the green Wood Tree.
sing and dance.
Gloz. Very right -- Oh sweet None-so-fair!

None-so. Princes have no such joys as these
When they sit down to Pork and Pease.
What Crowding's this my ears do pull?
Music is heard. With which the empty Air is full.

Twat. Oh! Gads-lidikins now I know,
This is May Day in the morning, ho,

Non. Oh! is it so, then let us go straight away,
For I Will be Lady of May.
exeunt all. Enter Costard and Redstreak.
Redstr. O lo! O lo! Costard, who do thou think is come hither -- now? --


Costard -- Who, who, vor the mercies sake.

Redstr -- Guess Costard, guess.

Costard -- Gammar Bunch the Carret-Woman.

Redstr. Noa, noa, noa.

Cost. Cicely Pountrinekets the Tripe-Wife.

Red. Psshaw waw; who but Princess None sofair our Landlord King Andrews
youngest Daughter --


Cost. Then have mercy on us, we shall see bad times;
For I believe she is run away from School.

Redst. Twittle Twattle, what if she be? what have we to do With state business
-- perhaps she is run away Incognito with her Fathers consent --


Cost. Now she is here, the short and the long on it is, we must choose Her Lady
of May. --


Red. Yes by my Fay -- And we will have a Masque, and Crouder shall be Pan, and he
must sing in resitantivy;

Great Psyche go dress up the silly. Rogues,
And then Piper shall be Chorus, and he shall sing:
Now Pan with his fooling has made a fair hand.
Then there must be Symphonie.

Cost. shall not I be Symphonie, Redstreak?

Red. Hold thy tongue, Wilta? Lord to bless us; what rowly powly, all fellows
at Football? The Symphony; No, Symphony must be a woundy cranck, short, tall,
squat vellow with rusty Music; and he must cry like a Bird: and then we must
have An Echo -- --


Cost. Oh! there is an Echo down at hollow Banck I Will call it Presently. --


Redstr. No no, we will make an Echo of our own.

Cost. How? prithee Redstreak how;

Redstr. Why look thee: One must be Voice, and another must be Air, and another
must be Rock; then voice must talk Soundly to Air, and beat her against Rock;
and Rock must Beat her back again; and then Air must cry out, and scold With
Voice, and that is Echo -- Let me alone for Plot; If you will but work up the
Sense and Passion, as they say; Go, and let every Mothers Child about it, and
I Will entertain Princess None-so-fair the while. -- Yonder she comes.

exit Costard. Enter None-so-fair, Twattle and Glozy.
Non. Gammar Redstreak. I make bold.

Red. So I am told.
Sweet Princess None-so-fair. Bring in Wickar-chair,
Twattle and Glozy; Cheeks shall be rosy.
For I have good Fuddle,

Twat. -- Mum Ducks in the puddle, (our heads-ake,

Gloz. -- Gad-speed, Gammar Redstreak. We Will drink, till

Twat. -- And we will have some Chat,

Red. -- Marry why not?

Non. -- What Crouding's this I hear, prepare.


Red. An entertainment which our head Hinds do for you prepare.


Twat. she fibs, they do it once a year, whether your at home or here.


Red. O Dear! it is for the nonce by Cocks bones.

Non. Well, well, be quiet, I say be quiet twice and once.
Enter a Country Crouder, followed by a Milk-maid with her Payl dressed up as
on May Day: -- After them a company of Morris-dancers, a Sylvan, and a Dryad --
Red. A Masque so please your Worship Madam;
Their Garments should be better, if we had them.
Pan come sing, God Pan, Chorus! Oh Symphony! where is
Your rusty Music; so, so, it is well; what are You?

Syl. I am a Sylvan -- Dry. And I am a Dryad Dame.

Red. Come Cheer up. --

Pan sings.
Great Nonesofair King Andrews Daughter dear,
Whom we do worship, but our Dame does fear;
For why? you come to eat up our good Cheer.
Here Is Cake, Bread, and Pruin,
And eke more are stewing.
Then pray now be doing.
Chorus.
And Cisly, and Dolly shall trip it around,
And None-so-fair shall have a dainty green Gown.
Sing Damzels, Sing, and jolly Lads Sing loud,
When Swains be blithe, the Nimphs should not be proud,
But foot it seatly after every Crowd.
And when you are weary,
Lie down and be merry,
Till cheek's red as Cherry.
Chorus.
Croudero, and Piper shall sing and shall play,
And Nonesofair shall be the Lady of May.
A Dance of Morris-Dancers, Milk-maid. etc. Red. So, so, well done, well done
all; Ha, ha, ha, it makes my heart leap in my Belly for joy -- homely Country
sport, Now could I weep for pure hearts ease, to see how towardly they are; and
how my good man Costard looks so sprunt I warrant ye. Chorus, Symphonie, Pan;
stand to your Fittles, can you be merry sweet Princess? Echo; where is Echo,
Rock, Air, Voice? Oh dull, dull!


Non. Fret not thy self sweet Redstreak.

Red. Oh Lord your Worship, -- a pax take ye;
Come, or I Will fetch you in with a Hedge-stake,
For Courtesy you have no Peer.

Nonsy. Methinks it is most serene and clear.

Red. Serene and clear, that I Will remember I warrant ye:
Then if that you do please to sit,
Old Nick take you, for a Company of lazy patches.
We have more sport to show you yet?
Voice, Air, Rock, do'e hear
Hold up your heads, and do it most serene and clear.
Voice sings and beats Air against Rock -- Rock beats her back again, and makes
her cry out like an Echo. Song.
Voice. How do Maids cry, when they lose what they value so dear

Rock. -- What they value so dear,

Air. -- O dear!

Voice. -- And then the poor Fellow does sigh like a Lass,

Rock -- O does sigh like a Lass,

Air. -- a Lass.

Voice. -- Beauties like meadows are mowed, and they pass,

Air. -- does are mowed, and they pass,

Rock. -- They pass.

Voice. -- Then what have they left for to offer at here?

Air. -- for to offer at here?

Rock. -- at here.

Chorus of All.
Dayzy Roots do mar the growth;
And Marjorum is good for Broth.
But Beef it is makes us lusty,
I love thee Sue, I Will take my Oath,
Then why art thou so crusty?
Thou shall have Eggs and Clary,
Faddle Fiddle,
Hey down Diddle.
Faith let us be merny.
Exeunt all the Dancers singing, Red. It may be sweet Princes. You like not
this Solemn Music, Faddle Fiddle, hey down Diddle, -- I value not my self upon
the Wit, but the fitness of the words; for Air and Melody.

Faddle Fiddle hey, down Diddle,
Faith let us be merry;
I have skill though I say it, that shud'nt, as they say for the Jews
Trump-Citizen, and Trump-Marine, I Will turn my back to none, though some have
been bred up many years to it; I my self chalked out the way to the Tune-Maker:
I know I have many Foes, that say I make not what I own, but mum for that: This
Rare Opera is all mine I Will swear; but for the Dress and Trim, give the Devil
his due, I am beholding to the most Serene and clear Monsieur Stephen, the
Kings Corn-cutter, and so you are all, for he put me upon it.

Now if, that you will wall in to close-up all,
We Will have a most Serene and clear Rank Ball.
Exit Redstreak.
Non. Oh happy silly life, what sports are here?
Noise without noise, grief without care;
Joys without joys, and frights without fear.
Ever all the World, me from this life ^^all hall;
I Will cry, lie down in ground, and kick and sprawl.
Enter Ambition, an Aldermans Wife; Power, Schoolmistress, Plenty an Ale Wife,
and Peace a Zealot.
Plen. See where she is, Oh! Missy you are a Fine Princess to run away from your
Friends so. --


Pow. You put your Father, King Andrew into a fine twitter twatter.


Amb. I come to fetch you from this life of Beast,
To grand Solemnity of City Feast;
Leave smoaky Cot, and Cake-bread tough,
There Is Custards hot, and Fools enough:
Leave Tib and Tom, for good House-holder,
There Is Capon fat, and Mutton shoulder.
Leave Eldern whistle, Gut of Cats,
For City Horn-pipe and Waits;
By me even Mrs. Steward you shall sit,
Whose Lilly hand carves every bit.
And tells the price to show housewifely Wit,
Lump shall be carried home too in Kerchief Wallet;
Or else it shall go hard infaith la, shall se't,
By me to noble thoughts you shall be brought,
And all the Arts of City Madam taught.
Locket on Arm, Ring on Finger,
Of Bobs too, in each ear a Clinger;
With fingers end, or Diamond Ring to play,
And cry, Oh! Lord when you have naught to say:
Finely to stretch, or show the pouting lip,
I Will teach you when to cry foro'th, or sip;
I Will teach you how to filtch and spend,
Dull Husbands muck on courtly Friend;
Yet with grave mouth to rail at the other end.
Of this wild Town. --
Leave boars with limbs, more stiff and hard then Oak,
And think of ruling sparks in Camlet Cloak;
Fresh Sweet-hearts every day new love shall swear:
And in all junckers, who (...) None-so-fair.
Come, come, wed rich retailing Prince; be Great,
Sit finely dressed in Shop, serve God, and cheat.

Pow. I from your silly life do you invite,
I, whose dread Scepter every child does fright;
Presents, and Fasting days are my delight.
If None-so-fair will back to School with me,
None of my Girls shall eat so much as she;
And so that I may get the Pence,
With any 'Prentice, Lord, or Footman Prince,
I Will give her leave to run away from thence.

Plenty. Is this a place for None-so-fair.
As stately Painted Alehouse is fitter far,
Come, go with me, and keep my splendid Bar.
Princess, thou shall Govern there,
Luxurious Ale, and double Beer.
Thy heart in precious Brandy thou shall soak,
In clouds of strong Mundungus smoke;
Hid like a Goddess thou shall lie,
Till thou art comely, Plump, and fair as I;
With ease, Fat Bub, and Virtuous Luxury.

Peace. And I, that thy delights may never cease,
Will steel thy soul with an audacious peace.
And lift up every sense,
With zealous Impudence:
When envious People rail, thou shall reply,
The Saints have suffered still, and so must I.
Let vicious Innocence be all thy care,
Such peace becomes chaste wanton None-so-fair.

Nonsy. Blessed are the Rich, and Happy, eke are those
That never saw Lord-Mayors Puppet Shows;
Nor like clean Beasts stood chewing cribs,
Till Coat was burnt from Rump with Squibs,
Ambition never shall stick to my ribs.

Power, in vain you huff and brag;
Since I have given School the bag,
Catch me there again, and cut off my leg.
Plenty has told a tempting tale,
But in the mind I am I Will drink no Ale.
Peace notably has spoak, but pains must loose;
Girls know more now ever they can tie their shoes.
You have your answers,
And may be gone Sirs.

Plenty -- How say by that?

Power -- She knows not what for her self is good:
Therefore let us force her up between Dorsers,
And carry her home in spite of her blood a.
Come Mrs. Minx.

Nonsy -- I will not goodly stincks,

Amb. I Faith, but you shall a.

Non -- I defy you all, a Grandjurie of Furies.
Oh Mrs. Ambition, pity my Condition.

Power. Oh Power, let me stay but one hour.
Gammar Plenty I Will Saint ye sweet face goody Peace,
Pity my case, Furies, Devils, Plagues; Bastard, help Redstreak.
Help Costard; Oh here is Prince Nicky I Faith He Will lick ye.
Enter Prince Niclas and Amb. Pow. Plent. and Peace run off.
Nick. Since Queans are gone that came eftsoons to humble ye,
Oh let me now anon hear my last Doom most humbly.

Nons. The first request I did command,
Was, that you should not hunt me out:
The next request you understand,
Will make you hang your ears, and pout.
My peace you here come for to break,
After my back, why should you sneak?

Nick. -- Cows that do fill our Guts cannot long be hid,
Though Mice run into holes, none see,
When they have eat our Bread and Cheese,
And stinck most basely when they are dead.
Sweet Cow you hide your Teats in vain,
Though your full Udder fills another pan,
Give me some stroakings to ease my pain.

Non. Prince Nick buckle of girdle turn,
For Milk of mine you never shall churn
Without's my skin, but mind's within;
Though you my hand may find, you cannot reach my mind.

Nick. Will You on you take just such blame,
As Ciss did lay upon her Dame;
Make faults to punnish them. Oh fie for shame!
If Dame should give her Fish to fry,
She must give Butter by and by.
Let ciss without Butter do what she can,
If she no Butter has, she burns the Pan:
Butter to save, she does Dame offend,
Who gave her Butter then to no end.
Cisses unbutter'd things may get her kicks,
For all her Maggots and her drop-nos'd tricks.
Butter cannot err, Ciss out o'th'way may turn:
Though Ciss may fret, yet Butter cannot burn.

Non. Butter good Dames have still allowed enough,
But Maids turn Butter into Kitchin-stuff:
So when they saw their Butter thrown away,
They put their Butter under lock and key.

Nick. -- If Dames Engine by Ciss must governed be,
And Butter spent -- For what a Devil serves she?
Must Maids dry Chops be buttered, they will never keep touch,
Though they are ayl'd with Butter never so much.
Oh None-so-fair! sweet Dame I am your man,
My heart's unbutter'd burning in your Pan,
Without some Butter, it can never move:
Oh Butter it with Butter of your love.

Non. Against your self sweet Prince you have said too much,
I Will keep my Butter since you cannot keep touch.
Go somewhere else, and make your greazy puns,
I love no buttered Fish, nor buttered buns.

Nick. -- Butter, Oh sweet Butter; ease my hissing smart,
And Butter None-so-fairs unbutter'd heart.
Enter Prince Phillip.
Nick. Prince Phillip, here that mighty lout,
Gad then it is time to look about.

Non. Oh you sneaking Prince, what would you have had?

Phil. Oh thou little Devil! I love thee like mad:
And chill take thee at a venture hab nab.

Nick. Fierce love full soon must die I think,
And vanish like abortive slinck.

Phil. My love's zoo bomination strong,
That 'twill hold buckle and thong;
And if dozn't get thee vurder aveel,
shat zee' can strick vyre with my steel.

Nick. -- Gods --

Phil. -- Gods -- and Devils!
Thee talk of Courage, if thou have any,
Here be the Cudgels, let us have a veny.

Nick. I don't care much if I have one touch.
They play Cudgels.
Non. -- Princess, hold for all your Squablin,
Cannot purchase my Tantablin.

Phil. Adzboard Prince Nick, cham yours.
If None-zo-vair zay do it, chill buss thy root.

Nick. -- Prince Phillip for fair Trollop,
Whose voice might bear of whelp beguile a,
Or Bread and Butter beg from Child a.
I Am thine --

Non. -- The next command of mine, in brief
Is after me no more to sniff.
Princess farewell, without or and if.

Nick. -- So sad are the commands that you do give,
That without meat or drink I cannot live.

Phil. Your mind that upon our veirce wrath prevails,
Can when you please, make hot or cool your nails.
exit None-so-fair. Enter Woudhamore and Sweet-lips.
Phil. But Zee, Zee, laud to bless us, if here been't hur
Zusturs now. -- Come Prince Nick, let us budge.

Sweet. Great Princess, whither do you sneak from this place?

Would. To None-so-fair, their Calf with a white face.

Sweet. I wonder what Princely virtues you can see in her i'faggs.

Can she make Butter, and Cheese, and Eggs?

Would. She Is a Bastard, some Village Hind got her under a
Hedge, when our Royal Mother was overtaken at a Wake.
Love us Princess, here is your true beauty.

Phil. There Is your Anchovies. [roll.

Would. Here Is a Cherubimical Face, mark how my Eyes
Here Is a Languishing look, Ah! --

Phil. Odzboars my Stomach begins to wamble at her.

Would. Here Is a foot like a Fairy, and a leg like a Lapwing.

Phil. Look Prince Nick, chil wager a Groat there is zomething at the end of
thick leg, -- there is your Anchovies.


Sweet. Here Is your white Hounds Tooth.

Would. Here Is your Illustrious Persian Hawk-Nose.

Sweet. Here, here, here is your generous wide Nostrils, you may see my Brains
work through them when I Am in passion.


Phil. Con yo Whistle and Dance Barnaby?

Both. Ay, ay. --

Phil. Con yo zing a new Ditty?

Both. Ay, ay, ay. --

SONG.
God Cupid, Oh fie, O fie, Oh fie,
God Cupid Oh fie, Oh fie,
I am vexed full sore,
Oh! thou Son of a Whore.
Take pity on me or I dye, I dye,
Take pity on me or I dye.
My face is Pale and wan,
My blood is turned to a jelly;
In my heart I have a gre^at pain,
Oh! Oh! how I long for a man,
With a Sol, my, fa, la, lang tree down derry.
Phil. Oh Prince Nick, ch'ad lever ha one o'th theze then a Cow, o'Ten groats.
-- Con ye milk a dreelegg'd Stool? live vive Months upon the droppings of your
Nose? and lie with no body but your own Husbands?


Both. Ay, ay, any thing for Husbands.

Phil. Then give me your hands, -- good buy to ye with all my heart --

Exit. Phillip.
Would. Oh! Villainous Clown, I think we are abused.

Sweet. Were ever Ladies bright so used?
Surely there is more of honor in Prince Nicklas:

Would. He looks like a Gentleman, sure he will tickle us.

Nick. Sweet lips, and would hamor you each, and both,
May keep your Princely wind to cool hot broth.
You know your Cheer, and may go chew your Cuds,
For I Will have None-so-fair, or lie ith'd Suds,
This is my dire resolve, witness ye Gods.
Exit Nicklas.
Sweet. Rot her beauty, while the case is thus,
No Crouder ever will Fiddle us.

Would. Each day she can command a several King,
As if the Gods, to do more had nothing.
But to make Kings for her,
Oh laud, Oh lack, Oh dear.
With strayning I am almost burst, hey ho;
What shall we do for all our Cake is do,

Sweet. Well I will straight complain to Mother Wosset.
And she shall Snuff a Candle in her Posset;
Brick Wall her Temple does Inviron,
Backdoor too is fenced with spikes of Iron.
Oh! Mother Wossat, you that can
By Circles dark, and deep, trappan,
The heart of any Jill or Jan.
Oh! help us to debauch this Jade,
Or her eoy tricks will mar thy Trade.

Would. No Citizen will pawn his Cloak;
No Country Squire will love one stroke,
And how can then thy Chimny smoke?
Nay, if things go on so odly,
All the Gallants will turn godly.
And then for Bub thou may go choke.

Sweet. Rowse mightily Woossat, Mantle done,
Thy hagship Venge, or Credits gone,
Make have, and let us know off, or on.
Horrid Music heard in the Air.
Would. Ha! what powerful Melody appears?
And snacthes thus our ears?
Woossat appears in a Chariot drawn by two Brooms.
Sweet. The Chariot of the Goddess comes,
Drawn by a Brace of well grown Brooms.

Woossat sings. Fair Damzels I have heard you prate,
You shall have Husbands soon or late.
I am as mad as any Dog to find,
You Have had so little good of humane kind,
But there is the more behind.
I will so order Nonsey's Princely louts,
You shall be satisfied and leave your pouts:
With Nonsey now is Daddy dear
And hand in hand they are gone to wishing Chair,
Good fortune for to hear.
That Rogue will very civil prove to me,
For Witch and Iuggler never disagree:
To you and me so kind he will prove,
That when you feel his love,
You Will give half piece to buy him fringed glove.
Woossat ascends. Sweet. Great Beldam, me thy hagship thank,
And now methinks I in wondrous Cranck.

Would. While young we will to loves Altar bow;
And when we are old be even as thou.
Enter King Andrew, None-so-fair, Twattle, Glozy, and Attendants.
K. And Daughters, by the love that you do bear me,
And the duty which I owe you, hear me:
Cease your brawling, and your Twittle Twattle.
At the Rose let us call in, and drink a loving bottle.
Then we will to the wishing chair,
If that don't ease your cares,
I Will give you both my Royal ears,
I think that is very fair.
None-so-fair's agreed sweet Lady,
Will you deny poor harmless Daddy?
What er'you wish for you will have,
Else say King Andrew is a knave.

Non. Cheer up Sisters, why should you look so gloomy?
What er'the wishing chair shall say:
The King, and That I will obey,
Else may this liquor never go through me.

K. And. Come let us not on each other stare,
But hye us to the wishing chair:
That will set all right in a minuit,
Or else I think the Devil's in it.
So swimmingly we will carry matters,
All pristine Poets that come after's.
To sing Heroic love and slaughters,
shall write of King and his three Daughters.
Exeunt.
The End of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Wossat and Bruine. Woss. SOn Bruin mind your hits, I say mind your hits;
this young cold Harlottry None-so-fair, must be sous'd, and touz'd do'e mark
me; she must be tumbled and jumbl'd; she must I say it, or else the Noble
Science of Wenching will grow obsolete, and all our Famous Function may starve;
for after that, who will pity poor decayed old Gentlewomen that carry Letters?
or suffer Pours, Points, Paint, or Patches, to be brought to their Chambers?
And you of the Illustrious Society of Pimping, may hang if you have Courage
enough to deserve it; or dye in holes like poisoned Ratts; You will be shouted
through the Street, like strange Dogs with horns at their tails, pumped and
baited like Spirits that steal children; every Cuckold will have a snap at your
Carcasses.


Bru. Then one comfort will be that our miseries will be short lived, for those
Beasts you talk of swarm so thick, that 't will be impossible to pass one
Street without being worried to death. Every public Assembly looks like a
Picture of the Creation before man was made, filled up with variety of
Creatures, that show all Horns and Tails.


Woss. It Is for our honor, know that I will revive the Sect of Adamites, renew
the Family of Love, and make the slavery of Marriage so out of fashion, that a
Man and Wife shall be showed about, and wondered at as much as an Hermaphrodite,
an entire Egyptian Mummy, or a Cat with two tails.


Bru. I know Mother your Interest with the Gentry is great, there is hardly a
Noble Family, where one of your Order, does not lie hid under the shape of a
Cousen, Housekeeper, Waiting Women, Chambermaid, or the like. --


Woss. That I learned from my Brother on the other side of the water: whose
Emissaries are all disguised, his precepts and mine agree in most
circumstances. We had rather allow 20 Whores then one wife to those of our
order; I will bring up here that old Scotch Custom, that every Lord of the
Manor shall have the first nights dalliance with the Bodies of all his Vassals.


Bru. That will assure you the hearts of all the great Ones, and keep the
others from Marriage, so your business is done.


Woss. But first let None-so-fair's business be done.

Bou. I dare not; she is King Andrews best beloved daughter.


Woss. Were she the skin between her brows, I'denot spare her; do it or forswear
thy Office. --


Bru. That I could easily do, for it is not now worth keeping, if there is any
new piece worth Money, a Father, Brother, or some Relation, Usurps our office,
and reaps the profit.


Woss. It Is too true, and it is unconscionable, that Christians should turn
Canibals, and feed upon their own flesh and blood, my case is even as bad too;
I that have spent my Youth to gain experience, must in my Age be Nosed, and
have my Bread taken from my Teeth, by every Black brow'd Baggage, that leaps
into the public Practice of procuring, ever they know the mystery of jilting;
nay too often learn both together.


Bru. In the City they dare not use two Trades at once; but in the Suburbs they
may do any thing. --


Woss. Your Midwife, who is related to our Craft, as a Phisician is to a
Mountebank; for we make work for them to finish, though we Lay six to their
one, suffers none to profess their Art till they have been Deputies seven
years. -- Well, things and things must be mended; but first to the point, King
Andrews three Daughters are coming to the wishing Chair: the two elder are mad
for Husbands, their business is done to our hands. --


Bru. Quite contrary; for if they Marry they will renounce you.


Woos. No! Though ordinary people that pretend not to the modish, Marry to live
sullen, that is, chaste. Others know better things; your Gentleman stands now as
much for the privilege of keeping a Miss after Marriage, as a Woman with a
Portion does for a Jointure: Ay! and inserts it into that Covenant. -- Make us
thankful, we live in a loving Age, -- but to the point -- None-so-fair, by my
means is resolved to wish the White Bear of Norwich to be her Husband;
thinking, which is indeed true, that there is no such thing, though we have
frighted silly people into that belief, to cheat them the better.


Bru. Oh! now I find your meaning, that White Bear I will be; and the King
being possessed with a Reverence to our Juggling wishing Chair; shall himself
bring her to my Arms. --


Woss. Very good; but least she should be stubborn, let Ieffery be ready to
assist you in your pious design.


Bru. If we can but wheedle them into an awful faith.

Woss. Why? should not the speech, of a Chair, do as much as Apollo's tripod, a
Spirit in a Wall; or the eyes of Images moved with Wires: let all be Grave and
Solemn, for that is the chief support of Counterfeit worship: and let your
expressions be in Greek, or any unpracticed canting Gibberish.


Bru. Enough, I Will warrant the business.

Woos. This Music tells their approach, let us dispatch and attend them in. --


Soft Music. The Scene drawn, discovers the wishing Chair. Enter a Boy in a
Surplice dancing, followed by two women bearing a Chaffing dish between them,
and smoking Tobacco; after them comes the Chief Priest in a Fools-coat, his
Train supported by two in like habit, two Priests in Surplices follow them;
then come two Judges playing on Jewes-trumps followed by a Cardinal, playing on
a Child's Fiddle; two in grave habits follow him playing on Childrens Pipes;
then comes a Major beating a little Drum; after him the King leading
None-so-fair. Prince Nick and Sweet-lips, Phillip and Woudha. attended -- with
Guards etc. They pass round the Stage, and place themselves on each side, and
the Chief Priests before the Chair, and the two in Surplices on each side. Song.
Let Maudlin lovers that are in despair,
And musty Virgins at their latest Prayer.
To be freed from their troubles, come hither.
And Widows, whose fires
Of unnatr'all desires.
Have parched up their faces like leather.
Chorus.
We Will dry up their tears, and ease all their Care,
With a delicate thing called a new wishing chair.
Of crackling tell-tale Wicker it is not made,
Which loves dear Secrets has too oft'betray'd.
To this Chair so much Virtue is given.
That when you are in
At the turning a pin.,
You will think you are going to Heaven.
Chorus.
We Will etc.
With offerings laden, to the chair make have,
Before the precious time of wishing's past.
For when once the kind Engine is falling,
You must bear your pain,
Till the time come again
Though you rend the moist Clouds with your bawling.
Chorus.
We Will dry up your tears. etc.
The Priests how, and mutter to the Chair; then turn to the People.

Song.
Son of Latrona thou great rogue,
Here Is None-so-fair her grief to disimbogue.
The Jade is skittish, full of treachery
But wilful rude, and loath to try.
Chorus.
Lo here is the Fool King Andrew too,
Let Us cheat them firmly er'they go.
Let Us cheat, etc. --
Chief Priest. -- The Sacred Chair vouchsafes that all
Upon all four should to him fall.
All fall on their hands.
Chair. Hoh, hoh, hoh, hoe, hoe, hoe:

Chapter P. -- Your offerings are accepted, stand by my Cronies,
Till we have finished all the Ceremonies.
Chair roars. Ha! the mystic Chair begins to frown,
All that have wealth, must lay it down.
Keep naught of Pride, or Riches near you,
Least Chair in wrath to pieces tear you.
They all lay down their Money, Swords, etc. which the Priests gather up.

Song by the two Priests.
1. Pr. Thou pickst the Butchers knife out of his mouth,
Thou robst a poor old woman of her tooth.

2. Pr. -- Thou did the monstrous Flesh-flies to destroy,
Who bred the Maggots which did Beef over run.
Chorus. Thou sly, and bauling Theif go on with joy,
Their Money, Swords, and Hats are all our own.

A Dance by the two Priests. Song. 1. Pr. By Germain Princess that notorious
cheat.

2. Pr. By Cressets memory we thee entreat,
Thou would with noise, and show blind all their eyes.

1. Pr. Least they our silly Opera despise,
Chorus of both. -- Least they our silly Opera despice.

Chorus.
Now Croudy mutton is come out of France,
Tom thimble has made show complete,
Iewes-Trumps, and Cymbals sound, and let us dance,
Since Wool' is small, let ery be great.
A Dance. The Invocation. 2. Pr. -- James Naylor, Pope Joan, Wat. Tyler, Mall.
Cutpurs, Chocorelly.


All-Answer. -- Help our Opera, because it is very silly.

2. Pr. -- Massaniello, Mosely, Iack-straw, Iantredisco, Pimponelli.


Ans. -- Help our Opera, because it is very silly:

2. Pr. -- Hocus-pocus, Don-Quixot, Jack Adams, Mary Ambry, Friar Bungy.

William Lilly. --

Ans. Help our Opera, because it is very silly.

2. Pr. Carpentero, Paintero, Dancers, Musickera, Songstero, Punchanelly.


Ans. Help our Opera, because it is very silly.
Chorus first Sung, and then Sung, and Danced to. Some shall hollow, some Dance
and Sing,
Hey ding, ding, ding, hey ding, ding,
Omn'a been -- Omn'a been.
Ding, ding, ding, with hey ding, ding ding,
With hey, etc. --
The Chief Priest seats None-so-fair in the Chair, it Thunders and Lightens;
the Chair sinks, and in its place a dreadful shape arises, and says. -- The
Princess to the Chair is pleasing,
And all her troubles now are easing.
The Chief Priest turns over his head, and the other two Priests take the
little Boy in the Surplice, and whip him while they Sing this. He took him by
the Lilly Frock,
And scourged him full sore;
A long half hour by the Clock,
Alack a day therefore,
While Youth does last, the changes Ring,
With a ding dong, ding dong ding,
When Youth is flown, and Age is come,
The Clappers down, the Bell does groan:
And call you to a sad long home,
With a heavy, heavy, heavy boam, boam.
The Chief Priest rises and waves his Wand thrice.
Chapter Pr. Comorah whee, Comorah whee, Comorah whee.

All answer bowing. Shoolimocroh, Shoolimocroh, Shoolimocroh.

Chapter Pr. -- Kiss Betty.

All answ. bowing. -- Pollykagathoy. --
It Thunders and Lightens, the Priest waves his Wand, all squat down -- the
dreadful shape sincks, and the Chair rises kissing None-so-fair, -- and she
immediately comes out of it.
Chapter Pr. Behold the Chair. --
[All rise up hastily and bow.
Chapter Pr. Now None-so-fair, has had her wish,
And first you shall hear what it is;
And after we will sacrifice a -- Fish.

K. And. Oh Sir! we humbly do beseech
To know who shall her Husband be,
For that our very Ears do itch;
And if you please we fain would see.
It Thunders and Lightens extremely, and then the Chair delivers this Oracle.
-- Lead None-so-fair to yonder Wood,
Where Lover showle like Beasts for Food,
There she must sigh, and weep a good.
And so you there must leave her,
For the White Bear of Norwich must have her.
To her he will be very Civil,
Be gone, it is vain to huff or snivil.

K. And. O fie, O fie, O laud, O me forlorn,
Would I had died ever I was born;
I have spent my Youth fair,
To get a wife for a Bear.

Would. Lippy, I could leap out of my skin for joy Mother Woossut, a brave
Beldam! she has keep'd her word.


Sweet. Nothing vexes me, but that I must be Aunt to her litter of Cubs. -- We
shall have roaring Nephews. --


K. And. Troop, troop, if I keep in this dreadful mind,
I will come back, but I Will leave my life behind.

Nick. Hold, hold, King Andrew stay, be wise I say,
And don't the Gods obey;
If 'twere good that None-so-fair were given to the Bear,
You should heard on it before y' had known't.

Phil. But if it is bad, then it is not good, we know what is what.

We must not shed the guiltless blood,
Yet None-so-fair, poor Sheep must go to pot.
Gods, you would be veaz'd, wo'r you z'ard in your kind,
Vor you are never half an hour in a mind.

Nick King be not cheated not cullied King; I Will be hanged if there is not a
live thing in the wishing Chairl, did n't you see how None-so-fair was tickled,
did not she spin like a Top, and stand upon her head like a Juggler; it is a
damned Son of a Whore Chair, and he lies, and I am not satisfied. --


Pr. Oh Sir, take heed for Crimes like this,
The Sacred Chair has Rods in piss.

K. And. When wishing Chair his Silence broak,
I do believe Tom-tumbler spoak.

Pr. The wonders of our wishing Chair, proved by Miracle, and that shows the
truth of the power of the wonder.


Nick. The Power is governed by the Order, which commands the Power and the
Order, Rules the Beauty which governs the Order, which is found tied fast to
the end of the Creation, in a long round Chain; and things, and things loose
fast upon one another, I don't know howish, like bunches of Paper at a Kites
tail, and so by a plain orderly method of Power and Order, and Order without
Power, and Power without Order; and no Power, and no Order, and no Order, but a
kind of Dis-orderly Powerful Order.

The fixed World is drawn, confined at large;
As men in Ropes tied loose, tugg Western Barge.

Chapter Pr. You and your Nature are mere Ignorance,
But we appear to wise foreseeing chance.

Nick. If Nature is less then Miracle, when Heaven uses Supernatural Miracle;
the Gods declare their Power. less, because Miracle is greater then Nature; --
But if the Gods make children, when Natures Instrument is out of tune: They use
no Nature, because Nature without Nature; is not Nature, but Miracle Unnatural,
miraculous Nature.


Phil. There Is your Anchovies; Priest -- 'twas woundy well spoak, and zooe if
this begranted; I he Gods can, but they wo'not; because they would, but they
cannot, and they will not, and they cannot, and they cannot, any they will not, and
zo.

They Will never be mad, because they are not long in a mind,
Az a deaf Hostess cannot zee, because she is blind.

Chapter Pr. Avaunt you scoffing Blades, avaunt,
The Thundering Gods begin to Rant.
It Thunders, and Lightens, the Chair sinks, and the Priests, and all their
Attendants run off the Stage.
Phil. What do think, we be wild Irish; and will run away,

Because the Clouds be troubled with the wind cholick,
Odzbboars do think chill, lose my Coin, and my Parcel?

Non. The Gods and wishing Chair, we must obey,
And I will go, because I cannot stay.

K. And. -- Come my sweet Pigs-nie let us make have,
If Bear eats thee for his breakfast:
As I Am a sinner. He shall have me for a dinner.

Nick. Thus great -- -- was betrayed,
And Psyche taken from her Dad,
Though Princess huff'd, and swore like mad.
Exeunt all but Phillip.
Phil. -- All gwon, zure it is a Bawdy House,
Vor there cham twoald they use you thus,
Be vengeance cranck, till you are snoring drunk,
And then away shirks Money, Clothes, and Punck.
The Gods may well rain Golden showr's,
Into the Laps of Paramours:
Credit is theirs, but cost is ours;
Ch'ave not one penny left my drouth to quench,
If this be Religion; give me a Wench. There Is your Anchovles.
Exit Phillipl
ACT II.
SCENE III. A Wilderness.
Enter King Andrew, Sweet-lips, Woudha. and None-sofair. Non. O Royal Dad, see,
how he blubbers,
Kings should not whine so like great lubbers.

K. A. O slip! O Daughter mine! where art thou gadding?
I never shall hear thee more sing with a fadding.
Oh! that could grave thee had thou put in,
Before by me thou were begotten:
Why should the Gods be so barbraous?
Oh! that t'hadst died in Natures Warehouse,
Then Death that cunning old Shop-lifter,
From stall of eyes had never snift her.

Non -- Your sniv'ling melts me, so that I shall be quite dead before I dye.


K. And. Oh ye Gods!
I Have many a day paid Scot, and lot,
And well I Am served, now am I not.

Nons. -- Oh! Sir begone, begone, I say,
For if you tarry here,
My life it will soon sneak away:
And cheat the Gods, and eke the bear,
Sisters two I leave you here,
To keep you clean and sweet.
Be good unto my Daddy dear,
For so it is very meet.
Each week let him have shirt full clean,
Let head be combed, and washed his face.
Let holes be mended in hosen,
Himself cannot do it, you see alas.
Sir, On my knees I you beseech,
To leave me now alone.
For why my Elbows both do itch,
Till you are fled, and gone.
O! Budge away from this place flat all,
For if the Bear should come, have at all.
Bw'y Daddy for ever and a day.

K. And. -- Mine own dear Hussy do not so say,
Bespeak a place for me below there:
For I Will come down some time of other,
And do'e hear, remember me to your Mother.
Exeunt all but None-so-fair.
Noneso. For all so well I hid my fears,
Deaths Calumny my facebesmears,
Laud what a quiddie am I in i'fack; i'fack,
You may wring the shift upon my back:
If 'twere but Flesh and Blood I would not fear,
But to be touz'd by naught, but claws and hair,
Hair, stiffer then, an old man's Beard,
Would make the stoutest Vizard here afeard
Why should I speak so; the Chair told me, the bear would be kind to me, I Will
shut my eyes, and think, A'tis some Gallant in Masquerade with Fur'd-Coat on,
but then he cannot cry like a discreet soft Counter, do'e know me now? no He Will
roar ^oh, ho, ho, and (...) oh like a Drunken Soldier at the Sack of a City.

Enter Phillip and Nicklas.
Phil. O hoe! here she is -- pluck up Heart, O Grace! here take my muckinder,
and dry thy ey'n, cham the Blood, Of The Phillips! never a Dog in the Village can
zay, blacks mine eye; but in the way of love and honesty, and av'ore the Bear
shall eat one bit o've thee.

Princess Chill beat my Oaken Plant to th'stumps,
Don't windle zoo, but leave thy doleful dumps.

Nick. -- Let Guts and Garbage feed white Bears,
Poor strolling Cracks and Wastcoteers:
Not Gods, but cheating Crew of juggling Chair,
Are mad to make a Meal on Royal Gueer.

Non. I will not hear the Sacred Chair abused.

Nick. -- Poor harmless Rogue! how sadly he is misused?
Great Princess, since grim ^uc^us coming,
No longer here, let us stay Caps thrumming.
Come jog along with us good Fellows,
We will regale you at next Alehouse.
And of one kiss of Bona Robas.
Bears, Gods, nor Devils, shall not bob us.

Non. No more great Sirs was it Court-ship here,
You take the wrong sow by the ear,
For by Lord Harry I'el never marry,
And when I do, it shall not be you,
Thereforego too.
A Roaring within as of a Boar.
Phil. Odz-boars Prince Nick.

Ston. Vast, here is the Anchovies.

Nick. Bear up, Phillip, bear up.

Phil. Ay, ay, but don't hunch me zoo, chill warn't vor one.
A Roaring again, the Bear enters, seizes the Princess, and sincks with her,
while Jeffry with a switch beats of the Princes.
END of the II. ACT.
ACT J.
Scene III.
Enter Payers with Beaters on thyir shoulders, and their Master with his
measuring Rod. SONG.
YOu tough brawny Lads, that can live upon stone;
And skin the hard Flint for good Liquor:
Let love to the Idle, and wealthy begone,
And let preaching alone to the Vicar;
Let all be made plain, with your Strikers and Thumpers,
And when your works done, we will about with the Bumpers.
The little blind God, of which lovers do prate,
Makes all that adore him grow lazy,
For counterfeit blessings he long makes you wait,
And with sighs and diseases he pays ye.
But he you serve now, with your Strikers and Thumpers,
When the works done, will about with the Bumpers.
1. Pav. The Walks are all gravelled, and the Bower shall be prepared for the
Bear and Nonsey.


2. Pa. But ever wego in, let the Drinking begin,
And then we will Thump it again.
Chorus.
With full double Pots,
Let us liquor our throats.
And then we will to work with a hoh, ho, ho,
But let us drink ever we go, let us drink ever we go.

Mast. Then toss up your liquor, and to labor make have,
The time is too precious to wast.

Chorus -- With full double, etc. 1. Pav. Here Harry. --

2. Pav. Here Will.

3. Pav. Old True-penny still.

All. While one is drinking, another should fill,

Pa. Here Is to thee Peter, --

4. Thanks honest Phil.

All. Lets lustily swill, and while one is drinking, another should sill.


Chorus -- With full double, etc. Master. Dispatch, or the Bear, or the
Princess will chide,
For Love can no hindrance abide.

Pa. There Is more need of drinking, drinking, then kissing by ods.

We Will bouse it in spite of the Gods.

Chorus -- With full double, etc. A Dance, and all run off. Inter Bruin and
Jeffry. Bru. Brave Boys all, it is as well done as if I had chalk' out the way
my self; and it had been doing 16 whole Months, by the excellent approved,
great most Famous, Ingenious, Industrious, careful Society of More-fields; Well
Geffery, what do think of my Missy None-so-fair!


Ieffry. Think! Oh she is the delicat'st, but of Man's meat that ever lips were
laid to, or legs laid over; she is an Armfull for one of the Gods, for Jupiter
himself in his Altitudes.


Bru. In his Altitudes -- what is that?

Ieffry. Why that is drunk as David's Sow, with Nector and Ambrosia, which is
stout Mum, and Brandy; the Gods drink upon Holy Days, But Sir, is not
None-so-fair a little soft childish, no wiser then she should be?


Bru. I thought thou had known better; all cunning Amorous Women, put on a
modish seeming. Innocent Ignorance, that they may have pleasure without loss of
reputation, it is a modest way of wooing, and as pleasant to the hearers, as
great lies ingeniously made, and seriously told, for things that come nearest
Truth; and are not so, are most taking.


Ieffry. Therefore, young Gallants are so much pleased with being like
Gentlemen; and the total of all the praise, they would give a Friend, ends in.
-- Gad, in short he is much like a Gentleman; the Devil take me, much like a
Gentleman? --


Bru. Ay! that is, he Swears, Drinks, Games, and Whores, which are no more the
true accomplishments of a right Gentleman; then Huffing, and speaking loud
Nonsense, are of the Gods, whatever our Friends, the Fopps, and the Poets,
which are much like one another, say to the contrary. --


Ieffry. Apollo, the wishing Chair told me. --

Bru. Pox take that liquorish Rogue, he has been beforehand, he will have a hand
in every sack, -- what did he say?


Ieffry. When he kissed her, she cried Oh laud! why do 'e kiss a body so, I Will
tell my Father, so I will. --


Bru. Ay, and thrust out her lips as 'twere to push him away, when 'twas only
to kiss closer? --


Ieffry. And when he talked a little, -- I do'nt know howish, you know of that
same, -- she looked so wistly, and Innocently in his face.


Bru. As Ignorant People do on one that speaks a Foreign Language. --


Ieffry. Ay, and repeated every strange word so harmlessly, and cried what is
that now?


Bru. And was as curiously inquifitive, as if she were learning a new stitch on
her Sampler. --


Ieffry. And looked with such Religious Languishing Eyes.

Bru. Religious Languishing Eyes?

Ieffry. Ay, as if she were at Prayers.

Bru. Thou incorrigible Fool -- If a Woman looks so, though in the Church; thou
may swear her thoughts are in the very Altitudes of Love -- Her heart's drunk
with it, and her eyes reel, and are dazzled her dying Eyes, think thy self into
an Amorous ecstasy, and I Will tell thee how thou lookst.


Ieffry. Gad, and so I will.

Bru Now, now, now, there is your Religious, languishing; drunken, dying Eyes.


Ieffry. Oh, oh, aha. --

Bru. There Is your Anchovies, as Prince Phillip says.

Ieffry. I Will swear it is very pretty, but why will not you appear to her like a
Gentleman? --


Bru. No, no, when she sees me in this invisible shape, like a Prince, she will
think I Am a God, and will make her a Lady. When love thus storms a Fort, and
enters by force, he plunders freely, and imposes what conditions he will; but
when he comes sneaking, and creeping like a Boy after a Butterfly, Ten to one
but she flies off, and he falls into the next Ditch; for where love is in
motion, like Water thrown on the ground: 'twill fall into the first hollow
place it finds.

My love comes, Ieffry to your Post, away,
Take care that none disturb our Play;
'Twill be your own another day.
Exeunt Bruin and Jeffry several ways. The Scene changed to an Arbor dressed
up with gaudy Play-games for Children. ^nter None-so-fair alone.
Non. Oh what a bewitching sight is here, a finer place cannot be seen in a
Summers day. -- Oh! my the other goodness, it looks like an Orange stuck with
Cloves, or a Pudding full of Plums, as who should say, come eat me, it is the
very Virginy Pepper of Nature, where the Spicy taste, of all Shows is bound up
in one fine sight; was this made for a Slaughterhouse, no, it is more like an
Opera, then a Bear-Garden; it is as fine as to Day and to Morrow, sure it is the
Countrey-house of some City God; I was brought hither above ground too, as if I
had flown in the Air: -- Oh happy Nonsey. -- But stay, if the Gods should play
the Jacks with me, and show me Roast-meat, to thurst the Spit in my Guts. --
No, no, let nothing trouble thee little Nonsy, they are better bred; and scorn to
be so base. -- But if some fine God should come in a great Periwig, and red and
green Ribbons, and swear he loved me like a Devil, and all that; there is your
Anchovies, as Prince Phillip says.


Bruin within sings. Sweet open the Door, and let me come in a,
For to go a wooing, I now begin a.
Non. I Will open, and open, and open again,
Then I prithee sweet heart come in.
O Melody most ravishing!
I could for ever hear it sing.
Oh if thou have the Bowels of a Man a!
Tune up thy Pipes, and sing again a.
Bruin within.
Br. Oh fair Maid! be not afraid: For I am come a wooing,
Thou art mine, and I am thine own sweet heart, and Bruin.

Non. Once more, Oh box my ears once more!
If er'I heard the like, I Am the Son of a Whore.

Br. Hey ding a ding, muck and Trash,
Little Miss None-so-fair has a white Elbow,
Oh take all my dross! but give me the Lass,
For I want a new sheath to my Bilbow.

Non. With a hey tralil, and ho tralil, my Elbow does itch,
Which makes me cry still:
Oh give me thy Dross! and thou shall have the Lass,
And a Dainty fine sheath for thy Bilboe.

Non. My heart's provoked by some Divine Bauble,
And all my Blood is turned to a Caudle.

Bru. All Play-games that e're be brought,
For love or Money, I Will give my Honey,
She shall have all the World in thought.

Non. -- O Dear! O dainty!

Br. -- O sweet and twenty!

Non. -- When shall I my Charmer know,

Br. -- Too morrow to mo.

Non. -- I Am afraid,

Br. -- Fie fair Maid.

Non. -- Hey I Am sad, and I Am glad,

Bru. -- Why all is paid I'gad.

Non. -- By this great gift, thou are some Goddy,

Bru. -- Thou shall perceive, I am no Noddy.

Non. -- Come in then my Dear hoddy doddy.
A Dance of Bears, among which is the white Bear of Norwich, and at the end of
the Dance his shape flies off, and he appears dressed like a Cupid.
Non. Oh what a glorious thing was here, in shape of ugly Bear.
Oh what hands! what legs are there?
But Oh the face! and oh the hair!
And Oh that he were mine own dear!

Bru. The Bear I am,

Non. Pray Gad be Jon.

Bru. For all you are so cranck and pretty,
The Chair has sent me here to eat ye.

Non. Oh eat me quickly! and Oh eat me long!
For and Oh! Iam not sickly, but Ah! I am not young.
Ah! I Am very tender by my troth,
Oh! I long to leap into thy mouth.
In thy dear kidneys I Will inhabit,
And make a Borough like a Rabbit.
Oh! no other love shall thence me ferret,
Ah! I will not hurt thee, do not fear it.
But like gentle Viper some-
Times to pretty mouth I Will come,
Hounds-teeth to pick; on eyes to gaze,
And view thy comely maple face:
Then turning round in wainscot jaws,
And sliding down rough corral Throat.
There in loves sweets I Will stewing lie,
Till all dissolved in love, I dye.
My mind boils over with the thought,

Bru. My fair

Non. my Love

Br. my Dear

Non. my Dove.

Bru. My Honey

Non. my Bunny

Br. my Croney

Non. Let me approach ye

Bru. Let me make much o'ye --

Non. Oh let me kiss that pretty pretty dimple!

Bru. My love is willing, but she is wondrous simple.

Non. Ah how I long! Oh how I am stung!
Ah I feel your headed steel!
Oh how it smarts! Ah how it tickles!
Ah the softness! and Oh the prickles!
Ah how it cleaves my heart in pieces!
Now, now, Oh now it increases.
Now my Blood begins to be at peace,
I Will warrant you, 'twas all up in my face.
Oh the sweets of the pain! Ah the pain of the pleasure!
Ah the griefs! Oh the joys without measure!

Bru. Is this cold Numph without heart like Iron?
Her face does tempt, but tricks do tire one,
My stomachs full, but she is more eager,
Then Soldier coming from long leaguer.

Non. Oh the Trance in which I Have been!
Ah that 'twould 'till Death remain!
But Oh 'twill never, never come again!

Bru. Allonz my Dear I am thy Bear,
Cheer up I say, I have it for ye,
With naught, but love I will not marry.

Non. Ah Laud Sirs, did you ever see the like? what have you done to me? well
you are a naughty Bear, I believe you are a Witch; do virtuous Princess use to be
so -- Poor thing I was never so before, and I would do nothing mis-becoming the
Rank, Quality of King Andrews-daughter --


Bru. Oh well dissembled Ignorance!

Non. Your hand bewitched me, but your eyes; Oh those Enchanting eyes! I never
saw such eyes, nor felt such eyes; nor heard such eyes, nor understood such
eyes, Oh those delicate! dear, long round, twinkling, pincking, glazing,
leering, sneering Sheeps eyes of thine.

O look away, they pierce me so,
I know not wher'I feel or no.
Why do'e gape so amorous, zee,
Would you have any thing of me.

Bru. Oh yes, I am soust too in loves pickle,
Salt tears down cheeks like Mil-stones trickle;
My heart in Stomach their would rest,
As brooding Rook does on soft nest;
And while for food it there sits calling,
With bit of pity, thou must stop his yawling:
Oh give me thy pretty thing.
And when that pretty thing thou give to me,
I Will burn its Tail, that it may fly from me;

Non. Oh take it then! Oh catch it quickly,
Staying with me it is grown so sickly,
It melts too fast, unless your help withstands,
'Twill dye away, and lie upon my hands;
Oh it flutters, Ah it pants, yet, yet I hav't,
Oh Sir dispatch, dispatch, if you would sav't,
Sir, Sir, Sir, now, now, Oh now it tingles at my fingers ends,
It Is gone, it is gone, run, fetch it back again:
Or I shall dye unless thou giv'st me thine.
Exeunt running. Scene changed. Enter the Princes, Nicklas and Phillip.
Pil. Prince Nick, cham zick ove this zokring work;
Che wonder where the Vengeance scab do lurk,
Why wuss mon she is but one of my Naunts:
There vore lets squot, and leave theez murrin Jaunts;

Nick. All ground's to hot for me to tarry on,
Till I have got my Princely Carrion;
Though Fortune is froppish still we hope well,

Phil. be not moapish, but ask all Pe-o-ple.

Phil. May be she is zunning on zome odrous mixion,
Choud teaz her ifz could vind the Vixon;

Nick. Had she none but we to put her tricks on.

Phil. A vowdry tit come Nick lets zlip hence,
When luch zares pride wull pay her odd vip'ence;
Yet white Bears a Beast, if he hurt imp Royal,
Though Bear have Feast, let wishing Chair pay all:
Let Us hye us to'n straight, and bumbast the bony Witch,
Che doubt thick Chair had vurst lick ove her honey Critch,

Nick. Mums the word least he by flight prevent us,
Let Us gallop straight on pair of nimble Tentoes.
Exeunt. The Scene changed to the Arbor. Enter None-so-fair.
Non. Laud what have I done, I reek like a new shot gun,
Heigh hoe, a kind of shameless shame I feel;
But I feel something else that joys me still,
And does that other feeling quite out-feel:
I cannot repent now for my blood,
Sure things so sweet must need be good,
Besides to love is to obey a God,
The things so Sacred, and so kind to boot:
That I will roar it out -- again I Will do it.
Here comes the little loving Rogue,
Now do I blush like a blew Dog;
What shall I do, I am rapt, Oh! I shall have my fit again, for
something catches me fast by the inclination. --
Oh, you Devil, you Ah!
Sing this. The more I look, the more I like, beauty breeds my hearts delight.

Bru. Poor virtuous loving Princess,
At first she seemed to loath loves pleasant bub,
And now she is all for empting of the Tub.

Non. Though I Am so fond of one never seen before,
I hope you do not think I am a Whore;
Yet least that I should prove with Child,
And you should run away therefore,
I pray Sir, be so meek and mild,
To tell me like a trusty Trojan,
Both what is your Name, and where is your Lodging.

Bru. I am a great Prince, my Estate lies in the new Utopia. I am chief
commander of all the Padders, Jugglers, Priggers, Ditchers, Bulkers, and
Pickpockets, to me all those merry Greeks pay Tribute, which shall come into
thy Fob, all the beauteous Doxies, Dells and Drabs, shall obey the back, and
admire thy magnificence.

Thou shall be both my pretty Romp in Luxury and Pomp, thy eyes shall watch;
while thy ears are ravished, and all thy other Senses shall dance Bobbing-Ioan
for joy, I Will keep thee in thy Hair, and thy Slippers; thou shall eat like a
Cameleon, and drink like a Flitter-mouse; thy House shall be made of one entire
Sugar-Plum, out of which thou shall every day eat thy passage like a lovely
Viper out of his Dams Belly, thy Closet shall be furnished with Sunbeams, thy
Clothes shall be all Marmalade powdered with Caraways for spangles, thy Bed
shall be made of a great Blue-Fig, and thy Curtains of Dyet-bread Paper, where
thou shall lie like the Lady in the Lobster 'till I come to dress thee with the
Vinegar of love, and the Nutmeg of Luxury, thy Coach shall be of some fine new
Trangam -- which we will study for --


Non. Oh I am rapt again!

Bru. Thou shall have a Dog and a Parrot, and when they are sick, thou shall have
a Physician and a Surgean for them.


Non. Oh! I am raped again -- but what if they should dye?

Bru. Then thou shall mourn over thy dear Cur, like a grave Person of quality;
put thy woman in black, and convey it with a Train of Hakneys to the Sepulcher
of his stinking Ancestor in Pomp and Luxury. -- But my dear Bunting I tell thee
one thing.

Ask not my mighty name, for that once known;
Like fairy pence thy Trump'ry will be gone:
If Newgate keeper once should smoke us,
Thy Bear must vanish with a hocus.

Non. But Love, Honey, will not you let my Sisters visit me? truly they are not
adopted Sisters, but of my true Royal Flesh and Blood; and I would fain show my
Pride and Luxury. For Bravery without being seen, is like John come kiss me
without dancing, or a Bell without a Clapper, for it makes no noise. --


Bru. My Ieffery shall for them hye,
And fetch them hither by and by.
Enter Jeffery.
G. Pri. Hoe, Iefferey, Hoe, make have, and go
Hunt for great Sisters high and low.
Thou Wilt find the stately Trape's tired with Travel,
Out of surbated trotters picking gravel,
Or at some Farmers door a resting haunches,
And singing smutty Ballads for Bread and Cheese.

Ieff. The Queen looks shy on it, will she bob? will she come?

Bru. The Nymph is plyant, done is job, word is mum.

Ieff. Blouzes I fly to call as fast as hoofs can fall,
I Will bring them hither with their Fardels,
Or leave them there, it will go hard else.
Exit Ieffery.
Bru. I hope your Sisters are no setters,
And come to tempt you with Love Letters:
If you let any other -- at my Charges,
My fresh tap'd love will turn as sour as Verjuice.
But let that pass --
Now prick up ears, let eyes stare hard,
Let all thy Senses stand on Guard.
That I may catch them unprepared.
Till Ieffry do thy lineage bring,
We Will go, and hunt the pretty thing.
Exeunt:
ACT III.
SCENE III.
Enter Wishing-Chair and Jeffry. Wish. And how, and how, do things and things
fit? does she melt like Snow in his arms? and make the Rogue think, there is
Fire in his bosom -- does the little Vermin twine about him like a tame Snake?
and make her tongue seem forked with swift motion.


Ieffry. Why all these questions Friend, and asked with such envious curiosity,
because you made the first discovery, you thought, the Natives would truck with
no other. -- You Are out; you only touched upon the Coast, he has failed up the
River; discovered the Inland, -- planted a Colony; and settled the Trade of
Furs. --


Wish. Oh Rogue! it is a dainty spot of Ground, Woods, Rivers, Mountains, over
which is placed a Sky always serene and clear.

Well the Dog has his day.

Ieffry. -- Ay and He Will not lose a minuit of it.

Wish. I shall never forget, the pretty skittish thing did so snach away my
kisses, and throw them back again with such a furious kind Scorn. -- Pray let
me go now, will not you? and then embraced me so fiercely, as if she had wished,
the Devil take me if I did. -- Ah! she pressed, like fresh Curds newly put into
the Cheese-frame. -- Oh Ieffry! Ieffry!


Ieffry. Oh Friend! Friend! you have had your time, and must now live upon your
Alforges; like a great Monkey chew the Cud, for you must be a clean Beast in
spite of your teeth, I overheard the Puissant Princess make dangerous
resolves against your dear life. Prince Phillip will be at your Anchovies,
in faith, Bruin thinks fit that you repair to our Palace the new Musick-house,
you know where, for your Worships safely, -- and to encourage you, hark ye --
I am sent for two fresh Frollicks, the two elder Sisters.


Wish. Art thou so? -- enough -- I am for the Straights.
Enter Gammer Readstreak.
Ieffry. Hold, hold, here is a Packing-penny, she comes to wish for a Famine,
that Corn may sell dear.


Wish. Or a foul disease on those that Robbed her Henroost, Pox upon her brown
Bread Phisnomie, -- lets go.


Ieffry. Not a foot Sir till this old Jade's curry'd; y' are bound by Oath to
refuse none. --


Wish. Pri'thee Ieffry be favorable, dispense.

Ieffry. On, on, Sir will you perform, or shall I complain; remember.

We Will dry up your tears, and ease all your Care,
With delicate thing called a new wishing Chair.
Let the good Woman be satisfied; now will I go find her Husband, and send him
hither immediately, dear mischief how I love thee.

Exit Ieffry.
Red. Ah blessing on his good heart, he speaks most Serene and clear, he is a
very notable Man I Will warrant you; -- and whoever says Gammar Redstreak has no
Judgment. Hy he and for all your whim whams, they prate and prate, but give
me something, has some savor; and say, and hold, Gadslidikins, I Will not be
trampled on by the Proudest. -- I have known the time when my penny was as
White, and round, as the best fiddle faddle of them all; Oh the tumbling, and
rumbling there was then, I Will warrant you my Linen was so touzl'd, and
mouzl'd, 't would do ones heart good to see it. But now like and old cracked
Groat, whose stamp's worn out; none will take me, they say I am not current. --
But I Will fit 'em, for I Will wish my self a Queen, and this House full of Money
in my Pocket.


Wish. And the Devil in thy Chattering Chops.

Red. Ay, your worships: and a new Husband every time I change my Apron. --


Wish. And a new Disease every time thou tun'st thy Clack.
Enter Jeffry and Costard observing them.
Ieffry. See how close they are, an honest Man, and an Headborough Cost: Oh
Trumpet, Oh Hilding, I have been her true and natural Husband any time this
twenty Year, up zitting and down-lying.

Ah how she bumbast him, out thou Carrion! --

Red. Show your favor Sir, and when I am a Queen you shall be my head Hind.


Wish. Some kind mischief deliver me, from this she Dragon.

Red. I shall make rare a Queen, and bring good houswifry into fashion; for
I Will make all the Masks, and Chorus's, and Simphonies my self, With a Fiddle
Faddle, hey down diddle, faith let us be merry.


Cost. How Pestilent Jocund the lown is; well, my heart leaps against my teeth,
like a Rat against the Wyers of a Trap. -- I Will be with thee in the twinkling
of a Cabbage, I Will scour thy Crab-lanthorn with a witness, look to it, I Will
swing thy Croudledum, I will. --


Ieffry. Dispatch then, for the Show will be past else; I would fain get the
Rogue some sour sawc to his sweet bit.


Cost. Ah! how she sneers like a Mare that has spied her stray Coult. -- do,
do, Ring all in, chill Ring noon about thy Pate presently.

Exit Costard.
Ieffry. So the dull Larrum's wound up, I would fain stay to hear it clatter;
but I must seek Sweetlips and Wondhamore.

Exit Jeffry.
Wish. Well I am mollifi'd, thou shall see the Show; the Woman is decent,
cleanly, and sound I Will Warrant; hanged, we must not always expect Beauteous
Women; stay here a little, thou pretty Rogue; I begin to have a mind to her; --
ha, old True penny.

Exit Wish.
Red. Now for me, I Will be a Queen or a Lady at least; and King Andrew's Three
Daughters shall be my Maids, and I Will have a high Seat in the Church, and the
Chaplain shall pray for his virtuous Patrons. -- Then I Will have the headache,
and be very sick, that I may receive Visits in my Bed, Oh! there is no way like
it to draw on Suitors; they know a poor weak Woman that lies there on purpose,
has no power to deny. -- One that I know, dressed her self in six several dresses
to catch her Sweetheart, but nothing pleased her; I Will warrant you 'till she
fucust her face, blanched her hands, put on a rich suit of Night Linen, and
went to Bed; where she lay like a Queen Apple upon a Tod of Wool, and the
Patches looked for all the World like Birds pecks, which show the Fruit is
Rotten-ripe; and what do'e think the Whore-Son snuffed up his Nose, and cried
he did not love brown crust in Milk; a proud Jack, I Will make a Law, that every
man shall be hanged that refuses a Woman; ay and it is high time, for we have
been even so kind to 'm, that they use us as they do Rackets at Tennis, when
they have exercised their Bodies; and thump'd their Balls, -- dress, and away;
but my Lady Redstreak, will not be served so in faith. -- After Dinner the Steward
shall set things right with me in my Closet, and the Gentleman of the Horse, or
some spruce fellow shall Fiddle me a sleep. Oh Redstreak, did thou ever think
to come to this. But if this should be a lie, now I Am bravely served. --

The wishing Chair is discovered. Oh there is the Chair, I cannot hold 'till the
Gentleman comes. -- Oh a Queen, a Queen and 80 Husbands, and this House full of
Money, O lo, O lo, whither am I going?

The Chair sinks with her, -- and Costard enters ridiculously Armed.
Cost. Whaur, whaur, whaur. -- Ha gwon, shark'd away, Oh mischief, Oh Costard,
Oh Cuckold -- budding, budding. I feel 'em budding. -- Oh Beast, I Will kill thee
with my horns; a Cuckold in my old days, I Will draw thy Colts Tooth with a
vengeance.

Exit Gostard, and Enter wishing Chair, and Redstreak.
Red. A thousand thanks to your worship, I have not seen so fine a Show this
seven years. --


Wish. A tough carrion, she draws like a Whirl-pool, and would kill a Man as
easily as a Cat sucks the breath of a Child: Go thy ways old Mumpsimus, the
mark's in thy mouth still.

Enter Castard.
Cost. Now, Courage, for the Blood of the Costards, I Will mow them off both in
the middle, so swiftly that they shall stand still, and never think they are dead.


Wish. No, no more at this time, I thank your Queen-ship.

Cost. Ah umh! she clings like a rotten Egg to a Pillory; yes pray do, and I Will
watch the grins like the head of a dead Horse, Scoundrel, snarle-chops,
Beezom-Beard, come out, come out, if thou dare. -- O Laud!


Red. I Am undone, as a man would undo an Oyster, my natural good man is here,
and there is Murder in his looks.


Wish. What art thou? what do stare at? wilt fight, ha?

Cost. 'Pranter aye 'Pranter, no my tongue's my own, and God save the King's no
Treason, my Blood's up, and I Will wish: what will thou do? -- who would fight
with?


Cost. Zate there cham as cunning's the Devil, and will not tell Wish: Dam ye for
a beetle-headed Dog.

Costard runs out.
Cost. Oh Sir! Sir! Sir!

Red. Oh good Sir! Wishing-Chair sit down, for I know he will come again, and if I
don't put this out of his head, he will not leave a whole bone in my skin. --

The Chair claps down, Redstreak sits in it; and Costard returns.
Red. And I wish, and I wish, that my dear Husband Costard.


Cost. How! wishing in the Chair for me? odz precious, if this been't a good
Woman, the Devil's a Hog. --


Red. I wish, that my good Husband Costard were married to King Andrews eldest
Daughter, though I were dead and rotten, I should rejoice for it a thousand year
hence, if I could remember't.


Cost. Poor Redstreak, my own true Spouse, -- 'twere better I were hanged, then
thee were dead: what a villainous Beast was I to think ill of her? no, thee art
my Princess, and I had rather lose the best Horse in my Team, then lose my
Wife. --


Red. Ay that thou had all I dare swear.

Cost. No zately, these two of them cost me zeaven and twenty Shillings a
piece, but prithee Redstreak let me wish for thee now, and requite thee in thy
own Coin. -- a woundy fine Chair. -- a Wishing-Chair do'e call it, Laud to see
the Art of man by your leave When he tryes to sit, the Chair moves, and he
falls down. Odzvish, and eeles, what has it no Bottom? -- yes it has, why what
a muxon did I vall through the Chair, or the Chair through me, let me zee; zoo
cham in now, and I wish, and I wish, The Chair strikes him a blow on the ear.
What Is that vor Redstreak? ha is it no more then a word and a blow, -- what a
Vengeance!


Red. Laud Husband I did n't touch you. --

Cost. Wilta lie to come of this side, -- so now I wish, and I wish. -- The
Chair strikes him on the other side. What a pox ails the Woman-bones? Of Me,
would be leather'd ha?


Red. Truly Husband I never touched you.

Cost. Never touched me, why thou Whore-Son Scab? come and stand before, and
look me in the face. -- So now I wish, and I wish. The Chair picks his Pocket.
Bones O me, Wife! there is a live thing in my Pocket, -- why Woman all my
money's vanished.


Red. That cannot be man, vor there is no kirsen Soul here but thee and I; -- but
if it be gwon, sit thee down, and wish for me.


Cost. Stand thee behind the Chair then, and zee that nothing molest me. -- And
I wish, and I wish, -- Oh lo, and I wish that -- Oh! I will have my wish in
spite of the Devil, and I wish -- Oh Bones! O me! Oh gogs nouns thou drab! she
has run a rifle into my Posterity, but chill pay thee vor't with a witness.

She pushes him into the Chair, who holds him fast, while both beat him.
Red. Out thou Carl, thou Beast to use a Woman so, the Wrong-way, Dunder-nose,
Dog-bolt, Limber-twist, I Will teach thee to spoil a Woman.


Cost. Oh Murder! Felony, Salt and Batter, the Devil and the Witch will
murder me.

Enter Princess, Nicklas and Phillip.
Phil. Now Nick for the honor of Knighthood let us stand to our Pan-puddings,
here is the white Bear, and the Wishing-Chair: have at'em by guess.


Nick. Oh Nonsy Lady mine! inspire my Arm with Knightly prowess to fight this
dreadful Battle. This trenchant Blade I draw, and now have at all.


Red. O mercy! mercy! passion of me, their naked Tucks upon a Woman.


The Chair and Costard sink the Princess, cut off Redstreaks head, clap it on a
Sword, and go off singing. Good Christians Rejoice,
With glad heart, and with Voice:
The white Bear is dead,
And here is his head.
ACT IIII.
SCENE I.
Enter two men -- Neighbors. 1. Neighbor. Don't you see a great noise
somewhere? just like an Echo coming from a Plain, where are no Woods, Hills,
or Valleys to make it.


2. Ay, ay, it is, because the Princes have killed the Bear, and every mothers
Child is gone out to meet them.


1. The Princess are fine Blades, i'faith'specially Prince Phillip for Quoyts,
or Cudgels, turn him loose. -- Well now, Maids may live and marry, when they
can get Husbands.


2. Ay, and we may hope to hear of a Maid in the ten's again, before they were
afraid of being given to the Bear, that Maiden-heads were as cheap as stinking
Fish.


1. I have heard much of these Maiden-heads, prithee what are they like?


2. Like. -- why they are so like nothing, that there is nothing like them. --


1. If the Bear was killed but half an hour ago, as it seems by the story, how
could the triumphal Arch be built, and all this Pomp and Luxury be prepared to
entertain the Prince. --


2. The way was chalked out by some Poet; or perhaps it was done by Nature, and
the Gods.


1. Nature and the Gods, they had other Fish to fry, they have been together by
the ears all this day about Princess None-so-fair; But hark, the Echo draws
near from the Plain: Let Us take our places, least we lose the Show.


Exeunt. Enter the Princess Riding in Triumph on Hobby-horses, the Womans-head
carried on a Spear, attended with many on Horseback; and a Foot with Banners,
and Trails, Drums, and Trumpets, etc. -- After they have passed round the
Stage, and taken their places; One sings a Ballad, and all throng about him.
Song.
Prick up your ears, for, and that you may hear,
A Battle so dreadful, 'tween Princess and Bear,
Oh Christian Pee-pel!
This Beast was so hungry, and also right fell,
he eat youth, and baggage,
like Salt, Beef, and Cabbage,
'twas doleful to look on, and ruefull to tell.
Chorus.
But now the Bear's dead,
And here is his head,
By which you may see, all is sooth that I said,
Therefore rejoice, sing, and dance all, and some
With a lum, trum, tum, trum, tum, etc.
Dark was the Air, as if Welkin were sick,
When bloody minded Rose, Phillip, and Nick,
Quoth Nicolas, I think
The Fight will be doubtful, then first let us drink.
Prince Phillip by and by,
Did fill out the Brandy.
And Courage did swell up, as Bottle did shrink.
Chorus.
But now the Bear's dead. etc.
Brandishing Blades with Bottle and Bag,
These Princes went boldly to find out the Draggon-Bear I do mean.
And caught him devouring of two pretty men,
They stole both behind him,
And ever he could mind them,
They cut him, and slashed him again and again.
A Dance performed by two men, and a Bear showing the manner of the Princes
killing the Bear. Song.
You Champions great, that killed the Beast,
shall drink, and eat still of the best,
For him you slew with Swords sharp dint,
Cared not one Fig for Jack o'lent.
But star'd, as if he would cry forth,
When Boy with Clapper cried shooh shoh.
Chorus.
Among Knights errant, you shall not
Give place to any, but Quixot.
1. While we their Praises are hum drumming,
See where Mother Wossat's coming.
Mother Woossat flies over the Stage, and calls Justice Crab, who comes out in
his Chariot.
Woossat knocks. Is Justice Crab within?

Crab. What would thou mortal?
Song.
Woss. Justice! Oh gentle Justice Crab!

Crab. Why makes my Croan this doleful moan?
Who dares affront my beauteous drab?

Wooss. My sister Redstreaks dead,

Crab. Is sister Redstreak dead?

Wooss. -- Ay! ay!

Crab. What mortal did the direful deed?

Wooss. Proud Springal Princess made her bleed.
And said
They cut off Bruines head,
Oh! If thou yet can prise?
The Amber dropping from my eyes.
If all the Pensions I have paid?
And jobs that thou have Gratis had,
Have any dent in Noddle made:
Let None-so-fair thy Fingers feel,
And all that did my Redstreak kill.

Crab. -- From thy dear Chops,
Such Kindness drops.
Still so much influence from thee rains,
Thou shall command my heart and brains,
I Will pay those saucy Princes for their pains,
I Will give them a Posset,
Dare make their tricks thus at,
My poor Mother Woossat.
Little Constable,
Come with Painted bauble,
And send off the Rabble.
Sumptuous their Throne is, but I Will make a Carr on it,
Crabs word alone is more powerful then Warrant.

Chorus.
Let the stripplings and losses be lustily curried,
Ay, and let their good Graces,
To limbo, to limbo, to limbo, be hurried.
Woossat and Crab fly out, a little Spirit rises, and beats off the Princes and
Attendants. Exeunt all. Scene II.
Enter Nicklas and Phillip. Nick. What bloody Rogues were these?
And we not run each Mothers Son
Had gone to Little ease.

Phil. A curse on thick Whoreson with the Painted Rod,
Sure 'twas some Devil, or some God.

Nick. Prince Phillip, there was never Knight errant famous without being
enchanted; nor Opera notorious without Gods, and Devils: have thou observed the
numerous Caves and Walks, in your dry White Cheese. --


Phil. Ay your tickle crack Cheese.

Nick. In one of those Cheeses was a Knight of Wales Enchanted Seven years; and
through those dangerous ways he Traveled, and destroyed all the Heathen
Knights, that like little Vermin devoured the fat of it. --


Phil. Ah! mischief on the Heathen Knights, and the Welsh Knight too, they
tickled the Cheese so between them, that no goodness has been in it ever since.
--

Yet 'spight of Hell we will search from Ventures,
Till Nymph distressed, is freed from Tenters.
Enter Woudhamore and Sweetlips.
Would. Now luck! Husbands, or something to eat, we beseech thee.


Sweet. If they will not have us, let us ravish them. -- Save your Princes, still
whining after your Pin-box, are there no more Maids but Maukin?

We might ever this have got fire out of flints,
Some brinded Wolf, Phils Father was, I wot,
On some she Rock, relentess thee he got.

Would. My Nickies dam was some rough Bear,
And Tigre fierce was sure his sire,
Oh pity thy despairing Trull.

Sweet. O let me buss my Phils fair Gull.

Would. Cloud not those Lanthorns clipped eyes,
If Nickie frowns poor Woudha. dies;
Pity my heart in loves fire roasting;
such pretty Bees sure should have no sting.

Sweet. Thou little Princox be more mild,
Oh how it joyed me when it smiled.

Nick. Indeed sweet Ladies, you but loose your labor.

Phil. You may as soon catch a Hare with a Tabar.

Would. Is it so? Lippy we are out. -- Gad, we must be more brisk; these Fellows
are for the downright way. --


Sweet. Courage then, la, la, la, come thou little pouting
Villain, I will order thee for thy dissembled cruelty. --

Phil. Bless us, what is the matter with the Woman; let me alone.


Sweet. Dam your pettish frowns. come here is a Guinny. --

Would. Since Nonsies devoured by the Bear, it is no inconstancy to choose again.
--


Nick. That whim will not pass Madam! we searched every cranny of the Beast, and
found no sign of her.


Sweet. If she lives, you have been constant to her too long, for by the new
modish Articles of faithful Love, it is no sin, nor inconstancy, to quit one
Mrs. or Gallant, for another; as often as you will, so you have but one at
once. Come, come, a George will gain the Lad, as well as the Lady -- here take
Money.


Nick. You Are an insolent audacious hectoring Pugg, and
I Will have you kicked if you do not leave us presently. --

Sweet. Come poor Green Sickness Rascals, they do not know what is good for
themselves, let us away with them.


Phill. Help, help, a Ravishment. -- You Are a brace of saucy foul Mouthed,
Rampant, Tatterdemalion Princesses, and. --


Nick. And so we take our leave,

Phil. Ay, and so we take our leave.
Exeunt Princes. Never were Poor Princesses so distressed for Husbands.

Sweet. Princess. No, there is no Princely Virtue in their Blood.


Would. Dam'em a Prince would no more refuse a handsome
Woman, then a Lion would hurt a Prince.

Sweet. Frozen Joy, Slaves let them be hanged.

Would. Hanged 'gad; and so they shall for killing mother Redstreak, for all
they made the silly People believe, 'twas the Bear.


Sweet. Let Us give notice to the Officers, and have them seized; when they are
in durance, their tough stomachs will soon melt.


Would. We Will do it, -- but stay, here is fresh game, he is right
I Will warrant I know by Enter Ieffery his leering eye. --

Sweet. Then he is mine, for I saw him first.

Would. Another word like that condemns thee.

Sweet. If you are so Tyrannical, I Will stroll alone.

Would. Stay, the stripling has something to deliver.

Ieffry. Queen None-so-fair, (Ladies most splendiferous)
Entreats you both would come, and dine at her house.
And after that great hearts to solace,
She Will show you every Nook of the Palace.
My Master loves her most fervent,
I Am Ieffry his man, and your Servant.

Would. Oh Fortune! luck our hopes are melted,

Sweet. Were ever Princesses so jilted:
None-so-fair, a Queen. --

Would. Let Us send to Jailer, er'bad news spread further,
That surly Princess may be seized for murder.
None-so-fair a Queen. --

Ieffry. -- True I Will assure ye.

Would. Come Let Us behold her Pomp, and eke Luxury,
And let Heroic love be turned to Fury.
To Jailer we will send Porter as we go by,
A Queen! says we will tickle her Toby.
Exeunt The Scene changed to None-so-fairs house. Enter None-so-fair,
Sweetlips, and Woudhamore,
Would. Say no more, the Treat was splendid.

Sweet. But where is your kind good man I wonder?
Of all your Pomp let us see the Founder.

Non. Stay you here a little tinie,
And I Will go call my loving Ninny:
Love, Honey, Chuck, Duch, so hoe, il o ho, ho, ho.

Would. Our Sister Queen has an excellent voice to call
Harvest-men to Dinner. --
Oh Cross, untoward Fate! Ay that thou art!
Must she all pleasure have, and we all smart?

Sweet. Like Image on housetop thou have put her,
And we must crawl like Ducks in gutter.

Would. And see her Finery, Oh Rot her!
Such earthen Dishes, such scull Basin,
Table so scrubb'd, you may see face on,
Such shining Platters, Shelves with lace on.
Such Pots so scoured with Sand and Whiting,
Monarch had n'r such Kitchen to delight in.

Sweet. Her Man, her Maid, her Dog, her Cat too,
At Dinner dresser thump'd like Tattoo:
Strong-bub in Closet, and all that too.

Would. We thought she'ad given Crow a pudding,
And Luxury is just a budding;
And we to see it must come a gooding.

Sweet. I cannot live to see this thing long,
A Curse on Mother Woossat's flim flam,
Are these the Fruits of flattering sing song.

Would. Well, luck may turn, what is more ficle then chance?
Come let us Club our Sculs, and plot Vengeance,
Her strolling jilting tricks, we'ltell'o
And make her trusty Roger yellow.
Enter Bruin, and None-so-fair. He comes in faith a witty fellow.

Sweet. Oh happy Mauks! if I could reach the rope of her heart, I would
starngle her with it.


Would. A brave fellow! he stands like a Tree, and his legs look like Hercules's
Pillars. --

I Will sell my Clothes from my back,
To buy love-Pouder for his sake.

Sweet. I Will poison my dear Sister Crack,
Ever I this Gallant thing will lack,
I must speak to him Servant Jack.

Would. Hold when I have supped with Margret Trantum,
With goodly thing you may play Rantum;
Till then ifacks you are like to wantum.

Bru. Ladies first you are very wellcom; and secondly, I hope to give you all
content. -- --

For Sisters sake my beauteous Gypsy,
On whom Prince Bruin casts Sheeps eye,
You shall bouze gratis till you are tipsie;
On stately shank rest tired ham trulls,
And you shall see my tricks and gambols.
Pisco flisco whisco fibribisco fosco posco, sebosco larasco velasco, trumdle
fundle, bundle hundle, tantarra dundle -- surgito surgitote. --

The Scene drawn, and many Statues disocver'd in several postures.
Would, Olippy what stone works here?

Bru. He that looks so like a despairing lover, is Peter Whiffle eldest Son of
the Countess of Puddle dock, he espoused the Puissant Landabridas Queen of
Sluts, and hanged himself because she would not wear fine clothes, and have a
Gallant.


Would. Alas poor Peter, I would not have been so unkind as Queen Lamberdas.


Bru. Those two are Polynicky, Nicampoops, two valorous Princes of Fairy-land;
they dived through Apivel to Hell, for the love of Piss-kitchin Daughter of
King Easiepate, passed through Fire and Water, without spoiling their Clothes
or Perriwiggs; and are now good sufficient Housekeepers in Elysium. --

That Is Rablays, the grave French Philosopher, that grew mad with Writing the
second part Tom Thum in Heroic meetre.


Would. Well, he did his endeavor, though he missed his Province.


Sweet. Oh Woudha. Woudha. if this Image were in a warm Bed, I Will be hanged if
I did not fetch life in him, and make him wagg.


Bru. When a house is on fire, the Lame, Sickly, and Lazy, frisk as if they had
a swarm of Hornets about them. --

Green Sickness Girl can lift huge trunck,
But Blade with Loves flame scorched and shrunk;
Will do much more for charming Punk.
These stones compelled by Amorous Bruin,
Shall Sing and Caper to some Tuin.
Mark how dull Statue kicks and Winces.
And all for love of Nonesy Princess.
Bruin Sings like a Walloon, and Plays on a Cimball and all the Images move.
--
Bru. Now you shall hear the Images sing in praise of the most Heroic and
Magnificient Sciences of Wenching, and Drinking. -- A Ditty fit for Spears,
and Quires of Cupid, when Gods are deaf, and Princes grow stupid.

My dear Nonesy set them in the way. --

SONG.
Let Taffy go seek for his bliss in a Leek,
And Teag in hot Isquebagh flobber.
Jocky be doing with Oatcakes and Sowing,
And sup up their brave Bonny clabber.
Chorus.
But let Misses and Gallants, make use of their Talents,
To be Wise, is to love and be drunk;
For drink, and that same will get you a name,
When your healths and Estates are all sunck.
Let sullen old Men keep their beesom Beards clean,
Let Slaves strive for Honor and Riches,
Let Widgeons debate our Religion and State,
And Matrons be sober as Witches.
Cho.
But let Misses, etc.
Let Us drink and be clapped till our Shin-bone sore scraped,
And gems deck our faces all over,
Till Palsies and Cramps, make our eyes shine like Lamps,
For such is the true drunken lover.
Cho.
Yet let Misses, etc.
A Warlike Dance, and then Exeunt all but None-so-fair, Sweetlips and
Woudhamore. None. Now Sisters did not I rise with my back upwards met this what
do'e call him? --


Would Ay! what do'e call him indeed? I Will be hanged if he does not deal with
the Devil -- Second me Lippy. --


Sweet. No, no, the Devil he is n't so good a Scholar, It Is some pitiful
juggling Jack-pudding, some strolling Tumbler.


Would. When he grows a little weary of you, he will strip you, and leave you; nay,
say you are obliged to him, for teaching you a modish Trade, by which you may
come to keep your Coach, if you have any Fortune. --


None. I will not despair, since the Proverb's on my side, Fools have Fortune, and
Cracks have luck, -- I can pretend to both by virtue of my Education. --


Would. If his Highness were true and trusty, why should he hide his Title?


None. Oh say no more, I tremble all over!
Enter Ieffry
Ieffry. Madam great Sisters must be packing,
My Master finds some Trenchers lacking.

Nonsy. How, Royal Sisters grown light fingered?
Of Princesses was ever so foul a thing heard;
Richer Goods in house could not be chosen,
Odznigs they cost two groats a dozen.

Would. How steal your Trenchers? Traps, marry come up here,
I find we should pay sauce, if we should sup here.

Sweet. It Is not gentilely done Faith Sister Nonsy:

Would. And if we had you out, i'gad we'd trounce ye.

Non. Minxes cease your idle prittle prattle,
And render back my Goods, and Chattle.

Wond. Minxes -- a ha -- let us give her battle.

Sweet. We Will thump bewitching eyes black and blue,
Put tricks on Daughters of King Andrew.
They fight, -- Fnter Bruin.

Ieffry. Great Master comes with arms a kimboe,

Bru. Take filching Madams hence to Limbo
Hence, or thy self shall strait for them go.

Wouda. Must we that have sent Princess thither, go our selves,
Hear me Justice, if there is any;
Let Us not be long without company.

Bru. Away with them,

Sweet. As by's own Bull was killed Phalaris,
We Are sent to Prison by Will. Harris.
Exeunt Jeffry, Sweetlips, and Woudha.
Bru. This was an Intrigue of love and state, poor Ladies, they stole no
Trenchers, but I heard Baggages contrive.

To undermine Prerogative,
And to seduce if they were able,
My Importance comfortable,
Before I Am weary of Bauble.

Nonsy. To Prison sent for filching Trencher-Plate,
When we had none in house,
Oh too too late;
I do begin to smell a Rat.
Ah woe is me! poor little mouse.

Bru. Why frowns? my beauteous dear,
Thy Forheads muffl'd in black pouts,
Like warlike Steed in Funeral clouts.
That did eftsoons both prance and neigh,
And briskly fell to Oats and hay,
As if he promised a fair day.
But strait in black dogged masters Course,
My dear looks sad as morning Horse.

Nonsy. Poh you prate, and prate, but you don't love me.

Bru. Love thee ungrateful Imp! Ah curse on thy jealous
Noddle, another word I Will squeeze thee like a Custard,
Devour thee without Salt or Mustard.
Ha, my Princess sniv'ling, who has disbused thee, Pydy tell me, if I have
ought can give thee ease; I swear, it is thine now by this Cheese, the Oath of
Gods.


Non. Enough, and if it is Truth, tell me thy name, Oh charming youth!


Bru. Heavens! Powers! Oh hold!

Non. Nay, nay, you have sworn.
I must have all the Secrets that are thine.

Bru. Must I my Secretest Secret then resign?

Non. Why should you keep your Secret? and yet take mine?

Bru. Prithee Nonsy ask any thing else?

Non. No, nothing.

Bru. The Devil take me if --

Nonsy. Is this your love? miserable unhappy Princess, perjured dissembling
men! before you had me, you swore any thing. -- You use poor Women, as Children
do Bubbles; you spare for no water of Sighs, nor black Soap of Oaths, till you
have blown us up with the Reed of your love, and then you cast us off to break
in the wide World. -- Ah! that ever I poor virtuous Lady should live to see
this day! Oh! ho, ho.


Bru. Well if like a wall-ey'd Hare, you will not see right before you, but run
into the noose, take your ill fortune. --


Non. Ay let me have it?

Bru. Shall I speak?

Non. Ay, ay, I say?

Bru. Then I shall you say?

Non. Odslifelykins, ay I say?

Bru. Consider. --

Non. I Will be hanged first, when did a longing Woman consider.


Non. What, what, Oh quickly.

Bru. I am.

Non. Heart, blood and bones, what are you?

Bru. Yet be wise,

Nan. I will not be wise, nor hear, nor see, nor speak till I know.


Bru. I am Deval.

Non. Bless us all --

Bru. That French Prince of the Padders, that was thought to be hanged, I have
lived ever since in this disguise, because I would not quite break the kind
Ladies hearts, to see me hanged twice.

But now must fly for thy folly least I am caught,
And pawn my pretty Nonesy for the shot.
Exit Bruin, claps on the Bears skin, and flies over the Stage -- The Scene
changed to a Tavern. -- Enter two Drawers.
1. I come, I come, did you call Sir? ha where is the Gentleman that pays the
reckning; look to the door Harry.


2. What Is the matter. --

1. A Crack, a Crack; to pay here in the Flower Pot?

2. Eleven and three pence; a Pox I know her she plies at the Pagean.


Non. O generous Youth speak not untruth,
I am a Princess of King Andrews stock in sooth. --
Right Valiant Knights spare my Honor, and do what you please, but use your
Victory with discretion, for Fortunes Wheel is still turning. --


1. Knights Honor and Fortune, 'gad she is mad.

2. Did find any Honor about her?

1. No, no Honor. -- If women have any such thing, they hide it so cunningly
that none can find it. -- Harry, thou know we melted down a Silver Tankard
to sodder up Cisses cracked Honor; let us swear she stoll it, and clap a strong
House upon her back to keep her warm.


2. But first let us strip her; come strip, strip. --

1. Ay, ay, this is she stoll our Silver Tankard; come strip:

Non. Oh the lovely Prince?

1. How, the Prince? 'gad she speaks Treason, lock her up and call the
Constable -- away. --

Exeunt Drawers.
Non. Oh my dear Prince, why would thou fly hence, and let thy loving Romp be
stripped from all her Pomp.

Sure in my mind 'twas much unkind,
To shark away and leave your love behind:
What ever now is thy design,
I Am sure when Nonsie's dead, he will whine,
Crossed love and grief to make an end 'o,
I Will break my neck out at a Window.

King Andrews Ghost rises Crowned, and Redstreak with her head in her hand --
attended with two Spirits. Song.
Oh stay thy foul and bad intent,
Dame chance does smile and frown,
When heels more high then head are sent,
That Is upward that was down,
And None-so-fair shall have her Bear,
K. And. -- Shall have her Bear,

Redstr. -- Shall have her Bear.

Chorus.
And None-so-fair shall have her Bear,
And none shall have the sweet Beast but her.
Woossat will come for, and to chide,
From mischief fly a main,
For all must obey that are tied,
Till they are freed again,
Cho.
And None-so-fair, etc.
The Song ended, they Vanish. Non. Why should I fly dear Dad, and eke
Ghost of Redstreak.
I Have nothing stoll upon my Soul,
Else would I n'r might speak.
Woossat flies down in her Chariot.
Wooss. Dares None-so-fair with eyes of Cat?
Look on Queen hag the dread Woossat,
So Impudent not make a Cursy,
Bend stubborn hams, or'gad I Will force ye.

Non. What have I done? dread Witch should seeking Ruin.

Wooss. Debauched my Son, my first begotten Bruin,
Taught envious men to burn my Thatch,
Nail Horse-shoe under hatch.
Nay strove by your enchanting eye,
To be a greater Witch then I.

Nonsy. If Beauty be fault in me, it is Heaven's decree,
I do not paint truly, as you may see;
He took my pretty thing for his Rantidla,
I did not ask him first indeed la.

Wooss. Dare's Minx to prate to me so proudly?
Thinking to choke my hate with loudy:
No, thou shall never get whole hence,
But to Prison; Volens, Nolens,
To dye for Treason and Insolence.
Woossat flies away. Enter Drawers, and Whistles.
1. Draw. Princess, so hoe Princess!
If you have ought to say dear Crack, be short,
Black Guard will not stay.

Nonsy. Oh well a day! I must away to Pluto's Court,
Oh State of Greatness variable!
Oh luck of Princess miserable!

END of the IV. ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. A common Prison confused.
A great noise heard -- Singing, Shreeking, Groaning, Roaring, and Rattling of
Chains. Enter many common Prisoners, among which, Tagrag, Brazennose,
Tatterd-hoe, Shrubs-hall, Bull-barrow, bringing in the Princess and Princesses.
-- All cry out. -- Garnish, garnish, garnish, Tag. Come, disburse, disburse.

Nick. As I Am a true Prince, our Exchecquers were robbed by these miscreant
Knights, that brought us to this Fortress.


Tag. Strip, strip then, and go like an Eastern Monarch half naked. --


Braz. Ay, ay, cast off superfluous Trappings, they will harbor vermin to
destroy the Microcosm.


Bulbar. Come my dainty Damzels, you must pay for Entrance too into our thrice
nasty, and right dread Society.


Tag. Skink away, sheer, drink, do hear not a rag of Provaunt, and then we will
have a Song; and after that, erect our mock-Court of Justice, and cast your
Destinies: Che^^ up, if you dye like Birds on Trees, you shall be cut dow^ like
Flowers, and your Funerals shall not cost you 2 d. you (...) be intom'd in a Ditch
on the public charge.

Come, a Song, a Song. -- Princess Nonsy, put in (...)
Treble at Rome; be a Roman. --

Song:
Be jovial, be jovial, each Lad,
Great Dukes of the Dungeon, and Knights of the Pad;
Now the Iaylor from hence is,
We are all great Princes.
Let Us sing, let us laugh, let us drink, and be mad.
Chorus.
Along, and along, mirth have it' s swing,
For older or younger, there' s none can live longer
Then Fortune is pleased, and the King;
Then let us merrily sing, and dance in a string,
Then let us merrily sing, and dance in a string.
This Palace, and all is our own,
Our lodging's provided, the Rent is paid down.
Every Shop's our Exchecquer,
Each p^rse is our debtor,
We always gain who ever's undone.
Cho.
Along, etc.
The Treasures the Husband does lend,
Treats on his doxy, we briskly do spend.
Ay, and when we are chained here,
She steals the remainder.
And kindly comes to visit her Friend.
Cho.
A long, etc.
A Dance performed by Prisoners under Gallos's. Tag. Now let us Adjourn to our
Sessions house, and bring our new Prisoners to Trial.

Exeunt all but Princes and Princesses.
Phil. A pox of your zeeking Ventures, cham as dumpish a new shrouded Tree. --
What course must we take now?


Nick. Course, why I think it is better to be freed, and ^arry the Princesses
then be hanged. --


Phil. Why? I think zoo too, but then who must be hanged for killing Mother
Redstreak? -- Justice must be satisfied.


Giok. Justice may be better satisfied with Marriage then hanging -- for it is
now the greater punishment.


Phil. Have you any 'Tority vor what you zay?

Nick. 'Tority, no but I have reason -- is not it better to go to Heaven in a
string, then be a Gally Slave, and be chained to one seat all ones life? --


Phil. Then do thee go to Heaven in a string, and let me be Married.


Nick. Thank you for that, 'faith what a well meaning Fool is this? -- I tell
thee 'twas not Redstreak, but the Bear we killed.


Phil. The Bear -- Odzboars 'twas as errant a Woman as my mother, and all the
neighbors know she was right. --


Nick. Then she was Enchanted?

Phil. Enchanted! Ah, if this should be a lie, we are bravely served. -- --


Nick. Why may not a Beast be turned to a Woman; we see Women every day turned
to Beasts.


Would. You Are rightly served, for a couple of Dancer Nosed Princes as you are;
if y' had Married us, you, might both have been King Andrews by this time. --


Non. Why has our poor sneaking Daddy kicked up his heels? Ah dismal merry
Tragedy, I thought something would follow when I saw his Ghost, and heard the
Circkets sing so dolefully.


Would. Your tricks broak his heart, for when he heard we were sent to Prison
for stealing Trenchers; he signed, eat a great piece of Bread and Butter; and
departed as quietly as any sucking Pig.

The Scene drawn, discovers the Court of Rogues with attendants.
Phil. Stint, stint, the Cwourtz zet, what must I zay Prince Nick?


Nick. Why say she killed her self volens nolens, in her own defense.


Phil. Bolens nolens, -- a pox on your bolens nolens. --

Tag. Bulbarrow, set the Prisoners to the Bar. -- Read their Indictment.


Braz. No, no, let us overruled that formality, and proceed to Sentence,


Tag. First, for fashions sake, though we have most prudently determined to
hang them, whatever they can say -- ask them the usual question. --


Shrubshall -- Guilty or not guilty, why don't you answer?


Tag. Give 'em time, I know my face is terrible; for a Judges leering smile is
as certain a sign of death, as walking in Sir John Broads Exchange all Dinner
time, is a sign of an empty pocket; Come Gentlemen Rogues, you that look as
sour as small Beer after Thunder; You with the Ember face.


Braz. You stand as if you were doing penance, for stealing a Pudding out of
your neighbors Wives-Kettle.


Tag. Or making Composition for killing your Father, or eating Eggs on a
Fasting day, which are equal Crimes among the Learned, -- answer, in what shape
did thy Friend the Devil appear, when he advised thee to act this horrid bloody
inhumanity.


Braz. Inhumane, untoward, unhandsom, Brother, enforce, the charge tattered ho:
unhandsome, unwholesome. -- I say unwholesom, for I have believed 'twill cost
thee thy life; Villainous unlucky Tagrag.


Tag. Unlucky, pitiful, most pitiful crime of -- of What Is the Crime Brothers?
--


Braz. By my Commission I know not, but that is all one, our business is to
Judge, and hang the offenders; let the Crimes alone, if we destroy them, our
Trade will be at an end. --


Tag. Come, confess, confess your Crime, and you shall have the favor to ride
to the Gallows in a Coach.


Nick. -- Sir. --

Bull. -- Sir! You must say my Lord.

Tag. Ha, who is that whispering? -- Bullbarrow -- Sirrah! how dare thou be of
Counsel against the King? thou bloated Jewish villain, that do lie and batten
in the Blood of poor Prisoners, like a Hog in his own mire? -- Dare thou be
of Counsel against the King?


Braz. Against the King, a Jailer would betray the Gods, if Prisoners had Money
to bribe him to it, tie him up. --


Bullb. Ah! I beseech your good Lordships, I only Instructed him to give you
your just Titles, because I know several have been hanged for omitting them. --
Pray your Honors.


Tag. Sirrah, no more of this, -- Hatchet-face, speak you; guilty, or not
guilty? --


Phil. She killed her self, volens nolens in her own defense, ask Prince Nick
else? --


Tag. Ask Prince Nick. --

Phil. -- Ay -- All King Andrew's Household can bear me Concord, I was bred up
in the Vear of my vather and mother shrubsh: guilty or not guilty. --


Phil. I zay cham not guilty, Prince Nick draw'd me in like a young Wench to a
Nunnery. -- Volens, Nolens.


Tag. So, so, Prince Nick draw'd thee in, and Squire Catch shall draw thee out:
Come Prince Nick, what say you Prince Nick? speak out Prince Nick; quickly
Prince Nick, you are in a fine pickle Prince Nick.


Nick. I say I am the man that killed the Bear, that stole the Princess; that
broke the heart of King Andrew.


Tag. Brave! this is the Horse that come of the Mare, that eat the Oats that
grew in the Field, that was bought with the Money that Jack stole. -- Well
Prince Nick. -- Bring in the Bears-head there.

The Woman's head set on the Table.
Nick. Now let my malicious adversaries hang their ears, and eat one another as
hungry Dogs devour dirty Puddings. Behold my Lords; if this be not the Bear's
head, I Am the Sophy of Persia.


Tag. I never met a more Intricate business, if any here was acquainted with
our defunct ^^^^er, whether Bear or Woman, let them discourse the head. --


Would. I and my Sister Lippy know, this is the head of honest Gammar Redstreak,
and this we will swear; because those unworthy Princes refused to marry us.


Tag. Gentlemen, your Opinions; is it the Bear's, or the Woman's head? All the
Woman's the Woman's.


Tag. Prince Nick! you hear the Sentence of the Court Prince Nick!


Nick. The Court's bewitched, and the head's enchanted.

Tag. Sirrah! you grow saucy, tie up Prince Nick.

Nick. Why may not the Bears-head be changed to a Woman's, as well as Mambrino's
Helmet to a Barbers basin, or a notorious Fellon to your Lordships, let the
head deny it if it dares.

The hands lift up the head, and it speaks, and then flies up in the Air.
Lament and be sad, Redstreak is dead; And here is her head. Prince Nick, and
Phil, Did me kill.
Nick. Oh I confess! I confess! pray hang me quickly, least the head should do
me some mischief.


Tag. Take 'em away, I knew this would do, it is not the first time Ghosts have
appeared to hang their Murderers.

Set those she-Monsters to the Bar. Exeunt Princess Nick and Phil.
Tatterd. Brother, it grows late, and I have no sweetmeats to nibble on, which
I think as becoming the gravity of a Judge, as a Tooth-pick the Solemn State of
a Spanish Grandee. -- Pray let the Court overruled all they can say, and
proceed to Sentence; for my stomach is maukish.


Tag. Be it so; I Will give directions to the Jury in a wise speech according to
Custom, and then we will adjourn the Court.

Gentlemen of the Jury, it was an Ancient saying among the noble Romans, and
worthy of everlasting Fame; set the Hares Head against the Goose-Jiblets, and
it is a right worthy custom among those modern Heroes: that Collar-Beef to put a
layer of fat, and a layer of lean, and what is all this for, but to teach us to
mix Mercy with Justice? -- We are here met together, and for what are we met
togeher? to lie (like Diogenes lazily) in a Tub, 'till the Sun cures the
disease of State; No, we must set our hand to the Plough tail, let every one
pluck a hair from the thick bushy Beard of Malefactors, and the Chinn of
mischief will soon be bald; as Poor Robbin has it in his modern Philosophy: We
have discovered a Wasps Nest of Hornets to you, it is your part to set the
Brimstone of Justice on fire, and smother them with the smoke of Correction. --
Two are found Guilty, of stealing most Feloniously Gammer Redstreaks head from
her shoulders, so much to her Detriment, that she will hardly ever be her own
Woman again. -- This appears as clear to the eye of reason, as if it were
written with the Rainbow on the South wind.

The two eldest Daughters of King Andrew, of notorious memory are in for
stealing Trenchers. -- You must find them Guilty, because We the mouth of the
Law determine it; If any grumblings of Conscience arise within you. The Court
overrules them; Psyche the 2d. also Miss Nonsy shall be freed, because her
Predecessor Psyche the first was, though both (for running from their Fathers;
and practicing publicly what their Sisters did but wish well to) deserve more
punishment then they. -- Now dispatch! and as Socrates says what you do, do
quickly? -- I read your Sentence in your looks; The Princes have already
suffered, and for your Ladies errant. The Sentence of the Court is, that you
never be married, but allowed the Conversation of all men through a Grate
without touching any; to Lasses of your Complexion, I think this is as bad as
drawing Water in a Cieve, or being hanged in Chains alive; away with them.

Exeunt all but None-so-fair. The Seen changes
Non. Must I for using what is my own,
In Hellish hole be left alone;
With pinches, and pricks of pin,
Be racked all day, all night with din?
With Hempen cord, have great Toe cramped,
By Dog of Newgate thump'd and stamped;
By Rogues and Vermin kept from sleep,
While some do roar, and some do weep.
Oh Woossat, harsh, Prince Bruin cruel,
To sneak away from precious Jewel:
Yet in these horrors I could sing,
Had I again my pretty thing.

Song.
Let Beauty triumph over despair,
For none are cruel to the Fair;
The Crooked, the Old, and deformed shall be,
From cares and affronts never free;
But the Youthful, the pretty and kind,
In a Prison some pity will find,
For all are to Love, and to beauty inclined.
One gives her a Bottle of Brandy, and Sings -- this.
Come hither, and take this Bottle of Nantz,
'Twill make mother Woossat soon leave off her rants,
For I know she is one of my Naunts.
Though she is hot as a Codling,
'Twill make her straight Maudlin.
She Will sip, she will sigh, she will swear, she will sing, and she will melt,
She Will kiss thee, and groan for the pains thou have felt.
Chorus.
Alas my poor Nonsy I grieve for thy smart,
For though an old Woman be never so tart;
A dram of the Bottle will soften her heart.
Song.
Thy Sisters must howl, for the Trenchers they stole,
And the Princes are in the Pit-hole.
There they shall stay,
For ever and a day.
But Nonsey shall straight go to play,
1. -- Make have poor Nonsey,

2. -- Make have poor Nonsey,

Both. -- Make have poor Nonsey to Bruin,

1. -- For Nonsey shall enjoy her pretty thing.

2. -- For Nonsey etc. --

Both. -- For Nonsey etc. --

Chorus of all.
make have poor Nonsey.
make etc. --
make --
For Nonsey.
Non. Now I am so glad and so sorry, I don't know which Leg to set foremost. --
My Sisters were two crabbed vixons to me, yet their Sufferings put out the
lighted Tinder of my joy, but then the Steel of my love strikes new Fire into
the Tinder-box of my Inclination, and makes my natural affection glow again; I
shall enjoy my Bear for ever. Oh happy Nonsey! -- yet this was a horrible merry
Tragedy, O lo! the Princess, Nicklas, and Phillip here again! --

Enter Princess, Phil. and Nick.
Nick. No, we are but their Ghosts.

Non. Their Ghosts, Oh! it is well you say so your selves, for Nobody would
believe it from any other, -- what makes you come to me?


Nick. We vowed at our Death's to come, and tell you what place we were at.


Non. Poor loving Ghosts, tell me quickly then? --

Nick. Immediately after we were dead, we found our selves in a ^^wer; made all
of Wishes paved with thoughts, where at a Table of Heigh-hoes sat King Andrew,
and Mother Redstreak at Dinner; they had a Phaenix boiled with a Dish of love
Raptures, and drank nothing but Spirit of Ecstasy, we sat down with them, and
Six Gods attended us: after Dinner we slept upon a Couch of Virginity,
imbroyder'd all over with Kings smiles; then walking by a Fountain of Fruition,
who should we see but King Andrew and his Queen at Hey-gammer-Cook in a Grotto
of Innocence.


Non. Oh most ravishing delights! but why is Phillip's Ghost so mopish?


Nick. He would have been kind to Gammar Redstreak, and she threw a Glass of
ecstasy in his Chops. -- One thing dear Princess we must entreat of you, that
you will sing that Ingenious Song of the delights of the Bottle three and
thirty times, and make as many Cursy's to the West; for till that is done, our
Soul's will not be free of Elyzium.


Nonsy. Upon my Honor, I Will do it, though I were to give my self a thump in the
back every time. -- For example.


Song.
The delights of the Bottle, and the Charms of a drab,
When they pour out their pleasures will make a man mad.
All the night in deep Healths, and loud Curses is spent,
Which the dull silly Fop the next day does repent.
And Love's sweet debauch in a moment is gone,
But leaves a damned Pox to last all the life long.
Love and Wine rule the Swords that shed so much Blood
All the World, but for them, would grow virtuous and good.
Were it not for the Witchcrafts of Wenching and Wine,
Madam, -- would be poor, and my Lord would be fine.
But she now keep, her Coach, and can live without thinking,
And damns her Debauch with his Wenching and Drinking.
Nick. Enough, enough, dear Princess; farewell, when thus you do, Think of us
two.


Phil. Dear Princess, Farewell. When thus you do, think of us two,

For I Am a Ghost, though I stood so like a Post.

None. Farewell, two such loving Ghosts were never found
[ -- On English Ground.] The delights of the Bottle etc. -- Oh how I begin to
be weary! If this will make Mother Woossat's heart cheerful? sure 'twill
refresh me? -- Princess thy good health, -- Nonsy I Will pledge thee six
go-downs, -- humming stuff upon my honor. Princess, where is this sold
Princess? Asking questions Nonsy! -- Time's precious: Ah poor loving Ghosts! --
The delights of the Bottle etc. You had hard Fortune; but there is one above
knows all. Oh my head swims! and I grow faint with strength. -- My dear Bear
farewell. -- The delights of the Bottle. --

[She falls asleep.] Enter Bruin.
Bru. Where is my love? where is my dear?
O lemine I think she is here!
Where are thy eyes? thy pretty eyes,
Look how thy love poor Bruin cries.
She Is dead, she is dead, she is dead,
Oh! whither art thou fled?
Oh Mother Woossat! Oh cruel Death!
Oh! who has stopped thy spicey breath?
Oh pretty Nonsy! Oh hapless Bruin!
Oh fie! Oh dear! Oh me! Oh thee! Oh hear!
Thy sobbing houling Bear.
Oh Woossat Mother! since tha'st killed my joy,
I will thy Imps and sucking Toads destroy.
Thy Charms and Pictures all shall perish too;
And what so ever thou do, I will undo.
Woossat flies down in her Chariot.
Wooss. So Insolent, why, what a Murrain?
You Will find the stink the worse for stirring.

Bru. I will revenge my dear Nonesee,
On Justice Crab, and eke on thee.
What Hellish Teen? what Devilish Ire,
Made thee leave Nonsey in the mire?

Wooss. For her you did neglect my Trade,
And when to Wishing-Chair I called for aid,
You wheedl'd him to be your Bawd.

Bru. Oh save my love! my Nonsy save,
And I Will for ever be thy Slave.
I Will trot to Carriers every week,
Fresh Country Ware for thee to seek.
And when thou hast'm,
I Will bring thee every Gallants Custom.

Wooss. Pry'thee stint thy silly talk,
Thou may as well turn Cheese to Chalk.

Bru. Oh my Nonsey! Oh my heart Blood and Guts!
Oh save my dear! Oh save my Queen of Sluts!
Thou stony-hearted Witch, is this so much?
Think, what fine Nymphs I did for thee debauch?

Wooss. Thou prat'st in vain, the cruel Dye is cast,

Bru. Oh cruel Mother! whither in such have?
I Will show thy tricks, and all thy conjuring Art;
And make thee ride in Triumph in a Care.
No Gallant ever shall rap at door,
And without Man, in vain is Whore.

Wooss. Thou Art insolent I Will hear no more.
Woossat Enters into her Chariot.
Bru. Inhumane Woossat do not run,
And let thy Son be quite undone.
I thee conjure, don't leave her thus,
By thy beloved Incubus.
Thy public Drabs, and private doors,
Thy little Bottles, and great scores:
Thy much Impudence, and no shame,
By all thy sports and by that same:
Oh stay the Cart! stay the Cart! stay the Cart.
He lays hold, and is drawn up; till he pulls down the Chariot. Justice Crab
is driven in, in a Wheel-barrow.
Bru. O ho, here is Justice Crab! now by this light,
He Will do me right.
Dear Soul, I beg you will check the Hag,
And read her a Lecture for abusing her Hector.

Crab. Matron of love, be kind to bauling Imp,
And let him have his amorous shrimp.
If Hector be disgruntl'd, Trade is broken,
He Will make thy mischiefs known by tale and token.
Redstreak and the King, you made dye,
And caused the Princess sad Tragedy.
Both Sisters ruined by your Plot,
If Nonsy too should go to Pot.
He Would blaze all this about the Town,
And make thy very house pulled down.

Wooss. Shall he have mortal only to his use?
When Pomp and State never so much bigger?
Cannot keep frail Missy to one trigger:
No, it is to credit Trade, and House abuse;
Besides she will eat Bread out of mouth;
I will not suffer't, 'faith, and troth.

Crab. Nonsey's business shall be done,
She Is mortal, therefore may be wone;
No, Missy was ever true to one.

Wooss. Then Nonsy rise, rise my sweet punck;
She seemed dead, yet was but drunk.
Rise from thy Chair as soft as Couch,
And turn to Arms of loving Slouch.
None-so-fair Wakes.
Non. Wha, wha, what is the matter? who is there? Not guilty, Not guilty my Lord
Tagr^g, H^igh ho, I wish you were all hanged for waking me. Gods! have I my
pretty thing again?


Bru. Thou have, Oh let me hug and buss it!
Thanks to great Crab, and Mother Woossat.

Non. I have. -- Oh let me, hug and buss it!
Thanks to great Crab, and Mother Woossat.

Crab, Come jolly lovers, let us be trudging;
I Will see you both safe in your lodging.
There kiss and take your fill of dodging:
First to my Hall, for there are coming.
A Crew of jovial youth's a mumming.
So well you shall be treated there,
That every Youth, and Damzel here;
Shall envy joys of Youth and Bear.

[Exeunt all.] The Scene opened, discovers a Crew of Bachanals dressed with
Ivy, and Vine-leaves, drinking, and laughing: beyond them a company of Lovers
adorned with Garlands of Roses, etc. in a pleasant Grove. Song by the
Bacchanals.
Time's an old Rascal, he never will stay,
Yet in spite of his Scythe, and his Glass;
He that flies from his liquor^ an Ass.
Boy, drink away, Boy drink away.
While this is a singing, Bacchus rises, riding on a Hogshead dressed with
Vine-branches and Ivy. Song by the Lovers.
Ah! Charming, Fair, Divine, Ice, Flames and Darts,
Nymph, Goddess, beauties, shrine, O eyes and hearts!
Stars, Suns, and Diomands, Roses, and Lillies,
Damon Alexis! Oh Cloris! Ah Phillis!
Powr's, Gods, and Fates, Oh pity joy, and pain,
Languish alas, Fears, Hopes, Smiles, and Disdain.
Oh cruel Nymph! Ah unrelenting Swayn!
While this is singing, Cupid flies down on the Stage. Bacchus sings.
Come my Sons of the Grape, while your faces outshine
The Sun in the Sky, with the juice of the Vine.
Let the pale whining lover discover
How sad are the Chains, and how pleasant are mine.
While this is singing, all the Bacchanals come on the Stage. Cupid sings.
Come happy Lovers, come, and tell,
The joys that in your Bosom's dwell.
The pleasures of the hands and eyes,
How every look and touch surprise,
Let your persuasive Language prove,
There is no Paradise but Love.
While this is singing the lovers come on the Stage. Chorus of all.
We come to dye or win the Field,
For hearts with Love and Bacchus filled.
Can fight, and fall; but never yield.
A Dance of Bacchanals, and Lovers. A Song by a Lover.
When Caelia my heart did surprise,
In an Ocean of grief my fair Goddess did rise,
And like Crystal dissolved, the tears flowed from her eyes.
From her beautiful Cheeks, all the Roses withdrew,
And she looked like a Lilly o'rladen with dew.
How sweet did her sorrow appear?
How I trembled, and sighed, and for every tear,
Made a view to the Gods, and a Prayer to her,
Oh how soft are the wounds we receive from the fair!
But the joys and the pleasures there is none can declare.
What panting, and fainting, I feel,
When embracing her feet before Caelia I kneel:
Oh how dear are her smiles! and how sweetly they kill?
Every minute I dye with the thoughts of her Bliss,
And she breaths a new life in each languishing kiss.
O Love let us still wear the Chain,
Let no Passion, but love in our fancies ever reign,
Let us often be cured, and never freed from our pain.
All the pleasures of Wine to the Sense are confined,
But it is Love is the Noblest delight of the mind.
SONG. by a Bacchanal.
Lovers grow pale, and Beauties grow stale;
And their pleasures end all like an old Winters tale.
But the Beauties of Wine do still sparkle and shine,
And make all that love it, and drink it Divine.
Love makes you old, ever thirty is told,
But the aged, and cold, become active and bold,
Look as plump, and as brisk as the Grape that is unprest,
When their heads with the Spirit of Wine are possessed.
The Clouds open, and from the inner part of the Heaven, descends Jupiter in
his Chariot drawn by Eagles. Jupiter sings.
Let Love and Wine no more contend,
To whose high Powers all Mortals bend.
Before this Assembly, where are
The Amorous, the Youthful, and Fair,
Make an end of your long doubtful War.
Chorus.
Why should you quarrel? and fiercely complain?
All the World is your own, and your Rites would maintain:
But without one another, you neither can Reign.
A Chorus of Cupid and Bacchus.
Let Hermes the Herald of Heaven, and Fame;
The Union of Cupid, and Bacchus proclaim.
Trumpets are heard a far off, the Heavens divide; and from the furthest end
Mercury flies down attended by Fame, and the whole Heaven appears adorned with
Angels, etc. and Music. -- Mercury sings.
To all, and to Singular in this great meeting,
The weighty Gods, Cupid and Bacchus, send greeting.
Whereas by some Poets a wicked design
Of difference, was raised between Love and good Wine.
They now do declare
An end of the War,
And the hearts of all Mortals will equally share.
Chorus.
When Beauties are cruel to banish your care,
From Love to the Charms of Bacchus repair,
And when Bacchus inflames you with too hot a Fire,
To the pleasures of Love for assistance retire.
A Catch sung in three parts, and danced. By Bacchanals and Lovers. Let Us love,
and drink, and drink, and love, and drink on,
What have we else in this dull World to think on?
But still to love, to drink, and love, and drink on?
Let Us love, and drink, and drink, and love for ever,
And let each Nymph be made a kind believer.
For he that loves, and drinks, will never deceive her.
Enter two Elizian Princes, and dance through Hoops. The Dance ended, Mercury
speaks to the Audience. Although the War 'twixt Love and Wine is done,
We dare not triumph, 'till your pleasure's known;
For here the very Gods your Powers own.
If all that Love and Drink loud plaudits ring,
The joyful Gods, and Nymphs again shall sing,
Sing. -- And Nonsy shall enjoy her pretty thing.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
LIke Cunning Wives to cheat you to your Bliss,
We took the Garb and Humors of your Miss.
As gay, -- as vain, and ayery we are grown;
And you, as brisk; as young Gallants came on:
And look as dull as they, now the Act is done.
Since Nonsense, Noise, and Show still bear the Bell,
As wise Physicians do with Madmen deal,
We humor you, to make you sooner well.
If this will not take --
T'insure our future charge, and Credit too.
As undertakers for great Volumes do.
We Will paint your Coats of Arms o'r every Scene,
And dedicate 'm to ye to draw you in.
Poor Nonsy dreading the approaching storm,
Sits trembling like a Hare within her Form:
While Critics swarm from every part o'th'Town,
Prepared with Damning noise to run her down:
She fears no Generous Hunters, for they come
Only for sport, and would prevent her Doom.
She fears no snarling Fops, though every foot,
Like eager Lovers they will put her to it.
Still hunting close, and snatching at her Scut;
No, only sneaking Poachers, she can dread;
That with their long-tail'd Mungrils hunt for Bread,
And lurk in holes to knock her on the head.
Tou Gentlemen that for your pleasure came,
Let not those creeping Vermin kill your game:
Give her fair Law, and while in view she flies,
Your swelling hopes and sweet delights will rise:
But when you paunch her, all your pleasure dies.
Keep up your sport; and to prevent our sorrow,
Save her this night, and run her down to morrow.
Non-so. -- Now to the Misses, thus poor Nonsy bends,
To leave no stone unturned to gain our ends.
You She-Weavers, that without lawless Engines, come;
Engines --
That like dark Lanthorns lurk in little Room,
And manage twenty Shuttles with one Loom:
While honest Lab'rers that can use but one,
For want of work lie still, and are undone.
Let all your Tools be stirring for your Aid,
Or we will burn your Engines, and destroy your Trade.
FINIS.

