A TRVE COPY OF COLONEL Sr GAMALIEL DVDLEY'S Letter to His Highness PRINCE
RVPERT, From NEWARK, 4. March. 1644.

BEING AN EXACT RELATION OF Sr MARM. LANGDALES March Northward; As also the
great Victory obtained by Him, over the Lord Fairfax near Pontefract, 1.
Martii, 1644.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

May it please your Highness,
THe zeal of our duties at once unto His Majesty's Service, and the relief of
our distressed Friends in Pontefract, being, by the blessing of God, seconded
with successes of happiness beyond our greatest hopes, I was commanded by Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, to give unto your Highness at present a particular Account
of each occuring circumstance in this our Expedition.

On Sunday the 23d of February, we began our march from Banbury toward
Daventry, where we had Intelligence of an uncertain number of Horse and Foot
that attended thereabouts with design to affront Us in our march, but Sir
William Compton marching before Us with his Horse, was only looked on by them
at a good distance, and after the encounter of a little skitmishing, they
perceiving the rest of our Horse advancing toward them, wheeled off in great
disorder, and Sir William Compton had the execution of them in their flight
very near Northampton Town. Their particular loss in this defeat, I presume
your Highness has already received account of at full from Banbury.

On Monday the 24th we continued our March to Harborough without any opposition
or sight of Enemy, but here we were certainly advertized of a conjunction made
that night of all the Horse of Leicester, Darby, Nottingham, Grantham,
Stanford, Burleigh, and Rockingbam, associated under the conduct of Colonel
Rossiter, (and then in present motion) drawn out, but upon what design,
severally reported* until the next day being Tuesday the 25. marching from
Harborough toward Melton-Mowbray, we were at full assured; for approaching
near the Town, we discovered some Horse and Dragooners in it, and upon
another pass of the same water in a fair Meade, about half a mile from the
Town, their main strength (as we judged them) being near 2000 in all, were
drawn up to oppose us (as Sir Marm. Langdale did conceive) at the passage,
being a place of very great advantage, for which purpose he was instantly
putting himself into a posture to endeavor to force the pass, but their
eagerness to fight saved us that labor; for by that time that we were well in
order drawn up, and had gained the brow of the Hill on the South side of
Melton, the Enemy was advanced through the Town to meet us, and in a gallant
fury gave us a bold charge upon the very ground chosen by our selves to fight
upon; the encounter continued hot and sharp a good while, with several various
appearances of success on both sides; but at length they were wholly routed,
many of their Commanders slain, many hurt, and all the body scattered unto
their several Garrisons, the fatigue of our long March, and the night
intervening, prevented our very far pursuit of them in a strange Country, but
we slew upon the place near 100, and took almost so many Prisoners and four
Colors of Horse. The loss we sustained was small, only Sir John Girlington
and Captain Gascoign, two gallant Gentlemen, both slain in the first charge,
and some few wounded. One Captain Hacker held a Garrison for the Rebels at Sir
Erasmus de la Fountains house in Kirby, within a mile of the place we fought
upon, who being with his Horse and Drogooners totally routed in this battle,
went back in despair to his Garrison and burnt it, and then fled with such as
would follow him, being but two in all, in the night to Leicester, a common
Parliament practice, to set a House on fire, and then to run away by the
light of it. The pursuit of the Enemy being done, and the pillage of the field
gathered by our men, wherein was good store both of Horse-mens Arms and
Muskets.

Sir Marm. Langdale rallying all his Troops together again in order, continued
his March that night beyond Belvoir Castle, and the next day, being Wednesday
the 26, we advanced four miles beyond Newark, at which time the Enemy with
some Foot from Lincoln, Welbeck, and some other adjacent Garrisons, and with
eight Regiments of Horse, and one of Dragooners had besiedged Norwell House, a
Garrison holden by Newark Forces some miles from the Town. But having gained
intelligence of our advance and success had against Rossiter, (their admired
Champion) they instantly deserted the attempt, and retreated in great disorder
unto Retford, from whence the night following they fled in as much fear and
distraction unto Doncaster.

On Thursday the 27th, the Governor of Newark assisted us with 400 Foot and
about 400 Horse under the Conduct of his Lievtenant-Governour, which joined to
us, we marched that night beyond Tuxford, not disturbed either in march or
Quarters by any Enemy, and the next day being Friday the 28th, we advanced
toward Doncaster; about Rossinton-Bridge some three miles from the Town, our
Forlorn Parties discovered some appearance of an Enemy, but still as we
approached with our body they retreated, this night we expected they would have
disputed our passage over the River Dun, but they only made a bon-mine there,
and left us the Town of Doncaster to Quarter in that night.

The next morning, being Saturday the first of March, we drew early into the
field, where immediately Sir Marmaduke Langdale put the Army into the posture
of Battle he did intend to fight in, and prepared the Soldier with a
knowledge of such difficulties as they should expect this day to encounter
with, and therefore to go armed with the constancy of undaunted resolutions,
it being a business that was at first no less dangerous to undertake, then it
was now desperate to decline; The news was entertained by a welcome from the
Soldiers that echoed out aloud their joyful acclamations. This prophetic
Omen presaging clearly the happy consequence of their ensuing Victory.

We marched without sight of Enemy, till we came near Wentbrigge, above three
miles short of Pontefract, where about 1000 Horse, and 500 Dragooners of the
Enemies, attended that place, as much as possibly they could, to impede the
speed of our course that way, but without much danger in the dispute, we forced
the Pass, but yet they so retarded our march, as the besiegers had gained time
to be all drawn together both Horse and Foot in order, being in number about
2500 Foot, and near 4000 Horse and Dragoones, all the strength of English that
possibly the Lord Fairfax could draw together in the North, excepting the
Forces that Meldrum lay withal before Scarborough, and Sir John Savile before
Sandal, which he himself in Person came this morning unto them, with two
Regiments of Horse, and 500 Commanded Musketeers.

Betwixt four and five in the afternoon, we gained the Top of the Hill over
against the Castle, their Army standing all drawn up in the bottom, and now
me thought we viewed them with the fancy of that great Captain when he first
encountered Elephants, Tandem par animis periculum video, a good advantage was
it to us, that our Forlorn Parties, seconded with several Divisions of our
Horse, had beaten in that great Body of their Van-currier^ in such disorder
into their Main Battle, as taking that opportunity with a continued charge,
this had not time to recover themselves into any settled order, and though the
suddenness of the Action gave not leave for each Division of our Horse to
observe its proper time and place of their several orders to Charge in, yet in
the whole it was so fully done, a^ that there was not one Body of them all, but
did four or five several times that day act their parts with very gallant
Execution.

The Fight continued without a clear Victory, at the least three hours,
until there was not left on our Party standing in order to Charge withal,
more then three small Bodies, consisting of above 120 in each Body, which with
some Officers and Gentlemen together rallied, gave a seasonable Charge to the
last of the Enemies strength, the Castle at the same instant making a gallant
Sally of 200 Musketeers, who fell in the Rear of the Enemies Foot, our own
Foot firing upon them at the same time in their Flanck, and this totally
cleared the Field. We followed the Execution six or seven miles three several
ways, as the Enemy fled; A short time (with a Reserve of Foot, and Morgans
Dragooners, and one piece of Cannon) they endeavored to defend the Pass at
Ferrybrigge, but were soon beaten off, lost their Cannon, and in the pursuit
their Carriages, with 34 double Barrells of Powder, and a proportionable
quantity of Match and Bullet, and much other spoil. There were slain about
300 upon the place, and many drowned in the River, which water they took as
nimbly as if it had been their natural Element, as yet we have not had time to
fish for them: betwixt 7 and 800 Prisoners, of which 44 Officers of quality, 22
Colors of Foot, being all they had there, and not one escaped with their
Arms, and 26 Standarts of Horse, many of their chief Officers both of Horse
and Foot slain, as Colonel Armyn, Colonel Thornton, Colonel Malevary, and many
more, whose names I have not, all the Foot Arms we took, to the number of 2500
at the least, and many Horse Arms. Te Deum Laudamus. Non nobis, Domine, non
nobis, etc.

One remarkable circumstance I cannot omit to acquaint your Highness with;
They had some few days before given out, that they would take the Castle with
a Stratagem, which should be thus: They would make as if relief were coming
to it, and so they would seem to draw all off, as to fight the Relief,
(leaving only an Ambuscada in the Town) and then they would skirmish
together, and seem defeated by the Releevers, and so retreat disorderly as
beaten, in expectation the Castle should make a Sally, and then their Ambuscada
should surprise it; But I hope they were now taught the danger of jesting with
edged Tools, and will hereafter leave such mocking. At our first advance into
the Country, it was generally reported, that your Highness was come in Person,
which struck a great terror into the Enemy and Courage into our Soldiers, as
had your Highness transmitted some of your Royal Spirit into their hearts,
and your active strength into their Arms, scorning to be guilty of any Act
that they should have had cause to have blushed, had your Highness looked on.

About two of the clock in the morning, all parties that had been in pursuit of
the Enemy being returned, we drew into Quarters to refresh, and about eight of
the clock in the morning, on Sunday the second of March, Sir Marm. Langdale
sent parties out into the Country, which brought in plenty of all sorts of
provisions for the Castle, and then appointed a Rendezvous the next morning. In
the interim he was advertised that Rossiter with all his broken Troops rallyed,
and others joined to them, and 300 Dragooners, was come to Doncaster with
intention to join with Fairfax, whereupon we immediately Marched toward them,
but they having secured the Bridge, Sir Marm. Langdale diverted his course over
a ford at Oldwark near Rotheram, and thence we continued out March (only
halting some few hours by the way to refresh) without any loss at all, to
Newark whereabouts we are at present Quartered. I can assure Your Highness
that the present effects of this Expedition are these.

Besides that our coming was highly seasonable, it being almost the very
Critical minute of the Castles necessity, Scarborough Bolton, and Skipton were
all besiedged, and they were forced to draw off upon this occasion, and are now
so shaken, as that they cannot suddenly be in any probable condition to begin
new siedges hastily, besides the Country is so discouraged from their party,
that whereas the Lord Fairfax had undertaken to have raised an Army of 20000
Horse and Foot for his Son to move into the South withal* and had prepared
his business in great forwardness, he will by this business doubtless
receive a good diversion, the Countries generally declining him, and whenever
your Highness shall be pleased to take this Country into your particular
care, he has* chalked out unto Your Highness a ready track for to raise the
same leavy in their own way, which that Your Highness may have a speedy
opportunity to undertake, next the continuance of your Highness happiness and
honor, shall be the daily Prayer of

May it please your Highness, Your most humbly and most faithfully devoted of
all that serve your Highness GAM. DVDLEY.
Newark that 4. of March, 1644. We lost not one Officer (God be thanked) and
but very few common Soldiers.



FINIS.

