Perspective Practical. Or, A Plain and Easy METHOD Of true and lively
Representing all Things to the Eye at a distance, by the Exact RULES OF ART AS,
Landskips, Towns, Streets, Palaces, Churches, Castles, Fortifications, Houses,
Gardens and Walks, with their Parts as Walls, Doors, Windows, Stairs, Chimneys,
Chambers and Shops, with their Ornaments and Furniture, as Beds, Tables, Chests
Cupboards, Couches, Chairs, Stools, and other Movables, Regular or Irregular,
in several Postures.

LIKEWISE RULES for Placing all sorts of Figures, with their several Postures,
Situation and Horizon; Also, A TREATISE of Shadows natural by the Sun, Torch,
Candle, and Lamp, very useful and necessary FOR ALL PAINTERS Engravers,
Architects, Embroiderers Carvers Goldsmiths, Tapestry workers.


And all others that work by design, by a Religious Person of the Society of
JESUS a Parisien.

Faithfully Translated out of French, and Illustrated with 150 Copper Cuts.

Set forth in English by Robert Prick for the Lovers of Art.

LONDON, Printed by H. Lloyd, and sold by Robert Prick at his Shop over
against the Cross Keys in White-Cross-street, and likewise at the Golden Lion
in N w Cheapside in Moor-fields near Bethlehem. 1672.

THE PREFACE.
THE Art of Perspective, which has the eye for its Principle, to whom Nature
has given more vivacity and more Perfections then to the other senses, and
which holds amongst them the Rank, and the Advantages that the Soul has
above the Body, is likewise the fairest and most delightful of all the Parts,
that the Science of the Mathematics has put forth into light. This Science
may well boast it self to be the soul and the life of Painting, seeing that it
is it which gives unto Painters the Perfection of their Art, which in its
ordering the heights and the measures of the Figures, the Movables, the
Architectures, and other Ornaments of a Picture: It instructs what colors he
should use, lively or sad, in what place he ought to apply the one and the
other, what he ought to finish, and what ought not so to be: where one is to
give a light, and where there is no need of it: in a word, it is this that
ought to begin and finish, seeing that it ought to go throughout all. Without
help, the best Master will make as many faults as draughts, principally in
Architectures, wherewith they would enrich their Works, as I have seen in
Pieces well esteemed, where they have failed so foully, that this in part has
been the motive of my design, for to cause them to know their errors without
naming them, and to teach the young ones to avoid them. How excellent a Painter
soever one is, he must observe all these Rules, or he shall content none but
Ignorants, and a Reasonable Painter that shall know and use these well, shall
do wonders to every ones content.

The Engraver in Copper ought not to be more ignorant of it then the Painter,
seeing that he does that with his Graver, which the other does with his Pencil:
It will make him to know that which he ought to touch toughly, and that which
he ought to make faint. The need that he has of this Science is so much the
more necessary, as his Pieces are far more in number, then those of the
Painter: the which if they be skilfully made, his praise is increased: if on
the contrary, his defects are thereby the more known, and every Piece is a
Mouth which decrieth its Workman.

The Carver in Boss shall learn the height which he must give to his Statues,
as well for below as for the midst, and in proportion to that which is higher,
what Projector he must give to Buildings, and to other Bodies that have
Mouldings or demi-Boss, the Angle for the point of the sight, for to take the
heights and abridgements of all the Objects near and far off.

The Architect by this Science, may be able to give the understanding of his
designs in a small space, he may also elevate one part, and leave the other in
Plane, for to make his whole work appear; and seeing that we are upon
Architecture, there needs that the Perspective, (or he that professes this,)
be learned therein, at least in the Practice of the Hand, by reason that the
fairest Pieces of Perspective are made in rich and sumptuous Buildings, framed
according to the Orders of Columns, the Beauty of which depends on
Proportions and Measures, which ought to be observed therein, otherwise they
will offend the eye; wherefore they ought to be well studied, and whosoever
knows them not when he ought to know them, is worthy of blame, seeing the
easiness that he has to learn them, having Vitruvius, Vignola, Scamozzii, and
many other which have written thereof so pertinently.

It is not enough that he knows the Orders of Columns, he must understand all
the Measures which are ordinarily given to Buildings, and to each particular
thing, Gates, Windows, Chimneys, etc. and to place them well, and to take days
fit for the purpose, that he make not any thing like one eye or maimed, to take
great care that every thing be right, nothing faulty, and that the symmetry and
proportion be kept, as much as one is able, otherwise the Perspective, which is
made for to content the sight, would offend it by its defects.

Goldsmiths, Embroiderers, Makers of Tapistry, Painters, workers in Silver, in
Silk, and in Wool; Joyners, and all others that busy themselves in making
designs, and with Painting, cannot let pass this Science, of Perspective, if
they would do any thing that may be commendable.

The most part of those I have known to affect this Science, have assured me,
that they have been beaten off by the great number of lines, that some Authors
have set for to frame and find the place of their Objects, Bodies, or Figures;
others, by having met with too much obscurity in their Orders and Explications,
and particularly, for that they have not set the Instructions over against the
Figures, and that whilst that they turn over leaves to find them, they forgot
that which they desired to know. All these Complaints oblige me to be more
clear, and more Methodical in the Instructions which I have set before every
figure, that they might have before them the Manner to set into Practice that
which they desire, applying my self to their capacity, without giving such
Demonstrations as would obstruct or hinder them rather then clear them, using
words which all may be able to understand, even in the Definitions, as one may
see at the seventh fol. Having also given to certain things qualities which the
common sort give to them, though that in effect they have them not. As for
example, at the 15th. fol. where I discourse of the distance or removal far
off, I have been constrained to say, against my thought, that it is the Apple
of the eye which receives the Rays of the Objects, as if they were bounded
there, by reason that I have experimented that when I say that the Vision is
made upon the Retine, or fifth thin Membrane, at the bottom of the eye, that
the Rays do but pass by the Apple, and that the representation, or species of
that which we behold are turned back; it seems to me that I speak a new
language, and that they cannot conceive that. Wherefore having considered that
this knowledge did little import for the Practice of this Art: I gave to the
Apple that which appertains to the bottom of the eye, which is the true place
of the vision or sight, where the species of the Objects are framed although
others say that it is in the Cristalline: Those which would be resolved in
this* may look into Aquilton Scheiner and des Carts, which have very well
discoursed thereof.

Although I have used all diligence possible, for to render this Science very
easy, yet I doubt not but many may find trouble therein at the beginning; but
he which shall be able to surmount the difficulties, which he shall find at
the first; there is nothing which he may not understand and practice, so that
he be careful to understand well, and retain one Order, before that he turn
over the leaf: because that they are, as it were linked together, and dependent
the one of the other: this little pains will give the satisfaction, by the
easiness which one shall have afterward, in making all whatsoever he would.

It shall be known by the Table following, that this Book suffices for to make
all sorts of Perspectives, by using the orders, which the Figures and Letters
shall show, the which one may bring together to have that which one desires,
in which he that would make some fair Perspective, shall be delighted to find
presently that which he shall conceive will content his mind: and then he
shall have far more delight then if he copied a Piece wholly made by another;
and if one be constrained to imitate any one, this shall be done with facility,
seeing that there are here orders, of all that possibly he can meet with. I
confess freely that I have an incredible delight in making of new designs, and
in inventing of new pieces which I would have published, as others have done,
had it not been that my desire is, that every one should be partaker of this
Recreation which he may take in composing them, and making them himself, having
given him all the means, and the orders for to bring the same to pass. But if
any one will not take this as pains, he shall find many of them all made
already in Marolois, Uredeman, Uriesse, and others, which have taken delight to
make their ingenuity appear therein.

So many, so fair, and excellent works have served to make some Painters lazy,
that they will not learn to make that which they found already made; they are
content only to design those the best that they are able, and as far as they
understand them, the which would be tolerable, if they did imitate them well;
but counterfeiting them without understanding, they make nothing that is good,
giving ordinarily so many points in a Picture, as they shall meet with objects
therein, lines and returns, they will make you see the under part of a thing,
which as a certain one has very well said, steal from particulars that which
they give to the public, to draw glory to themselves from the labor of others.

I had rather say freely, that I intending to make this little Treatise of
Perspective; I would see, as far as I could, those which had written thereof,
and take from one and others, that which might serve for my subject, afterward
to make a General Restitution, with which I have mingled a little of mine own,
for to bind them together, and to follow an Order, which they had forgot to
keep. The first that I found to have given some light to this Science, is
George Reich, an High-Germane, in the tenth Book of his Works: After him
Viator, a Cannon of Toul, which has given store of good Figures, but too
little Instructions. After him came Albert Durer, an excellent man, which has
left some Rules and Principles amongst his Works in the fourth Book of his
Geometry: John Cousin also has made a Book thereof, wherein there are many
good things. After those came Daniel Barbaro, Vignola, Serlto, du Cerean,
Sirigary, Solomon de Cause, Marolois, Uredement, Uriesse, Guidus Ubaldus,
Pietro, Acolti, le Sieur de Vaulizard, le Sieur Desargues, and lately the
Reverned P. Niceron a Minime, whom I have seen all, the one after the other,
admiring their study and pains, for to serve the Public, esteeming my self
much honored to imitate that which they done, and to be the unknown Copier of
their Works, besides those which I have named; there are many other brave
spirits, which have written thereon, which I have not had the happiness to see,
because I could not attain to it This Multitude of Authors causes sufficiently
to understand, that this Science has been in all times cherished and esteemed
by the most curious spirits, and more in that age that we are in, then in any
other passed, the which makes me to hope, that this little work will not
displease many, seeing that it brings Instructions, which have not been seen
for setting into Perspective, that which falls ordinarily under the senses,
and by consequence gives the manner of making all sorts of Perspectives which
any one can imagine.

I desire to proceed to cause it to be seen, and to teach to set into
Perspective all that may be set into it, not only in Pieces level, and upon an
united Plane, but also the bending, round and oblique, as for to paint within
Roofs, frettings or raised Works, Corners and Turnings again, making to appear
square, or round, that which it shall not be. In one word, all the Rarities and
Deceits of Perspective, whereof these ought to come forth first, being the
suondations and principles of those which must follow. If I shall know that
they may be pleasing, and that they are looked upon with a courteous eye, it
shall be such a contentment and satisfaction to me, as I hope not for, and
which shall easily compel me to acquit my self of my Promise.

A TABLE, Instructing how to find the pieces that may serve to make any part of
Perspective.
THe Art of Perspective ought to begin by the planes, and according to reason,
by those that are the most easy, amongst the which the square, or the Cube; is
the most easy, you may find how the plane thereof ought to be made, at the
19th. fol. and its elevation, at the 44th. and 49th. folios. If one would have
it seen by the Angle, its plane is at the 20th fol. and its elevation at the
50th. fol.

For to elevate the Walls of an House, or Hedge-Rows for a Garden, you must
take the 51th and 52th fol. and you shall find there, with the planes the
manner of elevating them.

Those that would have the inside of a Chamber, or of an Hall seen by the
Front, shall find first the Walls, as we shall show in the 51th and 52th fol.
The Leaf following will give you the Doors, and the 54th fol. will show how to
make the Windows there. For to raise the Chimneys in what place soever you
would, you must seek the 77th fol. After that you must lay there the Planchers,
which may be found in the 55th and 57th fol? for the Pavements, there are of
many sorts in the 31. 32. 33. and 34th. fol? If one would have open Doors, the
93th fol. will show how to do it, and the Leaf following shall be for opening
the Windows. When there shall be two or three Stories, or Chambers, the one
above the other, you must always keep the same Orders, and there ought to be
but one only point for the view, as you may see in the 76 fol. for to ascend
into these Chambers there is an Ascent turning, or Stairs in the 82. 83. and 84
fol.

Ordinarily all the Buildings which are viewed by the inside, are garnished
with some Movables, he that will place such there, shall find of all sorts in
the 96th fol. and so forword unto the 103 fol. For the measures of such
Figures, if any such ore to be placed there, they are to be found in the 122th.
or 125th fol.

For to make a Church appear by the inside, we must first resolve upon a plane,
and place that in the Perspective, according to the two orders, that we have
given thereupon in the 37th or 41th fol. You must raise the Walls, as is to be
seen in the 51th fol. For the Windows, one may make them as the Arches of the
62th fol. or as in the 54th fol Except that there is no need of the cross-bars,
and that they must be round above. If one would have Pilasters, or Pillars,
they are to be ^ound in the 48th fol. If one would have Columns there, he must
take the Order for them from the 87th fol. After all that there must be made a
bending Roof, or Roofs, if one would set it upon the sides fol. 68. 69. 70. 71.
and 72. will furnish you with all sorts thereof.

The Ridge or top of the Church is made after another manner then bending
sides, the Order for that may be found at the 74th fol. for to enrich it with
Cornishes, Mouldings and other Ornaments, you must have recourse to the 88. 89.
90. 91. and 92. fol. for Altars, if one would have them there, you shall find
the Method of making them in the 104 fol In the midst of the cross-bars of the
Church one may make a Lanthorn or Cubeloe, as is to be seen in the 75. fol. The
Pavement may be chosen in the 31. 32. 33. and 34 fol.

As for the Buildings without side of the Doors and Windows, they are made like
the Buildings in the inside, in the 53 and 54. fol. as may be seen in the 106.
fol. When you shall have elevated them to the height that you think fit, you
shall find the draught there to raise such a kind of covering, as you shall
think must fitting in the 107. or 103. fol. If one would have there any
Cornish, or other Ornaments, you may find how they ought to be placed in the
fol. 88. 89. 90. 91 and 92. Galleries Arch-wise, either for the outside or
inside may be found in the fol. 63. 66 67. and 106. He that would make a whole
street of Buildings, he must multiply the houses, and place them on the one
side, and on the other, as one may see in fol. 109. When one shall make houses
at a distance in the Perspectives, and that they shall be parallel to the
Horizon, you ought to allow them the single draught only, without the thickness
f the Doors or the Windows as I have made at the 110 fol. In the large open
places, which are ordinarily in Streets in Perspective, one may raise a
Pyramide there, the 80 fol. will show how to elevate it, upon steps, or any
other figure, or Statue, upon a Piedestal, the 91 fol. will furnish the
Piedestal, and the 124 fol. will show the figure.

When one would have Buildings seen by the left Angle he may take the planes of
the fol. 19. 30. and make the Elevations as he shall find them in the fol. 50.
and 111. which shall give Orders, how to make the Doors and Windows there.

Gardens made in Perspective do more delight the sight then any thing in the
World, as well for the color, that is so pleasing there, as for the variety of
things, which may be set there. The planes are to be made, as in the fol. 35.
38. or 113. In the which one may make such divisions, as one shall desire. If
we would have Bowers, the order therefore may be found in the 60. and 61. fol.
If one should like better Hedges or Arbours, he may find them in the fol. 51.
and 52. If instead of Bowers and Hedges, one would have a Wood, or Alleys of
Trees, the 112 fol. will show the Orders for diverse sorts. When one would make
Fountains there, or spouts of Water, the Round of the 29 fol. may serve for a
Basin, its elevation is at the 73 fol. If one would have a square, he must take
the fol 19 or 44. For to have thereof with diverse quarters he must seek in the
45 or 46. fol. where he may find Polygones. He that would set Statves, or
Figures upon Piedestals, which is a very fair Ornament for a Garden, he must
take their measures in the fol. 122. or 125. If one would place there any Caves
or Grottes, the 74 fol. will show him how they ought to be made.

When one oeould cause an Ascent from one Garden to another, he shall find many
sorts of steps in the fol. 78 79 80. and 81. Every one may choose amongst all
these things, that which shall please him best, and may put them all there into
the same piece, and without confusion, only he must keep the proportions and
symmetryes which ought to be observed therein.

If one would have Shops open, where there is nothing but the Walls, the 55
fol. will show: If one would that they should be garnished with Boards or
little Tables, he shall find the order thereof in the 105 fol. There is also
another fashion for a a Shop, which is not in the from like this, and whereof
the Opening is altogether different, one may set it in the 95. fol.

Ampl theaters were heretofore more in use in Pictures, then they are at
present, which is the cause that I have not set any of them here, accounting
them unuseful here: If I shall know, that any one desire them, I will set forth
some, in the second part in the mean time, if any one would raise up one
thereof, he may use the plane, that is in fol 29. in the which he must make a
greater number of Circles, according to the number and bigness, of the Stages,
that he would have therein: For to raise the Stages, he must use the line of
elevation, which he shall find in the 75. fol. As for Fortifications, he that
would set them into Perspective, shall find the Method to reduce and abreviate
the plane thereof in the 39 fol. and how they ought to be elevated in fol. 114.

The Treatise of Shad ws, which begins at the 129. fol. unto the 150.
teaches how to give them to all sorts of Objects, whether they be caused by
the Sun, by a Torch, or by the Candle.

As for all other things in particular, they are to be found according to the
Order of the Table which is at the end of the Book.

Licensed May 2, 1672.

Roger L'Estrange.

SOME DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF PERSPECTIVE.
The Definitions, Names and Terms of the Points, Lines and Figures which we
shall use.
THe point has not any parts, as we see A, in figure. 1. In Perspective, there
are three sorts thereof, which are called, points of sight, points of distance,
and points contingent or accidental.

The line, is a length without breadth, as A B in figure 2. The Perspective
has five principle ones, the which it always uses. The 1. The line of the
base or plane, as C D may be in figure 3. The 2. The line Perpendicular, or
Plomb-line, which falling upon another, makes the Angles on the one part and
another equal, and these Angles are called Right Angles, and the line is
Perpendicular to that upon the which it falls as in the figure 3. A B and E
F, falling upon C D, do make the Angle right in G. The 3. are lines parallel;
These are lines the which being continued upon the same plane, and prolonged on
the one part and other infinitely, will never meet together, as N O, in the
figure 6. The Horizontal line, is no other thing, then a parallel to the base;
We shall speak of it more largely in its place. The 4. is the line Diagonal,
this is a line drawn from one Angle to another, as K L in the figure 10. And
the 5. The line occult or pointed, is a line which ought to be made in white,
or with points, as O N in figure 2. and these lines never ought to appear, when
the work is finished.

The right Angle, is that which we speak of treating of Perpendiculars, I have
set it apart by it self, that it may be better known what it is, by E F G, in
Figure 4.

There are two other Angles, under which are comprised all the Angles which are
not right, the one is called the Obtuse which is more then right, as H L M, in
figure 5. And the other sharp, which is less then right, as is H I K, in the
same figure.

A term, is the end of any thing, as in the 2. A and B are terms or the ends of
the line.

A figure, is comprised by one or by more terms, as in 7. 8. 9. 13. 14, etc.
are figures.

The square, has the four sides equal, and the four Angles right, A B C D, in
fig. 7.

The Parallelogram, or long square, has the four Angles right, but not the
sides equal as C D E F, in fig. 8.

The Triangle Equilateral, has the three sides equal, as G H I in fig. 9.

Section and Intersection of lines, are two lines which do cross and divide
themselves in one point, as in the figure 11, the lines A B and C D, divide
themselves in E.

The bowed or crooked line; is that which is drawn by a Circuit from one point
to another, as L M, in fig. 12

A Circle or Round, is a plane figure, comprised in one line only, called a
circumference, toward which all the lines coming from the Center are equal
between themselves, as B C D of the figure 13, the point of the midst of the
Circle A, is called the Center

The Diameter, is the right line B C of the Circle, the which passing by the
Center of the Circle A, divides it into two equally.

The Oval is a long figure, comprised within one line only, not Circular but
bowed and Regular as E in fig. 14.

The Spiral or Volute, is a line, that is framed by two Centers, or by one only
by Revolution or Diminution F, in fig. 15.



The Rest of the Definiti^ns, Names and Terms.
TAngents are one or more lines, which being drawn forth, do but only touch or
graze upon some Object, figures or lines, without dividing them in any manner,
as A B touch the Circle C, at the points D D.

I have placed here two sorts of lines, which bear the same name with the
Precedent, and which nevertheless produce another effect, by reason of the
point of sight, and of the Perspective, for the Angle E A B ought to be held
for a right Angle, and all the lines C ought to be held for Perpendiculars upon
the Plane in Perspective, as is D F, and the lines A B, G I, and H K, are
accounted Perpendiculars upon the base, and all the lines which go to the point
of sight, either from above or from below, or on the side, are called Rays, and
lines visual or Radial.

The Plane or Ichnography, is a description or first design, the which
represents by single lineaments the Prints or footsteps, which the
foundation of the thing which one would describe, would make upon the Ground,
to the end that by one view only, one may behold the correspondence, situation
and interval of the parts between themselves, as one may see in L and M.

A Polygone is a figure which has many Angles as is L A Degree is one little
part, whereby the Circle is divided into 360, and every degree is further
divided by the Astronomers into 60 Minutes, and these Minutes into 60 others
which they call Seconds, etc. the which is not useful for us here. It suffices
that we know, that the degrees are those little divisions which are in the
Circle N O P Q, for to have the knowledge of the Angles. This knowledge will
enable easily to make all sorts of Polygones, by dividing 360 by the number of
Angles, which one would have in the figure: for example, if I would make a
square, I divide 360 by 4, and the Quotient will give 90, which is the right
Angle N M O, and so of others: for those which have not the use of Arithmetic,
they shall find at the fourth side of the Geometrical Orders to make such,
whatsoever may please them.



Some Orders of Geometry, for to make the Lines and Figures, which we are about
to define.
1. FOr to make the Perpendiculars, or as the Workmen say, the square Draught,
which is necessary in all our operations. If that you would have it in the
midst of a line, as A E, you must open the Compass more then the half of the
line, and place one leg of it at the point A, and with the other frame two
little Arches or Bows above and below, as F and to do the same from the point
E, and the sections of these little Arches, will give the Perpendicular upon A
E, 1 figure.

2. If the line be at the bottom of the table or paper, and that one cannot
make the Arches above and below. You must divide this line into two, for to
have the point G, then from the ends of this line to make the Arches, which
shall divide themselves in H, then to draw a line from H, to G, as in the
second figure.

3. To elevate a Perpendicular from the end of a line, as from the point I of
the line I K. This may be done diverse ways, first as we have said, but when
place is wanting you must place one leg of the Compass at the point I, and with
the other leg to make a great portion of the Circle L M, then to set the
Compass so opened upon the point M, and with the other to make it to divide the
Circle at the point N, then to take the half toward the point O, for to have
the right Angle O I K, or without busying ones self to seek this half of the
Arch M N, you must with the same, opening of the Compass make yet upon the N,
and from the same point N, an Arch P Q, then having laid the Ruler at the
points M and N, you must draw a line which shall divide this Arch P Q, at the
point P, and elevate a line from I to P, for to have the Perpendicular and the
right Angle P I K, figure 3.

4 Otherwise. If from the point P, you would raise a Perpendicular, take a
point at pleasure upon the line P R, as Q, and from the point Q make a Circle
which touches the point P, and shall divide the line P S, in some part, as S,
then to draw from S, by the point Q, unto the circumference of the Circle T,
and T P, shall be the Perpendicular. fig 4. For to abreviate all the orders,
you must have an equaller very just.

5. From a point given upon a line to make a Perpendicular to fall From the
point given A; you must make the Arch B C, which divides the line given E F,
at the points G H, from these points G H, make two little Arches above and
below, which shall divide themselves as at the point I, then from the point A,
cause a line to fall passing by I, upon the line E F, and that shall be the
Perpendicular of the point given.

6. From a point given at the end of a line to make a Perpendicular fall. Let
the point given be K, and the line L M, from the point K, you must draw a line
traversing at pleasure, which divides in some place the line L M, as N: after
divide this line K N, into two equal parts, and from the midst O, make the Arch
that passes by the point K, and at the section which it will make upon the
line L M, as P, and the point P, shall be to make the Perpendicular to fall K P.

7. The parallels. For to be well made ought to be over half-Rounds, which they
ought to touch as F G, which is parallel to H I, it is made over the half,
Round which it touches at the points K L.

8. To divide a line into many equal parts. Let the line to be divided be A B.
You must draw another above or below, which may be parallel to it, as C D, and
upon this latter, which must be greater or lesser, then that which is to be
divided: You must make as many parts, as you would divide that of A B into, as
in our example seven, then from the first and last point of these divisions, to
draw lines which pass by the ends of that which is to be divided, which shall
divide themselves in a certain point as here, having drawn from C by A, and
from D, by B, the section E is made, at which point F, you must draw all the
divisions of the line C D, and the line A B, shall be divided as one desires.



For to frame the Figures.
1. IF the line A B, be given to make of it a square You must set one Leg of
the compass, at the point A; and with the other leg take the length A B, and
holding firm at the point A, with the other leg of the Compass, make the Arch B
C, and make also from the point B, the Arch A D, which shall divide themselves
at the point E, without the side of the section, he must transport the half of
the Arch A E, or B E, which shall be in the points D C, by the which drawing
right lines one shall have a perfect square.

After another manner. Upon the line A B, draw from the point A, a
Perpendicular C A, equal to A B, then having taken with a Compass the length A
B or A C, you must set the leg of the Compass at the point B, and with the
other make an Arch, and do altogether the same from the point C, the section of
these two Arches shall be the point D, for to frame the square A B C D.

2. For to make a parallelogram or long square: Draw a Perpendicular greater or
smaller then E F, as E G, then ha^ing taken the height E G, set a leg of the
Compass at F, and with the other make an Arch, take also the l ngth E F, nd set
a leg of the Compass in G, and make a second Arch then divide the first at H,
and you shall have that which you desire, you must always observe the same
thing, for all the four right Angles.

Of Polygones Circular, which are Figures with diverse Angles within one Circle.
3. For the Triangle equilateral You must set the half Diameter, at the point
A, and describe the Arch D E, and draw a line D E, this line shall be the side
of the Triangle, D E F.

4. For the square draw 2 Diameters at right Angles, and join their ends, this
shall be the square A B C D.

5. For the Pentagone or five Angles. Make 2 Diameters, and take D G, the half
of the Demy-Diameter D I, and from the point G, of the Interval G A, make the
Arch A H, the subtendent H A, shall be the side of the Pentagone.

6 For the Hexagone, or six Angles. The half Diameter is the side of the
Hexagone.

7. For the Heptagone or seven Angles. Take the half of the side of the
Triangle Equilateral A.

8. For the Octogone or eight Angles Take the half of the quarter of the Circle

9 For the Ennagone or 9 Angles. Take the 2 thirds of the half Diameter, as E
B, for its side.

10. For the Decagone or ten Angles: Take an half Diameter and divide it in two
at the point G, then from the point G, and the interval G A, make the Arch A B,
the part of the half Diameter B C, shall make the side of the Decagone.

11 For the Hend^cagone or eleven Angles. Make two Diameters at right Angles,
and from the point A, make the Arch B C, of the interval of the half Diameter,
then from the intersection C, unto the E, draw a line C D. This is the side of
the Hendecagone.

12. For the Dodecagone, or twelve Angles, divide into 2 the Arch of the
Hexagone A B, the subtendent shall be the side

13. The Oval is made of many fashions and all composed of portions of the
Circle, or of one only line by two Centers, the most commonly used are these.
Having made a Circle with 2 Diameters, as A B C D, from the points A B, we must
make more two circles equal to the first, then from the point D they draw a
^ine by the Center of the l^st Circle A, unto the circumference E, then setting
a leg of the Compass at the point D, with the other, you must take the interval
E, and make the Arch E F. You must do as much on the other side, and the Wall
will be made.

14 For an Oval more round. You must draw one only line, and make a Circle, of
the Center A, and from the section of this circle upon the right line at the
point B, this shall be the Center of another Circle. To frame the Oval, you
must take with a Compass all the Diameter of one of the Circles, as from the
point A to the point E, and set at the sections of the two Circles D E, a leg
of the Compass, and with the other leg make the Arch D G H, and to do the same
from the point E.

15. There is another manner of making of Ovals very easy, and more useful
then the former, seeing that by one and the same Order, they be made long,
narrow, large, short, etc See here how they are made. You must upon a right
line set two nails, or two pins, which serve for the Center, as A B, for to
fasten a thread or small cord of the height and largeness that you would have
the Oval, as is the pack-thread A B C: you must hold this thread bended with a
feather or pencil, which you shall turn, until that you be arrived where you
have begun. If you would make it longer, lengthen out the Center, and do the
contrary, if you would have it short: for if you set the two nails close one to
the other, you shall have a Round.

16. For the Volute, or line like unto the Spiral, take two points upon one
line, as A B, let these two points serve for a Center, the one after the other:
for example, having made the half-round A B, set again the leg of the Compass
on B, and with the other leg take the length A, and make an half-Circle A C.
Then holding one leg of the Compass at A, you must take the distance A C, and
make the half-Round C D, and s^ often as you please, changing only the Centers.
Vignola gives it another fashion.



Of the Rays VISUAL.
THe Object being a Point, then there is but one Ray Visual made from the
Object to the Center of the Eye; And this Ray is called Axe or Centrical, which
is the most lively, and the strongest of all the other Rays, as you see in the
Figure A B. It is this which divides always the Horizontal line, and which
gives the Point of the fight.

If the Object be a right line, the Rays Visual make a Triangle, whereof the
line C D is the Base, and the two sides are the Rays on the outside, which
come from the Eye A, and make the Triangle C A D. And A B is the Centrical
Radius. If this line were viewed by one end, it would seem as one point.

If the Object be a Superficies plane or spherical, the Visual-Rayes will make
a Pyramid, the Base of which is the Object C D E F, and the top is the Eye A,
the rest of this Pyramide are the Rays Visual; if the Superficies were viewed
by the side, it would make but a line. Of all the Rays Visuals the strongest
is the Centrical A B: and so much as the others are further off, by so much
they are the weaker, and keep nevertheless a reasonable strength unto the
opening of a right Triangle, at G A P. Those which pass the right Angle, are so
weak, that they are not seen but confusedly, and therefore there is need that
the outside Rays which may comprehend the Object, make at least a right Angle
within the Eye.

Wherefore one may see better a Perspective with one Eye only, then with two.
According as some say, the whole object is better seen with one eye only then
with two; because, say they, that the sight is then more piercing, in respect
that all the Visual spirits of the Eye closed are directed and brought to the
other, and this union of Visual spirits gives a great force, and makes the
sight very strong: for every Virtue united is much more vigorous, then when it
is dispersed: which is the cause, as they say, that by closing one of the Eyes
all the Visual Virtue which was dispersed in the two, comes to join it self,
and to be gathered into one, and by this means it is the better. See here
wherefore they hold it for a certain thing, that any one sees more exactly,
having one Eye closed, then being both open.

Howsoever it be, it is certain, that one may see a Perspective better with one
Eye alone then with two, because that the Centrical Radius seeks out the
point of the sight, where all the radials of the Picture do m^et, which causes
the whole to be seen in its Perfection: which is the reason that we do not say
the point of the eyes, but the point of the eye: for to give to understand that
the Perspective is more pleasing, when it is viewed with one eye only.

1 fig
2 fig


The First Definition.
PErspective is the Art which represents every Object, seen by some Diaphane
or transparent Medium, through which the Visual Rays penetrating, are
terminated or bounded at the Object: and generally all that is seen through
something, as through the Air, through the Water, through the Clouds, through
Glass, and the like, things may be said to be seen in Perspective. And because
we can see nothing, but through these things, we must say, that all that we see
is seen in Perspective.

The end of Perspective is to represent upon a Plane, as is E F G H, the
objects which are beyond such as you see here A B C D, represented in I K L M:
for to understand this better, let us suppose that there is upon the Ground an
object A B C D, and that the Eye of the Beholder is in O, if one put between
the one and the other a transparent Body, marked with E F G H, the Sections
which the Rays of the Eye would make of the Perpendicular Q R S T, would make
the Figure I K L M, such as the object would appear in the transparent Body:
which makes us to understand, that all Perspective is no other thing, then
sections of a line: This is the reason that Monsieur Marolois, calls always
that which he puts in Perspective; The Appearance of the Section, because
that the Plane E F G H, divides the visual Pyramid A B C D and O, and gives
for the Section I K L M.

The reason of these Sections is, that one only line can determine nothing, and
that it is necessary, that there be two of them which divide themselves for to
have a Point: seeing that it is certain, that from our eye to the object there
is always made a Radius or right line, this cannot fail us: but for to have
another, which must divide it, we must imagine, that from our foot there is
made a Center, from whence diverse Lines or Rays do proceed which go to the
Angles of the objects, which we behold as from the Center P to the Angles A B C
D, the which Rays being divided by some transparent Plane, as is E F G H, all
these Rays P B, P A, P C, P D, which were Horizontal, raise themselves, and
become Perpendiculars, as P B, becomes Q M, P D, becomes R L, etc. For if
they remained Horizontal, the visual Rays would not divide them, but at the
object it self where both of them do meet. This is the Reason that we always
suppose a Plane, the which making the Rays to reflect, gives the means to
divide them, and so to find all the Points, to frame the appearance of the
objects whatsoever they be.



The Second Definition.
IChnography, is the Pourtraiture of the Platform or the Plane, upon the which
we would raise any thing, as A B C D is the Ichnography or the plane of a
square body.

The Third Definition.
Orthography is the Pourtraict of the face, or the forepart of the object, as
of a Building, or else it is the Representation of the Body, or of the Edifice
directly opposite to our eye, so as E F G H is the orthography or the forepart
of a Cube, or of a Building; for as the Ichnography represents the Plane, so
the Orthography gives the representation of the side opposite to the Eye.

The fourth Definition.
Scenography, is that which represents the Object wholly elevated and
perfect, with all its diminutions and umbrages, as well on the forepart as on
the sides, which may be seen, and are above, as I K L M N O P, is a perfect
Cube; in brief, it is the work wholly accomplished, which contains in it self
the other Parts.

That we may make these words more Intelligible, we shall name hereafter the
Ichnography, the Plane; the Orthography, the face or forepart; and the
Scenography, the Elevation.

1. fig.
2. fig
3. fig


Wherefore the Objects that are far distant seem to approach and join
themselves together, although they be in equal distance.
THis Figure will help to satisfy this question, which is difficult enough;
let us suppose then, that some body has his eye at the midst of a line: it is
evident, that if he would see the two Ends thereof A B, he must make an
half-round V X, the center of which is the Eye, and the centrical Ray, and
making this half-Circle, he discovers the objects, which are on the one side
and other in such manner, that it seems to him. that the farthest distant of
the side A, seem to come near to the center. And those on the side B go thither
also, and seem as if they would join themselves, as much as the one and the
other side can.

If one ask why the things so distant, approach the one to the other, whether
they be of the side either above or below us: for it seems, that that which
is on our sides would join themselves, and that the planchers both above and
below, do raise up and abase themselves the farther they are distant from us.

Behold the Answer and the Reason in two words: It is that all the objects
appear, under the visual Angle, under the which they are seen: now it is that
the columns, trees, or whatsoever objects they be, which are on the side A, the
farthest distant will appear to draw toward the center T, because they are
viewed by an Angle, or by a Radius that draws thitherward; and as for
example, the Ray K, is much nearer the centrical T, then is C, and E, and by
consequent it ought to appear so: and if the the objects were produced
infinitely, they would still approach nearer to the centrical T, until that
they would seem to make but one point, which would be infinite, as all the
points of sight ought to be.

Now in Perspective the sides A K, B S, remain not Parallels, but are changed
into visual Rays, which divide themselves at the point of sight, and by this
means cause the Diminutions of the body and sides of the objects. For example
in the second Figure, the eye being in a distance capable of seeing the line A
B, from the two Angles A B, two Rays begin to be made, which go to find out
the point of sight T. And these Rays A T and B T, receive the sections that
the point of distance gives to objects, which do close together
proportionally, as we shall declare in its place, so that the whole
Parallellogramne A K, B S, and all the objects that are on the one part and the
other, come to be reduced to the little space A V, B X: and if the eye were
farther distant, this space would be yet lesser, by reason that the objects,
viewed afar off, seem very small, as I shall make it appear in the next leaf.

1. Fig.
2. Fig


Wherefore the Objects draw near to each other, being viewed afar off.
WE have already said, that things do appear according to the Angle, in the
which they are viewed; this Angle is taken at the Eye, where the lines do meet
that do compute the Object: for example, the first Object being B C, if the Eye
A look upon it, it will cause the Rays A B and A C, which give the Angle B A
C: so that an Object seen in a great Angle will appear great, and another seen
in a little Angle will appear little: Now it is, that the Objects being equal,
those that are farthest off are viewed in a less Angle: we must conclude then,
that the Objects farthest off, ought to be the least in Perspectives: for
example, if the Eye be in A the Object B C, which is the first, will appear to
it the greatest, because that it is viewed by a greater Angle, the 2 3 4 and 5
Objects, will appear to it always the less, although that they be equal: the
reason is, because that the Angles diminish; according as the Objects are
farther distant if the Eye were remitted into N L K L, it would appear the
greatest, and B C would be no bigger then N O.

This second figure is in pursuit of that which we are speaking of: for
supposing, that the Objects appear such, as is the Angle within which they are
viewed; it follows thence, that if one draw many lines under one and the same
Triangle, that they ought to appear equal amongst themselves: so we say, that
all the lines which are comprised between the lines of the Triangle N O P, will
appear equal amongst themselves. Now seeing that all the Objects comprised by
the same Angle seem equal, those which shall be comprised by a greater Angle
will seem greater, and those that shall be comprised by a less Angle will seem
less.

Supposing that which we have said, if there were a quantity of Columns or
Pilasters of one side and the other in an Hall, it would be of necessity that
the Objects should be under the same Angle, and that all should proceed unto
one point, which is within the Horizon O. For example, the Eye being in A,
discovering the first Object D E if from the points D E, one draw the visual
Rays, D O, E O, they will make the Triangle D O E, which will enclose the
Pilasters D E, F G, H I, K L, M N, whence they ought to appear all equal.

That which we have said concerning the sides, ought to be understood likewise
of the pavements and planchers: for the diminutions of the Angles, under the
which we see the Objects that are far off, are made as well both above and
under us as on the sides. Wherefore we shall say thereof no other thing, but
only that we must observe that there be as many squares between the Objects
farthest off, as between those that are nearer: for although that the Objects
which are remotest do close themselves, the more far they are off: yet they
cease not to keep their said distance, as we may see between B C D E, which is
the Interval of the Pilasters, there are sixteen squares. There are also
sixteen between the most distant K L M N.

1. Fig.
2. Fig.
Fig 3
Fig 4


IT follows on that which we were speaking of, that if one join together two
Triangles, as in the last, but one for the sides; and two of the last for the
top and the bottom, that all four together will bound themselves in one only
point A, which is the point of sight where all the visual Rays come to join
together; and by this means it comes to prove that which we are speaking of,
That according to the measure of the distance of the Objects, they come to
close together; those which are below raise themselves, and those which are
above abase themselves, and those of the sides close themselves, as we may see
in the first Figure, the which makes us see by the Eye the hollowings which
fly from, and seem to be far distant from us, although we have them all near
to our Eye.

The Trees being produced by the same cause, bring forth the same effect that
the columns do: for being all comprised under the same Angle, and the two ranks
having each a Triangle, the Triangles join themselves in one point A, and frame
a third, which is the Earth; and the fourth, if you will, shall be the Air: and
so affords us a delight which rejoices us, and recreateth the sight. We will
now begin to show, how it must be proceeded to bring into Perspective, any
plane, body and figure whatsoever.



Of the Horizon.
THE Horizon in the Art of Perspective, is no other thing then a line which
gives us the height of our Eye, in such manner, as, if we be raised as the
first man, our Horizon shall be high: if we be but of our own height, as the
second man: it will be but of our height: and if we be lying or set, as the
third, our Horizon will be low: so that the Horizon shows how much the Eye is
elevated from the Earth.

This is the principal Piece of the Picture, and which ought to give the Rule
to all the rest, as well for the bending of the Buildings and Architectures, as
for the Measures and heights of the Figures. The which has caused a petty
dispute between the best Painters; for the one say, that it must needs be that
all Pictures have their Horizon within the work, and that the Perspective
suffers that a Picture elevated above the Eye, bears its particular
Horizon. Others will not have this second Horizon, and use always the Natural,
in what place soever the Picture be placed, imagining that all the height and
breadth which they have before them is as a great Piece or Picture, of which
that which is elevated in effect ought to take its Measures: The honor that I
bear to the one and the other, suffers me not to determine upon it, seeing
that many good Authors have suffered them both. But if any one should press me
to speak my opinion, I would say freely that I am of the opinion of the latter,
by reason that all that is in the Picture would appear there more natural.

This line bears always the Points of sight, of distance, and sometimes the
Contingents or Accidental: in brief, this is that which separateth the Heaven
from the Earth, and which limiteth the sight: it is always Parallel to the
bottom of the Picture or Plane, upon the which the Object is placed: whence it
appears, that one cannot set any thing above the Horizon, which surpasses
not the height of the Eye. But if the Object be so high, that it passes this
Horizon, it must be then, that the Plane of the same Object be above: as for
example, a Tree or a Mountain may well have its Top above the Horizon; but
nevertheless the foot thereof is far on this side.

All that is below the Horizon, makes its upper part appear, and as soon as
one is past it, one can see it no more. For example, the two Pieces placed upon
the foundation of the first figure A B show their Top, because that the Horizon
is above that of the second figure D C, do not show it: and if they be as it
were in the same line, by greater reason, those of the third E F ought less to
show it, seeing that they exceed it very much: they are nevertheless as high
the one as the other, it is then the Horizon that causes this difference.

1 fig.
2 fig.
3 fig.


Of the Base.
THE Base of the Plane. This is the line upon the which the Object ought to be,
and every Object has its own, the which is always Parallel to the Horizon, as
is A B of the first Figure: F G of the second: N O of the third: This line
serves sometimes to give the lengths and the bredths, as we shall see
afterward. It is always the bottom of the Picture which must give all the
Measures.

Of the Point of sight, Point of Perspective, Point Ocular, or Point Principal.
THE Point of Sight, of Perspective, Principal or Ocular. This is a Point which
makes the Axis of the Eye, or the Centrical Ray above the Horizontal line, as
E of the first Figure is the point Ocular above the Horizon C D, at which all
the lines or visual Rays ought to join themselves: It is called also the point
of the Eye, by reason that it is opposite to him which looks upon it.

Of the Points of Distance.
THE Point of distance, or Points of distances. Is a point or points (for they
make two, although it be not necessary) which are to be set equally distant
from the point of sight: They call them points of distance: because that the
Person must be as much distant from the Figure, or Picture, and from the base,
as these points are distant from the Point Ocular, and they must always be
within the horizontal line, as H I is the Horizon: K, the point of sight: L and
M are the points of distance, which serve to afford all the Abridgements. As
for example, if from the ends of the line E G, one draw two lines to the point
K, and from the same points F G, one draw two lines to the points of distances
M and L, where these two lines G L and F K shall be divided at the point X, and
G K, and F M, at the point Y, this shall be the line of sinking or hollowing,
and the abridgment of the square, whereof F G is a side and the base: the lines
that go to the point of sight are all visual Rays, and those which go to the
points of distance are Diagonals.

Of Points Accidental.
POints Contingent or Accidental. Are certain Points where the Objects do end,
which may be cast negligently, and without order, under the Plane: it is
because they are not drawn to the Point ocular, nor to the points of Distances:
but by chance and at adventure, where they meet each other in the Horizon: as
for example, these two pieces of wood X and Y, do make the points V, V, V, V,
above the Horizon P and Q, and go not to the point of sight which is R, nor to
the points of distance S and T: And sometimes the Bodies or Objects are so ill
ordered, that one must make these points without the Horizon, as we shall cause
to be seen in its place. They serve also for the Openings of doors, of windows,
of stairs, and such like things. The which shall be seen hereafter.

1. Fig.
2. Fig.
3. Fig


Of the Point of the Front.
THE point of sight direct, or of the front: it is when we have the Object
whole before us, without being more on the one side then the other, and then
one has the Object wholly right; that is to say, that it shows nothing but
the forepart, when it is elevated, and a little above, if it be under the
Horizon, but it never shows its sides, if the Objects be not a Polygone. For
example, the Plane A B C D is wholly the front, so that one can see nothing of
the sides A B nor C D if it were elevated, but only the forepart A D. The
reason is, for that the point of sight E, being directly opposite to it, it
causes the diminution of the one side and the other; this ought to be
understood if the Object were an Elevation: for when there is nothing but the
Plane, it shows all, as A B C D.

Of the Point of the side.
THE oblique point of sight, or on the side. Is when we see the Object on the
side of us, and that we see it not but athwart, or with the corner of the Eye,
our Eye being nevertheless always over against the point of sight: for then we
see the Object on the side, and it shows us two faces: for example, if the
Eye be in F, the point of sight the Object G H I K, will appear to it athwart,
and will show to it two faces G K and G H, and then it will be a point of the
side. We ought to do altogether the same in the points of the sides, as in the
points of the front, setting a point of sight, and those of distances, etc.
briefly, the same is to be done, as at the view of the front.

1. Fig
2. Fig.


Of the visual Rays.
THIS is a general Maxim, That all the lines which are Perpendicular to the
base, within a Geometral Plane, ought always to be drawn at the point of sight,
when one would set the same Planes in Perspective; for example, in the little
Plane of the first figure the base is A B, upon which all the lines Z are
Perpendicular to it.

This being supposed, that if one give a less or a greater line then that of
the Plane, as the great line A B, which has the same number of divisions with
the little one, and from all these divisions Z, one draw to the point of sight
all these lines of Z to E, they will all be perpendicular to the base,
according to the Reasons of Perspective, we may also name them Radial, and
properly visual Rays: the last of which are called Extremes, by reason that
they are at the end of the base, as are these A B.

Of the Diagonals or Diametrals, and of their sections.
IT is also a Maxim, that all the Diagonals of squares in Perspective, are
drawn at the Point of distance. For example, at the little Plane of the second
Figure, the Diagonals D O, F O, are drawn at the points of distances in the
Plane in Perspective, the which makes that the points of distances do give us
the Abridgements of the Objects, that the point of sight does remove from us:
in such manner (as we have already said) that if one draw from the ends of the
line of the base F G to the points of distances L M, they shall be Diagonals;
and where the lines shall divide the outmost Rays F K and G K, at the points
O; this shall be the Abridgment of the square, whereof F G is one side: and
where the same lines shall divide the lines Z at the point Q, one must draw
Parallels which shall give the Abridgement of all the squares, and a like
number of all the sides, as in the little Plane. And the more these points of
distances are removed from the point of sight, the more the Objects do abridge
themselves and close together. And this is it, why all the Beauty of the
Perspective depends on the points of distances, which ought neither to be too
near, nor too far off from the point of sight: the which made me set this third
figure, with diversity of removals, for to cause a belief of the verity of that
which I am speaking. Let us suppose then that R is the point of sight, and S S
the outmost Rays; if one sets the point of distance at T, he shall divide the
Radius S R, at the point V, which shall be the abridgement of the square,
whereof S S is one side, the which is ridiculous to see a square which should
appear three times more hollow then it ought to be, by reason that the point of
the distance T is too near to the point of the sight R, for it must be at the
nearest, that the point of distance be as far removed from the point of sight,
as the half of the Picture, or of the Perspective, which one would have seen,
as is X, removed from R, by reason that these Removals do always give a right
Angle to the Eye of the Beholder. In V it would be more pleasing, dividing the
square at 2, and at 3, it would be better, dividing it at 4. At 5 it would be
far enough removed, and would make the square more short in 6, as we shall give
the reason in the figure following.

Some one may say to me, why have I then set in all the Figures of this Book,
the points of distances so near, seeing that being removed farther, the whole
would have been more pleasing: And he might by reason, if I had made the book
only to have bin seen for curiosity: but it being made for to teach, there was
need that all should be seen, the better to understand our Orders: this is the
cause, that I have put into the works as much as I could. If one answer me,
that it were better to make the book longer: I must then have made it much
bigger, and have set but one figure in every page: the which I would avoid and
make a book, convenient for carriage and it will suffice to advertise that
amongst the works that one shall make, he ought to enlarge them: the which is
easy, keeping the Rules which we have given.

1 Fig.
2 Fig
3 Fig


Of the Distance, or Removal and Setting.
WE have said, speakingf of far off visual Rays, that the Eye could not
conveniently discover more, then that which may be comprised within one right
visual Angle. That is to say, that the sight receives not clearly nor entirely
the Objects, when the Rays go beyond the right Angle: And behold the reason,
The apple of the eye being near to the center of the eye, cannot receive
clearly more then a quarter of a circle, so that the Rays which are beyond
that have but a confused and troubled sight, when the Angle is more then 90
degrees: this is the cause that it is better to make it rather lesser then
greater, as it may be of two thirds, which are 60 degrees, but not less:
because that the Rays being so straightened or restrained, would not give
Contentment to the Eye, because that the Angles being so little, make as it
were but one point between the Apple of the Eye: let us see this difference by
figures. Supposing that these Planes and these Squares were the same that are
in the last figure. The distance of the point T to R, will give us the distance
of T to the Base, where being, it would be necessary that the Angle open it
self much more; for to see the Extremes Y, Y: for if it open but as a right
Angle, the Eye shall not be able to see all, as T the right Angle, cannot see
but the points V, V, the which would make the Perspective wholly faulty, by
reason that that which should give us a square, would frame us a
Parallelogramme. The nearest that one can set it is at the point X, which is,
as I said even now, the true Measure of the right Angle, which contains all
the Piece Y, Y: If one withdraw it yet further from the point of sight, it will
be yet more pleasing, as in I, which has but an Angle of 72 degrees. But if
one withdraw it unto Z it will be the perfection, because that the Rays being
not so much dilated, have the more force, and contain better the Objects: but
I would never go any farther then 5. for the reason whereof we are speaking;
that the Angles are but as one point within the Eye, and a confusion within the
Object. The which ought to oblige us to take good heed, where we set the
Points, seeing that they are so important and necessary. And to hold for a
general Maxim, that it must be at least, that the distance be equal to the
space, which is from the right Radius, unto the Corner of Perspective. For
xample R, is the right Radius and X, the lesser distance which is equal to Y,
whereof having taken the Measure, we must Carry it on the one and other side of
the Point sight as here R S S. Or of one side only, as shall be seen in the
Leaf following.

Behold what may be said herein, by the reasons of the Eye, but the Practice
gives this Excellent Rule, which may be General, so that one use it with
diseretion. That having chosen the place, where you would make the Perspective,
you may determine on what side it will be the better in sight, and whence it
ought to be looked on: and then you must take the measure of this last place
unto the former, and set this Interval by a little scale from the point of
sight unto the point of distance: provided that it be not too far removed: and
it is in this, that the discretion is requisite, that one do not set it too
near, and to avoid that which we are speaking of, nor too far off, for fear
that we find no returns where one would have it set: for Objects so far
removed from the sight do yield no return. This is why we ought to give but the
draught to Buildings far distant, as we shall say hereafter.

1 Fig
2 Fig.
3 Fig


The first Advice about the Point of the side.
THey never change the Rules of the Point of the Front for the points of the
sides; for they have all for a principle one and the same cause, which
produces always the like effects; Wherefore I shall not speak thereof in
particular seeing that the Order of the point of the side, is the same with the
Point of the Front as one may see in the first figure where the Base A B, has
as many, and the same divisions, as the foregoing. Let the Point of sight be in
C, and the point of distance in D, from which if you draw the line A D, you
shall have the sections Q, which give the abridgement of the squares in the
same Number with the other. The rest shall be known in the Orders following.

The Second Advice of the Hollowing or deep sinkings.
ONe may sink or hollow the Perspectives, as much as one would, by the Means of
the Base E F, if one draw lines to the points of distances H I; for which they
shall divide the Visuals E G and F G at the point K, it shall be the
Abridgement of the first square, as we have already said twice or thrice. Now
if we take his line K K for the base, and from the ends K K, we draw lines to
the points of the distances, where they shall divide the same line E G and F G
at the point L L, that shall be the Abridgment of the second square, which
shall have as many divisions and squares as the former; if we shall take
further this line L L, and shall make the same Operations, we shall have the
Abridgment of the third square at the point M. And if we shall begin again
further by that, we shall have a fourth, and so we shall go unto a Point: the
which would be a length which would appear infinite; And by this means it is
easy to sink and to abridge the Perspectives: for if you would have the double
of its breadth, do as we tell you; if you would have but the half, draw a line
where the lines of the points of the distances cross themselves, as in N, and
you shall have that which you desire.

Seeing that this is so infallible, that as many visual Rays as divide the
Diagonal line drawn from the points at the distances to the base, so many
squares one has of sinkings: we may, as I said, give as many hollowings as we
would to the Perspective; for if in stead of taking from the point of distance
O, at the Ray F, you draw it from the Ray Q. There will want two squares, but
that you have abridged the whole square R, as we see in S, which is that which
you have failed to take of the whole square. And if besides the square, you
would have yet two little squares, make a line from the same point O, which
divides two Rays as V, you shall have that which you desire. If you would have
four, take X: if six N. If the square whole Z, the which is a great easiness,
when one understands it well.



The third Advice of the Measures upon the Ease
THE Base only may serve for to give such a sinking as one would have and in
what place they would, without using any little squares, this is a means very
ready, but it is somewhat hard to understand; Nevertheless I will endeavor to
make it be understood, the best that I shall be able, for we do often use it.
For example, let the Base be B S, the point of sight A, the points of distances
D E: If you would make the Plane of a Cube B C, you must draw to the points of
sight two Occult lines, or pointed from the ends B C, then for to give it its
breadth take the same measure B C, which you shall transport upon the Base C F,
equal to B C, from which point you shall draw a line to the point of distance
D, and where this line shall divide the first Ray C at the point G, this
shallbe the Abridgement of the plane of the Cube B H G C.

If you would have an Object more forward toward the midst, you must take the
breadth of it and the distance above the Base, as I K. Now for to have the
sinking, set such as you would have upon the same Base, as it might be L M,
because that it is broad at that point L, and as much for the largenes at the
point M. Then from these Points L M, draw an occult line to the point of
distance D, and where these lines shall divide the Raye K, at the points N O,
you must draw Parallels to the Base and you shall have the square Q P O N.

By this manner, you may transport on the other side the square, which would be
above the Base, as B H G C, is transported to V, and the Points M and T, which
are removed but 2 feet from the point S, do give a figure very narrow, because
that they are very near, and the same distance, which they are removed, as we
see X.

The fourth Advice of the Base and of one only point of distance.
SEeing that one may have the bredths and the depths, by the means of this
Base, one shall need no more to take the Pains to make the little squares,
the which I would make appear to the sight in this example. Let us suppose,
that you would make a Rank of Pillars, or Trees on each side: You must set
upon the Base the place and distance that you would have, with their breadth or
Diameter, as A B C D E F G. Then placing the Rule upon the point of the
distance O, unto each of these Points A B C D E F G, where it shall mark the
sections upon the visuall Raye A H, it shallbe the Terms of the Objects which
you desire. For to transport them on the other side, upon the Raye G H, Set one
leg of the Compass at the Ocular Point H, and with the other take the same
without stirring the leg from the Point H, make an Arch with the other, where
it shall divide the Raye G H, this shall be the same Term; as M is the same
with N. And so of others, by the which you shall draw Parallells, which will
give you the bredths. And for the length, give it such, as you would have it,
and set it from A, as it might be P, then draw from the point P, to the point
H, and where it shall divide the other Parallells, it shall be the Planes that
you desire, which you may make rounds or squares.

The fifth Advice, not to deceive ones self in the Measures.
YOU must never set on the side of the point of distance where one would draw
for to give the sinking, the Objects which one desires to produce within the
Plane. Example, The visuall Ray, upon the which one must mark, let it be A B:
If you would produce there the point C, and D, it cannot be drawn from the
point of distance E, but well from that which is opposite to it F. If C and D,
were within, as G H, it ought to be drawn from the point E: because that the
line of the section meets between both, and not from the point E: and so both
the one, and the other shall divide themselves in the same point I K.

1. A Fig.
2. H Fig.
3. A Fig.


The sixth Advice, of the Point of distance only.
SOmetimes one is at such a straight for the smalness of the place that one
has, be it against a wall, or cloth, or paper; that it is impossible to make
more then one point of distance, and then those that are always accustomed to
have two of them are much troubled: We must draw them, and cause them to
understand, that one Point only suffices for this Practice. Let us suppose
that we would make a Pavement of small squares, and that we have already drawn
all the visual Rays ar the point A, for to have the Abridgement thereof, we
ought to draw at the points of distances, and the sections will give us the
points where we ought to draw, as we have already said: but if there be but one
as B, we must draw this one draught Diagonal C B, which will divide all the
visual Rays. Now for to mark the same sections upon the Rays opposite, for to
draw Parallels there: We must, as I said but now; set a leg of the Compass at
the point A, and with the other to run through all the sections, as I P: But
this is not good, but only for that which is viewed in front: Whence there is
need of one, which serves likewise for that of the side: behold it here, Take
a Compass, and set one leg upon the base, with the other; take the most
perpendicularly that you shall be able, the section that you desire to
transport as D, and carry it upon this line Perpendicular, as E O, and mark
your measure F, then draw from D to F, and you shall have the same as if there
were two points of distances: And so of all other sections.

The seventh Advice, that we should not use the Diagonal.
WHEN one would use the outmost Ray for the line or section, as it might be G
H; He ought to set the Objects upon the base, as are K L M N O, and from thence
to draw them to the point of distance L, which ought to be drawn back as far as
shall be possible, to the end that the Abridgement of the Perspective, may be
the more pleasing thereby: for if the point were nearer to the point of sight
G, the Objects would have too much hollowness, (I mean, for example, that a
square would appear a Parallelogram) And from this point I, to run through all
the Objects K L M N O, and to mark the section of the Ray G H: And from these
points to draw Parallels to the base, or of the Horizon, as is here P Q. This
Method is the least in use, although some do take it.

The Eighth Advice, for to abridge in diverse manners.
IF sometimes one be taken in a strait, and that one cannot remove the point of
distance, we must elevate from the foot of the Ray S R; a small Perpendicular,
as T S, which shall receive the sections, and give a lesser Abridgement; and if
one would have it yet more little, he shall but only bend a line, as is X, the
which by reason of its inclination, causes that the sections are closer
together. Then for to draw the Parallels, he has only to transport this line X
or T, upon the foot of the other Ray as is V, and from all these points to draw
lines Parallels to the base, and you shall have that which you desire.

1 Fig
2 Fig
3. Fig


THE ORDERS FOR PLANES IN Perspective.
Of Planes viewed directly or in front.
ONE may have seen at the third and fourth Advice, and the Elevations following
will cause to know, that it is not my purpose that one should use Planes
Geometrical, for to make Perspectives: for this would be to double the labor;
and no Painter would take this pains, seeing that I teach him to make the same
thing by means of the base. But as there is no Rule so general, which has not
its exception; so there are certain Figures, which one cannot set into
Perspective, but by the help of these Planes: further also one should be
troubled, if one should give one of these Planes to be set into Perspective,
and that one had not learned how he ought to pr^ceed. These Reasons have
obliged me to set these which follow, the which will suffice to learn to set
into Perspective all those, which may be presented and also be imagined.

1. To contract or abridge a square A B C D. One must draw A B at the point of
sight E, and from the same Angles A B, two Diagonals, F B, A G, and where they
shall divide the Rays A E and B E, at the points H and I. This shall be the
square A B C D, abridged into A H I B; for to make it without the Geometrical
Plane, we must draw from B to F, or from A to G, or else transport A B upon the
base, as B K, and from the point K to draw to the point F, it will give the
same section I upon the Ray B E.

2. To abridge a square viewed by the Angle D, having made the Plane A B C D.
We must draw a line which touches the Angle B, and it must be in right Angle
upon the line B D. This base being produced, we must set the Rule upon the
sides of the square, as A D, and D C, and where this Rule shall divide the
base, there to make the points H I, then to draw H and B, to the points of
distances P and B I, to the other point of distance G. And at the section of
these lines to make the points which shall give you the square K L M B; for to
make it without the Plane, you must set the Diameter on the one part, and the
other of the middle B, as H and I. But as well in the one manner as the other,
you must not draw at the point of sight O.

3. To abridge a Circle. It must be enclosed in a square A B C D: And from the
Angles A D and G B, to draw Diagonals, which shall divide the Circle into eight
parts; and where they shall divide it at the point O, to draw upon the base the
Perpendiculars E F, then to draw two lines Diametral Q R S P, which divide
themselves in right Angles at the Center G. The Plane being ordered in this
manner, you must draw all the Perpendiculars at the point of sight H, and where
they are divided, the Diagonals A K, and B I, to make points; of the which the
two latter M N, are the draughts of the square, which are to be divided into
four by the section of the Diagonals, at the point P. Then from the ends of
this Cross they draw bended lines by these points, which give the shape of a
Circle in Perspective. This manner may pass for little ones: but we shall give
one more exact for the greater.

4. This Figure is composed of the two first, wherefore I will say nothing of
it; for he that shall have made one or two of them, shall be able to make it
easily.

5. The fifth depends also upon the two first: but there is also more a Border
round about, which they have not; for to set this Border into Perspective, we
must draw these four Rays A B C D, at the point of sight G, and where the
inward Rays B and C are divided by the Diagonals A F and D E, we must draw
Parallels to the base, and you shall have that which you demand.

6. It is the same with the second, except that it is compassed about with two
Borders: wher^fore I will speak no more of it.



Planes viewed Obliquely or on the side.
THESE Planes being those, that we will soon dispatch ought to be made all in
the same manner; which makes me believe, that it would be loss of time to
repeat, how one ought to abridge them in Perspective; for it seems to me,
that the Figures do suffice to make it appear, that there is no other
difference from them that went before, but the situation of the Object, which
is here seen on the side, and the other is viewed in front.

All the A A A are Points of sights; and the B B B points of distances,



Of a Triangle.
THE Triangles, according to the Numbers, ought to precede the squares: but
according to reason, they ought to go after in this work, because they are
harder to set into Perspective, not because of the Plane, which is easy
enough, seeing that it is composed and framed of 3 equal lines joined together;
but because of the obliquity of its sides.

Let us now see the Practice of the Advice that we have given of Measures upon
the base A B, for to make this Triangle in Perspective, we must from all these
Angles 1, 2, and 3, draw Perpendiculars upon A B, and set one leg of the
Compass in their section, and with the other take the Removal of the Object
from the base, and set also this Removal upon the same base, by making a
quarter of a Round, as 1, 1, and 1, the same at 2, 2, and 2, and the same at 3,
3, and 3. Then having made another base in another place, as is this here under
E F, we must transport there the Measures, which are upon that A B, and draw at
the point of sight C, the points 1, 2, and 3, Perpendiculars. Then having taken
a point of distance D, there to draw the other points of sinking 1, 2, and 3:
and at the section of the visual Rays: by this we must produce the lines, which
shall give you the Triangle.

If you would give to it this Border, you need but do the same again, repeating
that which we are doing, setting down other ciphers, that nothing be
confounded, as over against 1, 4, and 2 a 5. and to 3 a 6. Then draw the
Perpendiculars at the point C, and where the others shall divide them, there to
draw the lines as you see.

The Triangle equilateral, as this is circular; that is to say, which they
enclose within a circle, whereof each side has 120 degrees.

There is no need to know the degrees of the Angles, for to frame all these
Polygones, so as we may see at the 4. side: but I have not omitted to set them
for the contentment of those which here take notice of them.

1. Fig.
2. Fig.


Of the Pentagone or five-Angles.
THE Order of framing a Pentagone is, that we must make a Circle, and divide it
into 5 equal Parts, of 72 degrees on each side. Now for to set it in
Perspective, it is altogether the same thing with the Triangles, as one may see
by this figure, except that it is with a Border; and I have marked it upon the
base: but single, by reason that one may have learned by the Triangle, how it
ought to be made. The point of sight, as well on the front as the ^^de, is A,
the point of distance B; the visual Rays which are the Perpendiculars of the
Angles of the Plane upon the base, are drawn at the point of sight A. And the
others which give the Abridgement, and the place of the Angles at the point of
distance B. As a divides the Ray marked 2, which gives the second Angle, 4
gives the fourth Angle, and so of others. All the rest is clear enough, we
must take heed of one thing, which is, that all the Angles ought to draw to the
center 6. It is therefore, that it must be set in the Planes in Perspective, as
in the Geometrical Plane, for to draw there all the Angles.

1. Fig.
2. Fig.
3. Fig.


Of the Hexagone, or six Angles.
THE Hexagone is a Plane which has six Angles, and six faces or sides. It is
the easiest of all the Poligones, that is to say, of all the figures of many
sides: for the same opening of the Compass wherewith these use to make the
circle, which is its half Diameter; gives the sides of the Hexagone of 60
degrees for each side. As for the setting of it into Perspective, there is no
difference in it from the Triangle and the Pentagone, as well for the single
Plane as with the Border or Thickness. A is the point of sight, B that of the
distance.

Seeing that we have more space in this leaf then in others; we will give a
small Practice of setting into Perspective the Borders or Thicknesses of any
Poligones that may be, whether regular or irregular: Let us use this Hexagone;
for to give an example of our Proposition, supposing that the Plane of the
front of the third Figure has but a single draught; and that it should have a
Thickness or Border, which turns round about it; for to set it into
Perspective, you must lay the Rule the length of the sides of the single
draught, and make a point upon the Horizon, where it shall be divided, as
laying the Rule along the side A B, it will divide the Horizon at the point C;
then laying it again upon the Plane B D, it will give the point E, and likewise
of all the other sides. Before that you do any more, you must from all these
Angles draw lines, which pass by the center F, and these lines which ought to
be occult, shall serve for to receive the sections which give the diminution.
All these Orderings being done, you must set the breadth or largeness if you
would give to the Border or List upon the base as A H; and draw this first
breadth at the point of distance G; and where this line G H, shall divide I, it
shallbe the Term or bound of the thickness of the first side: and which shall
give it to all the others. For from this point, you must draw to the point of
the side C, and at the section of the line K, it shallbe the diminution, from
the which drawing to the point of the side B D, which is E, you shall have the
other diminution at the point L, which shall serve for the last side L M. Then
transporting all these Measures on the other side, you shall have the figure
Complete.

We will show hereafter another manner.

1 Fig
2 Fig
3 Fig


Of the Heptagone or seven-Angles.
THe Heptagone takes its shape within a Circle, as the other Poligones. They
divide it into 7 parts: that is to say, that one give 51 degrees, 25 Minutes
and a little more, for every side, the Order of setting it into Perspective, is
alike to the foregoing; As concerning the Perpendiculars, which fall from the
Angles upon the Base, the which are drawn all at the point of sight A: But as
Concerning the Abridgement, and the lines that give the Place of the Angles, it
is of another manner and according to the 7th. advice that we have given:
although we do not approve it the practice of the 8th. advice being the better:
but for to Condescend to those that do use it, and to cause them to see, that
it does not abridge enough.

Having drawn Perpendiculars from the Angles of the Plane upon the Base as in
the former; We must on some side, on the right, or the left, make a
Perpendicular, as A B, which shall receive the sections of the Parallells,
which one shall draw by all the Angles; as here the first Angle set upon the
Base, of 2 and 7, I draw a Parallel, which marketh them both, and is divided
at the Point C. The 3 and the 6, will give the section at the point D. And the
4 and 5 will give the last at the point E. This line A B, being so divided, we
must transport it upon the Base, of the Plane, which one would abridge
beginning to set the point B, at the point F. as he e: and then to mark the
other divisions C D E, from the which one shall draw to the point of distance
O, and from the sections of the outmost Ray to draw Parallells to the Base: and
where they shall divide the Rays which bear the Numbers of the Angles, there
we must make Points, the which being conjoined by right lines, will give the
figure, which we desire. For the thickness or Border, it shall be made by one
of the two orders afore-going.

1 Fig.
2. Fig.


Of the Octogone, or Eight-Angles.
THe Octogone is made of a Circle divided into eight Parts, of 45 degrees for
each side; from the which divisions drawing lines, we have the shape of the
Octogone that is to to say a figure that has eight Angles, and as many sides.
The fore going Orders do cause sufficiently to know, how one ought to set it
into Perspective, either on the front, or on the side. I will only Advertize
that the Plane abridged on the front, is made according to the eighth advice;
And that of the side, according to the seventh. The point of the sight is A,
and that of the distance B. The rest is sufficiently seen without an Exposition.



Of the Octogone after another Order.
THe manner of making this Octogone, has bin Invented by Serlio: It is made in
this fashion. Having framed a Square by the Ordinary way, as is A B C D, we
must divide the base C D in ten parts, and leave 3 thereof on each side; and
from the third division of one part and the other E F, to draw lines to the
points of sight G, and at the sections of these lines by the Diagonalls O, we
must draw Parallells to the base, which touch the sides of the Square at the
points H I K L, then joining together by the lines of the points E H, I E, F K,
L F, you shall have an Octogone, as may be seen by the first figure.

Of the Hexagone or six-Angles
The same Serlio has made also the Hexagone after the same fashion. Let a
Square be drawn as this before A B C D, and that the A D, be divided into four
Parts, from one of the which on each side E F, let lines be drawn to the Point
of sight H: Then from the section of the Diagonalls, which is the midst of the
Square G, to draw a Parallel to the base which touches the sides of the
square at the points I K, Then draw lines by the points E I E, and F K F, there
will be framed an Hexagone. The second-figure.

I will say nothing of this Octogone viewed on the side, seeing that (as we
have already said so many times) it is the same Order, with that of the sight
of the front. The third figure.

1. Fig.
2. Fig.
3. Fig.


Of the Octogone double.
SUpposing that we have already made an Octogone single: for to make it double,
or to give it a thickness or Border, you must proceed in this manner. Set such
a breadth or thickness, as you would give to it, within the square which
contains the Octogone single, as here A B, on one side and the other, and
draw from these points to the point of sight C. And where these lines shall
Cross the diagonalls at the point O, draw the Parallells D; The which will make
a welt or guard about the square; Then draw from Angles unto Angles occult
lines, or points passing by the Center N; And where these shall Cross or divide
the lines of this inward square at the points E F G H I K L M, it shallbe the
Bounds of the Octogone of the Inside,

Of the Hexagone double.
ONe may do the same with the Hexagone figured within a Square: The which
makes me believe, that there is no need to use any repetition seeing that one
may see by the figure that whereof he might any ways doubt.

The Octogone viewed on the side, is all of the same frame with that of the
front, The point of sight is A, and that of the distance B.

1. Fig.
2. Fig.
3. Fig.


Of the Circle.
THe more that any Circular form shall have parts, the sooner and more easily
shall it be converted into a Round: hence it is, that Serlio says, that we
must frame a Demi-Circle, and of this circumference, one may make as many equal
Parts as they would: for the more that it shall have of them, the more this
Rotundity will be perfect: for example, the Demi-circle, a Plomb or Downright
is divided into eight Parts, which will give sixteen for the whole Round: and
from these divisions Z, to elevate Lines Perpendicular, upon the base, at the
point E. Then we must draw two Diagonals at the points of Distances, which are
here farther removed then the Plate is broad; but which one ought to suppose
within the horizon ordinarily; which will give a square A H I B; now the square
being framed, we must draw all the points E, at the point of sight F, unto the
line H I, and at the sections of these lines to draw Parallels throughout. Then
we must begin at the midst of one of the sides of the square, to make a point,
as a, and another point at the Angle opposite, as if one would draw a Diagonal,
as b, continuing so to do from points of Angles to Angles, following the
Diagonal lines, as a b c d E f g h i K l m n o p q. These points will frame a
perfect Rotundity: then you must bring with the hand bended lines, or circular,
and you shall have your round in Perspective. The Perspective must have this
Rule and Order to abridge the Rounds, very familiar and usual, for it is
oftentimes used, as well for Columns, bending Roofs, Arches, opening of Gates
and Windows, as for many other Rotundities.



Of the Circle double.
WE must suppose that the first Circle A B, is that which we are now to make,
and that we would give it a thickness or border, by making another more inward,
in this manner: We shall give it such a breadth as shall please us, as A C, and
from the center the great Demy-circle G we will draw the little one C D, which
we will divide as the other great one, by drawing occult lines from the
divisions of the Great unto the center G. And at the section of these lines of
points of the Great, upon the less demi-circle at the Points I, we must draw
Perpendiculars I, as those that we have made in the great, upon the base; And
to the end, that they may confound nothing, we must mark them with points from
the points I, of the base, we shall draw to the point of sight F, of lines of
points unto the line H K, and at their sections by the Diagonals, draw lines of
points M N, which shall give round about the square the thickness G Q, which
ought to have the whole circle. This done, we must draw lines from all the
Angles of the great circle, reaching to the center, and where these shall cross
the lines of points a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q, which go to the Horizon,
these shall be the Points, for to frame with the crooked lines the
Circumference or round of the Inside.

He that would have a Plane of 3. 4. 5 or 6 Rounds, or Circles, in Perspective:
He must set them in a Geometrical Plane, as the second is set there, and make
all the same Operations,



A Plane of the Square viewed from the Angle.
HE that would make a square by an Angle directly opposite to the Eye, he has
nothing to do but to follow the Order, which we have already spoken of, which
is to double the Diameter A B, upon the base as is A C, and from the point A
and C, to draw two lines at the point of distance D: then to transport the
measure A C, upon the base in A E, and to draw from E, and from A to the point
of distance F, at the sections of these lines H I K. These shall be the terms
or Bounds of the square A I H K, which one desires.

When one would divide a Plane of this form into many parts: We must set the
number of the Parts, into which one would divide it, between the points C and
A, and as much on the other side A E; and from all these points to draw to the
points of distances, as we see by this Figure, which has eight little squares
on each side, and sixty four in the whole.

If upon the same Plane, seen from the Angle, one would only cause to be seen
four other little Planes, at the ends of the Angles, as four Bodies of a
Building, columns, trees, or any other object whatsoever; We must set the
breadth of it upon the base within the length of a Pane, or sides of the square
A B, or A C, which have D and E between A B; and F G between A C, from which
points drawing to the points of distances H and I, their sections shall give
the four Planes K L M N, which is that which is demanded.

2 Fig.


A Pavement of Squares viewed by the Angles.
Seeing that we are at these Squares viewed by the Angles, we will show how they
make a Pavement of a Hall, of a Church, or of any other place. Having taken the
Horizon parallel to the base A B, the point of sight C, and the points of
distances D and E, we must divide the base into as many parts, as we would make
little squares. Then from the Ends of this line, to draw to the point of sight
C, as A C, and B C. And from the same points A B, to draw two Diagonals to the
points of distances D E, which shall give the Square of the Hall at the points
of the sections F G, by the which you shall draw the line of the sinking H I,
which we have already spoke of many tim^s: Then you must draw from all the
points which you have divided, the base at the point of distance D and E, and
you shall have between the Rays A B, that which you desire; as the Figure
shows you it. But behold a difficulty, which is to fill up the place that
remain^th B B and G I, A A, an^ H F, of the same squares: for I suppose that
the base cannot reach out it self farther. When this shall happen, take upon
the line of the sinking F G, one of the measures of the squares, as it might be
K. G, and transport it upon the same line H I, as many times as it can be
there, and you shall have the points L M N O P Q and R, by the which drawing to
the points of the distances you shall make the same squares, as are the lines
marked with points. This manner of transporting the measures upon the line of
sinking, shall be practiced in other Pavements, which shall follow hereafter.

Of Squares compassing a Border or Fillet.
THe Order of making the second Pavement, with a border about it, is the same
with the single squares viewed at front. Wherefore we shall not lose the time
in teaching it, seeing that we have made already so many Figures of it. Only I
shall advise, that you must divide the base into unequal Parts, as A B and C,
and to draw all these divisions to the point of sight D, and where they shall
be divided by the Diagonals A E and G F, then to draw lines Parallels to the
base, as you may see in the figure.



Pavements viewed by the Angle, Compassed with a Band or Fillet.
FOR to make this sort of Pavement we must divide the base A B, by unequal
Parts, whereof the Largest C shall be for the Squares, and the little ones D
for the Band or Fillet. And from all these divisions to draw to the points of
Distances E F: As we have done heretofore in the single Squares.

Pavements of Squares viewed by the Front, Compassed with Bands or Borders,
which have Squares seen from the Angle in the midst.
FOR to make this fifth sort of Pavements, we must use the same Order of the
second Manner, by dividing the base by unequal Parts: but to make here this
Square seen from the Angle which is in the midst, we must only divide the
greatest into two, as A B C D E F G; And from all these points to draw to the
points of distances, which will give you the Squares seen from the Angle or
Lozenge which is in the midst.

1. fig.
2. fig.


A Pavement of Squares seen from the Angle, with Chains of Squares on the Front.
I Suppose, that one has made the Perspective, or Diminution of the Square for
to draw the line of sinking, that we may not use so many Repetitions in the
Pavements following.

For to make this fifth sort of Pavement, we must divide the base into equal
parts, and to take some thereof, which we shall draw right to the point of
sight as A B C; and from all the other parts, we ought to draw to the points of
distances, without passing over them which are right: But after that all these
which we see from the Angle shall be drawn, we must draw Parallels to the
others, where they shall touch them on the side. As from the Angles D and E, to
draw the line F, and so by all the others, as the Figure shows it. We must
take heed to observe always the same number of squares between the Chains. As
here of 3 between A B.

A Pavement of Squares in Front, with Chains of Squares seen from the Angle.
THIS sixth sort of Pavements is made almost as the former: by dividing the
base by equal parts, and drawing lines to the point of sight, for to frame the
bands or chains G H I; yet nevertheless there is more to do; for we must take
heed to give to the Chains that go across, the same largeness, as to the others
which go to the point of sight O, which is a square throughout all: and that
there be the same number of Squares between the void ones. The rest is seen
sufficiently.



A Pavement of little Squares Octogones, mingled with the Squares.
WE should never have done, if one would set here all the fashions of
Pavements, which might be made by the means of the little Squares: for an
ingenious person would invent an infinite Company, according to his fancy. The
seventh fashion is plain enough, neither have I done it, but only to open the
Ingenuity, and to give means to compose others thereby. There is nothing to do
but to divide the base into a quantity of Parts, of the which we shall frame
the little squares, as we have said heretofore. And of these squares to take a
number, as here nine, whereof there are five all full, and four at the half:
The full do give the inside of the figure 1 2 3 4 5. And the Diagonals of
others 6 7 8 9, give the Panes or Sides. The rest is sufficiently seen.

A Pavement of single Squares viewed in Front.
I Have set this manner of Pavement the last; not because it is the hardest,
seeing that it is the beginning of all Perspective, and the most easy of all
the Planes: but to cause to be known, that it is the most useful and necessary:
for all the other may be made, and are made ordinarily, when all is done,
serving only for ornament. And this serves for a foundation, upon the which we
raise that which we desire to make appear. As we shall see hereafter.

1. fig.
2 fig.


The Plane of a Garden abridged.
THAT which we are speaking of is confirmed by this Plane; for drawing all
these divisions which are upon the base, to the point of sight, the Diagonals
will give the depth of the whole Plane, and the Abridgement of the little
Squares. Then taking the same quantity, as well for the Alleys, as for the
figures which the Geometrical Plane takes up, you shall have in Perspective
the same Garden, which is upon the Plane; As the figure shows it.

What plane soever you have to abridge; And to set into Perspective: The
easiest way is to Enclose it into a Square, and to divide this square into many
little squares. For setting the square and the quantity of little squares into
Perspective by the ordinary ways; You have but to take heed, that you take the
same Number of little squares in the Plane abridged, as in the Geometrical
Plane; And you shall make in the one, the figure of the other.



The Plane of a Building Abridged.
SErlio in his Treatise of Pespective, does highly esteem this Invention of
setting the Planes into Perspective, as a thing very useful to chief Builders
or Architects, by the which they may cause to be seen all at once a part of the
buildings elevated, and the rest in Platform, and as upon the base: But seeing
that it is the same Order with that of the Garden, which we are making now, we
will say nothing further of it. The Figure will cause to understand the rest,
and by this little to gather how the greater and more hard should be.

In the second part, you shall have the method to make to be seen in
Perspective a perfect House, where you shall see the Building finished and
accomplished; and by the same means all the divisions of each Story from the
Carpenters Work unto the Cellar, and the only space which the Geometrical Plane
would take up.



The Plane of a Church Abridged.
THis plane of a Church is made, according to that we have said at the seventh
Advice; That is to say, that all the sides which are Perpendicular to the Base,
ought to be drawn upon the Base, as are here the places of the Walls, and of
the Pilasters; and from the Base to draw them to the point of sight; And all
the other sides, which are Parallel to the Base, ought to be drawn on the side:
And to mark upon a line as O P, all the bredths, as we see A b c d e f g h i k
l. And then to transport all these Measures upon the Base, from the which
drawing to the point of distance, the sections of the outmost Raye will give
the Terms for to draw the Parallels, which will give the Abridgement of every
thing, the which is showed by the Letters a a, b b, c c, etc.

This manner of Abridging upon the outmost Radius, is practiced by many; But he
that would believe me, will leave it, for to take the Orders of the Eighth
Advice, where we set a Perpendicular line at the end of the Base, for to
receive the sections, and to take away the default of this present Practice,
which does not abridge it sufficiently, if it be not that the points of
distances are very far removed, for then the effect is wholly alike to the
other Methods.



The Plane of an House with a Garden.
THE Order of setting this Plane of a House in Perspective, is altogether the
same with that of the Garden, whereof we were speaking; the which ought to
suffice for the one and for the other; that we may not repeat so often. It is
set here for to show that one may abridge all sorts of Planes, whether they be
composed of equal parts, or unequal.



The Plane of a Fortification Abridged.
FOR to set all Fortifications, and whatsoever other Piece it be into
Perspective; we must use the Sixth and the Eighth Advice. It is the Order that
we spoke of for the Church, and for the House. Which is to draw from all the
Angles lines Perpendicular upon the base, and from the base Rays to the point
of sight; and from the same Angles to draw also Parallels to the base, which
shall mark the divisions upon the line on the side, as A B: The which line A B
ought to be set upon the base: And from these Measures to draw to the point of
distance for to give us the line of the section C D: But because that the Place
suffers us not to set it upon the base, I have transported it under the
Figure, as is A B. Then having set the point of Distance in E, of the height E
F: there you must draw from all the divisions of A B, to the end to divide the
line of the section C D into so many parts: The which line C D, with its
divisions, ought to be transported to the foot of the outmost Ray, or on the
one side and other D D: And from all these Points which are upon the line D C,
to draw Parallels: or else only to mark a point upon the Ray, which goes from
the Angle of the Plane, which is proper to it; And all these Points being
joined together of the lines, will give you that which you desire. The Figure
will serve to make one understand the Order better.



A Plane and Figure Irregular abbreviated.
HE which shall do well, that which we are about to leave, shall not be much
trouqled with all the rest; for this is that which is the hardest of Planes in
Perspective. I believed nevertheless, that it was good to set yet further
something irregular; which appeared difficult at the first sight; that I might
make it known, that there is nothing which one may not abbreviate, of
whatsoever view or Aspect it may be.



Another Plane of a Church abbreviated.
IT seems that this Order of Perspective, is altogether another then that
which we have used, because that the ordering thereof is not the same. The
which I have done on purpose to give to understand, that there are many
fashions and orders which all come but to the same; for this is the same, with
that which we have used for to abridge the Fortifications, the irregular
Pieces, and other planes, according to the eighth Advice: with this only
difference, That we have marked the Parallels o the base, upon the line on the
side; And here we have marked them upon a line in the midst of the Plane; And
as well in the one manner as the other, we have always the same effect: for
drawing from all the divisions of this line of the midst to the Eye A, you
shall have the line of the section B C, which shall be made upon the line,
which we may call the base D E.

For to set it into Perspective, transport into what place you would all the
length of the base as here above D E, and the height of the Eye A F. Then
having set on the one side and other, or in the midst of the line of the
section B C, draw Parallels to the base, by all these divisions, unto the
outmost Ray D A, E A; you must set the breadth of the Pilasters D K, upon the
base, and draw a line at the point of sight A, and the section of the lines
Parallels by these K A, shall be the breadth of the Pilasters.



THE ORDERS OF THE ELEVATIONS.
Some Necessary Advice, for the Orders following.
IT seems to me that I have given sufficiently to understand that which
belongs to the Ichnography, and Planigraphy, or description of Planes, which
is necessary for the foundation of Orthography and Scenography. The Orthography
is the face, or forepart etc. As one may see in the Definitions. Scenography,
is the Elevation of all that which any one has a design to make etc. See the
Definitions which are at the beginning of this Book.

For to make this more clear to those that are not acquainted with these words;
we shall Name hereafter (as I said already in the Definitions) the Ichnography,
the Plane, and the Orthography, and Scenography, by a Word common to the one
and the other, the Elevation: So that, instead of saying the Orthography, we
shall say the Elevation of the forepart; And for Scenography, the Elevation of
the whole.

Before we pass any further it must be observed, that the Elevations do never
give to the eye all the Angles of the Plane, and the Quantity of faces depend
on the Aspect, which causes the object to be seen: for if it be seen on the
front as the figure A, it will show but one face, although that the Plane have
four; If it be viewed from the Angle, although on the front it will show two,
as B, and never more, with what Aspect soever one look on it. This ought to be
understood of a square, seeing that figures with diverse Panes, may give thereof
3 4 5 and more. Now it is, that if the objects decline a little from the point
of sight, they are seen from the Angle, whence they ought to show two faces;
And the further they are removed from the point of sight, the more they are
discovered. As K E are more discovered then C L, although their thickness be
equal.

Another thing also that is further to be marked is, That which is Parallel to
the Horizon, when the object is viewed in front, although in Perspective, as C
D E F from the Gate in the first figure, becomes a visual Ray; when the same
object is viewed being in a Return, or obliquely. As in the second figure, that
C D E F, which is in the front above, is made a visual Ray to that which is
under: And on the contrary, that which is a Ray to that above, is made a
Parallel to the base to that below, as D G F H L. The Perpendiculars are always
Perpendiculars.

1. fig.
2. fig.


Of the Line of Elevation for to give the Heights to all kind of Bodies and
Figures, and in such a Place as one would within a Plane.
WE must endeavor to understand well, and remember this Rule: which is of such
importance, that he that shall know it perfectly, will not be troubled in the
Elevations, whatsoever they be of.

As for to make the Planes, we have used the base for the Elevations: we ought
also to use a line which shall direct us, and shall bring the Measures of the
Heights that are needful to every thing which one would elevate.

This line of Elevation must be Perpendicular upon the base A B, which is
always the nearest to our sight, and the first of the Plane: By consequence,
capable of giving and bearing the Measures of all that one would make in the
Picture, and therefore the line of Elevation C D is placed upon the line A B
Perpendicularly, as all those must be upon the Plane which we shall use
henceforward. We must then remember, that when we shall speak of Perpendicules,
or Perpendicks, in the rest of our Orders, we must always understand of
Plumb-lines upon the Plane or base.

Seeing that this line of Elevation must receive and give the Heights to all
the Objects that one would elevate from a Plane: it must have the same Horizon
with the Plane. Therefore we must from the foot of this line, which one may set
on the left or right side, draw within the Horizon, as one would have it, that
is to say, that it is no great matter where the Point be set within the
Horizon: for in what place soever it be, it will always give the same effect,
as it is from the foot of the line C to the point E, one may set it at the
point of sight, if one will. I have set this line on the one side and other in
the first Figure, and their point different within the Horizon, for to give to
understand that it is well throughout.

If from the point H, which is in the Plane of the second Figure, you would
elevate a line of two foot high; you must set upon the line of Elevation two
equal Parts, which you shall make to serve each for a foot, beginning at the
point C, as are C F, which is two foot high, to draw to the point E, and you
shall have an Elevation of two feet, between the two lines C and F, drawn to
the point E.

For to give the height of two feet to a line elevated from the point H: you
must from the point H. draw a Parallel occult to the base, until that it divide
the line below C E, which shall be the point I. If from the point I one elevate
a Perpendicule I K, between C F, it shall be the height that it ought for the
line of the point H, which you must take with a Compass and carry it to the
point H, which will give H L of two feet high.

If from the point M, you would have one of the same height of two feet, you
must make the same Operation, and you shall have between C F the Perpendicule N
O, which shall be the height that it ought at the point M. And making the same
Operation from the point P, you shall have the Perpendicule Q R, for the height
of the line of the point P.

For to give them the height of 3, 4, 5, 10, 20 and 30 feet. It is always the
same Order; there is nothing but to set these distances and heights abovesaid
upon the line of the Elevation. And from the point of the height, that you
would give to draw to the point of the line within the Horizon, which is here
the point E, and to make all the same Operations, which we are about making:
and you shall have that which you desire.



The Elevation of a Cube in Perspective.
HAving made the Plane by the Orders foregoing, and having set the line of
Elevation upon any side of the Plane, as is F L upon the base; We must set upon
this line F L, the height of a Cube, which is a Figure square on all the sides,
as a Die, which shall be F M, from which points F M we must draw to the point of
the line of Elevation E. Then from all the Angles of the Plane A B C D, to
bring Parallels to the base, until that they meet with the line F E, which is
the bottom of the line of Elevation, and from their sections F and H, to raise
the Perpendiculars F M and H K, between the lines M F, which are drawn at the
point E. Then to take its Measures with a Compass, and to bring them
Perpendicularly upon the Angles; for example, to take with a Compass the height
F M, and to bear it Perpendicularly upon the lines elevated from the Angles A
B, which will be A G, B G. Then to take also the height H K, and to carry it
upon the Angles of the bottom C D, which shall give C O D O; then to join the
right lines G O O G. This shall be the Cube elevated.

If you would have the Elevation of any Figure whatsoever, draw always from the
Angles of its Plane, Parallels to the base, unto the draught of the foot of the
line of Elevation, and keep the same Method that we spoke of for the Cube, and
you shall see, that there is not any thing, how difficult and unequal soever it
be, but that you may put into Perspective; as we shall make to be seen in the
Poligones following.

The second Figure is another Cube elevated, after a manner, very little
different from the former, which I shall speak of in three words: And he that
will may use it, not to be rejected.

Having made the Plane by the ordinary way, we must from all its Angles B C D
E, elevate Perpendiculars; And upon the first, set the height which one would
give to it, as B A C A. And from the points A A, to draw to the points of sight
F, or to the points of distances G H, and where the Perpendiculars of the
Angles D E shall be divided at the point I L, this shall be the line of
sinking, and the top of the Cube wholly elevated.

This last Order is not so universal as the former, which has always been in
use, and practiced by the Ancient Authors: It has nevertheless some benefits,
which we shall know in some of the Orders following.



The Triangle in Perspective.
IN the first Order I have promised to make the easiness of elevating all
Figures appear, whereof the most difficult are the Poligones or Figures with
many sides: and to keep some Order, we will begin by the Triangle.

Having framed a Plane by the Orders foregoing fol. 21: where we teach to make
it with a List or Border: we must, as we were speaking, set the line of
Elevation on the side of such an height as we would have, as is A B of three
feet: Then from all the Angles of the Plane, to draw Parallels to the base,
unto the bottom of the line of Elevation B E; And from their sections elevate
Perpendicules between the lines A B, and to bring all these heights upon the
Angles from whence the Parallels proceed; for example, the height A B must be
carried to the Angles C D, which will give C R and D S. The other height F I,
at the Angles G O, which will give G T and O V; That of H L to the Angle K,
which will give K X; and the last height N P to the Angle Q, which will give Q
Y. Then to join with right lines all these Points R S Y, then T V X, for the
thickness of the stone in the first figure.

The Pentagone, or five-Angles in Perspective.
THE Pentagone is a figure with five faces or sides; and with five Angles. We
have given the Method of framing it, and setting its Plane in Perspective in
the Treatise of the Planes fol. 22. It would be loss of time to give the manner
of elevating it, seeing that the second figure causes it to be known, that it
is the same Order, with that of the Cube and the Triangle.

The Hexagone or six-Angles in Perspective.
THE Hexagone is a figure with six Angles, and six faces or sides, as is to be
seen in two Manners in the Treatise of Planes, fol. 23. and 27. where it is
abbreviated. The Order for to elevate them is to be seen sufficiently in the
third figure.

1. fig
2. fig
3. fig


Of the Heptagone, or Seven-Angles, in Perspective.
THE Heptagone is a figure with seven sides or faces and seven Angles. Of the
which we have set heretefore, fol. 24, how it ought to be made, and to set its
Plane into Perspective. Its elevation is the same Orders, with that of the
Triangle, as one may see in the first figure.

Of the Octogone, or Eight-Angles, in Perspective.
THE Octogone is a figure with eight angles, and eight faces, as the second
figure shows it, in the Treaty of planes, fol. 25. and 26: One may see how it
ought to be set in Perspective in two different Manners. The elevation is as in
the foregoing.



A double Cross in Perspective.
I have set this figure, and that below it, which the Sieur Marolois has in
his Works, according to the first Order that we follow. The which would be more
difficult to set into Perspective by another manner of the diversity of the
Angles. And by this Method it is very easy, Elevating it from all the angles of
the Plane etc. as we have said of the Polygones, and may be seen clearly in the
first figure.

A Stone-fluted, or straked like a starr, in Perspective.
HAving not set the Plane of this figure with the other figure; I thought it
fit to set it under its figure, for to abbreviate it in the Ordinary way, as we
have set the others. The Geometrical Plane is easy to make. This is a Circle
divided into six, whereof the divisions ought to be joined with right lines,
leaving a Point between two; As for example, from I, to 3. leaving 2. Then to
take 2 and 4, leaving 3. and so others the rest is seen sufficiently in the
second figure.

1. fig
2. fig.


Of Pilasters in Perspective.
WHEN one would make some Pieces, as Columns, Pilasters or Walls, which shall
have the same height. There is no need of the line of Elevation: It suffices
to do as in the second Order, which is, that having elevated Perpendiculars
from the Angles of the Plane, as is A B C D, of the first figure; we must set
the height that we would upon the first or second Perpendicule, as is A F, or D
E. Then to draw the Ray E to the point of sight F; All the Perpendicules that
one shall elevate, must be unto this line E F, and then that the Pilasters G H,
shall be equal to the first.

If one would not use little squares in the Plane, we must set upon the base
the Measures, and draw the Rays to the point of sight F, and that which ought
to abbreviate at the point of distance K; for example, L M is one side of the
Pilaster: We must draw these two Points L M, to the points of sight F for the
breadth of all the Pilasters which one shall set there; for the depth of each
Pilaster, which we would make square, we must take the distance L M, and set it
before L, as is N; then to draw the line N K, which is the distance, and it
shall give the depth of the Pilaster at the point O, from which points L M O,
we must elevate Perpendicules, and do the rest as we have said. If one would
have the breadth of two Pilasters, between the one and the other; he must set
them upon the base, and after set the depth of the second Pilaster equal to the
first, as is P Q; and from these two points P. Q. to the distance K, which
shall give the points R S, upon the Ray L from S; we must draw a little
Parallel, which shall divide the Ray M F, as is S T; then from these points R S
T, to elevate Perpendicules, and to do as in the first: The third, and more, if
one would have them, ought to do the same, keeping always the Measures upon the
base, as in the first Figure.

Of Pilasters viewed by the Angle.
WE have said heretofore, that the Plane of squares is made, hy drawing
Measures from the base to the Distances. As concerning the Elevations, it is
the same that we are speaking of. For having set the height A B, upon the first
Perpendicule, we must draw from the point B to the distances C D, which shall
divide and give the heights to the two other Perpendicules elevated on the
sides: Then having given the Distances, which one would, between the two
Pilasters, which are here two little squares, you must elevate the second; and
by the same Order the third: Their height shall be found drawing a visual Ray
from the point B to the point of fight E, at the section, which this Ray shall
make of the first Perpendicules, at the point F F, and from the points F F, to
the distances, as in the first Pilaster.

Those which are made without a Plane, must take their Measures upon the base;
as if one would give them the like breadth to those above viewed on the front:
It must be set as G H, and to draw the Ray G, to the point of sight E, for to
have all the Middles or the Diameters: Then to set also the same breadth of G at
the point I; and from these three points G H I, to bring lines to the distances
C D, for to frame the first Plane: from this Plane he must elevate
Perpendicules: And upon the first to set the height as is G K; and from the
point K to draw to the distances, for to have the Abridgement of the
Perpendicule; of the sides, for the second Pilaster. The same shall be done
from the Points L. M; And the third, from the points N O. The rest is easy
enough to do, viewing the second figure.

1 fig
2 fig


The Effects of the diversity of Horizons.
THE more that any one is Elevated above any Object, the more he discovers
that which is above. By consequent, if one be lower, he shall discover less;
and if one be under it, he can see but that which is under, and nothing of that
which is above.

The first Proposition is verified by the first Figure: The second, by the
second: and the third, by the last.

The first and second Cube, is made as we have taught; the third is made also
by the same Orders, although they seem more hard, by reason that we see the
Objects by the upper part. But if you turn up the Paper, or the Picture, and
draw at the point of sight, and at the distances B C, as in other Orders you
shall have the same facility. I set nothing of the Objects viewed on the side:
seeing that I have said so many times that it is the same with those on the
front: And for to give further knowledge how to set them in order; There is one
in a single ^^aught, and the other shadowed also.

Before we leave this third Figure; we must observe, that the lowness of the
Horizon, is the cause that we see the bottom of the Objects, which are elevated
above, as D E F; and of the two others, which are G H, placed above the
Horizon, one cannot see neither above nor below. Above, because the Horizon is
lower; nor below, it being placed upon the Horizon.

There are many Painters, that do fail in this, making the upper part of many
things appear, although that the Horizon be much lower.

1 fig
2 fig
3 fig


The Elevation of Objects viewed by the Angle.
WE have snewed by the two Figures of the 19 h. and 20th. fol. how the Planes
are made, drawing to the points of distances, and never to the point of sight,
if it be not for to find the Diameter, We must keep the same rule for the
Elevations, as it is easy to see by the first Figures; which have all their
lines abutting at the points of distances B C, and not one at that of the sight
A.

The first Figure D is for to show, that whenever there shall be an
infiniteness of Parts, in one and the same Object viewed by the Angle, we must
draw them all to the points of distances B and C. If you would make one of the
same, see here the Order: Having made a Plane, and elevated occult
Perpendiculars, as we have said, you must set the height that you would give
unto it, at the first Angle E F, and draw from the point F to the points B C,
for to have the height of the second and third Angle at the point G: Then from
this point G, to draw again to the points B C, and you shall have the fourth
Angle of the Platform. The other little Bodies are elevated in the same manner,
by setting the height that one would give them, upon the first Perpendicular,
as from F to H, and from H drawing to the points, as we said but now from the
point F, we shall have the heights of all the Angles; And the points I K shall
give the thicknesses of all the little Bodies, and the Platform of that of the
midst: by drawing always to the Points B and C: The rest is seen sufficiently
by the Figure, which one may make to serve for a Castle, defended with four
square Towers, or for a Palace quartered with four Pavilions.

The two other Bodies which are on either side of the great one, are seen from
the side, whereof the Order is alike to that which is seen from the front: for
example, if you elevate Perpendiculars from all the Angles of the Plane L, and
that you give your height to the first, as M N, by drawing from the point N, to
the points of Distances B C, they will give the Angles 2 and 3 at the point O.
Then from the point O, drawing still to the points B C, you shall have the
fourth, which is the Elevation of the whole. This being practiced by the first,
and by the second Order you shall have the same.

The second Figure below is of the same Order. There is no difference, but of
the Horizon, which is lower.

The third shows the under-part of the Objects, but the order is altogether
the same with that above, drawing all to the points of distances Q R, which is
the Horizontal line.

1. fig
2. fig
3. fig.


For to raise Bodies, and remove them as far of as one would.
IF you would have the first Body of two feet high, and one foot deep, and one
broad, at two feet distance one from another, of two feet deep, of one foot
broad, and three feet of height, and three feet distance. Another of one foot
broad, five feet deep, and four feet high.

Thus you must proceed.
Having made a Plane of little squares, which we shall make to a foot square
(one may make them of what size he will) by the points of sight A; and
distances B C. You shall raise from the first Angle a Perpendicular, according
to the second Order, which shall bear the Measures that you would give to the
Objects as this D E, upon the which you shall transport four times the Measure
D F, seeing that the highest ought to have but four feet. From all the Angles
of this first little square F I G D, you must raise occult Perpendiculars. And
having given the Measure to the first distance D and 2, because you would have
it two feet high; you must draw from the point 2 to the point of sight A, and
it shall divide the Perpendicule of the Angle G at the point H, you must draw
Parallels to the base, which shall divide the Perpendicule of the Angle I, at
the point K, and another Parallel from the point 2, which shall divide the
Perpendicular of the Angle F, at the point L; And joining these 4 points H K L
2, of right lines, you shall have your first Body. Then because you would give
2 feet of space, between the first and the second Body, you must leave two
little squares of the Pavement between the one and the other body, and upon the
first Angles of the third to raise Perpendicules, and to do all the same as at
the first body, with these differences; that the height of this second, ought
to be taken at the third point of the line D E, seeing that it must have three
feet of height, and must contain two little squares, seeing that it must be of
two feet deep. Be^ween this second and the third Body, you must leave 3 little
squares, seeing that you require it at three feet distance the one from the
other, and from the first Angles of the fourth, to raise Perpendiculars as at
the first and the last after 5 little squares, which is the depth of your body,
and the Term of 5 feet, which the third Body ought to have of depth. The fourth
point of the line D E, shall give to it, its height, which ought to be of 4
feet, by dividing the Perpendiculars, as you have done in the first. Those
which are shadowed on the other side, are made by the same Order, and of the
same Proportion; But the Wall of the midst is of Equal height four feet only,
an Opening of 3 feet in the midst.

In the second figure is a Wall of equal heights. There being distances of 3
foot, left for doors or windows: The first part of the Wall is but 2 foot
deep. The other two 3, foot in depth a piece, on the other side there is a
Continued Wall of 14 feet of depth, and of height like unto the others.

The Order is the same with that of those above.

That which we have called a Wall, may also serve for an Hedge; or Rows for
Gardens.



Of Walls viewed directly.
BY that which we have said, one may make all sorts of walls viewed obliquely.
And although this very Order may serve for the same walls viewed directly, it
has seemed necessary to me to set also this figure, for two Reasons: The
first, for that they do not always make Planes, and in this case one should be
troubled for thicknesses. The second, for to give the thicknesses to the doors
and windows which may be to be set in those walls.

For to make walls Parallel to the base, or to the Horizon upon the Plane, you
shall give them such a length as you shall please, upon the Parallels to the
Horizon; for the breadth, you may take that of one little square, from the
Angles of which you shall raise the Perpendicules A B, which you shall make as
high as you shall please, as C. Then from the point C draw unto the point of
sight D; this Ray C D shall give the diminution and the perfection to the wall.

When one has not a Plane, we must set at the first corner of the wall, upon a
Parallel to the base, or to the Horizon, the thickness that we would give to
the wall, as E F. Then from the point F to draw to the point of sight D, and
from the point E to the point of distance G, from the section of these two
lines at the point H, you must raise a Perpendicular; and from the point F,
another upon this last: you must take the height of the Wall F I. Then from the
point I to draw to the point of sight D, for to have the diminution of the wall
at the section of the Perpendicule H; for the length, you shall give it such as
you please, upon the first Parallel E F; for the doors and windows in the same
walls; you must mark the breadth and height, as here K L M N; and to set the
thickness that you would give them upon a Parallel, above or below the doors or
windows, at the nearest corner to the point of distance, as here N O, or L O.
Then draw from the points L and N to the point of sight D; and from the points
O to the point of distance G. And from the section of the lines P, you must
draw the thicknesses.

Another Wall viewed from the Angle.
HAving the Plane, you are only to raise Perpendicules from the Angles, which
one has resolved upon, and to mark the height, which one would give them upon
the Perpendicule of the Angle that is nearest to you, as is Q R. And from the
point R to draw to the points of distances S T. The sections which these lines
shall make of the Perpendicules, elevated from the Angles of the Plane, shall
give the length and the thickness of the wall: If you have not a Plane, you
must set the Measures which one would give, as well to the breadth, depth of the
doors and of the windows upon the base, as here V X is the breadth, X Y the
depth, Z I the breadth of one window: Then to draw from all these points to the
points of distances S T: First X T, which is the Radius of the base: Then from
V T a small line occult, which shall divide the Ray X S at the point 5, which
is the thickness of the wall. For the depth, the Ray Y S shall give it at the
section that it shall make of that X T, at the point 6. and Z I, the breadth of
the window at the points 7, 8. from which points X 5, 6, 7, 8. you must raise
Perpendicules, and set above the first X the height 2. And drawing from the
point 2 to the points S T, you shall have the height of all, at the sections of
the Perpendicules, from the height of the window marked by 3, 4, draw to T, and
where it shall divide the Perpendicules 7, 8, you must draw right lines: And
from the Corners 9 to S, for the depth 10, at the point T, and from the section
11. to draw a line Perpendicular. All this may serve for a Pallisadoe as for a
wall.



For to place a doer in what place one would of a Wall.
WE must raise a Wall, as we have said, of 1, or 2, or of 3, feet thickness,
upon the Points H I, and to bring it to the bottom of the same height, then if
you know near upon the measure of the door that you would make; set the breadth
upon the base, as here A, and B, of the Plane below, which contains 3 feet:
and upon the side of A, and B, the breadth of a Band C D. And draw these 4
Letters A B C D, to the point of sight K, and where they shall divide this
Parallel to the Horizon M N, at the point O, you must raise Perpendiculars of
such height as one would: see here already the breadth of the Door: for the
height, you must transport D F E, of the Plane below to the Corner of the Wall
I, and draw these Points F E, to the Point K, and where they shall divide the
Perpendicular M P, at the Point Q, draw Q R, Parallel to M N, which shall give
the height of the Door, and the Band above. Its thickness, or depth shall be
the same, with that of the Wall, which is G F, and if you draw from the point
G, to the point of sight K, it will divide the Perpendicule M P, at the point
S, draw S T, parallel to Q R, you shall have the bottom of the Door V, which is
its thickness, and of the whole circuit of the Door.

For to make the Door to the Wall on the side; you must remember the Order of
fol. 17. which is, that one set all the measures upon the base, and drawing
from these measures to the point of distance, one has all the abridgements
that he desires. Example, you would have a Door 4 feet within the Chamber, you
shall set 4 equal distances I C. Then draw to the point of distance L, the
measures of the Door C A, and B D. And where the Ray I M, shall be divided by
the points elevated of the Perpendiculars X Y, which shall give the breadth of
the Door. For its height, you must draw to the point of sight K, the points E
F, and the sections of the Perpendiculars X Y, shall give you it! For the
thickness above and below you must draw the thickness the Wall G H, and F I to
the point of sight K; then drawing a little parallel to the base or to the
Horizon, from the corner of the Door X, and as much from the corner above, you
shall have X Z, the thickness above and below, which you must join with a
Perpendicular, as you see in the figure.

If you would also have a Door on the other side, you have only to draw lines
parallels to the base from the point X, to the Ray I N, and then to elevate
them as we have said, the rest is the same with the side shadowed. The Door of
the bottom is not in the midst, that is to say, a foot and half; the which I
have made on purpose for to reprove the error of those, who without other
measures, draw two Diagonals from their Picture, although it be of an enormous
greatness, and would that all the Objects should be equally distant from the
section of these lines: that is to say, from the midst of the Picture, so that
according to their account, it should be always mounted for to see their work
in its perfection, in which they deceive themselves; for when a Picture shall
have forty foot of height, and that it should be for to be seen set upon the
Ground, we should not set the Horizon higher then five feet, and rather less
then more. And according to their Rule this Horizon would be twenty foot high.



For to frame Windows in Perspective.
THE Order for to make a window, is altogether the same with that of a door,
for if you make an Ascent or a Cross-bar within a door, it will be a window and
no more a door, so that there is no more then to learn to make a single Cross
or double, and you shall know to make windows. If you would make one in the
wall A B of such largeness as you shall please; you must set its measure upon
the base, as D E, and draw from these points D E, to the point of distance F,
and from the section which the points G shall make at the Ray A C, you must
raise the Perpendicules G H, which shall give the breadth of the window, which
is here but of two little squares: for the height, they make them ordinarily
the nearest that they can to the Plancher above; But, the Rest or Stay ought
not to be higher then of three feet, or three feet and an half. Having then
taken this Measure, you must set it upon the Perpendicular A B, as A I, and to
draw I K. And where this line shall divide G H, that shall be the rest, a stay:
And likewise drawing L, which is above to the point of sight K, the section of
G H shall be the upper part of the window, the which will give us a long
square, or Parallelogramma, to the which adding a Cross, it will be a window;
for to make this Cross-bar, you must divide the space D E into two equal parts.
And at this division to give such a breadth as you shall please, ordinarily it
is four inches, or at the most half a foot. And to draw this breadth M, to the
point of distance F, and from the section of the Ray A C, to elevate the
Perpendicules N O, which shallbe the ascent or Rising of the midst of the
window for the Cross-bars, you shall set therein as many as you please; there
is nothing but to observe this, that they ought to have as much thickness as
the rising pillar; wherefore having taken this Measure M, you must transport it
upon the Perpendicule A B, as is P, and draw this Measure to the point K, and
the section that these Rays shall make of the Perpendiculars G H, G H, shall be
the Cross-bars; and by consequent the window made, for its thickness, it is not
here but of the half of the wall; for to give it to this window, you must draw
lines occult from the point Q to the point K, and drawing little Parallels to
the base, from the corners of the window S, they shall give the thickness at
the point, that they shall divide the line Q X, as we have said of the door.

This window is equal with the wall within side which is not ordinary, because
there are that make them with Chamfrettings or Scunches, that is to say, that
they enter within the wall, sometimes a foot more or less.

The Order thereof is altogether the same, except that in stead of taking the
sections upon the Ray A C K; we must take it at that which enters within the
wall; as far as one would cause the windows to enter, as may be seen in the
figure under the Ray O K, which receives the Measures which one has set upon
the base; and that he must draw at the point of the distance F all the rest, as
at those above, taking the thicknesses of the window, between the Perpendicule
O unto that F, which is the last. Then when the window shall be all finished
upon the Ray O K, and of the breadth of the wall O F, we must raise the
Perpendicule A, and draw it to the point K. Then from the corner below the
window to the points P, to make a little Parallel, which divides the Ray A K
at the point Q, which shall be the thickness of the wall, which shall cover a
little of the window, and shall make the thickness R P to be seen from the
point R, you must elevate the Perpendicule R V, which shall divide the Ray T K
at the point V, which shall be the thickness above the window. Of the Measures
of that, one shall make as much as they will, keeping therein always the same
Order.



Of the Planchers above.
THE Perspectiff (or Practiser of this Art) ought, as it were, to follow the
same Order which the Masons keep, which do raise and cause to come forth from
the Earth, by little and little, very fair Houses. The Pavement or Plancher
below, serve him for a Foundation, upon the which he raises the Walls, which
he pierces in so many places as he will (yet not without reason) for to have
doors and windows, as we have said.

Let the walls raised be A B, upon the which we must first set Beams or
Girders, and upon these Girders the Quarters or Joysts. Having taken the
Measure of the Square of its Piece (as it might be here on foot) it must be
carried to the height of the wall, as C D, from the which Points C D, we must
draw occult lines to the point of sight E, which shall give the Rays C G D F.
You must also carry this Measure C D, upon the Parallel to the Horizon D H,
which ought to bear the Measures and Quantity of Beams, which you would set
upon the wall, as we have set these three I K L, and draw all those Measures to
the point of distance M, and from the sections of the Ray, D F, at the point O,
to cause Perpendiculars to fall, which shall divide the Rays C G, at the
points P. Then drawing Parallels to the Horizon from the Points O and P, unto
the other side, you shall have the Beams laid, as you see in the first figure.

Let us set now Joysts upon the Beams, or to do more properly, let us mortaise
them there: The line Q R shall serve for the base, upon which you shall set
your Joysts, in such number, and so near and far from each other as you shall
please: these are distant from each other twice their thickness. Then when as
we would embox them, we must take their thickness within that of the Beam Q S,
as is Q T, and draw an occult line T V; then between Q R and T Y, to set your
Joysts X, and from all their Angles which may be seen, to draw to the point of
fight Y; and that you may not pass the half of the other beams, you must draw
from the midst of the first, which is the point T, an occult Ray to the point
of sight Y, which shall divide all the other beams by the midst at the point Z.
Then from the po^nt Z to draw Parallels to the Horizon, that one may not pass
them by drawing Joysts to the point Y. If you would not take so much pains, set
your Joysts Z, upon the line Q R, as they are under: Then draw boldly from one
beam to another, from all the Angles X to the point Y, and you shall have that
you demand



THIS Figure is set here only to cause one to see the effect of the Order that
we are about to teach, where we shall observe, that the Quantity of stories,
the one above the other, do not make the Order more difficult.

The Joysts are not Tenanted within the Beams in the upper story, as in the
under story.



Another Ordering of Planchers in Perspective.
THIS fashion ought to be ordered in the same manner with that which we are now
leaving: We ought only to change the setting of the Pieces; that is to say,
that we must set the beams at length, for to draw them to the point of sight.
and the Joyst a cross, which is contrary to the other.

The Walls shall be A B, upon the which, or upon the Cattozes that come from
them, you shall place the thickness of the beam C D, from the which points C D,
you must draw Parallels to the Horizon C E D F, between the which one shall set
such a number of beams as he will, as here three G H I, which he ought to draw
to the point of sight K, and to take heed where the Ray D P shall divide the
Perpendicular L P; Then from the point P, to draw a little Parallel to the
Horizon P M, which shall be the term of bound of the other Rays, as P N. And
from the point N to raise a Perpendicule N O, and so to all the Pieces.

Here is that which is for the beams, for to set the Joysts across upon these
beams, you must set their thickness upon the line Q R, and draw these Measures
V, to the point of distance S, and from the section which the Angles V, shall
make at the Ray Q T; you must draw Parallels to the Horizon, unto above the
beam of the other side. If you would mortaise them within the beams; you must
take the thickness of the Rafters within the beam, as is Q X. And from X to
draw a Parallel to the base, unto the other side X X. And between these two
lines Q R and X X, to set the divisions V, which shall be Y. And from all the
points, to draw to the distance S, for to have the thicknesses of the side, and
of below, which shall be taken in the section of the Ray X T, at the point Z,
from which drawing Parallels to the Horizon, you shall make the Plancher, as is
seen in the second figure.

You see how you must set into Perspective single Planchers of Carpenters work;
If yet after, or in the stead of those you would have some fair Plat-found of
Pictures, or some other Compartment; follow that which we have said in the 35
fol. speaking of the Compartments of the Gardens, and you shall use the line Q
R for the base. You may make there whatsoever it shall please you.

For the Planchers below, there are of some fashions in the folio's 30 31 32 33
and 34 of the Planes, for to give an open way to him that uses this Art to
Invent others by. You may see hitherto, how to make any Halls or Chambers
perfectly. We will teach the movables at the end of this first part.



THIS Figure shows clearly the Plancher which we are about to express, and
where the lines do make the Figure a little confused.

WE will teach in another place to make this Gate with Panes.



A single Draught of Doors and round Arches viewed directly.
HAving spoken that which is necessary for Halls, Chambers, Windows and square
Gates; We must now know how the round ones are made; for to set such where one
would have them.

Supposing that A B C D E F were Pilasters, or small Pillars elevated upon some
Plane; for to place there Arches, you must divide the breadth above G H, into
two equal Parts, at the point I, upon the which having set one leg of the
Compass, you shall make with the other a demi-round G H, which shall give the
first Arch.

For to make all the others of the same height and breadth, you must draw lines
from the points H G, to the point of sight K, and these two Rays shall divide
the Perpendicules C D E F, at the points L, from the which points L, you must
draw Parallels to G H, the which Parallels L L, you must divide into two, for
to make there demi-rounds, as in the first. For to find the Center of these
Parallels L, there is but only to set the Rule to the first Center I, and to
draw it to the point K, it will divide them all just at the midst M M, at the
which points you shall set one leg of the Compass, and shall make the
half-Circle as in the first. Those which are viewed in front, and those which
are viewed on the side, are ordered in the same manner, as may be seen in the
first Figure.

When one would make a thickness or a band equal throughout all, there is need
but of one Center, as O, of which they have framed the thicknesses N P, of the
figures below: All the rest is made, as we have said, drawing to the point of
sight K: These two last figures show how all kind of single Vaults, or bending
Roofs should be made, which have but an half-round; One may enrich them, as we
shall show hereafter.

1. fig
2. fig


Round Arches above the Pilasters viewed directly.
THE single draught that we are about to pass from, gives the means to make
this, being the same Order, there are a few more draughts, and not more
difficulties, for having drawn from above the Pilasters A B C D, Parallels to
the base. We must divide the first into two, and from the center I, to make
with a Compass the first half-Round A B, and without stirring it from the same
center, to make the band A G F C: Then drawing from this center E, to the point
of sight H, the Ray E H, will give all the Middles of the Parallels for to make
half-Rounds above all, beginning at B D until the last I. This is the same
order for that on the side.

Of the third Point in the Arch.
THE draught is as easy as of the Round: When one has given the breadth, as K
L, set a leg of the Compass in K, and turn the other toward O, which will
frame the Arch L O, set again the compass in L, and make the Arch K O, you
shall have one Arch in the third point K O L, do as much with M N, you shall
have the second Arch of the bottom M P N: The second figure of the third Point
is with a Band or Border about it, which is made from the same Center; for
example, from the Center R, they make the Arch S X and T V: And from the point
S, the Arch Q V, and R X. All the rest draws to the point, of sight Y.

The true third Point is the Figure, they divide the Diameter a b into three
equal Parts, then they set one leg of the Compass in one division as c, and
with the other leg they take the opening c b, for to make the Arch b e: then
setting again the compass in d, they make the Arch d a e, which is an Arch in
the third point as well as the other, you may use which you will. The Ancient
Churches come nearer to the first then the second: there are also some which
are more close.



A further Pursuit of this Figure.
I Have set an Arbor of a Garden, which is made, as we have spoken of, with
Arches, viewed directly.



For to frame and set into Perspective Doors and round Arches.
THE Round being hard to set into Perspective, has need of lines and of points
which go before it, ere it can be framed: And for to find these points the
more easily, we must understand the first figure, by the which we see, that he
which would have a demi-round upon the Diameter A B, has only to set a leg of
the Compass at the midst of A B, at the point C, and with the other leg of the
Compass to draw a crooked line from A to B, and so to carry his demi-round upon
the Elevation D E, for to have a Door or round Arch, as in the second Figure,
so as we have said.

But for to set into Perspective, we are to divide it into as many Parts as we
will: the more that one can make is always the best, as we have said and showed
at the 28th. fol. and as we shall show, speaking of cross vaulted Roofs. We
will divide this into eight Parts only, four for the half: Having made the half
Circle, as we have said, we must upon the demi-round draw a Parallel to A B,
which touches it at the point F, and this point F shall be the midst above the
Circle: Then to elevate from A B two Perpendiculars, which divide this Parallel
F, at the points G H. And from the Corners A B G H, to draw two Diagonals A H G
B, which shall divide themselves in I, and from this point I, to elevate a
Perpendicule C I F, which shall divide the Circle into two, and the Diagonals
shall divide it into two other Parts at the points K, by the which we must draw
a Parallel to the base K L. Let us transport all these divisions and measures
upon the third Figure, for to set them into Perspective.

First, draw the Corner E to and point of sight M: Then from the point N equal
to D E at the point of distance P, which shall divide the Ray E M, at the point
Q. Whereby E Q will be the breadth of the first Arch D E, in Perspective. Draw
also O to the point P, it will divide the second Arch at the Ray E M, or point
R, not having more space upon the base for to take the third Arch, you must
draw from the point N to the point of sight M; and from the point R a Parallel
to the base R S. Seeing that R S is under the same Angle with E N, it is then
of the same breadth as we have proved from the beginning: Drawing then from S to
P, it will divide the Ray E M, at the point T, which shall be the third Arch.

We must then elevate the Perpendiculars V, from these three Points Q R T, the
which shall be divided by the Ray H M, which shall be the highest of the
Arches. Then from the Ray B M, which shall give the lower part of the
demi-round, draw Diagonals from the-points B V H X, which crossing themselves,
shall give the place of the Perpendicular Y F, which divides the Arch into
two: And drawing the Ray L M, it shall divide the Diagonals into two, and the
Arch into four. If you join these points B Z F Z K, with, crooked lines, you
shall have the first Arch, and the means to make an infinite Company of the
same fashion. This Order serves for Vaults, Arches, Doors, B^idges, and every
other thing that requires the demi-round. And therefore I let alone making the
two others, speaking no more.

This Order may also serve for the Windows of a Church; There is nothing else
to do, but to make one or two Ascents, to fasten the Glass.

1. fig.
2. fig.
3. fig.


For to frame and put into Perspective Doors, and Arches round, double, showing
their thicknesses.
THAT which we are about to say, is only for the single draught, the which
being doubled, gives the bredths and thicknesses of the Arches, and of that
which bears them, joining thereto right lines at all the sections of the one
to the other; as for example.

Having made the first draught D E, as we newly spoke of, and drawn D E to the
point of sight A, we must set the thickness upon the base E C, by drawing C to
the point of distance B, it will divide the Ray C A at the point F, and from
this point F, to draw the Parallel to the base G F, which shall divide the Ray
D A at the point G. And from F and G which shall be the thicknesses, to elevate
the Perpendicules I F G: If from the point H, you shall draw to the point A,
this Ray shall give the height of the Perpendicular H I, upon the which you
must take the line of the Center of the demi-round K, by drawing K to the point
A, which shall give the point L, from which draw the Parallel L M, and this
Parallel shall be the line which must bear the center of the demi-round
behind: As N, is the line of the center of the demi-circle before: you must
divide this line M L, into two equal parts, by drawing from the point N, to the
point A, by the point O, and upon this point O you must set a leg of the
Compass, and make the half-Circle M L, the which shall be divided as the first,
as we have said in the figure foregoing; then to draw right lines from the
divisions of the one to the other; that is to say, from the demi-round before
to that behind, for of the two to make but one, as the figure shows it,
joining M to P Q to R S F to T V, to X L, to K.

or to make the Arches or round doors seen on the front, as D E F G, there is
no need to make all these divisions, seeing that it is sufficient to have found
the line M L, for to make the demi-round, which is carried again to the first N
P K. But I have made them there on purpose, for fear of confounding the letters
with the lines in this Figure below, where the Arches are viewed obliquely, or
at return, by drawing to the point of the sight Y, these Arches shall give
their thickness, by doubling the order, which we have spoken of in the figure
preceding, and joining the division from the one to the other, as we spoke but
now, and the which is seen in this second figure: to the which having given the
thickness E Z, I have framed the draught E of points, and Z of full lines,
thereby to avoid confusion: and to make to understand, that all that which is
made of Points ought not to be seen, the Picture being finished.



Of Figures in Arches of another fashion.
THE Arches viewed in front, that we have set heretofore, are made exactly: but
they are somewhat long in the Practice. Behold another fashion as right, and
more short then the other.

Having made from the Center A the demi-round, or the whole Circle B H I. You
must from the Center A, and from the end of the Diameter B, draw Rays to the
point of sight C, then set upon B I the breadth or thickness that you would
give, as is D A. And from this point D to draw to the distance E, and at the
section of this line D E, upon the Ray A C to the point F, you must draw a
Parallel to the base, until that it divide the Ray B C, at the point G, then to
set one leg of the Compass at the point F, and with the other leg to take the
distance G, for to make the demi-round or the whole round, which shall be the
thickness of the Arch, or of the Round, as may be seen in the Figures. All the
lines K, ought to be drawn at the Center A, and the other L, at the point of
sight C. This may serve for round windows made of stone; and these lines shall
make the points, as also for great Vessels, Pipes, bathing Tubs, etc.

Arches viewed obliquely in Perspective.
THis Order may serve when one shall be in haste, and that one would not be so
exact, and also to avoid a multitude of lines, which the other Order does
oblige to make.

I say then, that having framed the first Arch N O, as we have said heretofore,
we must make upon the first draught little Parallels to the base, in such
number as you shall please, as are these Q; then to take with a Compass the
breadth, where the Arch begins, as is P O, and to bring it upon all these
little Parallels Q, which shall give the points R, by the which we shall bring
a crooked line, which shall frame the thickness of the Arch.

It is certain, that according to Perspective, the Objects are enlarged, when
they come near to us, and that the line O P ought to be smaller: but in this,
the difference of these bredths is so small, that it signifies nothing. And yet
I give not this for a Rule, but for an ease to those that are in haste.



Of Arches flat, or in manner of an Handle of a Basket, or demi-circles.
THE Order to set them into Perspective, is the same with the demi-Round, and
of the third points, as we see in the Figure A B. All the difficulty is to
find the draught which is made in two Manners.

The first, by two centers, and a line or thread, as we have said in the Orders
before speaking of the Oval, by reason that the Handle of a basket is properly
an half-oval.

The second is practiced thus: If one give you the line C D, for to make there
a low Arch, which may have the height E F: you must from the center F, make the
demi-round C G D, and to divide it into as many equal Parts as one would, as
this here into twelve; and from all those divisions to draw to the Center F:
then again from all these divisions to draw Perpendiculars upon the line, or
Diameter C D, as are the lines L. After these works, we must of the height,
which one would have the Arch of, make also a circle, as from E F, the
demi-round H E K; and from the sections which this little circle shall make
upon the divisions of the great, we must draw little Parallels, until that they
touch the Plumb lines, or Perpendiculars, which fall from the same divisions:
as for example L O, and from all these points O, frame the Arch, as we see it
here made of Points.

The other Figure makes yet the Arch lower, and one might make it yet more
couching, keeping the same Rules and Orders.

The Figure below makes one of these Arches to be in Perspective, viewed in
front, as it ought to appear, being finished. I will set nothing of the
Practice, having already said, that it is the same with that of the demi-Rounds.



ONE may see in this Figure the good effect of the Arches, when one gives them
well the Center, or the draught of the Roundness that they ought to have,

For the Degrees and the Figures we shall have here after the manner of giving
them their just Measures.



For to set Arches or half-Circles upon Pilasters or Columns.
ONE might say that in the Figure, which we are about to behold, there are
Pilasters, which are not in the draught which goes before, the which has made
me resolve to set this here, which shall serve to make it known that it is the
same Order, and that we have only to leave the place and breadth of the
Pilaster, which we would give them between two Arches, the which is done by the
means of the Plane or of the Base, even as we have seen the demi-rounds, which
are between each Pilaster, the which are made as we have said in the last Order.

Arches in the third Point.
THE Arches, and the Vaults or bending Roofs in the third point, are ordered in
the same manner with the demi-round; wherefore, having made one of them, we may
very well make the other: it suffices only to know the draught, seeing that
the Figure shows sufficiently the rest; for the draught, we have already said
that there is nothing so easy. The breadth A B being given for to make there an
Arch in the third point; we must open the Compass for all this breadth; and
holding firm one leg at the point A, with the other to make the Arch B C, then
to bring back the leg to B, and with the other to make the Arch A C, where they
shall divide themselves, it shall be the point of the Arch C: The other sort of
the third point is the true, which we have set heretofore marked

Seeing that all the rest is ordered, as in the demi-round, we will not make
any repetitions thereof: there are only here Pilasters between two, which are
not in the others, that we may cause the better to understand that which I have
said here above, that we have only to draw these Measures from the base to the
point of distance O, which shall divide the Ray D E at the point F, for to
elevate the Perpendicules before: then having set the thickness G, to draw the
Ray G E, for the breadth of the Pilasters H, from this point H they elevate
Perpendicules, which bear the same divisions with those on the forepart, the
which are joined, with right lines, and as in the demi-tound.



For to set into Perspective Vaults or Cross Arches.
WE must remember, or see it anew, that which we have said at the 28. fol.
speaking of setting the great Round into Perspective, by reason that we have
divided the Circle into many Parts, for to make it the most exactly that may
be, and by consequence the Vaults or Arches more round and more just. But as
there are a great Company of lines in this division of 16 parts; I thought that
it would be better to begin by a division of 8, although it be not so exact, so
will it also be less confused. We will take again the other in the following
leaf.

Having then made the Plane of a Round divided into eight parts, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. We must draw from all its divisions, Parallels to the base, unto the
Ray B A, which shall give the points C, upon the which we must elevate the
Perpendiculars C D; We must transport upon the first Perpendicular B and D,
which is the line of elevation, the Measures of the half-Circle B E F, which
shall give the points D H G; from the which we must draw Rays to the point A,
and at the sections of the Perpendiculars C D, we shall have the same divisions
as in the Plane, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. for an half-Circle we must draw crooked lines,
as may be seen in the Arch of the first side, the measures of which we must
transport to the other for to have the two Arches collateral, from the risings
of which we shall make two Circles with the Compass, the one before G K from
the Center M; the other at the bottom 5 L, from the Center N, and so we shall
have the four Arches, which do meet ordinarily in the cross Vaults, at the
outmost Mouldings, Ogees or Circlets; There remains nothing but to make the
Cross, or the crooked Diagonals, which ought to rest and bear upon the corners
G, 5 K L, passing by the knot or fcutcheon O.

Seeing that the Circle is divided into eight Parts, the Arches which are but
the half of the Circle, ought to have but four, as have those of the sides:
whence we ought also to divide into four the half-Circle before G K, at the
points G P Q R K, the which ought to be drawn to the point of sight A, unto the
Circle of the bottom 5, L; Now that which follows, is the secret of the
Cross; it is that we must draw Parallels to the Horizon, or to the base, from
all the sections of the Circle on the side 1, 2, 3, 4; 5. at the divisions of
the Circle before, in such manner as G, which is the first division of the
Circle, touch in a point the first section 1. from 2 to draw a Parallel to the
second division P, and to make a point S, from 3 to the third division Q, which
shall give O, the place of the Knot; from 4 to the fourth division R at the
point T, then to join the crooked lines G S O T L, and you shall have already a
Diagonal; a d do as much on the other side, and you shall have the Cross
entire, and your Vault complete.



For to make the same Vault more exactly.
HE that shall understand well the foregoing Order, will not be much troubled
to do this, seeing there is nothing but to double the lines, and to take heed
to the sections which are in a greater Number, by reason the Circle is divided
into more Parts.

One may learn to make the plane at the 28. fol. you must draw parallels from
all the divisions of this plane, from i unto 16. or the half only to the Ray B
A, which will give the points O, upon which you must elevate perpendiculars,
etc. All the rest is done, as we have said in the foregoing Order. But this is
the more exact, and does make the Vault more easily, because the divisions are
more near the one to the other.



For to make the Vaults more straight then large.
THere are two Orders in this Figure; the one for to streighten the Vaults on
the sides, the other for to give a Thickness to the Cross. We will begin with
the former. The two Orders of Vaults, which we are about leaving, supposing
that they are all square; that is to say, that the distance and breadth of the
Arches is equal, as well on the sides as those on the front; and he that cannot
make but of this fashion, shall find some trouble, if he were to set up a
Church, where ordinarily the Arches of the sides are much closer then those of
the front.

See here a fair Invention, by the which you shall give such Measure as you
please, to those of the sides, by the means of the base A Q. Suppose then that
the Arch before it Q, is 40 feet broad, and that in that of the sides, you
would allow but 15, 20, or so much or little as you please: you must (according
to the fourth advice in fol. 17.) set this Measure upon the base, and draw to
the point of distance, which will give the sinking of the same Measure in A E;
as by example, we have set here A C of 20 feet, drawing from the point C; to
the point of distance, which is a little farther off here where our Paper is
too narrow for to cause it to be seen; it will divide the sinking of 20 feet,
upon the Ray A D, at the point E; then coming back to the Base, you must make
an half-Circle of this distance A C, and divide it into as many parts as the
greater Arcade F G shall have of division, as here 8; and from all these
divisions I, to elevate Perpendiculars I H, and from the points I H, being
drawn to the point of distance they will divide the Ray A E, at the point O,
which you must also elevate into the Perpendicular O P, you must make in some
place separate the Plane of this demi-round F G. Supposing that it has not
been made, for to take the divisions thereof, and to carry them from E unto B:
And seeing that the Plane of the Figure foregoing is equal to F G, take the
Measures of the half B C D E F, and carry them upon the Perpendiculcs A F, and
from these points E F D C B, draw to the point of sight D, and from the
sections which these Rays B C D E F, shall make at the Perpendic^les O P; you
must draw crooked lines, which shall frame the Arch of the side, and drawing
Parallels from the sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, to the divisions of the
Arch F G, you shall have the points F R S T V X Y Z, for to frame the Cross,
even as we have already said heretofore.

For the Thicknesses of the Joints of the Cross, you are only to make a little
line of Elevation a b, which I have set at the top of the Perpendicule elevated
from the point O: and this line a b being drawn to the point of sight D,
divides all the other Perpendicules at the points c d, for to give the heights
Proportionate to every Perpendicule elevated from the sections of the Cross;
that is to say, from the sections which must be made for to find the draught
of the Cross, following their Order: for example, the first Elevation a b shall
be given at the first Perpendicule G: The second Elevation c d, at the second
Perpendicule F, c; and so following for all the others, which shall give the
points C; by the which making a crooked line for to join them together, we
shall have the thickness of the Joints of the Cross of the Vault, as one may
see at half of the left side of the Figure aforegoing.



A Vault made by the Orders aforegoing.
ALL the Orders aforegoing; do show sufficient easiness for to make a perfect
Vault, as this here: except what concerns the Pillars or Columns, which we
will show hereafter.



Of Arches and Doors with three squares.
THere is another kind of fretted cieling, which holds the place of a Roof
for Gates and Galleries, and also in Churches, which makes well also in
Perspective; and is very easy to practice: I have set it after the Round,
because that it is framed of a demi-Circle, as a round door, which after is to
be divided.

Having elevated the walls A B, we must make a demi-Circle, which contains
all the breadth C D, then holding the Compass open of the breadth of the half
Diameter E C, you must hold one leg firm at the point C, and with the other E
to draw an Arch on high, which divides the demi-round at the point G, and to
make likewise from the point D the Arch E H. Then to join these four Letters C
D G H, with right lines, which will give you the Arch half-Hexagone, or with
three squares. You must also make a demi-round, upon the breadth I K: for the
bottom, and for to divide it, you have only to draw from the Angles of the
first C D G H, to the point of sight F, at the sections that it shall make of
the demi-round at the point L M: you must draw right lines, which will frame
the Arch of the hollow.

Of another Arch Half-Decagone, or of five squares.
THIS Arch is ordered altogether as the former, and there is no difference, but
in the division of the Circle: The first is divided into three, and this into
five; so if you divide the demi-Circle L M, into five Parts N O P Q, and that
you draw from all these points to the point R, you shall divide the demi-Circle
of the hollow: so as we have said, in that above of three squares.



The Elevation of round Figures in Perspective.
THE desire that I have to show the easiness of setting all things into
Perspective, has made me set here also, how one ought to elevate from a Round
or Circle, such an height as one would have; and this Order shall serve for all
round Figures, as Tops of a Church, Amphitheaters, Towers, etc,

Having made the Plane of the Round in Perspective, as it is ordered
heretofore, and set on the side of the Plane, the line of Elevation A B,
according to the height that one would give it: We must from the Angles of the
Plane which are here, the Points of which they have framed the Round, as are 1,
2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, to draw Parallels to the bottom of the line of
Elevation A B, and to elevate them as we have said, and with a Compass to
transport them upon the Perpendiculars elevated from the points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9. etc. as in the former Orders.

The demi-round before, has but half of the Elevation of that behind; and the
one and the other, but the single draught without thickness.

By this Order there is no round thing, which one may not set into Perpective;
I mean Rounds, Parallels to the Horizon; The other Rounds which are
Perpendiculars to the Horizon, are taught in the Orders of Vaults.

The Elevation of Pilasters set into a Round.
WE must double the Round, as is taught in the Plane, fol. 29. and between the
two Circular lines set the Plane of the Pieces, which one would elevate, as we
see the Places before A B C D, the which do draw to the Center E; Then from all
the Angles of these Planes to raise Perpendiculars, and to give them their
height, according to the line of Elevation F G, by the ordinary Rule, as is
sufficiently seen by the second figure.

1 figure
2 figure


A Vault like a Scallop-shell set into Perspective.
THIS Figure may serve for the hollow of a Church, for a Grotte or Cave, for an
hollow Nest in a Wall, and the like Pieces; the Elevation is made in the same
manner, and by the Orders that we have spoken of.

For this flat Band A B which may serve for a Cornish, its diminution must be
taken upon the line of Elevation in C D, and to carry it upon the Pilasters,

For the Vault, we must make the first Arch E F, in the manner that we have
said, and in the midst within to make a demi-Circle O, to the which we shall
draw crooked lines, which shall rise above the Pilasters, and shall make the
sides or Nerves of the Vault, as we see G H I K, the heights of the Windows
shall be taken upon the line of elevation, between L and M. The figure will
help for the rest.



Of open Rounds in Steeples, or Vaults pierced in Perspective.
HAving made the Plane of the double Round, fol. 24. and marked between the two
Circles, the places and the numbers of the Pilasters which one would have
there, the which ought to draw toward the Center A: we must mark the height,
which we would give from the ground unto the hollow of the Lovure, as here the
line D and E on high: the which must serve for the base, where we shall
transport the same Measures, which are upon the line B G. And from the same
point of sight G, to make a Plane on high as that below, whence all the places
of the Pilasters shall draw toward the Center H, for to frame the Pilasters,
we are only to draw lines from the places, which are opposite the one to the
other, and which shall give their breadth and their thickness. I have not drawn
lines to the three Pilasters before; as well to cause these of the bottom to be
seen, as also to make it known, that there needs on high, as below.

For to give the thickness of the Round from I unto H, and from K unto L, we
must set the height, which we would have upon the line of the Elevation D M,
drawing to the Horizon at the point F; And from all the points whence we have
framed the Round, to draw to this line D, upon the which we shall elevate
Plumb-lines, as D M, which we take with a Compass, for to transport all these
heights upon the Perpendicules, which shall be raised from the points, as K L N
O P Q; and so of the others.

He that in the place of the Round, would have a square or a Polygone, has
need only to keep the same Method; and he shall do all that he would, with the
same facility, seeing that this, which is the hard, is not difficult.



That the multitude of Objects and the Plurality of stories, ought to have but
one point of sight.
I Have already said elsewhere, that one never ought to set more then one point
of sight in one Picture; and that hence we may know the great ignorance of
Painters, which do give as it were as many points of sight, and of Horizons, as
they make lines. I remember I have seen a Picture, where there were many
Chambers, the one above the others, and each had two or three points of sight:
and after that the Master thought he had done a Miracle. The present Figure is
to correct this Error, and cause us to know, that there ought to be but one
point of sight only, as is A, to the which all the Objects ought to draw, and
all the Chambers, if there should be fifty, one above the other, or on the one
side and the other; as we see these three here, which draw all to the point of
sight A. All the rest is made, as we have said heretofore.



For to set Chimneys into Perspective.
WE must take the Measures upon the base A B, which must be divided into equal
Parts. You may make the divisions of what quantity you will. This A B is into
eighteen, of each one foot; for to make a Chimney at the Wall A, three feet
within the Chamber, we must take three Parts, as A C, and draw from the point C
to the point of distance D, which will give the sinking of three feet, dividing
the Ray A E at the point F, you must set the thickness of the Jaumbs of the
Chimney beyond the point C, as is G, then drawing from G to D, it will give
this thickness at the point H. You must also set the breadth of the Chimney from
G unto I, which is of four feet and an half: and for the thickness of the
second Jaumbs an half foot, as at the other: Beginning at the point I unto K,
then to draw from I K to the point of distance D, which will give their Measure
upon the Ray A E, at the points L M, from which four points F H L M, you must
draw little Parallels to the base, as F N H O L P M Q; for to give the breadth
to the Jaumbs, you must take a foot and half A R, and the Ray A E shall divide
the little Parallels at the points N O P Q, from which, and from F L, you must
raise Perpendicules; for the height of the Mantle-tree of the Chimney, you must
take five feet upon the base, and carry them to the corner of the wall A unto
S, and from S to T for Cornish, all the rest is seen clearly in the first
figure.

The other Chimney which is opposite to it, is made of the same manner, for we
ought always to make the Jaumbs as in the first; and of these Jaumbs, to make
Columns, Terms, and all that one would. I have made Brackets to this.

The Chimney of the bottom must also take its Measures upon the base 1, 2, 3,
4, drawn to the point of sight E, for to find the hollow of the Chimney, or
the bredths of the Jaumbs, you must draw from 7 to E, and divide the lines of
sinking at the point 5, which shall be a foot and half: then from the point of
distance V, to draw the Diagonal passing by 5, which shall divide the Ray 2. E.
at the point 6, and from this point to draw a Parallel which shall divide the
four Rays 1, 2, 3, 4. at the points 9, 6, 9, 9, from which you must raise
Perpendiculars, and make all the rest as in the others.

The second figure shows plainly, and without lines, that which we are
speaking of.



Of Stairs in Perspective.
THere is nothing that gives so great a grace to a Perspective, nor which more
easily deceives the eye, there is a muititude of Returns, by reason that there
is need of many lights and diverse shadows, which give such force to the
Objects; that they seem to cast them out of the work. Now stairs have this
advantage, that in what fashion soever one set them, they have always lights
and shadows, and by consequence they are pleasing to the sight. I will set down
some here. If one shall use little squares, they will have the more easiness,
having only to raise Perpendicules, from so many squares, as he would have
steps: then to set at the first square the line of Elevation, divided into as
many Parts as one would, and from these divisions to draw to the point of
sight, and they shall divide the Perpendicules where the steps ought to be.

For example, you would have a staircase of eight steps, and that the last may
have the breadth of 3, you must take upon the Plane the number of little
squares, beginning at B, as are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.8. And 3 for the last
marked 11, from all these Angles we must raise Perpendicules, which we shall
divide, according to the divisions of the line of Elevation B D in this manner.

The first division (four inches high, supposing the square of one foot) shall
divide the first Perpendicule, and it must be continued unto the second, for
that makes also the upper part of the step, as is E F, and so of the others.
You shall make these steps as long as you would as these are of three feet
taking, as I have said, the square for one foot, so as is B G at this distance.
You must also raise Perpendicules, as we have done on the side B; but for to
save this pains, it were better to take the height of the last step H, and that
of the first I. Then to draw the line H I, which must grate upon the Angles, or
the outward edge of the Steps, as E K, grateth upon them on the side B: for
this being, there is but only to draw parallells to the Base from all the
Steps on the side B, until that they divide the line H I, as we see L M N O P
Q, etc. without making squares; we need only to set the Measures upon the Base,
and to draw them to the point of distance. We may have the same Measures upon
the line A B.

I set no other figures, seeing that this suffices for to Understand them all,
and for to make them.



Other steps hollowed underneath in Perspective.
THIS manner of steps is made as those which we are now leaveing. As for the
hollowness, there is need only to see the Figure, for to know the manner of
setting them into Perspective: These two that I present shall give an open way
to the Practiser of this Art, to invent others by.

Steps in front in Perspective.
THIS manner of steps is according to the Order of the line of Elevation; you
must raise as many Perpendicules from the Angles of the squares of the Plane,
as you would have of steps, as are C D E F, and from the same Angles to draw
little Parallels unto the bottom of the line of elevation A, which shall be the
points O O O O, which you must raise until that they divide the occult Rays of
the divisions of the line of Elevation A: Then to take these Measures with a
Compass, and carry them upon the Perpendicules elevated from the Angles of the
Plane, each according to their Order. The first, for the first step; the
second, for the second, etc.

For to find these Returns P; you must from the same Corners P draw to the
distance Q, and to take heed, where that divides the line of the Plane, or the
under-part of the step; for example, above the fourth step I have made the
Plane of the fifth step; Now to have its Return P, we must from the same points
P, draw to the distance Q, and take notice where it shall divide the Ray R,
which shall be at the point S, and this point S shall be the point for to draw
the line of Return S T. And so of others.



For to make stairs, which one may show from four sides.
THere are many ways to make these Stairs, see here are two, which seem the
most easi^. The first; Being about to make one of these Stairs, we must take
the leng^h of the first Step, and set thereon the quantity of Steps, that you
would have, as upon the line A B, I have set the points C C C, for four steps:
From these points we must make Rays to the point of sight D, the Rays shall be
divided by the Diagonals A F, and B E, at the points I, from the which we must
raise Perpendicules, and draw little parallels unto the bottom of the line of
Elevation G, which shall give the points H, which they shall raise as H K.

We must upon this line of Elevation G, set as many equal parts, as we would
have Steps, as here 4, from these four points 1. 2. 3. 4. We must draw to the
point D, for to divide the Perpendiculars H K, and to give to each the height
that it ought to have, as that which is made of points shows it.

We must take these measures with a Compass, and transport them the one after
the other, beginning at the first G, 1. and carry it upon the first
Perpendicular, to the corner A, as A L, then to draw a parallel unto the other
side B. (but here I have not set it but at the half, for to make the plane to
be seen in the other) for the second Step, you must take the second measure H.
2. and carry it upon the second Perpendicular I, then to draw Parallels, as at
the first: And so of all the others.

Another manner.
The side M N, being given; we must make a parallel above, for the thickness of
the first Step, as O P, from which points O P, we draw 2 Rays to the point of
sight Q, and also to the distances R S, And these Diagonalls shall frame the
square in the ordinary manner and this shall be the first step. For the second,
we must set the measure of the breadth, which we would give it upon the line O
P, as is O T, and from the point T, to draw to the point of sight Q. and this
line or Ray T Q. shall divide the Diagonals O, where we must raise the second
Step at the point V. The height of this Step shall be taken from the half of V
X, as M O, is the half of O T. This measure being given at the point Y, we must
draw parallels unto the Diagonal of the other side, which is drawn from the
corner P, then from the points Y Z, to draw to the points of sight, and of
distance; for to frame the square as at the first Step. For the third Step, we
are only to carry upon the line Y Z, the measure V X, which shall be Y A, and
from the point A, to draw to the point of sight Q, for to divide the Diagonal
of the point Y, which shall be the point B, and the place of the third Step.
Its height shall be the half of B C, which is always that of O T in
Perspective. All the rest is the same, as in the first and second, if there
should be an hundred, you must work always in the same manner.

The third figure causes these Steps to be seen clearly without the confusion
of Draughts, which we should make for to find their places: these Draughts
should be made in white; or in such manner, that nothing may be seen of them,
when the figure is finished.



Stairs viewed on the side in Perspective.
YOu must set upon the base, the number of steps that you would have; that is
to say, as many points at an equal distance, as here the three A B C, from
these points, you must draw to the points of sight D. Then from the point A, to
the point of distance E; And this Diagonal A E, shall give the plane, and the
place of the steps at the section of the Rays B C, at the points I, and upon
the Ray F, which is the foot of the Wall, the point G, which is the midst of
the plane of the steps, from this point G, you must draw to the other distance
H, for to find the corner of the last step at the point K, and the place of
others at the points I. Then from all these points I, to raise Perpendiculars.

For to give them their height, you must from the points A B C, which are upon
the base, raise little lines, for to serve for the line of elevation, upon the
which shall be set the heights according to their number. For example, A, which
is first, shall have but one, B, which is the second, shall have two. and C,
which is the third shall have three. Draw from all these points 1, 2, and 3, to
the points of sight D, and you shall divide the Perpendiculars elevated from
the plane, to the points O, which shall be the height of each step.

That of the other side is for to make it seem without points, and without
lines. This manner of steps may serve for many things, as for an Altar, for a
Throne, for the forepart of a Church, for a Gate, etc.

Stairs within a Wall in Perspective.
SEt as many divisions at the end of the Wall, as you would have steps, as
here, for three, between A and B, and draw A B, to the point of sight C. Then
having determined the space, that you would give to the steps, as D E, you
shall draw the parallel to the base E F, which shall receive at the points I I,
the sections of the lines drawn from the points G H, to the point of sight C,
and from these points I I, you shall raise Perpendiculars I K, I K, which shall
receive the heights of the steps, drawing from the points 1. 2. 3, to the point
of sight C, as is to be seen in the second figure.

2 Figure


For winding Stairs with Rests in Perspective.
WE must remember the foregoing orders about Steps, and it will be easy to
frame these winding Stairs, but to avoid the pains of searching, we will unfold
the whole matter here.

By reason that the winding Stairs of this figure, have ordinarily twice as
much at the bottom, as they are broad: When one would raise then into
Perspective, he shall first set the Horizon, where he would. Then he must make
a square, according to the ordinary rules, and double it according to the
second advice of Fol. 16. and to divide this square by an unequal number of
little squares, that the Walls which should be in the midst, may be of the
measure of one little square.

In this figure each square has 9 sides, or little squares of each side, the
which being doubled makes 18. for all the hollow: Of these 18. you must leave
4 at each end for the Rests; there remains 10 little squares, which we will
make to contain 1 foot eevry way, of which we shall make ten Steps, or degrees,
as follows.

Having left 4 squares A B, beginning at the point A, which holds the place
of the Wall, we will raise a good height the Perpendicule B, then the second C,
and the third D, and so from the other Angles of the squares, until that one
have made the 10. which we have here: This being done on the one side; you
shall do as much on the other, and all these Perpendicules shall give the
depths of the steps.

For the height, if they have one foot of depth, or breadth, we shall give them
one half foot of height, which is the half of the little square A O: this
height being taken with a compass, we must set it upon the first corner, which
shall serve as for the line of elevation, beginning all below at the point A,
and to mark it as many times, as we would make Steps, as here 10 unto the first
Rest, from which we begin to ascend again on the other side opposite, where
which we shall take again the Rest of the numbers following are marked there on
the one side, and other unto the 23.

From all these 23 points, we must draw to the point of sight E, and to take
heed to divide the Perpendicules, according to their order, that is to say,
that having placed the rule upon the first point, and at the point of sight E;
we must divide the first Perpendicular B, unto C, with a small draught for the
first Step: For the second Step, we must from the second point divide the
second Perpendicular C; unto D And so of all as well of one side, as the other

From all the Angles of these small draughts between the Perpendiculars, we
must draw parallels to the Horizon, unto the Wall F, which is raised in the
midst, as are the small draughts I I I I, which I have made only on one side,
for to avoid confusion. It is only these parallels, which must frame the Steps:
All that is, made unto that, ought to be of occult lines, which ought not to be
seen, when the figure is finished.

The Rests ought to be taken from the defect of the last Perpendiculars unto
the Wall, as from G, unto H, their thickness H K, is of one half foot, as of
one Step.

The figure below, is the same wi^h that above; but this is made, and the other
shows how it ought to be made.



Stairs winding upright, in Perspective.
YOU must set upon the base one side of the Ascent, and divide it into so many
Parts, as you would set steps there: for example, the side of the stairs let be
the distance A B, if you would have 16 steps for the whole Circuit of the
square, each side shall have four: This is, why this Measure A B being divided
into four, you must make thereof a square divided into sixteen, according to
the Orders afore-going.

From all the outward divisions which divide into four the lines of each side,
you must raise Perpendicules which will give the bounds of the steps. Let then
the Perpendicules be A A, B B, C C, D D, E E. This E E made for three, by
reason that the point is in the midst; for that it serves for the Nuell or
Spindle, which is the Center of all, and the half of the line before, and of
that of the bottom, there follow F F, G G, H H, I I, K K, L L, M M, N N, O O, P
P.

You must set upon the first Perpendicule A. which we will make to serve for
lines of elevation, the height of one step or degree Q A: And from the point Q,
you must draw to the point of sight X, for to have the Measures of all the
steps at the sections of the Perpendiculars Q R S T V: A Q is the height of the
first, F R of the second, G S of the third, H T of the fourth, and I V of the
fifth; this of all those of the bottom, as A Q, is of all those before.

Seeing that G S is the measure of the third, which is the midst of the side;
it must also be the measure of the Center, and of the Nuell of the stairs;
therefore having taken this Measure G S, with the Compasses, we must carry it
to the Center of the square; and mark it in going upwards, as many times as we
would set steps in the whole Ascent, as I have set it here eighteen times for
eighteen steps or degrees.

All being ordered in this manner, the rest is easy enough, seeing that for to
make the first step, we must take the measure A Q, and carry it upon the
Perpendicular D, to the point I; and from this point I to make a Parallel unto
the other Perpendicule B; then from these two points I I, upon the
Perpendiculars to draw to the other I, which is at the Center of the square;
these three III will frame the first step. For the second, seeing that its
Corner comes to the Perpendicule B, which is on the side before, you must give
it the same measure A Q, which shall be 1, 2. And from the point 2, to draw to
the point of fight X, for to divide the Perpendicule P, or the point 2, from
the which points 2, 2, Perpendiculars, you must draw to 2 of the Center, which
will frame the second step. For the third, seeing that it meets upon the
Perpendicular P, you must take the measure F R for its height, and do as at the
second; and so of all the others.

He that would make them round, needs but only to reduce the square into
Round, according to the Orders aforegoing, and he shall have the same facility
wholly as in the square, in whatsoever remains.



Squares set into Round, in Perspective.
THIS Order is the same that we have given in the Planes, for to set into
Perspective; the Round divided into 8, as one may see in the figure A, where
the perfect Round of the forepart of the Cube, gives the draught how to
abridge that above; And that above with that before, for to abridge all the
other sides; as we see the Figure B, where the Round is abridged on three
sides, and at the other C, where it is of all the faces of the Cube.

The third Figures D E F, are pierced or hollowed, each on two sides, according
to the Plane of the Figure, where the Round A, as we see the Cube D, pierced by
the face before, and through that we see the bottom pierced; likewise E is
pierced by the sides, and F by the upper part and the face, which lies upon
the Ground, which cannot be seen, supposing that the Cube be of matter, which
is not transparent.

These three Figures which are under, are as the Pieces which one has drawn
from each Cube; this G should be drawn from the Cube D, H is drawn from the
cube E, and I is drawn from the cube F.

That which causes to understand the easiness of setting all square Figures
into Round, and that one shall not be troubled to set Columns in what place
soever he would. The reason why I have set none of them heretofore, has been
for to render the Elevations more easy to conceive, and to facilitate the
Orders; the which being well understood and remembered, one shall be able to
make a round figure of whatsoever he will; This is the beginning of Columns. We
shall further speak, how one ought to proceed for to make them perfect.



Round Stairs, in Perspective.
FOR to elevate these three Stairs, or round Steps viewed by the front, which
are in the first figure, we must make a Plane of three Rounds the one within
the other, as it has bin said in the Planes, fol. 28. And from all the points
that frame the round to draw Parallels to the Base, unto the Ray A, which is
the foot of the line of Elevation A B, which shall give the elevations by the
Ordinary Rule, which must be taken with the Compasses, and to carry them upon
the perpendicules elevated from the Points of the Plane, as we have done at the
Pilasters, set into Round.

Round stairs viewed from the side in Perspective.
THE Order of Figures or Objects viewed from the side, is altogether the same
with that of those of the front; But that it may be known that we are not
always bound to follow the division of the Circle into 16. I have made those of
the side into 8, as may be seen in the Circle made of Points in the Figure,
which is not shadowed; for all the Rest, it is as in other Orders; the line of
elevation C D, which is drawn to the point of sight E.

1. Fig.
2. fig.


For the winding stairs, or turning Ascent.
THIS Figure is the same with that before-going, which I have not shadowed, on
purpose to make the Order to be the better understood. And for this reason I
have reserved for this, the Tree, or the Nuell of the Ascent, which one may
find by making at the center A, a Round in Perspective, or rather a
demi-round, seeing that we can see but the half as is B C, at which demi-circle
we must draw lines to the Center A, from all the divisions of the square of the
first Plane, which will give G E F G H I K, which will divide this Arch B C
into eight parts. And from the section O we must raise Perpendicules, and
observe that they shall divide justly at the point, where we must place the
steps or degrees, which we shall have made: as for example, the step I, shall
be divided by the Perpendicule elevated from its point upon the demi-round, as
we see in A: the other step after which is the second, shall be divided by the
Perpendicular of the point, which K shall have made at the demi-round; and so
of all the others.

The rest which is in the figure, as the doors and the windows, shall be made
according to the foregoing Orders.



Of Columns or Pillars in Perspective.
THat which we are speaking of, is not only for the Cube, but it ought also to
serve for all that we would make round. For example, if from the square A you
would elevate a round piece, you must make a round within this square,
according to the ordinary Orders; and at the height, which one would give to
this piece, to make also another square, and a round within, as is B. For to
know to give the 2 lines D E, which make the thickness, or the Diameter of the
round: We must take notice where the round divides the Diagonal of the square,
and to hold for a general maxim, that it ought always to be taken at the round
pieces seen from the side, as it is in the figure C, that the Perpendicules are
elevated from the section of the round, upon the Diagonal of the square, at the
points D E

For the pieces viewed by the Front, as the figure F, they ought always to
possess the Demy-round G H I, and to elevate the Perpendicules of the Diameter
right G H, and from the one and the other, as well on Front, as on Side, we
must elevate a line from the Center, which shall serve to give the Diminutions
to the Columns.

For these three pieces below besides that they serve to make the others seen
clearly, and with their shadows, they serve also for to show how we must
proceed for the Columns. This piece of the midst K, is exactly round, without
ornament, nor intent to make any there: The second marked L, causes to be
seen, that when we desire to make a base there, we ought upon the square, which
must serve for a Plinthe, whereof M N is the upper part to make a double round
whereof the distance from one to the other, may be the Projector of the base,
and the round from within the plane of the shaft of the Column, from which they
shall raise the Perpendicules.

The third marked O, is a Column with its Ornaments which every one may make at
his pleasure, and we must take notice that the uppermost square of the Capital
answer to the Plinthe or top of the basie,



Of Cornishes and Mouldings in Perspective.
IN pursuit of Columns, which are the principal Ornament of Architecture, we
will set the Cornishes or Mouldings, with their Projectors, which we have not
set hitherto, for fear of giving confusion to the Elevations, which it behooves
to be understood with clearness and easiness.

It is true that there are not many Buildings made, which have not some few
Mouldings and Projector for their Ornament, for to make them more pleasing to
the eye: where-I thought fit to set here the manner, not of framing them,
seeing that depends on the pleasure of every one, nor to give them their
Measures and Projectors, for that were to oblige my self to sit down here, the
Orders of Architecture, and a thousand other Inventions of Ornaments, which one
may find elsewhere, and which I suppose are known. But only to set them into
Perspective, according to the Orders following, when any shall have occasion
for such an Order.

For to set then the Ornaments for a Pilaster in Perspective, we must take the
Measures upon the middle line of some other with its Ornaments, as is A B, of
which having taken the breadth, and made a square Plane in the ordinary way; and
from this square to elevate from all the Angles Perpendiculars, we shall frame
the body or solid part of the Pilaster.

Then we must only take that which projects it self from the body; for example,
the base of the Pilaster C, and transport its measures as in D E. for to set it
in Perspective round about the Pilaster: we must from the point of distance F
draw a line Diagonal, which passes forth of the square to the point E unto G,
it is no matter for the length: Then from the point A to make a Ray passing to
the lower part of the Projector H; and at the point where this Ray shall divide
the Diagonal at I, it shall be the advancement of the whole base: the same Ray
A H shall give the Projector of the bottom, by dividing the other Diagonal at
the point K: Then for the Projector before, we must from the point I draw a
Parallel to the base, until that it divide the Diagonal, which shall give the
other Corner of the Projector before at the point L; then drawing lines of the
height of the Base unto these points, as are M to L, from D to I, from N to K,
you shall have the breadth and the hight of all the Base; The Capital is made
of the same fashion. Here is for the first figures above.

Those below shall Cause the rest to be known, and shall avoid Confusion. For
the Pilasters O, we must observe that above P, where the line D H, bears all
the sections of the base; Wherefore from the point of sight A, we must draw
Rays, the which passing by the divisions of D H, must mark them upon the lines
D I, and N K; And drawing Parallels from the points of D I, to M L, there will
be no more then to give the Turnings about, or wheelings as the shape of the
Colum. When you shall meet with squares, or Flat-bands, either above or below
they are made by Perpendicular. As for to make the Plinth, you must raise
Perpendiculars from the Points L I K; the from the point of sight A, to pass by
the Corner of the Plinth Q, it will give the height upon the Perpendicules I,
and K. Then L must be equal to L.

I believe that this Instruction for the Base, will suffice for to make the
Capital being the same Order. This last Pilaster R, is only for to cause one
to be seen without being mingled with lines. We have broken them, for to make
the Bases and Capital to be seen, not having had space Enough for to make them
appear whole,



A great Cornish above the Horizon in Perspective.
IT is the same Order with that which we have explained, but as it is somewhat
difficult by the multitude of lines, I thought it convenient to set it down
again here, for to avoid confusion.

I say then, that having taken the pourfill of the Projector and the Cornish,
that one would make, we must set it at the place, where one would make it, as C
which is the pourfill is at the corner of the Wall A B, for to find the height
which it ought to have, and to make those below seen, we must from the point of
sight D, draw a Ray passing by the end of the pourfill E, as is D F; then to
make a line Diagonal from the point of distance H, passing by the corner of the
Wall B, and to continue it until that it divide the Ray D E at the point F,
from which you shall draw the line F G, which must be the Angle in Perspective,
for to receive all the measures F G, the corner of the other end of the Wall K
L, is drawn from the other distance I, as being the other Diagonal.

In the figure marked 2. we shall see, that all the figures which are upon the
line M N, must be transported by visual Rays from the point of sight D, upon
the line N O, for to draw Parallels to the Horizon from all these points, which
shall give the whole Cornish perfect. But before we pass any further, we must
mark, as I have already said, that all the flat-bands and squares are made by
Perpendiculars. For example, for to make this great square of the Cornish,
having made the Wave or Ogee, and the filet under the filet, which must be the
height of the square, we must abase the Perpendicule, P Q. Then for to know
where it must be divided for to make the under part be seen, we must draw from
the point of distance I, by the point above the quarter of the round R, unto
the Perpendicule P Q. and you shall have that which you seek. That which I have
said of the great square, must be understood of little ones, as are small
mouldings, the filets, etc because that they must all make that below to be
seen.

The third figure shows, that having found all the points, and drawn Rays
upon this line, from the Angle S T, we must there trace out or shape the
mouldings out proportionally: I mean, that when these shall project themselves,
as this here does, because that its point of distance is near, we must help the
mouldings, that is to say, a little bend down the quarter of the Round, set up
the Ogee, enlarge the filets, and mark at one end the same that at the other;
as at V X, the same that at S T after that, there is no more but to draw
parallels to the base, and all shall be done

The fourth figure shows the Cornish wholly made: I have drawn parallels from
all the points of the line of the Angle Y Z; I have made an end of the Wall to
pass upon the Cornish, for to give to understand, that one has liberty for to
make it throughout, and that our rule is general for to make it where they
would.



For to find the under parts of the Great Projectors.
FOR to find the Projector of the Crown of the Body, or of the Wall A; We must
from the Corner of the quarter of the round B, make as small line of the length
that one would have that it come forth, as is B C, then from the point of sight
D, to draw a Ray, E, passing by the end of the Measure C. After that you make a
Diagonall from the distance F, and make it to pass by the quarter of the Round
B, and the section that it shall make at the Ray D E, at the point G, that
shallbe the under part, as well of the bottom as of the side, as is B H, the
which one may see more clearly in the opposite, in the body marked K

The Projector of the Body, or Wall marked L, is made as the first marked A:
There is only this difference, that the Body L, has the Projector M N, greater
by one half, then that above B C, for to Show that by the same Order, one may
make as great, and as short, as one will.

One may observe further in this same Body L, how we must find the Return of
the Project, and of the Hollow; we must from a quarter of the Round of the
bottom of the wall at the point O, draw a Diagonal to the distance opposite P;
and the section of this line upon the Ray E D, shall be the point for to make a
little Parallels to the Horizon R Q, which shall be that which was demanded.

This may serve for all the squares, which are met with in Cornishes and
Mouldings as well great, as little.

The Body, or Wall, marked S, makes the Mouldings of the Body I, to be seen
clearly.



Of the Cornishes and Mouldings under the Horizon.
THE Orders are the same with the foregoing: But because of an Accident which
happens sometimes by the diversity of Horizons one might be in some trouble,
not knowing the reason wherefore that comes to pass,

I say then, that when we see Cornishes, which are below our eyes, and by
consequence below the Horizon; the Advancings which the Projectors cause, do
hide from us, sometimes the half, and sometimes less or more, according as one
is raised above them.

For to find justly that which should be covered, and that which should not
be, we must set, as we have said, the Pourfil or Mid-line of the Moulding at
the Corner of the Body which we would adorn, and having found the line of the
Angle, as we have said in the Orders aforegoing, there we must draw the
divisions of the Pourfil; and we shall find that the square or the flat-band,
will wholly cover the Astragal or small Boultel below, or the demi-round, and
will suffer but the half of the Filet to be seen; As is to be seen, that having
drawn a line from the point of sight A, by the Pourfil B C, it divides the
Perpendicular of the line of the Angle at the point D; which makes known that
which ought to be covered; for the moulding below, it is the same thing with
the Orders foregoing.

1. fig.
2. fig.


For Cornishes with many Returns.
WHEN there are many Returns in the Cornishes or Mouldings, they must always
take their under-parts from the points of the distances, as may be seen, that
having drawn the Rays A and B, at the point of sight E: We must from the point
of distance C or D, make a Diagonal passing by the corner of a quarter of the
Round O, until that it divide the Ray A or B at the point I, from the which
point I we must make a Parallel to the base, for to have the under-part, or the
Projector of the square, even as I have said at fol. 98.

I would willingly have made a greater Cornish, seeing that it would not have
bin more difficult, but the paper has obliged me to content my self with this.

If one would make Returns by the Ground, as these are upon the Horizon, he
must observe the same Order; And for proof of that which I say, turn this Paper
upside down, and you shall see the same effects.



For the Openings of Doors in Perspective.
SEeing that hitherto we have followed very near the Order which they keep in
raising of Buildings; whatsoever they be, we ought to follow in teaching the
manner of Garnishing them, and making them fitting for to lodge in: I will
begin by the doors of wood; afterward we will speak of other Openings, as of
Windows, Cupboards, Chests, etc. Then of Movables, Tables, Beds, Chairs,
Coffers, Settles, Benches, etc,

All the doors, which are made for to open and shut, depend of the Will of
every one, who may open them more or less, as he pleases; wherefore I will
teaeh to set them into Perspective, at such opening as one would have.

We must observe that the Doors, Windows, Cupboards, Chests, and in short all
things that may open and shut, do make always a demi-round in their whole
opening. The reason is, that the side which is fastened by the hinges or hooks,
does not stir from its place; and the other side moves and makes a
demi-Circle, as a pair of Compasses would do.

For example, in the Plane under the Figure, if the side fastened be at the
point A, and the other side at B, if you would open the door fully, the side B
shall make the demi-round B C D, whereof the center shall be A, as one may see:
from whence one may know, that if the door has theee feet of breadth, as these
have; it shall have also three feet for its Diameter A C; And 6 feet for the
Diameter entire B A D, of which six feet in length, and 3 of breadth, we must
make a Plane of 18 little squares, for which we shall make the demi-round A B C
D, for to give a facility to make the same demi-rounds in the Perspective. by
observing where the demi-round of the Plane divides the little squares, for to
divide in the same proportion those of the Perspective, and there to make a
demi-round, which shall take up as many of the little squares, and shall divide
them in the same place, as we see at the door E, where the sections are marked,
as in the plane below 1, 2, 3; 4, 5, 6, 7.

When one would make an open door in Perspective, he must upon its Plane make a
demi-round; then to set the point of the opening in what place he will, upon
this demi-round; as for the door E, the point of the opening is at the point 2.
from this point 2, he must elevate a Perpendicular 2. H. And again from the
same point 2, draw a line passing by the corner of the door F, and continue it
until that it divide the Horizon which is at the point G, from which he must
draw another line, making it to pass by the other corner of the door I, and to
continue it till it divide the Perpendicule raised from the point 2, which
shall be at the point H, and you shall have the door open, as is F I H, 2.

All the Openings are made by the same Rules, as are seen by the doors K and L;
the door K shows its outside, and the door L shows its inside;
nevertheless, the one and the other are ordered in the manner as the first; the
point accidental of K is the point M, within the Horizon. And that of the door
L is O. If one make to these doors, bars, locks, and such like things, they
must be drawn from the same accidental point, as the bar and the lock of the
door L, draw to the point O. These are the points which they call Accidental,
as I have expressed in the beginning of our Orders, and all the Openings make
but one within the Horizon, except two sorts of Openings. The one when the door
is wholly opened, for then it has its point at the point of sight, because it
is at the wall. The other, when it is Parallels to the Horizon, because the
Parallels never divide themselves but are drawn right, as is the door N.



For the Openings of Windows in Perspective.
ALL the difference that there is in the openings of windows, from those of the
doors, is, that the doors have the demi-round of their opening upon the Plane,
and the windows have it in the Air: by reason that the windows make their
Openings being elevated from the Ground, and the doors do grate upon it:
wherefore we must make this demi-round above or below the windows; and within
this demi-round to take the point for to open them.

For example, if the side of the window has 2 small squares of breadth, as A B,
and that one give it its whole opening, it will take up two more squares C A,
whereof A is the middle, and the center of the demi-circle A B C. But by reason
that the windows are elevated from the Ground, the demi-round also must be
elevated, as they are here above the windows from the corners D and E, which
are the centers of these demi-rounds, which shall be easily framed, raising
Perpendiculars from the squares, which are between C and B, until that they
divide the Rays, which pass by the corners of the windows D E. And from these
sections you must draw to the base, and give them the measures of the little
squares of the plane 1, 2, 3. from which points 1, 2, 3. on high, you must draw
lines to the point of sight F, which shall divide the Parallels of points, and
frame the little squares, for to make the rounds of the openings, which shall
be taken in the same manner as at the doors; as if one give within the highest
demi-round the point G, for the point of the opening from this point G, you
must draw 2 lines, the one which falls plumbe G H, the other which passes by
the corner of the window E, for to divide the Horizon where it can, which is
here the point I; from this point I you must also a line by the corner of the
window K, until that it divide the line plumb at the point H, which shall give
the window open K E G H; we must do the same of all the others, and take the
point within the Horizon; as L is the point for the window M; and N is that of
the window O. The window P has none, being Parallel to the Horizon.

The windows which are opposite are made by the same method, without the
confusion of lines, the one and the other are equal with the wall, for to
facilitate the ordering thereof. The door at the bottom is made as we have
said, and the window follows the Method of these.

For the Opening of the windows with Chamfrettings.
THE Order of this is as the others upon the side of the wall, except that
these cannot be opened wholly, by reason of the thickness of the Chamfring;
which causes, that the whole demi-circle is not allowed, but as much as the
opening can have of it. They ought always to take their point within the
Horizon, as we see Q and R, for the opening of the windows on high; that below
is Parallel to the Horizon.



Of diverse other Openings.
THE Openings of Cupboards and of Chests, are at least as Necessary, as those
of Doors, and Windows; and the fault would not be less to forget these, then
not to set down those. Let us see the Order in these two Figures.

The Cup-boards A, are opened according to the Orders of the Windows, and it
would be loss of time to busy Ones-self in repeating them here, we are to
observe only, that one height is Parallel to the Horizon, and the other below
draws to the point of distance B.

This Manner of Shop, which is on the other side, has its Opening with two
Shuts, whereof one is lifted on high, and the other comes down below, and each
makes its demi-round from the Center C and D which one makes with the
Compasses then we may take the Openings where we will, as here at the point E,
from which we draw a Ray to the point of sight F, until we divide the
demi-rounds of the other end, at the point G, from which points E G, we must
draw to the Centers C D, for to have the Shuts, which close up the Shop as we
see.

In the figure below, there are 3 Chests opened several ways for to open the
first H, I have made the quarter of a round M, in Perspective, following the
Measure of the little squares of the Plane, keeping the breadth of the Chest, as
this is of 2 little squares, from which we must raise Perpendiculars, and
thereof frame the half or quarter of a Round, for the opening which we may take
at pleasure, as here the point N, from which we must draw a Parallel unto the
other quarter of the round O, and from these 2 points N O, to draw to the
Center P, If we would open it wider, we must make a demi-round instead of a
quarter.

The Chest I, is the most easy of all the Openings; for having taken the
breadth of the Chest Q R, we must from the center R, make with the Compasses the
demi-round Q S. Then to take what opening you will, as T, and to draw a Ray to
the point of sight V, which shall divide the other demi-round at the point X,
and from these 2 points T X, to the corners R.

He that would open them further, has but to set the point of the opening
higher, within the demi-rounds as Y, is to the Coffer K; All the rest is
ordered like as in the Coffer I, as one may see.



Of planes, and the first elevations of movables.
I Had set these planes in their order, among the others, had there not been
one consideration, which made me defer them until now, which is, that if I had
handled them in the beginning, without making known the necessity thereof, they
would have been also too soon forgot and held as unuseful: they are now more
seasonable, and without doubt they will be well received, pleasing, and learned
with pleasure, seeing there are not only movables, nor pieces of
household stuff, which depend not thereon.

The first plane A, serves for Beds, Tables, Chairs, Stools, low Stools, etc.
The other B, which bears in length, two times its breadth, serves for long
Tables, Cabinet, Court Cup-boards, Coffers, Trunks. The third C, which is long
and narrow, serves for Benches or Forms, and other things which have need of
six Feet, or Pillars, as great Tables, and Cup-boards.

The knowledge that one has of other planes, will give the facility of making
these, seeing there is nothing but to set their measures upon the base, to draw
them to the point of sight, and to abridge them by the points of distances.

For example, for the plane A, you must set upon the base these two measures D
E, and draw them to the point of sight F, then from one of the distances, you
must draw to one of these measures, as here E, to the distance G, and where
that shall divide the Rays at the points H I, you must draw parallels, for to
frame the 4 little squares, which one may make to be for as much, or as little
as he will. Because for a Table, they must be of more bigness then for a settle
or stool, that is to say, that they must have more breadth, for if for this we
allow 2 inches, for that there must be four.

The plane B, is made of the same manner, except that by reason of its length,
which is the double of the breadth, we must draw from the point B, to one of
the distances, for to find the half K, for if one should draw from the point L,
he would divide at the point M, which would be the whole square; and we would
have but the half: Wherefore from the point K, we must draw parallels to the
sections of the Ray; and from the corner L, we shall divide also the Ray for
the first squares at the point N.

The other plane C, has no need of explication; for we see well, that it is
made as that A, and that you must double the square for to have 6 little
squares.

We see at the figure below, that from all the Angles of these squares, you
must raise Perpendiculars for to begin to give the frame to the pieces that we
shall make hereafter.



Of the Elevation of Movables.
HAving raised the Perpendiculars of the Plane, as aforesaid, we must in some
Place of the Picture make the line of Elevation, upon the which we shall set
the cross-lines or Travers, and the height that one would give them.

For example, the line C D shall be the line of Elevation, and C E and D F
shall be the bredths for the Travers; from all these four points, we must draw
in some place within the Horizon, as here at the point G. Then having from the
Planes A B, raised the Perpendiculars from all the Angles, we must from the
same Angles draw Parallels to the base unto the Ray C G, which is the bottom of
the line of Elevation, which will give the points 1, 2, 3, 4. which we must
raise into Perpendiculars; and the sections which these Perpendiculars shall
make, at the Ray C E, D F, shall be the points to divide the Perpendiculars of
the Planes, whither we carry them with the Compasses, or that we divide them
with Parallels, as we see in the Figure. That drawing a Parallel from the point
E, we shall divide the first Perpendicules of the Planes A B, at the points O,
from which drawing to the point of sight H, we shall divide the other
Perpendiculars of the Planes at the points P; and doing the same from the point
F, we shall frame a Cube pierced round on all sides, or composed of square
pieces; the which being well understood, we shall easily make all the Pieces
following, and whatsoever other may be.

It is easy to see that the two frames or feet of the Tables I and K, are made
by the same Order that those above A B, they having no difference but in the
Bar below, which is more elevated in the line of Elevation at the point L,
which gives the Bar M, and that which is under may be made into Bowls, or
to leave the feet square as they are.

For the latter frame N and Q, there is no more then in I and K, except that
they are seen by the Angle, and the others are seen in front: the Planes of
these I and K draw to the point of sight R, and these draw to the distances S T.

These Figures shows the ordering of all Pieces of Household Stuff; for
example, if of the Figures I or K, we would make a bed, there is nothing but to
give to it its breadth and height: for it is the same Order in all the rest; and
if one would make a low stool or flat base for a Table; there is nothing but to
make that above for a stool; besides that above, we must give it more height
then breadth, but all the rest is ordered in the same manner.



For to make the upper part of Tables, Stools, etc.
HAving raised the Perpendicules from the plane, as we have spoken, and given
the height, that we would they should have, we shall have the frame, for to
make there an upper part wholly by the line, and which passes not the frame;
we have only to leave the upper part of the cube, without marking any thing
there, and this shall be the uppermost, be it of a Table, Stools, low-stools,
etc.

But if one would that the upper part should have any Projector or Border, we
must from one of the corners of the Frame, or foot of the Table, draw a little
parallel as A B, and upon this parallel set the measure of the Projector one
would give it, as we have set here A B. Then from the distances C and D, we
must from the corners of the square made of points, which is the breadth of the
Frame, or feet of the Table, draw small occult lines, as are A E. Now for to
know how this measure A B, shall give in Perspective the breadth equal to all
the sides, and corners of the Table; We must from the point of sight F, draw a
Ray, passing by the point B, and continue it until that it divide the line C A
E, which shall be at the point G: from this point G we must make a parallel
which shall divide the other occult line at the point H. Then drawing from the
points G H, to the point of sight F, we shall divide the other lines Diagonal
of the corners at the points L and K, and then we shall have the upper part of
the Table, with the Projector which we have given to the line A B.

For the thickness of this upper part, we may give it at pleasure.

This order may serve for to make the upper parts in all whatsoever we would,
whether they be above or below the Horizon, whether they be on the front, or
sides; In short, they make them all after the same manner.



For to Elevate a Court-Cupboard and Cabinet.
HAving made the Plane, and Elevated Perpendiculars from all the Angles, as we
have said, we shall set upon the line A B, which shall serve here for the line
of Elevation, the Measures that we will give, as well to the distance of the
boards, as in their thickness, as are C D E, from the which points C D E, we
must draw Parallels to the Base, unto the other Ascent or Column F G. Then from
the points which shall be marked upon this Ascent G F, we must draw Rays to the
point of sight H, unto the other Ascent of the Hollow I K. This Hollow is given
at pleasure, setting upon the base, that which we will give it; for example,
for to have the hollow or breadth of this Cupboard, I have set the Measure F L,
from this point L, we must draw to the distance M, and where the Ray F H shall
be divided at the point L, that shall be the place of the last Ascent.

The Cup-board which is over against on the other side, is ordered in the same
manner, and for to find the Measure of this little Cabinet which is in the
midst, bore up by two little Columns, we must take the points L P, which are in
the midst of Q N, and the breadth of the little Cabinet, and draw them to the
distance O; and where the Ray N H shall be divided, we must draw Parallels to
the base, which shall divide the Ray T H at the point V, from which raising
Perpendiculars, we shall have for the little Cabinet of the middle.

The great Cabinet of the second figure, are of the same Order with the Court
Cup-boards above. There is none but that of the midst, which is at the bottom,
which we must a little explain, by reason that it is of the front, and that one
might be in some trouble for to determine its hollow, I say then, we must frame
its Plane, as we have said heretofore, and as we see it finished in the half;
for to give it the Traverses equal to the first in the forepart; we must from
the first Ascent R, draw occult Rays to the first Perpendicular of the hollow
S, and there to make little sections, from which we must draw little Paralels
to the base; and we shall have that we desire.



For the Elevations of Chairs.
FOR to elevate a Chair, you must of the Measures A B C, make a Plane by the
ordinary Rules, and from the Angles of this Plane, elevate Perpendicules, and
follow the same Method that we have given, speaking of the feet of the Table,
or of the frames for windows, without the upper part: there is nothing more in
this then the Back of the Chair, which one may make of such an height as they
will: here it is the height of A, unto the seat K, and this height is as well
for the single Chairs, as for those with Rests to lean on. We see sufficiently
by the Figure, that for to make them with backs, we must only prolong the
Perpendicules of the Ascents on the side, that we would make it, as is here the
first A E; and from the point E drawing to the point of sight G. We shall
divide where it ought the Ascent elevated from the Plane, or from the foot H,
which shall be the point F. The rest is clear enough by the Figure.

When we would have Rests there, we need only to prolong the Ascents before, as
they have made these behind for the back. Then to make there a Bar which
serves for a Rest, as is L M.

In the second Figure below you see a Form or a Bench garnished with carving,
and two little Couches to rest in, whereof one has the back turned on this
side, and the other viewed obliquely: It would be to lose the time to instruct
how to make them, seeing that the Order to elevate them, is the fame with the
foregoing, which we have given for the Movables, which is, that having made
the Plane, we must elevate Perpendiculars, etc.



One other fashions of Movables in Perspective.
CErtain movables, which close themselves. Those which they make to serve for
Seats, Tables, and Beds, etc. are very easy to set into Perspective.

We must only make the elevation, as if for a Cube; as is A B, C D, or E F G H.
Then to make there two Diagonals A C, and B D, for that of the midst of the
Front, or E H, and F G, for that of the side, which shall serve to bring in the
2 crosses, to take notice, that there be an half which enters within the
other, as G K, do pass within H I; and the one and the other are fastened by the
midst for to make them bend.

In this piece which is below, I have made a Table upon Tressels, that we may
have the smallest movables for to set them into Perspective. We must from the
measures A B, which is the interval for the Feet of the Tressels, draw to the
point of sight C: Then having set upon the base the thickness of the same Feet,
as are D and E, we must draw them to the point of distance F, and observe where
we shall divide the Ray B C for to draw little parallels to the base, which
shall give the little squares, or the planes of the Feet, as we see in A B,
between this distance D and E, we must set the breadth, which we will give to
the top of the Tressel, and draw it to the distance F, which shall divide the
Ray B C, at the points G H, from the which points G H, we must elevate 2
Perpendiculars, to such an height as we would have, as here at the point I.
Then from the Angles of the small squares of the plane, to draw lines bending
unto the piece I. The second Tressel is ordered all alike with the first

The form K, nor the Table, or high Stool L, have no need of Explication, nor
Instruction for to set them into order, seeing that they have nothing, which is
not common to them, with the foresaid pieces.



Of Movables set without Order.
WHen the movables are set in order along by the Wall, or according to the
Rays and the base, it is easy to set them into Perspective, by the Rules that
we have given; but supposing that one set them by chance, and without order, as
these are, we must do as I shall say. You must make the Geometrical plane R S
T, for the plane of three Chairs, which you must abridge by the Order that we
have set at the irregular figure, Fol 40. and the planes shall remain turned,
as are the Chairs, or rather the Chairs turned, as are the planes.

I say then, that having set these planes into Perspective, as it is taught,
you must set the Rule along by one of the sides, for to see what accidental
point, you shall have within the Horizon: For example, having set the Rule
along by the side A B, I shall have within the Horizon the point C, for the
accidental point, at which we ought to draw all the lines of this side, and of
that which is opposite to it, as we see that A and D, draw to the same point C:
It is true that every plane set irregularly must have 2; But they meet sometime
so far within the Horizon that it is a hazard when one can find them both
together These have each one within the Horizon, as A B, gives C. A D, which
is the other side, should give another point, but our paper is not long enough.
E F, gives G And H I, gives K, for these small squares 1.2.3.4. they are the
plains of the Feet of these Chairs, which one may make more large, or more
straight, at the pleasure of the Artist.

Now from these planes, you must elevate Perpendicules from all the Angles, and
set on the side a line of elevation M N, upon the which we must set the measure
for the Travers, as O, shall be for the Bars below, P, for the bars of the
seat. And Q shall be for the backs of the Chairs. All being disposed thus, we
must from the Angles of the plane draw parallels to the base, unto the line of
Elevation, and at the section to elevate Perpendicules, which shall give the
measures, as we have said of other figures heretofore.

All the lines of the sides ought to draw to the point accidental of the
plane: For example, in the chair of the midst, all the sides ought to draw to
the point G, which is the point of the plane, as I make it to be seen in the
figure.



Of Movables lying or thrown upon the Ground.
FRom the same Plane of the Chairs aforegoing, which are upon their feet, it is
easy to make these which are cast upon the Ground.

We must raise Perpendiculars from all the Angles of the Plane, and give to the
Side lying the same Measures, as to the side upright: For example, having
raised Perpendiculars from all the Angles of the Plane, we shall have the
breadth M, which is in the Chair lying upon its side, which draws to the point
K; we must double this Measure M, which will give O for the Bar below of the
Chair, and the Perpendicules elevated from the Plane, will give the Bar of the
Seat P; from which drawing to the point K, we shall divide the other
Perpendiculars of the front at the place that it ought, for to make the same
Bars appear from all the sides whence they may be seen; for the height of the
back of the Chair, there is but only to give to it the same Measure that the
Seat has of height: And for the back of that in the midst, you must double the
Diagonal on the Plane, and take notice where it divides the Rays or Ascents
lying R S. the rest is clear enough.

The two other Pieces which are under the feet upwards are very easy to make:
the one draws to the point of sight T, the other to the point of distance V
X, the line of Elevation is Y Z.

The Order for to elevate these is the same, as to make them upon their feet,
that is to say, that we must raise these Perpendiculars from the Angles of the
Plane, and from the same Angles to draw to the line of Elevation, which will
give the Measures which we must give to every Ascent, and the place for the
Travers, as well above as below.



For to set Altars into Perspestive.
THE Order of Altars, is the same with that of the frames of a long Table: that
which is more in this, is the Round of the midst, the Borders of the
Table-cloth, and the Laces which shall be found in their place, doing that
which follows.

First, for the body of the Altar, which we see in front there is no
difficulty: for having given to it the height and length, there is nothing but
to draw from all the points above the base, to the point of sight E, and from
the sections that these points shall give to the line of the bottom of the
Altar, you must raise Perpendicules for the Round of the midst, it is made with
the Compass. The rest is clear enough within the Figure.

For to make an Altar on the side, we must set the breadth and height, which we
should give it at the place where we would begin it, as is A B the breadth, and
B D the height. Then from B D and C to draw to the point of sight E, seeing
that B F is the length of the body of the Altar, and that we would give the
same to this, we must from the point F draw to the distance G, and take notice
where we shall divide the Ray B E, and from the section elevate a little
Perpendicular, until that it touch the Ray D at the point H, and from H to make
a little Parallel, which shall give I at the Ray C, and then we shall have the
upper part of the Altar C D H I: for to have these two laces which are on one
part, and the other of the Round: the points K L will give them upon the Ray B
E, by drawing them to the distance G, and M will give the breadth of the Borders
of the Table-cloth; and having taken the measure B M, we must bring it to D,
which will give O, for the breadth of the Border of the Tablecloth on high As
concerning the Round, I will not repeat that, for I have spoke of it elsewhere,
where any may have learned, how it is set into Perspective, it is enough that
we know, that from all the divisions we must draw to the distance G: And at the
sections of the Ray B to raise Perpendicules; then to take these same Measures,
and transport them from B unto O, as are P; And from all these Measures to draw
to the point of sight E, and to observe where they shall divide the occult
Perpendiculars, for to make by these points a crooked line, which shall give
the Rounds in Perspective. If instead of these laces, and of the Round, there
were an Embroidery, we should use the same Order for to abbreviate it

In the Figure below I have made the same Altar without line, and adorned with
a Cross and two Candlesticks; for to find the place of these Candlesticks, we
must prolong the line of the corner of the Altar, as is Q R; then from the
distance G draw a line by the corner of the Altar T, and to continue it until
that it divide that Q R; and this line Q R shall be the length of the Altar,
equal to B F of the first figure, upon the which we shall set the Measures of
the Cross and of the Candlesticks, as are V for the Cross, and S for the
Candlesticks; from all these points S V we must draw to the distance G, and
take notice that at the sections of the Ray Q E, we must draw little Parallels,
which we shall divide by the Ray S E, and will give the squares above the Altar
X for the Cross. We must leave the square for the foot, and from the midst of
the square elevate the Cross; for to find the Measure of the Arms of the
Cross, we must from the corners of the square raise the occult Perpendiculars,
as it is marked Y, and draw to the point of sight E for the Candlesticks Of
this square we must make a Round; and observe where it shall divide the
Diagonal, for to elevate these Perpendicules, which shall give the breadth of
the Basins, from the which we must draw to the point of sight E, from the
middle square or round foot of the Candlestick, we must elevate a Perpendicular
for the Body of the Candlestick, and for the Taper which we shall make as high
as we will: for to proportion it, we must from the top of the first draw to the
point of sight E, the rest has already been said: the Figure will cause us to
remember the Orders.



Of Merchants Shops in Perspective.
ORdinarily Merchants Shops are compassed about with Shelves or Boxes, for to
lay there and keep their Merchandise.

The Rule or Order for to make these Boxes, is as it were the same with that of
the doors and windows: For example, if instead of the thickness of the Wall, in
the order of the windows; You set in this the board A B from the point B, you
must draw to the point of sight C: For the under part, or bottom of the Boards,
from the point B, having set upon the base the distances, and the measures of
the Boards, or ascents E F G, you must from these 3 points draw to the points
of distance D, which shall give upon the Ray B, the section H I K, for to raise
the Perpendiculars there.

For to have the boards a cross, we must set such a number, as we will give
upon the board A B, or only upon the first Perpendicule B O, as are the
measures L M N O, from the which points we must draw to the point of sight C,
and we shall have the boxes in the section of the Perpendicules at the points
P; Then from the same section P, we must draw little parallels to the base,
which shall give the corner of the box, by separating the side from the upper
part, or the under.

For the boxes in the Front, there is nothing but to draw Rays from the points,
or measures E F, and at the section of the line of the hollow K Q, to raise
Perpendiculars R S; And for the Travers to draw parallels from all the
divisions which shall be found upon the Perpendicule K, as are P. 1. P. 2. P.
3. P. 4.

For the boxes of the other side, where there are ascents in square for to
uphold the boards, we shall have their breadth, drawing to the point of sight
C, the measures T G, and for to have their plane, or square, we must from the
measures A E F, draw to the distance V, which shall give upon the Ray T C, the
section, X Y Q, by the which we must draw little parallels, until that we
divide the Ray T G, at the point Z. and from the Angles of these little squares
to raise Perpendicules which shall be the ascents: as we see clearly in the
figure.

The figure below shows a Shop; already to receive such movables; as one
would put there, and to furnish the Boxes with that which you shall please. For
a Library, we must fill them with Books. For an Apothecary with little Boxes,
and Pots. For a Mercer, with bundles of stuffs. In short, for all that you
would, according to their occasions.



Of the outside of Buildings.
HItherto we have spoken of all that belongs to the in side of houses,
buildings Churches, etc. Now we will give some orders for the outside.

Many of the Rules and Orders, that we have given for the inside of Houses,
may serve for the outside. For example, the Rule which is for to set the doors
and the windows, in what place one would within, the Wall is sufficient alone
for the outside of all sorts of buildings, seeing that on the outside of the
house; there appears no other thing then doors and windows. But if they be
enriched with Ornaments, we have also given, how they ought to be set into
Perspective, if any have forgot them they may have recourse thither.

When there are Windows in front, as A, and that one would set them in a
return; which have the same measures, we must transport these measures upon the
base, as are B B B, equal to A A A, to draw them to the point of distance C,
and to take notice where they shall divide the Ray D E, at the points F, and
from these points to raise Perpendiculars which shall be the ascents of the
windows in the Return.

For the Travers, we must continue those of the window in Front, unto the
Perpendicular D, which shall be the points I, which we must draw to the point
of sight E, for to divide the Perpendicules F, and to give the cross bars to
the window of the Return.

When there shall be a greater number of Windows, there shall be nothing else
to do, but to continue their Rays, for to give them the same measure and height
of the crosses, as is to be seen on the other side, at the house which has 2
windows, by the means of the same Rays For the breadth or thickness of the
Jawmbs, and crosses of the windows in Front, we must set it upon one of the
Travers, as it is at that below K H, and from the corner of the window K, draw
to the point of sight E, and from the point H to the distance C, for the window
A. And to the distance L, for that of the other side, and at the section of
these two last lines, we must raise a Perpendicular H M: And then from all the
corners of the window draw to the point of sight And from the sections or
points Q, which they shall give upon this Perpendicule H M, we must draw
parallels, which shall be the thicknesses of the Crosses, or Travers: The
thickness of the Jawmbs of the midst N, shall be taken drawing from the corner
N, to the point of sight: And where we shall divide the thicknesses of the
Travers at the point Q, to raise a Perpendicular Q R.

For the thickness of the windows in Return, you must set it at the corner of
the Wall, upon the Perpendicule D, as is the distance I O, and from the points
O, to draw to the point of sight E Then to make little parallels from all the
corners of the windows as S T, which shall divide the Ray O, and shall give the
thickness at the point S. These rules serve for all sorts of windows, be they
high or low.

In the figure below, we may see a door abridged by the order that we have
given elsewhere: as also all that is there, is easy enough to understand and
practice by the instructions afore-going.



For to set the Roofs of Houses in Perspective.
THE Roofs are different in height, according to that whereof they are made:
those of slate are the most right; their ordinary Measure is the Triangle
Equilateral, that is to say, that the bending of the Roof is equal to the
breadth of the house, as one may see by the little Figure that I have set the
lowest, that C A or C B is equal to A B Others set this br^d^h A B, for the
middle top D C, which is the highest, but that is not so ordinary, as this D C:
for the flat Tyle, they allow but the two thirds of the height of those of
Slate, or of the breadth of the house, as one may see A E B: for the Tha^ch,
which is a Covering commonly used, they allow but the half of the breadth, as if
A F B And for the hollow Tyle, they allow only a third of the breadth for the
descent, as is A 9 B

Before we pass any farther, we must know that which I call the middle Top, are
Pieces elevated Perpendicularly upon the Beams which bear the Ridg where all
the rafters do meet, as is G H The rafters are pieces of wood that give the
descent of the Roof, as is H I. The other Pieces which are set in the corner,
and which go unto the middle Top, are called Stays, and are ordinarily longer
then the Rafters, as is H K.

Three sorts of Roofs are in use, Pavilions, Pynions, and Appentis, or
Pent-house like The Pavillions have four sides, the Pinions have but two, and
the Appentis but one; for to make a Pavillion in Perspective, we must know the
place of the Balls or middle tops, for to draw the stays thither: the which
has made me make this Geometrical Plane L M N O, for to show that of the
breadth of the house L N, we must make a square L M N P, from which we shall
draw two Diagonals, which shall divide themselves at the point Q: some set the
Ball at this point Q, but that is too much advanced, and makes this bending of
the end lie too flat: it has more comeliness when it is straighter; wherefore
we must advance it toward the wall L N, by the third part of the distance Q R,
which shall be the point S, and by this point S we must draw a Perpendicule
upon the line N P, which shall be T. Then to transport these Measures L T and T
M, upon the base, and draw them to the point of distance, which is here farther
off then ordinary, and to observe where they shall divide the Ray V; and from
the sections to elevate Perpendicules unto the height of the wall, which shall
give the points X, from which me must draw Parallels to the base, unto the
other Ray I. Then from the midst of the wall Y, to draw to the point of sight,
for to divide those Parallels at the point Z, and from these points to elevate
the Balls; for to give the height to these Balls, we must know wherewith we
would cover them, and according to that to give them the Measure that we have
spoken of, supposing that it be of Slates; we must of the breadth of the wall
make a Triangle equilateral 1, 2, 3. And from the point 3 to draw to the point
of sight, and to divide the Ball at the point 4. At which point 4 we must draw
lines from the corners of the House, which will give the shape to the Pavillion

For the Roofs with Pinions there is not so much to order, we must only of the
breadth of the wall 5, 6, make a Triangle equilateral 5, 6, 7. and as much on
the other end of the wall, which shall give the point 8. Then to join this 7
and 8, the Roof will have its shape and its measure.

The Figures on the other side do show the same thing, without being confused
with lines: This projecting which goes beyond the Roof, is made according as
one will.

This House on the Floor is covered with a Pavillion, which is made by the same
Orders as that on the side.

In this Figure where are the Letters, I have set the Horizon on very high, for
to make the upper part of the houses to be seen, and to give the more easiness
to understand the Order; but as this is seldom met with, I have set the other
Figure above, where the Horizon is low, as it is ordinarily, which nevertheless
is not therefore any other Rule for to make the Roof, then that below, as one
may see by the Figure.



The rest of the Roofs in Perspective.
IN the figure aforegoing, we have set the Roofs with small Pinacles viewed in
front, to which we must give the Triangle equilateral for their height, when we
do make them of slate: If they make them of other things, as of Tile or Thatch
we must take their measures at the little figure below.

For to set this fashion of Roofs in return we must set upon the base from the
foundation of the house, the breadth that it has as is A B; and of this
breadth to frame a Triangle according to the height that we would give to the
Roof, as to this, which has a Triangle equilateral, whereof C D, is the height
which must be set Perpendicularly at the first corner of the house, at the
whole height of the Wall as is E F. Then to take the breadth of the house C,
which is the midst of A B, and to draw it to the distance, and where it shall
divide the Ray A, at the point G, to raise a Perpendicule; then you must from
the point F draw to the point of sight X, and the section that shall be made of
the Perpendicule H, shall be the point of the Pinnacle, to which you must draw
from the corners of the house E I, if one would have there any advancings, he
may set them there at his pleasure as we may see on the other side K.

For the sloping we must only prolong the line where one would set the top of
the Roof, as is here the line L M, and to give it such a bending as we would.
To this, there is as much of the height M N, as the house has of breadth N O,
if from the points M O, we draw to the point of sight X, we shall divide the
Perpendicule of the Hollow at the point P Q. which we must join with a right
line, which shall finish the framing of the Roof. The figures of the other side
make the house covered to be seen after these fashions.

The figures above are only to make it seen, that we must always keep the same
order, although the Horizons change.

I have set a Church within the floor; which is covered with Pinacles, and the
wings of the two bendings, which have only the simple draught.

There is also a Pavillion seen by one end, of which we have spoken in the
figure preceding.



For to set a street into Perspective.
IT might suffice to see the figure, for to know the order thereby which is
very easy, we must only make a plane of single little squares by the ordinary
way, and to take one square, or 2 or 3 for the breadth, or length of every
house; And upon this breadth which we shall take, to set the measures of the
Doors and Windows, for to have thereby the abridgement, by drawing to the point
of distance A, as are the Measures B C D E, and F.

The first Angle of every house may serve for the line of elevation, as we at
the first house the Angle G for the Roofs; we have said already, how they ought
to be set.

When we would have streets going a cross, we need only to leave 1. 2. or 3
little squares, without elevating any thing, even as are H and I.

The figure below is to show that when one would advance, or draw back the
houses; we ought only to advance, or draw back their elevation, upon the plane
of the squares, as L, is more advanced by one square then K, and M more
advanced then L, and so of others, and for the rest to follow the Method which
we have given the figure above, to that below.



That the Objects afar off show not the Thickness.
HE that practices this Art shall be advertised, that the objects near to the
Horizon, that is to say very much distant, must not show the Thickness being
viewed in the front, For example, the houses, A B C D, ought not to have
thickness at the Windows, and at the Door; But only a single draught: The
reason of this is that the Rays which part from the Object, unite themselves in
the Eye with those that are Collaterals.

I would have brought the demonstration of this, if I had believed that it
would have served, but as it is not Necessary for my design, and that it would
be unprofitable, I have let it alone, remembering my self, that I promised at
the beginning of the Book that I would not give any, seeing that I have to do
with many persons, which would be in trouble to understand them.



For the Buildings viewed by the Angle.
OF these two buildings viewed by the Angle, that of the first figure is made
in the same manner, as we have said of the little squares, viewed by the Angle;
and at the beginning of the elevations of other pieces viewed in like manner.
But to avoid the trouble to run back to the one, and to the other: I will say,
that for to make these buildings, we must always set the measures upon the
base, and draw them to the point of distance; and at their sections to raise
Perpendiculars, and the first Angle shall serve for the line of elevation: For
example, this body of an house has for his breadth A B, and for its length B
C, which is the double of its breadth A B, from th^se points A B, we must draw
to the point of distance D, and from B C, to the point of distance E, from
their sections B F, and G, we must raise Perpendicules which shall serve for
the corners of the house. For the measures of the doors and the windows they
must be set upon the base between the letters A B, and B C, and drawing from
all these points to the points of distances D E, we must take notice, where the
B D, or B E, shall be divided, for to elevate there the ascents of the windows.
The Perpendicule of the first Angle B, must serve for the line of elevation,
which shall give the Travers and height of the windows, all the rest is
intelligible enough.

For the figure below it is the same order, with that of the Chairs without
order which is, that having made the plane Geometrical, we must set it into
Perspective, as the irregular pieces. Then to set the Rule at every bending of
the plane, and to observe where the Horizon shall be divided, for to make a
point there, to which we must draw, as if it were the point of sight of each
side of the building, each side having its particular point: For example, the
plane being set in Perspective, the side H I, gives upon the Horizon the point
K, to which we must draw all the Rays of this side: The other side I L, must
also have its point within the Horizon, but our paper is too short for to make
it be seen. These 2 points being found, we must place there the Rule, and make
an occult line to pass by the other side of the building parallel upon the
plane to that which has given the point within the Horizon; and to continue it
unto the base, as from the point K by the corner L, unto M; and by the corner
H, unto N. Then to set between N I, the number of the windows which must be on
the side H I, and between I, and M, to set the measures of them that we would
have on the side I L: All these measures being upon the base, we must draw them
to the points that we have found, and do altogether the same, as in the figure
above.



For to set Alleys of Trees in Perspective.
ALthough that by the orders foregoing one might draw sufficient instructions
for to set Alleys of Trees in Perspective, yet I did believe that it would not
be unprofitable, to give a particular order therein, which might make the
method more easy.

If one would have but one Rank of Trees on each side of the Perspective, there
will be no need to make a plane of little squares, he may only do, as I have
said in the fourth advice Fol. 17.

But when one would make a company of Alleys to appear, it seems to me, that
he sh ll do very well to frame with occult lines a pavement of little squares
with the Oaks; even as it has been taught in the planes Fol. 31. And from the
Diagonal of little squares to raise Perpendicules, as one may see A B; If one
desire the Trees to be farther of, or nearer the one to the other, he must
increase or diminish upon the base the distances of the squares.

When one shall have given such height as he would to the trunk of the first
Tree, as is A C, from the point C, he must draw to the point of sight D, to the
end that all the Trunks of the other Trees may not pass the Ray C D, the first
Tree A B, makes it to be seen, that between 2 right lines one may give to the
Trees such compass as he shall find good, and that they ought not to be drawn
by the Rule.

The figure below is ordered as that above, there is no difference, but only
that above gives the squares Right, or in Front, and this gives them viewed
by the Angle, that is to say, that from the measures upon the base we must
always draw to the points of distances E F, and from the little squares to
raise Perpendicules, and to do the rest as we have said heretofore.

One may within the same Perspective, where some Alleys should be drawn to the
points of distances, set also those that should draw to the point of sight; as
one may see by this of the midst, which draws to the point G, which is the
point of sight, and the others draw to the points E F, which are the points of
distances.



For Gardens in Perspective.
I Have given in the Treatise of Planes, the Method to abbreviate, and set into
Perspective the Plane of a Garden with its Compartments, by an Order
sufficiently easy; supposing that you have the Plane. But as I avoid these
Geometrical Planes, because there is need of too much time for to make them, I
have set these here, by the which we shall know, that having made a Plane of
squares, we may take as much or little as we will for the squares of the
Garden, as are here A B, which have each three squares on every side: and the
squares that remain shall serve for the Alleys C. He that would make some
Compartment within the squares of the Garden, he must use the little squares of
each square, dividing them, and giving them such a figure as he would have, so
as we may see the little square A B: and on the other side D E: the hedge-Rows
and Arbors are placed opposite to each other, and of the breadth of the Alleys.

The little Squares with Borders.
WHEN one would set Borders to the squares, he must set at the corner the
heights and bredths that he would give them. And from these Measures to draw to
the point of sight I. For example, in the figure below F G is the height and
breadth of the Borders of the little square H, from the corners of this little
square F G, we must draw to the point of sight I, and do all the rest as it
has been said several times.

For the Arbo^s, we must from the Angles of the squares of the Alley, elevate
the Ascents or Perpendiculars O. All the rest is done, as in the Arches viewed
by the side, fol. 60.

The little wood which is at bottom is made by elevating Perpendiculars from
all the Angles of a Pavement of little squares, etc.



For to elevate and set in Perspective Fortifications.
I Will not repeat here the Order of Abridging, and setting the Planes of all
sorts of Fortifications in Perspective; that which we have spoken thereof fol.
39. is plain enough.

For to elevate them, there is no more difficulty then in one single wall; but
there needs more time by reason of the multitude of Angles, which we must
always bring to the line of Elevation, for to take there the heights, that they
ought to have, so as we have said elsewhere many times, speaking of other Works.

The little line of elevation is divided into four Parts; I he first from 1
unto 2 is the height of the Parapet of the way covered; from 2 unto 3 is the
height of the Rampart; from 3 unto 4 is the height of the Parapet of the
Rampart. And from 5 unto 1 is the depth of the Trench.



For to make the designs of Perspective.
THere is not so excellent a Master, which has not some design in such pieces,
as he would willingly attain to: If this be ordinary almost in all sciences, it
is necessary in this, more then in any other, by the great substitution of
points and of lines, which we must therein exactly observe, and without which
nothing can be done, which may content those that have any understanding
therein.

Seeing that one is obliged in some manner, to make designs, we must search out
that which may help to make them exactly, that may be possible: and as every
one knows that all the length of these works, is to draw lines parallel, and
Perpendiculars, having then searched the Invention, as well by experience, as
in the Authors, to be able to make them readily: I have found nothing which
can help us in that, but the board and the square, which Viator has left us in
his Works. All those that would pass the time in designing, ought to have one
from the which they shall draw the delight and benefit which experience will
make them to understand.

Although that the Figure gives sufficient understanding, how it ought to be,
and the manner of using it, I did believe that I ought to give a more clear
understanding thereof. This Plank or Board A B C D, ought to be perfectly by
the rule or square, of a Foot and half long, of fifteen inches broad, and half
an inch thick, that the Wood be good, very dry, and well united, one may past a
sheet of Paper on it, for to make it more smooth and to help the Pen. The
square E F, is a Rule of a foot and half long, as the board, an inch broad, and
of thickness 2 lines, which is helved at the right Angle within another frame
of a Rule G H, eight inches long, one inch broad, and three quarters of an inch
thick; for to draw lines, they hold this latter Rule G H, closed against the
board A B C D, and the other Rule E F is assuredly strait, if so be the board
and the Rule be well ordered.

When one would work, we must fasten the leaf of Paper I K L M upon the board,
with 4 little bits of Wax N O P Q, and then from one only point, you may draw
lines, with assuredness that they will be right. And when you would have
Perpendiculars, set the handle of the Rule G H, on the side C D, the Rule E F
shall be Perpendicular to C D.

For my part I find that this eases exceedingly, and that without this
invention, you must always have the hand at the Compass. There is no further
need of substitution, but for the visual Rays, and there are also those that
use a Rule pierced at one end, which they fasten with a Needle to the point of
sight, but this is too much intangling, I would not counsel any to use it, one
may as soon do it with the common Rule, and so is not in danger to spoil any
thing.

R. Is the common Rule.

T. A common Compass.

V. Another Compass which bears the Ink, for to make circular Lines.

See here are all the Instruments that one has need of, for to make the
designs of Perspective.



For to draw little Perspectives into great, and great into little.
SEeing that designs are made in small, with more facility then in great, it is
credible that they will be made therein always, the which has made me resolve
to give the Method of setting small designs into great upon Cloth.

The Painters use ordinarily Squares or Checquers, that is to say, that they
divide the small designs and the clothes, where they must be painted into the
same number of squares, and set proportionally; that which is within one square
of the design, into the square of the Cloth which answers to it; some do like
well of this Order.

But here is another, which in my judgment, is more easy, more facile, and
more assured; we must have a skale proportionate to the less design, and
another skale proportionate to the bigger. When one would make a design, the
first thing that he resolves on, is the skale which must give all the Measures
of all the other pieces of the design. For example, in the less design A, the
skale B C, of five little parts, (which one may take for feet Royal) has been
made the first upon this skale; they have taken the Horizon, the height and
distance of the Trees, the breadth of the Alleys, etc.

For to fet this small into great, observe how we must proceed. First, we must
know, if the Perspective must have the natural Horizon, that is to say, that
the bottom of the Picture being on the Ground, the Horizontal line be at the
height of our eye, which is about five feet Royal; This being, there must be
five little parts which are between B C, to make a skale of five feet Royal F
G, that having taken all the Measures at the little one, we may transport them,
and take upon the great one, as I am about to say.

The two Measures of Proportion or skales, being ordered, as I have now said;
the first thing that one does, is to take upon the lesser design with a pair of
Compasses; the distance of the base D unto the Horizon E, and to carry this
opening of the Compass D E, upon the lesser skale B C, and to take notice what
number of Parts it shall give, as he does give 5, we must then take as many
parts upon the great skale F G, and set them on the one part and other of the
Picture, or great Design, beginning at the bottom of the Cloth H H, and they
shall end in I I, from these points I I we must draw a Packthread whited or
blacked, this line I I shall mark the Horizon in the great Picture; Then to
take the distance or sinking K L, of the lesser design, which is the foot of
the House; and to carry it upon the lesser skale R C, for to see how many parts
we shall have, and to take the same number upon the great skale F G, and to set
that which we shall find upon the edge of the Cloth H M, H M, which we must
tringle about, as the Horizon for to have the sinking of the second Tree; In
the less design, we must take the distance N O, and carry it upon the lesser
skale B C, and take as many parts upon the great scale F G, as we shall have
found in the less. N O gives two parts of the lesser, we must take two of the
great one, which will give H P, which we must tringle, as we have said: We
shall use in like manner all the Parallels to the base, as are the other Trees,
the Windows, the Roofs of the Houses, etc.

For the Plumb lines or Perpendiculars to the base, it is the same Method,
there is nothing but to change the side for to mark them, which is, that in
stead of marking on the side of the Cloth, as we have done, we must mark above
and below. For example, for to have the two Cotners of the house at bottom; we
must take with the Compasses upon the lesser design Q R, and carry this opening
upon the scale B C, we shall find about 7 parts and an half; we shall take as
many parts upon the great scale F G, which shall give H S T S, which we must
tringle and do so with all the other Perpendiculars, whether building Trees,
Hedge-Rows, etc.

For to find the visual Rays, which are the lines that go to the point of
sight V: at this point V we must fasten a pack-thread or thread, with a pin
bended, for fear of making the hole too great, this thread or pack-thread must
be of the length of the Picture, for to be able to tringle and draw all the
Rays very exactly; For example, for to have the two Rays of the breadth of the
Trees, which are in the less design D X, we must take this design D X, and to
carry it upon the lesser scale B C, and to take upon the great F G, in
proportion to that which we shall have found in the less which will give H Y,
the which points H Y we shall tringle with the Pack-thread of the point V; for
to have also the Ray of Hedge-Rows, we must take the diffance D Z, and carry it
upon the scale B C, and take as many parts upon the great scale F G, which will
give H I, which we must tringle with the pack-thread from the point V, etc.

All that is in Perspectives falls ordinari^y under these three sorts of
lines, Parallels, Perpendiculars, and Rays v^sual, which having been made easy
to make upon the cloth, we shall less fear the pa ns of setting the less
designs into great; for to set the designs of great into small, we must only
change the Orders, that is to say, that we must take the measures first upon
the great scale, and diminish them proportionally upon the less, as if the
Horizon of the great design were of 5 parts of the great s^ale. I would take 5
parts of the lesser scale, for the height of the Horizon of the less design,
and so of all the rest.



Orders to facilitate the Universal manner of the Siour G. D. L.
AS all those for whom I labor, have not perhaps a sufficient ground for to be
clear into this order, or Universal manner; I believed that the Author would
permit me to make it easy to them, as much as I shall be able, that they may
draw benefit thereby. Wherefore I shall set these two figures, which will cause
to remember that which I have already said, in the 2. 3. 4. and 5. advice,
which are for the understanding of this order, there having showed to take all
the measures upon the base, and that as many Rays as d^vide the Diagonal C, are
as many small squares in the sinking of the picture, to which squares they give
such a greatness as they will.

That we may not go to seek so far, let us look on the first figure where the
base is A B, the point of sight G, the points of distances E F, I divide this
base into 12 equal parts; each of which I shall make to be about a foot, and
from all these divisions, I shall draw to the point of sight, which shall be as
many Rays, whereof A and B are the last. Now I say that he that would have a
line, which should appear sunk a foot in the Picture, that he must draw from
the first division ^ D to the point of distance F, and where this line D F,
shall divide the Ray E G, that shall be the point for to draw the line sunk a
foot in the picture, if we would have one of 3 feet sinking, we must take upon
the base 3 of these parts, and from the third to draw also to the distance F;
and we shall have at the section of the Ray B G; the place for to draw this
line. So that if from the point C, we draw to the point F, where this line C F,
shall divide B G, this shall be a line sunk of 6 feet,

If of the other 6 parts that remain A C, we make 24, dividing each into 4, and
that we leave not to make each part to avail a foot, there will be ^4 feet from
A. to C. In such manner as if we require a line; which should appear sunk 18
feet in the Picture, I should reckon from A, 18 little parts, and from the 18 I
would draw to the distance E, which would give me by the section of the Ray A
C, the point for to draw this line; if one would that it should be sunk 24
feet, we must take A C, and draw from C, to E, and where this line should
divide A G, at the point H, we shall draw H I, which will appear of 24 feet of
sinking in the picture.

According to the Perspective, this line H I, is equal to that A G, and
contains as many feet or parts, so that if one draw from the point I, to the
point E, the section of this line I E, at the Ray A G, shall be for to draw a
line K L sunk of 48 feet; If from this we draw further to the distance E, we
shall have the section of the Ray A G, yet a line removed 24 feet more then the
others. And if one would have a line sunk 30 feet, we must from the point A,
reckon 6 small parts, and from the sixth draw to the point of sight G, and take
notice where we shall divide the line H I, as here at the point M. Then from
the point M, to draw to the distance E, and this line M E, shall divide the Ray
A G, where we must draw this line N, if it were of 40. We should from A, reckon
16, and do all the same if, it were 60, we should from A, reckon 12, and from
12, draw to the point of sight G, unto the line K L, which should be the point
O, Then from O; to draw to the distance E, and from the section of the Ray A G,
shall be for to draw this line.

For the second figure.
BY that which I have spoken, it is easy to find a point for such a sinking as
one would have. There remains to show how we may find it within, or without
the Ray A G, or B C, for this the line B C, shall serve as a scale of six feet,
the one of which I shall divide into twelve inches, that I may there find the
half, the third, and the 4th of a foot. All being thus ordered. If one require
of me a point which appears of 17 feet long, and of a foot and half within
the Ray A G. I will draw from the 17th part of the base to the point of
distance E, and where the Ray A G, shall be divided in P, I will draw a line P
Q, now when one requires a foot and half within the Ray A G, I will take with
a Compass upon the same line P Q, but on the side B C, a foot 6 inches, which I
will carry from P, unto R. And this point R, shall be the point which has been
demanded.

And if one would have one yet at 29 feet distance within the Picture, and
seven and an half beyond the Ray A G. We must draw from C, to the point E. and
where it shall divide A G, to draw a line which shall be of 24 feet, then from
A. taking five little parts, to draw them to the point of sight G, until that
we divide this line at the point S, and from this point S, to draw to the d
stance E Where the Ray A G shall be divided, we must draw a line T V, seeing
they require 7 feet and an half beyond the Ray A, we must upon the same line T
V, but on the side B C, take 7 parts and 6 inches with a Compa^s, and carry
them from the point T. to the point X And this point X, shall be the point that
one desires, And so of all others, at such a distance and removal, as one
would have.



Of a general manner for to exercise Perspective, without setting the Point of
distance out of the Picture, or Field of the Work by the Sieur G D L.
THIS Order obliges us to make a Geometrical Plane, or at least a device of
Measures, as well for the Plane, as for the Elevation; that by the one, or by
the other, it may be brought to set into Perspective I will take for the object
or subject the same Example of the Author, which is a Cage squared, covered
with a Point; or a Building covered like a Pavillion or Tent, to the which we
shall give the Measures by the means of a Scale.

Having then made the plane of this Cage m, i, l, k, which I have set on the
top of the figure, it must be, the at such a distance as one w^u^d have, that
the Obj^ct seem recoyld within the Picture, as it is here of 17 feet; we mak^
a line a, b, which shall be the base or the bottom of the Picture, which we
shall place according to the aspect, th^^ the object ought to be seen. Then
from the two ends of this line a, b, we must draw two lines Parallels the o^ to
the other, and undeterminate; thrt is to say, it is no matter if they divide
the plane, nor in what place, ^ are a g, b g, upon the one of these lines, as
here this a g, we must make little Parallels to the line a b, which man go unto
the Angles of the plane, and by the means of the scale, to see how far each
Angle of the plane shall be r^moved from this line a g. the which shall be
marked near to each line. Now from the place, which one she choose for to view
the Picture, which is here the point c, at five feet near to b. We must make a
Perpendicular (...) a b, which shall be the line c t, to this line c, t, we
must give as many little parts of the scale as we would have (...) be removed
for to view the Picture, which is for this 24 feet, and at the end of these 24
feet, which is the poin^ t, to raise a small Perpendicule of the height of the
eye, which shall be the line c t, of four feet and an half.

The Cloth, the Wall, or the Paper, being ordered for to set the plane in
perspective, and upon the plane^ make the Elevation; We must divide the bottom
of the picture, or the base A B, into as many, parts as that a b^^ the plane;
this having 12 thereof. We must divide the great A B into 12, which will be of
value each a foo^ Above the points A B we must set the height of the line s, t,
which is of four feet and an half. Take then with the Compasses four parts and
an half of those which are upon the line A B, and carry them perpendicularly
upon the points A B, which shall give the points E F and draw the line E F
parallel to A B, and this line shall b^ the Horizon. Seeing that in the plane
the point C, which is the place for to view the Picture, is removed ^i^ parts
from b, we must reckon as many parts from B, and from the fifth C, Elevate a
Perpendicule to A B, which she divide the Horizon at the point G, which shall
be the point of sight, to which we must draw the Rays A G, B G which shall
represent the Parallels of the p^ane a g, b g, for the point of distance, it
shall be the point F, and by reason that the line c, t, has 24 feet, must take
six parts of the l^ne A B, which shall be A D, and divide them ea^^ into 4, and
these 24 parts shall serve for a scale, for the depths, or removalls; being
sufficient for to let them out infinitely. And the six parts that remain
between B D, shall be the Scale which shall furnish the Measures of these
according as the lines drawn from the points found by the plane, shall divide
the Rays drawn to the point of s^^ G; For as this Scale, is a pyramide, whereof
B D, is the Base the Measures diminish in proportion as they are sunk have
divided the one of these parts into Inches for to find there all the Measures,
as they are upon the plane.

With the Scale or Removalls we find the points of the plane, and with that of
the Measures the length that (...) lines ought to have. as well for the plane,
as for the Elevation.

How for to find the plane in Perspective, we must observe all the Measures of
the Geometrical plane the (...) Angle of the planer, m, is removed 7 feet from
the point a, upon the line a, g; Wherefore I will reckon 17 pa^ beginning at A;
and from the seventeenth, I will to the point F, dividing the Ray A G, at the
point R. from this p^ R, we must draw a parallel to the Base; and by reason
that the Plane m, is within the Ray a g, a foot and an h^^ we must upon the
same line R but on the side B D, take part and an half for to carry within the
Ray A G, whi h shall be the point M, representing the Angle of the plane M; for
(...) Angle l; which is removed 26 feet from the point a. we must from the
point D, which is 24 feet from the pe^ A, draw to F, and where the Ray A G,
shall be divided at the pointy, draw a Parallel. Now as it is about (...) feet,
that this line y, is enough removed; we must draw from the second part of the
Scale to the point G, a^ where this Ray shall divide the Parallel y. at the
point Q, we must draw Q F, which shall give upon A G, (...) point H, from which
point H, we must draw a parallel to A B, and upon the same line H, but on the
side B take the Measures for to g^ve 13 feet and an half; from the point H unto
the point L.

For the point k, which is removed 29 feet from A, we must from the fifth part
of the Scale A D, draw to^ point G, and where this Ray shall divide the
Parallel y, at the point O, to draw O F, for to have upon A G, (...) point N.
Then from the point N. to draw a Parallel for to take on the side B D, 7 feet
and an half, (...) we must Carry out of the Ray A G, that is to say, from N to
K.

For the point i. removed 38 feet from the point a. we must upon the Scale A D,
take 14 parts, (...) from the 14 draw a Ray to the point G, which shall divide
the parallel the point S. And from the point S, to d^ to F, which shall divide
the Ray A G, at the point T, removed 38 feet from the point A: by reason t^ the
Parallel y is of 24, to the which having joined 14. they make 38. at the point
T. And by reason that Angle i, is 4 feet and an half within the Ray A G, we
must upon this Parallel T, but on the side D B, tak^ feet and an half, and
Carry them from the point T; to the point I.

For to frame the plane we must join by right lines, these 4 points M I, K I,
and from their Angles raise p^^pendicules as M, st, L, ff, K, fr, and I, sp.
The which shall have Each 17 feet, as is marked in the plane by (...) ^ ne X,
and from the ends of these perpendiculars, to draw two Diagonals, st, sp, ff
fr, which shall divide themsel^^ in Z, and upon this point Z, to elevate a
perpendicular Z Ae, of 13 feet and an half. Then to draw lines (...) all the
four corners sl. ff. sp, and fr, to the point Ae, and the Cage shall be framed
in perspective. If one would (...) it descend within the ground one foot, we
must adjoyn one foot under every point of the plane; and join the together with
lines.



For to give justly the distance removed, the Point remaining in the Picture,
THose that would use this common manner must know, that the number of feet
that we shall take upon the base, ought to have respect to the distance that
they shall have determined of.

For to cause my Proposition to be understood, I will set in the first figure
two distances, the one of six feet, the other of twelve, which have respect the
one to the other, by reason that dividing into two each of the six parts, we
shall have twelve.

Let us suppose then that the line A B is divided into twelve parts, and that
from all these parts, one has drawn Rays to the point of sight C, let us take
now the half of these divisions A D, and draw to the point E, which is the
distance of 6 feet; it is certain that the section of the Ray A C, shall be the
abridgement of the squares viewed six feet distant. If from the point D we draw
to the point F, which is the distance of twelve feet, this line D F dividing
the Ray A C, shall give the abridgement of six little squares viewed twelve
feet distance. He that would have the abridgement of twelve squares, viewed
twelve feet distant, he must from the point B, which is the whole base, draw to
the point F; and at the section of the Ray A C to the point H, shall be that
which is required: or else from the point I to draw I F, which shall give the
same point H, and the line H K shall be sunk twelve little squares viewed at 12
feet distance. We see in this that 12 little squares viewed at 12 feet
distance, do meet in the same line H K, that six squares viewed at six feet
distance, and all the lines of six squares, that the section of the Diagonal D
G has given, do reflect themselves by two and two to those, which the Diagonal
D F has given, the reason why the Diagonal D F has given two lines for one of
those D G, is that the distance is doubled. If it were trebled it would give
three, and four if it were fourfold. Now for to find on the side B D, the
same sections, and the same number of little squares, as on the side D A,
without the point of distance be out of the picture, we must only divide into
two each of the six equal parts which are between B D, which will make 12
parts, and from their divisions to draw occult lines to the point of sight C;
and if one draw Parallels to the base, by all the sections that the Diagonal
makes of all these Rays he shall have 12 squares of sinking in the same line,
and if the distance were of twelve feet, although that G be but six feet of
distance: the reason of this is, that by multiplying the Rays we multiply the
squares, and multiplying the squares we remove the distance: see then how
having made twelve parts of six, which were between B D, there arises twelve
little squares, which make the same sinking that the distance at twelve feet
distant. And he that would have the distance at 24 feet, he must divide still
into two, each of the parts between B D, which would make 24 parts, and from
the 24th. to the point D, to draw the line D G the section that it would make
of the Ray B C at the point K, would be the sinking of the 24 feet.

In the second figure, I have set upon the line L M the same Measures as upon A
B of the first figure, and on the side M N, the same sinking, and the same
distance as on the side A D, which gives the line H K, to the end that we may
see, that he which would draw the fifth part, as Q G, or from the seventh as R
G, that he should not have the true sinking which is at K: for R G would not
sink enough, and Q G would sink too much, although from these 5 or 7 parts,
there would be made twelve or twenty four.

Wherefore we must observe to take always a Number, which may be multiplied by
the distance, as here the distance of six may serve for 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42,
48. and so an infinite number by six. The distance of 5 may serve for 10, 15,
20, 25, 30, etc. The distance of eight, may serve for 16, 24, 32, 40. 48, etc.
We cannot fail doing thus, for supposing that the point of distance could not
be nearer to the point of sight then G is near to C, it Follows that if G is
at 6, at 7, 8, or at 10 feet from the point C, that the half of the base has
the same number, the which number we must divide proportionably to the removal,
which we will give it. For example, if there be eight feet from N to L, and
that I would have the distance of 32 feet without that G go out from his place,
I will divide each of the eight parts, which is the half of the base as L N
into 4, and 4 times 8 will be 32 Rays, so the abridgements of the square should
be at 32 feet of distance.

All these little divisions remain not after the Picture is made, there are
none but the principal divisions of feet, which they draw to the point of
sight, and the abridgements, that is to say, the Parallel to the base which
remain always.



A very sine Invention, for to make naturally Perspectives without keeping the
Rules.
HAving set down all the Rules, that we must keep for to make exactly
Perspectives: I would set also this Invention, and the following, for to make
thereby perfectly fair ones and very exact without being obliged for to use any
one rule therefore

This shall serve for those that love Panting, and take the pleasure to use it;
without being willing to take the pains to open the Compass, nor to take the
Rule for to draw a line; for in this order, we shall not need neither the one
nor the other. And nevertheless we may make very fair Perspectives, either of
Buildings, of Gardens, or Landskips. Before we proceed to the order, we must
know, that the principal piece and necessary for this invention, is a great
lease of Glass very clear, enclosed in a frame of Wood well smoothed and thin,
which I have marked with A: at the bottom of the figure, this frame must slide
between two pieces of Wood, an Inch and an half thick, the which must be
fastened to the end of a board, which is of the breadth of the Frame, as B C
shows, fit for to receive the Frame A. The breadth of this board B D, shall
be of a foot C. At the midst of the forepart of this board, we must make one
or more square holes E, for to fasten there a little Iron Rod or Wire, as a
Rule pierced all along, whereby to raise it, or let it down at the top of this
Rule F, there shall be Round of 3 or 4 Inches of Diameter, without thickness,
as it might be of white Lattin, the which must have a little hole in the midst,
as it were for a piece to go through, all these things put into one, make the
piece G

Although the figure shows the order, and how we must use this piece G, yet I
will not cease to tell, how we must proceed therein. Having then placed this
piece G, before that which one would draw, he shall look through the little
hole of the spectacle F, if one can discover upon the Glass all that he would
that should be there: if any thing come not there, you must put the spectacle
nearer to the Glass; until that he do see there, that which he desires The
piece being so settled, we must mark upon the Glass, all that shall be seen
there, looking through the hole F, which does here, that which the point of
sight does in other Orders, it being most certain, that all that shall be
marked upon the leaf of Glass, having the eye at the little hole of the
spectacle shall be found perfectly in the Rules of the Perspective.

Every one knows how we must withdraw that which shall be designed; wherefore
I shall leave that, for to say that one may mark upon the Glass with the Pen
and Ink. and after that all is done, to moisten a little the other side of the
Glass for to refresh the Ink and to set on the side, which we shall have
traced, a Paper somewhat moist, and then to pass the hand upon it; and the
Paper will take, all that which was marked upon the Glass.

If one will, they may also use a Pensil, and colors according as every one
shall think good, it is enough that one know the invention to use it, for to
retract that which they will: For it is as easy to retract a Palace as a
Countrey-House, or a Chamber, seeing that it is nothing but to set ones self in
a place, where there may see that which they would design, and to bring the
spectacle near the Glass, when there shall be ne^d, by the means of holes,
which are in the Board.

A Painter may also use this for to retract figures, at such a posture, as he
shall have given them, for to retract after the embossing. In a word, for all
that he shall judge, be assured, that the use will render many things easy
that were hard before.



Another pretty Invention for to exercise the Perspective, without knowing it.
THis Invention is found to be as pretty, as the former, and some do esteem it
more; by reason that the other obliges to design twice: the first upon the
Glass: the second to retract that which one has done there: and in this, we
design but once, and as exactly as the other.

I will not set down the framing of this instrument, it having no difference
from that which I have now given, but only that instead of a leaf of Glass, we
must set there a frame, divided by little squares, with threads very slender,
as the figure shows it, the which I shall call a Lettice; for the number of
the squares, I leave that to the discretion of every one, I shall say only that
we must not make them too great, for to work more exactly, nor too little for
fear of being confused.

For the order, there is need, that this piece H, be placed in such manner,
that one may see by the hole of the spectacle I, all that we would design; if
the design, which we desire to make, must be greater then the frame, or then
the Lettice is, or as others will, the Checker-board, we must make the squares
of Linen Cloth or of Paper, greater then that of the frame, and if it be
lesser, we must make the squares lesser, but we must always make squares for to
carry in each square of its paper, or of the Cloth, that which we shall see
within the squares of the frame, looking upon it by the spectacle I, and if all
shall be represented proportionably, the design will be as just for the
Perspective, as if one had used Rules and the Compass.

I have set the two figures, for to cause to be seen how this piece H, must be
placed for to use it in designing upon a Table, and when one would paint, by
the one and the other manner, we may make more exactly all sorts of
Perspectives, counterfeit Pictures, and draw to the life.

I doubt not but many will say, that this method is not new, and that there is
not a Painter, that knows not how to enlarge and diminish Pictures, using
this Checker-board, that is true, but I believe that not any one has ever used
the spectacle, which is the secret for to make every thing in its perfection.



MEASURES AND PROPORTIONS OF FIGURES IN PERSPECTIVES, PICTURES, AND WORKS
EMBOSSED
For Figures in Perspective.
AFter that we have set down that which may serve for to make all sorts of
Perspectives, with the means to give them a pleasing and ornaments for to
content the eye, there remains no more but to find out a way for to deceive
it altogether, which is to set down the figures there.

But before we pass any further, we must make a distinction of figures, for it
is another thing to represent a History, then to intend to deceive the eye in a
piece, which shall be set at the bottom of a Gallery, of a Hall, or of an Alley
in a Garden, for to these all figures of repose or resting are the best, and
for a History, they must be all lively and spirited, by the diversity of their
posture.

The multitude of Horizons, which the Painters take in their Pictures, is the
cause that they make an infinite company of Faults there, by not knowing to
give the height that they ought to the figures, proportionable to their
Horizon, I will give them a Rule, that they may not fail there, whatsoever
Horizon they shall have.

For the Fig re having the Eye within the Horizon.
IN the Perspectives, which are set at the end of a Gallery, of an Alley, of an
Hall; or of any other place for to deceive the sight, we must always set the
Horizon at the natural height, that is to say; at 5 Feet Royal, which are the
height of the common size.

He that would set there figures for to appear in the natural, they ought to
have the eye within the Horizon: for if the Figures have the eyes within the
Horizon as we have, they will appear to us of our height, this ought to suffice
for the instruction, but for to be more clear, and to make my self better
understood, I shall make use of these three figures instead of many others,
which one may set there, if he will. The first Figure A, shall have the natural
height, and the eyes within the Horizon, if I should yet have ano h r Figure at
the place B, I must from the point B, raise a line unto the Horizon, and that
shall appear of the same height with the first. He that would have a third at C
let him always set the eyes thereof within the Horizon, it shall be of the
height of the others within the appearance: In short, although there should be
a thousand, there is no other Rule to be kept when the Horizon is at the
natural height. I intend not to speak of Children, which oughr to be made in
proportion to the great figures, and according to the discretion of the
Painters.

For the Figures having the Horizon below.
WHen Pictures are made for Halls; where ordinarily they hang them, and place
them somewhat high, we must take the Horizon lower, for to approach to the eye,
as far as shall be possible.

Now for to give justly, and with proportion, the height to each Figures, in
what place soever, we meet with them, we must make one at what height we would,
in some place of the picture, as is the figure D E, which is here that which we
have called the line of elevation in the proceeding orders.

For to find the height of other Figures, which one would set into this
picture, which should appear as high as the first D E, we must from the Feet of
this F, and from the top of its head D, draw lines where we will within the
Horizon, as is the point E, and between this Triangle D E F, shall be found all
the heights of the others: For example, if I would find the height that the
Figure must have of the point G, from this point G, I draw a parallel to the
base G H, until that it divide the line F E, which shall be at the point H,
from which I raise a Perpendicule, until that it divide the line, or Ray D E at
the point I, and this Perpendicule H I is the height of the Figure, which we
must take with a Compass for to carry it to the point G, if I would have
another at the point K, I have only to make the same operations, and I shall
have the Perpendicule M N, for its height, and so of as many as one will.



For the Figures having the Horizon high.
WHEN the Horizon is high, as one is sometimes obliged to set it, for it
represents sometimes, which one has viewed from an high eminent place, we must
keep the same Rule with the Precedent, although it seem the contrary in that of
the Horizon below: all the Figures are above the first, and go always by
diminishing. And for this of the Horizon high, all the Figures raise themselves
above the first, and the furthest distant is always the most elevated, but
nevertheless the lesser in proportion, and according to the measure, which one
shall take thus. Having made the first figure A B, we must from the top of its
head, and from under its feet, draw in what place one would of the Horizon,
which is here the point C; all the heights of the other Figures must be taken
between this Triangle A C B. For example, desirous to have the height of the
Figure from the point D, from this point D we must make a Parallel to the base
D E, unto the line A C, which shall be the point E, from which we must raise a
Perpendicular unto the line B C, which shall give the point F this
Perpendicular E F shall be the height which must be to the figure from the
point D. If at the point G we would have yet a figure, you must make the same
practice from the Point D, and you shall have the Perpendicule H I, which shall
be for the height of the figure from the point G, And by the same Method all
the other figures shall take the heights from whatsoever place it be.

For the figure that have feet at the Horizon.
IT is rarely that one makes figures upon the Horizon, but if there were
necessity, we must make those that one would make appear the first, greater
then the other, that is to say, to give them the Natural height, and all the
others will be equal to them, and they shall be r^moved according as we shall
make them the lesser: For example, the figure K L, is the greatest and the
nearest and that M N, is the most removed: As the secret in this for the
Painters, is to finish well those before more then those of the bottom, and
the further they are removed, the more they are to be far it and less perfect.

The Rule of these Figures, and of those that have the Eyes within the Horizon,
is no other then their own height, for as well in the one fashion as in the
other, there is but only to make the Figures lesser and l^sse furnished, which
we would have backward and seem farther off.



Of Figures Elevated above the Plane.
THere are that say, that the Objects elevated from the Earth, have more
diminution then when they were upon the Plane, and that for this reason, it
must be that a Figure raised up 4 or 5 feet, should be lesser then if it were
on the Ground: this should be good if it were elevated very high, as we shall
say hereafter; but this little makes that the diminution is unperceiveable;
for supposing, that such an Object or Figure could be discovered at one only
view, that is to say, without lifting up the eye; they ought to have the same
height being elevated, as if they were on the Ground; For example, the figure A
must have the same height that the figure B, and the figure C, as that of D,
and that of F, equal to G, and so of others.

For the Figures below, we shall mark for the same reason, the Figures that are
below are of the same height as those above, as is the figure E, equal in
height to that of H and I, as great as the figure K These two Examples shall
serve for all those that we could make there.



Of the Postures that we should give to Figures in the Perspectives.
WE must make choice of the Postures, which we should give to figures, for to
deceive the eye, seeing that they are not all there good, as we have already
said: Wherefore it seemed good to me to set down some, which might show a way
to invent others.

The first is a Man, which reads being set: the second reads a proclamation
fastened to a Wall: the third plays upon a Lute: the fourth sleeps: the
fifth sits on a rail, and turns the back on the side of them that are two and
two: the first marked with six look upon a design upon Paper, the other farther
off seven, are about serious affairs

One might set those that play, that talk together, or entertain at a Table, or
standing up, which write, which pray on their knees, in one word, one may set
an infinite company of postures, so that they be such, that one may stay there
long time: But we must never set those that are in action, for that deceives
not to see always one Leg; or an Arm in the Air, nor those that run without
stirring from one place to another.

Of Beasts and Birds in Perspective.
WE must keep the same Rules as in the Figures, giving the height or breadth to
the first, and from the two ends of this first measure to draw to the Horizon,
to have all the measures of the others: For example, having made the first
horse A D, for to have the height of that of B, we must from the line A D, draw
to the Horizon C; and then from the point B, to draw a parallel to the base B
K, until that it do divide the line A C, which shall give the point K, from
which we shall raise the Perpendicule K L, for the height of the horse from the
point B.

For the Fowls we must from the ends of the Wings E F, draw Rays to the
Horizon, and between these two lines, take the measure of the others which I
suppose of the same bigness. For example, for to have the bigness of a Fowl at
the point G, we must draw a parallel to the base G H, until that it divide the
Rays E F, which we shall give the line H I, for the greatness of the Fowl G.

When we would set Beasts, or Birds in the Perspectives we must choose those
that are most at rest, as may be a Dog sleeping, or gnawing a Bone, a Cat
watching of a Mouse, or a Parret, etc.



For to find the height of Figures far removed, the first being upon a
Mountain near to the Eye.
IT is a thing that gives great Contentment and Satisfaction to the Mind,
when we have the knowledge of that which we have done, that which makes me
believe that any one will be glad to have the present Rule unknown to many.

When we are to make these Figures, we must determine the height of the first,
that is to say, the distance from the Ground, whither we would ascend, and at
this distance to set another figure below of the same height, from the feet and
from the head of which we must draw to the Horizon, for to have the height of
other Figures, which are within the Field. I express my self.

For example, the figure A which is above the Mountain, has for its height
five feet Royal, which is the natural. I suppose, that the Mountain has twenty
five feet of height, if one be raised up twenty feet, as this Piece in the
midst whither the Beholder is raised, which ought also to have five feet for
his height, the Horizon will meet it at twenty five feet, as the Top of the
Mountain and the Horizon will grate upon it, as we see at the Figure of the
Mountain, which has the feet upon the Horizon.

Now for to find the height of these little persons which are within the
field, we must make a figure twenty five feet lower, under that of A, or in
some other place, as is B C. And from the feet B, and from the head C, to draw
in some place within the Horizon, as is the point O, and between these two
lines B and C, which go to the point O, we must take the height of the little
figures, as we have done in the Orders aforegoing, as for to have the height of
the little figure D. We must draw a Parallel to the base; until that it divide
the line B at the point E, from which we shall raise the Perpendicule, which
shall divide the line C O at the point F.

And we must take with a Compass this Perpendicule E F, for the height of the
figure from the point D: If one would have also the height of the figures from
the points G H, we must do the same as at the Figure D, and we shall find
their height between the lines B and C, which we must take with a Compass, and
transport them to the points G H, and do always the same for as many persons as
you would diminish I all unto one point,

Observe here all that may be said for the Measures of Figures, according to
Perspective. But seeing that I am engaged for all the Measures of figures, I
have set down all the Orders following, although they are not according to this
Art.



For to give the natural height, or such as one would to Figures elevated on
high.
THAT we may omit nothing for the heights of Figures, we will set down also the
two Rules following, whereof one has already been given by Albert Durer,
Serlio, and others, for to write letters in an eminent place, and to make them
appear equal to those below: by the same reason we may make use of it for to
find the Measures and the greatness of Figures, which shall appear all equal
from a certain point where the Beholder shall be.

There is a man at the point B, five feet high, and distant from the Tower A
fifty feet, which beholds the first Figure C, which appears to him as
natural, and at 30 feet higher D he would set another Figure, which should
appear as natural as the other from the place where he is: How should he find
its measure?

He must make a quarter of a Round, or only a little Arch upon the paper, which
he must set before the Eye, and behold the feet and the head of the Figure C,
and that shall give to the quarter of the Circle, the distance or the Angle E
F, then he must at the same time, and without moving the quarter of the Circle,
behold the point D, where ought to be the foot of the Figure D I, and to mark
the point that it shall give at the quarter of the Circle, which is here the
point G; and at this point G he must set the Angle, or the same distance that
the Figure C shall have given, which is E F, which being transported unto G,
shall give G H. Then by the point H, we must look where we shall divide the
line elevated from D, which shall be at the point I, so that the distance D I
shall be the height which we must give to the Figure which we would set there.
He that would make one yet higher, has only to do the same operations, and he
shall have that which he desires, and they shall all appear as natural to the
Beholder B. If one would know the reason, he must remember the Principles, or
to look therein anew, and he shall find that all the Objects viewed under
equal Angles appear equal; now it is that the Angle G H is equal to E F,
whereof the Figure D I must appear in the eye equal to the figure C

For to know how much Figures equal diminish to the eye, the one set upon the
others in height.
THE Beholders K, having a quarter of a Round, or part of a Circle, as that of
the first figure B, he looks upon the first figure M, from the Tower L, which
appeared to him as Natural, measuring it from the feet unto the head; he
marketh the Angle, or the distance upon his quarter of a Circle, which are N O;
then without stirring any thing, he beholds also the feet and the head of the
Figure P, and marketh upon his quarter of the Round the Angle that it gives,
which is Q R, if there were any also higher, he could take them all, and set
them upon his quarter of a Round.

For to know the difference that there is from the one to the other, we must
with a Compass take the Angles, or the distances of the one and of the other,
and we shall know that the most elevated give the least Angle, and by
consequence make appear to the eye the Figures lesser; and then we may say,
that the figure P appears not to the eye, but the half of the figure M,
although that one be as high as that other. If one demand the reason, we shall
say that the figure P gives to the quarter of the Round of an Angle, which is
but the half of the figure M, as one may see that Q R is but the half of N O,
or very little to speak of. By this knowledge we come to the other from above,
and from that from above, to this here: for if M and P be of the same height,
and that P from below appear not but the half of M; we may say assuredly, that
to make P to be seen as M, that there would need yet as much more of height,
the same is of that above, where the figure D, which is double of C, appears
not at all greater, beholding it from the point B* One may say also, that if D
were not greater then C, there would appear but the half of its height, and so
one Rule is the Reverse of the other.

As well the first as the second Order ought to be contracted, as the figures
are made heretofore, where we shall have also assuredly the diff rence and
proportion of the figures, as if they were taken at the Natural with this
fourth of the Circle.



Of Measures for the Figures elevated.
COncerning that which we are speaking of, for the diminution of figures when
they are elevated, we must draw the Measures in proportion to those which we
would elevate in the Pictures, whether we do set them upon the Mountains, upon
the Houses, or upon the Clouds in the Air. The two Orders that we are about to
give, shall render the Method very easy.

For the first, I suppose that the man A is six feet high, the which height we
multiply many times upon a plumb line B upon the base; and from these divisions
from 6 to six feet, we must draw to the Head of the Figure A; Then having set a
leg of the Compass at the point A, with the other leg we must make the Arch C
D, and the sections which this Arch shall make of the Rays, shall be the
Measures which we must give to the Figures, for example, if one would make a
figure appear Elevated 42 feet we must take the draught E D, which divides
the 2 last Rays, which we must transport to F, which is elevated 42 feet upon
the same base A B. If we would have another at 30 feet high, we must take the
draught G H, which divides the Rays 30 and 36, which shall be the height of
the Figure P, and so of others. All the concernment is to know how much this
line B ought to approach or retire back, which ought always to be the distance
of the beholder to the Object beheld, as here of 30 feet, or thereabouts.

For the second Order, in stead of this line B, in the first Order I have set
the divisions from 6 to 6 feet upon the base I T, the two first points I and 6
ought to be drawn to the point of sight K, for to have between these two Rays I
K, 6 K, the Measure of six feet, which is the height that we give to the
Figures. Then from all these other Measures from 6 to 6, unto 48 or more, if
there be any, we must draw to the point of distance L, and at the sections that
we shall make of the Ray 6 K; we must draw little Parallels to the base,
between the Rays I 6; the which Parallels shall be the heights of figures
within the sinking; and by consequence, for the figures elevated at the same
distanc^, the which we may verify, carrying back the Measures of the first
Order with those of the second.

He that would know how much each figure is diminished from the first which
has six feet, he has but only to take the height of that which he desires
with a Compass, and carry the Compass so open upon the little scale M, and he
shall have that he desires. For example, if having taken the height of the
figure P we carry it upon the scale M, it will give but 4 feet, the which
causes to know, that a Figure of 6 feet elevated 30 feet, will appear but of 4
feet. The heights or diminutions of others shall be known by the same
operations, so that it be in the same distance with these here; if one change
the distance, all the Orders must be begun again all anew, and work as we have
done.

The Figures V X Y, which are in the Air above the Clouds, at the second Figure
below, are of the same height and proportion as that in the first: I have set
them down only for to see, that alth^ugh that the Orders be different, the
effects are the same.

That which I have said for to find the height, and diminutions of the
Figures, which are upon the b^^e A B of the first Order, and I T of the second,
ought to be observed in proportion as they are sunk, and it must be that the
most elevated having the same reference with those that are on the Ground,
which are in the same line as this F P with this A For example, in the second
Order, if over against the last figure N, there were a figure O, Elevated upon
a Tower, 48 or 50 feet high, what Measures should we give it? I answer, that we
must give it the same Proportion that this N, shall have with the I. And as the
last N, contains but twice and an half, of the 6, the I has, this O which
shall be upon the Tower, ought to have but 2 and an half of the 6 parts that
the figu e N has. If I would have also a Figure R, Elevated upon another Tower
of 48 or 50 feet before the figure Q, we must take also 2 parts and an half of
6, from the Figure Q, for the height of the Figure R. He that would have also
one in S, at the same Tower, which is elevated 30 feet, he must give it 4 parts
of the 6, of the Figure Q. that is to say, 4 feet, as we have found it in the
first O^ er, between he Rays G H. In one word, all the figures do diminish
themselves to the Eye, according as they are E evated, as the contrary happens,
when they are abased.

That which ought to make this Rule esteemed is, that all the proportions of
Figures may be learned by heart, for he that would take the pains to make a
Measure of this, where he might join more parts, and they would serve him for
ever; and he might ^ender it so familiar to himself, that in a moment he will
tell you, that being removed 35 feet, if the Figure h t^ 6 feet, or 6 parts of
height, being upon the Ground, One of which shall be of the same height, being
elevated 12 feet, will nor appear but of five and an half. That which shall be
e^evated to 18. shall appear but of^. That which shall be elevated 24, shall
appear but of 4 and an half Tha of 30 but of 4. That of 36 of 3 feet; And that
of 42 but of 2 feet and an half; And so proceeding from 6 to 6, as I had done,
^f the pap r would have suf^e e i; It is enough, that it is known how we ought
to do, for to set here a greater number thereof.



ORDERS FOR TO FIND THE NATURAL SHADOVVS AS WELL BY THE SUN AND BY A TORCH AS
BY A CANDLE AND A LAMP.
The Original of Shadows.
FOr to define the natural Shadow, we say not that it is an entire Privation of
light; for that would be to say a perfect obscurity, where we should see as
little the objects as their shadows, but we understand a diminution of Light,
caused by the interposition of some body which is not transparent, the which
receiving the Sun, or the clearness which should cast it self upon the plane
where it is set, gives there a shadow of its shape, for the light being
Comunicative of it self, produces it self upon all that which is not hidden
from it, and Extends it self upon all that is plain and united: but if it
meet which the least Elevation, this hinderance causes it to make a Shadow,
which renders upon the Plane the form and figure of that which is Enlightened.

The diversity of lights, makes a diversity of shadows for if the body that
enlightneth is greater then that which is enlightened the shadow will be lesser
then the body if they be equal, the shadow will be equal to the Body
enlightened: but if the light be lesser then the Object, the shadow will still
be more and more the greater.

For to understand this the better, we will make the three figures following,
which shall serve us as a foundation, for the Rules which we shall give.

The first shows that the Body of light A B, being much greater then the
Enlightened C D, it Enlightneth more then the half of the Object, the which
makes it to give a shadow with a Point and frame it into a Pyramide, whereof
the Sun is the Base. This truth is showed in the Ecliepse of the Moon, which is
seldom wholly Covered with the shadow of the earth, which nevertheless
exceeds it in greatness forty times, by reason that the Sun, which is the
body full of light, is an hundred sixty six times, and more, greater then the
Earth, which it enlightneth more then the half; and by consequencee causes to
give a shadow to it in a point.

The second, having the body of light F G, equal in greatness to the enlightened
H I, it enlightneth the half of the Object, and gives its shadow parallel H I
K L.

The third makes appear, that the lightsome body, or the light M, being less
then that which is enlightened N O, is not enlightened by the half, the which
causes a shadow unto it, N O P Q, which enlarges it self according as it is
removed, from the object, and makes a Pyramide, whereof the light is the point.



Of the difference of Shadows.
BY that which I have spoken in the Leaf aforegoing, we must conclude, that one
and the same Object may give diverse shapes of shadows or projections, although
that it be enlightened of the same side; by reason that the Sun gives it of one
fashion, the Torch of another, and the Day does not frame it.

The Sun renders always the shadow equal to the object, that is to say, by
parallel, as the first figure shows it. I shall teach in the Leaves
following, how we ought to use this method, and to give to every object the
natural shadow, which the Sun would cause it to have; All Painters, Gravers and
others may, if they please, observe these Rules, when they would make any thing
pleasing, and not to take the Rule of the Candle, or Torch, for this; as diverse
have done.

The shadow of the Torch is not given by parallels, but by Rays, which issue
from the same Center, that which causes the shadow is never equal to the body,
but more large, and is greater always according as it is removed, the which may
be seen in the second figure, where the shadow is larger then in the first,
although that the Cubes of the one and the other be of equal breadth and
height. See then how one should be much deceived if one should make the shadow
of a Torch, like as that of the Sun, and of the Sun, as that of the Candle,
seeing that the difference is so notable.

There is a third sort of shadow, which is neither of the Sun, nor of a Torch,
but only caused by a fair Day, the which having not strength enough for to
frame the figure, renders only a confused blackness at the object, as in the
third figure. Now this has no Rule, wherefore every one gives it, and
practiceth it according to his fancy,

All these shadows as well of the Sun, as of the Torch, and of the Day, ought
to be more dark then the parts of the objects which are not enlightened, as A,
it not so dark as B, by reason that A receives the reflection of the
clearness, which is about it: and B, has not the reflection that A, which is
in obscurity. We must observe also, that the part of the shadow most distant
from the object, is also more dark, then the part nearer as G, is darker then
H, by reason that A cannot communicate that little reflection which it
receives unto G, as it does to H.

1. Figure
2. Figure
3. Figure


For to find the shape of the Shadows.
WE shall observe at the beginning of this Book, that the Definition of
Perspective is to give upon a Plane perpendicular to the Horizon, the
Representation of Objects which are upon the Ground, or upon a Plane
Horizontal: And for shadows, it is altogether contrary; seeing that one
supposes a Body elevated upon the Plane, the which being enlightened, casts
its shadow upon the same Plane, as we see, that the Body A gives upon the
Plane the shadow B; for to find the shadows we must suppose two things, the
Light and a Body: The Light, although it be contrary to it, it is that
nevertheless which gives it its Being, and the Body or the Object gives it
its shape and its figure. I shall not discourse here but of shadows, for I
suppose that we have learned to set the Bodies or Objects into Perspective.

For to understand these shadows more easily, and render the Orders following
more easy; we must mark that we must make use of two points: the one of the
foot of the light, which ought always to be taken upon the Plane where the
Object is placed; and the other of the Torch or lightsom Body; seeing that the
Rule is general for the Sun and for the Torch, with this only difference, that
the shadow of the Sun is given by Parallel, and that of the Torch by the Ray of
the same Center. We will begin with that of the Torch, seeing that it will help
the better to comprehend that of the Sun, which shall follow.

We say then for example, That if one would have the shadow of the Cube A, as
we see B, that we must from the point O, foot of the light, draw lines by all
the Angles of the Plane of the Object, as here by the plane of the Cube O D, O
E, O F, O G: Then you must draw other lines from the point of the light of the
Torch by all the same Angles elevated, and to continue these lines until that
they divide the other lines drawn from the point O: for example, having from
the point O drawn the line passing by the Angle of the Plane D; if one draw
from the point C, a line passing by the same Angle elevated; this shall divide
the other at the point H, and the point H shall be the shadow of this Angle. If
from the point C, we do the same by all the Angles elevated, we shall divide
the lines of the Plane, at the points H I K L, the which points we must join
with right lines, and we shall have the shadow of the Cube, as is to be seen at
the Figure above, and more clearly at that below.



Of Shadows taken from the Sun.
THE Sun, that glorious lightsom body, being far greater then the whole Globe
of the Earth, as I have already said in the beginning of this Treatise, should
make all its shadows in point, seeing that he does always enlighten more then
the half.

In pursuit of this demonstration we should conclude, that all the shadows of
the Sun ought to be less then the Body that is opposed unto it, and to diminish
as it removes it self far off: which would be true, if there were any
correspondency of the Body enlightened, to the Body enlightening: but all the
Objects which are upon Earth, are so small a thing in respect of this great
light, that the diminution of their shadows is unperceivable by our eyes, which
acknowledged them all equal, that is to say, that they are neither larger nor
streighter, then the Bodies that give them their shape; for this reason, we
give all the shadows caused by the Sun by Parallels, as we have seen at the
second Figure of this Treatise.

It follows from all this discourse, that for to have the shadow of what body
soever it be, being opposed to the Sun, we must draw a line from above this
great light, which may fall plumb at the place where one would take the foot of
the light; and from this place to draw an occult line by one of the Angles of
the Plane of the Object, and another of the Sun by the same Angle elevated, and
the section of these two lines shall show how far the shadow must go, all the
other lines shall be drawn Parallel unto these.

For example, for to take the shadow of the Cube A, the Sun being at B, we must
from under the Sun C, which is as the foot of the light, draw a line which
touches an Angle of the Plane, as C D. Then from the other Angles E, to draw
Parallels to this; for to find the end of the shadow, we must draw a line from
the Sun B, passing by the Angle elevated F, which shall divide the line C D in
G. Then drawing a Parallel to this by the Angle H, it will divide the line E at
the point I, and we shall have the shadow of the Cube D G L.

He that would cause the shadows to cast before, or in any other way; he must
determine the place of the Sun, and the point underneath, to draw the lines of
an Angle, and make all other lines parallel to that, as you may see by the
figure below, without repeating the Practick, which is the same as that above.



The Shadows of the Sun are equal to the Objects of the same height, although
that they be removed the one from the other.
EXperience teaches us, that many styles, or elevations of the same height;
removed the one from the other, cease not to give their shadows equal in the
same time, I say in the same time, for they do lengthen or shorten themselves,
according as the Sun comes near, or retireth himself, the which he does every
moment, seeing that he never stands still.

Wherefore when one desires to cause the shadow of some object to cast, we
must determine of the place of the Sun and the point under it, to draw from
thence the two occult lines which give the term of the shadow, as here the
Hedge-row A, gives the point of its shadow in B, and if from the point B, you
draw to the point of sight C, this line B C shall be as well the shadow of the
Hedge-row D, as of that A, and of all those that should be in the same line
unto the point of sight, and you must hold for a maxim, that the shadows do
always keep the same point of sight with the objects.

Following this experience, that the objects of the same height do give the
shadows equal, if one would give the shadow to the Hedge-rows E F, which are of
the same height with A D; we must only take with a Compass the distance A B,
and carry it to the foot of the Hedge-Row E, for to have E G; and from this
point G, to draw to the point of sight C, and to make always the same Practice,
even when these Alleys were prolonged infinitely.

But if the light come from the bottom, or from before, as in the figure below,
must we change the Order? No, we most only set forward or draw back the foot,
or that under the Sun, and draw lines from the one and from the other by an
Angle, as are H and I, which shall give the bound of the shadow of the
Hedge-Row K, to the point L; and from this point L we must draw to the point of
sight M: Then from all the Angles of the Plane of the Palissades, we must draw
Parallels to the line H, unto the Ray L M, and we shall have the natural
shadows of the same Palissades or Hedge-Rows.



Of the Shadows when the Sun is directly opposite to the Eye.
AS often as the Sun is before our eyes, that is to say, above the point of
sight; the sides of the shadow that it shall cause shall be parallels, as are
all the visual Rays; wherefore the point of sight shall serve always for the
foot of the light; And the other Ray, which shall determine the shadow, shall
be taken from the center of the Sun.

For example, when we would find the shadow of the Cube A, we must by the
Angles of its plane B C, draw Rays to the point of sight D, as are B E, C F.
Then from the center of the Sun G, draw also two Rays, which shall divide those
at the point K L, passing by the ends of the lines elevated from the angles B
and C, which are H and I: In such manner as the shadow of this Cube shall be B
K L C.

The shadows of the two other pieces M and N, shall be taken by the same order,
and so of all the others, which may there be met withal.

It comes into my mind, that one might be troubled, if instead of a Cube,
there were a Pyramide: by reason that the Ray of the midst of the plane of the
Pyramide, and the Ray of the Sun, that passes by the point, made but one line,
and by consequence can terminate nothing for to take the shadow from the point
of this Pyramide.

When this shall happen, we must from an Angle of the plane, as is here O, draw
a Ray to the point of sight P, which shall make O Q: And from the same Angle O,
elevate a Perpendicular O S, then from the point of the Pyramide T, make a
parallel to the base, until that it divide the Perpendicular O S, at the point
V: We must make the Ray of the Sun to pass by this point V, and continue it
until that it divide the Ray O Q, at the point X, from this point X, we must
make a parallel to the base, unto the Ray of the midst of the Pyramide, which
shall be divided at the point Y, the bound of the shadow: We must draw to this
point Y, from the Angles Z and O, and the Triangle Z Y O, shall be the shadow
of the Pyramide.

These Walls, which are at the bottom of the one and the other figures, take
their shadows as we have said of the Cube A.



For to give the shadow of the Objects pierced by the light.
WHEN the Object is square, or of a right line, we must from the point A from
under the Sun, draw lines Parallels from all the Angles of the Plane: Then from
the midst of the Sun B, draw a line to the Angle the far^hest removed C, which
shall divide the line A at the point D, and to draw from the point D to the
point of sight E, until that it find the last line of the Plane F: for to have
the rest of the shadows, we must draw Parallels to the line B C D, by the
corners G H I, by reason that the Sun enlightneth two faces, and makes the
shadow larger, as is to be seen in the first figure, that G C and H I are the
Diagonals of these square Pieces enlightened on two sides; and where these lines
drawn by C G and H I shall divide the line A, we must draw to the point of
sight E, and we shall have all the Projection, or the shadow of the Object.

If it be a Round, as in the second figure, we must make the Round by the Order
of the Arches on the side, as fol. 62. and 63 by elevating the Perpendiculars,
and when the Round shall be framed with its thicknesses, we must from the foot
of all these Perpendiculars draw Parallels to the base, as L K, then to take
for the under-part of the Sun L, which is the Parallel of the midst of the
Round. Then from the midst of the Sun M, to draw a line passing by the upper
part of the Round N, and to continue until that it divide this Parallel L, at
the point O, which shall be the bound of the shadow. The empty part of this
Round shall be found, drawing a Parallel to N O from the point P, which is the
upper part of the Round opposite to the Sun, until that it divide the line I O.
The rest of the Round shall be found drawing also a little Parallel to N O from
the point R, which shall give S. All the rest of the Rounds are found by making
parallels to N O, by all the points of the Round of the Perpendicules, which we
must continue until that they divide the Parallels to the base, so as I have
made that of the midst L O, I had marked them all with points; but I am such an
enemy of confusion, that this has caused me to omit them.



The Shadows take the shape of the Planes where they are cast.
HItherto I have given the shadows within a Plane united, being assured that he
which shall understand them well, shall not have any difficulty to practice
these here, and the others that follow; because that it is all the same Rule,
and that one only direction shall suffice for to make to understand, how these
shadows do raise and abase themselves according as they find their Planes.

For to make it appear, that these shadows are found by the same Rule that the
former, is it not sertain that he which should draw a line from under the Sun
A, passing by the Plane of this Gate B, and that from the Sun C, one should
draw another by the top of the Gate D, that these lines would divide themselves
out of our paper, and would give the bound of the shadow, so as I have said of
others? But the wall E hindering the line A B to prolong it self, as it would do
if the Plane were united, obliges it to raise it self as we see E G: wherefore
it is that the Ray of the Sun C, which ought to go very far to seek the line A
B, divides it against the wall at the point G, and there marketh the shape, or
the shadow of this Gate, whereof the Top draws to the point of sight H.

The shadow of this piece K easteth its self with its whole length K I, passing
over this other piece I; and we must mark, that the shadow keeps always its
length, although that it meet with something between two: and it must be, that
the shadow which passes over something, observes the figure and the form of
the same thing: as here the shadow M and N, keeps the shape of the Piece L.

Although that I have made the Sun to appear in the other figures, we must not
think that he should be so near the Objects; it has bin only for to give to
understand, that the Rays do come from thence, whenas he is in this height: but
nevertheless, out of the Piece, as in this second Figure, which yet cease
not, have the line from under the Sun A B, and that of the Ray of the Sun C, by
reason that we ought always to suppose them for to find the bound of the
shadow.

The shadow of the Piece O is found, by continuing the line A B, and making it
to ascend the steps, and raise it self against the wall, until that the Ray C,
passing by the corner of the Piece, divides it at the point S, then from the
point S to draw to the point of sight T

For to find the shadow of the Piece P, we must remember that which I said at
the beginning of this Treatise, that we must always suppose the foot of the
light upon the Plane where the Object is placed, and so the Ray C, dividing the
little line A B, shows how far the shadow of the little piece P ought to go,
which must be drawn to the point of sight T.

The Piece V gives its shadow all along, although it descend into a Pit; the
shadow of the wall R is found by the same Order that the others, as also the
lines A B, and ^he Ray C, cause it to be seen.



For to find the shadow of the Objects, when they have more breadth above then
below.
WHEN one would have the projection below, or shadow of Figures, whereof the
upper part has more breadth or length then the lower, how these two figures
ought to be.

They make ordinarily a plane, from which they raise the Perpendiculars A B.

The plane being made, we must from under the Sun draw a line as I have already
said, and from all the Angles of the plane draw parallels to that, then to draw
one from the Sun C, passing by one of the Angles of the Object, as D, until
that it divide the line of the plane of the same Angle A, so that it make the
line D E at the point F, and to draw E and F, at the point of sight G; which
shall give the shadow of the square above the Object, then drawing from the
point of the figure H, to the point F and L, we have the whole shadow of this
Pyramide turned down-wards.

We may see well, that the projection, or the shadow of this cross below is
made by the same Order, which I will not repeat that I may not be troublesome,



For to find the shadow of Objects elevated from the Ground.
THis order will be rendered easy by that which I have newly given, seeing that
in the one and in the other, we need only to find the plane, and from this
plane to draw lines, parallels to those under the Sun by all the Angles, then
from the same Angles of the Objects, elevated into the Air, to draw also lines
for to divide those which are drawn from the plane, and to find the bound of
the shadows, as I have here already said many times in the figures foregoing.

The which makes me believe, that any one shall easily understand all that I
can make of the shadows taken from the Sun, without that there be any need of
other explications for the figures, seeing that they are sufficiently
intelligible, and all made by the Rules which one may have learned by others
heretofore.

But as every figure has always some particular observation, it will not be
besides the purpose to give notice thereof, to the end there may be nothing,
which may not be easily understood.

I say then, that in the first figure, I have only made use of the plane A B C
D, for to find the shadows of the objects E and F, by reason that they are both
upon the same line, and of the same height.

In the second, we must observe that the piece of wood G, casting its shadow
upon the Wall H; this shadow makes the same figure that the Corniche I, which
is below, the which is seen also at the Staff K, set against the same Wall H.

For to find the shadow of the board L, we must remember the order afore-going
of the Objects broader above then below: for having drawn the Perpendicule M,
where it shall divide the Ray N O, we must draw the line from under the Sun M
P, then from the board elevated L, to draw a line, which divides M P, and this
section shall be the bound of the shadow.

The shadow of the Boul Q, shall be found also, making two Perpendiculars to
fall, of which we must frame the plane: Then by the Center of this plane, to
draw the line from under the Sun R, and from the Sun a Tangent, as Q S, until
that we divide the line R, at the point T, and also another V, which divides
the same R, and this distance T V, shall be the greatness of the shadow of the
boul.



For to find the shadow at the Sun in all sorts of Figures.
THE shadow of these Figures is found by the same Orders of other bodies, that
is to say, by parallels, as well of them from under the Figure, as of those
that come from the Sun; with this only difference, that the shadow of the
bodies, or objects, is found by the help of their plane, and that the figures
have none thereof, but instead of these planes, we must, from the aspect
whereby we see the Figure, draw a line by the under part, and upon this line
make to fall perpendicularly, that which is most remarkable in the figure, for
to help to find the shadow, and then this line from below, shall serve as for a
plane.

For example, the figure being naked, or clothed, and without a Cloak, as the
first that turns the back to us: We must from under its feet A, draw a line
to the point of sight B, and upon this line A B, make to fall occult lines from
all the points which can help to find the true shadow: as from the hand C, to
make to fall a Plumb-line, which shall divide the line A B at the point D, and
from the Elbow E, to make one fall to the point F, and yet another from the
head G, which shall give the point H, from all these points D F H, from the
feet of the figure, and from the end of his Staff I. We must draw parallels to
the base.

Then the height of the Sun being determined of, we must draw a line, as K,
passing by the forepart, touching the brim of the Hat G, and to continue the
same, until that it divide the line H, at the point L, which shall be the end
of the shadow. And also from the brim behind his Hat M, to draw a parallel to K
G L, until that it divide also the line H, at the point N, these points N L,
shall be the shadow of the Hat. We must draw a parallel by the point C, until
that it divide the line D, at the point O. This point O shall be the shadow of
the hand, which holds the Staff: Wherefore drawing from this point O, to the
point I, this line O I, shall be the shadow of the Staff: We must also draw a
parallel to the point E, which shall divide F; at the point P, and shall be the
shadow of the Elbow, and so of all the places that one would, as of the Knees,
upon the parallels, which pass under the feet; and from all these points to
mark the shadow of the whole figure: the little figure Q, has taken its shadow
by the same order. I have not marked all the points, nor the parallels for to
avoid confusion.

When they are clothed at length, for to find the shadows of the figures, we
must, as I have said draw from under their feet, a line to the point of sigh^
R, as this S R, and from the bottom of the garment on the one side and the
other, draw two parallels to the base, as T V, and between T V, another X,
which is the midst of the figure. Then from the top of the Head, to draw a line
Y, which shall be for the Ray of the Sun, which we must continue, until that it
divide the line X, at the point Z, and this point Z shall h^^ the bound, where
the shadow must end, the rest of the shadow shall be drawn between the two
parallels T V, and if any thing flow over, as the two fold, and *, we must
draw them by parallel to Y X, until that they divide the Ray V, as we see that
the, gives the shadow of the Elbow, and the *, gives that of the folds of the
Cloak.



For to find with facility the shadows by the Sun.
IF I would here set down the shadows of all the Objects which may be given, it
were to take in hand a design without end, for the Objects may be given
infinitely: for besides the great number that there is of them, each would
suffice to make a Book, seeing that it may be turned, bended, and lie down in
diverse manners, each having its shadow different. But this labor would be very
unprofitable seeing that every one may make those which shall please him, so
that he remember well two or three Rules which he must keep, as I have showed
in the Orders of the shadows taken from the Sun; where two sorts of lines give
the means to find all the shadows which may be; the one coming from under the
Sun passing by the Plane: the other which parts from the Sun by the upper
part of the Object, and goes to divide this other line, where the shadow must
go: but as these lines must be each Parallels: that is to say, those from under
the Sun Parallels between themselves, and those of the Sun also Parallels
between themselves. I believed that I should oblige, I gave an Invention to
draw them readily the one and the other.

I have said elsewhere, how we should draw Parallels to the base, by the means
of a Board well squared, as this here A, and of a Rule as B, the which shall
serve to draw lines from under the Sun, when it meets directly opposite to
the face of the Object, as may be the line C D; but if it enlighten by the
Angle, we must use another instrument, as that marked E, which is a Rule
fastened to the End of another piece of Wood well squared, and hollowed of one
side and the other, in such manner that the Rule F G, may move with force, to
the end that having taken a line bended as H D, one may thereby make one which
may be Parallel to it, which is I K with this false square or Grashoper, it is
so as the Workmen call it E F G; this Instrument does abbreviate exceedingly,
when one would make shadows of the Sun, for there is not a line, and of what
inclination soever it be, whereof one may not draw Parallels. The use will make
us to know its profitableness.

But for the shadow by the Torch and the Candle, it is of no use at all, by
reason that all the lines are drawn from one Center.



The Shadows taken from a Torch, from the Candle, and from a Lamp; are found by
one and the same Order.
I Have already said, that for to find the shadows, we must necessarily have
two points, the one from the foot of the Torch, or of the Candle, or of the
Lamp, which ought always to be found upon the Plane, where the Object is set:
the other from the flame of one of these lights.

From the first point, which is the foot of the Torch, the bottom of the Lamp
or of the Candle, we must draw Rays by all the Angles of the plane of the
Object, of which one would have the shadow: And the second point, which is the
flame, will give other Rays, which passing by the Angles from the top of the
Objects, will go to divide these lines drawn from the plane, and to mark where
the shadow must end it self: I shall show this by example, using the same
Letters, for these three lights, in which it shall be easy to see, that it is
all the same order, in the one, as in the other, with this only difference,
that the foot of the Torch, or of the Taper is set below, and that it must
suppose in others that they set it there.

I say then, that if one would have the shadows B, of the Cubes A, that we must
from the point O, foot of the light, draw lines by all the Angles of the planes
of these Cubes, as O D, O E, O F, O G, Then from the point C, which is the
light, or the fire of these Luminaries, draw other lines, which must pass by
the Angles of the objects elevated, and continue these lines, until that they
divide the other lines drawn from the point O.

For example, having drawn a line from the point O, passing by the Angle of the
plane D, if one draw from the point C, another line passing by the same Angle
elevated P, this of the point C being continued, shall divide the first of the
corner D, at the point H, and this point H, shall be the shadow of this Angle D
P. If from the point C, we do the same by all the Angles elevated, we shall
divide the lines of the Angles of the plane, at the points H I K L, the which
points H I K L, we must join with right lines; and we shall have the shadow of
the Cubes, as is to be seen in the three figures,

By this example, it is easy to see, that it is all the same order, in the one
as is in the others.

In the leaf following, it shall be taught to find the under parts or the feet
of the Candles and Lamps.



Of the foot of the light.
SEeing that the Order for to find the shadows for the Torch, for the Candle
at for the Lamp, is altogether the same in the one as in the other, as we have
sai but now. There will be no more need to set down distinctions in the Order
following: for when I shall set a Torch, one may set a Candle or Lamp in the
place, by reason that the flame of the one has the same effect with that of
the other: wherefore from henceforth, I will use the word of light for all
three.

For the foot of these lights, which must be upon all the Planes, where they
set the Objects, they shall be found by this Method.

Having a Torch lighted within a Chamber, whether we shall set it in a corner
on the side, or in the midst as this, it must be, that all the Parts of the
Chamber, or of the Hall, as the Boards above and below, the sides and the
bottom have a point that serve^h for the foot of the light: that from this
point we may draw by all the Angles of the Plane of the Object, of which we
would have the shadow, as I shall show in the leaf following, contenting my
self to show in this, how we must find this point which I call the foot of the
light.

The Torch being placed in A, this point A, is the foot of the light, and B the
fire or the light of the Torch; this fire or light B remains firm and never
changes, but the foot must be found on all sides.

For to have the foot of the light at the wall on the side C, we must from the
point A draw a Parallel to the base; until that it divide the Ray D E at the
point F, and from the point F to raise a Perpendicular F G; Then from the point
B, which is the fire, to draw another Parallel to the base until that it divide
F G at the point H, and this point H shall be the foot of the light, as if the
Torch were lying, by reason that its fire remains always at the point B.

For to find this foot of light at the Board above, we must from the point G
draw a Parallel to the base as G I, and from the point B to make a Perpendicule
to G I, which shall give the point K, which shall be the point of the foot of
the light, as if the Torch were turned upside down.

For to find it on the other side of the Hall, we must make the same Order as
on the side C, and we shall have the point L.

For to find the foot of the light at the bottom of the Hall, we must from the
point H draw to the point of sight O, until that we divide the Perpendicule E
at the point M; then from this point M to make a Parallel to the base, which
shall divide the Torch at the point N, this point shall be the foot of the
light for the bottom of the Hall.

The foot of the Candle is found by the same Order, as that of the Torch,
taking the midst of the foot of the Candlestick for the foot of the light; but
when it is a P^ated Candlestick, or an Arm set against a wall, it must be that
the Arm or the Branch of the Candlestick, determine the line, or shall be the
foot of the light. For example, in the Plate P, we must by the branch Q draw a
Perpendicular to the base, as R S; then from the fire T to make a small
Parallel to the base, which shall divide R S at the point V, which shall be the
foot of the light for this side, the point X shall be it for the board below,
the point Y for the board above, and Z for the bottom of the Hall or Chamber.

For the Lamp, it is the place where it is fastened, which determines its foot,
as here *, from which place they draw a Parallel to the base unto the first
Ray, and altogether the same as at the Torch, and at the Candl^.



For to find the shadows by a Torch, on all the sides of a Chamber,
THe shadows taken from the Sun, draw always toward the Earth, by reason that
this Star, communicates not its brightness except it be above our Horizon: and
by consequence elevated above all the objects, which causes that their shadow
always descends. But it is not so with the Torch; nor with the Candle, or
with the Lamp, the which one may set above or below, or on the side of the
objects, which renders their shadows on all parts, as we have said.

The Figure aforegoing will help to find the shadows of the Objects, set on
every side of a Chamber, for having found the Foot of the Light, as I have
newly spoken, there is no more difficulty, seeing that this is all the same
order, as the Cube of the 141 F O, whither we may have recourse: but that we go
not to search so far: I shall say, that for to have the shadow of the Table,
upon the which the Torch is passed we must from the point A; the foot of the
Torch, draw Rays by all the feet of the Table C, then from the point of the
light B, draw lines by the corners from upon the Table I, until that they
divide the Rays C, at the points O, which shall be the bounds of the shadow of
the Table.

The shadow of the piece D, shall be found drawing from the point A, by all the
Angles of the plane, unto the Angle of the Wall E, and from this Angle to raise
them Perpendicularly: Then from the point of the light B, to draw lines by the
top of this piece D, by observing the Angles correspondent to the lines of the
plane, and we shall have the shadow F, of the figure, or of the piece D.

The shadows of all the other pieces shall be found by the same order:
Wherefore I shall quote only the foot of the light, seeing that the fire shall
be always the point B.

For to find the shadow of the piece G, the point L, is the foot of the light.

For to find the shadow of the piece N, the point H, is the foot of the light.

For to find the shadows of the pieces I and M, the point K, is the foot of the
light.

The second Figure.
HAving found the foot of the light on all the sides of the Chamber as I have
said in the foregoing leaf; one may have the shadows of the objects in what
place soever they be; by the order that I have given. For by example, having
found the foot of the light Q, and its fire P. We must for to have the shadow
of the piece R, draw Rays from the point Q, which pass by the plane of the
piece R, and to continue them infinitely, but because that they meet with the
bottom of the Chamber, or the Wall T, we must at the meeting of the Angle S,
elevate all these lines; Then from the point P, draw other lines, by the top of
the same piece R, which shall go to divide those of the plane, and to mark the
place of the shadow upon each of them, taking care that the Angles have
reference to the lines drawn on the plane.

This order is so general, and universal, that he which shall well understand
only how to take the shadow of a Cube, shall find no difficulty to find the
shadow of any object whatsoever it be. Wherefore having given this order of the
Cube at the 141 fol and this above which is altogether the same, I believe I
have sufficiently instructed how to give all the shadows, without being obliged
to use repetitions in all the other figures which follow, where I shall only
quote the point for the foot of the light.

For to find the shadow of the piece V, the point X, is the foot of the light.

For to find the shadow of the piece Y, the point Z, is the foot of the light.

For to find the shadow of the piece, the point and, is the foot of the light,
and P, the fire or the light, for all the pieces of this second figure.

2 Figure


The shadow by a Torch of a Pyramide upright, and another upside down.
THIS Pyramide upright, gives its shadow by a Torch, as if it were by the Sun,
by reason that in the one and the other, there is but one line only, upon the
which they determine a point ^n which is for the point of the Pyramide: For
example, having made the Plane B C D E, and drawn two Diagonals for to find
the midst of the Plane F, we must raise a Perpendicule F A, then to draw from
these four points B C D E, to the point A, and the Pyramide shall be framed;
for to find its shadow, we must from the foot of the light G, draw one line
only passing by the point F, and prolong it infinitely. Then from the fire or
light of the Torch H, draw another line by the top of the Pyramide A, and
continue it until that it divide G F, at the point I, which shall be the bound
for the shadow of the Pyramide, which shall be finished, drawing C to I, and E
to I, for this Triangle C I E, shall be the shadow of the Pyramide A.

For to have the shadow of this Pyramide over-turn'd, we must cause
Perpendiculars to fall from the square above, and to frame the Plane below
thereby, as we have said at that of the Sun fol. 138. this Plane being framed,
we must from the foot of the light G, draw lines by all these Angles. Then from
the point H, which is the fire, draw also others by the Angles of the square
above, which dividing those of the Plane, shall mark the place of the shadow as
we have said in other Orders of the Torch.

The shadow of a Cross.
HAving set a Cross in the shadows of the Sun, it seemed to me necessary also
to set one in the shadow of a Torch, to the end that by that and by this, we
might know the difference of the one from the other.

The Order is seen enough, seeing that we have already taught at the 137 fol,
to find the Plane; and that the rest is as in other Orders of the Torch.



For to find the shadow of Round Objects, by a Torch.
HAving made the foregoing figure, it came into my mind, that one might be in
trouble, if there should be Bowls, Cups, Viols, Flagons, or other round pieces
(which have Ordinarily more breadth above then below) of the which we would
have the shadow by a Torch; by reason that such pieces seem more difficult then
the squares, although that in effect, it be all the same Order there being
nothing but to reduce the square into round so as I, have taught in the fol.
19. 20. 28. 29 and 86: Where we shall see all the Orders for to set the Planes
of round pieces into Perspective; the which being known, all the rest is very
easy to understand.

I have said already at fol. 138, how we must find the Plane of a Bowl, and
by this Plane, to have justly the greatness of the shadow by the Sun: But as
this of the Torch is different from that; I believed it to be necessary to set
that also down here by reason that it does facilitate the Order of all the
other Rounds.

For the shadow of this Bowl, I say then, that having made its Roundness with
a Compass, which is the the Circle A, and draw his Diameter B C, that we must
under this Circle make a line Parallel to B C, which touches the Circle at the
point H, then from the ends of the Diameter B C, to Cause Perpendiculars to
fall upon this line underneath, as B D, and C E, of the which points D E, we
shall frame the ordinary way the Plane D E F G, whereof the diameter F G, shall
divide this D E, at the point H; This Plane D E F G, shall serve for to find
shadow of this Bowl A. For after having drawn from the Foot of the Light I,
lines which touch this plane on the one side and other, as are the lines I K
and I L; And also another line passing by the midst of the plane H, which shall
be the line I H M. We must afterward draw other lines from the Light of the
Candle N, which touching the Bowl shall go to divide these lines of the Plane,
as from the point N, to draw a line, which touches the Bowl between A and B,
and divides the line I H, at the point M, which shall be the end of the
shadow: for to have the beginning of this shadow we must from the same point N,
draw another line which touches the forepart of the Bowl, and divides also
the line I H, at the point Q: this distance Q M, shall be the length of the
shadow, for its breadth, we must also from the point N, draw two lines by the
ends of the Diameter of the Bowl Z Z, and they shall divide the lines I K, at
the point R, and this I L, at the point S. Wherefore if R S, be the breadth of
the shadow, and Q M, the length, we have only to join these four letters of
Crooked lines, which shall give an Ovall, for the shadrw of the Bowl A

I have a little Extended my self for to facilitate the shadow of this Bowl,
by reason that I believe this only Order sufficient for to find the shadow of
other Rounds, as of the Figure V, the which having two breadths unequal, ought
to have a Plane of two Circles. And that below X, which has three differences,
obliges to make a Plane of three Circles; The one for the Neck of the Viol, or
Flagon, the other for its Belly and the other for the foot: all these Planes
are made as of the Bowl. I believe that it not necessary to use Repe^itions.
The figure being able to teach of it self.



Of the shadow upon many Planes Parallels.
THE first Plane, that is the Ground, where the Chair A is placed, the second
Plane is the upper part of the Table, which is Parallel to the first Plane, and
either above or below the Table: it might also have one, or two, or more of
these Planes, upon which we shall find the foot of the light; for to find the
shadows of the Object, which should be there. For example, the foot of the
light it is C, and the fire B; from these points C B, we must draw lines by the
under-part, and the upper of the Object D, for to have its shadow E, upon the
Table E.

But to have the shadow of the Chair A, which is upon the Ground, we must find
upon the same ground the foot of the light which is upon the Table the point C,
the Order following teaches this.

We must from the point of distance, which is here out of the Paper, draw a
line by the foot of the Table F; then from the corner upon the Table G, to make
a Perpendicular G to fall, which shall divide the line F at the point H, and
from this point H to draw a Parallel H I, which is equal to the upper part of
the Table, and which ought to facilitate to find that which we seek: for
having from the point of sight K, drawn a Ray passing by the foot of the light
C, unto the end of the Table L; we must from this point L, let fall a
Perpendicular upon H I, which shall give the point M; from which point M we
must draw a Ray to the point of sight K; and upon this Ray M K must be the
point of the foot of the light, which shall be found easily, making a
Perpendicular to fall from the point C, the which dividing the Ray M K, shall
give the point N for the foot of the light. This point N being found, there is
no more difficulty to find the shadow of this Chair A, because that it is all
the same Order as of other Objects, which we have seen in the leaves
aforegoing; that is to say, that we must from the foot of the light N, draw
lines by all the Angles of the Plane of this Chair, and from the light B, to
draw other lines by the upper part of the same Chair, which divide those of the
Plane, and shall mark where the shadow ought to go: the figure will make it
known, that all is to be ordered as I have said elsewhere.

The second Figure.
I Do not set down this second Figure, for that I have any particular thing,
nor different from that above. But only to refresh the Memory of that which I
have said in the beginning, that all the Objects cast their shadows diversely,
and according as they are set about the light, as we see that which is upon the
Table gives its shadow, according as it is enlightened, that is to say,
directly, either on the right or on the left: that which is found by the
ordinary Orders of the foot of the light P, and of its fire or light O, the
most part of these Objects are broader above then below, wherefore we must make
their Planes, as I have said in those folio's where I have spoken of the like
figures.



The shadow of boarded Floores by a Torch.
I Have not set this figure in the shadows taken from the Sun, by reason that
this light is above all the Objects that are in the World, and by consequence
cannot give a shadow, which supposes the Light, or the Light-some-body under
the Object.

One might object to me that Experience causes it to be seen every day, that
when the Rays of the Sun enter within an Hall, or a Chamber: the shadow of the
Floores and of other things cease not to appear; To which I answer, that then
this shadow, or these shadows, is not, or are not of the Sun, but caused by the
great Brightness of the Sun; and such shadows might not be given by Parallels,
as those of the Sun, but by Rays from one and the same Center; as those of a
Torch, taking the Window where the Sun passes, or the place where it gives,
for the point of the light, and to do for such shadow, as I am saying of the
shadow of a Torch.

The Orders aforegoing which oblige to make Planes and to draw lines by all the
Angles, for to find the bound of the shadows, would be too long for this, and
the great Number of lines, which one must draw there, would make this figure
very difficult, by reason of the Number of Beams and Joysts which there are
met with: the which made me seek the Means to abridge it, for to make is easy
in the practice, without going forth of Rules and Maxims of Art

Having made the floor in Perspective, as it is taught in the 55th or 57 fol.
And placed the Candle, the Torch, or the Lamp, in what place we would. We must
search by the means of the foot of the light, the place where the fire ought to
to be, or to speak more truly, the which we shall use in stead of the fire, for
from this point to lines, which pass under the Object, and mark out the bound
of the shadows.

For to have this point of fire, the light being at B, we must from the foot of
the light C, draw a Parallel to the Base D E, until that it cut the Ray E F,
at the point G, from this point G, we must elevate a Perpendicule G L. Then
from the fire of the Torch B, draw a Parallel to D E, which shall divide the
Perpendicular G L, at the point L, and this point L, shall serve for the point
of fire, which shall give the place and the length of the shadow.

For Example, having to find the shadow of the Beam A, we must from the point
L, make a line to pass under the Angle which is toward us as H, and see where
this line L H, shall divide the first Joyst, at the point I, for this shall be
the place where the shadow of the Beam ends: from this point I, we must draw
a parallel I K, and mark upon the Joysts the place of the shadow O, for the
shadow of the space of the Joysts, ir will be found by drawing also a line from
the point L, by the Angle of the first Joyst M, which shall divide the Angle of
the Hollow at the point N, from this point N, making a Parallel N P, we shall
have all the shadow marked Q, for the Beam A.

For to find the shadow of Joysts, besides that of the Beam, we must only
draw a line of fire B, by the Angle S, until that it divide the Bottom of the
Floor at the point T, do the same to all the other Joysts, and you shall find
the shadow longer at the farther distance from the fire. Having marked upon one
Beam all the points T, we must from the point of sight R, draw lines by each
of these points, and we shall have justly between all the other Beams, the
shadow of the Joysts as is to be seen at the points V.

The figure below is the same with that above, with this difference, that this
is shadowed and that the former is not, by reason that the shadow would have
hindered to see the letters and the small lines. There is more in this, the
shadow of the Iawmbs of this Gate, which must be taken from the foot of the
light as is to be seen in X and Y.



For to find the shadow by the foot of the light.
IF the Objects be Perpendiculars to the base, and more elevated then the fire
of the Candle A. We ought only to draw lines from the foot of this light B, by
the Angles most advanced of the Objects, as are C D of the Screen, and from the
Angle of the wall E, the which lines B C, B D, and B E, shall make the place of
the shadow at the meeting of the Angles, which the Shuts of the Screen make
with the floor, and also the return of the wall at the points G, from which
points G we must elevate Perpendiculars at the base G R, which shall finish the
shadows which the Candlestick A gives

The reason of this is, that the line A B, is parallel to the lines C H, D I,
K, and E L, the which makes that, in what part soever the fire be upon the
line A B, whether on high, or in the midst, or all below, it shall give always
the like shadow.

We must observe, that this Order is not good but in Pieces, which are more
elevated then the fire, as these here; for when those show the upper part, as
the Object M. we must use the Orders aforegoing, by drawing lines from the
points of the feet, and of the fire of the light

Of the Shadow doubled.
WHEN two lights meet in the same subject or object, it is of necessity that
two shadows meet there, because that each day or each light produces its own
with proportion, I say, with proportion; for if these Fires lights be equal, at
the same distance: It is certain that the shadows shall be equal; but if there
be the least disproportion, as if the one of these lights be a little greater
then the other, or that these fires be a little greater then the other, or that
these fires, although equal, be more or less advanced the one then tho other
from the object; these shadows shall be different; for example, the object O,
being enlightened with two Candles; the one near P, the other farther off Q; it
is most assured, that the shadow of the Candle P, shall be much stronger then
that of the Candle Q, as is to be seen in the figure.

The Orders of these shadows, are no other, then those that I have given, as
well so the Sun as the Torch



For the Shadow of Figures by a Torch.
IT is to be believed, that my counsel will be followed that one should not
turn over the leaf for to learn the order which follows; before they
understand and remember well, that which went before Wherefore supposing that
one understands well the order, that I have given at 139 fol. for to find the
shadow by the Sun, for all the figures of such postures as they may be: I have
nothing to say for these, seeing that the line below, which I make to serve for
the plane, and all the other measures are taken jn one, as in the other. But
because that the Torch does not render an equal shadow in breadth to the body
that gives its shape, as does the Sun: We must take this advice, which is,
that instead of drawing the llnes parallels, that one to the other, as they are
in the shadows taken from the Sun, we must draw them all from the same point,
as from a Center; that is to say, that all the lines, which are drawn by the
plane, must be drawn from the foot of the light A, and those above, and about
the figure must be drawn from the point of fire B, in like manner as in all the
other orders of the Torch, the which makes me leave the rest, that would be
but tedious repetitions, seeing that the figure expresses it of its self.



Of the diverse dispositions and heights of shadows by the Torch.
THe shadows taken by the Sun, do cast themselves always on the same side, and
have ordinarily one and the same disposition: it being impossible that the Sun
should cause at the same time, to cast the shadow of one body toward the West,
and of another toward the East, it is very true that it does this every day,
the one in the morning, and the other in the evening, but in one and the same
hour, it will never do it naturally.

The which is done without failing, by the Torch, the Candle, or the Lamp: for
in what place soever you set one of these lights, if there be many bodies about
them, they will cast their shadow diversely, that is to say, that the one will
cast it to the East, the other to the West, this to the North, that to the
South: in short on every side according as the bodies shall be ordered about
the light, the foot of the which marked A, serves them for a Center, whether
all these shadows draw, and the fire B, marketh where they must end, although
diversely, by reason that the nearest, have their shadow shortest, and those
that are farther off, cast it more at length,

Although that the second figure has not the light in the midst, yet the order
of these shadows cease not to be kept, as we see that they all draw to the
foot of the light C, and that they are bounded by the point of fire D.



THE TABLE
THe Definitions, names, and Terms of the Points, Lines and Figures, which we
shall use. page 1. The Rest of the Definitions Names and Terms. page 2. Some
Orders of Geometry, f^r to make the Lines and Figures, which we are about to
define. page 3. For to frame the Figures. page 4. Of Polygones Circular, which
are Figures with diverse angles within one Circle. ibid. Of the Rays visual.
page 5. Wherefore one may see better a Perspective, with one Eye only, then
with two. ibid The first definition. page 6. The second third and fourth
definition. page 7 Wherefore the Objects that are far distant seem to approach
and join themselves together, although they be in equal distance. page 8.
Wherefore the Objects draw near to each other, being viewed afar off. page 9.
Of the Horizon. page 11. Of the Base. page 12. Of the point of sight, Point of
Perspective, Point Occular, or Point Principal. ibid Of the points of distance.
ibid. Of points accidental. ibid Of the point of the Front. page 13. Of the
point of the side. ib. Of the Visual Rays page 14 Of the Diagonals or
Diametrals and of their sections ib. Of the d stance, or Removal and setting.
page 16 The first advice about the point of the side. page 16 The second advice
of the Hollowing or deep sinking. ib. The third advice of the Measures upon the
Base. page 17. The fourth advice of the Base, and of one only point of
distance. ib. The fifth advice not to deceive ones self in the Measures. ib.
The sixth advice of the point of distance only. page 18. The seventh advice
that we should not use the Diagonal. ib. The eighth advice to abridge in diverse
manners. ib. Of planes viewed directly or in front page 19. Planes viewed
obliquelie or on the side. page 20. Of a Triangle. page 21. Of the Pentagone or
five angles. page 22. Of the Hexagone or six angles page 23. Of the Heptagone
or seven angles. page 24. Of the Octogone or eight angles. page 25. Of the
Octogone after another manner. page 26. Of the Hexagone or six angles. ib. Of
the Octogone double. page 27. Of the Circle page 28. Of the Circle double. page
29. A plane of the square viewed from the angles page 30. A pavement of squares
viewed by the angles. page 31. Of squares compassing a Border or Fillet. ib.
Pavements viewed by the angle compassed with a brand or Fillet. page 32.
Pavements of squares viewed by the front, compassed with Bands or Borders,
which have squares seen from the angle in the midst. ib. A pavement of squares
seen from the angle with Church of squares, on the front page 33 A pavement of
squares in front with Chairs of squares seen from the angle. ib. A pavement of
l^ttle squares Octogone mingled with the squares. page 34 A pavement of single
squares viewed in front ib. The plane of a Garden abridged. page 35. The plane
of a Building abridged. page 36 The plane of a Church abridged. page 37. The
plane of an House with a Garden. page 38. The plane of a Fortification abridged
page 39 The plane and figure irregular abbreviated. page 40 Another plane of a
Church allreviated page 41. Some necessary advice for the orders following.
page 42. Of the lines of elevation to give the heights to all kind of bodies
and figures, and in such a place, as one would within a plane. page 43. The
elevation of a Cube in Perspective. page 44. The Triangle in Perspective. page
45. The Pentagone or five angles in Perspective. ib. The Hexagone or six angles
in Perspective. ib. Of the Heptagone, or seven angles in Perspective. page 46.
Of the Octogone or eight angles in Perspective. ib. The double cross in
Perspective. page 47. A stone flatted or streaked like a Star in Perspective.
ib. Of Pilasters in Perspective. page 48. Of Pilasters viewed by the angle. ib.
The effects of the diversity of Horizon. page 49. The elevation of Objects
viewed by the angle. page 50. For to raise bodies and remove them as far as one
world. page 51. Of Walls viewed directly. page 52. Another wall viewed from the
angle. ib. For to place a door in what place one would of a Wall. page 53. For
to frame Windows in Perspective. page 54. Of the Planchers above. page 55.
Another Ordering of Planchers in Perspective. page 57. A single draught of
doors and round arches viewed directly. page 59. Round arches above the
Pilaster viewed directly. page 60. Of the third point in the arch. ib. A
further pursuit of this figure. page 61. For to frame and set into Perspective
doors and round arches. page 62. For to frame and put into Perspective doors
and arches round double, showing their thicknesses. page 63. Of figures in
arches of another fashion. Arches viewed obliquely in Perspective. ib. Of
arches slat, or in manner of a basket or Demi-circle. page 65. For to set
arches or half circles upon Pilasters, or Co^^mns. page 67. Arches in the third
point. ib. For to set into Perspective, Vaults, or cross arches. page 68. For
to make the same Vaults more exactly. page 69. For to make the Vaults more
strait and large. page 70. A Vault made by the Orders. page 71. Of arches and
doors with three squares. page 72. Of another arch, half Decagone or 5 squares.
ib. The elevation of round figures in Perspective. page 73. The elevation of
Pilasters set into a round ib. A vault like a Sc^llop shall set into
Perspective. page 74. Of open Rounds in Steeples or Vaults pierced in
Perspective. page 75. That the multitude of Objects and plurality of stories
ought to have but our point o sight. page 76. To set Chimneys into Perspective.
page 77. Of Stairs in Perspective. page 78. Other steps hollowed underneath in
Perspective. page 79. Steps in front in Perspective. ib. For to make Stairs
which one may show from four sines. page 80. Stairs viewed on the sides in
Perspective. page 81. Stairs within a Wall in Perspective. ib. For winding
stairs with Rests in Perspective page 82. Stairs winding upright in
Perspective. page 83. Sq^ares set into around in Perspective. page 84. Round
Stairs in Perspective. page 85. Round Stairs viewed from the side in
Perspective. ib. For the winding stairs up turning ascent. page 86. Of Columns
or Pillars in Perspective. page 87. Of Corn^shes and Mouldings in Perspective.
page 88. A great Cornish above the Horizon in Perspective. page 89. For to find
the under part of the great projectors. page 90 Of the Cornishes and the
Mouldings under the Horizon. page 91. For Cornish^s with many Returns. page 92.
For the op ning of do^rs in Perspective. page 93. F r the opening of Windows in
Perspective page 94. For the opening of the Window with Chamfreti^gs. ib. Of
diverse ^ther openings. page 95. Of planes and the first elevations of
movables. page 96. Of the Elevations of Movables. page 97. For to make the
upper part of Tables. Stools, etc. page 98. For to elevate a Court Cupboard or
Cabinet. page 99. For the elevation of Chairs. page 100. One other fashiono of
Movables in Perspective. page 101. Of Movables set without order. page 102 Of
Movables lying or thrown upon the Ground. page 103. For to set altars into
Perspective. page 104. Of Merchants Shops in Perspective. page 105. Of the out
side of Buildings. page 106. For to set the Roofs of Houses in Perspective.
page 107. The rest of the Roofs in Perspective. page 108. For to set a street
into Perspective. page 109. That the Objects afar off show not the thickness.
page 110. For the buildings viewed by the Angles. page 111. For to set alleys
of Trees into Perspective. page 112. For Gardens in Perspective. page 113. The
little squares with borders. ib For to elevate and set in Perspective,
Fortifications. page 114. For to make the designs of Perspective. page 115. For
to draw little perspectives into great and gr at into little. page 116. Orders
to facilitate the Universal manner of the Ste^r G. D. L. page 117. Of a general
manner for to exer^ise perspective without setting the point of distance, out
of the picture, or field of the work by the Sie r G. D L. page 118. For to give
justly the distance removed, the po nt rema^^i^g in the picture. page 119 A
very fine inve^tion, for to make naturally perspectives without keeping the
rules. page 120. Another pretty invention, for to exercise the perspective,
without knowing it. page 121. For Figures in perspective. page 122. For the
Figure having the Eye within the Horizon. ib. For the Figure having the Horizon
below. ib. For the Figures having the Horizon high. page 123. For the Figure
that have feet as the Horizon. ib. For figures elevated above the planes. page
124. Of the postures that we should give to figures in the perspective. page
125. Of Beasts and Birds in perspective. ib. For to find the height of Figures
far removed, the first being upon a Mountain near to the Eye. page 126. For to
give the Natural height, or such as one would to Figures Elevated on high. page
127. For to know how much figures equal deminish to the Eye, the one set above
the other in height. ib. Of Measures for the figures Elevated page 128. The
Original of shadows. page 129. Of the difference of shadows. page 130. For to
find the shape of the shadow. page 131 Of shadows taken from the Sun. page 132
^Te shadows ^f the Sun are equal to the Objects of the same height although
that they b^ removed, the one from the other page 133. Of the shad ws when the
Sun is directly opposite to the Eye. page 134. For to give the shadows of the
Objects pierced by the light. page 135 The shadows take the shape of the planes
where they are cast. page 136 For to find the shadow of the ob^ec when they
have more breadth above then below. page 137. For to find the shadow of Objects
Elevated from the Ground. page 138. For to find the shadow at the Sun in all
sorts of figures. page 139. For find with facility the shadow by the Sun. page
140. The Shadows taken from a Torch, from a Candle and from a Lamp, are found
by one and the same Order. page 141. Of the foot of the light. page 142. For to
find the shadows by a Torch, on all the sides of a Chamber. page 143. The
shadow by a Torch of a Pyramide upright and another upside down. page 144. The
shadow of a Cross. ib. For to find the shadow of round Objects by a Torch.
page 145. Of the shadow upon many planes parallels page 146. The shadow of
boarded Floors by a Torch. page 147. For to find the shadow by the foot of the
light. page 148. Of the Shadow doubled. ib. For the shadow of figures by a
Torch. page 149. Of the diverse dispositions and heights of shadows by the
Torch. page 150
FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of Books Printed for Rob. Prick, and are to be sold at his Shop
over against the Cross-Keys in White-Cross-street, and the Golden Lion, at the
Corner of New-Cheapside near Bethlehem,
A New Treatise of Architecture, according to Vitruvius. Wherein is discoursed
of the five Orders of Columns, viz. The Tuscan, Derick, Ionick, Corinthian and
Composite. Divided into seven Chapters Which declare their different
Proportions, Measures and proper Names, according to the Practice of the
ancient Architects, both Greeks and Romans; As also of their parts general and
particular, necessary in building of Temples, Churches, Palaces, Castles,
Fortresses, and all other Buildings with their Dependents: As Gates, Arches
Triumphant, Fountains, Sepulchers, Chimneys, Cross-barr'd windows, Portals,
Platforms, and other Ornaments; serving as well for the beautifying of
Buildings in Cities, as for necessary fortifications of them: designed by
Julian Mauclerc Lord of Lign^ron Mauclerc Brossand ere and Remanguis. Whereunto
are added the several Measures and Proportions of the famous Architects,
Schamozzi, Palladio, and Vignola: with some Rules of Perspective. The whole
represented in fifty large Prints, enriched with the rarest Ornaments of
Antiquity, and Capitals of extraordinary greatness, with their Architraves,
Frieses, and Cornishes proportionable. Large fol. price bound 12 s.

A New Book of Architecture, wherein is represented forty figures of Gates and
Arches triumphant Composed of different Inventions, according to the five
Orders of Columns, viz The Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite, by
Alexander Francine Florentine, Engineer in Ordinary to the French King: With a
Description of each figure Large fol bound 10 s.

The Art of Fair Building: Represented in several Uprights of Houses, with
their Ground-plots, fitting for persons of several Qualities. Wherein is
divided each Room and Office according to their most convenient occasion, with
their Heights, Depths, Lengths and Bredths according to Proportion: With Rules
and Directions for the placing of Doors, Windows, Chimneys, Beds, Stairs and
other conveniences: with their just Measures for their best advantage, both of
Commodiousness, Health, Strength and Ornament Also a Description of the Names
and Proportions of the Members belonging to the framing of the Timber-work,
with Directions and Examples for the placing of them By Pierre le Miet,
Architect in Ordinary to the French King, and Surveyor of his Designs and
Fortifications in the Province of Picardy Large fol. price bound 8 s.

A Book of Architect, containing Cieling-Pieces, Chimney-pieces, Fountains, and
several sorts useful for Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, invented by J
Barbet.

Gethings Red vivus or the Pens Masterpiece. Being the last work of that
eminent and accomplished Master in this Art. Containing Examples of all curious
Hands written, and now in Practice in England, and the Neighboring Nations:
with necessary Rules and Directions toward the attaining of Fair writing, etc.

An Excellent Introduction to Architecture, being a Book of Geometrical
Practice Which is the first degree of all Arts: wherein is contained Variety
of Examples of; that admirable Science, showing and describing the making of
several Figures in that Nature, with the proper Names belonging to each Member
and Figure, and how to begin and end them after a plain and easy manner, it
being of great use to all Artists and Workmen concerned in Building: More
especially, Surveyors, Architects, Engineers, Masons, Carpenters, Joyners,
Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Painters, Carvers, Glasiers, etc In general, for all
that are concerned or delight to practice with the Rule and Compass. 4to price
bound 2 s.

M^gnum in Parvo, Or the Practice of Geometry. With a new Order and particular
Method thereof; Wherein is contained Examples of Landskips, Pieces of
Perspective, and the like: Represented by Eighty two Plates: Each Plate having
a full Descrptiion. Bound with fillets 4 s.

Likewise there is Choice of Copy-books, Maps, Landskips, Cieling-Pieces, Books
of Birds, Beasts, Flowers and Fruits, colored, or black and white. Also very
good Choice of Italian, French and Dutch Prints; there likewise you may have
money for such like Books or Prints in English, Italian, French, and Dutch, or
others in Exchange for them.

FINIS.

