THE Duchess of Mazarines Farewell to ENGLAND.
ANd must I then sweet England leave at last,
With the remembrance of all pleasure past?
Does Fate decree I must renew my dance,
And wheel about from England now to France?
It Is vain, I see, for to be great or proud;
We taste the Fate often of the meaner Crowd.
Though puffed with greatness, we often make a bustle;
Dame Fortune rudely does our greatness justle.
Happy the Countrey-Swain, who courts the shades,
Whose Privacies no sullen Fate invades.
Happy that Rural Maid who sees alone
Her self a Queen, and placed in Beauties Throne,
Whilst her admiring Shepherd bows his knee,
And none like her in all the world can see;
It Is happier than all our Pageantrie.
Honor, the bugbear that affrights the Great,
Makes us but slaves, and does of freedom cheat;
Debars us much of pleasures, and of sport;
Robs us of Substance, whilst we Shadows court.
We stand on high, of all men to be seen:
In this alone I do not love the mean;
I Would be a Shepherdess, or else a Queen.
The last exalted is above report,
And the other innocently cares not for it;
Whilst nothing in the world can prove so strong,
To keep us from the shot of an ill Tongue.
Beauty's a shadow, vain and empty thing;
I thought that mine might have subdued a King.
Though fair I seemed in mine and others eyes,
My own Duke me and Beauty did despise
Whilst I was forced to wander in disguise.
What various Chance my Fortunes did attend?
Alas! when will my rouling Troubles end?
As if with Fortune drunk, I reeling go,
Or like a Ball that is bandied to and fro.
Wave after Wave of Trouble follows still.
And like a Slave I grind in Fortunes Mill.
Forced by my Fate, to France I must return;
And for sweet England's loss I truly mourn.
Farewell, sweet Land, where Peace and Plenty flow,
Where all things to ease wretched Souls do grow;
Where all things fit to make Life sweet abound,
And where I Pleasure, Ease, and Comfort found.
Farewell, the best of Princes, and the chief,
Whose Court has given me shelter and Relief:
Whose Power has me defended like a shield,
Whose bounteous hand has me, even me upheld.
Farewell delightful Windsor, who on high
Lifts up thy awful head, unto the sky:
Beauty and Strength, Nature and Art agree,
A Princes Royal Seat to frame in thee.
Farewell, thou underlying Silver Thames;
Often have I sported with thy gliding streams,
And often my self committed to thy Charge,
Triumphing sat in my delightful Barge;
And often to Whitehal with like pleasure came,
As Egypts Queen, when she on Cydnus swam.
Farewell the Theater, where I have seen
The Tragic fall of many a lofty Queen:
Where many a sad Intrigue acted I Have known,
Yet scarce could find one equal to my own;
And where, if evil Fortune still pursue,
I may hereafter be well Acted too.
London farewell, thou City Fair and Great,
The Head of England, CHARLES his Royal Seat:
May Heaven still bless you, for your Sovereigns sake,
And may you long with him sweet Peace partake.
Where e're I go, your goodness I shall tell,
Your Bounty and your Love: England, farewell.
Printed for Langley Curtiss. 1680.


