Beauties Triumph; A MASQUE.

Presented by the Scholars of Mr. Jeffery Banister, AND Mr. James Heart, At
their New BOARDING-SCHOOL for Young Ladies and Gentlewomen, kept in that House
which was formerly Sir Arthur Gorges, AT CHELSEY.

Written by T. Duffett.

-- tutus, and intra
Spem veniae cautus --
LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLXXVI.

Prologue, spoken by a young Lady.
Ladies,
You Are welcome, -- and we hope you are all sharp set,
Good Appetites excuse a homely Treat;
This was intended for our selves alone,
From whom our Masters feared no cens'ring frown:
But awed, and dazzled by your piercing eyes,
(For, though expected, you like Death surprise)
They humbly bow, -- and beg a kind excuse,
For straightened time, and a disordered House;
Hoping, the want of practice, fitting dress,
And glorious Scenes, may make our failings less:
As if defects could purchase good success.
This might appease an accidental Guest;
But you are invited, and expect a Feast:
Enlarged hopes, and longing looks you have brought,
Fine Dances, Songs, and Show, swell every thought:
Such things our Masters meant; but strove so fast
To win the prize, we fall with too much have.
Like eager Gardeners, that make Nature post
The Flowers to early births, which being forced,
Their sweet perfume and native beautie's lost.
If we miscarry, let them feel the smart,
They hardly gave us time to read a Part:
Yet -- if we are out, -- I fear 'twill break my heart. --
Courage! be gone dull fear, and sullen doubt:
The Cause! the Cause we fight shall bear us out.
Beauties Triumph, -- Beauty! your joy and care,
The crown of Peace, and the reward of War.
Ladies, Your interest your assistance calls;
Your Empire's lost if Beauties Triumph falls:
If any Lover his applause denies,
Kill the Rebel, -- stab him with your eyes.
Sound a charge, -- we will nor take no quarter, Music flourish.
She that falls is Educations Martyr.
Beauties Triumph; A MASQUE.
SCENE I.
The Curtain being drawn, Fate is discovered sitting on a Throne, dressed in a
dark-colour'd Robe, powdered with Swords, Stars, Daggers, Books, Flames and
Crowns, etc. -- a Crown on his head, a Globe at his feet, and a great Book open
before him: near his feet sit the Three Fatal Sisters, one holding a Distaff,
another Spinning and drawing out Threads, and the third cutting them. On the
Stage stand a King and Queen crowned, and richly habited; a Hero crowned with
Laurel, and a Slave chained: -- near him a beautiful Lady, and a despairing
Lover: -- a man and woman, whose dress express Poverty and Misery: in the midst
of all stands Death, threatening with his Dart and Hourglass. -- Thus all
continue, while a solemn Air is played by Violins, Rechorders, etc. -- which
done, all but Death kneel to Fate and the Three Sisters. The King and Queen
sing together. STern Fate relent, change thy obdurate will,
Can thou without remorse see Monarchs kneel?
For every moment added to our breath,
We Will send whole Hecatombs of Slaves to death.
This repeated by a full Chorus of Voices, and Music. The Lady sings alone. O
gentle Fate my beauty spare;
Is there no pity for the Fair?
All the Stars and the Glories my Lovers e're gave,
I Will part from to buy a release from the Grave.
The Hero rises up and sings. Shall a Hero whose valor no force e're
o'recame,
Submit his great heart to an Aerie name?
Thou Deity of slaves and fools,
Let me and my Subjects alone,
Or I Will pull thee from thy gloomy Throne,
And make thy Spinsters quit their tools.
The Lover sings, and one of the Unfortunate. We court the fate from which they
fly,
For death, for death the wretched cry,
Oh change our doom, Oh change our doom, Oh change our doom
Or let us dye.
Chorus of the Lover, Slave, and the two Unfortunate. We court, etc.
Fate sings. Mortals give over,
In vain like raging Seas your passions roar,
In vain for pity you implore:
The fixed decrees which Fate has passed,
No threats or prayers can stop or have;
The Vassal shall tread
On the Conquerour's head;
And the Beggar that lies
In the dust shall arise
To a Crown,
While Usurpers and Tyrants fall down:
Fate crops the gayest, sweetest Rose,
While the prickly Thistle grows;
The creeping Bramble still looks green,
When he lops the lofty Pine:
Some shall love and sigh in vain,
For her that is by others slighted,
And the coyest Nymphs disdain
Shall be requited
By as proud a Swain.
Some shall dye laughing, and some shall dye sad,
For the deformed the fair shall be mad,
And the glittering Scepter be changed to a Spade.
Chorus of Fate and the Three Sisters. Some shall, etc.
For the deformed, etc.
And the glittering, etc.

A Dance. In which Death kills the King and Queen, the Slave stabs the Hero,
the Unfortunate seize the Crowns, and the Lady courts her despised Lover. Fate
sings. With cares and contrivance their Fate to avoid,
Men lose the short pleasures that may be enjoyed;
Their fears are too swift, and their wishes too late,
For nothing can alter the dictates of Fate.
Chorus by Fate and the Three Sisters. With cares, etc.

While the Chorus is singing, the Stage is cleared of the rest. Fate spurns the
Globe, throws down his Book, and rises in anger; the Three Sisters follow him.
Fate. Give over --
Spin no more lives, burn all the sacred Tow,
Let hasty births to sudden fun'rals go,
Till the vast world a second Chaos know.

1 Sister. Dread King of all the skies great lights, disclose

2 Sister. What weighty cause
Obstructs thy Laws,

3 Sister. What does thy haughty spirit discompose?

Fate. Juno and Pallas with proud Venus join,
The awful Throne of Fate to undermine:
Ungrateful powers! I Will break your close design.
Hoe Discord! hoe! -- Enter Discord.
Whence come thou, Mignion, from the shades below?
Or from dark caves where struggling winds do grow?

Discord. Ah -- no!
In Courts and Cities now I dwell;
The sullen man and wanton wife,
Have more employment found for strife,
Then all the winds
The Seaman finds,
Or all the Fiends in Hell.
Chorus. The sullen man, etc.

Fate. From the Hesperian Tree with nimble wing,
The fairest, largest golden Apple bring:
Have! have! I sealed the watchful Dragons eyes.

Discord. Great Ruler of the World, thy Servant flies.

Exit Discord. Fate. When power and wisdom with beauty unite,
Mankind will be drowned in such Seas of delight,
My frowns they will despise, and my favors they will slight.
Proud Deities, dare you oppose my Yoke,
When your poor petty Cobweb plots are broke?
I Will make you cringe and tremble at my stroke.
The fiercest Gods with all their Titles swelled,
Even Jove himself to Destiny shall yield.
Chorus of Fate and the Three Sisters. The fiercest Gods, etc.
Even Jove, etc.

Enter Discord with a golden Apple; Fate writes on it, and gives it her again.
Fate. Be gone, to Ida's flowery Mount make have,
There thou shall find
Three Goddesses joined,
And by Concord embraced;
Before their eyes this gilded poison cast:
Take all the Furies with fierce Adders curled,
Let their envenom d^spight a' round be hurl^d,
And ghastly mischief fright the sleepy world.
Chorus. Take all the Furies, etc.

Exeunt Fate and the Three Sisters. Discord. What hoe! you dismal haggs, --
What hoe! you dismal haggs, -- that hate the light,
Daughters of dreadful Styx, and dreary Night;
You snakie Sisters rise with threatening hands,
Shake your steeled whips, and wave your smoakie brands.

Enter the Three Furies. 1 Fur. The news, --

2. The news, --

3. The news,

All. The news, fierce Discord, quickly tell the news.

Discord. Listen dire messengers of angry fate.

All whisper and mutter together. 1 Fur. Enough,

2. Enough,

3. Enough, we will about it strait.

All. Enough, we will about it strait.

A Song in two Stanza's. Disc. Lean Virtue shall down with her barren reward,
When Discord comes on she will no longer be heard.

1 Fur. Great Power, and Wisdom, and Beauty we will sever,

2 Fur. And singly destroy what would conquer together:

3 Fur. The fair shall be foolish, the wise shall be mad,
And by their delusions the great be misled.
Chorus. The fair, etc.

Disc. The Gallant shall swear, and the Nymph shall be kind,
But both shall prove false to the Love they designed:

1 Fur. The wise shall for power and wealth be too zealous;

2 Fur. The great of their plotting and pride shall be jealous.

3 Fur. And when the whole World's in confusion again,
The Furies and Discord shall pleasantly reign.
Chorus. And when, etc.

A Dance by Discord and the Furies. Exeunt all. The Scene is changed to a
pleasant Landschape of a flowrie Mountain, etc. Juno, Pallas and Venus enter,
attended by Iris and many Nymphs; the Goddesses lay their hands on a Garland of
Laurel, Bays and Myrtle. -- It Thunders and Lightens. -- [ All this Scene is
spoken.] Juno. Our Sacred Union all the Gods approve,
And send this thundering message from above,
To grace the Sister and the Wife of Jove.
Iris my swift Embassadress, be gone,
Clap thy light wings and shining colors on,
And let our Union round the world be known.

Iris. Great Queen of Gods, and Empress of the Skies,
Whose fair plumed team adorned with Argus eyes,
Eclipse the splendor of my brightest Dies:
My painted Throne with watery Clouds I Will build,
Which with more various colors shall be filled,
Then flowrie Springs, or gaudy Summers yield.
When wondering Mortals from their houses run,
To see my Glories far outshine the Sun,
The will of Royal Juno shall be known.

Juno. Rich Embassies the wills of Kings declare:
What then should mine, to whom great Monarchs are
Like twinkling Glowworms to the Morning Star?

Juno and Iris seem to talk together. Venus. Is this the Union, this the equal
sway?
I Will rather Fate's than Juno's power obey:
The will of Royal Juno --
And is not Venus worthy of a name?
My Beautie's greater, and as great my Fame.

Pallas. Fair Queen of Love, let not the rash mistake
Of that untutored Maid a difference make;
My honor is an equal suff'rer made,
And with your fame shall Pallas shine or fade:
But let not Passion be too fast obeyed.
Passion commits more crimes then it can find,
It shakes the soul like a tempestuous wind;
The Senses slave, but Tyrant of the mind.

Venus. Sister of much-loved Mars, Goddess of Arms,
Thy Prudence conquers whom thy Beauty warms,
I yield as all must to thy powerful charms.

Pallas. Juno does private power in vain pursue,
While Beauties Goddess is to Pallas true;
Beauty and Wit the highest powers subdue.

Juno, to Iris. Thou do the full of our great purpose know,
Ascend and from thy party-colored bow,
Proclaim it to the listening world below. Exit Iris.
Now Fate, deluded mortals shall no more
Dread thy feigned Laws, and thy fantastic power,
But with glad hearts our sacred Shrines adore.
Our Rites were lost, our Temples were profaned,
No Praise or Sacrifice our Altars gained,
No power, forsooth, could change what Fate ordained.

Pallas. So far this wild Imposture has been hurled,
Gypsies and Star-gazers command the world.

Venus. They Are Fate's Viceroys, dispose of every heart;
From Sacred Love the giddy Youth depart,
And marry by the Stars: -- vain rules of Art.

Juno. Juno's not called to kindle Hymen's fire,
And bless the Nuptial-bed with chaste desire,
But Fate with Avarice base knots conspire.

Pallas. Then bloody Discord with a Hellish throng
Of Furies, houl the Hymeneal Song,
And make the hated Marriage-night seem long.

Juno. They rise, seek lawless Love in several rooms,
And cry, Alas! who can avoid their dooms?
Thus rigid Fate a gentle Bawd becomes.

Venus. Then with unhallowed breath they spot my name,
And on my Innocence would lay their shame;
I cherish none but chaste and virtuous flame.

Juno. The lazy drone lies stretched upon the floor,
Cries, Destiny compels him to be poor:
He lies, -- What am not I the Queen of Power?

Pallas. The wild debauch against Heaven makes open War,
And lays his crimes upon his harmless Star,
As if that caused that did the guilt declare.

Juno. Mankind no more in slavery shall remain,
Long banished Justice shall to Earth again,
And Virtue over insulting Fate shall reign.
I Will give her power unlimited to share
The highest blessings of the Field or Chair,
Among the good, the painful, chaste and fair.

Pall. Prudence I Will give, and an enlightened mind,
To teach her where she may be wisely kind.

Ven. Beauty I Will give in blooming youth enshrined;
Beauty which Monarchs more than Empire prize,
Which makes the Hero brave, and Statesman wise;
For which the wretched lives, and happy dies.

Juno. Fortune shall still command the ign'rant Fool,
But those that live in spotless Virtue's School,
Over the severest Destiny shall rule.

Enter Iris. Iris. Hail mighty Queens of conquered Fate.

Juno. Quickly thy progress and success relate.

Iris. No sooner from my arched Throne,
Which with unusual Beauties shone,
Did I Fate's sudden fall proclaim,
But every word by greedy Fame
Was to a thousand echoes sent,
And posted through each Element;
Like Lightning 'twas dispersed a-round,
And Thunder echoed from the ground:
Such joyful shouts were upward sent,
As shook Heavens lofty battlement:
My painted bow their vigor felt,
And to a pearlie shower did melt.
Hark! the impatient Crowd draws near, Music heard.
To let their hasty joys appear;
Two of Fate's notorious cheats,
About the Mount the Rabble beats.

Juno. In yond bright cloud concealed let us lie,
While the rejoicing Crowd pass by.

Exeunt omnes. After a flourish of Violins, Rechorders, Flajolets, etc. an
Astrologer with a Globe in his hand, and a Fortune-telling woman enter, pursued
by Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Chorus of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, to which
all Dance, and drive off the Astrologer and woman. Be gone you Deluders, your
Traffic is over,
Your Figures and Canting shall cheat us no more.
Song by a Shepherdess. Come, come away,
To solemnize this happy day;
With joyful cries
Let Us rend the skies,
For Fortune's fall is Virtue's rise.
Chorus of all with Music. Come, come away, etc. 2 Shepherdess sings. Sing,
sing aloud,
And you that love the coy or proud,
No more complain,
But choose again,
For Fate must yield to Virtue's reign.
Chorus. Sing, sing aloud, etc.

Song by a Shepherd. Fortune's a drab, though the fool and the knave
Proclaim her a Goddess, and Court her;
Because they deserve not the blessings they have,
They think the blind Queen their supporter:
But the wise and the brave
Still make her a slave,
They laugh at her frowns and her favor,
And now the deceiver
Is ruined for ever,
Her Cracks and her Cullies shall leave her.
The Iilt to her own rouling-wheel shall be tied,
And the three Fatal Sisters be hanged in their thread.
Chorus. The Iilt, etc.
A Dance by a Shepherd alone. Song by a Shepherd. I love and am loved, but dare
not declare
The beauty that reigns in my breast,
She Is smoother then Lillies, she is softer then Air,
She Is all that can make a man blessed:
But alas she is confined to the pleasure
Of one more unhappy then I;
An Indian that knows not the worth of his treasure,
But slights that for which I would dye.
The Dragon still wakes, and guards with fierce eyes
The fruit which he cares not to taste,
But Virtue and Honor are watchfuller spies,
Their tyranny ever will last:
When in secret our flames we discover,
We bow to the Laws they ordain,
How short are the joys of a virtuous Lover,
But Ah there is no end of his pain!
A Dance by a Shepherdess alone. A Song by a Shepherd and Shepherdess.
Shepherd. Joy sits smiling on each brow,
In each dimpl^d cheek's a furrow,
Made by mirth to bury sorrow;
All are happy, -- All are happy now,
Only Celia's cruel, cruel, cruel eye,
Dooms Amintor still to dye.

1 Shep. Poor Amintor's doomed to dye.

2 -- Poor Amintor's doomed to dye.

3 -- Poor Amintor's doomed to dye.

All Shep. Chorus. Only Celia etc

Shepherdess. Oh Amintor hide thy pains,
If thy tempting tongue had won me,
Lawless passion had undone me,
Sacred Virtue, -- Sacred Virtue reigns.
All that Virtue, All that Virtue grants I Will give,
For thy hopeless love I Will grieve,

1 Shep. And Amintor still shall live.

2 -- Celia bids Amintor live.

3 -- Celia bids, etc.
Chorus. All that Virtue, etc.

Shepherd. Then the longing eyes may gaze,
In each others beams uniting,
And the trembling hands uniting,
Break not Virtues, -- Break not Virtues Laws.
Chastest Vestals, Chastest Vestals thus may kiss,
Thus may Saints repeat their bliss,

1 Shep. Virtue will not blush at this.

2 -- Virtue will, etc.

3 -- Virtue will, etc.
Chorus. Chastest Vestals, etc.

Shepherdess. Hold, fond Shepherd, keep thy vow,
Love denied 's an humble waiter,
But a bold insulting traitor,
When the Virtuous, -- when the Virtuous bow.
Dear Amintor, Dear Amintor pray give over,
Celia cannot grant thee more,
Alas she would but has not power.

1 Shep. Virtue, makes thy Celia poor.

2 -- Virtue, etc.

3 -- Virtue, etc.
Chorus. Dear Amintor, etc.

A Dance to the following Song, the Rechorders and Flajolets playing. Song.
Let Us love, and let us laugh, let us dance, and let us sing,
While shrill echoes ring,
Our wishes agree, and from cares we are free,
Then who are so happy, so happy as we.
We press the soft Grass, each Swain with his Lass,
Or follow the chase,
When weary we be, we sleep under a Tree,
And who are so happy, so happy as we.
By flattery or fraud no Shepherd's betrayed,
Or cheats the fond Maid,
No false supple knee to deceive us we see,
Then who are so happy, so happy as we.
We envy no power, nor cannot be poor,
Who wish for no more;
Some richer may be, and of higher degree,
But none are so happy, so happy as we.
The three Furies rise up in the middle of them, and fright them all off: --
Then the Furies dance, -- and Exeunt. Enter Juno, Pallas and Venus, embracing:
Discord enters observing them. [Discord speaks this.] Now injured Fate thy
gloomy den forsake,
Raise all thy forces from the Stygian Lake;
Thy foes are mighty, and thy Crown's the stake.
Burning Ambition and revengefull Pride,
Heart-gnawing Envy, and all ill beside,
Attend, and Hell and Furies be your guide. Discord throws the Golden Apple,
which the Goddesses strive for, and go off.
Hoh, ho, ho, hoe, it is done, it is done:
Methinks I see the frighted world look pale,
And Nature to her secret mansion crawl,
As if she feared an everlasting fall.
To Ida's Mount the striving powers retire,
Prophetic Spirits my hot brains inspire,
And swell my thoughts with ruin, blood and fire.
Venus obtains the prize from Priam's Son:
Good, good, then Rapes and Murders shall be done,
Whose stories shall make future Ages groan.
Now Fate, let thy tormenting Furies rest,
Since my wild Empire's fixed in every breast,
The Goddesses themselves shall do the rest.
Virtue shall into several factions fall;
Strictness, Pride; Freedom, it shall Looseness call:
Where Discord raigns, swift ruin swallows all.
Exit Discord. Music plays. Enter Paris and Oenone, crowned with Garlands of
Flowers, with Sheep-hooks in their hands, attended by Shepherds and
Shepherdesses. Song in Dialogue. Paris. Tell me dearest Oenone,
Why such sadness clouds my Sun;
A pearly deluge from thy eyes,
Spreads thy rosy cheeks around,
Where poor Cupid mourning lies,
To see his World of beauty drowned.

Oenone. Oh my Paris, Oh my Swain,
Thou darling of the flowery Plain,
I fear -- But Ah my grief's too much to speak,
I fear, I fear my swelling heart will break.

Paris. Has the fierce Woolf devoured a bleating Lamb,
Or robbed the Fondling of his Dam?

Oenone. Ah! -- no, those losses are
Which changing time or prudent care
Would soon repair.

Paris. Say what does thy heart invade,
I conjure thee, charming Maid,
By those secret Bowers,
Which the twining Myrtles shade;
By those banks of flowers,
Where our sacred vows were made;
By the Spring, and by the Grove,
And by the soft delights of Love.

Oenone. Among the sweets this Garland bears,
Say which the greatest glory wears.

Paris. That --
Whose bright leaves round yellow seeds are grown,
Like sparkling Gems about a Golden Crown.

Oenone. That does my sudden sorrow move,
It will I fear thy Emblem prove,
That gaudy flower's called Shepherd's Love.
How far his sweet perfumes do spread,
How proudly shines his painted head:
A dazzling Crown's less gay then this,
And that excels Arabian Spice.
Chorus. How far, etc.
How proudly, etc.
A dazzling, etc.
And that, etc.

Paris. My Shepherdess more glorious shows,
And sweeter breath perfumes her vows.

Oenone. But e're yond' Sun the world survey,
And chase a second night away,
This glory of the Spring will fade,
And shrink into perpetual shade.

Paris. His stalk will stoop,

Oenone. His head will droop,

Paris. His fragrant scents will fly;

Oenone. His beauteous leaves no more will shine,

Paris. But this proud Shepherds love will die,

Oenone. And so alas, and so I fear will thine.

Paris. The Sun shall be fixed, the Earth shall remove,
But never shall Paris be false to his Love.

Oenone. And will you always be thus kind to me?

Paris. By all those powers that our actions see
I will. --

Oenone. Yet! yet! yet you may deceive.

Paris. O cruel! will you never believe?

Oenone. I do, I do, and will no longer grieve.

Paris. We Will love while we live, and we will live without care,
Together we will dye, and we will make but one Star,
To which happy Lovers shall offer their prayer.
Chorus of all Voices and Instruments. We Will love, etc.
Together, etc.
To which, etc.

A Dance. Enter Iris and speaks to Paris. Iris. Hail thou most beauteous youth,
hail Princely Swain!
Thou pride of Shepherds, glory of the Plain!
The motto on this Golden Apple writ,
Three powerful Goddesses at strife has set;
Let it be given to her that is most fair,
Thy prudent Judgment must their right declare.
To thee their doubtful Titles they submit,
Thou now art Lord of Beauty, Power, and Wit.

Enter Juno, Pallas, and Venus, attended by a great Train. Juno. Spoken. If for
Juno thou declare,
Crowns and Empire are thy share;
Laurels on thy brow I Will shower,
And all the tempting sweets of power.

Enter a Spaniard, with a Crown in one hand and a Laurel in the other, he lays
them at Paris's feet. Song in praise of Power. Oh how sweet it is to reign!
How delightful it is to see
The begging eye and bended knee,
To hear the gilded Palace ring
With praises of the King:
Kings are Gods, and from the lofty Throne,
On all the rest of men look down;
All bow to them, but they submit to none.
With frowns they kill,
And with a smile
More ravishing delights they move,
Then all the fading sweets of Love.
Pleasure and Treasure and Beauty are theirs,
To sweeten their Cares;
All Nature gives or Art can find,
To please the sense and ease the mind,
The Gods for Monarchs did ordain:
Oh how sweet it is to reign!
The Spaniard dances a Saraband in honor of Juno, -- Et Exit. Enter an Amazon
with a Mitre and Sword, which she lays at Paris's feet. Pallas. Spoken. If
Pallas gain the envied prize,
Though thou to Empire do not rise,
Great Monarchs shall yield
To thy Counsel at home, and thy Sword in the field.

Song in praise of Wisdom. Why should short-lived mortals strive to gain
Gilded cares and glorious pain,
It Is not powers boundless sway,
Nor all the guards that wait upon
A shining Throne,
Can drive intruding care away.
Wisdom's sacred power can bind
The raging passions of the mind,
He that has attained to that,
Is the Emperor of Fate.
Rough tempests that make Kingdoms roll,
Against his breast in vain do beat,
They cannot shake his fixed soul,
But must like vanquished waves retreat.
No restless wish, no trembling fear,
Or fierce despair can enter there;
Vain love, cold death, or hasty time,
Have neither darts nor wings for him;
When life forsakes his quiet breast,
He does but change his place of rest:
It Is he, it is he alone is blessed.
The Amazon dances in honor of Pallas, -- and Exit. Enter a beautiful
well-dress'd Woman, with a Garland of Flowers, and a wounded Heart, which she
lays at Paris his feet. Venus. Spoken. If thou grant'st the prize to me,
None shall be so blessed as thee;
Killing eyes and charming faces,
Beauties decked with all the Graces,
Shall submit to thy embraces.

Song in praise of Beauty. When Beauty armed with smiling eyes,
And in betraying features dressed,
For wandering hearts in Ambush lies,
She beats the valiant, cheats the wise,
And gains a Throne in every breast;
To so many bright forms she varies her shape,
No God nor no Hero can ever escape.
Who pleasing looks and mirth disdain,
She wounds with more Majestic Art,
And where the haughty mien proves vain,
Such pearlie showers of tears she will rain,
As can dissolve the hardest heart:
So deep is her cunning, so sweet is hes stroke,
That all must be subject to Beauties soft yoke.
But Oh how sweet it is to possess
The secret wishes beauty move,
The joys no language can express,
Nor any wretched mortal guess,
That has not tried successful love;
Such raptures of pleasure from Beauty proceed,
That none but true Lovers are happy indeed.
The Lady dances in honor of Venus, -- and Exit. Song by Paris. The wise and
the great
To Beauty submit,
It reigns in the Study, and conquers in fight;
Then let my fair Mistress for ever be true,
And Beauty shall Power and Wisdom subdue.
So sweet are her charms,
I Will quit without terms,
The splendor of Empire and Trophies of Arms;
Oh let me be blessed in my dear Oenone,
And give the Ambitious the Mitre and Crown.
Paris gives the Golden Apple to Venus, at which Juno and Pallas seem to storm.
Juno. Thy fondness, silly Shepherd, shall destroy
The late enlarged Monarchy of Troy;
When Grecian Swords and Fire thy house devour,
No God shall guard thee from my injured power.

Pallas. I Will your infatuated minds prepare,
To urge swift ruin and destructive War;
Neglected Wisdom near that fatal hour,
Shall leave the City, when I quit the Tower.

Exeunt Juno, and Pallas. Venus. Saturn's proud daughter, to thy office hie,
Go mind thy Match-making and Midwifrie.
And what is dame Pallas with her pining train?
A sordid Insect, bred of Jove's hot brain.
Go threaten Children with your Bugbear rods,
My Son, my Husband, and Gallant are Gods.
Love! -- Love's thy Province! -- let Fools and Stoics care,
I rule the mighty Gods of Fire, Love, and War.

Exit Venus. Song between Paris and Oenone. Paris. To the Grove, gentle Love,
let us be going,
Where the kind spring and wind all day are wooing;
He with soft sighing blasts strives to overtake her,
She would not, though she flies, have him forsake her.

Oenone. But in circling rings returning,
And in purling whispers mourning,
She swells and pants as if she would say,
Fain I would but dare not stay.

Paris. Strait he gets all the sweets on the banks spreading,
Which he brings on his wings where his Nymph's hiding,
In some close hollow creek kind Nature shades her,
In the green Willow tree he Serenades her.

Oenone. -- And to gain her chaste embraces,
Sends his notes to losty places;
In calms they lie and seem to say,
Stormy care drives love away.

Paris. -- There the loud busy Crowd never shall part us,
Nor no kind fawning friend from love divert us;
We Will to each other be friends, fame and treasure,
And no unruly thought shall stain our pleasure.

Oenone. -- Time and Nature ever smiling,
Shall forget their Arts of killing;
And all the Gods aloud shall say,
Love so chaste should never decay.

A Dance by Paris and Oenone. Sung by several. 1. Oh, how delightful is Love,
and how strong,
When Beauty and Virtue are joined in the young.
Chorus. Oh how, etc.
When, etc.

2. The flashes of Vices intemperate joys,
Are haunted with noise of Drunkards and Boys:

3. And when the short blaze of Beauty decays,
With spite and contempt on the ashes they gaze.
Chorus. Oh how, etc.
When, etc.

1. For the ruin of Virtuous Beauties are still,
Adored like old Temples where Deities dwell.

2. Fair Virtue keeps love still alive in the heart,
When Age has overcome Youth, Beauty and Art.
Chorus of all Voices and Instruments. Oh how, etc.
When, etc.

A Dance to this Chorus. FINIS.
Epilogue, spoken by a young Lady.
LIke cloistered Nuns with virtuous zeal inspired,
From public noise, and vicious ease retired,
Here we have all that is by the good admired.
While thus the loosest of our time is spent,
It Is advantageous, sweet, and innocent.
And when our thoughts to serious things are bent,
One in rich works with lively colors tells
Lucretia's Rape, or mourning Philomels:
Each chaste beholder sighs and drops a tear,
To burn the well-wrought Silk they scarce forbear,
So sad and moving does the work appear:
Oh that the Ravisher were here! one cries,
Thus would I rend the bloody Tyrant's eyes;
Then for his crime some harmless Flower dies,
Whose falling head, as if indeed 'twere pained,
Sheds dewie tears upon the murth'rers hand.
Some Hero's praise in sacred Verse kept long,
Another sings to th'Lute --
While every string seems turned into a tongue,
And sends soft echoes to the joyful Song.
Another different mind more pleasure takes,
In various forms to mould the painted Wax;
Such shape, such beauty in each piece is shown,
Nature sits pale, or blushing on her own,
To see her pride by curious Art outdone.
While buzzing Infamy, with venomed wing,
Haunts clamorous pleasures that in Cities ring,
Thus we enjoy the sweets without the sting.
When riper age with flattering care's oppressed,
Toiled with false joys, 'twill sadly be confessed,
Of all our lives these happy hours were best.

